Healths Improvement: OR, RULES Comprizing and Discovering The Nature, Method,
and Manner of Preparing all sorts of FOOD Used in this NATION.

Written by that ever Famous THOMAS MVFFETT, Doctor in PHYSIC:

Corrected and Enlarged BY CHRISTOPHER BENNET, Doctor in Physic, and Fellow of
the College of Physicians in London.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Newcomb for Samuel Thomson, at the sign of the white
Horse in Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

Imprimatur,

FRANCIS PRUJEAN, President. Censors.

The Table.
CHAP. I. 1. WHat Diet is. 2. Who were the Authors of it. 3. What good it
brings. 1
Chap. 2. 1 How many sorts of Diet there be. 2. Wherein Diet consists
materially. 3. Wherein Diet consists formally. 2
Chap. 3. and 4. Of Air. 1. How it is to be chosen. 12 2. How it is to be
prepared. 20 3. How it is to be used. 20
Chap. 5. Of Meat, and the differcnces thereof, in Kind, Substance, Temperature
and Taste. 29 Chap. 6 Of Meats. How they differ in Preparation, Age and Sex. 41
Chap. 7. 1 How many sorts of flesh there be. 2. Whether flesh or fish were
first eaten of, and whether of them is the purest and best nourishment. 50
Chap. 8. Of the flesh of tame Beasts. 58 Chap. 9. Of the Flesh of wild Beasts,
or Venison: 71 Chap. 10. Of the Flesh of tame Birds. 79 Chap. 11. Of the Flesh
of wild Foul, abiding and feeding chiefly upon the Land. 90 Chap. 12. Of the
flesh of wild Foul, abiding and feeding chiefly upon the waters. 106 Chap. 13.
Of the Inwards and Outward both of Beasts and Birds. 110 Chap. 14. Of Milk.
119 Chap. 15. Of Butter, Cream, Curds, Cheese and Whey. 128 Chap. 16. Of Eggs
and Blood. 134 Chap. 17. Of Fish generally, and the difference thereof. 141
Chap. 18. Of Seafish. 147 Chap. 19. Of fresh water fish. 175 Chap. 20. Of such
living Creatures and Meats, as be neither Flesh nor Fish, and yet give good
nourishment to the Body. 190 Chap. 21. Of Fruit and the differences thereof.
194 Chap. 22. Of all Orchard Fruit. 195 Chap. 23. Of such Fruits of the Garden,
as are nourishing. 215 Chap. 24. Of such Fruits of the Field, as are
nourishing. 231 Chap. 25. Of the Variety, Excellency, Making and true use of
Bread. 235 Chap. 26. Of Salt, Sugar and Spice. 245 Chap. 27. Of the necessary
use and abuse of Sawces, and whereon they consist. 253 Chap. 28. Of variety of
Meats, that it is necessary and convenient. 258 Chap. 30. Of the quantity of
Meats. 273 Chap. 31. Of the quality of Meats. 285 Chap. 32. Of the Time, Order
and Manner of Eating. 289
To the Reader
It Is not an itch to be in print, but my Profession to keep men alive, and when
gone to recover and revive them, that has induced me to this undertaking*
Blame me not therefore for using means to raise our Author out of the dust, and
long oblivion, wherein he was buried: It Is true, his own relations and their
interests much solicited my help; but the merits of the man were my greatest
motives, and his Old Fame most quickened me to restore him* Seriously, upon
perusal, I found so much Life and Pulse in his dead Works, that it had not been
charity in me to let him dye outright, specially when it is for the worlds good
and your (Healths Improvement.) This is all, only if it may be any advantage to
have my Judgment, it is a Piece for my palate, not likely to dis-relish any,
where so much pleasure is interlarded with our profit* I may safely say, upon
this subject I know none that has done better; and were Platina, Apicius, or
Alexandrinus, with all the rest of Dietetick writers now alive, they would
certainly own, and highly value this Discourse. Accept then kindly his
endevors, that strives to do you good both in public and private. Farewell.

Chr. Bennet.

CHAP. I.
1. What Diet is.

2. Who were the authors of it.

3. What good it brings.

Biesius lib. 1. theor med. Jason Prait lib. 1. Dier.

Hippoc. lib de. Pri^c.


DIet is defined by very learned Scholars, an exact order in Labor, Meat,
Drink, Sleep, and Venery. For they are thought to be Pythagoras his pentangle
or five squared figure, wherein (as Hipocrates says of man's body) there be
several confluences and concurrences; yet but one general Sympathy through all
Nevertheless Labor was appointed for most to invite meat and drink: they to
draw on sleep, for the ease of our labors: and all four, to perfect generation;
which is not only essendi Aristot. lib de* genesis anim.
sed semper essendi causa; not only the cause of being but of ever being: for
indeed after we are dead in our selves, we recover in our posterity another
life. But in this Treatise I define Gal. cap. 2. lib. 11. Comm. Hippoc. de na^.
hum. Avicen. lib. 1. Top. 3. cap. 7. All our life i^ but a consumption.
Diet more particularly (as it is usually taken both by the vulgar and also the
best Physicians) to be an orderly and due course observed in the use of bodily
nourishments, for the preservation recovery or continuance of the health of
mankind. Which how and when it was first invented and by whom collected,
neither Cardan, nor Scaliger, nor Virgil, nor Montuus, nor Biesius, nor Jason
Pratensis, nor Psellus, nor any Lib. de prisc. med.
(in my judgment) have more truly declared, then Hippocrates himself;
avouching that Necessity was the mother, and Reason the father of Diet. For
when sickness crept into the world, and men gave the same meats to sick folks
which they did to the healthful, they perceived them to be so far from
recovery, that they rather waxed worse and worse. Hereupon being enforced to
alter either the kind or the preparation, or the quantity, or the quality and
order of nourishments: they knew by diligent observation what was fittest for
every disease, for every sex, age, and complexion, and accordingly committed
them to memory, or set them down Lib. de sol. anim.
in writing. Plutarch thinks that we first learned this knowledge of brute
Beasts. For Pigeons and Cocks before they fight, will eat store (if they can
get it) of cummin seed to lengthen their breath: and Nightingales eat spiders
to prevent stoppings; and Lions having surfeited on flesh, abstain from all
meat til it be digested. So the Marlin taught tender persons first to keep warm
their feet, the Storkes to remedy costiveness of body by the use of glisters,
the Hedghog to avoid walking in windy seasons, the little Birds to bathe in
Summer, the Flies and Bees to keep home in Winter. For there is no doubt but
the natures of men were in former ages so strong, that they did eat and digest
every thing as it grew. Neither were Mills, Boulters, Ovens, and artificial
preparations from the beginning; but as sickness of the body increased, so the
mind devised remedies, teaching men how to thrash and grind corn, to make
bread, to boil, roast, and bake meat, to give thin and liquid meats to weak
stomachs, and grosser cates to them that be strong, after the example of every
Bird; who first softneth and boileth the meat in their mawes, before they give
it to their young ones, neither should we marvail hereat; For as ignorant
Sailers (whose errors and imperfections no man could perceive in a calm sea)
in a tempest do follow every man's advise: So the examples of Birds and Beasts
did teach sick men wisdom, when through selfignorance they lost the light of
nature, and knew not what was good for themselves. But leave we Plutarchs
conceit, and let us fetch the invention of Diet from a more worthy teacher, yea
from the worthiest of all other, God himself. For can we imagine that he taught
our forefathers (having sinned) how to cloth their bodies, and not how, and
when, Genesis 3.
and wherewith to feed them? He that taught Abel how to diet sheep, would he
leave him unskilful how to diet himself? or had Cain the art of tilling the
ground, and not the knowledge how to use the grain thereof? Knew Physicians in
Genesis 50. v. 2.
Jacobs time how to conserve dead bodies, and wanted they knowledge to preserve
the living? Wherefore how foolishly soever some ascribe the invention of Diet
to Apollo, Aesculapius, and that many-eide Osiris, or to Hippocrates, Galen, or
Asclepiades: yet let this rest immovable, that it springs from an elder
time, then that any heathenish Chronicle is able to record the author thereof.
For if the multitude of Hippoc. de vet. med.
burials be an argument of ill diet, and contrariwise long life an argument of
good; it must needs follow, that before the Universal Flood this noble
knowledge of diet was not hid from the first Patriarcks, but as perfitly
perceived as it was practiced. For till after the Flood, men usually lived to
eight hundred years, some to nine, many to seven, and none (for Genesis 5.
ought we have heard or read) dyed a natural death before five.

Now if any man shall object, that the very name of Diet is not mentioned
before the Flood, and that therefore the thing it self was not in use: I can
shape him no better answer Lib. de art*
then from the mouth of Hippocrates: Names are the Daughters of men, but things
the Sons of nature. So that as soon as men began to feed, no doubt they were
inspired with wisdom how much, how often, and of what to feed. For we must not
imagine, though they had as it were Ostriches stomachs, and Giants strength,
(insomuch that Lamech in his wound could crush into pieces the mightiest
champion of our age) that therefore they neglected preparation or proportion in
the use of nourishments; nay reason it self will conclude, that as one shoe
did not fit every man's foot, nor children and young men fed alike in those
days, so every man knew or was taught his peculiar diet, most proper healthful
and convenient for his own estate. Wherefore as many disseases are recovered
with our Physicians, but none without Physic: so albeit there lived no dietary
Physicians before the Flood (if I should grant so much) yet no man can deny,
that through feeding or fasting, drinking or thirsting, taking this thing or
refusingthat, they preserved their life-oile (as I may term it) for many ages,
which in this surfeiting and riotous age is commonly consumed in less then one.
But some men will further object against me. What Sir? may diet prolong a man's
life? why then through diet we may prove immortal, or at the least live as long
as Adam did. Whereunto I answer, that albeit immortality is denied upon the
earth to mortal men, yet so much life is prolonged by a good diet, by how much
disseases thereby are eschewed. For as Solomon says, to whom is pain of the
belly, and gripings, Prove. 27. Eccl. 28.
and redness of eyes, and want of health? even to those lib. de art.
that keep no measure, but greedily hunt after wine, and rise up early to drink
strong drink. Some in Hippocrates time, seeing Hippoc. de prisc. med.
precise observers of Physic to dye as soon as they which used no physic,
conceived presently no otherwise of Physicians, them as of Kings in a stage
play; carrying golden crowns, and scepters, and swords, commanding for the
time whole Empires, but indeed void of in-borne Majesty in them selves, and of
outward abillity fit for so high a caling. So now in our days the name of Diet
seems but a scarecrow to the unwiser sort, who think it best diet, to keep no
diet at all, saying (as Will. Summers said to Sir John Rainsford) drink Wine
and have the gout, drink no Wine and have it too. Which in effect what is it
else, then with the Sicilians Athen. lib. 1. cap. 1. Aristoph. in Acan. Homer.
Odyss. s.
to erect a Temple to riot: or with the Barbarians to praise surfeiting? or with
Ulisses drunken companions to open Aeolus his bottle all at once? whereby their
Ship was so far from proceeding, that all art and prayers, yea and all the Gods
(in a manner) were not able to keep it above the waters. Let me Hippoc.
epistol. ad. Crate^
laugh (said Democritus) at men's follies, who diet their horses, sheep, cattle,
yea their capons, and geese, and yet themselves keep no diet. They foresee by
porking of raven, flying of kites, croking of frogs, and bathing of ducks, when
it will rain; yet surfeiting daily they cannot foresee their own ruin.

To the like purpose sings a French Poet.

Si tu veux viure sainement
Aye pour toy tell pensement:
Que de ton cheval falcon on chien,
Quand autre chose leur vint que bien.
If sickness thou will long award,
Have of thy self that due regard,
Which to their falcons, Steeds, or Hounds
Men bear, when sickness them surrounds.
And truly well might the one laugh, and the other sing at such follies. For
albeit an exquisire thin diet (called of Ioubertus the inch-diet, wherein we
eat by drams, and drink Lib. de vulg^ error.
by spoonfuls) more perplexeth the mind then cures the body, engendring a
jealousy over every meat, suspicion on every quantity, dread, fear, and
terror over every proportion (bereaving the head of quietness, the heart of
security, and the stomach consequently of good concoction) yet the full diet as
it is more usual, so is it in effect no less dangerous. Would you see the
discommodities of excess? why then imagine Cic. orat. cont. Ver. Plut. in Dion.
Homer. i. Odyss. Herodorus. Ovid. 14. metam. Plut. de sal. pr. Plut. ibidem,
you saw Verres rouling before break of day in his own Vomits, Dyonisius
belching up a sour and unpleasant breath, Polyphemus stripped of wit and memory,
Cleomenes King of Lacedemonia playing after his drunkenness at cherrypit with
Children, Elpenor (Ulisses his companion) breaking his neck down the stairs,
Ennius racked with the Sciatica* Riglus the wrestler dead of an apoplexy,
Anacreon so unable to swallow any more drink that he was strangled with a
Xiphil. in vitellio.
grapes kernel, Vibius Crispus dying at the stool, an old English Knight dying
at the Chamberpot. On the otherside Marsil. Fic. de tuend san.
will it please you to mark the commodities of diet, and moderate nourishing?
Then behold Timotheus, who being continually sick through daily surfeiting,
came once to Platoes Table, where he fed (as the company did) and drank
moderately. The next morning he cried out with this admiration:* O sweet Plato,
sweet Plato; how truly sweet are thy suppers, which make us to sleep and awake
so sweetly? How able am I now to all exercises, being erst so unable to the
least labor? No marvel Timothy: for as the Sun cannot warm us when Clouds be
between: So excess either fetters or divides the minds, faculties. How careful
is the mind always to preserve life? yet many a drunkard sinks under water,
because reason cannot teach him the art of swiming, the inward senses being
choked with abundance of lib. de Diet.
clammy vapors. Divine Hippocrate (whom I can never sufficiently name nor
honor) compares diet most fitly to a Potters wheel, going neither forward
nor backward, but (as the world it self moves) equally round: moistning that
which is too dry, drying up that which is too moist, restoring true flesh if it
be decaid, abating proud flesh (by abstinence) if it be too much, neither
drawing too much upward nor downward (as peevish Sawyers do:) neither clapping
on too much nor too little Sail (like unskilful Mariners) but giving (like a
wise Steward) every part his allowance by geometrical proportion, that the
whole household and family may be kept in health Such a steward was
Asclepiades, who cured by only G^^. comm. 2. in Hippoc. de vict. rat. Gal. lib
5. cap. ^ de tuend. san Sip^nt^us in vet. Gal.
Diet infinite diseases. Such an one was Galen, that famous Physician, who being
three or four times sick before he was twenty eight years old, looked
afterward more strictly to his diet; in such sort that a hundred years
following he was never sick but once, and died only through want of radical
moisture. Such an one finally was Hippocrates, who lived till he was a hundred
and nine years old (or at the least till he was fourscore and five) without any
memorable sickness, and Soranus in ^jus vita.
yet he had by nature but a weak head, insomuch that he ever wore a night cap.
Wherefore let us neither with the impudent, call diet a frivolous knowledge, or
a curious science with the imprudent: but embrace it as the leader to perfect
health, (which as the wise man says) is above gold, and a Siracid. cap. ^. v.
15.
sound body above all riches. The Romans once banished Physicians out of Rome,
under pretense that physic druggs weakened the peoples stomachs: and Cooks,
for corrupting and enforcing appetites with strange sawces and seasonings: and
Perfumers, and Anointers, and Bathe-masters, because they did rather mollify
and effeminante the Romans minds, then any whit profit or help their bodies.
Yet they retained Cato, the chief dietist of that time, and all them that were
able (without physic) to prevent or cure diseases: esteeming diet (as it is
indeed) to be so honest, pleasant, and profitable a science, that even malice
it self cannot but commend it, and her enemies are forced to retain it. Thus
much or rather too much, in the commendation of Diet; for which some Spartane
censor would severely punish me, as Antalaides did the Orator that praised
Hercules, whom no wiseman ever discommended. For howsoever idle heads have made
these addle proverbs. 1. Dieted bodies are but bridges to Physicians minds. 2.
We shall live till we dye in despite of Diet. 3. Every dissease will have his
course. 4. More Rubarb and less Diet, etc. Yet the wisest man and King of all
others, has established it upon such grounds, as neither can nor shall ever be
shaken with all their malice.

CHAP. II.
1. How many sorts of Diet there be.

2. Wherein Diet consists materially.

3. Wherein Diet consists formally*

How many kinds of Diet there be.

Gal. com. in apho. 4. lib. 2. Com. 6. in 6. Epid.


1. THere be especially three sorts of Diets; a full Diet, a moderate Diet, and
a thin Diet. The first increases flesh, spirits, and humors, the second
repaireth only them that were lost, and the third lesseneth them all for a
time, to preserve life. Full Diet is proper unto them Com. 4. in 6. Epid.
which be young, growing, strong, lusty, and able through their good
constitution to endure much exercise. Moderate Diet is fittest for persons of a
middle health, whose estate of body Com. in aph. 4. lib. 1.
is neither perfectly strong nor over-weak. Thin Diets are never to be used,
especially in the strictest kind, but where violent diseases (caused either of
fullness or corruption) have the pre-eminence: wherein how much the body wants
sufficient food, so much the sickness wants his tyrannical vigor.

The matter of Diet.

Roger Bacon lib. de record. senect. accid.


2. The matter of Diet, is neither iron nor steel, nor silver, nor coral, nor
pearl, no nor gold it self; from which worthy simples, albeit most rare and
effectual sustenances be drawn (as our own Countryman of all other, most
learnedly proves) to strengthen our body, and to thicken our radical moisture,
which is soon consumed (like a fine spirit of wine) when it is too thin and
subtle: yet neither have they, neither can they have a nourishing power,
because our natural heat will be tired before it can convert their oil into
our oil, their substance into our substance, be it never so cunningly and
finely exalted. Furthermore, if it be true (which Hyppoc. de diaet sal.
Hippocrates and reason tells us) that as contraries are expelled by
contraries, so like is sustained by his like: How should the liquors of gold,
pearl, and precious stones (which the Chemists have named Immortal essences)
nourish or augment Paracelf de vit. long l. ^: c: 4:
our mortal substance? Nay does not that soonest restore decayed flesh (as milk,
gellie, strong broaths, and young lamb, which soonest corrupts, if it be not
presently eaten? Is not a young snite more nourishing (yet it keeps not long
August* de civit. dei.
sweet) then a peacock that will not corrupt nor putrify in a whole year, no
not in thirty years (says Kiranides) though it be buried in the ground? yet as
a candles end of an inch long being set in cold water, burns twice as long as
another out of water; not because water nourishes the flame, which by nature
it quenches, nor because it increases the tallow, which admits no water, but
by moistning the circumfluent air, and thickning the tallow, whereby the flame
is neither so light nor lively as it would be otherwise: in like sort, the
substances, powders, and liquors of the things aforesaid, may perhaps hinder
the speedy spending of natural heat, by outward cooling of fiery spirits,
inward thickning of too liquid moistures, hardening or condensating of flaggy
parts; but their durableness and immortality (if they be immortal) are
sufficient proofs that they are no nourishments for corruptible men. But they
are pure essences, Phaedr. de aquila coel Michael Tox. com* in Para^* de vit.
long.
and therefore suitable to our radical moisture, which the best Physicians
derive from a starr-like substance. Alas, pure fools! what do you vaunt and
brag of purity, when the purest things do least nourish? for had not the air,
water, and earth, certain impurities, how should men, beasts, birds, fishs, and
plants continue? for the finer the air, the less it nourishes, the clearer the
water, the less it fatneth, the simpler the ground, the less it succoureth: yea
were we in an air (such as the element of air it self is defined to be) void
of invisible seeds, and those impalpable substances or resekens that are
sometimes descried by the Sunbeams, our spirits should find no more sustenance
by it, then a dry man drink in an empty hogshead. And though we see Pikes to
live a great while in Cisterns with clear water alone, yet were that water so
pure as the element it self, they would clean consume for want of nourishment.
The like may be said of plants growing in a dry, crumbling, sapless and
unmingled earth, wherein we should see them quickly so far from sprouting, that
for want of their restorrative moisture they would come* to withering.
Wherefore I conclude, Neither Oriental stones for their clearness, nor pearls
for their goodliness, nor coral for his temperating of blood, nor gold for his
firmness, nor liquor of gold for his purity, nor the quintessences of them all
for their immortality, are to be counted nourishments, or the matters of Diet.
Object Io. Bonus Ter. ^^r. in Margar. philos.
not the Ostrich his consuming of stone and metals, to prove that therefore
they may nourish man; no more then the duck, nightingale, or stork, to prove
that toads, adders and spiders are nourishing meats: For our nourishment
(properly Gal. de alim. ^ac. 1.
taken) is that nature or substance, which increases or fostereth our body, by
being converted into our substance. Now for as much as our bodies (like the
bodies of all sensible and living creatures else) consist of a treble
substance, namely, aerial Spirits, liquid humors, and confirmed parts: it is
therefore necessary it should have a treble nourishment answerable to the same;
which Hippocrates truly affirms Lib. de aer. loc. and aq.
to be Air, Meat, and Liquors.

Whether Metals be meat: vide supra:
Meat is a more gross and corporeal substance, taken either from vegetables in
the earth, or creatures living upon the earth, or living ever or sometimes in
the water, whereby the grosser part of our body is preserved-liquors are thin
and liquid Plin. lib. 7. c. 2. Apol. lib. de hist. mir. Athen. lib. 2. dipn.
cap. 2.
nourishment, serving as a sled to convey meat to every member, and converted
most easily into humors.

Now whereas Pliny names some which never eat meat, and Apollonius and
Athenaeus, other which never drank; they are but few and particular persons
(yea perhaps the sons of Devils)* which cannot overthrow the general rule and
course of nature. It is possible to God (as the Devil truly objected) to make
stones as nourishing as bread; to feed men with locusts) a most fretting,
burning, and scalding vermin) as he did John Baptist: to give us stones instead
of bread, and to give us scorpions when we ask eggs: yet usually he does not
transgress the course of nature, by which, as by his bailiff, he rules the
world: so that when any man lived without meat or drink (as Moses and Elias did
forty days) it is rather to be counted a miraculous working, then to be
imputed to the strength of nature.

CHAP. III.
Of AIR.
1. How it is to be chosen.

1. AS Hippocrates said of Meats, Like Food, like flesh: so may I justly say of
the air, like air, like spirits; for hence comes it that in pure, clear, and
temperate air, our spirits are as jocund, pleasant, active, and ready as
butterflies in Summer; but in thick, dark, cloudy, and unseasonable weather,
they are dull, drowsy, idle, and as heavy as lead, working neither perfectly
what they ought, nor cheerfully what they would. Witty Cardan supposes lib. 1.
de rer. var.
a like resemblance to be betwixt our bodies, and the air, as there is betwixt
the soul and heaven: So that as they incline the soul, so the air alters the
body every way; let the air be cloudy, how can the body be warm? Let it be
hot, how can that be cold? let it be chilled with frost or snow, our skin (yea
our inwards themselves) begin to shiver? How staggers the head, and how
presently finks the heart, at the smell of a damp, or the insensible sense of
deadly and subtle spirits, carried from the ugh-trees of Thasus, or the hole
of a Cokatrice, or the breathing of Aspes, or the dens of Dragons, or the
carcases of dead Serpents, wherewith the air is not so soon infected, as the
hearts and brains of men, lib. 2. de tu. san.
whereunto it is carried. Galen says, That the inhabitants of the Palestine
lake are ever sickly, their cattle unsound, and their Country barren, through
the brimstone and pitchy vapor ascending from thence over all the Country, in
such sort that birds flying over it, or beasts drinking of it, do suddenly die;
And verily no bird hates that Lake, nor the Lakes of Avernum, Lucrine, or
Padua, like unto it; no frogs and serpents can less live in Ireland, foxes in
Crete, staggs in Africa, hares in Ithaca, and fishes in warm water, then the
heart of man can abide impure smells, or live long in health with infected airs;
which if they do not always corrupt men, yet they show their force, and
exercise their power over cattle, herbs, grass, corn, fruits, and waters, a
great while after* poisoning us (as it were) at a second draught, Lu^tet. lib.
10.
whilst we feed of infected things, and (as Eclipses are wont to do) spitting
out their venom when they are almost forgotten. Sicil is recorded to be seldom
void of the Plague: and the dwellers of Sardinia quitted their Country
oftentimes for the same cause. But how could it be otherwise, when the wind
blows there most commonly out of Africa, the mother of all venomous and filthy
beasts? Is not Middleborough, Roterdam, Delf, and diverse other Cities in
Zealand and Holland, stinched every dry Autumn with infinite swarms of dead
frogs, putrefying the air worse then carrion? Rome also was greatly annoyed
with agues and pestilence, till by Asclepiades his council their common sewers
were monthly cleansed, their privy-vaults yearly emptied, and their soil and
offal daily carried forth into the fields; whereby receiving the benefit of
sweet air and health both at once, no marvel (as Mr. Ajax his Father has well
noted) though the Skavenger and Gun-farmer, that is, Stercutius and Cloacina
were honored as Gods. And verily had that worthy Author lived amongst those
Romans, as he lives in this unthankful and wicked age, wherein (to speak with
Hippocrates) admirantur fatui, calumniantur plerique, intelligunt Lib. (...).
pauci:) no doubt ere this he had been very highly exalted, and stood in some
solemn Capitol, betwixt Stercutius and Cloacina, as King Ludd does upon
Ludd-Gate betwixt his two sons: For I assure you (and let us not but give the
Devil his right) he has truly, plainly, and perfectly set down such an art of
Privy-making, that if we would put it in practice, many a house should be
thought in London to have never a Privy, which now smells all over of nothing
else: Neither is the air only infected with venomous winds and vapors, sinks,
sewers, kennels, charnel houses, moors, or common lestals (as in great Camps
and Cities) nor only with privy vaults; but also Biesius makes mention, that a
lib de aeris potest.
house in Spain seated among many elder trees (wherewithal the grounds were
headged) cast every man out of it (like Sejus horse) either dead or diseased,
till such time as he caused them to be rooted up, and so made it both wholesome
and Plin. l. 13. c. 1.
habitable to the dwellers. Furthermore it is recorded, That as the air in
Cyprus cures any ulcers of the lungs, so the air of Sardinia makes and
enlarges them: And as the air of Anticyra helps madness, so contrariwise
the air of Thasus (especially in a hot and dry summer) brought almost all the
inhabitants into a lunacy, which no doubt happened upon these causes, That Cyprus
abounds in Cypres and Firrtrees, Sardinia in Alom and Copper Mines, Anticyra
is replenished with true Hellebors, and Thasus is full of deadly Ughes, which
either kill a man, or make him mad, when the savor infects him fully, as it
does in such hot and dry Plut. in vita Marii.

Hieron. in epi^. Nepotiani.


Countries. The air may be also infected with the smoke of Charcole newly
kindled, whereof Quintus Catulus died: or with the smell of new mortar, which
killed Jovinianus the Emperor in his bed: or with the snuf of a candle,
wherewith many have been strangled; or with the air of a pan of coals
thoroughly kindled, by which as Aemylius Victor studied Hieron. Mercurial. in
Gymnast.
in the City of Parma, he suddenly fell down dead. By the smell of a snuf of a
candle, many become leprous, and women miscarry of children. What light is best
to study by, of oil, wax, dears suet, and tallows; the very smell of roses
cures headache, and of some flowers drunkenness. The smell of a wantlowse may
kill a child in the mothers womb: the very smell of Physic cures many.

First therefore in the election or choice of air, observe this, that it be
pure and void of infection: for pure air is to the heart, as balm to the
sinews, yea it is both meat, drink, exercise, and Physic to the whole body.
Meat, whilst it is easily converted into spirits: Drink, whilst it allayeth the
thirst of the lungs and heart, which no drink can so well quench; exercise,
whilst it moves humors immovable otherwise of their own nature; medicine or
Physic, whilst it helps to thrust forth excrements, which would else harden
or putrify within our bodies, the vapors whereof would so shake the bulwark of
life, and defile the rivers of blood issuing from the liver, that we should not
live long in health, if happily we lived at all.

Next to purity of air, we must choose that also which is temperate. For
natural heat is not preserved, says Galen, but of air moderately cold: And
Aristotle says, That Lib. de resp. ^su. ex Hipp. l. de loc. aer. and aq l. 7
polit.
Countries and Cities, and houses, which by interposition of hills on the North
side be seldom cooled, are subject to mortality, and many diseases. Yet must it
not be so hot as to dissolve spirits, procure thirst, and abundant sweat, to
the hindering of urine, and decaying of strength and appetite: But (as I said
before) of a middle temper, because as nature Gal. 1. dr* tu* san
is the mother, so mediocrity is the preserver of every thing. Who sees not a
dry Summer peeleth, and a dry winter riveleth the skin? and that contrariwise,
an over-moist air puffs it up with humors, and engenders rheumes in the
whole body?

Thirdly, That air is best which is most seasonable: Namely, warm and moist in
the Spring, hot and dry in Summer, cooling and dry in Autumn, cold and moist in
Winter: Hip de aer. loc. and aq.
which seasons falling out contrarily, as sometimes they do (especially in
Islands) infinite and unavoidable diseases ensue thereupon. For if the
spring-aire be cold and dry through abundance of Northeast winds, dry
inflammations of the eyes, hot urines, fluxes of blood by nose and bowels, and
most dangerous catarrhs to old persons, follow upon it. If Summer be cold and
dry through the like winds, look for all kinds of agues, headaches, coughs, and
consumptions: Contrariwise if it be too hot and dry, suppression of urine, and
women's courses, together with exceeding bleeding at the nose is to be feared.
If Autumn be full of Southern and warm blasts, the next Winter attend all
rheumatick and moist diseases. If Winter on the contrary be cold and dry, which
naturally should be cold and moist, long agues, humoral aches, coughs and
plurisies are to be expected, unless the next Spring be of a moist disposition.

Again, consider also, how any house or City is situated, for the air is
qualified accordingly. Namely, if they be placed Southeast, South, and
Southwest, and be hindered from all Northern blasts by opposition of hills, they
have neither Hippoc. de loc. aer* and aq.
sweet water, nor wholesome air; but there women are subject to fluxes and
miscarriages, children to convulsions and shortness of breath, men to bloody
fluxes, scourings, and Hemorrhoids, and such like. But Cities, Countries, or
houses situated clean contrary, toward the North-west, North, and North-East,
and defended from all Southern gusts and blasts, albeit the people there are
commonly more strong and dry, yet are they subject through suppression of
excrements, unto headaches, sharp plurisies, coughs, exulceration of the lungs,
phlegmatic collections, rupture of inward veins, and red eyes. Likewise in
those Countries, young boys are subject to swelling of the codds, young girls
to the navel-rupture; men to the diseases above named: Women to want and
scarcity of their natural terms, to hard labors, ruptures and convulsions, and
to consumptions after childbearth* Easterly Towns (especially inclining to the
south) and houses are more wholesome then the westerly for many causes: first
because the air is there more temperately hot and cold. Secondly because all
waters and springs running that way, are most clear fragrant pleasant and
wholesome, resembling as it were a dainty spring; and verily women there
conceive quickly and Hippoc. loco citato.
bring forth easily: children prove large, well colored and lively: men
healthful strong and able to any exercise, But Western cities and houses,
barren, clean, of Eastern gusts, have ever both troubled waters and unwholesome
winds, which mingled with the waters obscure their clearness, and makes the
inhabitants weak, heavy, and ill colored, hoarce-voiced, dull witted, and
wanting (as if they were entering the house of death) quickness and vigor. But
Avicen of all others declares this most at large, who showing the boldness and
goodness of air by the situation, Lib. 1. Fen. 2. d^st. 11.
describes them in these words. Houses having their chief or full seat Eastward,
are very wholesome for three causes. First, because the Sun rising upon them,
purges the air very timely, Secondly, because it stays not there long to
dissolve spirits, but turns westward after noon, Thirdly, because cold winds
are commonly as ushers to the Sun rising, by which all corruption is killed,
that either was in the air or lay on the ground. Western places are worst
situated: First, because the Sun bestows not his maiden head and kingly heat
upon them, but a hot and scorching flame, neither attenuating nor drying their
air, but filling it full of fogs and mists Whereupon it falls out, that the
inhabitants are much troubled with hoarseness, rheumes, measils, pocks, and
pestilence. Southern seats are commonly subject to catarhs, fluxes of the
belly, heaviness, want of appetite, haemoroids, inflammation of eyes; and their
women conceive hardly and miscarry easily, abounding in menstrual and mighty
pollutions, their old men are subject to palsies, trembling apoplexies and all
humoral diseases, their children to cramps and the falling evil: their young
men to continual putrified agues, and all kind of rebellious fevours. In
Nothren countries through the dryness, coldness, and sharpness of the wind;
women do hardly conceive, and dangerously bring forth: or if they be well
delivered, yet commonly through want of milk they are not able to nurse their
children. Their young men die of consumptions, their old men and children of
cruel cramps. They which dwell upon the tops of hills (where every wind blows
from under the Sun) are for the most part sound, strong, nimble, long-lived and
fit for labor. Contrariwise the valley people (so seated that no wind blows
upon them) are ever heavy spirited, dull and sickly: for as a fire of green
wood dies unles the flame be scattered with continual blowing; and as a
standing water corrupts in a little space: so an idle air rouled about with
no winds soon putrifieth; because his dissimilar parts be not separated by
winowing, as the chafe is from the wheat. The best Air
But the best situation of a house or city, is upon the slaunt of a southwest
hill (like to this of Ludlow, wherein we sojourne for a time) neither fully
barred of the East, North, and Southern winds, clear, and free from the mists
of bogs and fens, purified from the stinck of common Sinks, Vaults and Lestals,
as also from the unwholesome breathings of Caves, Colepits, and Copper, or
Brimstone-mines: not so cold as to stupifie members, not so hot as to burn the
skin, not so moist as to swell us with rheumes, nor so dry as to parch up our
natural moisture: not to much nor to variable (as upon the top of hills) not so
little, nor too standing, as in low Valleys: neither smelling of nothing, as in
barren Countries, nor smelling of bad things, as in the Fens: but fragrant
without a discerning of smell, and sweetest of all in an unknown sweetness For
howsoever some men dream, that the smell of the spice-trees in Arabia felix
make the neighbor inhabitants both healthful of body and sound of mind (which
I will not deny, if you compare them with the borderers of the Palestine lake.)
Nevertheless as Tully says of women, They smell best which smell of nothing;
so verily the air that smells of nothing is best to nourish us in health,
though otherwise in some sickness a perfumed air is best, and also to expel a
loathsome stinck, or (like to the neighing of Apolloes horses) to rouse up dull
and sleepy senses. In which respect I am of Aristotle's opinion, that sweet
smells were appointed to be in flowers, fruits, barks, roots, fields, and
meddowes, not only for delight, but also for medicin. Nevertheless as the
tastles water makes the best broth, so the smelling air gives the purest (I
will not say the strongest) nourishment to our spirits. In Plutarchs time men
were grown to this wantoness, that every morning and night they perfumed not
only their apparel and gloves, but also their bodies with sweet ointments,
made of most costly spices: buying with great charges, what shall I say? an
idle, a needless, a womanly pleasure? nay verily an unnatural and more then
brutish. For every beast loves his own mate only for her own smell (whatsoever
it be) but some men love not their meat, nor drink, nor the air, nor their
wifes, nor themselves, unless they smell, or rather stinck of sweet costly and
foreign fumes: which being taken without cause, do the head more hurt then
being taken upon cause they do it good. Wherefore if thy brain be temperate,
and not too moist, cold, or dull, eschew a strong smelling air (such as comes
from walflowers, stock-gillyflowers, pincks, roses, Hiacynths, mead sweet, honey
suckles, jasimin, Narcissus, musk, amber civet, and such like) contenting thy
self with the simplest air, which for sound complexions is simply best. Or if
for recreation and pleasuresake thou desire it some time, let it not be of a
full or strong sent: but mingled with sweet and sour (as violets with Time)
and breathing rather a sharp then a fulsome sweetness. And thus much of the
choice of aires; now come we to the preparation and use of them.

CHAP. IIII.
OF AIR.
1. How it is to be prepared.

2. How it is to be used.

Lib. cont. Epic P u^ de u^. ex: host. cap.
SAtyrus (that Goat-bearded God) the first time that ever he saw fire, would
needs kiss it and embrace it in his arms, notwithstanding that Prometheus
forewarned him of coming too nigh: for he knew well enough the nature of fire
to be such, that as in certain distances, times, and quantities it may be well
endured, so in others it is harmful and exceeding dangerous. The like may I say
of heat, cold, moisture, and dryness of the air: which in the first or second
step toward them may and do preserve life, but the nearer you come to their
extremities, the nearer are you to death: So that either you will be burnt with
Satyrus, or frozen to death with Philostratus, or dried up for lack of moisture
with Darius Soldiers when they could get no water, or dye as the inhabitants
of the lakes in Egypt do with too much moisture. Wherefore let every one
consider his own strength and constitution of body; for some like to new wax,
are dissolved with the least heat, and frozen with the least cold: others with
Salamanders think nothing hot enough, others like to silk worms can abide no
cold; others with Smiths and Woodcocks can abide those frosts which even the
fishes themselves can hardly tolerate. So likewise dry constitutions laugh and
sing with the Thrush when rain approaches: when others of the contrary
complexion do mourn and lament with the Plouver, because it is so wet. Which
being so, I shall no doubt deserve well of every man in teaching him so to
prepare the air, that sometimes abroad, but always at home it may be tempered
(according as he most needs) and purified from all infection. Concerning the
tempering of air in our houses: is it too hot and dry? then coul it by
sprinkling of Vinegar and Rose water, by strewing the flower with green flags,
rushes, newly gathered, reed leaves, water-lilly leaves, violet leaves and such
like; stick also fresh boughs of willow, sallow, poplar, and ash (for they
are the best of all) in every corner. Is it too cold and moist? amend it by
fires of clear and dry wood; and strew the room and windows with herbs of a
strong smell, as mints, penniroial cammomil, balm, nep, rue, rosemary and sage.
Is it too thick and misty? then Plut. de Isi. and Osir.
attenuate and clear it in your chamber first by burning of pine-rosin (as the
Egyptians were wont to do) then presently by burning in a hot fire-shovel some
strong whitewine vinegar. But their chiefest perfume of all other called Kuphi:
The great temper, was made of sixteen simples: namely, wine, honey, raisins of
the sun, cipres, pine-rosin, mirrhe, the sweet rush, calamus aromaticus,
spike-nard, cinnamon, berries of the great and little juniper, lignumaloes,
saffron, figtree buds, and cardamoms: to which composition Gal. 2 de ant^d*
Plut. de Isid.
in Galens time Democrates added Bdellium and the seed of agnus castus, and the
Physicians in Plutarchs time the roots of Calamint. It were needless to write
how wonderfully Apollo, I mean our new Apollo Francis Alexander Tract. de*
^rochis^.
of Vercelles (for so like a proud Italian he calls his own work) commend
the same in his third beam; or how Plutarch Plut. de Isi. and Osir. Avic. Fen.
2. Tract. 3.
and Avicen extol it above all others, in that it not only brings any air to
a good temper; but also cleanses the same of unclean spirits, opens it when
it is clowdy, attenuateth it when it is too thick, refineth it when it is full
of dreggy mixtures, and consequently dispelleth melancholy from the head, fear
and ill vapors from the heart, procuring natural and quiet sleep, and
therefore not unworthily consecrated to the Gods. Now as the Egyptians burnt
rosin in the morning, and their Kuphi toward noon, so albeit the sun set, when
many heavy vapors lie in the air, the Ancients were not to burn mirrhe and
juniper: which disperse those heavy vapors, leaving in the house a rectified
air, quickening the senses, and correcting those melancholic fumes that
pervert judgment. Wherefore the Egyptians call mirrhe, Bal, and Juniper Dolech
the purifiers of the air, and curers of madness. Whereat let no man wonder,
since the very noise of bells, guns, and Trumpets, breaks the clouds, and
cleanses the air: yea Music it self, cures the brain of madness, and the
heart of melancholy, as many learned and credible Authors have affirmed. Much
more then may it be tempered, and altered to the good or hurt of our inward
parts by smells and perfumes, whereby not only a mere air (as in Sounds) is
carried to the inward parts, but also invisible seeds and substances qualified
with variety of diverse things. For who knows not that the smell of Opium
brings on sleep, drowsiness, and sinking of the spirits? contrariwise the the
smell of Wine, and strong vinegar out of a narrow mouthed glass, awaketh the
heaviest headied man, if possibly he can be awaked. Furthermore because
stinking smells (unless one by little and little be accustomed to them, as our
dungfarmers, and kennel rakers are in London; and as a wench did eat Napellus,
a most cruel poison, ordinarily as a meat) are both noysom to the head, and
hurtful to the lungs, heart, and stomach; in such sort, that they which live in
a stinking house, are seldom healthy: It shall be good, where the cause cannot
wholly be removed, to correct the accident in this sort, with sweet waters,
sweet perfumes, sweet pomanders, and smelling unto sweet fragrant things.

Isabella Cortesa, that dainty Lady of Italy, combed her hair, and sprinkled
her gown every morning with Swe t waters perfumed, and cakes against i^ smells.
this sweet water following, whereby the air circumfluent was so perfumed,
that wheresoever she stood, no stinch could be discerned. Take of Orange flower
water, water of Violets, water of the musk-geranium, and the musk rose, water
of red and damask roses, of each a pint; powder of excellent sweet orris, two
ownces; powder of Storax Calamite, Benjoine, and Indian wood of roses, of each
half an ounce; Civet a dram and a half. Mingle all together, and let them stand
in Balneo three days. Then after the water is thoroughly cold, filtre it out
with a fine filtre, and keep it to your use in a glass very close stopped.

Marinellus makes another not much inferior unto this, whereof this is the
description. Take a pottle of damask-rose-water, Benjoin, Storax calamite,
cloves, and wood of Aloes, of each a^ ounce; ambre-grice and civet of each a
scruple: boil them together in Balneo in a glass very well stopped, for 24 hours
space; filtre it out when it is cold, and having hanged fifteen grains of musk
in it tied in a close cloth, set it five days in the sun, and keep it to your
use.

These waters are costly, but verily exceeding good; nevertheless since men of
mean fortune are likewise to be preserved, I appoint for them these perfumed
cakes, and for the poorer sort, a less costly perfume. Take of Benjoin six
drams, wood of aloes four drams, storax calamite four drams, sweet orris two
drams, musk a scruple, white sugar candy three ounces, beat them into fine
powder, and with red-rose water, work them into a stiff paste, whereon make a
sort of little cakes no bigger nor thicker then a threepence; dry them in a
cold shadowy place, and then put them up very close into a glass, and take out
one or two, or as many as you please, and burn them upon quick coals. The
poorer sort may make them fire-cloves, far better then you shall find any at
the Apothecaries, after this Receipt. Take of good Olbanum half a pound, Storax
Calamite an ounce and a half, Ladanum half an ounce, coals of Juniper wood 2
drams, make all into fine powder, and then with 2 drams of gum Tragacanth
mingled with rose water, and macerated three days together, and an ounce of
Storax liquida, form the paste like great cloves, or sugar-loves, or birds, or
in what form you list, and dry them in an oven when the bread has been drawn;
kindle one of these at the top, and set it in any room, and it will make it
exceeding sweet.

But forasmuch as no air is so dangerous as that which is infected with
pestilent influences, let us consider how, and in what sort that of all other
is to be corrected. Hippocrates (for ought we read of) when his own Country,
and the City of Athens were grievously surprised of the Plague, used no other
remedies to cure or preserve the rest, then by making of great fires in each
street, and in every house, especially in the night time, to purify the air;
whereby the Citizens or Athens being delivered from so dangerous an enemy,
erected to Hippocrates an Soranus in vita Hipp.
Image of beaten Gold, and honored him alive as if he had been a God. And
verily, as running water, like a broom, cleanses the earth, so fire like a
Lion, eats up the pollutions of the air, no less then it consumes the
drossie metals. So that cleanliness and good fires* cannot but either
extinguish or lessen any infection: whereunto if we also add the use of other
outward correctors and perfumers of the air, no doubt it will be much, if not
wholly amended. The Pestilence (as I have noted How the air is t^ he corrected
in the time of pestilence.
to my grief in mine own house) takes some first with a great chilness and
shaking, others with a hot sweat and often fainting: In some place it raineth
most in Winter, others it never annoyeth but in Summer. The first sort are to
correct the air about them with good fires, and burning of Lignum Aloes, Ebony,
Cinnamon bark, Sassaphras, and Juniper, which (as Matthiolus records Com. in
Diosc. ho. 1. cap. 88.
in his Herbal) retains his sent and substance a hundred years. Burn also the
pills of Oringes, Citrons, and Lemons, and Myrrh and Rosen; and the poorer sort
may perfume their chambers with Baies, Rosemary, and Broom it self. Make also a
vaporous perfume in this sort; Take of Mastick and Frankincense, of each an
ounce, Citron pills, Calamint roots, Herb-grass dried, and Cloves, of each three
drams; make all into a gross powder, and boil it gently in a perfuming pot with
spikewater and white wine. The second sort (I mean such as are sick of the
Plague in Summer, or are the first taken with a dissolving heat) should rather
burn sweet Cipres, Lignum Rhodium, Sanders, sprigs of Tamarisk, Gum tragacanth,
Elemi, Cherri-tree gum, and a little Camphire. Likewise their vaporing perfumes
should be of red-rose-leaves, Lignum Rhodium, and Sanders, with rose water and
Vinegar boiled together. So that according to the kind of taking, and the
season of the year, is the air to be corrected in the time of pestilence, and
not alike at all times with one perfume, which Marsilius Lib. de pesle.
Ficinus so diligently observes, that he blames many Physicians for their
general preferring of this or that masticatory: some extolling the chewing of
sage as one goes abroad, others the chewing of Setwall roots, others of
Elecampana, Cloves, Angelica, or Citron pills; which indeed are best in a cold
season; but in the hot time of the year and a hot Plague, the chewing of
Coriander seeds prepared, grains, Sanders, and the pulpe of Oringes, Lemons,
Citrons, or Pearmains, is far to be preferred before them.

The like may be said of sweet Pomanders strong of musk, civet, ambre, and
storax; which are no doubt good correctors of the pestilent air; but yet in
hot seasons and pestilences, nothing so good as the smell of a Lemon stickt with
lignum Rhodium instead of cloves, and inwardly stuffed with a sponge thoroughly
soaked in vinegar of red-roses and violets.

But here a great question arises, whether sweet smells correct the pestilent
air, or rather be as a guide to bring it the sooner into our hearts? To
determine which question, I call all the dwellers in Bucklers berry in London to
give their sentence: which only street (by reason that it is wholly replenished
with Physic, Drugs, and Spicery, and was daily perfumed in the time of the
plague with pounding of Spices, melting of gums, and making perfumes for
others) escaped that great plague brought from Newhaven, whereof there died so
many, that scarce any house was left unvisited.

Of variety and change of Air.
Hitherto of the correcting and tempering of distempered and infected air;
which being clean and purified, may yet through ignorance of wilfulness be
abused: For as Satyrus would needs kiss the glowing cole, and children delight
to put their fingers in the candle, so some know not how to use this general
nourishment, which is not given (as all other nourisments be) unto one
particular man or Country, but equally and universally unto all. Now there be
two sorts of air, as every man knows; the one open and wide unto all men,
the other private, shut within the compass of a house or chamber: that
permitted to any man which is in health; this proper to very many and sickly
persons, who receiving but the least blast of the outward air upon a sudden,
fall into great extremities, and make the recidival sickness to be worse then
the former. Many, and amongst them, my Lord Rich his brother, can justify
this, who almost recovered of the small pox, looked but out of a casement, and
presently was stricken with death. So likewise one Harwood of Suffolk, a rich
Clothier, coming suddenly in an extreme frost from a very hot fire into the
cold air, his blood was presently so corrupted, that he became a leaper; which
is an ordinary cause of the same disease in high Germany, as Paracelsus and
many other writers Lib. de lepra.
have truly noted. Again, some men tie themselves so to one air, that if they
go but a mile from home (like to fresh water soldiers) they are presently sick:
others are so delighted with variety, that no one air or Country can contain
them: of which humor was Agesilaus, Phocion, Diogenes, Cato, yea and Socrates
himself, who Aelian. 7. de v r. hist. Plut. in vita. Phocion. Sabel.* l. 2. c.
10 Plut. in vita. Porc. Cat. Coel. lib. 3. cap. 23. A. L.
sometimes lay abroad in the fields, sometimes at home, sometimes travailed one
Country, and sometimes another, that being accustomed to all airs, they might
(if necessity served) the better abide all. Furthermore in long diseases, it is
not the worst, but the best physic to change airs; which few can endure that
are tied in conceit or by custom only to one, and therefore that (of both
fantastical humors) is the most dangerous. Besides this, the time of going
abroad in the open air is to be considered; for some go out early before the
dew be off, and the sun up, which is very unwholsom; others also walk at night
after the dew falling, which is as perilous: for the dew to man's body is as
rust unto iron, in so much that it blasteth the face and makes it scabby
(especially in some months) if a man do wash himself with it. Furthermore some
men delight to travel in tempests and winds, which the very hedghog reproves,
and the beasts of the field eschew by seeking coverture: for strong and violent
winds, be (as Cardan calls them) the whales of the Lib. 10. de rer. var.
air, rolling clouds and meteors where and whether they list, beating down
trees, houses, and castles, yea shaking otherwhiles the earths foundation. Now
as some go abroad too much, so others with over-fearfulness take the open air
too little, sitting at home like cramb'd Capons in a close room, and not daring
in a manner to behold the light; better it were by degrees to go abroad, then
with such certainty of danger to stay at home; yet so that a calm, mild, and
temperate day be chosen, lest we make more haste outward then good speed, and
bewail the alteration of air through decrease of health. For as contrariety of
meats make tumults and rebellions in our stomachs, so contrary changes of air
upon the sudden, makes dangerous combats in our bodies: Yea though a fenny
air be thick and loathsome, yet suddenly to go dwell upon the high mountains in
a clear air, is a posting to death rather then a course to life, and albeit a
Southern Country be pregnant of corruption (for all trees lose their leaves
first on the Southside, and on the Southside houses decay soonest, and the
Southside of corn is soonest blasted, and malt lying in the Southside of a
Garner, is first tainted with weevels) yet suddenly Cardan. lib: 10. de var:
rer: c: 8.
to depart to a Northern soil, where the North wind chiefly blows, is to leave
the Sea to be forzen in ice, and brings imminent peril, if not hasty death to
the patient, yea to them that are otherwise sound of body: wherefore use the
open air in his due time, season, quantity, and order; else shall thou be
offended with that nourishment, which simply of all other is most necessary:
for as this invisible milk (for so Severinus calls the air) in time, season,
and quantity, nourishes these lower, and In Idaea med. phil.
perhaps the upper bodies: so being taken out of time, and longer, and lesser
then we should, it is both the child, the mother, and the nurse of infinite
mischiefs.

CHAP. V.
1. Of Meat, and the differences thereof, in Kind, Substance, Temperature, and
Taste.

PUrposing now to treat of Meats, I will keep this method. First I will show
their differences: then the particular natures of every one of them: Last of
all in what variety, quantity, and order they are to be eaten. Their
differences be especially seven in number; Kind, Substance, Temperature,
Taste, Preparation, Age and Sex. How many kinds of meats* there be.


1. Concerning the first, It is either of vegitable things only by ordination,
or of sensible creatures by permission. For whilst Adam and his wife were in
Paradise, he had commission to eat only of the fruit of the Garden; being cast
thence, he was enjoined to till the ground, and fed in the sweat of his brows
upon worts, corn, pulse and roots; but as for flesh, howbeit many beasts were
slain for sacrifices and apparel, yet none was eaten of men 2240. years after
the creation; even till God himself permitted Noah and his family to feed of
every sensible thing that moved and lived, as well as of fruits and green
herbs.

Eusebius lib. 1. de praepar. evang Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 4.
Nay the Indian Philosophers, called Brachmanes, did never a great while after
the flood taste of any sensible creature: and though Nimrod the great hunter
slew many beasts, yet flesh was even then untasted of the Babilonians Lib.
primo.
(and many hundred years after) says Herodotus. And verily till God would have
it so, who dared to touch with his lips the remnant of a dead carcass? or to
set the pray of a wolf, and the meat of a falcon upon his table? who I say
durst feed upon those members which lately did see, Plut. dees. carm
go, bleat, low, feel, and move? Nay tell me, can civil and humane eyes yet
abide the slaughter of an innocent beast, the cutting of his throat, the
mauling him on the head, the flaying of his skin, the quartring and dismembring
of his joints, the sprinkling of blood, the ripping up of his veins, the
enduring of ill savours, the hearing of heavy sighs, sobs, and groans, the
passionate struggling and panting for life, which only hard-hearted Butchers can
endure to see? Is not the earth sufficient to give us meat, but that we must
also rend up the bowels of beasts, birds, and fishes? yes truly there is enough
in the earth to give us meat, yea verily and choice of meats, needing either
none or no great preparation, which we may take without fear, and cut down
without trembling, which also we may mingle a hundred ways to delight our
taste, and feed on safely to fill our bellies. Nevertheless we must not
imagine, that God either idely or rashly permitted flesh and fish to be eaten
of mankind, but that either he did it for causes known to himself, or for
special favors showed to Symp. 8. cap. 8.
us. Plutarch writes that hens eggs in Egypt do hatch themselves in the warm
sun, and that wild connies breed every month: so that albeit by their rites of
religion the Egyptians were forbidden to eat eggs, or to kill for meat any
living creature, yet necessity caused them to eat both, lest their corn should
be devoured both in seed and blade, or they forced to do nothing else but to
bury young rabbets and to squash eggs; perhaps upon foresight of the like
inconvenience, God appointed men to eat flesh and fish: least happily
overflowing the earth by daily increase, there would scarce be any food left
for man, and man should not be able to rule his subjects. But the chiefest
thing which he aimed at in the permission, was (in my judgment) the health and
preservation of our lives: for as before the flood men were of stronger
constitution, and vegitable fruits grew void of superfluous moisture: so by the
flood these were endued with weaker nourishment, and men made more subject to
violent diseases and infirmities. Whereupon it was requisite or rather
necessary, such meat to be appointed for humane nourishment, as was in
substance and essence most like our own, and might with lest loss and labor of
natural heat be converted and transubstantiated into our flesh. And truly
whosoever shall with the Adamites refuse that Diet, which God and nature has
appointed; either because they think they should not, or because they would not
feed upon living creatures: I dare boldly avouch they are religious without
knowledge, and timorous without occasion; yea (unless naturally they abhor fish
and flesh, as some men may) they shorten their own lives and do violence to
nature.

How meats differ in substances.
2. Touching the difference of meats in substance: some are of thin and light
substance, engendring pure thin and fine blood, fit for fine complexions, idle
citizens, tender Gal. lib. de dissol. cont. Gal. lib. cib. de enchy. et. 1. de
fac. alim.
persons, and such as are upon recovery out of some great sickness: as chiken
peepers, rabbet suckers, young pheasants, partridge, heath-poulse, godwits, all
small birds being young, all little fishes of the river, the wings and livers
of hens, cockchickens and patridges, eggs warm out of the hens belly, etc.
Others are more gross, tough, and hard, agreeing chiefly to country persons and
hard laborers: Avic. 3. Fen. 1. tract. 1.
but secondarily to all that be strong of nature, given by trade or use to much
exercise, and accustomed to feed upon them: as poudred beife, bacon, goose,
swan, saltfish, ling, tunnis, salt samon, cucumbers, turnips, beans, hard
peaze, hard cheese, brown and rye bread, etc. But meats of a middle substance
are generally the best, and most Gal. ^. de alim. sac.
properly to be called meats; engendring neither too fine nor too gross blood,
agreeing in a manner with all ages, times, and complexions, neither binding nor
loosning the body, neither strengthening nor weakening the stomach, neither
procuring nor hindering urine or sweat, causing no alteration in coldness, heat,
dryness, or moisture; finally neither adding to the body by overnourishing, nor
detracting from it by extenuating, but preserving it in such estate as they
found it, restoring daily as much as daily decayed, and nothing or very little
more. Of which sort may be reckoned young beife, mutton, veal, kid, lamb, pig,
hen, capon, turkye, house-doves, conny, sodden lettice, skirrets, almonds,
raysins, etc.

How meats differ in temperature and distemperature.
3. As there is a certain temperature and distemperature of our bodies, so
likewise is there in meats; that temperate bodies should feed of their likes,
and distempered of their contraries. Wherefore God has appointed some meats
hot only in the first degree, etc.

Hot Meats.
Lamb, pork, pig, gosling, partridge, quail, thrush, sturgian, mullet, base,
oisters, cockles: cream, butter, figs, sugar, raisins, sweet apples, ripe
pomegranates, new hasselnuts, new almonds, asparagus, borrage, bur-rootes,
skirrit-roots, white thistle roots, hop buds, parseneps, wheat and rice.

Others hot in the second degree, as Hare, roe-buck, turkey, peacok, pigeon,
duck, turtle, pickled oisters, anchoves, honny, ripe mulberies, new walnuts,
pickled olives, preserved capars, pisticks, dates, chestnuts, artichokes,
carots* potadoes, persly, and radish roots, eryngo roots, nutmegs and saffron.

Some hot in the third degree, as scallops, mints, taragon, onions, leeks,
Alisanders, ^ld walnuts, cinnamon, ginger, cloves, and pepper.

Some are hot in the fourth degree, as skallions, garlic, and ramsies. Now
whereas all meats hot further then the second degree, are reckoned by
Physicians to be rather medicin then meat: I allow their judgment, for the
most sort of men; but not generally in all. For in Scythia and some parts of
Persia, as also in Scotland and Wales, many men's bodies and stomachs are so
full of cold and raw fleagme, that leeks, onyons, watercresses, and garlic is
made a nourishment unto them, which would gripe, fret, and blister temperate
stomachs. The like reason may be given, why Adders are commonly eaten of the
people called Ophiophagi, and venomous spiders of many in Egypt. Yea, my self
have known a young Maid, of an exceeding moist and cold complexion, whose meat
for two years was chiefly pepper, wherewith another would have been consumed,
though she was nourished: for it is hot in the third, and dry in the fourth
degree.

Cold Meats.
Of cold Meats, God has likewise appointed some of the first degree, as
Cow-flesh, steer-flesh, conny, rabbet, young hedghogs; Eeles, lumps, olafes,
fresh tunny, fresh sprats, fresh herrings, curds, and all sorts of pompions,
millions, cherries, strawberries, peaches, some apples, pears, quinces,
medlars, cervices: spinache, succory, sorrel, gooseberries, cabbage,
colewoorts, peaze and beans.

Others cold in the second degree, as tench, pike, shrimps, crabs, crevisses,
new cheese, prunes, damsins, apricots, and most sorts of plums, lettice,
endiff, citrons, oringes, lemmons, gourds, and cucumbers. Whatsoever exceeds
this degree in coldness can never be turned into our nourishment, howsoever
some one body by a proper Sympathy or long usage (as Docter Randal did) may
digest and nourish himself with poppy medicines.

Moist Meats.
Meats moist in the first degree, are these and such like: Wild bore; lamprey,
barble, cramb, shrimps, crevisse, pineapple-kernels, new filbirds, sweet
allmonds, dates, asparagus, spinache, borrage, hop buds, carrots, turnips* and
french peaze.

Meats moist in the second degree: Hedgebuck, turkey, young pigeon, young ducks,
young quails; fresh sturgeon, lump, olaffe, tunny, tench, eele, fresh oisters,
ruen-cheese. Meats moist in the third degree are only fresh pork, and young
pigs.

Dry Meats.
Neither has nature omitted to provide dry Meats for them, who by nature or
sickness are overmoistned: whereof some are dry only in the first degree, as
peacock, heathcock, the dorry, and all fresh fish lightly poudred:
strawberries, sour fruit, medlers, fennel, artichokes, colewoorts, raddish,
saffron, and cheese curds thoroughly pressed.

Others in the second in degree, as Oxe-beife, venison, hare, conny, partridge,
turtle, thrush, black-birds; mullets, crabs, perwinckles, cockles, honny,
cinnamon, nutmegs, ginger; galanga, pears, quinces, soure-pomegranats, pickled
olives, pisticks, chessnuts, succory, sorrel, persty, onyons, leeks, lemons,
citrons, beans and rice.

Others in the third degree, as flesh and fish long salted, stock fish, old
cheese, poudred capers, cervisses, mints, garlic, ramsies, scallions,
watercresses, cloves and cinnamon. Others in the fourth degree, as pepper, and
all things by miscookery over-peppered.

Temperate Meats.
Temperate meats are such, as hardly can be discerned to be either hot, cold,
dry, or moist, or if they can yet do, they never exceed, yea scarsly attain the
first degree. Of which sort, a young pullet, a crowing cockrel, a grown capon,
soles and perches, fine wheat, new laid eggs (eat white and all) being potcht,
and all small birds being young, are to be accounted.

How Meats differ in taste.
4. Being now come to the fourth difference of meats, which consists in
Taste, it is necessary to show how many kinds of tastes be found in
nourishments; whereof some be abominable to certain persons, though good and
pleasant in nature; Others contrarily desired and liked, though naturally not
appointed for meat; which if you call a sympathetical and antipathetical taste,
or an in borne tasting Meats of peculiar and extraordinray tastes.
or distasting, it will not be amiss: for though the words seem strange and hard
at the first, yet time and wearing will make them easy and common. What is more
unpleasant to most men's natures, then the taste of humane flesh? yet not only
some women with child have longed for it, but also the whole nation of Canibals
account it the sweetest meat of all others. It is also recorded that Neroes,
great Sueton. in Nerone.
gourdman, thought no meat pleasant but raw flesh* Fermius Sabel. lib. 10. cap.
10.
Saleucius loved the Sea horses so exceedingly, that he daily dived for them
amongst the Crocodiles of Nilus, Laert. lib. 6. Naucl. de greg. 3. pontif.
Gaugen. lib. 3. histor.
ventring his life to save his longing. Plato thought that Olives had the best
taste. Mecaenas coveted the fish of Asses foals, whereby the whole race of
Asses had been extinguished, but that he died in a good hour. The Germans once
(and now the Tartars) reckon horseflesh for the sweetest and best meats, even
as our Welshmen esteem of Cheese, Lancashire men of egg pies, and Devonshire
men Vergil 3. Georg
of a brown whitepot. What need I write of Achilles, who in his nonage living
with Chiron, desired most to feed upon Lions livers? or of the Vandales, who
long after Foxes; Gel. lib. 28 cap. 5. A. L. Herodo. lib. 4 Plin. lib. 6. cap.
24. Caelius lib. 28. cap. 2. A. L. Cardan. de. rer. var. Sabel. ex Herodot.
lib. 6.
or the Zygantes in Africa, that covet Monkies and Apes, no less then the
Carmanians love Tortesses, the West Africans Lisards, the Egyptians
Grasshoppers, the Candneans Serpents, the Corsicans and Maltanists young
Whelps, the Romans and Phrygians timber-worms, the Allmans Mites and Magots of
Cheese, and such filthy meats. Yea (if Herodotus an Sabellicus write a truth)
the Budanes desire to feed on Lice, which a Muscovite abhors to kill; least
unnaturally or unwittingly he might slay his own flesh and blood. It were
strange to believe (yet Fernelius Lib. 6. cap. 3. Patholog.
writes it for a truth) how a noble man of France found a greater sweetness in
quicklime, then in any meat beside, refreshing his stomach and hurting no
inward part with the Trincavella lib. 7. cap. 5. de cur. morb. ^entur. 3:
curat. 86.
continual use thereof. Others feed greedily upon rags of woollen cloth and
wall-morter: and Anatus Lusitanus remembers a certain young maid of twelve
years of age, who did eat usually stones, earth* sand, chalk, wool, cotton
and flox; esteeming their taste and substance better lib. 4: cap: hist. mir^b.
then of the finest and tendrest Partridge. Marcellus Donatus saw a girl so
longing after Lisards and Neauts, that she would hunt after the one in gardens,
and after the other in houses with a bough in her hand, as a Cat would hunt a
mouse, and eat them without hurt* Albertus Magnus (as Caelius reports) saw
another wench in Collen but Coel. l. 11. c. 13. ant. lect.
three years old, hunting as diligently after all sorts of spiders, with which
meat she was not only much delighted, but also exceedingly nourished. Yea
Doctor Oethaeus Lib. observe. propriarum.
tells a story of a certain Farmer in the County of Hirsberg, that feeds
chiefly upon potsheards finely beaten, batling no less with them then Mariners
do with eating biscuit. And Joachimus Camerarius (my dear and In epist ad Ioann.
Scl: eng.
learned friend) reports that a certain girl of Norimberg did eat up her own
hair, and as much as elsewhere she could get; neither conld she be persuaded by
parents or friends, to think it an unpleasant or an unwholsom meat.
Contrariwise Petrus Aponensis loathed milk: The Inhabitants Io. Mat. a Grad.
ep. de appetit. Cromer. l 20. Olaus, l* 20. c. 7 sept reg. Marant. l 3 de cogn.
simp.
of the new fishing Land abhor Oil; many men cannot abide the taste of Cheese,
others of flesh, others of fish, others of all sorts of fruit, and that
Bartimew Marnta his father was almost dead of hares flesh in a gallimawfery, it
is not unknown to Physicians. Nay some are naturally (or by imagination) so
perverted, that they cannot abide the sight of many meats, and muchless the
last. What Soldier knows not that a roasted Pigg will affright Captain Swan
more then the sight of twenty Spaniards? What Lawyer has not heard of Mr.
Tanfiels conceit, who is feared as much with a dead Duck, as Philip of Spain
was with a living Drake? I will not tell what Physician abhors the sight of
Lampres, and the taste of hot Venison, though he love cold; nor remember a
Gentleman who cannot abide the taste of a rab bet, since he was once (by a
train) beguiled with a young cat.

Nay (which was more) all meat was of an abominable taste to Heliogabulus, if
it were not far fetched and very dearly bought; even as some liquorish mouths
cannot Cranz. de reb. lituan.
drink without sugar, nor Sinardus hot stomach could break wine without snow;
which dainty and foolish conceit, though it picks a quarrel with God and reason
(after the nice fineness of Courtly dames, that abhor the best meat which is
brought in an earthen dish) and makes ulcers as it were in sound stomachs; yet
that there is a natural liking and disliking of meats, and consequently of the
tastes of meats, both the examples of men and women forenamed do justly prove,
and even Spaniels and Hounds themselves (I mean of the truer kind) by refusing
of Venison and wild-fowl in the cold blood, can sufficiently demonstrate.

Meats of ordinary tastes.
Now let us come to the ordinary tastes of meats, which are especially seven in
number; Sweet, Bitter, Sharp, Sour, Fatty, Salt, and Flash.

Sweet Meats.
Sweet Meats agree well with nature, for they are of a temperate heat, and
therefore fittest for nourishment; Gal. 4. de fac. simp. cap. 7.
they delight the stomach and liver, fatten the body, increase natural heat,
fill the veins, digest easily, soften that Isaac de univ. diet.
which is too hard, and thicken that which is too liquid; but if they be
over-sweet and gluttish, they soon turn into choler, stop the liver, puff up
lungs and spleen, swell the stomach, and cause oftentimes most sharp and cruel
fevers.

Bitter Meats.
If any thing be very bitter (as asparagus, hop-sprouts, and broom-buds) they
cannot much nourish either man or beast, unless they have first been boiled or
infused in Gal. 4. de simp. fac. c. 10. and s. ejusdem c. 25.
many waters: for otherwise they may engender (as they do) some choleric
humors, burning blood, killing worms, opening obstructions, and mundifying
unclean passages of the body; but their nourishment they give is either little
or nothing, and that only derived to some special part.

Sharp Meats.
Sharp Meats (as onions, skallions, leeks, garlic, radish, mustardseed,
cresses, and hot spices) dry the body exceedingly, being also hurtful to the
eyes and liver, drawing down humors, sending up vapors, inflaming the Avic 2.
can. cap. 3.
blood, fretting the guts, and extenuating the whole body: Wherefore we must
either taste them as they are, or not feed upon them till their sharpness be
delaid with washings, infusions, oilings, and intermixtions of sweet things.

Sour Meats.
Gal, de fac. alim. c ult.
Sour meats (as sorrel, lemons, oringes, citrons, sour fruit, and all things
strong of vinegar and verjuice) albeit naturally they offend sinewy parts,
weaken concoction, cool natural heat, make the body lean, and hasten old age;
yet they pleasure and profit us many ways, in cutting Gal. 2. de reg. ac. morb.
phlegm, opening obstructions, cleansing impurities, bridling choler, resisting
putrefaction, extinguishing Aristot: 22. problematum.
superfluous heat, staying loathsomness of stomach, and procuring appetite: But
if they be sour without sharpness (as a roasted quince, a warden, cervises,
medlars, and such like) then they furthermore strengthen the stomach, Anic in
univers. Diaet.
bind and corroborate the liver, stay fluxes, heal ulcers, and give an
indifferent nourishment to them that eat them.

Salt Meats.
Saltishness is thought to be an unnatural taste, because it is found in no
living thing. For the very fishes are fresh; so likewise is all flesh, and
every fruit, and all herbs which grow not where the sea may wash upon them.
Wherefore howsoever salt has the term of divinity in Homer, and Plato calls
it Jupiters minion, and the Athenians Homer 1. Iliad. Plato in Timae.
have built one Temple to Neptune and Ceres (because even the finest cakes be
unwholsom and unpleasant if they be not seasoned with salt) yet I hold it to be
true, that salt meats (in that they are salt) nourish little or nothing; but
rather accidentally in procuring appetite, strengthening the stomach, and
giving it a touch of extraordinary heat, as I will more perfectly prove when
Gal. 3. de fac. alim. and 3 de loc. aff. c. 6.
I treat of sawces. For salt meats (especially if they be hot of salt) engender
cholor, dry up natural moistures, inflame blood, stop the veins, gather
together viscous and crude humors, harden the stone, make sharpness of urine,
and cause leanness; which I speak of the accidental salt wherewith we eat all
meats, and not of that inborn salt which is in all things.

Fat Meats.
Fattiness is sensibly found not only in flesh and fish, of every sort, but
also in olives, coco's, almonds, nuts, pisticks, and infinite fruits and herbs
that give nourishment: Yea in serpents, snails, frogs, and timber-worms it is
to be found; as though nature had implanted it in every thing which is or may
be eaten of mankind. And Gal. 5 de alim. fac* Isaac de uni^. and partic. diaet.
verily as too much fattiness of meats glutteth the stomach, decays appetite,
causes belchings, loathings, vomitings, and scourings, choaketh the pores,
digesteth hardly, and nourishes sparingly; so if it be too lean and dry on the
contrary side (for a mean is best of all) it is far worse, and nourishes the
body no more then a piece of unbuttered stockfish.

Unsavory or unrelished Meats.
Flashiness or insippidity (which some call a maukish or senseless taste)
tasting just of nothing (as in water, the white of an egg, mellons, pumpions,
and pears, apples, berries, and plums of no relish) is of no taste, but a
deprivation or want of all other tastes besides; which be it found in any thing
that is dry (as in spices) or in things naturally moist (as in fish, flesh, or
fruit) it always argues an ordinary weakness in nourishment, howsoever
extraordinarily (I will not say unnaturally) it may strongly nourish some.
Avicen says truly in his Canons, Quod sapit, nutrit: That which relisheth,
nourishes: yet not Lib. 2.
so, but that unsavory things nourish likewise, though not abundantly nor
speedily: for what is more unsavory then fresh water, wherewith many fishes are
only nourished? what so void of relish as the white of an egg? yet is it to
aguish persons more nourishing then the yeolk; yea and stockfish will engender
as good humors in a rheumatick person, as the best pigg or veal that can be
brought him.

CHAP. VI.
Of MEATS.
How they differ in preparation, age and sex.
THe preparation of meats is threefold, One before the killing or dressing of
them, another in the killing or dressing, and the third after both. Of which
art Timochides Rhodius wrote eleven books in verse, and Numenius Heracletus
(Scholar to Dieuches that Athen l. 1 c. 2.
learned Physician) and Pitaneus Parodus and Hegemon Thasius compiled also
diverse Treatises of that argument; which either the teeth of time, or stomach
of envy having consumed, I must write of this argument according to mine own
knowledge and collections.

Whether an iron Ladle hinders Peace and Rice from seething? Whether roast meat
be best, and best tasted, larded, barded, scorched or basted? Beasts killed at
one blow are tenderest and most wholesome. Why all broth is best hot, all drink
best cold. Some fish, flesh, and fruits never good but cold; some never good
when they are cold; and yet we have all but one instrument of tasting.

Of fatting of Meats.
Lean meat as it is unwholsom, so it seemed also unsavory Gal. l. 4. antiq.
lect.
in ancient times; in so much that Q. Curtius being sewer at Caesar's table,
seeing a dish of lean birds to be set at the table, was not afraid to hurl them
out at the window. Also the Priests of Israel, yea the Heathen Priests also of
Rome and Egypt touched no lean flesh, Plut. in quaest. Romans
because it is imperfect till it be fat, fitter to feed hawks and vultures, then
either to be eaten of men, or consumed in sacrifice to holy uses. Hereupon came
a trial how to fatten flesh and fish (yea snails and tortesses, as Macrobius
Sat: 3. c: 13.
writes) by feeding them with filling and forced meats; Suet: in vit: Augusti:
casting not only livers and garbage into fishponds, but also their slaves to
feed their pikes (as did Vidius Pollio) and to make them more fat and sweet
then ordinary. Hence also came it that swine were fatned with whey and figgs,
and Plin: l. 8. c. 51:
that Servilius Rullus devised how to make brawn, and that the Egyptians
invented the fatting of geese, because Diod: l: 1: c: 6:
it was ever one di^h at their Kings table. Amongst the Romans it was a
question, who first taught the art of fatning geese; some imputing it to Scipio
Metellus, others to Marcus Sestius; but without contradiction, Marcus Aufidius
Lucro taught first how to cram and fatten Pl^n: l: 10: c. 20 and 22:
peacocks, gaining by it threescore thousand sesterties, which amounts to
3000000 l. of our money. Cranes and swans were fatted in Rome with ox-bloud,
milk, oatmeal, (...) es: carn:
barley, curds and chaulk mingled (to use Plutarch's phrase) into a monstrous
meat, wherewithal they were crammed in dark places* or else their eyes were
stitched up, by which means their flesh proved both tenderer, sweeter, whiter,
and also (as it is supposed) far wholsomer. Hens, capons, and cockrels, and
tinches were fatned by them of Delia, with bread steeped in milk, and feeding
in a dark and narrow place, that want of scope and light, might cause them to
sleep and sit much, which of it self procures fatness. In Varro's time men did
not only fatten Varro l: 3: rer. rust:
conies in clappers, but also hares, and made them (of a melancholic) a most
white and pleasant meat, according to that of Martial, Inter aves princeps
pinguis (me judice) turdus,
Inter quadrupedes gloria prima lepus.
Amongst the feathered knights, fat thrushes do excel,
Amongst four-footed squires, the hare deserves the bell,


But here a question may be moved, Whether this penning up of birds, and want
of exercise, and depriving them of light, and cramming them so often with
strange meat, makes not their flesh as unwholsom to us as well as fat? To which
I answer, that to cramb Capons, or any bird, and to deprive them of all light,
is ill for them and us too: for though their body be puffed up, yet their flesh
is not natural and wholesome; witness their small discolored and rotten livers;
whereas Hens and Capons feeding themselves in an open and clean place with good
corn, have large, ruddy and firm livers. So great is the diversity betwixt a
crammed, I may say a strangled, and captive Capon, and betwixt a gentleman
Capon feeding himself fat without art. Wherefore the best fatning of all fowl,
is first to feed them with good meat (for like food, like flesh.) Secondly, to
give it them not continually as crammers do, forcing one gobbet after another
till they be fully gorged, but as often as they themselves desire it, that
nature be not urged above her strength; not in a coope or close room, for then
the air and themselves will smell of their own dung, but in a clean house
spacious enough for their little exercise; not in a dark place, or stitching up
their eyes, for that will cause them to be timorous, or ever sleepy; both which
are enemies to their bodies, and consequently to ours: for every man knows that
fear marreth concoction, and sleepiness bereaving us of exercise, hinders
digestion. Yea young Pigeons whilst they are in the nest (be they never Avic:
fen: ^: tract: 12:
so fat) are reckoned but an unwholsom meat; but when they follow and fly a
little after the dam, then are they of great and good nourishment. The like may
be said of the fatting of beasts, for they are not to be stied or stalled so
close that they cannot stir, but to have sufficient room for to walk in, as
well as to feed in, that they may be wholesome as well as fat, and not corrupt
our bodies with their own corruption. So likewise fish kept in great ponds
where they may rove at pleasure, are better then such as be mewed in a narrow
and shallow ditch; which not only we shall find by inward digestion, but also
by outward tasting; yea look what difference there is betwixt tame and wild
Conies, betwixt Deer fed by hand, and Deer fatning themselves in the Chase and
Copses, the like shall you perceive betwixt forced fatness, and fatness gotten
by natural and good diet.

Another thing also is to be observed before the killing of any beast or bird;
namely, how to make it tenderer if it be too old, and how to make it of the
best relish: Patrocles affirmed, that a Lion being showed to a strong Bull
three or four hours before he be killed; causes his flesh to be as tender as
the flesh of a Steer: fear dissolving his hardest parts and making his very
heart to become pulpy. Perhaps upon the like reason we use to bait our Bulls
before we kill them: for their blood is otherwise so hard, that none can digest
it in the flesh, but afterward it is so far from being poisonable, that it
becomes tender and nourishing food. Perhaps also for this cause old Cocks are
coursed with little wands from one another, or else forced to fight with their
betters before they are killed. Perhaps also for these causes, so much filthy
dung is brought from common lestals into great gardens; namely to cause roots
and herbs to be fatter and tenderer then they would be: which intent I do not
disallow, only I wish that no other soil were used, then what proceeded from
the earth or from brute beasts. Concerning the manner of killing, it is diverse
in diverse Countries. The Grecians strangled their Swine, and did eat them with
their blood. The Romans thrust them through the body with a spit red hot,
whereby death ensuing without cooling and voiding of blood, the flesh seemed
far more sweet and tender. But if Plut. lib. de es. carn.
a sow were ready to farrow, they trampled upon her belly, bruising her pigs,
and the kernells of her dugs with the milk and blood ot once, eating them for
the most delicate meat, as some delight in the bruise or pudding of the Deer.
Plutarch also avoucheth, that Sheep killed by Wolves, Sim. ^. quaest 9.
Birds by Hawks, Geese by Foxes, Hares or Deer by Greyhounds, eat much
sweeter, kindlier, and tenderer, then if they be killed suddenly by sleight or
violence. Yea I have heard of a Lady in England, that let a score of Partridges
be brought unto her, some killed by the Hawks, others at the foot of Dogs,
others by men, she will discern that which the Hawke killed at sowce from all
the rest, having tasted but one morsel.

Furthermore as there is a reason of cutting down wood for timber (namely in
the prime of the Moon, or about the last quarter) and a special good season of
moulding Plut. 3 Sim^os. quart. 10.
bread, and laying of leavens (this before the full of the Moon, that in the
full it self) so there is likewise a season to kill Beasts Birds and fishes,
and to eat the fruits of Gardens and Orchards. For experience teaches that
Hens are best in January, eggs in February, Lamb, Kid, Pigeons and Veal in
March, herbs in April, Cockles in May, Bucks and Salmon in June, July, and
August, Gurnards in September; Oisters in all Months in whose name an R. is
found, Pork, Bacon, and Cabbage in frosty weather, etc.

Nay further it is to be considered, whether a Deer be stricken stone dead at a
blow, though he be in season, or suffered to dye languishing upon his hurt; for
his skin be it never so well dressed, will soon shed his hair and wax worm-eaten
if it languish, whereas as otherwise it will hardly corrupt at all in a long
season: wherefore no other reason can be given, then that by the one way
natural heat is inwardly restrained, and by the other way of killing outwardly
expired. So likewise there are seasons for gathering of fruit, herbs, flowers,
seeds, and roots, which whosoever observed not carefully and diligently, he may
sees bones for flesh and (to speak more properly) stalks for lettice. For all
things have their several times, and there Eccle* (...)
is a season for each purpose under heaven. A time to plant, and a time to pluck
up; a time to kill, and a time to preserve. The last preparation is after the
killing of sensible creatures, or the gathering of the which are only
vegetable: all which preparations are divided into five principal actions,
garbelling, boiling, rosting, baking, and frying. Garbelling is a taking away
of all things from any creatures, which are counted either hurtful or
unnecessary: as the flaying of Beasts, pulling, and scaling of fouls, garbaging
of all things that have corruption in their bellies, voiding of piths, cores,
rinds, and stones in roots, apples, Macrob. 3 sat.
and plums, etc. For albeit the first cooks were so unskilful, that they roasted
Oxen skin and all, yet reason after taught them to reject the outward, as they
had upon just cause emptied the inwards. The other four preparations are so
necessary, as that all things in a manner are subject to them. What is raw
flesh till it be prepared, but an imperfect lump? for it is neither the beast
it was, nor the meat it should be, till boiling, roasting, bakeing, or
broiling, has made it fit to be eaten of men. Diocles being asked whether were
the best fish, a Pike or a Conger: that says he, if it be sodden; this if it
be broild; but none Athen. lib. 8. cap. 6.
better then another if they were raw: only Oisters of all fish are good raw
(yet he was no Coward that first ventered lib. 4. cap. 3.
on them) being called of Athenaeus the Prologue of feast, because ever (as we
use them) they were eaten foremost. Other fish being eaten raw, is harder of
digestion then raw beife: for Diogenes died with eating of raw Laertius.
fish, and Wolmer (our English Pandereus) digesting iron glass and oister
shells, by eating a raw Eele was overmastered. Nay the Icthyophagi themselves
feeding only on fish, do first either roast them in the Sun, or prepare them
with fire before they eat them; having stomachs far hotter then ours, and
consequently more proper to digest them. As for raw flesh (besides Butchers,
Cooks, Poulterers, Slaughter men, and Canibals) who dare almost touch it with
their fingers? much less dare any grind it with their teeth, no not that
Egyptian, who was Neroes gourman. Suet. in Ner. lib. 4 de. fac. simpl. med. cap
8. and 16.


Now as Galen says of Chestnuts, that being roasted in embers, they are sweet
and drying, being sodden in broth they are sweet and moistning; being roasted
with their husk they eat delicately, being roasted without their husk they
eat rank and sourish, being sodden without their husk they prove unsavory:
so may I say of all other meats whatsoever, that according to the kind of
preparation, they either keep relinquish or alter their propriety. If hereupon
you ask me what meats is best boild, and what roasted I answer that flashy
meats and naturally moist should be dressed with a dry heat (as in baking,
broiling, frying, and rosting) and meats naturally exceeding in dryness and
firmness should ever be boiled. Temperate meats may be used any way, so they be
not abused by miscookery, which even Diocles knew many years ago, saying (as
before I noted out of Athenaeus) that a Pike is best when he is boild, and a
conger when he is broild; because that is a firm and solid fish, this of a
moist soft and eely substance. But forasmuch as in my particular discourses of
several meats, I purpose to touch their best preparing, I will surcease to
speak any more generally of the dressing of meats, either before they are
bereaved of life, or in or after their death: only this I conclude, that who
sees not a great difference betwixt meats killed in season, and out of season,
betwixt raw meat and parboild, betwixt fri'd meats and baked meats, spiced and
unspiced, salt and fresh; betwixt asparagus once washed and twice washed, betwixt
cabbages once and twice sod, etc. is in my judgment deprived of his wits, or
else over-wedded to his will. For who is ignorant that cabbages once sod loosen
the belly, but twice sod (I mean in several waters) procure most dangerous and
great costiveness? Lib. 1. de. fac. simp.
who knows not (as Galen affirms) that Asparagus often washed is a good
nourishment, but otherwise so bitter that it wholly purges? what stomach of
any such dullness, that being overmoist it confesses not amendment after the use
of spiced, salted, baked, and dry roasted meats; and contrariwise complains of
hurt by fresh liquid sodden and unsavory meats?

The difference of meats in age and sex.
6 Last of all meats differ in age and sex, for the flesh of sucklings is
moistest, most slippery excremental and viscous; the flesh of old beasts are
tough, lean, hard, dry, and melancholic: Wainelings less, hard, and dry then
the one, and withal more firm, temperate, and nourishing then the other. But
generally they are best for most complexions, when they are almost come to
their full growth both in height, length, and bigness: for then as their temper
is best so likewise their substance is most proportionable to our natural
moisture, which is neither so hard that it is unchangeable, nor so thin and
liquid that it is over easily disolved. Concerning the difference of meats in
sex, the males of beasts, fish, and foul are more strong, dry, and heavy of
digestion, the females sweeter, moister, and and easier to be concocted: but
gelt beasts, kerned fowls, and barren fish, are counted of a middle and better
nature then them; as an Ox amongst beasts, a Capon amongst birds, and a Pike
wounded in the belly can well testify; who therefore being unable to conceive
again, fatten abundantly, (as experience daily shows in our London fishponds)
and becomes a most delicate meat. Now are we come to the particular natures of
every meat, and first to them which are called by the name of Flesh.

CHAP. VII.
1. How many sorts of flesh there be.

2. Whether flesh or fish were first eaten of, and whether of them is the
purest and bestnourishment.

IT will seem strange perhaps unto some, that they begin first to treat of
flesh, which was one of the last foods appointed unto mankind by the voice of
God. For (as before I touched) till 2240 years after the flood, we read of no
flesh eaten or permitted to be eaten of any man. Neither indeed was it needful
whilst herbs, fruits, and grain, were void of that putrefying moisture,
whereto ever since the flood they are subject, and whilst men's stomachs were so
strong and perfect, that in a manner no meat could overthrow them: and verily
were the Sun of such power with us, as it is in Southern Countries toward the
Equator, to ripen our fruits thoroughly, and to take them as it were upon the
Tree; no doubt being freed from their crudities and superfluous moisture, they
would give as good nourishment unto us (and perhaps far better) then any flesh.
But now our complexions waxing weaker and weaker through abundance of sin and
riot, and our climate being unapt for wholesome and much nourishing fruits, let
us give God thangs for storing us with flesh above all other Nations, making
our Shambles the wonder of Europe, yea verily rather of the whole world. Now
all the flesh we have is taken either from beasts, or birds, or things creeping
upon the ground.

The difference of flesh.
Of the first sort some are tame, as the Bull, cow, ox, and calfe; thc ram,
ewe, weather, and lamb, the he-goat, she-goat* geled goat, and kid, the bore,
sow, hog, and pig: Others wild, as Venison, red and fallow, wild bore,
roebucks, hares, connies, hedg-hogs, and squirrels.

Amongst tame Birds these are most familiar unto us: Cock, hen, capon, chicken,
turkey, peacock, goose, guinyhens, duck, and pigeon: amongst wild foul some keep
and feed chiefly upon the land, as Bystard, crane, heronshaws, byttors, stork,
Pbeasant, Heathcock, partridge, plover, lapwing, cuckoe, pie, crows, woodcocks,
rails, red shanks, gluts, woodsnites, Godwits, smirings turtles, stockdoves,
rockdoves, ringdoves, jayes, wood peckers, stonechatters, thrushes, mavis,
feldefares, blackbirds, stares, quails, and all sorts of little birds; as
sparrows, reed sparrows, larks, bulfinches, goldfinches, thistlefinches,
citron-finches, bramblings, linnets, nightingales, buntings, wagtailes,
robinredbreasts, wrens, witrolles, siskins, oxeys, creepers, titmise, titlings,
swallow, and martlets. Others live in or upon the water,, as Swan, Bergander,
Barnicle, wildgeese, wildduck, Teal, widgin, fly-duck, shovelars, cormorant,
curtues, gulls, black-gulls, seamewes, cootes, water railes, sea-pies, pufins,
pivers, shell drakes, moor-cocks, and moorehens, dobchicks, Water Crows
kingsfishers, water-snits.

Of creeping things I know none but the snail in our Country, which some esteem
not only for a meat, but also for a meat very restorative. And thus much of the
kinds of flesh. Now let us come (for recreations sake) to the comparison
betwixt Flesh and Fish; which of them is the more ancient, pure, and wholesome
meat for man's body; whereat perhaps both Butchers and Fish Whether flesh or
fish be the more ancient pure and whlosome meat.
mongers will be much pleased, and perhaps no less of fended: but I will write
what I have read, and leave the determination to others that can better judge.

Whether flesh or fish be the more ancient, pure, and wholesome meat.
The Charter-Monks to the preferring of fish before flesh, use especially these
arguments: First, That Christ did feed most upon it; for we never read but once
that he did eat flesh; but that he did often eat fish it is proved Bald. in
postillam Carthusianorum.
by many places, namely, Mat. 15. Luc. 5. 9. Mar. 6. 8. John 6. Furthermore he
restrained by name no kind of fish from the Israelites, but diverse kinds of
flesh; which shows that fish is the cleaner, purer, and more holy meat: for
the action of Christ should be our instruction, and his works our imitation.
Thus much said Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury, of whom Rainulphres writes
this story. When Baldwin was chosen ^. ^olychron.
Archbishop of Canterbury, he swear that from the time of his enstallment, to
his dying day, he would never eat flesh: whereby his body so decayed, that he
fell into a consumption: An old woman meeting him on the way as he was carried
in an open Horselitter, called him liar to his face: whereof being reproved by
some of his followers, Why (said she) do you rebuke me? does he not lie, for
saying that he never ate flesh since his enstallment, when his face shows
that he surpassed the savages in eating his own flesh? For indeed by
superstitious observing of his vow, he became an anatomy, and lived as a
cipher amongst men.

But to answer the Carthusians arguments, I say this; That Christ in the places
of Scripture cited before, asked his Disciples what meat they had? and they
answered, None but a few loaves and a few fishes; wherewith he satisfied
himself and his Disciples, and above five thousand persons at one time: Neither
is it to be doubted if they had had flesh, but he would have fed the people
with that: For it was his property (which every man ought to follow) to eat
with thanksgiving of that which was set before him, were it flesh or fish; as
no doubt he did at the marriage in Canan, in Lazarus his house, and the house
of Zacheus, and at the feast of the passover, which albeit (for ought we read)
he did but once celebrate, yet reason and Religion teaches us, that according
to the commandment of God, he did every year celebrate it before, since the
time of his childhood; else Exodus 12. 24*
the Jews would have accused him as a transgresser of the Law, and by justice
have cut him off from amongst the people: but as he submitted himself to
circumcision (being then one of the Sacraments of the Church) so questionless
after the years of discretion, he did yearly eat of the pascal lamb (for he
came not to break any Law given by Moses, but to fulfill it) which cannot be
fewer then five or six and twenty times at the least. As for the other argument
taken from the restraining of certain beasts and birds by name, and that no
fish by name is there forbidden: Saving Baldwin his graces reverence, it is a
very lie: For when God generally forbids the Israelites to eat of any fish,
that wants either fins (as Lev. 11. v. 9, 10.
the Poulpe, Periwinkles, Lobsters, and Crabs) or scales (as the Eele, Lamprey,
Plaise, Turbot, and Conger, etc.) does he not expressly forbid them to eat of
Poulps, Periwinkles, Lobsters, Crabs, Eeles, Lampres, Plaise, Turbot, and
Conger, and a hundred fish more wanting either scales or fins? Fish is
therefore no purer meat then flesh, neither can a Carthusian eat a Sole (being
a meat forbidden the Israelites) with a sounder conscience then a piece of Bief
or Swines flesh.

Finally, where he says that the actions of Christ should be our instruction,
and his works our imitation: Why do not those fishy Friars eat flesh every
Maundy Thursday, since Christ himself did so, whom we ought to imitate? But let
these alone to the conformity of their 1 Epist. ad Timorh. cap. 4. v. 3.
Church injunction, remembering also with St. Paul, to abstain from no meats
which God has created for our life and health.

Hieronym: in Epist.
It is recorded by St. Jerome in his Epistles, that Seneca upon a foolish
conceit abstained so long from flesh, and fed only upon fruit and fish
(infected perhaps with the leaven of the Egyptian Priests) that when upon
Neroes commandment he was to bleed to death, there did not spring from him a
drop of blood. The like is written of Marul. lib. 1. decad. 1.
St. Genovese, the holy Maid of Paris, who (like the Egyptian Prophetess)
abstained wholly from flesh, because it is the mother of lust: she would eat no
milk, Polydor Verg lib: 3. cap. de rer. invent.
because it is white blood; she would eat no eggs, because they are nothing but
liquid flesh: Thus pining and consuming her body both against nature and
godliness, she lived in a foolish error, thinking flesh more ready to inflame
lust, then fruit or fish, the contrary whereof is proved by the Islanders,
Groenlanders, Orites, Plin lib. 7. cap 21. Diod. lib. 3. ap. 3. Herod. lib. 2.
and other Nations; who feeding upon nothing but fish (for no beast nor fruit
can live there for cold) yea having no other bread then is made of dried
Stockfish grinded into powder, are nevertheless both exceeding lecherous, and
also their women very fruitful. Yea Venus the mother of lust and lechery is
said to have Cic. 3. de not. Dior.
sprung from the foam of fish, and to have been born in the Sea, because nothing
is more availeable to engender ust, then the eating of certain fishes and
sea-plants, which I had rather in this lascivious age to conceal from
posterity, then to specify them unto my Countrymen, as the Grecians and
Arabians have done to theirs. What Nation more lascivious then the fenny
Egyptians, and the Poeonians? yet their meat was only fish, yea they fed their
horses with them, as Herodotus writes. Also in Heb. 2.
the Isle of Rhodes, the Mother-seat of a strong and Warlike Nation, the people
heretofore fed chiefly of fish, abhorring with such a kind of detestation from
flesh, that Ael. lib. 1. de vac: h^ss.
they called the eaters of it savages and bellies. And verily if a strong,
lusty, and Warlike Nation sprang from the eaters of fish alone, why should we
deny, that fish is as much provoking to venery, as any flesh. So then, I having
fully proved that flesh is as lawful, as pure, and as holy a meat as fish; Now
let us try which of them is the more ancient and best nourishment

lib. de es carn.
Did we but mark (says Plutarch) the greasy fowlness of Butchers, the bloody
fingers of Cooks, and the smell of every beasts puddings and offal: we must
needs confess, that first every thing was eaten before flesh, which even still
we naturally abhor to see whilst it is in killing, and few touch without
loathing when it is killed. The Indian Philosophers. called Brachmanes, being
at length induced to feed upon living creatures, killed fish for their
sustenance, but abhorred from flesh. And though Eusebius. 1. de prap. eu.
the Babylonians delighted much after Nimrods example, in hunting and killing of
wild beasts, yet (as Herodotus Alex. ab. Alex* lib. 4.
reports) they abstained from flesh, and lived wholly upon fruit and fish.

For answer of which Objections, I oppose to the Babylonians, Abraham and the
holy Scriptures; which making mention of a Calf dressed and eaten in Abraham's
house, before ever any mention is made of eating of fish; it is very probable
that flesh was foremost, after the general permission to eat both. To the
Indian Sophisters Ge^. 18. v. 8.
I oppose Pythagoras and his Scholars, who being Genesis 9. v. 3.
persuaded at the length to eat of certain beasts and birds, utterly yet
abstained from eating of flesh, perhaps Gal. lib. cap. 8.
upon these causes. First because it is a cruel and unmanlike thing, to kill
those creatures which cannot possibly hurt the inhabitants of the earth.
Secondly, what necessity is there to use them, Nature having replenished the
earth with fruit, herbs, grain, beasts also, and birds of all sorts? Thirdly,
Had fish been eaten first, no doubt it had been first eaten of the Islanders
and Sea-borderers; Plut. and Symp. quest. 8.
but neither the inhabitants of Hellespont, nor the Islanders of Phoeacum, nor
the Wooers of Penelope (bringing all manner of dainties to their feasts) are
ever read in Homer to have brought or eaten fish. No nor Ulysses his companions
are recorded to have made their Sea-provision of fish, but of flesh, fruit,
salt, and meal; neither used they any hook to catch fish withal, till they
were almost famished for want of victual (as you may read at large in Homer his
Ulysses) which is a manifest argument, That fish was not used (or at the least
not eaten of) till men were unfurnished of other meats.

Last of all, whereas Plutarch objecteth how loathsome a thing it is to see
Butchers and Cooks sprinkled with blood in killing and dressing flesh. I answer
him, That the sight is not so loathsome to nature, but to niceness and conceit.
For what God permits to be eaten, nature permits to dress and kill; neither
rebelleth she more at the death of an Ox, then at the cutting down of hay or
corn. Nay furthermore, since all was made for man's use, and man for God, she
gives us liberty to kill all things that may make for the maintenance of our
life, or preservation and restoring of our health. Hippocrates most wittily
having showed, that some men are deceitful by nature, and that therefore nature
taught them the art of making Dice (the instruments of deceit) he shows
consequently, that because nature is provident for men's health, therefore she
has likewise invented the arts of building, plaistering, weavin g and tillage:
wherefore (to imitate and urge Hippocrates argument) if nature have provided
flesh and fish (that a substantial, this a more light nourishment for our
bodies) how squemish soever we are to see them killed, yet it is no unnatural
thing to see it, no not to do it our selves.

Concerning the last question Whether flesh or fish be the better nourishment;
I cannot answer better then as Galen did, being asked the like question of wine
and water. For as wine is best for one man, and water for another; so likewise
flesh is most nourishing to some constitutions, and fish to others. Timothy
was young, but yet sickly and weak stomacked, his youth required water, but his
sickness wine; wherefore Paul, like a good Physician; advised him to drink no
longer water, but a 1* Tim. 5. v. 23.
little wine for his stomachs sake, and his often infirmities. So likewise
Severus the Emperor being sick at York, of a hot gout, his Physicians forbad
him all flesh, especially Sextus Aurel.
of the stronger sort; but he refusing their council, nourished his disease with
forbidden meats, and soon died. Contrariwise Seneca was forbidden by Serenus
Hieron in Ep.
the Physician to eat any more of fish, being too too watrish a nourishment for
his weak body; which whilst he refused to do and forbear to eat flesh, his
blood was all turned to a gellied water. So then in respect of particular
persons, neither flesh nor fish be of better nourishment, but both alike: yet
generally flesh engenders the better, purer, and more perfect blood (as the
very color and face of men which use either of them apart, does perfectly
declare;) and consequently for sound men, it is and ought to be accounted the
best sustenance.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Of the Flesh of tame Beasts.

VEAL.
CAlves Flesh is of a temperate constitution, agreeing with all ages, times,
and temperatures. Calves are either Sucklings or Wainlings: The first are of
easier digestion, making good blood, and driving choler from the heart: So
likewise is the Wainlings, but somewhat harder; either of them agree with hot
and dry persons, howsoever it is dressed; but to flaggy 3 de fac. alim. c. 2.
and moist stomachs, Veal is unwholsom unless it be dry roasted; for roasted
meats give dry nourishment, and Valthas. Pisanellus l. de esc. and potul.
boiled meats moist, as Galen writes. The Italians are so in love with Veal,
that they call Veal Vitellam, that is to say, their little life: as though it
gave not only nourishment, but also life to their dry bodies: which albeit I
confess to be true, by reason neither their Calves flesh, nor their own bodies,
be so moist as ours; yet in our Country it falls out otherwise through
abundance of moisture; so that howsoever sound bodies do well digest it, yet
languishing and weak stomachs find it too slimy, and can hardly overcome it:
Did we not kill them so soon as commonly we do, namely, before they be fully
Gal. 3* de alim. sac. c 7.
a month old, they would give the more sound and wholesome nourishment; for till
they be five or six weeks old, their flesh is but a gelly hardened; afterward
it is firm flesh, void of superfluous moisture, and most temperate of
constitution. Likewise in the choice of Veal, the Bull Calf is thought the
sweeter and better flesh, whereas in all other beasts (for the most part) the
female is preferred.

Lib. de cib. bov. and mal* succi. and 3 de alim. fac* cap. 1.
BEEF.
Ox-beef, the older it is after his full growth, the worse it is, engendring
(as Galen dreamed of all beef) quartane agues, leprosies, scabs, cankers,
dropsies, stoppings of the spleen and liver, etc. but whilst it is young, or
growing forwards in flesh and fatness, it is of all meats by nature,
complexion, and custom, most nourishing unto English bodies; which may easily
appear in the diffecence of their strength, and clean making, which feed
chiefly upon it, and betwixt them that are accustomed to finer meats. Choose we
therefore the youngest, fattest, and best grown Ox, having awhile first been
exercised in wain or plough to dispel his foggie moisture; and I dare
undertake, that for sound men, and those that labor or use exercise, there is
not a better meat under the Sun for an English man; so that it be also corned
with salt before it be roasted, or well and sufficiently poudred before it be
sod: for so is it cleansed from much impurity, and made also more savory to the
stomach: but if it be over salted, poudred, or dried (as commonly it happens
in Ship provision and rich Farmers houses, that keep beef a whole twelvemonth
till they eat it) it is tough, hard, heavy, and of ill nourishment, requiring
rather the stomach of another Hercules who is said to have fed chiefly of Bulls
Athen. lib. 7. cap. 1.
flesh) then of any ordinary and common ploughman. Wherefore howsoever we may
taste of it to bring on Isaac. 4 de (...) dieta. c. 7.
appetite, let it be but a touch and go: for being eaten much and often, it will
heat and corrupt our blood, dry up our bodies, choke the mesaraical veins, and
bring forth many dangerous inward and outward griefs. The Macrob 3. sat cap. 13.
Romans when they first ventured to dress an Ox (fearing belike what event
might follow the eating of an unknown meat) roasted the Ox all at once, and
stuffed his belly with all sorts of sweet herbs, and good flesh that the season
yielded, making no small pudding in his belly, which the people called Equm
Trojanum, the Trojan horse: because it contained no fewer kinds of meats then
that did Soldiers; but had they known the wholesomness of the meat, and our
manner of dressing, they needed not to have mingled so many antidotes, and to
have corrupted rather then corrected so good a nourishment.

Cow Biefe.
Cowbiefe is supposed by the Irish people, and also by the Normans in France to
be best of all: neither do they account so much of Oxen; either because they
think the unperfit creatures, or rather (as I take it) because they know not
how to use and diet them in the gelding. But were they as skilful in that
point, as also in the killing and dressing of Oxen, as was Prometheus; no doubt
they would make higher estimation of one Ox, then of all the fat Cowes in
Ceres stall.

3. Dealim. fac. est 2: and temperam.
Nevertheless I deny not, yea I affirm with Galen that a fat and young Heifer,
kept up a while with dry meat, will prove a convenient temperate and good
nourishment, especially if it be killed after the French fashion, as I saw the
Norman butchers kill them in our Camp, whilst I lay there in Camp with that
flower of Chivalry the Earl of Essex. When the Cow is struck down with the axe,
presently they lay her upon her back, and make a hole about the navel, as big
as to receive a swans quill, through which the butcher blows wind so long,
till the whole skin swell round about like a bladder, in such sort that the
beast seems of a double bigness; then whilst one holds the quill close and
blows continually, two or three others beat the Cow as hard as they can with
cudgils round about: which beating never bruseth the flesh (for wind is ever
betwixt it and the skin) but makes both the hide to prove better Leather, and
the flesh to eat better and tenderer then otherwise it would.

Bull Beife.
Bull Beife, unless it be very young, is utterly unwholesome and hard of
digestion, yea almost invincible. Of how hard and binding a nature Bulls blood
is, may appear by the place where they are killed: for it glaseth the ground
and makes it of a stony hardness. To prevent which mischief either Bulls in
old time were torn by Lions, or hunted by men, or baited to death by dogs as
we use them: to the intent that violent heat and motion might attenuate their
blood, resolve their hardness, and make their flesh softer in digestion. Bulls
flesh being thus prepared, strong stomachs may receive some good thereby,
though to weak, yea to temperate stomachs it will prove hurtful.

Lambs Flesh.
Galen, Halyabbas, and Isaac, condemn Lambs flesh for an over phlegmatic and
moist meat: breeding ill nourishment, and through excessive watrishness
slipping out of the stomach before it be half concocted, in cold stomachs it
turns all to slime, in a hot stomach it corrupts into choler, in aged persons,
it turns to froth and phlegm, in a young person and temperate, it turns to no
wholesome nourishment; because it is of so flashy and moist a nature: all which
I will confess to be true in sucking Lambs who the nearer they are killed to
their birth day the worse they are: but when they are once weaned, and have fed
half a year upon short and tender grass, I think that of all other flesh it is
simply the best, as I will prove by divine and humane reason. For as in the new
Testament, the Lords Supper materially consists of two such things, as there
cannot be any drink or meat devised more comfortable nor more strenthening to
the nature of man, namely Bread and Wine: so likewise the blessed Sacrament of
the old Testament, could not conveniently be so well expressed as in the eating
of that, which was the purest, most temperate, and most nourishing of all
meats: and what flesh is that I pray you? Veal? Pig? or Goats flesh? or the
flesh of wild beasts? or the flesh of Birds? no, but the flesh of a sound
weaned Lamb, of a year old, whose flesh is neither too cold and moist, as is a
sucklings; nor too dry, and hot* as when it has strength to know the Ewe: but
of a most temperate constitution, fittest to resemble the thing signified, who
is of all other Athen. lib. 1. cap. 4.
our best nourishment. Philochorus is recorded to have made a law that the
Athenians should eat no more Lambs flesh: not because they thought it too
tender a meat for men's stomachs (as some foolishly have conceived) but because
the people found it so wholesome, pleasant, and nourishing, that every man
desired it above all meats: in such sort that had not the eating of them been
restrained by a severe law, the whole race of Sheep Cael. lib. 28. cap. 2. A L.
would have decayed amongst them. Upon the like reason Valens the Emperor made
a law that no Veal should Diod. lib. 1. cap. 6.
be eaten; which was counted in old time a princely meat (for always it was one
dish at the Kings table in Egypt, though they never had but two) howsoever
through God his singular blessing it is an ordinary meat amongst us in mean
households. The best way to prepare Lambs flesh is sufficient roasting; for
boiling makes it too fleshy and phlegmatic, and by over-rosting the sweetness
thereof is soon dried up. Yea all Mutton (contrary to the nature of Pork, Pig*
and Veal) should rather be too raw then too much roasted; according as the
French men find by experience, who slash and cut a giggot of Mutton upon the
spit, and with the bloody juice thereof (tempered with crumbs of bread and a
little salt) recover weak stomachs and persons consumed. Wherefore howsoever
some naturally abhor it (as my honest friend Signor Romano) and strong stomachs
prove better with harder meat; yet without all question, a Lamb chosen and
dressed in manner aforesaid, is for most men a very temperate nourishing and
wholesome meat, agreeing with all ages, times, regions and complexions.
Arnoldus Freitagius Tract. de Ver. vece.
in his natural history, says that the hinder quarters of a Lamb being drawn
with rosemary and garlic first steept in milk, and moderately roasted at the
fire, is a meat most acceptable to the taste, and also profitable to moist
stomachs, for which it is else commonly thought to be hurtful. Also he
assures, that Lambs flesh being well beaten with a cudgel before it is
roasted, eats much better and is far wholesomer: which I leave to be judged
by the Cooks experience.

Mutton.
Why Mutton makes one live longer then ^^y meat.
Mutton is so generally commended of all Physicians, if it be not too old, that
itis forbidden to no persons, be they sick or sound. The best Mutton is not
above four years old, or rather not much above three; that which is taken from
a short hilly and dry feeding, is more sweet short and wholesome, then that
which is either fed in rank grounds, or with pease-straw (as we perceive by
the taste) great fat and rank fed sheep, such as Somerset shire and
Linconshire sends up to London, are nothing so short nor pleasant in eating,
as the Norfolk, Wiltshire, and Welsh Mutton; which being very young are best
roasted, the elder sort are not ill being sodden with bugloss, borrage, and
persly roots. Now if some shall here object, that gelding and spading be
unnatural actions; and that Eunuchs are subject to more diseases then perfect
men: inferring thereupon a reason or likelihood, that the like may be also in
all gelded ware (and lib. 3. de alim. fac. cap. 1.
consequently in Muttons) contrary to that which Galen has affirmed; I will
deny all their positions upon good grounds. For even nature has deprived some
things of that which gelders cut away; and that Eunuchs are freed from many
diseases (as Gouts, Baldness, Leprosies) whereunto other men are subject,
experience in all ages truly avoucheth. Last of all, it is generally confessed
of all lib. 1. de la. maison rushque.
skilful Shepherds, (and namely by Charles Steven and John Liebault) that Ewes
and Rams are subject to far more maladies then Muttons; requiring greater cost,
care, skill, and providence to maintain them in health.

Rams flesh and Ewes flesh.
As for Rams flesh and Ewes flesh (that being too hot and dry, this too
excremental and soon corrupted) I commend neither of them, especially in this
Country of ours, where there is (God bethanked) such choice of wholesome
Wethers.

Kid and Goat.
As Lambs flesh is lighter and moister then other Mutton, so is Kid more light
and moist then Goats flesh: because (...) de. vict. rat.
(as Hippocrates reasons) it is less bloody, and the blood which it has is
very moist, liquid, and fine. The black and red Kids are better then the white:
and the younger they are (so they be above a fortnight old) the more wholesome
and nourishing they are esteemed. Their flesh is soon and quickly digested, of
excellent nourishment, and restorative after a great sickness: especially for
young persons and hot stomachs, but naught for them which are old and
phlegmatic. It is better roasted then sod, and the hinder parts are to be
prefered because they are dryer and less excremental. They are temperately hot
and moist, whilst they are under six weeks age: for afterward they grow to
such heat and lasciviousness, that (before they are wained) they will after
they have sucked, cover their own dam; after they are once wained, their flesh
may be fit for strong laboring men, which would not so well brook a tender
suckling; but for the most part of men it is unwholesome and of bad juice.

The Old He-goat is suitable to an old Ram, save that it is more tough, hard,
and unpleasant; his flesh is not to be eaten, till he has been baited like a
Bull to death, and Haly abb. s. theor.
when he is dead you must beat the flesh in the skin, after the French fashion
of beating a Cow.

The She-goat being young, is less hurtful; but an old She-goat is worse and of
a more sharp and corrupt juice: rather provoking venery and sharpness of seed
(as also the Male does) then nourishing the body.

A gelded Goat was unknown unto ancient Physicians, but questionless it is the
best next to sucking Kid; for it is more moist through abundance of fat, and
also of more temperate heat because it wants stones; in which I certainly
believe a more violent heat to be placed, then in any part beside: yea whereas
the liver draws only from the stomach and guts by the meseraical veins, and
the heart only from the lungs and liver, and the brain from all three; the
stones have a heat which draws seed from the whole body, yea from the bones
and gristles, as Hippocrates Lib. de genit.
writes and reason collecteth.

Furthermore the tolerable smell which a gelded goat has, shows that his
flesh is far sweeter: but He-goats Athen. lib. ^. cap. 24.
and She-goats are so rank, that a Fencer of Thebes feeding much of them, no
man could endure his sweat. Also the chief Priest of Rome did never so much as
touch them says Plutarch, because they are subject to the falling i^ Quest Rom
sickness, letcherous in life, and odious in smell.

Pigg, Sow, Bore, and Hogg.
Piggs flesh by long and a bad custom is so generally desired and commended,
that it is credibly (though falsely) Sheep and Piggs, the younger the better.
esteemed for a nourishing and excellent good meat: Indeed it is sweet,
luscious, and pleasant to wantons, and earnestly desired of distempered
stomachs: but it is the mother of many mischiefs, and was the bane of mine own
Mother. A sucking Piggs flesh is the moistest flesh simply of all other;
engendring Crudities, Palsies, Agues, Gal 3* de alim. ^ac.
Gowts, Apoplexies and the stone: weakening the memory (for it is moist in the
third degree) procuring fluxes of the belly, and engendring most viscous,
flashy and corrupt humors. Their flesh is hardly digested of a weak stomach,
and their leather-coat not easily of a strong. The younger they are, the worse
they are: yet some venture Plut. lib. de es. carn.
upon them (yea covet them) ere they be eight days old; yea the Romans delicacy
was such, that they thought them dainty meat being taken blood and all out of
the Sowes belly ere she was ready to farrow, eating them after a little
bruising in the blood, no less greedily then some do the pudding of a bruised
Deer. We do well in roasting our Piggs at a blazing fire, sprinkling them with
salt on the outside: but if we stuffed their bellies with a good deal of salt as
well as sage, and did eat them with new sage, and vinegar and salt, they would
be less offensive. The Danes I remember (when I was at Elsenore) draw them with
garlic as the French men do with lard: which is no ill correcter of their
sliminess and viscous humor. The Bore-Pig is not preferred before the Sow-Pig:
because it is strong and rank.

Lib. 8. ^. 51. in P^n* and Bucc^.
Bores flesh (I mean of the tame Bore) is never good but (...) it is brawn'd;
which though Pliny avoucheth to be first invented by Servillus Rullus, yet by
Plautus it seems to be a more ancient meat.

The best way of brawning a Bore is this of all other, which I learned first of
Sir Thomas George, and saw practiced afterward to good purpose. Shut up a
young Bore (of a year and a half old) in a little room about harvest time,
feeding him with nothing but sweet whey, and giving him every morning clean
straw to lie upon, but lay it not thick. So before Christmas he will be
sufficiently brawned with continual lying, and prove exceeding fat, wholesome
and sweet; as for the common way of brawning Bores, by stying them up in so
close a room that they cannot turn themselves round about, and whereby they are
forced always to lie on their bellies, it is not worthy the imitation: for
they feed in pain, lie in pain, and sleep in pain: neither shall you ever find
their flesh so red, their fat so white, nor their liver so sound, as being
brawned otherwise accordingly, as is before rehearsed. After he is brawned for
your turn, thrust a knife into one of his flanks, and let him run with it till
he dye: others gently bait him with muzled Dogs. The Roman Cooks thrust a hot
Iron into his side, and then run him to death; thinking thereby that his flesh
waxed tenderer and his brawn firmer.

De diaet. partic.
Sows Flesh is reckoned of Isaac, to engender good blood, to nourish
plentifully, yea to be restorative if it be young. But an old Sow breeds ill
juice, is hardly concocted, and begets most viscous humors. The
Heliopolitanes abstained from Sows flesh of all others: First, because
(contrary to the nature and course of all other beasts) she admits the Bore not
in the full, but in the wane of the Moon. Secondly they demand, How can Plut.
l. de Isid.
her flesh be wholesome, whose milk being drunk, fills our bodies full of
leprosy* scurf, tetters and scabs? Yea a sow is one of the most filthy
creatures in the world; her belly is never void of scurf, her throat of kernely
imposthumes, her brain so heavy and moist, that she cannot look up to heaven;
or rather she dare not, being the Plut 5 f* mp.
rooter up, and so bad an inhabitant of the earth. Nevertheless I am of Isaacs
mind, that a young Sow kept long from the Bore, sweetly dieted with roots,
corn, and whey, and kept from filthy feeding and wallowing, may be made good
and tolerable meat for strong stomachs, after it has been powdered and well
roasted.

Pork and Bacon.
Now concerning Pork and Hogs flesh, made of a spaded Sow, or a Hogg gelded,
verily let us say thereof (as Plut. 5. symp.
Theon said of all sorts of swine) if it be not good for meat, wherefore is it
good? his cry is most odious and harsh, his smell loathsome, his very shape
detested: at home he is ravening, in the field rooting, and every where filthy,
foul, unhappy, and unprofitable. All which hurts he recompenceth in this only
one, that of all other beasts 3. de alim. fac. c. 13.
(if Galen be not deceived) he most nourishes: especially if he feed abroad
upon sweet grass, good mast and roots; for that which is penned up and fed at
home with taps drappings, kitchen offal, sour grains, and all manner of
draffe, cannot be wholesome. In Plinies time they Plin. l* 8. c. 51.
were so far from fatting them with such refuse, that (considering they were to
be eaten of themselves) men usually fatted their hogs with milk and figgs. But
since that course is more chargeable then necessary for Englishmen; either let
their hoggs feed themselves fat abroad with grass and mast, or at home with
only sweet whey, and a little grounded corn, then which they cannot have a more
sweet meat.

Furthermore, to use Galens encomium or phrase of a hogg (whereby you may swear
he was no Jew, nor Lopus no good Physician) howsoever nothing less resembles a
man, then a Hogg in his outward, yet inwardly no creature resembles him more:
For the color and substance of his flesh, the shape, figure, connection,
suspension, proportion, and situation of his entrails, differ little or nothing
from man's body: and besides that (when he is of a just grouth) his temper is
also most like to ours. Thus much out of Galen for the praise of Pork; whom
albeit Rea^dus Columbus, and Vesalius do oppugn in their Anatomies concerning
the likelihood of a man's and a hoggs entrails; yet none hitherto denied Pork to
be a a temperate meat, being corned and roasted, or sodden after it has been
well powdered. Nevertheless, (to yield mine own opinion) I esteem it (by Galens
leave) a very queasie meat, howsoever it be prepared, and to have in it self
always, flatuosum chacochynicum and febrile quid. For if you eat it fresh, it
is as dangerous as fresh Sprats to an aguish stomach: if you eat it corned, yet
is it of gross juice, and speedy corruption, unless by mustard and sorrel sauce
it be corrected: If it be sodden and powdered* green-sawce made of sorrel, is
to be eaten with it, both to cool the fiery nature of the salt, and also to
qualify the malignity of the flesh it self: If it be salted and made into
Bacon, how hard is it to be digested in most men's stomachs, either boiled or
fried? Yea the Caretanes of Spain (whom Strabo* writes to be the best L. 3. de
orb ^it.
makers of Sawsages and salt meats in the whole world) and the Normans in France
(whose Bacon flitches and jambons Varro extolleth) could never so dry Bacon, or
make Pork into such wholesome Sawsages, seasoned with L. 2. de re rust.
Pepper, Salt, and Sage, but that it needed a draught of Wine more then ordinary
to macerate and digest it in the stomach. It is recorded that Leo the tenth,
Pope of Rome, loved Pork so exceedinglv, that he bestowed above two thousand
crowns a year in Sawsages, mingling P. Iov. in vita* Leon. x.
the brawnes of Peacocks, with Porks flesh, Pepper, and other Spices, which were
afterward called Leonis incisia, Leo his Sawsages. But when Hadrian the sixth
his successor perused the accounts, and found above ten thousand Ducats spent
by his predecessor in that one meat, he detested him (says Jovius) as much
dead, as he honored him whilst he was alive.

Finally, no Brawn, Pork or Bacon, should be eaten without Wine, according to
that old Verse made in Salern School (which some no less account of then the
Schol. sal c. 5.
Heathen did of Apollo his Oracles) Est caro porcina sine vin^ pejor ovina;
Si tribuis vina, tune est cibus and medicina.
As Mutton tough, Pork without Wine
Is not esteemed so good:
But if that Wine be drunk thereon,
It Is Physic both and Food.


Or if Wine be scarce, drink after such meats, a good draught of your strongest
beer well spic'd with Ginger, and then labor it out (as Ploughmen do) for ease
after gross meats is very dangerous; but strong labor overcomes all things.

As for the entrails of Hoggs, and especially the Harsenet Plin. l. 28 c. 9.
(which Publius Syrus preferred before all meats) I find them to be stopping,
and of bad nourishment; yet the Livers of Piggs are counted nourishing, but
their Lungs are watrish and very phlegmatic.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Flesh of Wild Beasts, or Venison.
Wild Bore, and Wild Sow.
OF all Venison, Hippocrates most commends the flesh of a Wild Sow, because
it is not only an excellent Lib. 2. de victrat.
nourishing and strengthening meat, but also medicinable to keep us from
costiffness. Reason teaches us that it is far above tame Pork or Swines
flesh: First, because it feeds more purely; secondly, because it has not meat
brought to hand, but gets it by travail, and has choice of Diet to feed
whereon it lists. Thirdly, it is not penned up (as commonly our Swine be) in
a little Close and stinking Stie, but enjoys the benefit of a clear air,
which clarifieth blood, as much as any meat can augment it. It is a rare meat
in England, and found only (as I have been informed) in my Lord Latimers Woods,
who took great pleasure in hunting them, and made also wild Bulls of tame ones,
as our Forefathers (more wisely) made tame of wild.

If they be young, fat, fully grown, and taken in chaso, in the Winter time
(presently after mast is fallen) they are unfit for few men's stomachs, being
thus prepared as I have seen them dressed in High- Germany. First, after the
flesh is thoroughly cold, parboil it in Rhenish Wine, wherein ripe Juniper
berries were sodden: then having taken it out and sliced it, season every slice
or cut thereof with Pepper, Salt, Cloves, Mace, Ginger, and Nutmegs, of each a
sufficient quantity, last of all make it in paste, with good store of sweet
butter and it will prove a most excellent meat to be eaten cold.

Wild Calves are common in Wales upon the Mountains: whence one was brought
this last Christmas to Ludlow Castle, where I did eat of it roasted and baked;
and by taste I find it more firm and dry, and by the effects of digestion, more
wholesome and passable then our ordinary Veal.

Red and Fallow Deer.
Now concerning Deers Flesh, which Isaac in his old age so much longed for;
some imagine it to be the worst meat of all others, and some conceive it to be
the best. Genesis 25. L. 5 de vict. atten.
Galen numbreth it amongst hard, meclancholique, and gross Meats, comparing,
yea almost preferring Asses flesh before it; ascribing also unto it ill
concoction, ill nourishment, stoppings, and quartane Fevers. Roger L. de
retard* fen.
Bacon thinks it one of the best meats, if it be so young that we can digest
it: For, says he (Quod diu sem tipsum, alios illud diu conservare potest) that
which long lives by its own nature, makes also others to live long. But by
his leave, we may then feed better upon Ravens then Capons, for these never
live above seven years, and a Raven lives to nine hundred years, if Virgil
be not deceived. Plutarch thinks Deer an unwholsom meat, because it is of a
cold and melancholic constitution. And how L. quaest. not.
proves he that? forsooth 1. because he is fearful: secondly because if he were
of a hot complexion (as the wild Bore is) his tears would be sweet, as his
be; but the tears of a Dear (and especially of a Stagg) are salt: ergo, he is
of a cold and dry constitution. But Empedocles was of sounder opinion, who
ascribes all tears to the working of heat: for as milk yields whey by
stirring, churning and pressing, so any violent passion (be it joy or grief,
anger or pity) churneth the blood, stirs the humors, and presses the
brain, whereupon tears (the wheyish part of them all) must needs ensue.
Furthermore they are thought to be unwholsom, because Bucks and Staggs feed
Plut. de sol. anim.
much upon snakes: yea as an Ass is to a Lions mouth, or honey to Bears, or Bees
to Martlets, so are Serpents to them a most desired meat; whereupon the
Grecians call them (...), Serpent catchers. Might I be a sufficient Arbitrator
between two so Learned men, I would determine the truth to be on either side:
For indeed young Venison, whilst it is sucking, is very restorative; neither do
I think old Isaac in his declining age to have Genesis 25.
delighted more in it in respect of taste, then in respect of wholsomness and
goodness. Also a gelded Deer is neither too dry, nor too cold, but of a
temperate constitution, and so void of superfluous or excrementitious humors,
that his horns never grow again after he is gelt, which Aristotle, and all
Philosophers impute to superfluity of heat and moisture. Nay young Bucks and
Does, Hinds and Staggs (whilst they are in season) are a wholesome and delicate
meat, breeding no bad juice of themselves, yet bearing often the faults of bad
Cooks (which know not how to dress nor use them aright) but more often the
deserved reproaches of greedy Gourmands, that cannot moderately use the good
creatures of God; either eating venison when they should not, or more liberally
and usually then they should. The Italians also Pisanel. de esc. and potul.
have this opinion of Venison, that eaten in the morning, it prolongeth life,
but eaten toward night, it hasteneth death. Contrariwise old Venison indeed is
dry, and perhaps too cold likewise; full of gross, clammy, and incorrigible
humors: So that the same meat may be wholesome at some age, in some times, and
for some certain complexions, which otherwise in contrary circumstances is
unwholsom: yet is it never so precious as that a man should venture his life to
get it by stealth, as many do, and have done in Noble men's Parks, yea perhaps
in their lib. 6. de v* rer.
Princes Forests and chief Chases. Cardan affirms that Bucks and Does have no
Galls in their bodies, which is rather a sign of good temperature and
lightness, then of any dull, dry, or heavy meat. This one thing only I will
add, That Keepers of Parks, or at the least their servants and young children,
have, upon my knowledge, fed all the year long of little meat else, and yet
remained as strong, healthful, and active, as any persons could be. Finally,
admit Deer be dry; does not butter amend them? Suppose they be cold; does not
pepper and salt, and baking, give them sufficient heat? Thus, howsoever it
falls out, they are either by preparation (which none can deny) or by nature
(as I verily believe) a good nourishment, so that they be chosen in their due
season, just age, and moderately fed upon: Neither have we any reason from
their unwholsomness to dispark our Parks, or to c^t down Forests provided for
their succor; nay rather we ought to cherish them for the maintenance of
Hunting, whereunto if young Gentlemen were addicted, as their Fathers were
heretofore (they would be more ready (whereof Hunting is a resemblance) to
Warlike purposes and exploits.

Roebuck and Capreol.
But of all Venison Roebuck and Capreol bareth away the bell; for whereas the
forenamed beasts are discredited for their grosness of blood, the Capreol his
blood is exceeding fine, through his swift running, and continual frisking and
leaping from place to place, whereby his pores are ever opened, and all bad
humors consumed by exercise, so that the very smell of his flesh is not heavy
nor fulsome (as in other Deer) but fragrant, quick and delightful; neither has
his flesh the ordinary taste of Venison, but a peculiar and more pleasant
taste: neither lies it heavy upon any stomach, but is digested as soon as Kid;
curing also (as Isaac writes) the falling sickness, In diaet univ.
colic, dropsy, and abundance of fleam collected in any part. It is permitted
to all indifferent stomachs, and forbidden only to Children, colerick
constitutions, lean and consumed bodies, shrunck sinews, and burning agues. The
Alps are full of them in high Germany, and some of our mountains of Wales are
not without them. They are good roasted, sodden, or baked as red Deer; but you
need not to pepper or salt them half so much, for their flesh (even when they
are old) is easily digested, and scarce needs a cup of wine (which other
Venison necessarily requires) to hasten their concoction. Furthermore, where
all kinds of other Venison are not good but at certain seasons, yet the Capreol
is never out of season: being alike wholesome in Summer and Winter, and alike
toothsome, as the borderers of the Alps do best know, and our own Country men
might perceive if they made trial.

Hares.
Lampridius.
Hares or Leverets (the beloved meat of Alexander Severus) taken in hunting,
roasted with fresh lard, and Gal. de vict. atten.
eaten with Venison sauce, cannot offend a reasonable stomach. Galen says that
the flesh of a Hare prevents fatness, causes sleep, and cleanses the blood:
how be it 3 de alim. fac. cab. 1.
in another place he says, that it breeds gross blood and melancholic
humors: which unless he understand only of old, lean, and unseasonable Hares,
experience it self will overthrow him; For take a young Leveret, and let it
blood as you do a Pigeon, the flesh of it will be very white, tender, and well
rellishing; yea little inferior to a midso^mer Rabbet. Yet I deny not (with
Hippocrates) Hares be often leprous.
that it dries more then ordinary meats: for it provokes much urine, and so
accidentally moistneth little, Lib. de fac. esc.
though it be moist enough of its own nature. Pissanellus writeh (and the
Italians generally believe it) that eating of much hares flesh makes a man
fair and merry seven days after; For which purpose perhaps they were Varro. 3.
lib. agric.
so much in request amongst the Romans, who fatned young Hares in clappers, as
we do Connies, finding them so dieted to be a delicate and wholesome meat: tame
Hares so prepared are good at all times but wild Hares are best and fattest in
the hardest time of Winter. Certain it is, that much eating of Hares flesh
procures leanness; because it is very diuretical, and common sense teaches,
that a man pissing much cannot be fat, because the wheyish part of blood
(called of Hippocrates (...) the sled of nourishment) is sooner expelled then
that it can carry nourishment throughout the body. The neither Germans hang
their Hares six or seven days in the cold and shadowy air before they flay or
dress them: whereby they prove exceeding tender, though a night or two nights
hanging were sufficient. We do usually boil the foreparts in broth, and roast
only the hinder parts: and not without reason; for as in Kid and Lamb the
hinder parts are driest; and therefore we sees them, the foreparts over-moist
and therefore we roast them: so contrawise a Hare is driest before, and
moistest behind.

Matthiolus. Com. in lib. 2. Diosc. cap. 18.
Now concerning such Medicines, as Matthiolus avoucheth to be taken from a Hares
harsenet, from his skin, gall, kidneys, bones, stones, hair, blood, and dung;
I think it impertinent to the treatise of Diet, which shows not how to give
Medicines but to use nourishments.

Connies.
It is not to be thought strange that Hippocrates and Galen, and all the
Grecians wrote so little of Connies, which with us, above all other Nations is
so common a Strab* lib. 4.
meat. For as Ithaca never bred, nor fostered them, so in all Greece they hardly
lived. Here (thanks be to God) they are plentiful, in such sort that Alborne
Chase affords above a hundred thousand couple a year, to the benefit of good
housekeeping, and the poors maintenance. Rabbet suckers are best in March,
agreeing as well with old melancholic dry, and weak stomachs, as disagreeing
with strong and moist complexions. A Midsomer Rabbets flesh is less moist and
more nourishing; but a Michaelmas or Winter Rabbet is of firm, wholesome,
temperate, and most laudable flesh: best roasted, because their nourishing
juice is soon soked out with the least seething, making good broth and bad
meat. Choose the Female before the Male, the fat before the lean, and both from
out a chalky ground and a sweet laire.

Hedghoggs.
When I considered how cleanly the Hedghogg feeds, namely upon Cows milk (if
he can come by it) or upon fruit and mast; I saw no reason to discontinue this
meat any longer upon some fantastical dislike; since books, nature and
experience has commended it unto us. For as Martial made Hares flesh the
daintiest dish of the Romans, 2 de vict. rat.
so in Hippocrates time the Hedghogg was not of least account among the
Grecians; which he commends for an excellent nourishment, were it not
something Jas. Prat.
too moist and diuretical. Nay (as some affirm) it nourishes plentifully,
procures appetite and sleep, strengthens Travailers, preserves Women with
child from miscarrying, Jo. Necker. Syntax. 3.
dissolveth knots and kernelly tumors, helps the Lepry, Consumption, Palsy,
Dropsy, Stone, and Convulsion; only it is forbidden unto Melancholic and
Phlegmatic persons, and such as are vexed with Piles or Hemorhoids.

Squirrels.
Squirrels are much troubled with two diseases, Choler and the
Falling Sickness; yet their hinder parts are indifferent good, whilst they are
young, fried with parsley and butter: but being no usual nor warrantable good
meat, let me skip with them and over them to another tree; for it is time to
write of the winged nation, which promise us a second course of more dainty, I
will not say of more wholesome meats. Neither shall any discourse Plin. lib. 8.
c. 43
of Asses flesh (which Maecenas so highly loved, that all Italy was too little
to find him Asses enough) nor of horse Nauclerus.
flesh (for longing after which Gregory the third excommunicated the Germans)
nor of Foxes flesh (which the Vandales eat for restorative) nor of Lions flesh
(wherewith Virg. 3. Georg. Guagnimus.
Achilles was dieted in his pupillage) nor of Bears flesh (which the Moscovite
calls his great venison) nor of Apes flesh though it most resembles a man
(which the Zygantes in Africa highly esteam and eat of in their solemn feasts)
nor of Lysards, Tortesses, or any other fourfooted beasts: nor of man's flesh,
albeit the Canibals lib: 2. de gest. Emanu. Athen. lib. 10. cap. 1.
praise it above all other (as Osorius writes) and Cambletes King of Lydia
having eaten of his own wife, said he was sorry to have been ignorant so long
of so good a dish. As for the flesh also of young puppies (commended of
Hippocrates 2 de vict. rat. lib. 3. de. alim. fac. cap. 1.
and afterward of Galen) howsoever in the Isles of Corsica and Alalta they are
still esteemed as good meat, yet Cardan says in his diverse history, that they
made the people like to dogs, that is to say, cruel, stout, rash, bold, and
nimble. Wherefore leaping over these insolent and bad meats, which neither use
nor reason has confirmed. I now to come treat of Birds and fowl, and then of
fish, and the fruits of the earth, and waters according to my first division.

CHAP. 10.
Of the Flesh of tame Birds.
THat the Flesh of tame foul nourishes more then wild foul, Isaac the
Physician proves by three S. partic. Diaet.
arguments. First, because they are more usually eaten of, and so by custom (a
second nature) made more agreeable to our stomachs. Secondly, where al other
Birds fly from us, and are not gotten without cost and travel: nature has
caused tame Birds to converse with us, and to offer themselves (as it were) to
be killed at our pleasure: which verily she would never have done, had they
been of a small or a bad nourishment. Thirdly, wild foul (for the most part)
especially such as fly far for a little meat, and trust more to their wings
then their feet, though they are more light in digestion, because they are of a
more spirituous and aerie substance; yet they are not of so abundant
nourishment as tame household Birds, which feed not at random of what they can
get, but of good corn, such as men themselves eat, and therefore most fit to
nourish man.

Now of all kind of fowl, remember that the youngest is tenderest and lightest;
old Birds flesh is heaviest, but they which are proceeding to their full growth
are most nourishing; for ungrown Birds (and much more nestlers) give but a weak
thin and gelly-like substance, old Birds are tough and dry; those which are
almost fully grown are of a more fleshy and firm nature.

Furthermore all Birds feeding themselves abroad fat with wholesome meat, are
of better nourishment then such as be crammed in a coop or little house: for as
prisoners smell of the Gaol, so do they of their own dung.

And thus much generally of birds: Now let us come to every particular.

Pulli Gallenacei.
2 can. and Fen. 3. t^. 1.
Chickens (says Avicen) are so pure and fine a meat, that they engender no
excrements in our bodies, having in themselves no illaudable substance:
Wherefore Caius Pisanel* de esc. and potul. ex. Plinio.
Famius being sick of a burning fever which had almost consumed all his flesh,
was advised by his Physicians to eat of no other meat then Chickens: whereby he
recovered his consumption; and the eleventh year after the second Carthaginian
Wars, made a Law, that nothing but Chickens or young Pullets fed in the Camp
should be brought to him at his meals. The young Cockrels are counted the best
in this kind, being of all flesh the most commendable, nourishing strongly,
augmenting seed, and Joach. Curaeus. in situanim
stirring up lust: For which purpose Boleslaus Duke of Silesia did eat thirteen
Cock-chickens at a meal; whereof he died without having his purpose fulfilled,
because he knew not how to use so wholesome a creature.

We do not amiss in England to eat sodden Chickens and Bacon together, for if
they were eaten first, and Bacon after, they would oversoon be digested, and if
they were eaten after Bacon, they would be corrupted: but Platina lib. 6. cap.
16. Bucinus lib: 6: cap: 9:
they are best being roasted, because they are a moist meat; and if they be
sawced with Sorrel and Sugar, or with a little Butter and Grape-Verjuice, they
are a most temperate meat for weak stomachs (as Platina and Bucinus set down)
for no man I think is so foolish as to commend them to Ploughmen and Besomers.
White Chickens are found by experience to be hardest of digeston, as Gilbert
our Countryman writ a great while since: Yet Griunerius prefers them for
Hectic persons, because they are coldest and moistest of complexion. They are
all best in Summer, as contrariwise Pullets and Hens be best in Winter.
Cock-chickens are best before they crow loud, Hen-chickens before the cock
offers to tread them.

Galli.
Gal. 3. de alim* fac.
Cocks Flesh, the more old it is, the less it nourishes; but if they be young,
and kept from their Hens, and dieted with white bread and milk, or wheat steept
in milk, they recover men out of Consumptions, and Hectic fevers: and then
their stones, livers, and loins, are of excellent good nourishment: being
sodden they are nothing worth, for their goodness is all in the broth: as for
their flesh, it is good for nothing but to dry and bind the stomach. Galen
says, that as the broth of a Hen binds l. and vict. atten.
the body, and the flesh loosneth the same; so contrariwise the broth of a Cock
loosneth, and the flesh binds. They of the game are esteemed most wholesome;
called of the Romans, Medici galli, Cocks of Physic, because the Physicians
most commended them: Amongst which, if I should prefer the Kentish kind for
bigness and sweetness, I suppose no injury to be done to any Shire of England.
Choose the youngest (as I said) for nourishment: Rhas. 23. Cont. Avenz. 1. and
2. Theisir. Halya. s. theor.
for if once he be two years old, his flesh waxes brackish, tough, and hard of
digestion, fitter to be sodden in broth for the loosning of the belly, then any
way to be dressed for increase of nourishment.

Gallinae.
Hens are best before they have ever laid, and yet are full of eggs; they also
are best in January, and cold months, because long rest and sleep in the long
nights makes them then fattest. Their flesh is very temperate Elluch. c. 2. l. 3
(whilst they are young) of good juice, and large nourishment, strengthening
natural heat, engendring good blood, sharpning a dull appetite, quickening the
eysight, nourishing the brain and seed, and agreeing with all ages and
complexions; for they are neither so hot as to turn into choler, nor so cold as
to turn into fleagm, nor so dry as to be converted into melancholy (and yet
Rhasis imagines them to have a secret property of breeding the Gout and
Hemorrhoids) but turn wholly, or for the most part into blood, making a lively
color in the face, and quickening both the eyesight and every sense. Pullets
Rhas. 24. Con.
flesh (says Avicen) helps the wit, clears the voice, and increases the
seed, which is a manifest argument that it nourishes greatly; which also
Gallen confirms by many other arguments; but that argument of increasing seed
is the chiefest of all, seed being the superfluity or abundance of nourishment.
Hens flesh is sweetest, when they are not too much fed, but dig out their meat
with 3 de fac alim.
their heels in a clean flour; for exercise consumes the superfluous moisture,
which else cannot but make them more unpleasant. Nevertheless the Delians used
to fat them with bread steept in milk, and Platina, Apicius, and Stendelius
show many ways to fatten them; but the best way is to let them fat themselves
with pure corn cast amongst chaff, that by exercise of their legs in shuffl^ng
and Plin. lib. 10. c. 1
scraping they may make their flesh to eat better, and prove more wholesome; and
yet by your leave (Mr. Poulter) the fattest Hen or Capon is not wholesomest,
but that which is of a middle fatness; for as in a man too much fatness is both
a cause of diseases, and a disease it self, so falls it out in their bodies;
which how can they be wholesome meat unto others, when they are diseased in
themselves?

Of a black Hen the broth is whitest, and of a black Goat the milk is purest;
the most part of Hens and Hares are scurvy and leprous.

CAPI.
Capons of seven or eight months age, fatned in an open air, on a clean flour
with pure meat, are preferred by all Physicians (old or modern, Greeks or
Latins) before all meats. And to say the truth, what dish can any Cooks-shop
afford, that can be compared with a boild or roasted Capon? which helps
appetite, opens the breast, clears the voice, fatneth lean men, nourishes
all men, restores sickmen, hurts none but the idle, tastes pleasantly,
digesteth easily; which is also more solid then the flesh of Pullets, more
tender then Cocks, more familiar to our nature then Phesants or Partridges; not
so dry as a Cock to be slowly digested, not so moist as a chicken, to be soon
corrupted; but equally affected and tempered in all qualities, engendring much
blood and yet unoffensive, engendring much seed without unnatural sharpness or
heat: finally the flesh of Capons is so mild, temperate, and nourishing, that
Faventinus fears not to make it the ground cap. de phthis. Dialog. 3*
of his restorative electuary; yea Aloisius Mundella thinks him to be
desperately consumed, whom Capon-gellies and cullises cannot recover.

Concerning the preparation of them, I commend them roasted for moist stomachs;
but being boild with sweet marrow in white broth, they are of speedier, though
not of stronger nourishment. Now if a Capon be so wholesome a meat, why should
we not also by stitching up some veins, or searing them in the loins, try
whether we may not likewise make Hen-capenets? which the Italians practice to
good purpose, and make them exceeding fat; but yet in Pisanels judgment they
eat too moist. One lib. Creophag.
word more of the Etymology of a Capon; which some derive from the English by an
Irony, Capon; because he has not his cap on: others from the Italian, Capone,
that is to say, qua pone, set it hither, because it is an excellent lib. not.
histor.
dish; but I like Fritagius his Etimologie best of all, Caponem dicimus quasi
caput omnium: We call it a Capon says he in the Latin, because it is Caput
omnium, the head or chief of all other meats. And thus much of a Capon, whose
excellencies had the heralds known when Dr. Capon bought his arms of them, I
see no reason why they should have preferred into his Scutchions three Cocks,
all being nothing equivalent to one Capon.

Galli Africani. Meleagrides.
Turkies, though they be very hardly brought up, and require great cost for
their feeding, yet their flesh is most dainty and worthy a Princes Table. They
were first brought from Numidia into Turkey and thence to Europe, whereupon they
were called Turkies. There are some which lately brought hither certain
checkred Hens and Cocks out of new Guiny, spoted white and black like a Barbers
apron; whose flesh is like to the flesh of Turkies, and both of them like the
flesh of our hens and cockchickens, but that they be two parts hotter and
moister then ours. The youngest, fatted in the fields or at the barn door,
killed also in Winter rather then in Summer, and hanged a day and night before
they be dressed, are wholesomest to be eaten and of best nourishment. Their flesh
recovereth strength, nourishes plentifully, kindles lust, agrees with every
person and complexion, saving such as be of too hot a temper, or inclined to
rhumes or gouts; it must be thoroughly roasted, and if it be sticked full of
cloves in the roasting, or when it is to be baked (which are the two best ways
to cook a Turkey) it will soke up the watrishness, and make it of speedier
digestion.

PAVONES.
Peacocks are (as Poets fain) the beloved Birds of Juno: which none durst kill
in old time, for fear of that jealous and revengeful Goddesses displeasure.
Among the Romans Quintus Hortensius was the first that ever brought Macrob. 3.
sat. cap. 13.
them to the table; whose commendation made them so desired, that within a while
a Peacocks egg was sold for ten pieces of silver, and his kacrsas for twenty
times as much. Afterward Marcus Lurco seeing that old and Pli. l. 10. ^. 20.
lean Peacocks grew to such a rate, he began to cram them fat whilst they were
young, and gained thereby in a short time six thousand Sesterties.

Paul Jov. in vita Leon. X.
Leo the tenth (that noble Epicurean Pope) made their brawnes into Sausages,
allowing therefore every year many hundred Ducats. It is strange that S. Austin
writes l. de civit. Dei.
of Peacocks flesh, namely that in a twelve month it corrupts not after it is
dressed: Nay Kiranides avoucheth, that a Peacocks flesh will not putrify in
thirty years, but remains then as sound and sweet as if it had been new
killed; which whether it proceed of the toughness and sinewy constitution, or
the feeding upon Serpents (as some imagine) I will not now determine: this I
only observe, that being once above a year old, their flesh is very hard,
tough, and melancholic, requiring a strong stomach, much wine, and afterward
great exercise to overcome it. It is very ill for them that are molested with
the Hemorrhoids, and such as live slothfully.

Gal. 3 de alim. fac. Halyab: s. theo.
Concerning their preparation, Galen appoints them to hang upon a hook
fifteen days, but Haliabbas twice fifteen before they are dressed. The Italians
after they are drawn, stuff their bodies full of nettles (which softneth the
hardest cheese being laid amongst them, and then they either bury it in sand,
or hang it in a cold dry place, with a great weight at his heels; and so within
a fornight it becomes very tender. Plutarch reports out of his countriments
Plut symp. 7* quest. 10.
experiments, that an old Cock, or an old Peacock, or any hard flesh, hanging
but one night on a fig tree, waxes very tender by morning: others ascribe as
much to the hanging of them upon a brazen hook, which I permit to trial; and
wish both as true in effect, as the reasons why they should be so are learnedly
disputed. As for young Peacocks, fed at home, with wholesome and pure meat (as
bread corn and curds) no doubt they are very good meat, yielding not only a
taste extraordinarily strange and pleasant, but also giving good nourishment:
the older sort is best roasted with lard; the younger without lard, both should
be well sowced in pure wine; for without it they are unwholesome.

Anseres.
de Enchym. and Caroch.
Galen commends nothing in a Goose beside the Giblets, Stomach, and Liver,
sodden in broth: which whether l de. esc. and po^.
Scipio Metellus, or Marcus Sestius first noted, Pisanellus durst not decide;
but had he been as conversant in Pliny, as he might have been, he should have
read, that a question was moved in Rome, who did first fatten geese: Plin. l.
10. c. 22
some imputing it to Scipio and some to Sestius. But Messalinus Cotta without
all controversy was the first, that ever taught how to dress and use their
Giblets.

Diod. l. 1. ca. 6
Nevertheless since the Kings of Egypt feed usually but on two dishes, Geese and
Veal; either custom has made them a harmless meat, or else they are not so
hard, hot, aguish, and melancholic a meat as some suppose them. Jas. Prat. 1.
lib. Diaet.
Jason Pratensis says, that the Jews have so hard a flesh, so foul a skin, so
loathsome a savor, and so crooked conditions, because they eat so many Geese.
Indeed Plut. in quest. Romans
their exceeding watchfulness, moody disposition, and blackness of flesh, argue
a melancholic constitution; yet being taken whilst they are young, green
feathered, and well fatted with wholesome meat, and eaten with Lege
Heresbachium, li. 4. de re rust.
sorrel sauce to correct their malignity (if any malignity can remain after such
dieting) no doubt their flesh is as nourishing as it is pleasant and sweet. But
of all other a young stuble goose feeding it self fat in wheaten fields, is the
best of all; being neither of too moist nor too dry a flesh, but a middle
constitution. If any Goose be eaten above four months old, it is badly digested
without Garlic sauce, exercise, and strong drink. Fritagius, in his
Creophagia, having set down that young Geese are overmoist, and old Geese very
aguish, appointeh them to be both corrected in this sort. Before they be killed
make them to receive the smoke of Borax down into their bodies three or four
times together; then stuff them with spices and sweet herbs, and roast them
thoroughly; which is a very good way to correct their superfluous moisture; but
nothing available for their aguishness.

In hort* san.
Savanarola makes Geese of a very hot constitution, Albertus makes them very
cold; their flesh is hard to digest, and yet more moist (says Galen) then of
any water-foul besides: but their natural feeding shows them to be hot and dry,
as Savanarola writes; for they drink infinitely often, delight to be in the
coldest waters, and feed most gladly upon Lettice, Endiff, Purcelane, Trifoil,
Ducks meat and Sowthistle. They are so tame and obsequious to them that usually
feed and dieted them, that (if Pliny says truth) they were driven (like sheep)
from Brabant and Picardy to Rome on foot; but I fear me whilst he did so
excessively commend their obedience, he did (...), play the very Goose himself.

Cygni.
Swans flesh was forbidden the Jews, because by them the Hieroglyphical Sages
did describe hypocrisy; for as Swans have the whitest feathers and the
blackest flesh of all birds, so the heart of Hypocrites is contrary to their
outward appearance.

So that not for the badness of their flesh, but for resembling of wicked men's
minds they were forbidden: for being young they are not the worst of meats; nay
if they be kept in a little pound and well fed with Corn, their flesh will not
only alter the blackness, but also be freed of the unwholesomness; Being thus
used, they are appointed to be the first dish at the Emperor of Lege Davidem
Chytr. in descript. Russiae.
Moscovie his table, and also much esteemed in East-Friezland.

Nevertheless I deny not but that naturally they are unwholesome, for their
flesh is hard and black; and all flesh the blacker it is, the heavier it is,
the whiter the lighter; and the more red the more enclining to heaviness, the
less red the more enclining to lightness and easiness of digestion: which being
once written for a general rule, needs not (I hope) hereafter to be repeated.

Anates.
Tame Ducks feed filthly, upon froggs, toades, mud, waterspiders, and all
manner of venomous and foul things: lib. volatilum.
Wherefore it is not untruly said of Gesner, that the best part of a Duck are
his feathers; for his flesh is hotter Gal. 3 de alim. fac.
then of any tame fowl, and withal toomoist, hard, gross, of slow digestion,
and very excremental; yea furthermore, Gal. de comp. in sec. genesis
so aguish, that once or twice it brought Galen himself into a fever, while he
desired to try the operation of it.

Nevertheless young Ducklings fed with grinded malt and cheese curds, drinking
nothing but milk (or chalkwater) Isaac. in partic. diaet.
wax both white, fat, and soft in flesh, giving much good nourishment, clearing
the color of ones face, amending hoarsness of throats, increasing seed, and
dispelling Rhas. 2. de ali.
wind: wherein we may see, that art and diet can make that wholesome, which
nature of it self has made hurtful.

Pipiones. Columbae.
Tame Pigeons are of two sorts, the one great and very tame, breeding monthly,
kept and fed continually at home: the other fed never at home but in Cadlock
time and the dead of Winter, when they can get no meat abroad, breeding only
but twice a year, namely at the first and later seed-time. They are of a very
hot complexion, and dry when they are old; but whilst they are young they are
hot and moist; the wilder sort is most wholesome, being killed after it has
flown a while up and down the Dove-house, for then they give a purer juice, by
reason that their foggy moisture is lessened by exercise; also they must be let
blood to death under the Rhas. com* (...) 4 aphor Aveuz. 1. and2. theisir.
wing, which though Dr. Hector assumed to himself as his own invention, yet it
is of no less antiquity then Plinies writings. Being thus newly killed and
forthwith roasted at a blasing fire, their flesh engenders great store of
blood, recalling heat unto weak persons, clensing the kidneys, quickly
restoring decayed spirits, especially in phlegmatic and aged persons, for whom
they are most proper. In Galens time (says Rhasis) they only plucked off their
heads and cast them away; but bleeding under the wing is far better, and makes
their flesh more cold and whiter; in so much that Galen is not afraid, to
commend them to persons sick of agues. Nay the Italians do as usually give them
in agues, as we do Chickens. Pigeons of the first flight are counted better,
because the latter flight is after they have eaten cadlocks, which makes them
neither to eat so sweet, nor to prove so white and wholesome: when they cannot
be had, home Pigeons (I mean of the greater sort) are to be taken, and to be
used in the like manner.

CHAP. XI.
Of the flesh of wild fowl, ahiding and feeding chiefly upon the Land.
THere is no small difference of Land fowl, according to the meat they feed on,
and the place they live in; for the purer their meat, the better meat they are
themselves; they that feed upon flesh or garbage, are not so wholesome as they
that feed upon good corn, bents, or wholesome seeds; less wholesome are they
which feed upon worms and fish on the Sea shore, or rivers banks; but worst of
all other, they that feed upon Serpents, Spiders and Venomous beasts: which no
doubt may prove very medicinable to cure diseases, but they cannot prove
nourishing (keeping their natural diet) to restore flesh.

Concerning the place wherein they live and feed, it is certain that high and
dry Countries have the wholesomest Birds: for they which sit in low and moist
places, are of no sweet nor wholesome complexion.

Furthermore, their manner of taking alters their flesh; for a Partridge taken
in flight, or a Lark dared with a Hawke, is worth ten taken with nets,
springes, and trammels; the reason whereof is already set down in my Chapter of
Preparation.

Finally look what Bird is whitest flesht, that Bird is easiest to be digested:
what Bird is reddest of flesh, is strongest of nourishment: whatsoever is black
of flesh, is heavy to be digested and of slow nourishment; yea so much the
heavier and slower, by how much his skin and flesh appears blacker. This
shall suffice to be generally spoken of land fowl, yea of all fowl: now let us
descend to their particulars, beginning with birds of greater volume.

Tardae.
Bistards or Bustards (so called for their slow pace and heavy flying) or as
the Scots term them, Gusestards, that Albertus in hort. san.
is to say, Slow Geese, feed upon flesh, Livers, and young Lambs out of
sowing-time, and in harvest time, then they feed upon pure corn: In the Summer
toward the ripening of corn, I have seen half a dozen of them lie in a
Wheat-field fatting themselves (as a Deer will do) with ease and eating;
whereupon they grow sometimes to such a bigness, that one of them weighs
almost Gesn. 3. de avib.
fourteen pounds. Now as they are of an extraordinary bulk, so likewise are they
of rare nourishment to indifferent strong stomachs, rellishing finely,
restoring blood and seed, offending no part of the body, but strengthening all.
Choose the youngest and fattest about Allhalontide (for then are they best) and
diet him a day or two with a little white bread, or rather keep him altogether
fasting that he may scour away his ordure; then let him bleed to death in the
neck-veins, and having hanged three or four days in a cool place our of the
Moonshine, either roast it or bake it as you do a Turkey, and it will prove
both a dainty and wholesome meat.

Grues. Gesn. 3. de avib.

Cranes breed (as old Dr. Turner writ unto Gesner) not only in the Northern
Countries amongst the Nation of Dwarfs, but also in our English Fens. Pliny
says, that in Italy they feed much upon Grapes; but with us they feed chiefly
upon corn, and fenny seeds, or bents, Theodosius esteems them of a cold
temperature; but all the Arabians judge them to be hot and dry: Certain it is
that they are of themselves hard, tough, gross, sinewy, and engendring
melancholique blood, unfit for sound men's tables (usually to be eaten of) and
much more unmeet for them that be sick; yet being young, killed with a goshawk,
and hanged two or three days by the heels, eaten with hot galentine, and
drowned in Sack, it is permitted unto indifferent stomachs. In Plutarch's time
Cranes were counted a dainty and good meat, fatted Plut. lib. de es. carn.
after this manner: First, they stitched up their eyes, and fed them in the dark
with wholesome mixtures of corn, milk, and seeds to make them white, tender, and
pleasant of taste: A day before they were killed, they tempered their meat with
the juice of that herb, or with a good quantity of that seed whereof they would
have their flesh especially to relish; were it Mints, Basil, Time, Rosemary,
Commin, Coriander, Fennel-seed, or Annis-seed: Which course if we likewise
observed in the cramming of Capons, and fatning of our household birds, without
question they would taste far more delicately.

Ciconiae, Asteriae, Ardeolae.
Storks, Bittors, and Herons, neither do breed, nor can breed any good
nourishment, feeding chiefly upon little fishes, frogs, and worms: yea the
Stork delights in newts, water-snakes, adders, and sloeworms; but (except it
be almost famished) it will not venture upon a Epist. ad Gesn.
Toad, as Casparus Heldelinus writes.

It was my chance in my first travel into Germany, to meet one Godfrey Achtius
(chief Physician of Aquisgrane) at Francfort Mart, whose Triacle was there
sold, and esteemed better then the Triacle of Venice, whereinto he put not the
flesh nor the salt of Adders; but L de ^h eriac. ad Pison:
the flesh of a Heronshaw, fed a long time with nothing but such Adders as Galen
wishes us to choose. Verily his conceit was not ill; and if we practiced the
like in England, it cannot be amiss, considering that the subtilest part of the
Adder is (no doubt) as it were sublimed and imbibed into the Storks body and
flesh: Wherefore howsoever we use such birds for Physic, yet let us not feed
upon them as upon meats, lest we take poison instead of nourishment. Nay even
all the Heronshaws, (namely the black, white, criel-Heronshaw, and the
miredromble) though feeding somewhat better then the Byttor or Stork, are but
of a fishy and strong savor, unless they be very young, and scarce able to
fly; yea they are not dangerless being green roasted, but procure the Arnald. de
Vil. nov.
piles and smarting hemerrhoids; of all of them, choose the youngest and fatest,
for they may be eaten, so with much spice, salt, or onions, and being thoroughly
steept in a draught of old Wine. Furthermore, if they be dressed without their
skins, they relish far better, according to the French and the best fashion,
who also stuff them full of sweet herbs, and draw them with fine and small lard.

Phasiana.
Phesants are of so excellent a constitution, as well for substance as
temperature, that from them as from a center, Physicians do judge the
complexion of every foul, being of a middle constitution betwixt a brown De es.
and pot:
Hen and a Partridg (or as Pisanellus will have it, betwixt a Capon and a
Partridg) neither so moist as the first, nor so dry as the second, but
exceeding both in taste, temperature and goodness. Galen, Rhasis, Avicen,
Averrhois, Gal. 5 de alim. fac. Rhas: 4: Aph:
Arnaldus de Villa nova, Trallian, and all Writers do prefer a Phesant for the
soundest and best meat of all other; and the Frenchmen think a Phesant to be
called Fai-san, because it makes a sound man. Nevertheless Savanarola wills
men not to eat them often in health, that when sickness comes they may do them
the more good. They are best in Winter, and the young ones are fittest for weak
stomachs; the old ones are to hang three or four days by the heels, and then
being dressed, they will eat tender. In Hectic Fevers, and upon recoveries from
a long or violent sickness, no meat so wholesome as Phesant-pouts; but to strong
stomachs it is inconvenientest, especially to Ploughmen and sabourers* who
eating of Phesants, fall suddenly into sickness, and De esc. and potul.
shortness of breath, as Pisanellus has wittily (and perhaps truly) noted.

Attagenes Myricae.
Heath-Cocks whilst they are young, are little inferior to a Phesant, very well
relishing, and being of good digestion; when they wax old, all their flesh
proves black, saving the brawn next their brest-bone, which is ever white,
tender, firm, and wholesome.

Perdices.
Partridges have a temperate heat; but incline to dryness in the second degree;
they feed upon Snails, Chickweed, tops of Leeks, and all manner of good and
wholesome corn; they are never subject to pips, nor any rhumatick diseases,
which makes them to live till they be Gal 3. de alim. fac.
almost twenty years old: But beware of old Partridges, for they are as
dangerous as old Beef; being young and tender, they agree exceeding well with
cold, weak, watrish, and pale bodies, drying up a moist stomach, strengthening
the retentive power, easily turning into pure blood, fatning the body, and
increasing lust. They must not be eaten (says Galen) being newly killed, but
hang De vict. atten.
a while in the cold air: And the wings and breast of a Partridg (as also of all
birds, save a Woodcock, trusting to their flight) are better then the legs and
thighs: Nay the legs and thighs of Partridges are thought by Sethi, to have an
extraordinary weakness in them, causing them to go as if their back or
ridg-bone were parted in sunder, whereupon perhaps they had their name, and
were called Part-ridges. Choose them that are young and fat, killed with the
Hawk at sowce, or else at foot after a long flight. Their broth is good for a
weak stomach, for the jaundies, and a tainted liver. If you sees them in
Capon-broth with marrow, eggs, and bread, a Panado made of that broth is
exceeding nourishing, being eaten next ones heart. But if you would have a
strengthening broth indeed, then sees them in broth wherein chines of Mutton
have first boiled: Roasted Partridg is best for most stomachs, if it be not too
dry roasted; for then it is rather Physic to stay a looseness, then fit meat to
nourish or restore flesh. They are best at the end of Harvest, before they have
either troad or laid.

Rallae terrestres.
Railes of the land (for there is also a water-Rail, which the Venetians esteem
so highly) deserve to be placed next the Partridg, for their flesh is as sweet
as their feeding good, and they are not without cause preferred to Noble men's
Tables.

Gallinagines and Rusticulae.
Woodcocks and Snites are so light of digestion, and so good in temperature,
that they agree with most men's stomachs, especially at their first coming in,
or rather a month after when they have rested themselves after their long
flight from beyond the Seas, and are fat through ease and good feeding upon fat
worms, and snails, lying in trees. Avicen and Albertus dreamed that Woodcocks
and Snites fed upon seeds; whereas indeed no bird with a long piked, crooked,
and narrow bill can pick them up: but where they perceive a worms hole (as I
have seen Snites to do) there they thrust in their Bill as far as they can, and
if the worm lie deep, they blow in such a breath or blast of wind, that the
worms come out for fear as in an Earthquake. If worms fail, then they pick
snails out of their shells, and likewise devour them.

Toward their going out, either of them wax drier and worse rellishing.
Woodcocks require the stronger stomach, Snites the weaker; both are of laudable
nourishment, but chiefly the Snite. There is a kind of Wood-Snite in
Devonshire, greater then the common Snite, which never comes into shallows nor
springs of water: And in Holland I remember Snites never living out of springs,
as great almost as our Woodcocks, called Herren-Schnepfs, because they are in
comparison the Lords or chief of Snites, or that they are only fit for Lords
Tables, which Gesner therefore also terms by the name of Rusticula regalis.

Columbae Petricolae Liviae Palumbes Turtures.

Wild-Doves be especially four in number, Rock-Doves, Stock-Doves, Ring-Doves,
and Turtledoves. Rock-doves breed upon Rocks by the Seaside, but never far
from Corny Downs, whether in Seed and Harvesttime they fly for meat, living all
the year besides upon Mast and Ivy-berries. The other three sorts of Doves feed
also upon Corn, Mast, Hawes, Juniper Berries, Ivy-berries, Hurtle-berries, and
Holly-berries when they are ripe. Marcus Cato fatted young Ring-doves with L:
r^i rustic: 1: c: 90:
Bean-meal made into paste with new milk; and Didynius, Turtledoves with bread
steept in Wine; which way they are made of excellent taste and nourishment,
though also undieted they are good, being under half a years age. Avicen
(contrary almost to the opinions of all other Writers) commends the flesh of
Turtles above Fen. 3 doct. 14 tract. 21.
all other, as being of a good nourishment, easily digested, quickening wit and
memory, increasing seed, and strengthening both stomach and guts exceeding
well. But Isaac reproves that opinion, unless it be De diaet partic
understood only of young Turtles, or such as have been fed and fatted in the
house by art, with moist and cooling nourishments: For otherwise (as he truly
avoucheth) all manner of Wild-doves are so hot, hard, and dry, that they cannot
prove of any indifferent nourishment.

Coturnices.
Quails have gotten an ill name ever since Pliny accused them for eating of
Hemlocks and Bear-foot; by reason Plin l. 10. c. 22 Avicen Fen. 14 tr. 3. c. 21.
whereof they breed cramps, trembling of the heart and sinews; yea though
Hercules loved them above all other meats, in so much that Iolaus fetched him
out of a Athen. l. 9. c. 15.
swound when he was cruelly wounded by Typhon, with the smell of a Quail; yet
with much eating of them he fell into the falling-evil, which ever since has
been termed Hercules's sickness. Avicen thinks that they Loco citato.
bring cramps not only by feeding on Helleborus and Hemlocks, but also from a
natural inborn property. L. 1. Epist. 8.
Monardus writes thus of them; I allow not the flesh of Quails neither in the
Spring nor Winter, not because the ancient Fathers of Physic do condemn them;
but because reason is against them. For in the Spring and Summer time they are
too dry, engendring rather melancholy then blood: In Autumn and Winter they are
too moist; yea though they be fat, yet are they of small nourishment, causing
loathing of stomach, and corruption of meat. Baptista Fiera, Amatus Lusitanus,
yea Avicen, Rhasis, Isaac and Galen are of the same judgment; only Arnoldus de
Villa nova in his Commentary upon the Salern School, affirms them in some
Countries to be of fine substance, good juice, and easy digestion: Nay,
Kiranides says that their broth cleanses the kidneys, and their flesh
nourishes indifferently well. Were I here to give my censure, I would be of
either side, and yet defend the truth likewise; for I nothing doubt but Quails
flesh is bad (as Ducks flesh is) of its own nature, and heavy to be digested;
nevertheless being taken young before they have eaten of unwholesome weeds, and
fatted with pure Wheat, Hemp Seed, Coriander*seed and Milk (or Chalk-water
instead of Milk) I make no question that their flesh is laudable, and may be
counted a good and dainty meat.

And here by the way let us marvel at one thing, That Qualis are generally
forbidden because their flesh engenders the falling evil, and yet Galen
commends their 3: Euporist:
brains (the principal seat of that great evil) as an Antidote against the same.
What need I write that when the Israelites Nam: 11: v: 31:
loathed Manna, Quails were sent them as the best and daintiest meat of all
other? And if some curious Paraphrast would therefore say it was the worst,
because whilst the flesh was in their mouths, many thousands of them fell in
the Wilderness! We answer, That it was not through the badness of the food, but
the naughtiness of their lusting and tempting God.

Pluviales.
Plovers feed upon no solid meat, and therefore being new, have no need of
drawing; their meat is chiefly the scom or excrements of worms lying about
their holes, or of worms themselves; yet are they of a very sweet, delicate,
and fine flesh, being taken when they are fat in Wintertime; and the gray
Plover is so highly esteemed, that this Proverb is raised of a curious and
malecontented stomach; A gray Plover cannot please him. Yet to some the green
Plover seems more nourishing, and to others the Lapwing, which indeed is
savory and light of digestion, but nothing comparable to Plovers.

Cuculi.
Cuckoes flesh, whilst it is a nestler, is by Perot highly Tract: de avib:
extolled; but when once it comes to feed it self, it is ill rellishing, hot,
and leprous. Gesner asks, How any Lib: 3 de avib:
man dare be so foolish or venturous as to eat of a Cuckoe, whose much spitting
argues a corrupt and excremental flesh; yet by experience we find the young
ones to be good meat, yea Pliny and Aristotle prefer them for sweetness above
most birds: And albeit the old ones feed filthily upon Dorrs, Beetels, and
venomous spiders, yet the young one are fed by the Titling, (their foster-dam)
with gnats, flies, and red-worms, having no venomous nor bad quality.

Fedoae.
Godwits are known to be a fenny fowl, living with worms about Rivers banks,
and nothing sweet or wholesome, till they have been fatted at home with pure
corn; but a fat Godwit is so fine and light a meat, that Noblemen (yea and
Merchants too by your leave) stick not to buy them at four nobles a dozen.
Lincolnshire affords great plenty of them, elsewhere they are rare in England
wheresoever I have travailed.

Erythopodes and Glottides.
Redshanks also and Gluts feed in the Fens upon redseeds, bents, and worms, and
are of no bad taste, nor evil nourishment.

Ochropodes.
Smirings live in watrish Copses with worms, and are a fine and delicate meat.

Pici.
Pyes or Haggisses feed upon flesh, eggs, worms and ants; their flesh is very
hard and loathsome, unless they be very young, and then are they only the meat
of poverty.

Graculi.
Jayes feed upon akorns, beech-mast and worms, and never came into the number
of good nourishments, because they have themselves, and procure unto others the
falling-evil.

Pici Martii.
Cael. l. 28. c. 2. antiq. lect.
Wood-Peckers are suspected of the like malignity, though they feed upon
timber-worms, the most dainty dish, and most highly esteemed amongst the Romans
and Phrygians.

Orioli.
Witwols are of excellent good nourishment, feeding upon bees, flies, snails,
cherries, plums, and all manner of good fruit.

Arquatulae terrestres.
Stonechatters feed as they do, and are of a very good taste and juice.

Ispida.
The Kings-fisher feeds most upon water-worms, and little fishes, and is of a
bad relish, and worse nourishment.

Coccothraustes.
The Clotbird (called sometimes a Smatch, or an Arling) is as big almost as a
Thrush, feeding chiefly upon cherries, and cherry-kernels.

Nucifraga.
The Nope feeds upon mast, nuts, and cherreis.

Sitta.
So also does the little Pyot, which we call a Nutjobber.

Upupa.
Epist ad Ge^n*
Houpes were not thought by Dr. Torner to be found in England, yet I saw Mr.
Sergeant Goodrons kill of them in Charingdon Park, when he did very skilfully
and happily cure my Lord of Pembroke at Ivychurch; they feed upon
hurtle-berries, and worms, but delight to feed most upon graves, and man's dung,
and stinking soil; wherefore they deserve to be counted very unwholsom.

Turdi and Turdelae Anglicanae.
Cael. l. 6. antiq. lect.
Thrushes and Navisses feed most upon hawes, sloes, misle-berries, and
privot-berries; which being lean, deserve (as Quintus Curtius used them at
Caesar's Table) to be flung out at the windows; but being young, fat, and in
season, and by cunning drawing rid of their gall, Plut. in Lucullo.
they deserve the nourishing in Lucullus Cages, and to be commended by
Physicians to Pompey's Table for a most wholesome meat.

Turdi Exotici.
Feldefares are of the like feed, and give (almost) as good nourishment, yea
better, when Juniper Berries be ripe, for then all their flesh is perfumed with
the scent thereof.

Merulae.
Lib. de avib.
Blackbirds are preferred by Baptist Fiera far before Thrushes, Throstels or
Feldefares, as being nothing so strong, hot, nor bitter; Trallianus commends
all alike. Their feed is on little grasshoppers, worms, hurtle-berries,
juniper berries, ivy-berries, bay berries, and hawes; they are suspected to be
a melancholic meat, because they be never found but alone and solitary,
whereupon the Latins call them Merulas, that is to say, Solitarians.

Sturni.
L. 6. de tu. san. L. 3. de alim. sac.
Stares-flesh is dry and sanery, and good against all poison, if Kiranides be
not mistaken. Galen in one place compares them for goodness, with Partridg,
Thrush and Blackbirds; in another place he dispraiseth them as much for their
ill juce, hard digestion, and bad nourishment; which nevertheless are both
true, that being understood of young Stares, fed with wholesome meat, this of
old stares, who delight to feed of unwholesom meat as well as wholesome, namely
hemlocks, dwale, and such llke. Amongst this treatise of the greater sort of
Landbirds, I had almost forgotten Owls, Rookes, Crows, and Cadesses.

Noctuae.
Concerning Owls, when they be once old, they feed upon Mice, Frogs,
Grasshoppers and all kind of flesh. Rabbi Moses in his Aphorisms says, that the
flesh of young Owls is dainty and good, strengthening the mind and diverting
melancholy and madness: yea I have heard certain noble men and gentlemen
avouch, that no young Cuckoe or Partridge is a finer meat.

Corvi Leguminales.
Rooks cannot be ill meat when they are young, for they feed chiefly upon pure
corn; but their skin is tough, black, and bitter.

Corvus.
The carrion Crow is generally condemned, and worthily Monedula.
despised of all men: As also the Cadesse or Jacdaw, which is not more unhappy
in conditions, then bad of nourishment.

Now we are come to treat of small Birds of the land, which we will divide
according to the order of the Alphabet: having first admonished you, that no
small Birds must be overmuch sodden, or dry roasted: for then their nourishing
moisture is soon taken out; neither are they to be given to strong stomachs,
lest they be converted into choler, whenelse they would wholly turn into good
blood. Finally, young Birds must not hang long before they be dressed; for they
are of an airy substance which will soon be evapourated. But let us consider
every one particularly in his place.

Montifringillae.
Bramblings are a kind of small Birds, feeding chiefly upon seeds, sloes, and
hawthorne kernels.

Rubetrae.
Buntings feed chiefly upon little worms.

Pyrrhacia.
Bulfinches feed not only upon little worms, but also upon hempseed, and the
blossoms of peare-plums and apple trees.

Citrinellae.
Citrinels or straw-coloured Finges, be very small Birds, feeding chiefly of
white and black poppy seed, but especially of the wild-poppy called Red-weed.

Certhiae.
Creepers seem to be a kind of Titmise, living upon the worms which engender in
and betwixt the barks of Trees.

Fringillae.
Finches for the most part live upon seeds, especially the Goldfinch, which
refuses to eat of any thing else. Acanthis.


Acanthis Atlantica.
So also does the Canarie Finch or siskin; yet the Bullfinch in hunger feeds
upon small worms; and the Greenfinch upon horsedung, and nuts in frosty
weather. Chloris.


Alandae.
Larkes are of three sorts: Field Larks, Wood Larks, and Heath Larks. The first
sort feeds upon corn seeds and worms. The second chiefly upon worms. The third
upon worms and heath seed. Some of each sort are high crested like a lapwing,
others uncrested which are counted the more wholesome. Their temperament is hot
and dry in the second degree, unless they be young and fat, and then they
scarce exceed the first degree. Galen and Rhasis write, that as their broth
looseneth, so their flesh binds the belly.

Linariae.
Linnets feed chiefly upon flax seed: but for a need they eat also the seed of
hemp and thistles.

Apodes.
Martinets are either smooth or hairy legged: for neither of them have perfect
feet, but stumps instead of feet. Baptista Fiera in his treatise of Birds
exclaimeth against them, and calls them beggars meat: engendring most hot and
feverous blood, fitter to be eaten as a medicin to quicken eyesight and memory,
then as a wholesome or nourishing meat; but being taken when they are new
fledged, experience warranteth them a dainty and good meat, except they be over
roasted.

Luseiniae.
Nightingales as Martial said, are nothing worth when their breath is departed;
for as they feed filthily in the fields upon spiders and ants, so their flesh
is unwholesome at the table.

Pari majores.
Oxeys or great Titmise, feed (as ordinary Titmise do) upon caterpillars,
blossoms of Trees, bark worms and flies; but their flesh is unwholesome.

Rubeculae.
Robin-red-brests feed upon bees, flies, gnats, walnuts, nuts, and crumbs of
bread; and are esteemed a light and good meat.

Passeres.
Sparrows of the house, feed commonly on the best Corn. They are hot and dry
almost in the third degree: engendring hot and aguish blood. The best are the
youngest, fattest, and wildest. Trallianus commends lean Sparrows only to such
as are sick of the Tympanie: and young Cock-sparrows flesh (as well as their
stones and brains) to such as be cold of nature, and unable to Venus sports.
Haly abbas wills such men to mince young cock-sparrows 5. Theor. c. 22:
with eggs and onions, and to eat them in a gallymawfry: which perhaps you may
find a better medicin, then Dr. Julius his bottle, that is said to have cost
twenty Troglodytae*
pound a pint; but the red and hedge Sparrows feed ill, and are both unwholesome.

Hirundines.
Swallows (be they either house Swallows or banck Swallows) are of the nature
and operation of Martlets, but that they are esteemed the hotter of both.

Curruca.
The Titling, Cucknel, or unfortunate Nurse (for the Cuckoe ever lays his egg
in the Titlings nest) feeds upon gnats, flies, and worms; it is a very hot
bird, coming in and going out with the Nightingale, but of a delicate taste

Pari.
Titmise are of diverse shapes with us in England; some be long, others* be very
short taild: some have black heads, some blew, some green, some plain, and some
copped: all of them feed but ill, and nourish worse.

Motacillae.
Wagtailes live upon flies, worms, and fat earth, being no bad meat whilst they
are young, unless some because their tail is ever trembling, shall therefore
divine that they are ill for the shaking Palsy.

Reguli.
Wrens feed finely, and sometimes fill themselves so full of little flies, that
their bellies are like to burst. Their flesh being salted cures Strangullions
and the stone not confirmed; but no man ever wrote that they give good
nourishment.

Galguli.
Yellow Hammers feed (as the most part of Titmise) of seeds and grain; namely
the seeds of white and red roses, poppy, burs, thistles, succory and endiff,
etc. In the winter time being fat, they are counted wholesome: at other times
they are lean and also bitter.

CHAP. XII.
Of the flesh of wild Fowl, abiding and feeding chiefly upon the waters.
Cygni Sylvestres.
OF all water fowl, the wild Swan is the biggest and fairest in outward show:
but (as I said of tame Swans) it resembles a hypocrite, for his flesh is
black, melancholic, and hard of digestion, though not so hard as the tame, by
reason of his much flying.

Anseres sylvestres.
Wild Geese are for the same reason better then tame, for their high and long
flight breeds tenderness of body, and expels many gross and heavy vapors;
but of Vulpan^eres.
all other the Bergander is the best and lightest.

Anates ferae.
Wild Ducks feed chiefly upon a green narrow-leaved grass (called therefore
Ducks grass by Crescentius) which lies upon the waters in moors, ponds, and
plashes all winter long: but they eat likewise the leaves, seeds, and roots of
other waterplants, and also worms, spawns of fishes and frogs, young sedge, fat
mud, waterspiders, and all venomous and foul things; they are no less lecherous
then Cock-Sparrows, who as by often treading, they kill themselves and live not
till they be two years old, so wild Drakes by often treading kill their Hens.

Anates muscariae.
But there is a kind of wild Duck, called Anas muscaria because it eats
nothing but flies: which is of as wholesome and good nourishment, as the other
is bad and heavy of digestion.

Brantae.
Barnicles both breed unnaturally by corruption, and taste very unsavory. Poor
men eat them, rich men hate them, and wise men reject them when they have other
meat.

Querquedulae.
Teales^ and Widgins feed alike upon worms, herbs, roots and seeds; commonly
they are very fat and sweet of taste; much to be esteemed above wild-Ducks or
Geese, yet suspected of ill juice by many Authors.

Totani.
Pool-Snites live wholly upon fish, and therefore have a strong and uncouth
relish.

Merganseres.
Shell-drakes, or the Ducks of Italy, are of most pleasant taste, feeding
purely themselves, and us as strongly; sometimes the^ wax so fat, that their
feathers being pulled Genesis 3. de avib.
off, their body has weighed twelve pound weight.

Urinatrices.
Diverse feed most upon reeds and reed roots, and caddis-worms breeding in them.

Scarboides.
Such likewise is the Dobchicks food; but it is of a strong smell, and fatter
and tenderer then the most part of fowls that be clove-footed.

Fulicae.
Coots feed upon reeds, mud, grass, little snails, and small fishes, they are
of a strong and muddy savor, best in Autumn, but never wholesome.

Nigritae.
Boseades.
Moor-cocks and Moor-hens, as also Pocards, be of the like nature with Coots;
save that a fat Pocard is counted a dainty, though not a wholesome meat.

Pici marini.
Epist ad* Gesn.
Sea-pies as Dr. Cajus writes, resemble other Pies in color, but they have
whole feet like water fowl; they feed upon spawn, frogs, and fry of fish, and
are but of a bad taste.

Mergi.
Cormorants, be they gray or black, feed most of fish and frogs, but especially
of Eels; and relish badly.

Arquatae.
Curlnes feed wholesomly upon cockles, creuisses, muscles, and perwinkles;
which makes them to have no ill taste, and to be counted restorative amongst
the French, if they be fat.

Gulones albi and Cinerei.
White Gulls, Gray-Gulls, and Black-Gulls (commonly Phalacrocoraces.
termed by the name of Plungers and Water-Crows) are rejected of every man as a
fishy meat; nevertheless being fed at home with new curds and good corn till
they be fat, you shall seldom taste of a lighter or better meat.

Pufina Britannica.
Puffins being Birds and no Birds, that is to say Birds in show and fish in
substance, or (as one may justly call them) feathered fishes, are of ill taste
and worse digestion; how dainty so ever they seem to strange appetites, and are
permitted by Popes to be eaten in Lent.

Erythropodes.
Redlings or Water-Redshancks feed as Water-railes do, and be of the like
nourishment.

Rallae aquaticae.
Water-rails are preferred in Italy before Thrushes or Quails, they feed upon
water-snails and water-flies, and the worms breeding in the roots of reeds:
They be very sweet and pleasant of taste, giving also a fine and wholesome
nourishment.

Lari.
Sea-mews and Sea-cobs feed upon garbage and fish, thought therefore an unclean
and bad meat; but being fatted (as Gulls use to be) they alter their ill
nature, and become good.

Plateae.
Shovelars feed most commonly upon the Sea coast upon cockles and Shellfish,
being taken home and dieted with new garbage and good meat, they are nothing
inferior to fatted Gulls.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Inwards and Outward both of Beasts and Birds.
HAving hitherto spoken of the Flesh of Beasts and Ala mala, Coxa noxa, Crura
dnra, Cropium dubium. Collum bonum.
Fowls, it remains now to speak of those parts which are not properly flesh,
but either of another, or a mingled nature: Namely, their Fat, Marrow, Brains,
Lungs, Livers, Tripes, Stomachs, etc. together with their Eyes, Ears, Noses,
Feet, Pinions, Tails, Rumps, Udders, Stones, and Skins: whereof I will write in
order.

Fat.
Fat of Beasts, as it was forbidden the Israelites by God himself, for some
cause unto himself best known; so there be many reasons to persuade us not to
eat of the same: For it takes away appetite, gluts the stomach, hardly
digesteth, turns wholly to excrements, and decays the retentive powers,
especially if it be the fat of greater Beasts, or the greater sort of Birds:
For the fat of Rabet-suckers, and little Birds, and small Chickens, is not
discommendable, because it is soon and lightly overcome of an indifferent
stomach. Of fat Beasts and Birds notwithstanding, the lean is sweetest (so they
be not exceeding fat through cramming, but upon their own feeding) by reason
that it is basted and suppled with the oyliness thereof, and made both tender
and of good relish. Wherefore let some commend lard and fat bruis never so
much, and slap it up as greedily as they list, yet they will reward us in the
end with many diseases, unless their stomachs be exceeding strong and good.

Marrow.
Marrow is the finest part or (as it were) the sweat of fat, secretly conveyed
into bones: Sweet, unctuous, and pleasant of taste, nourishing them whose
bodies be dry, and stomachs able to digest it. It is sod usually with Capons,
Cockrels, and Hens in a nourishing white broth, and also dainty pies be made
thereof: but I have known many men to have surfeited of them, and therefore I
dare not generally allow of Marrow. Of all Marrows, I find the Marrow of a Deer
easiest to digest; next of a young Mutton, and Beef Marrow to be the heaviest.
The Marrow of a Goat is very offensive, and the Marrow of Lambs or Calves are
not good, because they are crude, bloody, and imperfect for want of age.

Brains.
Macr. 3. Satur.
The Egyptians thought it a capital offense to eat the Head of any thing, for
the Brains-sake, wherein they thought the soul of every living thing to be
chiefly placed. And Plutarch says, that many things were thought lib. cap. 37.
delicate in his time, which no man before desired or dared to taste; as the
Brains of Birds and Beasts. How abject a thing Brains were in old time, it
appears in Ulysses scoffing of Agamemnon, comparing him with a Calves Brain,
as with a most abject and vile thing, which all men cast away. And verily
Brains for the most part are exceeding phlegmatic, of gross juice, hard
passage, slow concoction, great heaviness, and so offensive to the stomach,
that being eaten last, or with any fat meat, they trouble the same exceedingly,
and procure vomit: wherefore we do well to eat the brains of Calves, Lambs,
Kids, and Pigs, at the beginning of Dinner or Supper, for were they eaten last
(through their unctuous and superfluous moisture) we should bring up all.
Likewise I commend the tosting of Piggs brains at the fire (being the moistest
of all other) the thorough rosting of Hares brains and Rabbets brains; and the
mingling of sage, salt, pepper, and Vinegar with Calves brains.

Concerning the brains of Birds, none are absolutely commendable, but of such
fowl as be of a temperate constitution, as Cocks, Chickens, Capons, Pullets,
Partridg and Phesant. Also the brains of roasted Woodcocks, and Snites, and
Blackbirds, and all small birds are counted wholesome; but the brains of great
birds, and waterfowl, and Pigeons, and all sorts of Wild-doves, Aveuz. 1. and:
2. Theisir. Gal. 4. Eupor. Gal de comp. in sect. loc.
are counted by the old and learned Arabians very dangerous: Only Quails brains
are commended by Galen, against the falling sickness, and Cranes brains against
the Hemorrhoids.

Tongues.
The Tongues of Beasts seem to be wholly of a fleshy substance: Which if we
deny not because it is full of muscles, yet verily the flesh thereof is more
spongy and Diocl. in 7: sap. Conv.
oily then of any flesh besides. Aesop and Thales called Tongues the best and
the worst part of the body; but as an Asses bones make the sweetest Regal-pipes
of all others, though the living Ass be least musical; so let the living
Tongues of any Beasts be never so bad, yet they are without comparison the
sweetest meat of all others, when they are dead and dressed: For the Tongues of
Beasts are soft, temperate, light, moist and spongy, never faulty of
themselves, but marred oftentimes by miscookery. As for Birds Tongues, they are
generally exceeding dry, hard, and gristly (Parots tongues excepted) neither
could I ever find any cause (but because a curious and sumptuous fool would
have it so) why Heliogabulus should have pies made of Nightingales Tongues.

Chine-Marrow.
Pith. Marrow, running all along from the hinder brain (whereof no doubt it is
a portion) to the end of the backbone or chine of beasts, is no doubt much
harder and drier then the brain it self, especially toward the further end of
the back; which dryness makes it less loathsome to the stomach then brains are;
yea furthermore it strengthens that body which is able to concoct it. Many
are of opinion that Cawdles made strong with the pith of a Steer, and yolks of
new-laid eggs, do by a secret property restore nature, and recover the weakness
of loins caused by venery. Montagnana makes a singular confection of diverse
marrows to that purpose, which I will not set down in English, lest wantons be
too bold to follow their follies.

Hearts.
Hearts of all living creatures, whilst life endures, are most active and
effectual to many purposes; but after Gal. 3 de alim. fac.
death there is no part of less use, nor less nourishment. Yea they are harder
of digestion then any entrail, concocted with no small difficulty, though
chosen from the youngest and tenderest sort of fowls or beasts: Yet if any do
overcome them, they give no weak nor bad nourishment.

Lungs.
Isaac. Jud. de part. diaet.
Lungs of beasts are softer then the heart, liver, kidneys and spleens; easier
therefore of concoction, though of a more phlegmatic and froathy substancer.
Tacuinus commends them greatly to young men sick of hot agues, because they
both temper their hot and dry disposition, as also for that they be light, and
soon concocted. But he says, that therefore they are ill for strong and
laboring men, whom so light a meat cannot sufficiently nourish, but is more
likely to putrify in their stomachs. Gal. 3. de alim. fac.
The Lungs of Foxes are no wholesome meat, but rather medicin to sore lungs.

Livers.
Livers of all beasts give but gross nourishment, and are hardly concocted, and
of slow passage; unless it be of sucklings, or of young swine fed with pure
meat. The Livers of tame fowl, as Hens, Capons, chickens, ducklings and geese,
fatted with wholesome and white meat, please the taste, clear the eyesight,
agree with the stomach, and increase blood. Cranes Livers sod in the broth of
cicers assuage the pain of the back and kidneys, but they are of a small and
bad nourishment. The Livers of Larks and Snites are very sweet and restorative,
as also of a Woodcock, which has of all other birds (for proportion of his
body) the greatest Liver.

Tripes.
Stomachs, Paunches, and Guts of Beasts, are far harder in substance then their
flesh, requiring much time ere they can be concocted, deserving scarce the name
of meat, because they give so little nourishment, and so much excrement. Yea
all tripes and chitterlings made of elder beasts (be they oxen, swine, or deer)
though accidentally through sowcing they procure appetite, yet naturally they
are foul and unwholsom meat, engendring scabs, itches, and leprosies, and other
filthy diseases like themselves. Yet the taste of tripes did seem so delicate
to the Plut. de es. carn.
Romans, that they often killed oxen for the tripes sake, not caring what
became of the flesh; till such time as their licentious appetite was bridled by
banishment if any should attempt the like again. But the maws or gyzards of
Hens, Capons, Chickens, and Geese especially, are both tender and pulpy, and
are supposed extraordinarily to corroborate the stomach. So likewise the guts
of Larks, Woodcocks, and Snites, give no bad nourishment, being presently
roasted as soon as the birds be taken.

Milts.
Spleens of beasts give an unpleasant taste and a worse nourishment: and no
marvel, for if livers, being the fountains of blood, be of hard and unwholesom
juice, how can spleens (the sinks and spounges of the liver) prove wholesome
meat? Only such a hoggs spleen is commended, which has fed long upon
Tamarisk, whereby all gross, sour, and melancholic humors have been consumed
in it. Paracelsus is the first that ever l. de Magister.
commended an Oxes spleen, as available to hasten the courses of women.

Pli. l. 10. c. 61.
Kidneys of beasts (for birds have none, the Bat excepted, which also has
breasts and gives milk) be of a middle temper betwixt flesh and kernels, of
hard concoction and ill juice, especially in the greater sorts of beasts;
always keeping a smack of that which passes through them, and being too
strong for most stomachs; the kidneys of sucking Lambs, Calves, Piggs, and
Kids, are the tenderest and the best, but when they have left sucking they are
all too rank.

Kernels and Sweet-breads
Kernels of Beasts, especially such as lie about the throat and breast of
sucking Calves, Kids and Lambs, Gal. 3. de. al. fa* cap. 6.
are a very good meat being well digested, drawing near to the nourishment of
flesh; but if they be not well digested, they breed raw and phlegmatic humors.
Our Countrymen do well first to roast and then to boil the sweetbread of
beasts; for thereby all superfluous moisture is consumed. Kernels of fowls lie
chiefly about the rump on either side thereof, and are (as many take it) very
restorative.

The Matrix.
The matrix of beasts, yea of a barren Do so highly esteemed, is but a sinewy
and hard substance, slow of digestion and little nourishment.

Eyes.
Eyes of young beasts and young birds are not unwholesome, being separated from
their skins, fat, balls, and humors; for then nothing remains but a sweet
tender and musculous flesh, which is very easy of digestion.

Ears, Snouts and Lips.
The Ears, Snouts and Lips of beasts being bloudless and of a sinewy nature,
are more watrish, viscous, and phlegmatic, then that they may be commended for
any good or indifferent nourishment.

Pinions and Feet.
The Pinions of birds, and the feet of beasts are of like disposition; yet the
pinions of geese, hens, capons, and chickens are of good nourishment: and so
are the feet of young hogs, pigs, Lambs and Calves; yea also a tender Cow-heel
is counted restorative; and Heliogabalus the Emperor amongst his most dainty
and lustful dishes made Pies of Cocks-combs, Cock-stones, Nightingales tongues,
and Camels heels, as Lampridius writes. Galen ^, de alim fac.
also for men sick of agues boiled Piggs-pettitoes in barley water, whereby each
was bettered by the other: the Ptisan making them the more tender, and they
making the Ptisan more nourishing and agreeable to the stomach. That sodden
Geese feet were restorative, Messalinus Plin. lib. 10: cap. 22.
Cotta by trial found out, if Pliny may be credited. The Tails or Rumps of
Beasts are counted by certain unskilful Physicians, yea of Dr. Isaac himself,
to be hard of digestion. First, because they are so far distant from the
fountain of heat. Secondly because they are most of a sinewy constitution; to
which if a third had been added, that they are but covers of a close-stool,
perhaps is arguments would have been of some indifferent weight: For indeed the
farther any part is from the heart, it is fed and nourished with the more fine
and temperate blood; also the extremities or ends of sinews are of strong
wholesome and good nourishment; but as for the Tails and Rumps of Beasts, it is
indifferently mingled of flesh, sinews and fat; so that the very Anatomy of
them shows them to be a meat agreeable to all stomachs; and verily whosoever
has eaten of a pie made only of Mutton Rumps, cannot but confess it a light
wholesome and good nourishment. The Rumps of Birds are correspondent, having
kernels instead of flesh; but when they are too fat, they overclog and cloy the
stomach.

Udders.
The Udders of milch beasts (as Kine, Ewes, Does, and She-goats) are a laudable
taste, and better then Tripes, because they are of a more fleshy nature. Lean
Udders must be sod tender in fat broth; fat Udders may be sod alone; each of
them need first a little corning with salt, being naturally of a phlegmatic and
moist substance.

Stones.
lib. esc. and potu.
The Stones of a Bore work marvails (says Pissanellus) in decayed bodies,
stirring up lust through abundance of seed, gathered by superfluous and rank
nourishment. Indeed when Bucks and Stags are ready for the rut, their stones
and pisels are taken for the like purpose: as for the stones of young Cocks,
Pheasants, Drakes, Partridges, and Sparrows, it were a world to write how
highly they are esteemed. Averrhois thinks that the stones of a young Cock,
being kept long in good feeding and separated from his Hens, do every day add
so much flesh unto our bodies, as the stones themselves are Capi vaccius
in weight. Avicen as much esteems Cock-sparrowes stones, or rather more. But
the Paduan Doctors (but especially Doctor Calves-head) gives that faculty to
the stones of Pheasants and Partridges above all others.

Skin.
The Skins of Beasts, yea of a roasted Pig is so far from nourishing, that it
can hardly be well digested of a strong stomach. Some Birds are sodden or
roasted without their skins, because they are black and bitter (as Rooks,
Dawes, Cootes, and Moor-hens) and howsoever others are spared, yet the skin of
no Bird turns to nourishment, but rather to ill humors or filthy excrements.
Nay the very skin of an egg, of a nut, an almond, a prune, a raisen, or a
corrin, and generally of all fruit, is so far from nourishing, that it comes
out of the strongest man's body (either whole or broken) as it went in.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of Milk.
FOrasmuch as childrens stomachs, and old men's bodies, and consumed men's
natures be so weak, that not only all flesh and fish, but also the fruits of
the earth are burdensome to their tender and weak bowels: God tendering the
growing of the one, the preservation of the other, and the restoring of the
third, has therefore appointed Milk; which the youngest child, the weariest
old man, and such as sickness has consumed may easily digest. If we would
define or describe what Milk is, it seems to be nothing but white blood,
orrather the abundant part of blood, whited in the breasts of such creatures as
are ordained by nature to give suck; appointed properly for children and
sucking little ones, but accidentally for all men, sick either of consuming
diseases or old age. That women's Milk is fittest for young children, it may
easily be proved by the course of nature, which converteth the superfluity of
blood in a woman bearing her child within her to the breasts, for no other
purpose, then that she should nourish her own babe. For truly nothing is so
unperfect, defectuous, naked, deformed, and filthy as a man, when he is newly
born into the world through a strait and outstreatched passage; defiled with
blood, replenished with corruption, more like to a slain then a living
creature, whom no body would vouchsafe to take up and look on, much less to
wash, kiss, and embrace it, had not nature inspired an inward love in the
mother toward her own, and in such as be the mothers friends.

Hence it comes that mothers yet hot and sweating with travail, trembling
still for their many and extreme throws, forget not their newborn Babes, but
smile upon them in their greatest weakness, heaping labor upon labor,
changing the nights trouble with the days unquietness; suffering it to taste
no other milk, then that wherewith in their bellies it was maintained. This
does a kind and natural mother (if she be of a sound and indifferent strong
constitution) for her child; and thus did Eve, Sara, Rebecca, and Rachel; yea
all women which truly loved their children, and were both able and willing to
feed their own. There be many reasons why mothers should be afraid to commit
their children to starnge women. First because no Milk can be so natural unto
them as their own. Secondly because it is to be feared, lest their children may
draw ill qualities from their Nurses both of body and mind, as it fell out in
Jupiter, whom whilst his Mother committed to Aega Ex Higyno.
(Olens daughter and Pans wife) to be nursed by her, the Country woman living
only upon goats milk, could not but be of a strong lascivious nature, which
left such an impression in the child, that growing once to the age of a
stripling, he was in love with every fair wench, lay with his own Sister,
forced his own Neices, left no fair woman unassaulted, if either bygold, or
entreaty, or craft, and transforming himself he could obtain her love. Nay when
he was full of women's company, he loved boys and abused himself unnaturally in
companying with beasts. The like also is recorded of Aegysthus, who being fed
in a Shepherds Cottage only with goats Milk, waxed thereupon so goatish and
lecherous, that he defiled not only Ovid. in rem. amor.
Agamemnons bed, but also neighed (in a manner) at every man's wife.

Nevertheless if the Mothers weakness be such that she cannot, or her
frowardness such, that she will not nurse her own Child; then another must be
taken suitable to the Child's constitution: for a fine and dainty Child requires
a Nurse like to it self; and the Child of strong and clownish Parents, must
have a Nurse of a strong and clownish Diet. For as Lambs sucking, shegoats bear
course wool, and Kids sucking Ewes bear soft hair, so fine Children degenerate
by gross woman's milk, losing or lesning that excellency of nature, wit, and
complexion, which from their Parents they first obtained. Neither is women's
Milk best only for young and tender infants, but also for men and women of
riper years, fallen by age or by sickness into compositions.

Beasts milk.
Best I mean in the way of nourishment, for otherwise Asses Milk is best, for
some Cowes, Milk and for others Goats milk; because the one cleanses, the other
loosens, and the third strengthens more then the rest. Goatsmilk is also
better for weak stomachs, because they feed on boughs more then grass.
Sheeps-milk is sweeter, thicker and more nourishing, yet less agreeable to the
stomach, because it is fatter. Cows-milk is most medicinable, because with us
it looseneth the body, though in Arcadia it stays the belly, and cures
consumptions better then Plin. l 6. c. 30.
any other milk. Finally the milk ofany beast chewing the cud (as Goats, Sheep,
and Kine) is very ill for rhumes, murs, coughes, fevers, headache, stoppings
and inflammations of any inward part; for sore eyes also, and shaking of sinews.
Avicen says, that their Milk is hurtful to young men, because they are
choleric; to sore eyes, headaches, agues, and rhumes, because it is full of
vapors: to convulsions and cramps, by reason of repletion: to resolution or
palsies, by over moistning; to the stone and obstructions, because the cheesy
part of it is very gross.

Of Beasts not chewing the Cud Camels milk is the sweetest and thinest of all
other; Mares milk the next, and Asses milk of a middle temper: not so thin, but
that it nourishes much; nor so thick, as that easily it will curdle. All milk
is thinnest in the Spring, and thickest in Summer, because then the wheyish
part is resolved by sweat; and all meats then obtain a dryer faculty.

Signs of the best Milk.
There be four ways in women and beasts to know the most nourishing and
substantial milk: namely by the color, smell, consistence, and taste. For the
best milk is of a pearl-colour, neither blue, transparent, nor gray, but white
clear and confused; the consistence of it is neither thin nor thick, hanging
like a row of pearls upon ones nail (if it be milked on it) not overhastily
running of. In taste it is not sour, bitter, salt, sweet, sharp, nor strong,
but sweet yet not in excess, and pleasant after 4 de sac. simpl. cap. 17.
an extraordinary kind of pleasantness: yet Galen affirms, that if milk could
be tasted when it is first concocted in the veins and breasts, it would seem
sweeter then honey it self.

The smell likewise of it is pure and fragrant, though proper to it self, and
void of loathsomness.

Causes of good Milk.
Also it is much material to the goodness of milk, to have special regard to
the Diet of those creatures whose milk we use, or choose for our children. Galen
reports that a friends child of his, having lost his good Nurse by an
untimely death, was put out to another: who in time of dearth being forced to
feed chiefly upon fruit, and roots, and Acorne bread, infected her child (as
she her self was infected) with much grevious and filthy scabs. And I pray you
what else is the cause, that many children nursed in the Country are so subject
to frets, sharpness of urine and the stone; but that their Nurses for the most
part eat rye bread strong of the leaven, and hard cheese, and drink nothing but
muddy and new Ale? It is also recorded, that a young man sick of a Consumption,
used the milk of a goat to his great good, so long as it fed in his own field;
but afterward feeding in another field where store of Scammony grew, and some
wild spourge, he fell into a deadly scowring and felt no nourishment.

Furthermore care is to be taken of their health, that give us milk; for as an
unclean and pocky nurse (which woeful experience daily proves) infecteth most
sound and lively children; so likewise a clean sound and healthful nurse
recovereth a sickly and impotent child. Nay (which is more) no man can justly
doubt, that a child's mind is answerable to his nurses milk and manners; for
what made Jupiter and Aegystus so lecherous, but that Politianus in Nutricia.
they were chiefly fed with goats milk? What made Romulus and Polyphemus so
cruel, but that they were Syl. p^et. l. 14 Aelian. lib. 12. var. hist.
nursed by She-wolves? What made Pelias (Tyrus and Neptunes son) so brutish,
but that he was nursed by an unhappy mare? Is it any marvel also, that Giles
the Abbot (as the Saint-register writes) continued so long Marulus. lib. 4
cap. 2.
the love of a solitary life in woods and deserts when three years together he
sucked a Do? What made Dr. Cajus in his last sickness so peevish and so full of
frets at Cambridge, when he sucked one woman (whom I spare to name) froward of
conditions and of bad diet; and contrariwise so quiet and well, when he sucked
another of contrary disposition? verily the diversity of their milks and
conditions, which being contrary one to the other, wrought also in him that
sucked them contrary effects.

Now having showed what milk is best, and how to be chosen, let us consider how
it is to be taken and used of us. First therefore if any naturally loath it (as
Petrus Jo. Mat. a Grad. c. de appetitu.
Aponensis did from the day of his birth) it cannot possibly give him any good
nourishment, but perhaps very much hurt in offending nature. If contrariwise
any Athen. l. 2. c. 2 Guagninus in Tart. Cael. l* b ^8. cap. 2. A. L.
with Philinus love nothing else, or with the poor Bizonians can get no other
meat, or with the Tartarians and Arabians feed most often and willingly on
milk: let them all remember these three lessons.

How Milk is to be eaten and used, in time of health.
First that they drink or eat the milk of no horned beast unsodden, for so will
it not easily curdle nor engender wind: but Women's milk, Asses milk, and Mares
milk, need no other fire to prepare it, for it will never curdle into any hard
substance. Secondly to be sure that milk shall not curdle, season it with salt,
sugar, or honey, and neither drink any wine or sour thing upon it, nor mingle
it with other meats, but eat it upon an empty stomach, and fast an hour after
it. Thirdly exercise not presently upon it, neither sleep upon any milk taken
from beasts chewing the cud, and when you have eaten it wash your teeth clean,
for there is no greater enemy unto them then milk it self, which therefore
nature has chiefly ordained for them, who never had or have Lib. de san. tu.
lost their teeth. And truly (as Marcilius Ficinus notes) Milk is not to be
used of young men, who have sound teeth given them for stronger meat, but of
such as either have none at all, or very few and weak ones; or though they have
strong teeth, want ability and strength to set them a grinding as it falls
out in them that are fallen into Fever Hecticks. Wherefore when Poppaea plin l.
11. c 41:
wife to Domitius Nero carried 500 she Asses (shod with gold) continually about
with her, to bath her body in their milk once a week, and to drink of it every
day, to make her skin clear and smooth without wrinckles: she left it rather a
monument of her pride, then a memorial of her wisdom; for nature taught her a
better meat, though Art could not appoint her a finer Bath. If she had taken it
(as the Arcadians do Cow-milk) in the Plin. l. 25 c. 7.
spring time only, for a month or six weeks together once in the morning, to
cleanse and purge the body of bad humors, it had been good and warrantable by
physic: but to use it continually in health could not less corrupt her, then
Goats milk did my Lady Penruddock, of whose cruel and terrible end, caused by
the lest worms of all other, perpetually engendered betwixt the skin and the
flesh, through superfluity of nourishment arising from the long continuance of
Goats milk; I will not here rehearse, it being fresh enough in their memories
that best knew her and most loved her. The like may I say of Cow milk so
generally used of us, that being now and then taken of sound men (not subject
nor distempered with hot diseases) it nourishes plentifully, increases the
brain, fatneth the body, restores flesh, asswageth sharpness of urine, gives
the face a lively and good color, increases lust, keeps the body soluble,
cease extreme coughing, and opens the breast; as for children and old men
they may use it daily without offense, yea rather for their good and great
benefit.

What Milk is best in sickness and consumptions.
Concerning them that be sick, There are few diseases to which milk is not
offensive being inwardly taken, except the Consumptions of the solid parts
called Marasmus, the Consumption of flesh, called Atrophia, and the Consumption
of the lungs and breathing parts called Phthisis. For recovery of the first,
Cammels milk is preferred before all others, because it is most moist and thin.
The second sort is best recovered by sucking milk from a woman's breast, as most
familiar to our livers and blood, needing no preparation (for it is only blood
discolored) but only application unto the flesh.

The choosing of a good Nurse.
The Nurse must be young, clear of skin, of a kindly smell, pure complexion,
good temperature, wholesome and moderat diet, much sleep, little anger, neither
too idle nor too toiling, no wine bibber, no eater of hot spices, no ordinary
wanton, and void of all diseases; such a nurse is sooner wished for then found;
yet such a one is to be chosen either for sound children or sick Persons, lest
drawing corruption in so fine a meat as milk is, our consumptions be increased
so much the more, by how much poison given with drink is more dangerous.

Asses milk.
The third sort of Consumptions, wherein the flesh accidentally decays
through exulceration of the lungs and breathing parts, is especially to be
cured by Asses milk; for which Cammels milk is unfit, because it is too thin
and moist; as also woman's milk, because it wholly nourishes and nothing
cleanses; whereas Asses milk is both meat and medicin, cleansing and
nourishing alike, not so thin as to hinder expectoration, not so thick as to
cause condensation of the matter putrified, but being of a middle temper and
consistence, and consequently most proper for that disease. Neither are all
Asses of alike goodness; for a young Asses milk is of the thinnest, an old
Asses milk is too thick and dry, but one of a middle age is best for that
purpose. Having gotten such a one, every morning (four or five hours before you
use her milk) shut her from her foal, and curry her well and clean, lest her
skin growing scurvy and foul ill vapors be augmented inwardly for want of
expiration: then feed her with grinded malt, straw-dryed, mingled with a little
sweet fennel seed, aniseed, or carraway seed, which she will eat with great
pleasure, and digest into a sweet and wholesome blood: an hour after that, milk
her as near the patient as conveniently you can, that he may drink her milk ere
the air has altered it, for if it be once cold it is never wholesome; this is
to be done twice a day, morning and evening upon an empty stomach, neither
eating nor drinking ought after it for two hours; you may sweeten it also with
sugar candy, sugar of roses, or fine maiden honey, and it will be the more
effectual. As Soon as the Ass is milked, turn her and her foal into fine leaze,
wherein store of Cowslaps, Trifoil, Cinqfoil, Elecampana, Burnet Filipendula,
Meadtansy, Horsetail, Plantain, Lambs-tongue, Seabiouse, and Lung-wort grows.
In winter feed her with the sweetest hay growing in the finest and best meddows
If Asses milk cannot be conveniently obtained for the Lung-consumption, nor
women's milk for the Liver-consumption before specified, use the milk of a
meetly young reddish and sound Cow, feeding in the like leaze or upon the
sweetest hay: but beware (as commonly fools do not) that you feed them not with
new and much less with sour grains; for it makes their milk strong, windy,
and unwholesome, especially for such as be weak and much consumed; likewise
remember to rub and stroke down your Cow every morning, and her milk will be
both sweeter and more nourishing. Thus much of Milk, what it is, how it is
made; for whom and for what diseases it is convenient, how it is to be prepared
and used, how many kinds thereof are wholesome for man's body, what milk is
fittest for sound men, and what for them that be sick: so there rests no more
but to wonder at Plinies credulity, who as constantly (upon hearsay)
avoucheth, mares feeding near the river Plin. l. 2. c. 67. Card. lib. 1. de
rer* var.
Astaces in Pontus to give all black Milk; as Cardan reports blew snows to be
common near the Straits of Magellane.

CHAP. XV.
Of Butter, Cream, Curds, Cheess, and Whey.
THe milks of horned beasts (as Cows, Ewes and Goats) do consist of three
substances; Cream, Curds and Whey.

Of Cream.
The first (being compared to the rest) is hot and unctuous; the second
phlegmatic and viscous; The third of a middle nature. Again there be two sorts
of Cream; one natural called the flour of raw milk, gathered of the milk
without fire, after it has stood in a cold place: the other called the flour
or cream of sodden milk, or clouted Cream; gathered from it after it has been
thickened upon a soft fire. Raw cream how sweet soever it seems to wanton
stomachs, yet it weakneth concoction, hinders retention, and is more hard of
digestion then any milk. Sodden and boild cream (such as we use in Tarts, Fools
and Custards) is less offensive to the stomach, and of better nourishment; yet
we do ill in eating it last, when the lightness and unctuosity of it shows
that it ought to be eaten first.

Butter.
Butter (not undeservedly termed the Flemmins Triacle) is by laboring and
churming made of both sorts of cream; so that as milk is nothing but blood
twice concocted, so Butter is nothing but Cream twice labored. Pliny shows
the true making of it, which I need not to repeat, because it nothing, or very
little Lib. 28. c. 9.
differs from ours: Only I wonder with him, that Africa, and other Barbarous
Countries esteem it a Gentleman's dish, when here and in Holland, and in all the
Northern Regions, it is the chief food of the poorer sort. For go from the
elevation of 52 to 8^ of the North pole, you shall every where find such store
of good butter, as no where the like, no not in Parma nor Placentia, nor
Holland it self, whence so much Butter Olausl. 13. sept. gent.
and Cheese is dispersed through the whole world. In Iceland they make such a
quantity, that having neither earthen Vessels nor Cask enough to keep it in,
they make Chests of Firr, thirty or forty foot long, and five foot square,
filling them yearly with salt butter, which they bury in the ground till they
have occasion to use it.

Butter is hot and moist, of gross nourishment, softning rather then
corroborating the stomach, hastening meat into the belly before it be concocted,
rhumatick, and easily converted into oily fumes, which greatly annoy both
throat and head. It is ill for the stomackrhume* and all fluxes either of
bloud-humors or seed; and in truth it is rather to be used as Sauce and
Physic, then as meat to feed upon. It is best at breakfast, tolerable in the
beginning of dinner; but at supper no way good, because it hinders sleep, and
sends up unpleasant vapors to anoy the brain, according to the old Proverb,
Butter is Gold in the morning, Silver at noon, and Lead at night. It is also
best for children whilst they are growing, and for old men when they are
declining; but very unwholsom betwixt those two ages, because through the heat
of young stomachs, it is forthwith converted into choler. Weak stomachs are to
eschew all fat, oily, and buttered meats, especially when they swim in butter;
for naturally butter swimeth aloft, and consequently hinders the stomachs
closing, whereby concoction is foreslowed, and many ill accidents produced to
the whole body. The Dutchmen have a by-Verse amongst them to this effect: Eat
Butter first, and eat it last,
And live till a hundred years be past.


And Paracelsus in his Book de Tartaro, thinks the Netherlanders to be more
free of the stone then other Nations, because their chiefest food is butter;
wherein the silly Alchymist was not a little mistaken, for no people in the
world are more subject to that disease, as the number and excellency of
stone-cutters in that Country may plainly prove. And if butter be less
offensive, and more nourishing to them then better meat, it is to be imputed
either to a natural affection unto it, infused (as it were) with their parents
seed, or else to a long custom, which is (as before I noted) another nature.
And verily their natural love unto that meat of all others, appears in this:
for that as English people, when the Bride comes from Church, are wont to cast
wheat upon her head, and the Grecians to anoint the Plut. l. 28* c 9.
door posts with fat la^d; so when their Brides and Bridegrooms return homeward
from Church, one presents them (as presaging plenty and abundance of all good
things) with a pot of butter, which they esteem the foundation (though a
slippery foundation) of their lives. The fattest butter is made of sheeps milk,
the strongest of goats milk, but the best and most of Cows milk, which caused
it of the Grecians to be called Butyros. It were tedious and impertinent to
show how many and necessary uses it has in Surgery and Physic, considering
that here we are only to describe (as we have done) what nourishment it gives,
not what it works against diseases.

Of Curds and Cheese.
As there has mention been made of two sorts of Cream, so now also I must
write of two sorts of Curds, the one fresh, without salt or runnet, the other
mingled with the one or both: Now if the Butter be at Market when the Curds or
Cheese is pressed at home, then are they both utterly unwholsom, clamming the
stomach, stopping the veins and passages, speedily breeding the stone, and many
mischiefs; but if they be equally mingled with the butterish part, then the
Cheese made thereof is wholesome, unless age or ill-housewifery has made it bad:
For new, sweet, and fresh Cheese, nourishes plentifully; middle-aged Cheese
nourishes strongly, but old and dry Cheese hurts dangerously: for it stays
siege, stops the Liver, engendereth choler, melancholy, and the stone, lies
long in the stomach undigested, procures thirst, makes a stinking breath, 6
de alim fac. Isa. de diaet. pt.
and a scurvy skin: Whereupon Galen and Isaac have very well noted, That as we
may feed liberally of ruin Cheese, and more liberally of fresh Cheese, so we
are not to taste any further of old and hard Cheese, then to close up the mouth
of our stomachs after meat.

Concerning the differences of Cheese in substance: Good Cheese is neither too
soft nor too hard, too close, nor yet spongy, too clammy, nor yet crumbling,
too salt, nor yet unsavory, too dry, nor yet weeping, pleasantly, not strongly
smelling, easily melting in the mouth, and never burning as it is tosted at the
fire. Likewise Cheese made of Ews milk is soonest digested, that of Cowes milk
is more nourishing, but Cheese made of Goats milk is most nourishing of all,
being eaten whilst it is new and soft, for it quickly waxes dry, earthly, and
crumbling. The Western Goths, to prevent the dryness of Cheese, make them so
big, that two strong men with leavers can scarce move one of them; which also
causes the Parmisans to be so big, and also L. 3 Trid. hist.
them of Placentia, which Bernardinus Scaccus in his Annals of Trent, prefers
before the Parmisans: But was not that a great Cheese think you, wherewith
Zoroaster Plin. l. 11. c. 42
lived in the Wilderness twenty years together, without any other meat? or
rather was it not most cunningly made or preserved, when at twenty years end it
did eat as soft as at the first day? Which though some do think impossible, yet
the Parmisan of Italy will prove it true, by age waxing mellower and softer,
and more pleasant of taste, digesting whatsoever went before it, yet it self
not heavy of digestion. Our Essex Cheese being well handled, would in my
judgment come next unto it, especially if Goats were as plentiful there as
sheep, that there might be a proportion betwixt the three milks, without which
it is folly to attempt the like. Now whereas the Placentians and Parmians add
Asses milk, and Mares milk, and also Camels milk Plin. l 11. c 41
(when they can get it) to the making of their Cheese, it is not for the Curds
sake (because they yield no hard Curd) but for the butterish part that is taken
out of them: for indeed the butter made of them is most thin, liquid, moist and
penetrating, whereby such a suppleing is procured, that their Cheeses do rather
ripen then dry with long lying.

The Irish men, like to Plinies Barbarians, have not yet so much wit as to make
Cheese of Milk; and our Plin. l. 11. c. 42
Welshmen want cunnning to make it well. French Cheese in Plinies time tasted
like a medicine; but Plin. loco citato.
now the Angelots of Normandy are counted restorative; which many of our
Gentlewomen (and especially a Niece of mine own) have so well counterfeited,
that they excel their first pattern. Spain has forgotten the art of Cheese
making; and Portugal makes them but indifferently well, though sometimes the
best Strab. l. 3* Plin. l. 11. c. 42*
in the world were made at Cuna, near to Cape Vincent, where they also made
Cheeses of 1000 l. weight apiece.

As for our Country Cheeses, Banbury and Cheshire yields the most, and are
best; to which the Holland Cheeses might be justly compared, if their makers
could but soberly put in salt.

As for Butter milk and Whey, I leave them to my Treatise of drinks, because
they are of a thinner substance, than that conveniently and properly they may
be numbered and accounted amongst Meats. Now a word or two of Eggs, and then to
our variable and no less profitable Discourse of Fishes.

CHAP. XVI.
Of EGGS and BLOOD.
Plin. l. 4. c. 13.
AS the Oonians live only of Eggs and Oatmeal, so the Egyptians for a great
while durst not eat Eggs, Polid. Vir. l. 3. c. 5. de rar. inv.
because they are unperfect or liquid flesh; neither did they eat a long time
any Milk, because it is but discolored blood: Certain Grecians abstained from
them, Alex. Aphr. l. 2 problem. 84.
because they resemble a little world; for the shell of them is like the earth,
cold and dry; the white is like to water, cold and moist; the foam or froth in
the white, resembles air, which is warm and moist; the yolk agrees with the
fire, which is hot and dry. But to omit such frivolous reasons, let us not
doubt but an Egg is a lawful and wholesome meat, tempered so excellently well by
nature it self, that it must needs be accounted one of the best nourishments,
being eaten white and all; For they which eat only the yolk (as many do in a
conceit to nourish more plentifully) fall into many hot and dangerous diseases,
unless they have a very cold liver, and Pl. l. 29 cap. 3.
watrish blood. Contrariwise the whites of Eggs are so cold, that spongy wood
being thoroughly overlaid with them, will hardly, or not at all be burnt in a
glowing fire. Both being taken together, do so qualify one another, that
generally they agree with all stomachs, or at the least offend none, if we
choose them that be best, and prepare them well after they be chosen. Now all
Eggs being potential creatures, no doubt but they are of like substance and
temper with that which in time they shall be made. Wherefore as the flesh of
Pheasants, Partridges, and Hens be of best juice, temper, quality, nourishment
and digestion, so likewise their Eggs are wholsomest of all others.
Contrariwise, as the Greek Proverb says, Like Crow, like Egg. Neither can we
imagine how any Egg should be wholesome, proceeding from an unwholsom or
distempered creature. Wherefore we condemn (in the way of comparison) all Eggs
of Turkies, Peacocks, Geese, Ducks, and all waterfowl, preferring Hens Eggs
before all other, because they are a most usual, familiar, and temperate meat.

What kind of Eggs be best.
In the choice of good Eggs observe these lessons,

First, That they be rather Pullets Eggs then laid by an old Hen.

Secondly, That they be not self-begotten, but gotten by the Cock upon the Hen.

Thirdly, That they be new, white, and long: For such Eggs nourish plentifully
and quickly, clear the Schol. Salem. and Horat. Sermon. lib. 2. Satyr. 4.
voice and breast, strengthen the stomach, recover men out of consumptions, and
increase nature so much, that in continuance of time they make us wantons. They
nourish quickly, because they are nothing but liquid flesh: Rha. 4 ad Alm.
They nourish much, because their heat and moisture is proportionable unto ours:
They are wholsomest in the morning, because they are then newest. They are best
in winter, because Hens are then fattest, strongest, and best relished; they
are worst in summer, because Hens feed then upon flies, snails, cadlocks, and
many ill weeds, which rather scoures then nourishes their bodies: They are best
being eaten alone, because being mingled with orher meat, they corrupt in the
stomach, filling many men's faces full of pimples, morphues, and freckles. They
are ill for young children (especially being often eaten) for that their hot
bodies turn them into over-hot nourishment, whence itch, scabs, inflammations,
and corruptions do arise. They are also as bad for old men, because they are
hardly digested of a cold stomach; fittest they are for temperate young
persons, and such as are consumed without any notable fever.

Concerning the nature of other Birds Eggs, besides Hens. Epenaetus extolleth
Peacocks Eggs before all Athen. l. 3. c* 7.
other, and then the Eggs of Berganders, and lastly of Phesants, Partridges, and
Turkies, whose judgment I would have thoroughly confuted, had not daily
experience, and Antonius Gazius his arguments done it already. And verily
whosoever will taste other eggs then which daily we use, shall find none void
of a strong savor and bad relish, saving the eggs of Phesants, Partridges,
Berganders, Ostriches, Turkies, Ducks and Geese, though the three last named be
bad enough. Yet if Ducks eggs be hatched under a Hen, they eat more sweetly,
and Goose eggs also hatched under them, are Avicenna and Albertus.
thought by Simeon Sethi no unwholsom meat. Pigeons eggs are exceeding hot, and
of ill taste, hardly hardening by long seething. The eggs of Sparrows increase
lust, strengthen the heart, and nourish abundantly: As for the eggs of other
birds, great and small, howsoever they are eaten (as Rhasis says) in the way
of medicine, 4. Ad Almans
yet they give either none or no good nourishment. But Hens eggs are so
temperate and nourishing, that Galen himself in certain continual fevers, gave
them usually to 12 de meth. med.
his Patients to restore spirits,: and not without reason, being of so fine a
substance, and freed in a manner from all hurtfulness; for they moisten us in
fever Hecticks, they nourish us in consumptions, they strengthen us in fluxes,
they bridle sharp humors when they gripe us, restore spirits in weakness of
heart, they speedily pass from a clean stomach, neither are they forbidden in a
strait and thin diet, did they not nourish oversoon. Gesner shows a good
reason, why new white and long lib 2. de avib*
eggs be the best of all other. First, because new eggs are ever full, but old
eggs lose every day somewhat of their substance, and in the end waxing addle
stink like urine, whereupon they were called of the Latins Ova urinae.
Secondly, the whitest eggs have the palest yolks, and most thin, fine, little
bloody strings swiming upon them. Thirdly, the longest eggs are commonly
cock-eggs and therefore of better nourishment. Some eggs are almost all yolk
and no white, yea some have two yolks in them, others have in a manner no yolk
at all, or (at the most) nothing proportionable: the former sort nourish most,
the other are fittest for hot stomachs.

The dressing of Eggs.
Concerning the preparation of them, a rare egg any way dressed is lightest of
digestion, a hard egg is most rebellious, an egg betwixt both is of strongest
nourishment. Brassavola reports a Monk to have been made so costiff with hard
eggs, that no art was available to give him on stool. Furthermore all hard
eggs, especially hardened by frying, get from the fire a smoky and hot nature,
and from the drying pan and burnt butter a malign quality, not only as
offenssive to the stomach as rotten eggs, but also sending up bad vapors to
the brain and heart. Eggs potcht into water or verjuce are fittest for hot
complexions, or men distempered with agues; sodden rare in the shell they are
soonest converted into blood; but being rare-roasted in embers they make
thickest and strongest blood, and are fittest for weak, cold and watrish
stomachs. Thus much Avic. Fen. 1. tract: 1. cap. 8. Lib. de san tu*
of Birds eggs, which in a little quantity nourish much, and are called of
Ficinus, the quintescence of flesh; because they yield so speedy and fine
nourishment.

Now it rests to discourse something of Tortesses eggs, which be not
poisonable nor hurtful (as the eggs of Snakes, Lizards, and Chamaeleons) but
very fit to Pisanel de esc. and potul.
nourish men in hot agues, when all birds eggs may be suspected of inflaming the
blood; for they are of a more phlegmatic nature, tempering hot humors,
procuring sleep to the watchful, moisture to the dried person, and inspiring as
it were a second life, to such as seem desperately consumed of hot fevers* Sir
Will. Pelham (that worthy and valiant Knight) kept them in his garden at the
Minories by the Tower of London, where I wondered much at the beast and more at
her eggs: for contrary to the nature of hens eggs, the most spotted were the
best, and the hardest of shell the best likewise; and they are worst when they
are newest, best when they are three months old.

Last of all, as touching that question made by Plutack, l. sym. 2. quae. 3.
and disputed of him more wittily then wisely of either side, Whether the Hen or
the Egg be first in nature, I omit it as a foolish and superfluous doubt, since
common sense and reason tells us, that the perfecter creatures were first
made, and the whole is more ancient then that which is gotten of the whole.

Of Blood.
Blood being the charet-man or coacher of life, was L^vit. 7.
expressly forbidden the Israelites, though it were but the blood of beasts,
partly because they were naturally given to be revengeful and cruel hearted,
partly also because no blood is much nourishing out of the body, albeit in the
body it is the only matter of true nourishment: Cael. lib. 13 cap. ^. A. L.
Nevertheless the Laconians black broth, so highly commended of Dionysius, was
made of kidds blood sodden with water, vinegar and salt; yea the Bisalta of
Scythia make pottage of horses blood and milk, accounting Virgil. 3. Geo. Guag.
in Tart.
it their best and strongest meat. Also in Aegira Bulls blood is so far from
being poisonable (as it is in all other places) that it is held both delicate
and restorative; so likewise is the blood of a Mare that was never covered; for
if she once have taken horse her blood is dangerous. Drusus the Tribune
purposing to accuse Quintus Caepio Pl. l. 28. cap. 9.
of giving him poison, drank Goats blood a good while before, whereby he waxed
so pale and colorless, that many indeed suspected him to have been poisoned by
Caepio: whereby it is manifest, that blood has been a very ancient
nourishment, and not lately devised by our country pudding writes, or curious
sauce makers, as Jason Pratensis and other foolish dietists have imagined. Nay
(which is more) not only the blood of beasts has been given for meat, but
also the blood of men and striplings has been drunk for a restorative; yea in
Rome (the seat and nurse of all inhumanity) Physicians did prescribe their
patients the blood of Wrestlers, causing them to suck it warm breathing and
spinning out of their veins, drawing into their corrupt bodies a sound man's
life, and sucking that in with both lips, which a dog is not suffered to lick
with his tongue; yea they were not ashamed to prescribe them a meat made of
man's marrow and infants brains. The Grecians afterward were as bold and
impious as the Romans, tasting of every inward and outward part of man's body,
not leaving the nails unprosecuted. But of all other I wonder most at Marsilius
Ficinus, a most famous Scholar and accounted Mars. Fic. de. studios^^n ^ue. I
b. 2. cap. 1^.
for a good Catholic, who has thus written of the use of man's blood. No doubt
(says he) the milk of a young and sound woman is very restorative for old men,
but the liquor of man's blood is far better; which old women-witches knowing to
be true, they get young children unto them, and prick or wound them, and suck
their blood to preserve their own health and life. And why may not then old men
(I pray you) for a need, suck likewise the blood of a young man or maid, which
is merry, lusty, sound, and willing to spare some of his superfluous blood for
another man's life? wherefore I advise them to suck an ounce or two of blood,
fasting, out of the vein of the left arm, at a little orifice, toward the
full of the moon, drinking presently upon it some wine and sugar, etc. Which
though he protests himself to Avic. l* 1. d^c. 3
have uttered as a great secret (though the Prince of Abohaly writ as much
before in his Old-mans diet) and to be as lawful as it is helpful in Physics
practice: yet by his leave I dare again protest and prove the contrary; for it
is unlawful to gaze upon a man's carcass, and is it lawful to eat or drink his
blood? what remedy call you that, which is more savage and abominable then the
grief it self? what law, what reason, nay what conjecture found out this
canibals diet? well, let it proceed from the Americans and Barbarians: nay,
from the Grecians, that were counted civil. Let Democritus dream and comment,
that some diseases are best cured with anointing the blood of strangers and
malefactors, others with the blood of our friends and kinsfolks; let Miletus
cure Plin. l. 28. ca. 1.
sore eyes with men's galls; Artemon the falling sickness with dead men's sculls:
Antheus convulsions with pills made of dead men's brains; Apollonius bad gums
with dead men's teeth; but far be it from any humane or Christian heart (brag we
of this foolish invention never so much) to suck away one another life in the
blood of young men, wherein Charles the 9 King of France being but outwardly
bathed for his leprosy, died therefore and for other his cruel massacres a
most bloody death: wherefore let us content our selves with the blood of geese*
swans, hoggs and sheep in our sauce and puddings, which yet are but a gross and
fulsome nourishment, unless they meet with a strong and good stomach.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Fish generally, and the difference thereof.
AS amongst Poets there is some called the Coryphaeus, or Captain-poet, so
fares it likewise amongst meats. Some prefering fruit as being most ancient,
Pis. de esc. and potul. Corn. cells. l. 2.
cleanly, natural, and needing either none or very little preparation. Others
extol flesh, as most suitable to fleshy creatures, and giving most and best
nourishment. But the finest feeders and dainty bellies did not delight Plut. 4.
symp. qu 4.
in flesh with Hercules, or in fruit with Plato and Arcesilaus, but with Numa
and Philocrates in variety of fish; which Numa made a law, that no fish without
scales nor without finns should be eaten of the people, whereupon I may justly
collect and gather, that he was not ignorant of Moses law. Also (according to
the vain dream of Lev. 11. v. 9. 10.
Gregory the great Bishop of Rome, and the author of the Carthusian order) he
put more holiness in fish then in flesh, falsely imagining flesh to be a greater
motive to lust and lasciviousness, then the use of fish; which frivolous
conceit is before sufficiently confuted in the seventh Chapter, and needs not
to be shaken again in this place. Now I will not deny, that fish is a wholesome
meat, if such fish could be always gotten as may sufficiently nourish the
body; but now a days it so falls out through iniquity of times, or want of
providence, or that our Seacoast and Rivers are more barren of fish then
heretofore; that in the Spring time, when we ought to feed on the purest and
most wholesome nourishment, our blood is not cleansed but corrupted with filthy
fish, I mean saltherrings, red-herrings, sprats, Haberdin, and greenfish: which
are not amiss for Sailers and Ploughmen, but yet most hurtful and dangerous for
other persons. Gatis Athen l. 8. c. 6. Caelius lib. 23. (...) 5. antiq. lect.
Queen of Syria made a Law, that no meal should pass through the year, without
fish: which if it were as firmly made and executed in England, no doubt much
flesh would be spared, and Navigation and fisher men maintained through the
land: neither should we need to imitate Gregory the Lent-maker, persuading men
to eat only fish at that time, when it is most out of season, most hardly
gotten, and most hurtful to the bodies of most men. Also in high Germany there
is both fish and flesh continually set upon the table, that every man's
appetite, humor and complexion, may have that which is fittest for it: in
which Country though no Lent be observed (except of a few Catholics) yet is
there abundance of flesh, all the year long, restraint being only made in
Spring time of killing that which is young.

Differences of Fish in kind.
lib. 32. not hist. cap. 11.
Concerning the kinds of Fishes, Pliny makes a hundred threescore and
seventeen several sorts of them, whereof some being never seen nor known of in
our Country, it were but folly to repeat them. As for them which we have and
feed on in England, they are either scaled, as Sturgian, salmon, grailings,
shuins, carps, breams, base, mullet, barbel, pike, luce, perch, ruffs,
herrings, sprats, pilchers, roch, shads, dorry, gudgin, and umbers; or shell'd,
as scallopes, oisters, mustles, cockles, periwinckles; or crusted over, as
crabs, lobsters, crevisses, shrimps; or neither scalld, shell'd, nor crusted:
as Tunny, ling, cod, hake, haberdine, haddock, seal, conger, lampreyes,
lamperns, eeles, plaise, turbut, flounder, skate, thorneback, maids, sole,
curs, gildpoles, smelts, cuttles, sleeves, pouts, dogfish, poulps, yards,
mackrels, troutes, tenches, cooks, whitings, gournards, and rochets: To which
also we may add, Sticklebacks and minoes, and spirlings, and anchovaes, because
they are also neither scaled, crusted, nor defended with shells.

As for the goodness or badness of fish, it is lessened or increased upon three
causes; the place they live, in the meat they feed on, and their manner of
dressing or preparation. Concerning the first, some live in the Sea, some in
Rivers, some in Ponds, some in Fenny creeks and meers.

Difference of Fish in respect of place.
Seafish as it is of all other the sweetest, so likewise the least hurtful;
for albeit they are of a thicker and more fleshy substance, yet their flesh is
most light and easy of concoction, insomuch that Zeno and Crato (two notable
Physians in Plutarcks time) commended them Plut. 4. symp. 4* quest.
above all other to their sick patients, and not without desert; for as the
Sea-aire is purest of all other, because it is most tossed and purified with
winds, so the water thereof is most labored, and nourishes for us the
wholesomest and lightest meat; lightest, because continual exercise consumes
the Sea-fishes superfluities; wholesomest, because the salt water (like to
buck-lye) washes away their inward filth and uncleaness. Of Sea fish those are
best, which live not in a calm and muddy Sea, tossed neither with tides nor
winds; for there they Gal. 3. de alim. fac.
wax naught for want of exercise; but they which live in a working Sea, whose
next continent is clean, gravelly, sandy, or rocky, running toward the
North-east wind, must needs be of a pure and wholesome nourishment, less moist
and clammy then the others, easier also of concoction, sooner turned into
blood, and every way fitter for man's body. This is the cause why the Oritae
Plin. lib. 7. c. 2. and lib. 16. ca. 1.
and Northern-people live as well with fish alone, as we do here with such
variety of flesh; even I say the goodness, lightness, and wholesomness of their
fish, which is not brought unto us till it be either so stinking or salt, that
all their goodness is gone or dried up.

River-Fish likewise are most wholesome and light, when they swim in rocky,
sandy, or gravel'd Rivers, running Northward or Eastward, and the higher they
swim up, the better they are: Contrariwise, those which abide in slow, short,
and muddy Rivers, are not only of an excremental and corrupt juice, but also
of a bad smell and ill taste.

Pond-fish is soon fatted through abundance of meat and want of exercise; but
they are nothing so sweet as River-fish, unless they have been kept in some
River to scour themselves, especially when they live in little standing ponds,
not fed with continual springs, nor refreshed from some River or Sea with fresh
water.

Fenny-fish of all other is most slimy, excremental, unsavory, last digested,
and soonest corrupted; having neither free air, nor sweet water, nor good food
to help or better themselves; such are the fish of that lake in Plin l. 31. ca
2.
Armenia, where all the fish be black and deadly: and albeit our English meers
be not so bad, yet verily their fish is bad enough, especially to stomachs of
other Conntries, unacquainted with such muddy and unwholesome meats.

Differences of Fish in respect of their feeding.
Concerning the meats which fishes feed on; some feed Plin. l. 32. ca* ^.
upon salt and saltish mud (as near Leptis in Africa, and in Eubaea, and about
Dyrrhachium) which makes their flesh as salt as brine, and altogether
unwholesome for most stomachs: Others upon bitter weeds and roots, which makes
them as bitter as gall, of which though we have none in our Seas or Rivers, yet
in the Island of Plin. l. 32. c. 2.
of Pene and Clazomene they are very common: Also (if Pliny may be credited)
about Cephalenia, Anipelos, Paros and the Delian rocks, fish are not only of a
sweet taste, but also of an aromatical smell: whether it is by eating of sweet
roots, or devouring of amber and ambre-grice. Some also feed and fat themselves
near to the commonsewers, sincks, channels and draughts of great Cities; whose
chiefest meat is either carrion or dung; whereas indeed the proper meat for
fish, is either flies, frogs, grasshoppers, young fry and spawne, and chiefly
certain wholesome roots, herbs, and weeds, growing in the bottom or sides Plin.
li. 32 c. 2.
of Seas and Rivers. Caesar, Crasus, and Curious fed them with livers and flesh;
so also did the Hieropolitans in Venus lake. In Champagny they fed them with
bread; yea Vidius Pollio fed them with his condemned Slaves, Suet in vita*
Severi.
to make them the more fat and pleasant in taste. But neither they that are fed
with men, nor with garbage or carrion nor with citty-filth, nor with any thing
we can devise, are so truly sweet, wholesome, and pleasant, as they which in
good Seas and Rivers feed themselves, enjoying both the benefit of fresh air,
agreeable water, and meat cor respondent to their own nature.

Difference of Fish in respect of preparation.
Concerning their difference of goodness in preparation: I must needs agree
with Diocles, who being asked, whether were the better fish, a Pike or a
Conger; That Athen. l. 8 c 6.
(said he) sodden, and this broild; showing us thereby, that all flaggy, slimy,
and moist fish, (as Eeles, Congers, Lampreys, Oisters, Cockles, Mustles, and
Scallopes) are best broild, roasted, or bakt; but all other fish of a firm
substance and drier constitution is rather to be sodden, as the most part of
fish before named.

Last of all, we are to consider what fish we should chiefly choose; namely the
best grown, the fattest, and the newest.

How to choose the best Fish.
The best grown, shows that it is healthy and has not been sick, which made
Philoxenus the Poet at Dionisius Athen. l. 8. c. 3*
table, to request him to send for Aesculapius Priest to cure the little barbles
that were served in at the lower Mess, where he sat. If a fish be fat, it is
ever young: if it be new it is ever sweet; if it be fed in muddy or filthy
water, keep it not till the next day, for it soon corrupts; but if it be
taken out of clean feeding, it will keep the longer.

Rules to be observed in the eating of fish.
Sodden fish or broild fish, is presently to be eaten hot; for being kept cold
after it but one day (unless it be covered with wine pickle or vinegar) it is
corrupted by the air in such sort, that sometimes (like to poison-full
mushroms) it strangleth the eaters: also fish coming out of a pan is not to be
covered with a platter, lest the vapor congeled in the platter drop down again
upon the fish; whereby that fish which might else have nourished: will either
cause vomiting or scouring, or else corrupt within the veins.

Finally, whosoever intends to eat a fish dinner, let him not heat his body
first with exercise, least the juice of his meat (being too soon drawn by the
liver) corrupt the whole mass of blood; and let no fish be sodden or eaten
without salt, pepper, wine, onions, or hot spices; for all fish (compared with
flesh) is cold and moist, of little nourishment, engendring watrish and thinn
blood. And if any shall think that because Crabs, Skate, Cockles, and Oisters
procure lust, therefore they are likewise of great nourishment. The argument is
denied; for though they blow up the body with wine, and make good store of
sharp nature, which tickleth and inciteth us to venery; yet that seed is
unfruitful, and that lust wants sufficiency, because it comes not from
plenty of natural seed, but from an itching quality of that which is unnatural.
Thus much generally of fish, in the way of a Preface; now let us speak
particularly of every fish eaten, or taken by us in this Island.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of SEAFISH.
Seafish, may be called that sort of fish, which chiefly lives, feeds,
breeds, and is taken in salt water; of which I will write according to the
letters of the Alphabet, that every man may readily find out the fishes name,
whose nature or goodness he desires to know of.

Encrasicholi.
Anchovaes are but the Sea*minoes of Provence and Sardinia; which being poudred
with salt, wine-vinegar and origanum, and so put up into little barrels, are
carried into all Greece, and there esteemed for a most dainty meat. It seems
that the people of those hot Countries are very often distempered and distasted
of their meat; wherefore to recover their appetite they feed upon Anchovaes, or
rather taste one or two of them; whereby not only to them, but also to us
appetite is restored: I could wish that the old manner of barrelling them up
with origanum, salt and and wine-vinegar were observed; but now they taste
only of salt, and are nothing so pleasant as they were wont to be: They are
fittest for stomachs oppressed with fleam, for they will cut, ripen, and digest
it, and warm the stomach exceeding well; they are of little nourishment, but
light enough if they were not so over-salted; they are best dressed with oil,
vinegar, pepper, and dried origanum, and they must be freed from their outward
skin and the ridgebone and be washed in wine, before they be laid in the dish.

Variatae. Alburni marini.
Bleaks of the Sea, or Sea-bleaks, called of Dr Cajus Variatae, or
Sea-cameleons (because they are never of one color, but change with every
light and object, like to changeable silk) are as sound, firm and wholesome as
any Carp; there be great plenty of them in our Southern Seas, betwixt Rye and
Exceter, and they are best sodden, because they are so fine and so firm a meat.

Abramides marinae.
Breams of the Sea, be of a white and solid substance, good juice, most easy
digestion and good nourishment.

Piscis Capellanus. Asellus medius.
Cod-fish is a great Sea-whiting, called also a Keeling or Melwel; of a tender
flesh but not fully so dry and firm as the Whiting is: Cods have a bladder in
them full of eggs or spawne, which the Northern men call the kelk, and esteem
it a very dainty meat; they have also a thick and gluish substance at the end
of their stomach called a sown, more pleasant in eating then good of
nourishment; for the toughest fish-glue is made of that. Of all parts of the
fresh Cod, the head, lips, and palate is preferred, being a very light though a
slimy meat

Pectines. Pectunculi.
Cocks and Cockles are commended by Scribonius Lib. 32 cap. 7
Largus, for strengthening the stomach. Pliny says they increase flesh, but
certain it is that they increase lust; for they themselves are so hot of
nature, that they leap and fly above water like an arrow, in the summer nights
Plin. l. 9. c. 29.
to be cooled by the air, Alexander Benedictus reports, that some with eating
too many Cockles have become stark fools. Their broth loosneth the body, but
their flesh stays it. Galen commends them for a good 3. de simp. sac.
meat, but dangerous to them that are subject to the stone or falling sickness.
The best Cockles keep in sandy seas, which makes the Purbeck and Selsey
Cockles so highly esteemed; they are best in the month of May, for then are
they fullest, lustiest, and cleanest of gravel. To avoid their gravel, keep
them in salt water or brine a whole day before you eat them, and if you shift
them into fresh water or brine when the tide is coming, they will open
themselves, and spue out all their gravel and filthiness. Choose the greatest
and the whitest of them, and of al shell fish, they are best broild in a frying
pan, neither are they ill being sod in water with salt, pepper, parsley, dried
mints, and cinnamon, after the French fashion.

Conger.
Conger is nothing but a sea-eele of a white sweet and fatty flesh: little
Congers are taken in great plenty in the Severn, betwixt Gloucester and
Tewkesbury, but the great ones keep only in the salt seas, which are
whiter-flesht, and more tender; they feed (as eels do) upon fat waters at the
mouths of rivers running into the sea: they are hard of digestion for most
stomachs, engendring chollicks if they be eaten cold, and leprosies if they be
eaten hot after their seething. Philemon the Comical Poet seeing a Conger
Athen. l. 8. c. 6.
seething in a Cooks-shop for diverse young Gentlemen, that bespake it to dinner,
suddenly snacht away the Vict. l. 18. c. 17. var. lect.
pan wherein it boiled, and ran away with it, the Gentlemen followed and caught
at him like a number of Chickens; whom he had crossed, and turned, and mocked
for a great while, till having sported himself enough, he flang down pan and
all with these words: O humane folly! how do fools long for unwholesome meats?
for he thought Conger to be bad enough of its own nature, but far worse if it
were eaten hot out of the pan. In England we do not amiss first to boil it
tender in water with salt, time, parsley, baies, and hot herbs, then to lay it
covered in vinegar, and then to broil it; for so is it a meetly good
nourishment in Summer, for hot stomachs.

Merula.
The Cook-fish, is so called of the seamen, because he so pleasantly tastes
when he is well sod, as though he had seasoned himself with salt and spices.
They are very rare, but tender and light of nourishment; and there is never
seen of them past one at once, which caused the Latins to call them Merulas,
that is to say the Solitarians or Hermits or Blackbirds of the Sea.

Cancri marini.
Crabs of the Sea, be of diverse sorts; some smoothcrusted, and some
rough-casted as it were, and full of prickles, called Echinometrae: The first
sort has the two foremost claws very big and long, the other wants them;
wherefore as they go side wi^e, so these move not themselves but round about
like a spiral line: the first sort are also very big, or never growing to be of
any reasonable sise. The great ones are called Paguri, whereof some weigh 10 l.
weight; furthermore one sort of the great ones (which is the best of all) goes
so fast upon the shore, that the Grecians have termed them Hippeis, or light
horsemen. The little sort of Crabs is softer shelld (called Pinnotheres) whose
weakness is defended with abundance of wit; for whilst he is little, he hides
himself in a little Oister, and when he grows bigger (yet is he never so bigg
as our common crabb) he conveyeth himself into a bigger Oister; of all
sea-crabbs this is the lightest and wholesomest, next unto them are our
ordinary crabs, but somewhat harder of digestion; both of them nourish much,
and are highly commended, in consumptions of lungs and spittings up of blood,
not only by Dioscorides, Pliny, and Avicen, but also by all writers,
especially if Asses milk be drunk with them.

As for their manner of preparation, their vents are first to be stopped with a
sticks end, and then they are to be sodden in water for such as are costiff, or
in wine for them which are loose bellied; some sees them in vinegar, water,
and salt; but Galen says that then they Gal 9. comp. sec. loc.
are best, when they are sod in that water out of which they were taken; the
fuller of eggs the better they are, for the female is preferred. Our great
sea-crabbs (either of the smooth or rough kind) full of a yellowish red and
strong pulp, lushish in taste, and bought deerly, are of a very hard digestion,
except they light upon a very strong stomach. They also over-heat and inflame
the body, whereas contrariwise the lesser sort do cool and moisten it. The
broth of all of them consume the stone, and cures Quartains being drunk every
morning fasting they are best in season in the spring and fall, as also at the
full of the moon.

Cuculi marini.
Currs are supposed by Dr Cajus to be all one with our Gurnard; but it somewhat
differs, being of a very firm, whitish, dry, sound, and wholesome flesh; they
are best sodden with salt, water, mace, nutmegs, parsley and vinegar.

Sepiae. vel Lolligines calamariae.
Cuttles (called also sleeves for their shape, and scribes for their incky
humor wherewith they are replenished) de alim fac.
are commended by Galen for great nourishers; their skins be as smooth as any
woman's, but their flesh as brawny as any ploughmans, therefore I fear me Galen
rather commended them upon hearsay, then upon any just cause or true
experience; Apicius, that great Mastercook, makes sawsages of them with lard
and other things; which composition I would not have omitted, if it had been
worth the penning.

Canis Cetaceus.
Dog-fish is strong* hard, and of gross and bad juice: lib. de af^^. int.
albeit Hippocrates commends it in Pleuresies, and also in the skin-dropsie or
Anasarca. The Dorry is very like to a Sea-bream, of most excellent taste,
constitution, and nourishment, being either backed, or sodden whilst it is alive
in wine, water, salt, vinegar, and pennirial.

Mustelae.
Eele-powtes are best in April, May and September; their spawne is counted very
hurtful, but their flesh is white, firm, and of good nourishment, and their
livers most sweet and delicate: sees them as you do a Dorry, and then broil
them a little to make them easier of digestion, or else boil them as you do
Sturgian, and so eat them cold.

Rhombi marini.
Sea-Flounders are very thick, firm, and yet light of digestion, they are
exceeding good for aguish persons being well sod, and for some men, being fried
in vinegar and butter.

Lucernae.
Gilt-heads or Golden-poles, are very little unlike the Gournard, save that it
seems about the noddle of the head, as though it were all besprinkled with
gold-filings, it is something harder of digestion, as Galen writes.

Cuculi majores.
Gurnards are of two sorts, Swart or Reddish; either of them are within of a
white, firm, dry, firm, and wholesome substance; giving our bodies a competent
nourishment, being sodden in white wine-vinegar, salt, mace, and onions, or
else being sodden only in wine and then sowced.

Asellus. Islandicus.
Haberdine is nothing but an Island Cod, bigger somewhat then ours, and also
firmer.

Asselluli.
Haddocks are little Cods, of light substance, crumbling flesh, and good
nourishment in the Summer time, especially whilst Venison is in season.

Aselluli longi.
Hakes be of the same nature, resembling a Cod in taste, but a Ling in likeness.

Aquila marina.
3. de. al. fa c. 31
The Sea-Hawke is of hard flesh and slow digestion, as Galen avoucheth from
Philotimus mouth; smelling strong and heavily, not to be eaten without leeks,
onions, and garlic

Haleces.
Herrings are an usual and common meat, coveted as much of the Nobility for
variety and wantoness, as used of poor men for want of other provision: it is
one of the Cardinal supporters of our holy Lent, and therefore not cap. 185.
to be ill spoken of: yet Thomas Cogan (in his Haven of Health) says that by
eating of fresh Herring many fall into fevers, and that Red-herring gives as
good nourishment to the body, as resty Bacon. And truly I dare avouch, that
new bloat-herrings are little better; and pickeld herrings far worse, though
you correct them with never so much vinegar, salt, pepper and oil. As for salt
Herring well watered or qualified in warm milk, they taste not ill after they
are broild, but yet they give none or a bad nourishment; saving to Ploughmen,
Sailers, Soldiers, Mariners, or laboring persons, to whom gross and heavy
meats are most familiar and convenient.

Rhinocerotes. Acus.
Horne-beaks are ever lean (as some think) because they are ever fighting; yet
are they good and tender, whether they be eaten fresh or poudred. Highly be
they commended of Alexander Benedictus in the plague time, because they breed
no unwholesome or excremental humors.

Leucisci marini.
Javelings or Sea-darts are plentiful in the Venecian gulf and all the
Adriatique Sea; where having taken the young ones, they salt them and send them
to Constantinople in infinite number for Anchovaes; the greater sort they fry
and boil at home, being of a very sweet and soft flesh.

Miluus marinus.
Keelings differ nothing but in name from Cod. The Sea-Kite, called of Pliny
Hirundo volans, the flying Swallow, resembles much the flying Herrings so
plentiful about the West Indies, which finding not proper meat within the
waters, flies after gnats and muskitoes like a swallow. Sir Francis Drake
(whom thankful posterity will worthily esteem) did first show me one of them
dead, and I think he was one of the first of our Nation, that did ever eat
them; they are of a good taste, tender flesh, but somewhat aguish after the
nature of fresh Herrings.

Asellus.
Ling perhaps looks for great extolling, being counted the beef of the Sea,
and standing every fish day (as This Asellus is also by Jul. Scaliger, and ^ac.
Cujacius rendered stockfish perhaps because like unto the Afse, not serviceable
or fit for use til well beaten.
a cold supporter) at my Lord Majors table; yet is it nothing but a long Cod:
whereof the greater sised is called Organe Ling, and the other Codling, because
it is no longer then a Cod, and yet has the taste of Ling: whilst it is new it
is called green-fish, when it is salted it is called Ling, perhaps of lying,
because the longer it lies (being conveniently turned, and the Peace-straw
often shifted wherein it lies) the better it is, waxing in the end as yellow
as the gold noble, at which time they are worth a noble a piece. They are taken
only in the far Nothern Seas, where the sweetest and biggest live; but
Codlings are taken in great plenty near to Bedwell in Northumberland shire.

Locustae marinae.
Lobsters are of a strong and hard flesh, and hard of concoction; the belly,
claws and upper parts are most tender, the tail parts tough; when they are
seething their mouth and lower vent should be stopped with towe, lest the
liquor being bettered with their juice, they themselves prove flashy and
unpleasant in taste. As the Athen.
River Lobster or Crevisse seems (as Dorion said) to be made only for weak
stomachs; so I think these are ordained only for the stronger sort: for I have
known many weak persons venture on them to their great hurt, as contrariwise
sound stomachs do well digest them? Pliny says, that in the North-west Indian
Seas there be lib 9. cap. 3.
Lobsters taken of two yards length; whereof we have none, or if we had, yet can
they not be so wholesome, for the least is tendrest, and the middle sised is
best flesht; as for the great ones they be old and tough, and will cause sorrow
enough before they be well concocted. They come into season with the Buck, and
go out of season when the Do comes in; also in the wane of the moon they are
little worth, and best toward and in the full: clove-vinegar and gilly
flour-vinegar is their best sauce, and if you butter them after they are well
sodden with store of vinegar and pepper, they will give a strong nourishment to
an indifferent stomach; when their spawne lies greatest in their head, then are
they in prime; but when all their spawn is out, then is their spawn good, and
they wax bad.

Lucij.
Luces are properly called Pikes of the Sea; so rare in Spain, that they are
never seen. But our English Seas, especially which wash the Southern shore,
have store of them which are large fat and good. Mr Huzzy of Cookfield sent me
once a Luce out of Sussex a yard and a half long, which being presented by me
to the Mirror of Chivalry (the Lord Willoughby of Eresby) was thought, and
truly thought a most dainty fish; for it eats more sweet, tender, and crisper
then our river Pikes, and may be eaten of aguish persons, weak stomachs, and
women in childbed. Their feed is chiefly upon young fry, and spawnes of fish:
and by continual swimming (whereunto they are forced by beating of the surges)
they become tenderer then our fresh water Pikes, though not so fat.

Orbs.
Lumps are of two sorts, the one as round almost as a bowl, the other
resembling the fillets of a Calfe; either of them is deformed, shapeless and
ugly, so that my Maids once at Ipswich were afraid to touch it, being flayed
they resemble a soft and gellied substance, whereupon the Hollanders call them
Snot-fishes; I liked not their substance, taste, nor qualities, for they were
(as they are written of) a curde, raw, and fleagmatick meat, much like to a
Thorne-back half sodden, they are best being boiled and pickled like Sturgian,
and so eaten cold.

Scombri.
Mackrels were in old time in such request, that two gallons of their pickle
(called the pickle of good fellows) Plin. l. 31. c. ^.
was sold for a thousand pieces of silver; but time and experience described
them to be of a thick, clammy and suffocating substance, offensive to the
brain, head, and breast, though pleasant in taste, and acceptable to the
stomach: Certain it is that they cause drousiness in the Arnol. de vil. nou.
com. in* Sch. Sal.
best stomachs, and apoplexies, or palsies, or lethargies, or dullness (at the
least) of sense and sinews to them that be weak. Tralianus rightly advises all
persons sick of fleagmatick diseases, and of stoppings, to beware of Mackrels
as a most dangerous meat: albeit their liver helps Aelianus.
the jaundies, being sod in vinegar, and their flesh sod in vinegar cures the
suffocation of the matrix: they are best being sod in wine-vinegar with mints,
parsley, rosemary, and time, and if afterward they be kept in pickle, made of
Rhennish wine, ginger, pepper, and dill, they prove a very dainty and no
unwholesome meat; they are worst of all buttered. The French men lay
Southernwood upon a gridiron, and them upon the Southernwood, and so broil them
both upon the fire, basting them well with wine and butter, and so serve them
in with vinegar, pepper and butter, as hot as can be; by which way no doubt
their malignity is much lessened, and their goodness no less increased.

Rajolae.
Maids are as little and tender Skates, feeding chiefly upon flesh, livers,
and spawne of fish; whereas other fish bring forth eggs, which are in time
converted into their parents shape; only Maids Skate and Thorne-back bring
forth their young ones without eggs, after the kind of propagation of beasts:
they are very nourishing and of good juice, fit for weak stomachs, and such as
have through wantoness spoiled themselves and robbed nature. Boil them in wine
water and salt, with a sprig of rosemary, and then eat them with vinegar,
pepper, and sweet butter.

Mugiles marini. Italice Cephalo.
Sea-Mullets differ little or nothing in shape from Barbels, saving that they
are very little or nothing bearded, and those that have beards, have them only
on the neither lip.

There is store of them in the mouth of the river of Plin. l. 9 cap. 8.
Usk, and perhaps as many as at Lateran in Province. They are so swift, that
they often outswim the lightest Ships; which argues them to be of a light and
aeireal substance: It is strange what is written of this fish; Plin. l. 32. c.
7.
namely that it should hurt Venus game; yea that the very broth of it, or the
wine wherein it is sodden should make a man unable to get, and a woman unable
to conceive L. de Venereis.
children. Nay furthermore Terpsides avoucheth, that a little of that broth
being mingled with hens meat, makes them barren though never so well trodden
of the Cock; whereupon he says, The Poets have consecrated the Sea-Mullets to
Diana, as being the procurer and preserver of chastity; which if it be true (as
I can hardly think it is) then farewell Paracelsus his cabalistical conclusion,
or rather the follies of Avicen and many Arabians, which give the stones,
brains, and combs, of most lascivious birds (as Cocks, Phesants, Partridges,
Drakes and Sparrows) to stir up lust and increase seed: for the Sea-Mullet is
so lascivious, that a thousand Females swim after one Male as soon as they have
spawned, and the Males likewise strive as much if they have not choice of
Females; yea whereas in a manner all kind of fish, spawne but once a year; they
come (like to swine among beasts) thrice a year at the least; yet are they (as
men say, and as many have written since) abaters of courage, extinguishers of
seed, and charms as it were against conception: Nevertheless since their flesh
is Plin. 9. c. 17.
wholesome, white, sweet, and tender, and they feed clean and good, I dare
boldly aver them to be much nourishing; being first well sodden in wine, salt,
and water, and then either sowced like a Gurnard, or kept in gelly like a
Tench, or eaten hot with vinegar and pepper. Of the eggs and blood of this fish
mixed with salt (which must not be omitted in this discourse) is also made that
which the Italians call Botargo, from the Greek words (...) or salted eggs.

Mityli. Chamae.
Mussels were never in credit, but amongst the poorer sort; till lately the
lilly white Mussel was found out about Romers-wall, as we sail betwixt Flushing
and Bergen-^p-Zon, where indeed in the heat of Summer, they are commonly and
much eaten without any offense to the head, liver or stomach; yea my self (whom
once twenty Mussels had almost poisoned at Cambridg, and who have seen sharp,
filthy, and cruel diseases follow the eating of English Mussels) did fill my
self with those Mussels of the Low Country, being never a whit distempered with
my bold adventure. Dr Wotton says that the least L de diff. anim.
Mussels be ever best, because they are whitest softest, and soonest digested,
but the great ones give a stronger and larger nourishment; the red ones are
very dangerous, yellow ones are suspected, but the white ones are wholesome and
much commended, save unto hot and distempered stomachs: they are best sodden in
the water out of which they were taken, which being not obtained, sees them in
water and salt, and a little strong Ale and Vinegar: broild Mussels increase
heat and draught; fried Mussels do easily corrupt in our bodies, and turn to a
bad juice. If they be kept in the like pickle, as lately is devised by Sergeant
Goodrons to keep Oisters in (made of sea water, wine, vinegar, bayleaves,
mints, pepper, ginger, and cinnamon) I durst warrant them as wholesome, and
questionless more pleasant then the Oister. As for horse-mussels they deserve
not the remembrance, since neither experience, custom, nor reason approves
them a wholesome meat; nay as lib. 32 c. 9.
Pliny says, Salem virusque refipiunt; they taste brackish and strong, having
a hidden poison within their flesh; yet have I seen them ordinarily sold in
Venice, which makes me think that some Sea and River may have wholesome ones
of that kind, though ours be neither wholesome nor pleasant of taste. They are
exceeding bigg in Spain and the West Indies; but the greatest that ever I read
of, is that which Juba records in his volumes Plin. l. 32. c. 1.
written to Cajus (Augustus son) being as big in compass as three pecks.

Monachae.
Nunfishes were not seen in England till Sir Francis Drake and Mr Caundish
brought them (no man knows out of what Seas) cleaving to the keels of their
happy Vessels. It is a kind of shellfish, not winding like a Periwinckle, nor
opening his shell (as Oisters, Mussels, and Cockles do) but creeping out of his
craggy cabine, like a sea-snail, but that (as I said) his hole goes strait
inward and windeth not: the face of it is very white, the head is covered as it
were with a black vail, like the Nuns of Saint Bridgets order, whereof I
suppose it took the name. It feeds upon sweet mud sticking upon Ships sides
whilst they lie at Anchor, and is as wholesome and delicate a meat as any
Periwinckle.

Ostreae.
Oisters do justly deserve a full treatice, being so common, and whithall so
wholesome a meat; they differ in color, substance, and bigness; but the best
are thick, little and round sheld, not sli ppery nor flaggy through abundance
of a gellied humor, but short, firm, and thick of flesh, riseing up round like
a woman's breast, being in a manner all belly, and no fins; or at the most
having very short fins, of a green color, and listed about as with a purple
hair, which will make them indeed to be justly called Calliblephara, that is
to say, The fair eye Plin. l. 32. ca. 6.
lidded Oisters; such are our Walfleet and Colchester Oisters; whose good
relish, substance, and wholesomeness, far exceeds the Oisters of Vsk, Pool,
Southampton, Whitstable, Rye, or any other Port or Haven in England.

Thus much concerning the body of Oisters, now somewhat concerning their
bigness; Alexander with his (Friends and Physicians wondered to find Oisters in
Plin. l. 32. ca. 6.
the Indian seas a foot long. And in Plinies time they marvelled at an Oister,
which might be divided into three morsels, calling it therefore Tridacnon by a
peculiar name: but I dare and do truly affirm, that at my eldest Brothers
marriage, at Aldham hall in Essex, I did see a Pelden Oister divided into eight
good morsels, whose shell was nothing less then that of Alexanders; but as the
Greek Proverb says, Goodness is not tied to greatness, but greatness to
goodness; wherefore since the little round Oisters be commonly best rellished,
and less fulsome, let them be of the greatest account, especially to be eaten
raw, which of all other is thought to be the best way. Galen says that they
are somewhat heavy De cib bon. and. mal. succ.
of digestion, and engender fleagm; but as he knew not the goodness of English
beef (when he condemned the use of all Ox-flesh) so had he tried the goodness
of our Oisters, which Pliny makes the second best of the Loco citato.
world, no doubt he would have given Oisters a better censure. That they are
wholesome and to be desired of every man, this may be no small reason, that
(almost) every man loves them, Item whereas no flesh or other fish is or can be
dangerless being eaten raw, raw Oisters are never offensive to any indifferent
stomach. Nay furthermore they settle a wayward appetite and confirm a weak
stomach, and give good nourishment to decayed members, either through their
own goodness, or that they are so much desired.

Finally if they were an ill and heavy meat, why were they appointed to be
eaten first? which is no new custom brought in by some late Physician: for one
asking Athen. l 4 c. 3. Mac 3. sat. c. 13
Dromeas (who lived long before Athenaeus and Macrobius time) whether he liked
best, the Feast of Athens or Chalcis? I like, said he, the Athenians Prologue
better then the Chalcidians, for they began their feasts with Oisters, and
these with hony*cakes: which argues them to have been ever held for a meat of
light digestion, else had they not always been eaten in the first place. It is
great pity of the loss of Asellius the Sabins book written Dialogue-wise
betwixt the Fig-finch, the Thrush and the Oisters, wherein upon just grounds he
Su. in vita Ti^.
so preferred them before the Birds, that Tiberius Caesar rewarded him with a
thousand pound Sterling. The fattest Oisters are taken in salt water at the
mouth of Rivers, but the wholesomest and lightest are in the main C^lcus.
Trallianus.
upon shelfs and rocks; which also procure urine and stools, and are helps to
cure the chollick and dropsy, if they be eaten raw, for sodden Oisters bind the
Gal. 5. de. sa. tu
belly, stop urine, and increase the colic. How dangerous it is to drink small
drink upon Oisters it appears Gregr. hist. l. 9.
by Andronicus the elder, who having made a great Dinner of Oisters, drank cold
water upon them, whereupon he died, being not able to overcome them. And truly
as Oisters do hardly corrupt of themselves; so if cold drink follow them they
concoct as hardly: wherefore (especially having eaten many) drink either wine
or some strong and hot beer after them, for fear of a mischief. Little Oisters
are best raw, great Oisters should be stued with wine, onions, pepper, and
butter, or roasted with vinegar, pepper, and butter, or baked with onions,
pepper, andbutter, or pickled with white-wine-vinegar, their own water, bays,
mints, and hot spices; for of all ways they are worst sod, unless you sees
them in that sea water from whence they were brought.

All Oisters are dangeours whilst they be full of milk, which commonly is
betwixt May and August. Raw Oisters are best in cold weather, when the stomach
is hottest, namely from September to April: albeit the Italians dare not
venture on a raw Oister at any time, but broil them in the shell with their
water, the juice of an orange, pepper, and oil; which way I must needs confess
it eats daintily. Pickled Oisters may be eaten at all times, and to my taste
and judgment they are more commendable, chiefly to cold, weak, windy,
distasted Lib. 32. cap. 6.
stomachs, then any way else prepared. I wonder whether it be true or no which I
have heard of, and Pliny seems also to affirm, That Oisters may be kept all
the year long covered in snow, and so be eaten in Summer as cold as can be;
which if it prove answerable to the likelihood I conceive of it, I will cry out
with Pliny in the same Chapter, Quanti quanti es*luxuria, quae summa montium
and maris ima commisces? How great and powerful is riot, which makes the
highest covering of Seneca in ep.
mountains, and the lowest creatures of the seas to meet together? Yet it is
recorded that Apicius the Roman, kept Oisters so long sweet (were it in snow,
pickle, or brine) that he sent them from thence sweet and good to the Emperor
Trajan, warring against the Parthians.

Cochleae marinae.
Perwinckles or Whelks, are nothing but sea-snails, feeding upon the finest mud
of the shore and the best weeds; they are very nourishing and restorative,
being sod at the seaside in their own sea water: the whitest flesht are ever
best and tenderest, and they which are taken in clean creeks eat pleasant, but
they which are gathered upon muddy shores eat very strongly and offend the
eyesight. They Gal. 8. de comp med. sec. loc.
are best in winter and in the spring: for a stomach and liver resolved as it
were and disposessed of strength. Apicius Apic. l. 7. c. 16.
warns us to pick away the covering of their holes, for it is a most
unwholesome thing, being nothing but a collection of all their slime hardened
with seething. The best way to prepare them for sound persons is to sees them
in their own seawater, or else in river water with salt and vinegar; But for
weak and consumed persons Apicius wills them (in the Book and Chapter
aforesaid) to be thus dressed; take first the skin from their holes, and lay them
for a day or two covered in salt and milk; the third day lay them only in new
milk, then sees them in milk till they be dead, or fry them in a pan with
butter and salt.

Passeres.
Plaise (called the sea-sparrows, because they are brown above and white
beneath) are of good, wholesome and fine nourishment. Arnoldus de villa nova
writes thus of them. Of all seafish Rochets and Gurnards are to be preferred;
for their flesh is firm, and their substance purest of all other. Next unto
them Plaise and Soles are to be numbered, being eaten in time; for if either of
them be once stale, there is no flesh more carrion-like nor more ^roublesome to
the belly of man: the best Plaise have blackest spots, as the best flounders
reddest, and the thicker, is most commended, and such as are taken upon the
Eastern cost, as Rye, Sandwich, and Dover; could we have store at all times of
such wholesome fish, at any reasonable rate, Jackalent would be a cock-horse
all the year long, and butchers meat would go a begging.

Alausae minores.
Pilchers differ not only in age (as some dream) but even in substance and form
from Herrings; for their flesh is firmer and fuller, and their body rounder,
neither are they of so aguish an operation; they are best broild, having lien a
day in salt, and eaten with butter salt, and pepper.

Porci marini.
Porpesses, Tursions, or sea-hogs, are of the nature of swine, never good till
they be fat, contrary to the disposion of Tunnies, whose flesh is ever best
when they are leanest; it is an unsavory meat, engendring many superfluous
humors, augmenting fleagm, and troubling no less an indifferent stomach, then
they trouble the water against a tempest; yet many Ladies and Gentlemen love it
exceedingly, baked like venison; yea I knew a great Gentlewoman (in Warwick
lane) once send for a pasty of it given from a Courtier) when the prisoners of
Newgate had refused the fellow of it out of the Beggars basket. Thus like lips
like lettice, and that which is most men's bane, may be fittest to delight and
nourish others.

Pol^pi.
Poulps are hard of digestion, naught howsoever they be dressed, as Platina
thinks. But since Hyppocrates commends Lib. 1. de morb* mul.
them to women in childbed* I dare not absolutely diswade the eating of them;
especially since Diphilus, Paulus, Aegineta, and Aetius commend them likewise,
saying that they nourish much, and excessively provoke lust. Indeed if any
would eat a Lae. in vit. Dio.
live pulp, to anger others and to kill himself, as Diogenes did (though some
say that he died of a raw cow-heel, others that he stiffeld himself in his
cloak) no doubt he shall find it a dangerous morsel; but being well sodden in
salt water and wine, and sweet herbs, it is as dainty and far more wholesomer
then a Mackrel.

Anates marini.
Puffins, whom I may call the feathered fishes, are accounted even by the holy
fatherhood of Cardinals to be no flesh but rather fish; whose Catholic
censure I will not here oppugn, though I have just reason for it, because I
will not increase the Popes Coffers; which no doubt would be filled, if every
Puffin eater bought a pardon, upon true and certain knowledge that a Puffin
were flesh: albeit perhaps if his Holiness would say, that a shoulder of Muton
were fish; they either would not or could not think it flesh.

Aranei marini.
Quawiners (for so the Scots and Northen English term them) are very subtle
and crafty fishes, but utterly unwholesome for indifferent stomachs, though the
poorer sort of the Orcadians eat them for hunger.

Rubelliones.
Rochets (or rather Rougets, because they are so red) differ from Gurnards and
Curs, in that they are redder by a great deal, and also lesser; they are of the
like flesh and goodness yet better fried with onions, butter, and vinegar, then
sodden; because they are so little, that seething would soke out their best
nourishing substance.

Pectines veneris.
Scallopes are called Venus Cockles, either because she was borne in one of
them, or because she loved them Lib 32 cap. 11
above all other meat. Pliny extolleth the Scallops of Alexandria in Egypt, but
now the most and best be in Spain by Compostella, whether many lecherous men
and women resort, to eat Scallops fot the kindling of lust and increase of
nature, under the name of a Pilgrimage to Saint James his shrine: The whitest
are best, and least hot, all of them increase lust, provoke much urine, and
nourish strongly. Selsey and Purbeck have gotten them credit for them and for
Cockles, above all the Costs of England; they are best being broild with their
own water, vinegar, pepper, and butter, but sodden they are held to be
unwholesome

Phocae.
Seals flesh is counted as hard of digestion, as it is gross of substance,
especially being old; wherefore I leave it to Mariners and Sailers, for whose
stomachs it is fittest, and who know the best way how to prepare it

Triches. Clupeae.
Shads have a tender and pleasant flesh, but in some months they are so full of
bones, that the danger in eating them lessneth the pleasure; they nourish
plentifully, especially the Severn shad, which in my judgment is void of that
viscous humor, whereby other shads (no less then Mackrels) enforce sleepiness
to the eater. They are best in May, June, and July, for then they are full of
flesh and freest of bones.

Squillae.
Shrimps are of two sorts; the one crookbacked, the other straitbacked: the
first sort is called of Frenchmen Caramots de la sante healthful shrimps;
because they recover*sick and consumed persons; of all other Pli. lib 9* c. 51.
they are most nimble, witty, and skipping, and of best juice. Shrimps were of
great request amongst the Romans, and brought in as a principal dish in Venus
feasts. The best way of preparing them for healthful persons, is to boil them
in sea or salt water, with a little vinegar; but for sick and consumed bodies
dress them after this sort: first wash them clean in barley water, then unscale
them whilst they are alive, and sees them in chicken broth; so are they as
much (or rather more) restorative as the best crabs and crevisses most highly
commended by Physicians. Futhermore they are unscaled, to vent the windiness
which is in them, being sodden with their scales, whereof lust and disposition
to venery might arise, but no better nor sounder nourishment.

There is a great kind of Shrimps, which are called Prawnes in English, and
Crangones by Rondeletius, highly prized in hectic fevers and consumptions; but
the crook-backt Shrimp far suprasseth them for that purpose, as being of a
sweeter taste and more temperate constitution.

Squatina.
Skate is skinned like a File, of the same nature with a Thorneback, but
pleasanter, more tender, and more available to stir up letchery; it is so near
a Thorneback in Plin. li. 9. ^. 51.
shape, that they often couple and engender together.

Lingulacae Soleae.
Soles or Tongue fishes, are counted the Partridges of the sea, and the fittest
meat of all other for sick folks; for they are of a good smell, a pleasant
taste, neither of too hard nor too soft a flesh, engendring neither too thick
nor too thin blood; of easy concoction, leaving none or few excrements after
they be digested. Platina fried them (as we do) with persly, butter, and
verjuce, and sawced them with butter and juce of orenges; but for sick persons
they are best sodden in water, butter, and verjuce with a little falt; it is a
fish impatient of winter, and therefore then it lurketh in deep holes, but in
summer it sporteth it self abroad, and offers it self to be seen when it is
most seasonable.

Chalcides.
Sprats need no description, being one of Jack-a-lents principle pages: They
smell well being new and fresh, resembling therein the river-smelt; but their
flesh is quezy, corruptible, and aguish, especially if they light on a weak
stomach; they are worst being smoked or fried, indifferent sodden, and best
broild.

Chalcides majores.
Spurlings are but broad Sprats, taken chiefly upon our Northern coast; which
being dressed and pickled as Anchovaes be in Provence, rather surpass them then
come behind them in taste and goodness. Were English men as industrious as I
could wish, we should sell them deerer to the French and Italians, then their
Anchovaes are sold to us; for I have seen some prepared by Dr. Turner, which
far exceeded theirs: but strange things are ever best liked, according to that
saying of Galen, Peregrina, quae ignorant, magis celebrant mortales, quam quod
nativum est, quodque esse praeclarum norunt. com 1. epid. 3* cap. 4.
Mortal men (says he) do more extol foreign things, albeit they know them
not; then home*bred and familiar things, though they know them to be excellent.

Apuae infumatae.
As for Red Sprats and Spurlings, I vonchsafe them not the name of any
wholesome nourishment, or rather of no nourishment at all; commending them for
nothing but that they are bawdes to enforce appetite, and serve well the poor
man's turn to quench hunger.

Asellus aridus
Stockfish whilst is is unbeaten is called Buckhorne, because it is so tough;
when it is beaten upon the stock, it is termed stockfish. Rondelitius calls
the first lib. de pisc*
Merlucium, and Stock Fish Moluam, it may be Salpa Plinij, for that is a great
fish, and made tender Lib. colloq.
by age and beating. Erasmus thinks it to be called Stockfish, because it
nourishes no more then a dried stock: wherefore howsoever it be sod, buter'd,
fried or baked, and made both toothsomer and delectable by good and chargeable
cookery; yet a stone will be a stone, and an ape an ape, howsoever the one be
set up for a Saint, and the other apparelled like a Judge.

The Stilliard Merchants lay it twenty four hours in strong lie, and then as
long again in warm waters; afterward they boil it in abundance of butter, and
so serve it in with pepper, and salt, which way (if any way) it is most
nourishing, because it is made not only tender, but also more moist and warm:
Now let us stay longer upon the Sturgian, esteemed sometime the Monarch of all
seafish.

Acipenser.
Sturgian is thought of Mr. Cogan to be a fish of hard substance, not much
better (in his judgment) then Bacon cap. 184.
or Brawne, although for the rareness it be esteemed of great Estates; which I
will not deny to be true in old and resty Sturgian; but young Sturgian is so
far of from being tough or unwholesome, that of all other fish it is and was
ever most preferred: Severus and his followers Suet. in vita. Sever.
did so esteem it (though Trajan for an in borne hatred could not abide it) that
whenever any great feast was kept, the chief Gentleman of his Court carried
up the Sturgian, all gilded over with gold, and attended with minstrelsy and
carolling, as though a solemn Pageant or Saints shrine were to be carried about
the City. Gal* de Euchy and cacochym. cic. 1. Tusculan quaest.
Galen likewise and Tully affirm it to be of a sweet delicate and good
nourishment. Cordan compares it with Veal, but indeed it is far sweeter:
Sturgians livers are so exceeding sweet, that at Hamborough they rub them over
with the broken gall, lest the stomach should be cloyed with over swetness. The
great and full grown Sturgians are better then the less, and the Male then the
Female; and they which suck and lie at the mouths of Rivers, are counted
sweeter then they which are taken in the main sea; it feeds not (as other fish
do) upon flies, worms, fish-spawne or roots, but sucketh like a Lamprey
(because it has no teeth) of such sweet morsels or offall as happily it
finds. One thing is admirable in this fish, that albeit clean contrary to
other fishes the scales turn toward the head; yet against the side and stream
it swimeth fasteth* Physicians forbid all Sturgian (especially the head and
fore-rand) to aguish persons and such as be lately recovered of agues; because
they are so fat and oily, that their stomachs will convert them into choler. At
Danske and Hamborough (whence we have the best) sometimes they are roasted,
being stickt full of cloves; but then the belly only is toothsome, which
eats like Veal, or rather better, if such sauce be made unto it as we use to
roasted Venison. Otherwhiles they are broild and basted with oil and vinegar,
having been first a little corned with salt; but if Sturgian be well sod, and
then kept in convenient pickle, of all other preparations it is the chiefest,
being eaten with vinegar and sweet fennel.

They are first sod in two parts of water, one of white wine, and one of white
wine vinegar, with sufficient salt, verveine and dill, as long as one would
sees a leg of Veal; then being cold, they are divided into jouls and rands,
and put up into barrels or kegs, with store of Rhenish wine, wine*vinegar, and
seawater; wherein having lain half a year, they become a light, toothsome and
singular good meat, to an indifferent and temperate stomach. As for Cavialie,
or their eggs being poudred, let Turks, Grecians, Venetians, and Spaniards,
celebrate them never so much, yet the Italian Proverb will ever be true.

Chi mangia di Caviale,
Mangia moschi merdi and salae.
He that eats of Cavialies*
Eats falt, dung, and flies.
I commend the flesh of Sturgian chiefly to hot and distasted stomachs, to
young men, and especially in Summer; at which time (eaten with gilly-flour
vinegar) it slaketh thirst, sharpneth appetite, setleth the stomach, delayeth
heat, and gives both a temperate and a sound nourishment.

Xiphij.
Sword-fishes are much whiter and pleasanter in taste then Tunny; but as hard
of digestion, and therefore unworthy any longer discourse.

Raja.
Thornback, which Charles Chester merrily and not unfitly calls Neptunes
beard, was extolled by Antiphanes in Athenaeus history for a dainty fish;
indeed it is of a pleasant taste, but of a stronger smell then Skate,
over-moist to nourish much, but not so much as to hinder lust, which it
mightily increases. Albertus thinks it as hard to be concocted as any beef;
whose judgment I suspect, Lib. de morb. int.
since Hippocrates permits it in long Consumptions: Assuredly if not the flesh,
yet the liver is marvelous sweet and of great nourishment, which the very taste
and consistence thereof will sufficiently demonstrate. Thorneback is good
sodden, especially the liver of it, Athen. l. 8. c. 5.
though Dorion the Musician said, That a sodden Thornback is like a piece of
sodden Cloth; but the flesh is best broiled after it has been sodden* to
consume the watrishness.

Thynni.
Tunies are best when they are leanest; namely, toward the Fall and the dead
of Winter. When they are at the best, their flesh is unsavory enough, cloying
an indifferent stomach, and engendering most gross and superfluous moistures.
As Porpesses must be baked while they are new, so Tunny is never good till it
have been long pouldred with salt, vinegar, coriander, and hot spices. No Tunny
lives past two years, waxing so fat that their bellies break: at which time
more gain is made of their fat, by making Train-oyl for Clothiers, then good by
their flesh; which is only good, (if good at all) for Spanish and Italian
Mariners.

Rhombi.
Turbuts, which some call the Sea-Pheasant, were in old time counted so good
and delicate, that this Proverb grew upon them, Nihil ad Rhombum; that is to
say, What is all this in comparison of a Turbutt. Verily, whilst they be young,
(at which time they are called Butts) their flesh is moist, tender, white, and
pleasant; afterward they are harder to be digested, though more crumbling to
feel to: and as their prickles wax longer, so their flesh waxes tougher. They
are best being sodden as you sees Thornback; or rather as you sees a grown
Plaise.

Balaenae.
Whales flesh is the hardest of all other, and unusual to be eaten of our
Countrymen, no not when they are very young and tenderest; yet the livers of
Whales, Sturgians, and Dolphins smell like violets, taste most pleasantly being
salted, and give competent nourishment as Cardan writes.

Onisci. Albulae. Molliculae.
Whitings had never staid so long in the Court of England (where they are never
wanting upon a fish day) unless they had done some notable service, and still
deserved their entertainment; the best Whitings are taken in Tweede, called
Merlings, of like shape and virtue with ours, but far bigger; all Physicians
allow them for a light, wholesome and good meat, not denying them to sick
persons, and highly commending them to such as be in health; they are good
sodden with salt and time, and their livers are very restorative, yea more then
of other fishes: they are also good broild, and dried after the manner of
Stockfish into little Buckhorne; but then they are fitter (as Stockfish is) to
dry up moistures in a rhumatick stomach, then to nourish the body.

Colybdaenae.
Yards or shamefishes (so called because they resemble De comp. med. sec. loc.
the yard of a man) are by Galens judgment as agreeable to weak stomachs, as
Crabs, Shrimps, and Crevisses. Gesner in his book of fishes, says that the
French men call this li. de dif. anim.
fish the Asses-prick, and Dr Wotton terms it grossly the Pintle fish. How
shameful a name so ever it bears, it needs not be ashamed of his virtues; for
it nourishes much, is light of concoction, and increases nature.

Yellow heads or Giltpoles are before spoken of, next before Gurnards. And thus
much of Sea fish; now fresh water fish challenge their due remembrance, of
which we will treat in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Fresh water Fish.
Apium.
ALderlings are a kind of fish betwixt a Trout and a Grayling, scaled (as the
Trout is not) but not so great scaled as the Grailing is; It lies ever in a
deep water, under some old and great alder, his flesh being sod smells like
to wild parsley, whereupon I guess it had his Latin name, and is of indifferent
good nourishment, and provokes urine.

Barbellio.
Barbels are counted nothing but bearded-mullets; It is most likely that this
is the fish dedicated to Diana the Goddess of chastity; for it is a very cold,
moist and gellied fish, hurting the sinews, quenching lust, and greatly Plin.
l. 32. ca. 7.
troubling both head and belly, if it be usually and much Terpsides lib. de
Vener.
eaten of; some eat it hot after it is sodden in wine vinegar, time, and savory
(which is a good way to correct it) others eat it cold laid in gelly, which
only agrees with hot and aguish stomachs in Summer time; assuredly the eggs
or spawne of Barbels is very sharp, griping and corrosive, driving many into
bloody fluxes that have eaten them fasting.

Abramides.
Breams seem no other then flat Carps; yet whiter of flesh, and finer
nourishment. There is a kind of Bream called Scarus ruminas, which we call a
Cudbream, because his lips are ever wagging like a Cow chawing the cud: this of
all other is the lightest, sweetest, and best fish of the River, fitter for
weak and sick persons then such as be in health, because it is so fine.

A very good way how to dress most part of scaled fishes.
Prepare it after this sort, set on a good quantity of white strong vinegar*
and stale Ale, with a cursey of salt, a little mints, origanum, parsley and
rosemary; and when your liquor boileth fast upon the fire, stop the mouth of
your Bream with a nutmeg thrust down into his throat, and cast him in skipping
into the liquor keeping him down till he be through dead and perfectly sodden:
dress Pikes, Roches, Carps, Grailings, Mullets, and all great fish of the River
in the like sort; for it will make them to eat pleasant, crisp, brittle, and
firm, not watrish and flaggy, as most fish do, because we know not how to use
and order them.

Alburni.
Bleyes or Bleaks are soft flesht, but never fat; fitter to feed Pikes then to
nourish men; in the heat of Summer they are troubled with a worm in their
stomach, which makes them so mad and frantic, that rowing upon the Thames you
shall have three or four in an evening leap into your boat: A waterman once
opened one, and found a little worm in it, not unlike to them which grow in
oxens skins (wherewith they are often enraged) but far less; they are counted a
tender, but never any wholesome meat; because they are so subject to frensy and
giddiness.

Cyprini. Carpiones.
Carps are of a sweet taste, and much good nourishment, in which respects they
were dedicated to Venus, discommended for nothing, but that they will not last
long; wherefore they are forthwith to be dressed, because Pisan. de. esc. and
potul.
(through lightness of their substance) they will soon corrupt. The Portugals
suppose that Carps feed upon gold, because nothing almost is found in their
bellies, but a yellow glistering sand; which opinion is also increased, in that
they lie only at the bottom of waters: The River Carp is most wholesome; if
the ground of that River be gravel or clean sand; otherwise take them out of
gravelly ponds fed with springs, and fatted with convenient meat; where they
will not only increase mightily in number and bigness, but also get a very
pleasant taste and a wholesome nature: The middle sised Carp is ever best,
agreeing with all times, ages and complexions. The Tongue is the most
nourishing part of all, but the spawne is heavy and unwholesome howsoever it be
dressed. The head of a Carp, the tail of a Pike, and the Belly of a Bream are
most esteemed, for their tenderness, shortness, and well rellishing. Some bake
a Carp with spice, fruit, and butter; but in my judgment being sodden like a
Bream, it is of as good a taste and better nourishment. A red Cavialie is made
of their spawne in Italy; much eaten and desired of the Jews, for that they
dare not eat of the Cavialie of Sturgians, Seals, and Tunny, because they are
only to feed upon scaled fish, and such as carry fins: above all things see
that your Carps stink not of mud nor fenny filth; for they cannot then be
wholesome for man's body.

Locustellae. Astaci. Carabi.
Crevisses and Shrimps were appointed by God says Dorion (as Athenaeus
writes) for quezy stomachs, and give also a kind of exercise for such as be
weak: for head and breast must first be divided from their bodies; then each of
them must be dis scaled, and clean picked with much pidling; then the long gut
lying along the back of the Crevisse is to be voided. Lastly, the small claws
are to be broken, wherein lies part of the best meat. Crevisses feed upon
fish, water-herbs, and sweet clay; but most gladly upon the livers of young
beasts; before we are to use them, it were good to diet them in a cistern with
crumbs of white bread for three or four days together, so will they be
cleans`d of all impurities, and give a more strong and fine nourishment. They
should be sodden in the water whence they were taken with a little salt; and
never kept above a day after, for they will soon smell and putrify: we do
foolishly to eat them last, being a fine temperate and nourishing meat. They
are best from the Spring until Autumn, and at the full of the Moon they are
most commendable. The Females likewise are better then the Males, which a wise
man will soon discern: for consumed persons they are first to be washed in
barley water, and then to be sodden in milk (being first dis-caled) till they be
tender; according as before I wrote of Shrimps.

Leucisci.
Daces, or Darts, or Dares be of a sweet taste, a soft flesh and good
nourishment, either sod or broild; or pickled like Anchovaes after the Italian
manner.

Anguillae.
Eeles have so sweet a flesh, that they and Lampreyes were dedicated to that
filthy Goddess Gula or gluttony; yet withal it is so unwholesome, that some
Zoilus or Li. de rect. rat.
Momus would have accused nature, for putting so sweet a taste into so
dangerous a meat: for Eeles (as Hippocrates writes) live most willingly in
muddy places: and in his Epidemiques he rehearses many mischiefs to have
happened to diverse through eating of Eeles; they give much nourishment, but
very corruptible: they loosen the belly, but bring fluxes, they open the
wind-pipes, but stop the liver; they clear the voice, but infect the lungs;
they increase seed, but yet no good seed: finally they bring agues, hurt the
stomach and kidneys, engender gravel, cause the strangury, sharpen the gout,
and fill us full of many diseases; they are worst in Summer, but never
wholesome: the elder ones are least hurtful and if any be harmless it is the
silver-bellied and the sandy Eele. Arnoldus de villa nova, says that no Eele
is Com. in Sch. sal
free from a venomous malignity and a kind of gluish suffocating juice. But
Jovius reports that some Jov. in desc. Hetrur.
Eeles are engendered in a little River by Cremona, less a great deal, then our
little griggs, hurtful in no disease, but of a pure wholesome and good
nourishment; which I will believe because so grave a Chronicler reports it:
otherwise I should think ill with Hippocrates of all Eeles, even of those
little ones as well as the Eeles in Ganges, which are thirty foot long, as
Pliny writes: Verily lib. 9* cap. 3.
when Eeles only sink to the bottom, and all other fishes float after they are
dead, it cannot but argue them to be of a muddy nature, little participating of
that a^ereal substance which moves and lightneth other fishes. Again since like
an Owl it never comes abroad to feed but in the night time; it argues a
melancholic disposition in it self, and a likelihood to beget the like in us.
Great Eeles are best roasted and broild, because their malign humor lies
more next under the skin then in their flesh, which is corrected or evapourated
by the fire. Next of all they are best poudred and sowced, and baked with
butter, salt, and pepper; but worst being sodden in water, ale, and yeast, as
commonly they are; for the yeast adds one maglinnity to another, and does
more hurt then I can express to the stomach, liver, and blood.

Rhombi fluviatiles.
Flounders if they be thick and well grown are a most wholesome and light meat,
being sod with water and verjuice, or fried with vinegar and butter; but the
little Flounders called Dabs as they are little esteemed of, so their watrish
and flaggy flesh does justly deserve it.

Thymi.
Grailings called both of Greeks and Latins Thymi, because their flesh smells
like thime when they be in season, are a white, firm, and yet a tender meat,
tasting no worse then it smells, and nourishing plentifully. Sees it in such
sort, as was described in our Treatise before of dressing Breams, and you will
find few fishes comparable unto it; of all scaled fishes they only want a gall,
which perhaps is the cause of their greater excellency.

Gobiones.
Gudgins are of two sorts, one whiter and very little, the other bigger and
blackish; both are as wholesome as a Perch; but if any be found yellowish, they
are dry, 3 de alim. fac.
lean and unseasonable. Galen commends their flesh exceedingly, not only
because it is short and pleasant in taste, being fat and friable; but also for
that it is soon concocted, nourishes much, and increases good blood. They are
best which lie about rocky and gravelly places, for fenny and lake Gudgeons be
not wholesome.

Paganelli.
Rondeletius in his book of fishes, mentions two Sea Gudgins called Paganelli
of a far greater length and bigness then ours are of, which our Western
fishermen call by the name of Sea-cobs: they sometimes come up the River of
Vske, where they are taken and brought to Exceter, and accounted (as they are
indeed) a most sound, light, wholesome, and nourishing meat.

Capitones.
Gulls, Guffs, Pulches, Chevins, and Millers thombs are a kind of jolt-headed
Gudgins, very sweet, tender, and wholesome, especially when they be with
spawne; for their eggs are many and fat, giving good nourishment; and though
their flesh be hard in Albertus judgment, yet it never putrifieth, and is well
digested.

Funduli.
Groundlings are also a kind of Gudgins never lying from the ground, freckled
as it were on each side with seven or eight spots; they are seasonable in
March, April, and May: the best lie lowest, and feed finest, sucking upon
gravel; but they which lie near to great Cities, feed upon filth and delight in
the dead carcasses of men and beasts, therefore called of the Germans
Leijtessers.

All sorts of Gudgins be wholesome either sod or fried, agreeing with all
constitutions of body, sicknesses and ages.

Pungitij. Spinachiae.
Hackles or Sticklebacks are supposed to come of the seed of fishes spilt or
miscarrying in the water; some think they engender of their own accord, from
mud or rain putrified in ponds: howsoever it is they are naught and
unwholesome, sufficient to quench poor men's hunger, but not to nourish either
rich or poor.

Iacks or young Pickrels shall be described hereafter, when we speak of the
nature of Pikes.



Lampretae. Muraenae.
Lampreys and Lamprons, differ in bigness only and in goodness; they are both a
very sweet and nourishing meat, increasing much lust through superfluous
nourishment; were they as wholesome as sweet, I would not much discommend
Lucius Mutaena and the Nobles of England for so much coveting after them: but
how ill they are even for strong stomachs, and how easily a man may surfeit on
them; not only the death of King Henry the first, but also of many brave men
and Poly. Virgil. lib. 11. hist.
Captains may sufficiently demonstrate. Pliny avoucheth that they engender with
the land Snake: but since they engender and have eggs at all times of the year,
Lib 9. cap. 2^. Plin. l. 32 ca 2.
I see no reason for it. Aristotle says, that another long fish like a Lamprey
called Myrus is the Sire; which Licinius Macer oppugneth, affirming constantly
that he has found Lampreys upon the land engendring with Serpents, and that
Fishermen counterfetting the Serpents hiss, can call them out of the water and
take them at pleasure. They are best (if ever good) in March and April; for
then are they so fat, that they have in a manner no back bone at all: toward
Summer they wax harder, and then have they a manifest bone, but their flesh is
consumed: Sees or bake them thoroughly, for otherwise they are of hard and
very dangerous digestion. Old men, gowty men, and aguish persons, and whosoever
is troubled in the sinews or sinewy parts, should shun the eating of them no
less, then as if they were Serpents indeed. The Italians dress them after this
sort; first Plin. l. 32. ca. 2.
they beat them on the tail with a wand (where their life is thought to lie)
till they be almost dead, then they gagg their mouth with a whole Nutmeg, and
stop every oilet-hole with a clove, afterward they cast them into oil and
malmsie boiling together, casting in after them some crumbs of bread, a few
almonds blancht and minced; whereby their malignity is corrected and their
flesh bettered.

Cajus Hercius was the first that ever hemmed them in ponds, where they
multiplied and prospered in such sort, that at Caesar the Dictators triumphall
suppers, he gave him six thousand Lampreys for each supper; he fed them Plin.
l. 9. ca. 55
with the liver, and blood of beasts: but Vidius Pollio (a Roman Knight, and one
of Augustus minions) fed his Lampreys with his slaves carcasses; not because
beasts Plin. l. 9. c. 23*
were not sufficient to feed them, but that he took a pleasure to see a thousand
Lampreys sucking altogether like horse-leeches upon one man.

Concerning our English preparation of them, a certain friend of mine gave me
this Receipt of bakeing and dressing Lampreys; namely first to powder them
(after parboiling) with salt, time, origanum, then either to broil them as
Spitchcocks, or to bake them with wine* pepper, nutmegs, mace, cloves, ginger
and good store of butter. The little ones called Lamprons are best broild, but
the great ones called Lampreys are best baked. Of all our English Lampreys, the
Severn-dweller is most worthily commended, for it is whiter, purer, sweeter,
and fatter, and of less malignity then any other.

Lochae.
Loches, meat (as the Greek word imports) for women in childbed, are very
light and of excellent nourishment; they have a flesh like liver, and a red
spleen, which are most delicate in taste, and as wholesome in operation.

Apuae Cobitae, Gesneri. Aliniatae Caij. Phoxini Bellonij.
Minoes, so called either for their littleness, or (as Dr. Cajus imagined)
because their fins be of so lively a red, as if they were died with the true
Cinnabre-lake called Minium: They are less then Loches, feeding upon nothing,
but licking one another. Gesner thinks them to engender of the wast seed of
Gudgins; others that they engender of themselves out of unknown matter; yet
certain it is that they are ever full of spawn, which should argue a natural
copulation of them with some littlefish or other: they are a most delicate and
light meat (their gall being warily voided without breaking) either fried or
sodden.

Mulli.
Mullets of the River be of like goodness with the Sea-Mullets, Athen. l. 1. c
3.
though not fully of so fine and pure substance. Philoxenus the Poet, supping
at the lower mess in Dionisius Court; took suddenly a little lean Mullet out
of the dish* and set his ear to the mouth of it; whereat Dionysius laughing,
and asking him what news? marry (quoth he) he tells me of some strange news
in the River, whereof none (as he says) can more fully enform me then yonder
great Mullet in the upper dish: so for his pleasant jest he got the greater;
and withal gives us to note, that unless a Mullet be large and fat, it is but
a frivolous dish, making a great show on the Table, but little nourishing; how
they are best to be dressed, is already specified when I wrote of Breams.

Vetulae
Olaffes, or rather Old wives (because of their mumping and sour countenance)
are as dainty and wholesome of substance, as they are large in body; it was my
chance to buy one about Putny, as I came from Mr. Secretary Walsingham his
house about ten years since: which I caused to be boild with salt, wine, and
vinegar; and a little thime; and I protest that I never did eat a more white
firm, dainty and wholesome fish.

Percae.
Perches are a most wholesome fish, firm, tender, white, and nourishing.
Ausonius calls them delicias mensae the delight of feasts, preferring them
before Pikes, Roches, Mullets, and all other fish, Eobanus Hessus in his
poetical Dietary, terms them the River-partridges. Diocles Hippoc. 2. de rat.
vict. Gal. 3. de al. fa.
the Physician writ a just volumn in the praise of Perches, and Hippocrates and
Galen most highly extol them. They are ever in season, save in March and
April, when they spawne. As the oldest and greatest Eele is ever best, so
contrariwise the middle Perch and Pike is ever most wholesome. Sees them in
wine-vinegar, water, and salt; and then either* eat them hot, or cover them in
wine-vinegar to be eaten cold: for so they both cool a distempered feverous
stomach, and give also much nourishment to a weak body.

Lupi.
Pikes or River-wolves are greatly commended by Gesner and diverse learned
Authors for a wholesome meat, permitted, yea enjoined to sick persons and women
in child bed; yet verily to speak like a Lawyer, I cannot perceive quo
warranto; for if fenney or muddy-rivered fishes be unwholesome, the Pike is not
so good as Authors make him, living most naturally and willingly in such places
where he may fat himself with froggs and filth. Futhermore when a Pike is big
and full grown, is not his flesh rather to be counted hard, then firm; indeed I
will not deny but a Pike of a middle sise, fed in gravelly ponds with fresh
livers of beasts, sodden crisp in wine-vinegar and sweet-herbs, is of no bad
nourishment for any man, but fittest for hot chollerick stomachs and young
persons. Macrobius writes, that the best Pike is 3. sat. cap. 16.
taken in a clear River betwixt two bridges; but I never saw them fat in any
clear River, and therefore I suspect their goodness.

Certain it is that old great Pikes are very hard, tough, and ill to digest:
young ones (called Jacks) are contrariwise to watrish and moist. Choose
therefore one of a middle growth* for it is most likely to nourish us best. The
Germans having split them along the back, thrust their tails into their mouths,
and then fry them a little with sweet butter, then they take them out of the
frying pan, and boil them (as long as one would sees an egg) with wine, water,
vinegar, and salt, gallopping on the fire, and last of all having sprinkled it
over with the powder of cloves, cinnamon and ginger, they serve it to the Table.

Rutili.
Roches, or Roch fishes (called so of Saint Roch that Legendary Aesculapius and
giver of health) are esteemed and thought incapable of any disease, according
to the old Proverb, As sound as a Roch. Hence have men collected, that the
flesh of them is light, sound, and wholesome; which verily is not to be denied,
being sodden like a Bream: they are full of bones, which makes them the less
regarded, though wisemen know well enough, that roses are roses, albeit their
tree be dangerous and full of thorns.

Cernuae Aspredines.
Ruffs or Ruggels are not much unlike to Perches, for the goodness of their
flesh, though their skin be rougher: the best live in sandy places, where they
wax exceeding fat and sweet; dress them as you do perches: some take them for
the Base; and verily by Gesners description they disagree as much as nothing.

Salmones.
Salmons are of a fatty, tender, short, and sweet flesh, quickly filling the
stomach and soon glutting. Gesner commends them that go fardest up into fresh
Rivers, accounting them worst which are taken nearest the Sea; which I find to
be true in the difference betwixt the Salmons of upper Severn (betwixt
Shrewsbury and Beaudly) and the Salmons taken betwixt Gloucester and Bristowe.
Nevertheless if they go too high up the River, they wax leaner for want of
sufficient nourishment, as manifestly appears (which I my self have seen) in
the Salmon of the Rhine taken at Ringfielden beyond Basel, and at Oppenheim
above the City of Ments. Salmons come in and go out with the Buck; for toward
Winter they wax kipper, full of kernels under their throat like a measeld
hogg, and lose both their redness of flesh, and also the pleasure of taste which
else it gives: they are to be sodden wholly in wine, or wholly in water; for
if they be sodden in both, they prove tough and unpleasant: it is best to sees
them in wine vinegar and salt, or else parboile them only in water, being cut
into certain pieces, and having stickt those pieces full of cloves, broil them
upon a gridiron, and bast them with butter, and serve them in with sauce made
of vinegar, cinnamon and sugar. Some have pickled Salmon as Sturgian is used,
and find it to be as dainty, and no less wholesome; but salt Salmon loses a
double goodness, the one of a good taste, the other of a good nourishment. Hot
Salmon is counted unwholesome in England, and suspected as a leprous meat,
without all reason; for if it be sodden in wine, and afterward well spiced,
there is no danger of any such accident.

As for Salmon peales (which indeed are nothing but Sea*Trouts) howsoever they
be highly commended of the Western and Welsh people; yet are they never enough
commended, being a more light, wholesome, and well tasted meat then the Salmon
it self.

Salmunculi.
Shuins, seem unto me akind of Salmon, whereof plenty is taken in the River
running by Cardiff castle: but it surpasses the Salmon as much in goodness, as
it is surpassed by him in length and greatness; boil it in wine vinegar salt,
and sweet herbs, and you shall find it a delicate and wholesome fish.

Violaceae. Epelani Rondeletij.
Smellts are so called, because they smell so sweet; yea if you draw them, and
then dry them in a shadowy place, (being seasonably taken) they still retain a
smell as it were of violets. Their flesh is of the finest, lightest, softest,
and best juce of all other fish; their excellency is in winter, and whenever
they are full of spawne. Western smelts have the greatest commendation for
their greatness and goodness. Void the gall cleanly, and then use the livers,
guts, bellies, and fat for great restoratives. The best are taken by Kew and
Brainford within eight miles of London, and at Westchester. Sees them in hot
boiling water and salt, and take them out as soon as they are sodden; for lying
long in the water they will wax flaggy: their sauce is butter and verjuce
mingled with a little gross pepper; but if you fry them in butter, eat them
with the juice of civil-orenges; for that is their best sauce.

Truttae.
Trouts are so great in Northumberland, that they seem thicker then Salmons,
and are therefore called Bull-trouts; there are especially two sorts of them,
Red-trouts resembling little fresh water Salmons, and therefore termed
Salmon-trouts; and Gray-trouts or Skurffs, which keep not in the chanel of
Bournes or Rivers, but lurk like the Alderlings under the roots of great
Alders; they are both a very pleasant and good meat for sound persons: but they
are foully mistaken* which prefer them in agues before Perches, (whose flesh is
tender, friable, light, of good juice, and speedy concoction) when they are in
no one thing comparable unto them: they are best being sodden like a Bream and
eaten hot, for being eaten cold they lose much of their grace and more of their
goodness.

Tincae.
Tenches are naturally such friends to Pikes, that pity it is they should be
separated; yet since I have followed the order of the Alphabet, I could not but
divide them in name though they agree in nature. Old writers hardly vouchsafe
to mention them, because they were only esteemed as beggars meat; the very
feeling and smell of them, show, that a Tench is but a muddy and slimy fish.
Albertus living 1252 years after Christ, was the first that ever wrote of the
nature of the Tench. His flesh is stopping, slimy, viscous, and very
unwholesome; and (as Alexander Benedictus writes) of a most unclean and
damnable nourishment. Antonius Gazius says, that a fried Tench is a secret
poison: and I remember that Dr. Cajus (whose learning I reverence) was wont to
call Tenches good plasters, but bad nourishers. For indeed being outwardly
laid to the soles of ones feet, they oftentimes draw away the ague; but
inwardly taken they engender palsies, stop the lungs, putrify in the stomach,
and bring a man that much eats them to infinite diseases; they are very hard of
digestion, burdensome to the stomach, increasing slimy nourishment, and
breeding palsies, and appoplexies in the head: From May to November they are
very dangerous; afterward, hot choleric and laboring men may be refreshed by
them, but none else: they are worst being fried, best being kept in gelly, made
strong of wine and spices.

Umbrae.
Umbers have a dry and whitish flesh, like the flesh of gray-trouts, being of
the like substance, quality and goodness, and needing no other preparation. The
belly of it is preferred before the other parts, and is wholesomest in the
Dog*daies. Pisanellus says that it is called Umbra in Latin, because it
swimmeth in the river like a lib. de esc* and potul.
shadow; and he commends it exceedingly for young and hot stomachs, as that
also it is soon concocted and increases seed.

CHAP. XX.
Of such living Creatures and Meats, as be neither Flesh nor Fish, and yet give
good nourishment to the body.
Cochelae terrestres.
SNails are little esteemed of us in England, but in Barbary, Spain, and
Italy they are eaten as a most dainty, wholesome, nourishing, and restoring
meat. Let us beware when, and in what sort, we use them; for Plin. l. 8. c. 39.
they are naught whilst they feed, but toward winter having scoured themselves
from all excrements, and batled themselves fat with sleep, then are they
wholesomest: also if they feed in woods or in gardens full of Physick-hearbs,
they are strong both of smell and taste and dangerous to eat of. They desire of
all other herbs to feed of deffadills and asphodils; but then they are not so
good, as those that feed upon other herbs and fruits, but especially upon
Dew-berries. In Cales and Spain they feed chiefly upon orange flouers, which
makes them very pleasant in eating. In the Islands of Plin. loc. citato
Majorca and Minorca, they never come out of their caves, but live by sucking
one another shell, hanging together like a gluster of grapes; which no doubt
are of a purer substance then ours, that suck and feed upon all herbs. Fulvius
Hilpinus not long before the civil Plin. li. 9. c. 55. Ex. M Varrone
war betwixt Caesar and Pompey, made in his garden several snail-parks (as I may
call them) keeping every kind by themselves; there might one find the white
snails of Reate, the gray and great snails of Illyricum; the fruitful snails of
Africa, and the Solitan snails, most famous and excellent of all others: which
he suffered not to feed upon what they listed, but made certain papp with sweet
wine, honey, and flour, whereby they were fed so fat, and became so wholesome,
sweet, and delicate, that they were highly esteemed, being sold every dishfull
for Fourscore Quadrants. But since no man is in hope to gain so much by that
Occupation, they which must needs use them, may choose them in this sort: First,
let them choose them of middle size, feeding all Summer time in hilly places
upon wholesome Herbs. Secondly, let them not eat them till September be past,
for by that time they are thoroughly purged of all Excrements. Also, they are
unfit for weak, cold and moist Complexions, because they themselves are cold in
the first degree, and moist in the second. They are best Pisanel. de esc. and
potul.
for hot stomachs, choleric constitutions, thirsty distemperatures, watchful
brains, and men troubled with Ulcers of the lungs, and free from all stoppings
and inflammations Plin. l. 30. c. 6.
of the Kidneys. Pliny wills them to be first parboyl'd in warm Water with sweet
Herbs, and then to be broyld upon the Coals, and to be eaten ever in an odd
number: but if you dress them as Apicius appoints Periwinckles to be dressed
(which I before described in the Treatise of Periwinckles) they will prove a
Supra cap. 18.
light, wholesome and good nourishment.

Testudines.
Tortisses are likewise no usual Meat amongst us: yet because I see no reason
but that Riot may bring them in, and make them as familiar unto us as Turkies
are, I will write something of their choice, use, hurtfulness, correction and
degrees of Temperature. Choose ever the greatest, fullest of Eggs, liveliest
eyed, and fatted at home with the best meat. Their flesh nourishes plentifully,
and recovers men out of Consumptions. Yet is it slowly digested of weak
stomachs, engendering thick and phlegmatic blood, and making the eaters sleepy
and sloathfull. Wherefore sees him thoroughly in many Waters with sweet Herbs
and hot Spices; especially for that it is no less cold then Snailes, and fully
as moist, agreeing only at such times of the year, and for such kind of
persons as Snails be thought convenient for.

Ramae.
Frogs are of hard concoction, troublesome to the stomach, breeding much
phlegm, and giving no sound yea rather a bad juice: Yet Water frogs are best,
of the bigger sort, and both bred and taken in a dry season. Plin. l* 8. c. 29.
Their hinder parts and Livers (which be two in each) are the best to be eaten;
and being thoroughly sodd in oil, salt water and Vinegar, and eaten with sauce
made of sweet Herbs, Onions and Scallions, they are no bad meat for choleric
young men, though for old and phlegmatic persons they be wholly unprofitable.
They are moist in the first degree, and cold in the second, and therefore to be
corrected with hot and drying simples.

Mel:
Athen l. 2. c. 3.
Honey and Bread was a great Meat with Pythagoras and his Scholars, and counted
a sufficient food for a temperate life. For Bread strengthens the body, and
Honey both nourishes much, and also cleanses away superfluities, Plin. lib. 22.
cap. 24.
Pollio Romulus being asked by Augustus the Emperor, how he lived so long! By
nourishing (says he) Cael. lib. 28. cap. 27. A. L.
my inwards with Honey, and my outward parts with oil. The like answer likewise
made Democritus, being demanded the like question. Furthermore, it is so
general a Meat thorough all Russia, that the Children eat it on their bread
every morning, as ours do Butter to their breakfast: with whom, and with Old
men, it agrees exceeding well, clensing their breasts, opening their pipes,
warming their stomachs, resisting putrefaction, procuring solubleness and
urine, and engendring sweet and commendable blood: but young men (whose
moisture is less then childrens through sharpness of heat, and whose stomachs
are hotter then old men's) by much eating of honey inflame their blood, increase
choler, bloody fluxes, wind, and obstructions, together with a continual
loathing of meat and a disposition to vomit: hony-cakes were wont to be a great
dish in old times at the end of bankets, as ginger-bread is with us; which
custom Macrobius and Gellius have justly reproved; Macr. 2. sat. c. 8. Gel. l.
13. c. 11.
because sweet things being last eaten, open the mouth of the stomach, which
after meat should be closed, and as it were sealed up to help concoction:
Wherefore Pisanellus de esc. and potul.
does very well, in prescribing us to eat sugar-rosat or some sour fruits after
honey, to prevent the engendring of choler in the stomach, and to help the same
whilst it concocteth. Raw honey is never good, therefore What honey is best
clarify it thoroughly at the fire; and choose the whitest* purest, clearest,
most glistering and thickest, for they are notes of the best honey: also let it
be honey that ran and was never pressed out of the combs, and of young Bees
rather then old, feeding upon thime, rosemary, flowers, and such sweet and
wholesome herbs. Then may you boldly give it as meat to young children, to cold
and moist complexions, and to rhumatick old men, especially in Northern
Countries, and cold climates, and in the winter season.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Fruit and the differences thereof.
NOw we are come to the last course, which in ancient and more healthful ages
was the first and only, whilst men's hands were neither polluted with the blood
of Beasts, nor smelt of the most unwholesome sent of fish. This kind of meat is
commended (like the Hebrew tongue) for three principal reasons; antiquity,
purity, and sufficiency; for it was more ancient then either flesh or fish by
two thousand years; it is so pure of it self that it never defiles the hand nor
needs any great dressing: and that it is sufficient to maintain us long in
life, not only the history of the first twelve Patriarchs, but also whole
nations living at this day in India, Africa, Asia, and some parts of Europe do
sufficiently declare, feeding wholly or principally of fruit; whereof I find
three chief or especial kinds, namely Orchard-fruit growing upon trees:
Garden-fruit growing upon shrubs, herbs and roots: and Field-fruit concluded
under the name of Grain.

CHAP. XXII.
Of all Orchard Fruit.
Pruna. Armeniaca chrysomela.
Plin. l. 15. c. 1^.
smell, their flesh quickly corrupting and degenerating into choler and wheyish
excrements, engendring pestilent agues, stopping the liver and spleen, breeding
ill juice, and giving either none or very weak nourishment; yet are they
medicinable and wholesome for some persons, for they provoke urine, quench
thirst: and sirup made of the infusion of dried Abricocks, qualifies the
burning heat and rage of fevers: They are least hurtful to the stomach, and
most comfortable to the brain and heart, which be sweet kerneld, big and
fragrant, growing behind a Kitchin-chimny (as they do at Barnelms) and so
thoroughly ripened by the Sun, that they will easily part from their stone.
They are best before meat, and fittest for hot stomachs; but let not women eat
many of them and let them also remember to drown them well in Sack or Canary
wine. Galen prefers 3 de alim. fac.
Abricocks before Peaches, because they are not so soon corrupted: whereas
common experience shows the contrary; for as Abricocks are soonest ripe, so
of all other stone fruit they soonest corrupt in a man's stomach.

Amigdalae.
Almonds (into whom fair Phyllis was turned, as Poets imagine) are of two
sorts, sweet and bitter. These are fittest for medicin, but the sweet ones for
meat. The sweet almonds are sometimes eaten green of women with child to
procure appetite; and in Summer of others, because then they are most pleasant:
but they nourish most after the fall when they are fully ripe, being blanched
into cold water; they fatten the body, give plentiful nourishment, increase
flesh and seed, help the brain and eyesight, purge the breast by spitting, clear
the voice, cleanse the kidneys, and provoke sleep; eat them not when they are
very old and wrinckled, for then they stay long in the stomach and breed
headache: if they be eaten with sugar (as they are in march-paens, or in
cullices, mortises, rice*porredge, or almond milks) they are of greater
nourishment and more easy digestion; but then they are to be eaten alone, not
in the middle (and much less in the end) of Meals.

Mala.
Apples be so diverse of form and substance, that it were infinite to describe
them all; some consist more of air then water, as your Puffs called mala
pulmonea; others more of water then wind, as your Costards and Pome-waters,
called Hydrotica: Others being first graffed upon a Mulbery stock wax thorough
red, as our Queen-apples, called by Ruellius, Rubelliana, and Claudiana by
Pliny. Roundlings are called mala Sceptiana of Sceptius; and Winter-goldlings,
Scandiana Plinij; Pippins mala Petisia; Peare-apples, Melapia; and Pear-mains
or Peauxans no doubt be those Applana mala, which Appius graffed upon a Quince,
smelling sweetly, and tasting a little tart, continuing in his goodness a year
or two. To be short, all Apples may be sorted into three kinds, Sweet, Sour,
and Unsavory. Sweet Apples moisten the belly, open the breast, ripen rhumes,
ease the cough, quench thirst, help spitting, cure melancholy, comfort the
heart and head (especially if they be fragrant and odoriferous) and also give a
laudable nourishment. Sour Appels stay the belly, hinder spitting straiten the
breast, gripe and hurt the stomach, increase phlegm, and weaken memory. Unsavory
Apples are unfit for our eating, appointed rather to fat Hoggs and Swine, then
to come into our stomachs. Old Apples are best (if they be such as can bear
age) because by long lying they lose two ill quallities, Watrishness and
Windiness, and have also a more perfect and pleasing taste. As Nuts, Figs, and
Mulberies be best toward the lowest boughs, so contrariwise Plums, Apples,
and Pears be best from the top of the Tree, and hanging on the sunny side.
Sweet Apples are to be eaten at the beginning of meat, but sour and tart
Apples at the latter end. All Apples are worst raw, and best baked or
preserved. None at all are good sodden besides the Codlin; which afterward
being made into tart stuff, and baked with rosewater and sugar, is no bad meat:
their coldnese and watrishness is soon corrected, either in baking, roasting,
or preserving with cinnamon, ginger, orenge-pills, aniseed, caraway-seed, sweet
fennel-seed, and sweet butter.

Cael. lib. 27. ca^* 17. A. L.
Now whereas the old Proverb (ab ovo ad mala) shows that Apples were ever the
last dish set upon the board, you must understand it of tartish and sour
Apples, or else justly (though newly) find fault with an old custom. Philip of
Macedonia and Alexander his son (from whom perhaps a curious and skilful Herald
may derive our Lancashire men) were called Philomeli Apple-lovers, Athen l. 7.
c. 1. Cael lib. 13. cap* 15* A. L.
because they were never without Apples in their pockets; yea all the
Macedonians his Countrymen did so love them, that having near Babylon surprised
a Fruiterers hoy, they strived so for it that many were drowned; which fight
was therefore called by Historiographers, Melomachia, the Apple-fight; but
cruel fluxes surprised the Army upon this, and many dyed of intolerable
gripings.

Oxyacanthae. Spinae acidae.
Berberies preserved, are a great refreshing to hot stomachs and aguish
persons; and being kept in pickle they serve for sallets and the garnishing of
meat; but they are of very little nourishment themselves, or rather of none at
all, though by a pleasant sharpness they edge an appetite.

Prunus-Sylvestris regius.
Bullices likewise (both white, speckled and black) are of the like nature,
being stued, bakt, roasted, or preserved; fitter to be eaten last to close up
the upper mouth of the stomach, then first to stop the neither mouth, unless it
be in fluxes.

Sorbi.
Cervises (like to Medlers) are then truly ripe, when they are rotten; if you
would choose the best, choose the biggest, most poulpy, and voidest of stones.
They are cold in the first degree, and dry in the third, giving little
nourishment; but staying fluxes, preventing drunkenness, strengthening the
stomach, and making a sweet breath; their great astringency shows that they
are to be eaten last, for otherwise they will bind the body, burden Lib 15. cap.
21
the stomach, and engender very gross humors. Pliny makes four kind of
Cervisses, one as round as an Apple, another bottled like a Pear, the third
ovale made like an egg. The Apple-cervise is most sweet, fragrant, and
nourishing, the other of a most winy taste; the fourth kind of Cervisse is a
very little one, called the Torment-Cerviss allowed for nothing but that it
cease the torments of bloody fluxes.

Cherries were neither brought into Italy nor England till Lucius Lucullus
returned from his victory Plin. l. 15. c. 25.
against Mithridates; whereof there are chiefly four sorts amongst us.

Iuliana.
Iulians which are very red, soft, and poulpy, never good but under the Tree;
for they rot in carriage a little way.

Aproniana.
Apronians, which are red, round, and harder, and can abide the carriage.

Duracina.
Duracines or in French Coeurs, or heart-Cherries, because they are made like a
heart, which are the firmest of all other.

Actiana.
The blackest of all be called Actians, because they were brought from Actium a
promontory of Epire. In England we have also seen white Cherries growing,
wherein the artificial choler marred the good nature and taste of them;
wherefore I will not commend them for wholesomness, but show their rareness.

Concerning their uses, let us remember thus much; that the Coeurs or French
Cherries are most cordial, the common and pulpy Cherries most nourishing, the
black Cherries kernel is the best meat, but his flesh unwholesome and loathsome
to the stomach.

Furthermore our common Cherries being ripe and eaten from the Tree in a dewy
morning, loosen the belly: when contrariwise Coeurs and red sour Cherries bind
the same, being of a more dry and astringent faculty.

All Cherries (saving them which are black) slake thirst, cool moderately, and
procure appetite. Sweet and ripe Cherries should be eaten foremost; others are
to be eaten last, either scalded or baked, or made into tart stuff, or
preserved with sugar, or rather dried after the German manner; which they keep
all the year long to quench thirst in agues, to cool choler, to stir up
appetite, to unfur the tongue and relish the mouth, to stay puking, vomiting,
and all kind of fluxes.

Castaneae nuces.
Chestnuts are so discommended of Galen in his book of Thin Diet, that they
should be little esteemed, had lib. 15. c 23.
not latter ages better considered of their nature. Pliny thought (and I allow
his reason) that it could not be a vile meat, which nature had hidden with such
wonderful and artificial covers or husks. Divus Tiberius having been in
Sardinia, or rather (as I take it) at Sardis in Lidia, brought from thence some
chestnuts, and set them in Italy; whence no doubt they were derived into France
and England. It is questioned by some, whether raw Chestnuts may not engender
lice. But the French Chestnut is bigger, tenderer, and far sweeter then ours;
whereof there are two kinds, the one of a light and reddish color fittest to
be roasted, the other resembling a dark bay, enclining to a blackish brown
(called Coctivae of Pliny) because they are best sodden. Of all Chestnuts choose
the biggest, fullest, brownest and roundest, and let them be three months old
at the least before you eat them: If you eat too many, they breed headache,
collicks and costiffness, but feed moderately upon them in the midst of meals,
and they nourish without offense. They are dry in the second degree, and almost
as hot as dry; but seething remits a little of each, as roasting adds
somewhat to either quality. They are best in Winter, agreeing with moist
complexions, and such as are not subject to stoppings of the breast and liver.

Mala medica and Citria.
Citrons, were not known in Homers time to be any meat: only the pills thereof
were burnt with Cedarwood Plin. l. 13. ca. 1.
in Temples, when they sacrificed to Apollo: as thinking the fume of it a
special preservative against the Plague: Neither is the juice of them since
commended, but to resist poison, to qualify humors putrified within the body,
to make a sweet breath, to cure hot burning Plin. l. 23. ca. 6.
agues, and to cure the longing of women with child; for which yet the seeds are
thought most medicinable. Nevertheless I am sure as ripe Citrons in Spain do
nourish Spaniards, so preserved Citrons may no less nourish us, considering
that their corrosive quality is altered by sugar, and their coldness made
temperate thorough perboiling.

Pruna Damascena.
Damsins, which were first brought from the mount of Damascus in Syria, are a
most wholesome Plum of all others, giving moderat nourishment in hot weather,
to young chollerick and dry stomachs. The most nourishing be fully ripe, sweet,
plump, and thin-skinn'd. Our custom is very bad to eat ripe Plums last, when
their sweetness and lightness persuades us to eat them foremost. Ripe Damsins
eaten whilst the dew is upon them, are more medicinable then meat; but being
eaten at the beginning of Dinner or Supper, they are more meat then medicin,
and give an indifferent sustenance to an indifferent stomach, especially when
they are preserved. Damsins not fully ripe, had need to be boiled or preserved,
to correct their cold and crude nature; but as they are fit for hot stomachs
and aguish persons, so none at all are good for them that be old, or cold, or
watrish and phlegmatic of constitution.

The like may be said of Damase-prunes, brought out of Syria, Spain and Italy,
which are sweet, nourishing and pleasant being stued or sodden; when
contrariwise the French Prune is harsh and sour, fitter to cool men in agues
and to edge distasted stomachs, then to be offered any man in the way of meat.

Dactili.
Dates are usually put into stued broaths, minced-pies, and restorative
cull^ces, as though they were of very great and wholesome nourishment. Ceatain
it is that they fat much and increase blood, but such blood as easily Plin. l.
13. ca. 4.
turns into hot choler. Alexanders Soldiers were killed with new Dates;
which taste so pleasantly, that only danger makes a man surcease to eat them.
The best Dates grow by Jericho in Jewry, the next by Alexandria in Egypt; but
the Dates of Barbary and Spain have long writhled bodies without substance:
Choose them which are ripe and not rotten, firm and not wormeaten, sweet and not
astringent, and at the least a year old after the gathering; for such are best
for a cold Liver, fittest to move the Belly and to help the cough; whereas new
Dates bind excessively, stop the liver, stomach, veins, and lungs, gripe the
guts, breed headache, hurt the teeth, and make little ulcers to arise in the
mouth: yea ripe Dates lighting upon a bad stomach do easily putrify,
engendering malign agues, and stuffing the body with crude humors, whereupon
great stoppings increase both of spleen and liver. They are hot in the second
degree, and moist in the first, never good when they are eaten alone, or
without sugar, which hinders their speedy corruption.

Praenestinae, Heracleoticae, Ponticae and Avellanae nuces.
Plin. lib. 15.
Filberds and Haselnuts, coming first out of Pontus, and translated by the
Romans into our Country, are found by experience to nourish the brain, to heal
old coughes being eaten with honey, and to stay rhumes if be tosted. Also being
peeld whilst they are green, and laid a while in water, and eaten afterward
with sugar or salt at the end of meat, they give a laudible nourishment,
increasing seed, tempering blood and making it of a good consistence. Choose
ever the longest, ripest, and thinnest shel`d, fullest of meat, and freest from
spot or worm; also eat them whilst they are new, if you purpose to nourish
much; for afterward they wax more oily and less nourishing: they are best
toward Winter, and fitter for strong and able stomachs, because they easily
overturn weak stomachs and procure headache.

Ficus Crossi.
Figs are the sweetest fruit of the bitterest tree in the world; for neither
leaf, nor bud, nor bark, nor wood, Plut. 5. Symp.
nor body, nor root, nor any part of it is sweet besides the fruit: nay the very
ashes of a fig tree, is as sharp and bitter as any soot; yet figs themselves
are so sweet, Plin. l. 12. ca. 1*
that only for love of them the French men first invaded Italy, and inhabited a
great part of it many years; yea Moschus Antimolus the Sophister having once
tasted Alex. l. 3. ca. 11:
them, he hated all other meats during his life; and Plato Athen. l. 7. ca. 1
so affected them, that he was called (...) ^he Fig lover; nay he loved them so
much, that he died of lice, engendered of corrupt blood which the Figs made;
also Pompejus Columna Cardinal and Viceroy of Naples, died suddenly in the arms
of Austen Nyphus that famous Pau* Jov* invita Colu^.
Philosopher, with eating too many figs.

Figs are dangerous without wine, but wholesome with it. Wherefore let all men
beware of them, as Solomon bids us take heed of too much honey least our sweet
meat bring sour sauce, and pleasure be punished with too late repentance. They
are seldom eaten of us green from the tree; and of outlandish figs, let
Dioscorides commend his ((...)) yellow figs, Athenaeus his blue Figgs, and
Pratensis his Mariscas, or Fig-dates; yet in my judgment the round, short, and
thick barrel'd Figs (having a thin skin, and a firm substance, with few seeds
in them) are of all other the best, though not the sweetest, Lib. 15. cap. 18.
which I nothing doubt to be Callistruthiae Galeni, and those delicate figs of
Livia Pompeia which Pliny writes of.

The seed of Figs nourishes no more then a stone, their skin hardly digesteth,
only their pulppy substance gives much, though no very wholesome nor good
nourishment. Choose the softest, roundest, newest, soundest, thickest, and
ripest; and as you drink wine upon cold and moist fruits, so drink small drink,
or suck the sour juice of Orenges, Pomegranards, Lemons, or Citrons after
Figs: thus being taken they augment fat, clear the countenance, provoke venery,
quench thirst, resist venom, purge the kidneys of gravel, and nourish more then
any Tree-fruit whatsoever. But if you would ripen a cold, or cleanse your
pipes, or clear your voice, it is best to eat them with ripe Almonds, or to
drink them with barley water: old age is most offended by them, and such as have
stopped livers, or be of a bad and corrupt complexion.

Pistacia, or Psittacia.
Matthew. com. in Diosc.
Fisticks, or rather Pisticks (alluding to the Syrian word) are Nuts growing in
the knob of the Syrian or Egyptian Turpentine*tree, being so much more
wholesome, good and nourishing, by how much they are more sweet, odorifreous,
full, big and green: They nourish plentifully, open the liver, cleanse the
breast, strengthen the stomach and kidneys, stay fluxes and vomitings, fatten
the body, stir up lust, and resist poison. They are wholesome both before and
after meat, being eaten with old-pippins, or sugar-roset.

Children and hot complexions must not use them, for they inflame their thin
blood, and cause giddiness: but even Galen (who discommends them more then he 2
de diaet. part.
needed) allows them in Winter for cold fleagmatick and weak stomachs. Isaac
says, that they are hot and dry in the second degree, whereof indeed they want
very little.

Uvae.
Grapes differ two ways especially, in substance and taste. In respect of
substance, they are either fleshy, which are fittest for meat, or winy and
thinn, which are fittest to drink, being made into wine. In respect of taste,
sweet Grapes fatten and nourish most, being of hottest constitution, and
speediest concoction; yet they swell the stomach, engender thirst, and loosen
the body. Sour and harsh Grapes are cold in operation, hardly digested, of
little nourishment, griping and yet binding the belly, and therefore fitter to
be tasted of as sauce, then to be eaten as meat.

The Germans hang up clusters of ripe Grapes (suffering them not to touch one
another) upon lines in a cold Gallery, or rather in their Bed-chambers; which
being dried nourish much, and yet neither swell the stomach nor cause looseness:
in heat of agues one such Grape or two at the most do more refresh the mouth,
and restore the taste, then six ownces of conserve of cold Berberies.

Haselnuts are already written of in our Treatise of Filbirds.

Mala Iunia.
Iunitings are the first kind of Apples which are soonest ripe, coming in and
going out with the Month of June; of a little round and light substance, tender
pulp, and very fragrant smell; sent at that time to cool choler, slake thirst,
and restore spirits decayed with heat of Summer; it gives sufficient though no
great nor strong nourishment, being fitter for young and hot complections, then
them which are weakened with phleagm.

Gorni.
Kornils or Corneols are of a very astringent and binding taste, fit to nourish
weak stomachs that can keep nothing, or weak guts that void all things. For
sound men they are not good, but eaten in small quantity after meat; because
they firmly seal up the stomach, and accidentally help concoctition. Tart stuff
or Marmalade may be made of them to that purpose, wherein no doubt the excel
quinces, Egleutius berries be of the like substance and nature.

Malum Limonium.
Lemmons approach near unto Citrons: and Limes are engendered of them both.
Their poulp is cold and dry in the third degree; their peel hot and dry in the
second, and their seed temperate. If you eat the juice alone, it causes
gripings, leanness and crudities; but if you eat the peel with the pulp (as
nature seems therefore to have united them) the heat of the one corrects
the rawness of the other, and not only the stomach but also the heart is
comforted by them both. They of Naples Pisanel. de esc. and potul.
and Genoa slice the best and sourest Lemons and Citrons very thinn, and having
cast on salt and rosewater, use them as a general sauce to all flesh and fish;
by which preparation an appetite is procured, their wine well tasted, and their
kidneys scowred.

But forasmuch as we live in a colder climate, it is best to take the ripest
sort of Lemmons, and to steep their slises, peel and all in wine, sugar and
cinnamon upon the warm coals, and then to eat them alone, or with our meat. Let
old and consumed persons beware of them; for they will spend their spirits with
abundance of urine, and also overthrow their natural heat, which is rather to
be quickened and restored with wine, then quenched or quelled with so great a
cooler.

Mespila.
Plin. l. 15. c. 20.
Medlers were not seen in Italy whilst Cato lived, but now in England there be
too many. Concerning the fruit it self, it is never good till it be rotten;
wherein the bus-meddlers of our age may also worthily be compared to them: the
great ones (called Setania) have most pulp, the little ones less, but more fine
and fragrant: these also do more comfort and bind the stomach, though the great
ones excel them in plenty of nourishment: either sort is to be eaten last,
because they are of an heavy and astringent nature, burdensome to the stomach,
and engendering gross humors, if the be eaten first.

Mora.
Mulberies being black and fat (which is a sign of their full ripeness) are
hot in the first degree, and moist in the second; fittest to be eaten before
meat; because they easily pass from out the stomach to the guts, drawing the
other meat along with themselves: they please the stomach, procure losness of
body and urine, nourish ^ound and clean bodies, though they corrupt in unclean
stomachs; also they smoothen the harshness of the Pis. de esc. and pot. ex
Avicenna Aetio and Isa. aco Iudaeo.
throat, quench thirst, delay choler, and cause no great, but yet a natural
appetite to meat. They should be gathered before Sunrising, and given only
(as I said) to clean stomachs and before meat; for they will else corrupt and
swell us up, and drive us perhaps into some putrified fever. They are fittest
in Summer for young men, and such as abound with blood and choler.

Unripe Mulberies (which is discerned by their whiteness and redness) may be
good to make medicines for ulcered throats and fluxes of the belly, but they
deserve not the names of nourishments.

When Mulberies cannot be gotten, Blackberries or ^ de alim. fac.
Dewberries may supply their room, to which Galen ascribes the like virtues.
This one thing let us note, omitted of all Herbarists of our latter age; that
albeit a Mulbery Tree be called in Greek and Latin Morus, that is to say, a
fool; yet her wisdom excels all other Trees in my judgment, because it
never budeth till all sharp weather be clean gone, and then spredeth out her
leaves more in a day, then all other Trees did in thirty before.

Olivae.
Laert. in Plut. vit.
Olives (the desired salade of divine Plato) are an usual dish at most men's
Tables, though none of them grow in England. Wild Olives are better, then those
which are set in City Orchards; which the very Birds do know in Italy, more
coveting the wilder sort. We have three sorts of them brought into our
Country, Spanish-olives, Italian olives, and Olives of Provence. The first
sort is the biggest, but yet the worst, being too yellow, too soft, and too
full of oil: the Italian Olive is almost as big, but more firm of flesh, and
pleasanter through retaining his natural greenishness. The Province Olives are
less then either, something* bitterer also and more leather like skinned, yet
better for the stomach then the Spanish, though nothing near the Italian or
Bononian Olive in flesh, taste, or goodness: There also their pickles is made
of water, salt, ind sweet fennel, which gives them a greater grace, and makes
them less heavy unto weak stomachs.

All Olives (even the best) are but of slow and little nourishment; serving
especially to provoke appetite, to cleanse the stomach of phlegm, to strengthen
the guts, and to cure loathing of meat. It were good to take them out of their
salt pickle (which enflameth blood) and to lay them a while in vinegar before
we eat them, to correct their heat, and make them more agreeable to the
stomach. They are best in the midst of meat with a French salad; for being
first eaten, they lie heavy in the stomach, and being last eaten, they offend
the head with their brackish and salt vapors, which hinder sleep and increase
thirst.

Malum Aurantium.
Orenges are brought hither of three kinds, some exceeding sweet, others sour,
and the third sort unsavory, or of no relish. The first sort are sweet and
temperately hot, of indifferent nourishment, good for stoppings of the breast,
rhumes and melancholy. Very sour Orenges are extremely cold, making thin and
watrish blood, and griping the belly; but right Civil-orenges have a pleasant
verdure betwixt sweet and sour; whose juice and flesh preserved, cause a good
appetite, bridle choler, quench thirst, yet neither cool nor dry in any excess.
As for unsavory Orenges, they neither nourish nor serve to any good use; but
lie heavy in the stomach, stirring up wind and breeding obstructions in the
belly: being eaten with sugar and cinnamon, civil-orenges give a pretty
nourishment to aguish persons, whose stomachs can digest no strong meats; and
also their pills preserved do somewhat nourish, especially if they be not
spoiled of the white part, which is most nourishing; as the outward rind
contrariwise is most medicinable; choose the heaviest, ripest, and best
colored, and those that taste pleasantly betwixt sweet and sour.

Mala Persica.
Peaches show manifestly how change of earth and climate may alter natures; For
Columella and diverse before Plinies time have recorded, that in Persia (from
whence they were brought into Europe) peaches are a deadly poison; but with us
the smell of a ripe, tender, and fragrant peach comfort the heart, and their
meat not only causes appetite, makes a sweet breath and cools choler, but
also easily digesteth and gives good nourishment. I never saw greater store of
good peaches then in Suitzerland; where the poor men fat themselves and their
hoggs with them exceedingly when they are in season. All Peaches are to be
quartered, and laid in strong wine before they are eaten. Ripe Peaches
according 2 de alim. sac.
to Galens rule must be eaten in the beginning of meals, because they are a
moist and slippery fruit; but hard and unripe Peaches are best at the end of
meat (if ever they are good at all) yea though they be candied or preserved;
yet Peaches must be sparingly eaten, for many are dangerous, and killed
Theognostus that fine Scholar, so much lamented in the Greek Epigrams. Four
good morsels, Peaches, Figs, Melons, and Champignois.

Pyra.
Pears be of infinite kinds, because men by graffing diverse Pears together
have made of them infinite mixtures. The Norwich-pear, and St. 1. Amerinum.
Plinij 2. Signinum. 3. Venereum 4. Crustuminum 5. Hordearium 6. Do^obellianum
7. Superbum. 8. Cucurbitinum 9. Ampullaceum


Thomas-Pear are most durable and very good; the Sand-pear is firm and also
nourishing; the Lady-pear is too watrish, though beautiful in color: The
Katherin-pear is simply best and best relished: The Musk-pear is very cordial;
The Long-tail has a good verdure; The Puff-pear is full of wind: The Bell-pear
is very sappy: The Tanckard-pear is somewhat bitterish and noisome to the
stomach. But leaving their infinite differences of shape, color, and time, let
us only write of their differences in taste, which is chiefly to be regarded.
All sweet Pears be most nourishing, cleansing the breast of Phleagm, comforting
the stomach, and least binding. Sour and harsh Pears are exceeding hurtful to
the stomach and sinewy parts; unsavory Pears breed ill juice, and bitter Pears
nourish nothing at all. If a well rellished Pear be also endued with a fragrant
smell (as the Katherin Pear, Violet, Poppering, Sugar-Pear, Musk-pear and such
like) they are to be preferred before all others. Schol. sal. c. 39.


Concerning the preparation of Pears, they are worst raw, and their skinn is
most unwholesome; without wine they are counted poison, especially being
largely taken as a meat. They are best being eaten last, as contrariwise Apples
for the most part are first to be eaten; because they are rather of a loosning
then an astringent nature. They are best baked, lib. de. la. mais. rust.
then roasted; but dried Pears (in Harry Stevens judgment) surpass all for
strong nourishment. They are temperate in heat and cold, but dry in the second
degree: which causes them to cease fluxes and vomits, to repel vapors, and
strengthen the stomach.

Pruna.
Plums grow here in such variety, that to name them only were a tedious work.
The most pulppy, sweet, pleasant and nourishing be these. Pear-plums,
Violet-plums, Pescod-plums our Ladies-plums, Wheatplums, Mawdlins, and Damsins,
whereof we have already spoken.

The least nourishing (though some of them taste not unpleasantly, especially
the Christian-plum) are Bullices, Christians, Prunellaes, Skegs and Horseplums.

All Plums baked, stued, or preserved with sugar do more plentifully nourish,
because much of their sharpness, watrishness, and rawness is thereby corrected.

Always remember to eat the sweetest sort before, and the sourest sorts of
Plums after meat, least unorderly eating cause that to be blamed, which was
good and wholesome in his due place.

Here I have occasion to speak of the paste of Genoa made of fragrant and fine
ripe Plums; which no doubt is not only cordial, but also restorative to such
stomachs, as through extremities of agues have lost their strength.

Mala Punica.
Pomegranads when they are sweet and thorough ripe, loosen phlegm, help the
stomach, breast, and cough, increase Gal. l. 8. simpl.
venery, provoke urine, loosen the belly, moisten the spiritual parts, and give
indifferent store of good nourishment: they are best in Winter for old men and
phlegmatic constitutions.

Gal ex. Diosc. lib. 1 cap. 127.
Sour Pomegranads hurt a cold stomach, straiten the breast, hinder
expectoration, stop the liver, offend both teeth and gums, cool excessively,
stay all humoral fluxes, yet provoke urine most plentifully; and therefore they
are more prescribed in agues then the sweet ones, as also to choleric young
men subject to scowrings. Paulus Aegineta affirms, sour Pomegranads to bind
only sound men's bodies, but not such as be sick. Howsoever it is, since the
ones goodness resists the others hurtfulness, it is best to mingle both their
juices for such as be aguish or weak, and severally to use them for the strong
according as occasion serves.

Mala cotonea and Cydonia.
Quinces are of two sorts; an Apple-quince called malum cotoneum, and a
Pear*quince called of Dioscorides Struthium; both of them were first brought
from Cydon, a castle in Candy, whereupon they are commonly called mala Cydonia;
we account most of the latter sort; but the cotton and downy Quince made like
an Apple, is most commended of the Grecian and Latin writers. Of either of them
choose the most clear, transparant, thin-skind, ungravelly, downy, best
smelling, and most furrowed as it were with long streaks; for the very scent of
such is comfortable, and though their raw flesh be as hard as raw beef unto
weak stomachs, yet being roasted, or baked, or made into Marmalade, or
cunningly preserved, they give a wholesome and good nourishment, and make the
body soluble being eaten last at meat; for if you eat them first, they clyng
the stomach, cause exceeding costiffness, and hinder digestion, as Galen 3 de
alim. fac* cap. 22.
sufficiently tried in Protas the Orator. They are cold in the first degree, and
dry almost in the second: agreeing with all ages, times, and complexions, where
just occasion is given to use them.

Uvae passae.
Raisins are of the same temperature with the Grapes which they are made of,
being also as diverse in taste, substance and quality, as they be. That Noah was
the first planter of Vines, Christians know better out of the Bible, then any
Poet or heathen writer could ever aim at; but who first divised the drying of
Raisins in the Sun, or the pressing them into frailes, it is neither set down
by Pliny nor any other Author that I have read. Only this I find by reason
and experience, that the greatest, fattest, sweetest, longest and blewest
Raisins of the Sun are ever best; nourishing sufficiently, moderately clensing,
very well temperating ill humors, mitigating all pains, and engendring very
pure and good blood; yea the African Physicians that lived in Galens time did 2
de alim. fac*
with one voice and consent protest thus much of them, that for opening the
breast, stomach and lungs; for cleansing the blood, kidneys, and bladder, for
ceasing all pains of the guts and moderate nourishment, no fruit is to be
compared unto Raisins. Matthiolus in his Commentaries Lib. 5. cap. 4.
upon Dioscorides says that Raisins of the Sun being either voided of their
kernels or growing without kernels, loosen the belly, help hoarseness, and both
nourish and cleanse the liver: contrariwise being eaten with the stones or
kernels, they work rather a contrary operation. That Grapes nourish much, we
may see (says Lib. 2. de alim. fac. cap 9.
Galen) by Vintage laborers, who come lean to the vineyard, but return as fat
as Hogs. Much more do Rasins of the Sun and other Raisins nourish our bodies,
and are therefore to be accounted for no bad meats.

Pyra volema Plinij.
Wardens or Palme-pears so called, because one of them will fill the palm of a
hand, were first brought into Plin. l. 15. c. 15.
credit by Livia Pompeja; they are very hurtful and almost indigestible being
eaten raw or green; but toward Winter they are very wholesome for a weak
stomach, being stued, bakt, or roasted, and to be preferred for nourishment
before all fruit; engendring (especially when they are sweet and red) most
wholesome juice; strengthening concoction, repelling vapors from the head, and
comforting the weak and decayed spirits: would to God every hedge were as full
of them as they are of wild Pears and Crabs, that both poor and rich might have
a competent nourishment when fish and flesh can hardly be gotten.

Iuglandes.
Wallnuts or Jupiters acorns (for so the Greeks and Latins Mac. 3 sat. c. 18.
Plin. lib. 23. c. 8
called them) are sufficiently nourishing whilst they are green, but when they
once wax so dry that they hardly peel, they are more medicinable then
nourishing: either Pis. de ^scul. and potul.
of them engender the cough and cause headache; but if you peel new Walnuts and
wash them in wine and salt, they are least offensive to the stomach, and yet
more nourishing if you eat them with sugar. Old Walnuts are hot in the third
degree, and dry in the second; new Walnuts are most temperate in each respect,
agreeing with old men and phlegmatic persons, being eaten at the end of the
Fall, and the beginning of winter.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of such Fruits of the Garden as are nourishing.
A Atichokes grew sometimes only in the Isle of Sicil; and since my
remembrance they were so dainty in England, that usually they were sold for
crowns a piece: now industry and skill has made them so common, that the
poorest man is possessed of Princes dainties. Julius Capitolinus in the life of
Pertinax, and Pliny likewise in the 19 book of his natural History, reports
Artichokes to have been of such estimation in Carthage and Corduba, that there
were sold as many Artichokes in one year, as came to six thousand Sesterties,
which makes thirty thousand pound Sterling. The first sprouts of
Artichoke-leavs being sod in good broth with butter, Dod. lib. 4. Pla*
do not only nourish, but also mightily stir up lust of the body both in men
and women: the young heads of them eaten raw with pepper and salt do the like;
but the great heads being once come to perfection, howsoever they are counted
windy and hard of digestion, fuming up to the head, and burdensome to the
stomach: yet certain it is that they are of great nourishment being well
prepared. Some Gal. 2. de alim* fac.
boil them in fat poudred beef broth till they be tender, and then eat them
with vinegar, pepper, sugar, butter, and salt. Others having parboiled them a
little, take the pulpy part in the bottom, and with sweet Marrow, Verjuice,
Pepper, Sugar, and Gooseberries, make most excellent and restorative Pies. The
Italians broil them on a Gridiron, setting their bottoms downward, and pouring
on a little sweet oil upon every leaf as soon as they open with the heat, and as
that soakes in, they put in a little more: for if much should be poured in at
once, they would smell of the smoke, by reason that the oil would drop into the
fire. This way the Artichoke is least windy, and (if it be eaten with Sugar,
Butter, and the juice of an Orange) most pleasant likewise. They are hot in two
degrees, and dry in one; and therefore fittest for cold, aged persons, and
complexions. Remember that raw Artichokes are to be eaten toward the end of
meals, but the other at the beginning or in the midst.

Asparagus.
Asparagus was in old time a meat for such Emperors as Julius Caesar; now
every board is served with them. They must be presently gathered when their
heads bow downwards, and being sodden in two or three waters (to ridd them of
bitterness) they are to be boiled in mutton broth till they be tender, which is
done in a trice. The greatest and tenderest stalked are ever best, and few or
no kind of herbs nourish more, being spoiled of their bitterness and eaten hot.
Galen doubts of their active quality, but yet experience shows them to be
temperately moist, and not to exceed in heat the first degree.

Dodon. lib. 2. hist. pl.
Ballocks-grass, or Satyrium (whereof there be five principal kinds) is only
nourishing in the full, heavy and sappy root; for the other is of clean
contrary disposition. Some eat them being boiled in Goats milk and Sugar.
Others candy them, or keep them in Syrup: any way they increase bodily lust
strengthen the liver, help the parts of conception, restore them which are
consumed, and give plentiful nourishment in hectic Fevors.*

Mora rubi.
Bramble-berries, or Black-berries, be they of the greater or the less kind,
are temperately warm, and sufficiently nourishing to a weak stomach. How the
poor live upon them, daily experience shows; yet being much eaten they bind
the body, and engender such putrified humors as beget both scabs and lice.

Borrago. Buglossa. Sirsium.
Borrage, Bugloss and Langdebeif, are of so great a temperature in all
qualities, that they are not only commended for special Cordials being steeped
in Wine, or made into Conserves; but also their flowers, herbs, and roots are
esteemed restorative, nourishing weak bodies sufficiently, and strengthening
the parts of nourishment more then meanly, being sodden in broths, cullises, or
gellies.

Personatae radix.
Burr-roots, (I mean of the Clot burr, called (...) by the Greeks) whilst they
are young and tender, in the month of April, are very wholesome and nourishing,
being eaten like a young green Artichoke with pepper and salt. The Frenchmen
and Italians first found them out: since which time they are more common
amongst us, through the means of them which have traveled into strange
Countries.

Brassicae.
Coleworts be of diverse sorts, but the most nourishing of all is your
white-leafed Cabbage (as big as a great Plin.
loaf) called Brassica Tritiana, and that which the Italians calls Cauli
flores: so beloved of Pompey, that it was termed Brassica Pompeiana. Either of
them must first gently be sodden in fair water, then again steeped all night in
warm milk; afterward sees them with fat marrow or in fat brues, and they are
very nourishing without offense. Otherwise all Coleworts engender gross and
melancholique blood. Choose ever the whitest and tenderest leafed, for they are
of the finest and Alex. l. 5. c* ^1.
best nourishment. The Egyptians eat Cabbage first to prevent drunkenness.

Danci hortenses.
Carot roots, are very temperate in heat and dryness, of an aromatical and
spice-like taste, warming the inward parts, and giving great nourishment to
indifferent stomachs, being sodden in fat and fleshy broth, or else buttered.
The yellower the root, the more sweet, tender, and aromatical is the Carot: and
the best grow in a black, soft and ripe though not in a forced earth.

Anguriae Citruli.
Plin. l. 19. c. 9.
Citruls, (so much beloved of Tiberius the Emperor) are of like temperature
with Melons and Pompions (of whom hereafter) nourishing hot stomachs very well
being boiled with good flesh or sweet milk.

C^cumeres. Melopepones.
Galen.
Cucumbers growing in hot grounds and well ripened with the Sun, are neither
moist nor cold in the second degree. They agree well with hot stomachs being
eaten with vinegar, salt, oil, and pepper: but if you boil them (whilst they
are young) with white wind, vervin, dill, and salt liquor, they are not of a
bad nourishment (as Galen took them) but engender good humors, and settle a
very cold and weak stomach: as by much practice and long experience I have
proved in diverse persons.

Schaenoprasa.
Cives, or Rush-leeks be almost as hot as Leeks themselves. Some eat them raw
in Salads, but then they nourish not. If you boil them twice or thrice in
water, they lose their over-hot and drying nature, and give no bad nourishment
to cold stomachs.

Glandes terrestres Dodonaei.
Earthnuts grow much on Richmond Heath and Coome Park, as also beside Bath as
you travel to Bristol. They are best in May. In Holland and Brabant they are
eaten (as the roots of Turnips and Parsneps) boiled in fleshbroth, which
corrects their binding quality, and makes them of good and wholesome
nourishment.

Bulbocastanea.
Earth-chesnuts are far bigger then Earthnuts, and the flowers of them are
white where the others be red. About Bath there is great plenty of them, and
they are of like nourishment and use with the Earthnuts.

Intubum sativum latifolium.
Endive (especially that which has the longest, largest, softest, and whitest
leaves) is of good nourishment to hot stomachs, not only cooling but also
increasing blood; if it be sodd in white broth till it be tender: but if you
eat it raw in salads (as it is most commonly used) then it only cools and
lies heavy in the stomach, because it is not freed from its crudities.

Vacinia palustria.
Fen-berries grow not only in Holland in low and moist places, but also (if I
have not forgotten it) in the Isle of Eli. They are of like temper and faculty
with our whortles, but somewhat more astringent. Being eaten raw or stewed with
sugar, they are wholesome meat in hot burning fevers, unto which either fluxes
of humors or spending of spirits are annexed. Likewise they quench thirst no
less then Ribes, and the red or outlandish Gooseberrie.

Mora Rubi Idaei.
Trambois, or Raspis are of complexion like the Blackberry and Dewberry, but
not of so astringent nor drying quality. Furthermore they are more fragrant to
the Nose and more pleasant in taste, and of far better nourishment to hot
stomachs for cold stomachs cannot convert them into any good juice.

Allium.
Garlic was so odious or hurtful to Horace that he makes it more venomous then
Hemlocks, Adders Horat. l. 3. ^pod
blood, Medea's cups, yea then the poison of Nessus the Centaure which killed
Hercules. Contrariwise the Thracians eat it every morning to breakfast, and
Suidas.
earry it with them in warfare as their chiefest meat. Whereat we need not
marvel, considering the coldness of their Country and their phlegmatic
constitution. Let us rather wonder at the Spaniard, who eats it more (being a
hot Nation) then our laboring men do here in England. Whereby we may see how
preparation begets in every thing another nature: for the Thracians eat it
raw because of their extreme coldness; but the Spaniard sodden first in many
waters, or else roasted under the embers in a wet paper, whereby it is made
sweet and pleasant, and has lost more then half of his heat and dryness Thus
is Garlic medicine and meat: medicine if it be eaten raw, but meat and
nourishment being roasted under the embers, or stickt like lard in fat meat, or
boiled in many waters, broths, or milks. By which way also his fuming and
diuretical quality is much corrected. Yet beware lest you eat too much of it,
lest it engender little worms in your flesh, as it did Crinz. l. 3. ca 3. hist.
saxon.
in Arnulphus the Emperor, whereof he died. It is very dangerous to young
children, fine women, and hot young men; unless the headdy, hot and biting
quality thereof be extinguished by the foresaid means.

Cucurbitae.
Gourds eaten raw and unprepared, are a very unwholesome food, as Galen says,
exceedingly cooling, charging, and loading the stomach; and engendering
crudities and wind. But being boiled, baked, or fried with butter, it loses
his hurtfulness, and gives good nourishment to indifferent stomachs. The seed
of it being husked and boiled in new milk is counted very restorative in
hectic fevers.

Grossulae. Uvae crispae.
Gooseberries being thorough ripe are as nourishing as sweet, and of the like
temper, not only increasing flesh, but also fatting the body. They should be
eaten first and not last, because they are so light a fruit. When they are
almost ripe they are restorative being made into Codiniack, or baked in Tarts.
Sour Gooseberries nourish nothing, serving rather for sauce to please ones
taste, then to augment flesh.

Grossulae transmarinae.
Red Gooseberries or bastard*Corinths, commonly called Ribes of Apothecaries,
and taken of Dodonaeus for the Bears-berry of Galen; is almost of the like
nature lib. 7. de med. sec. loc.
with Gooseberries, but more cold, dry, and astringent by one degree, because
they never wax sweet in our Country. They are very cordial and cooling in
Agues, being eaten either in Conserve, or Codiniack; yea nourishing also to hot
stomachs.

Lupularii asparagi.
Hop-shootes are of the same nature with Asparagus, nourishing not a little,
being prepared in the like sort (which is before described) though rather
cleansing and scouring of their own nature.

Alliaria.
Jack by the hedge, as it is not much used in Medicines, so it was heretofore a
very ancient and common meat, being therefore called Sauce alone. Country men
do boil it and eat it in stead of Garlic, being no less strengthened and
nourished by it then the Persian children were with Town-cresses. I allow it
not for indifferent stomachs, unless it have been steept in diverse warm waters,
and then be eaten (as Garlic may be eaten) moderately: for it is hot and dry
more then in the third degree.

Porra.
Leeks are esteemed so wholesome and nourishing in our Country, that few think
any good Pottage can be made without them. That they engender blood no author
denies, but they say it is gross, hot, and evil blood. Nevertheless if they be
first sodden in milk, and then used in meat, they are unclothed of all bad
qualities, and become friendly to the stomach, and nourishing Polemon lib. de
Samothra^. Athen. l. 9. c. 3.
to the liver. The Grecians made such reckoning of Leeks, as our Welsh men do;
yea he ever sat uppermost at Apollo's feast that brought thither the greatest
headed Leek. Some impute that to his mother Latona her longing for Leeks whilst
she was with child of Apollo. Others say that Apollo did so highly esteem them,
because they engender much blood and seed, whereby mankind is much increased:
which opinion I like best of, hearing and seeing such fruitfulness in Wales,
that few or none be found barren, and many fruitful before their time.

Porrum sectivum Palladii.
The unset Leek or Maiden-leek is not so hot as the knopped ones; because his
fuming quality is diminished by often cutting.

Lactuca.
Lettice is not more usually then profitably eaten of us in Summer; yea Galen
did never eat of any other Garden herb save this (for ought we read) whereby he
2 de alim. fac.
delayed the heat of his stomach in youth, eating it foremost, and slept soundly
and quietly in age, eating it last. It is better sodden then raw, especially
for weak stomachs: and if any will eat it raw, correct it with mingling a
little Tarragon and Fennel with it. The young loaft. Lettice is simply best,
but you must not wash it, for then it loses its best and most nourishing
virtue that lies upon the outmost skin: only pluck away the leaves growing
near the ground, till you come to the cabbage of the Lettice, and it is enough.
Long use of Lettice causes barrenness, cools lust, dulleth the eyesight,
weakeneth the body, and quenches natural heat in the stomach: but moderately
and duly taken of hot natures, it increases blood, seed, and milk, stays all
fluxes of nature, brings on sleep and cools the heat of Urine. The middle
and thickest part of the leaf being boiled and preserved in Syrup (as Endiff
and Succory is done beyond sea) give a great nourishment to weak persons newly
recovered of hot Agues. The Romans did eat Lettice last to provoke sleep: we
eat it first to provoke appetite. So that Martials question is fully answered:

Claudere quae coenas Lactuce solebat avorum.
Dic mihi, cur nostras incipit illa Dapes?
When elder times did feed on Lettice last,
Why is it now the first meat that we taste?
Melones and Pepones.
Melons and Pompions are not so cold nor moist as Cucumbers. Growing in a hot
ground and thoroughly ripened with hot and dry weather, they give much
nourishment, especially being baked with good flesh or sweet milk, or baked
with sweet apples butter and fennel-seed.

Melopepones.
Musk-melons are neither so moist nor cold as the ordinary sort, engendring far
better blood, and descending more speedily into the belly. They will hardly
prosper in our Country, unless they are set in a very fat, hot, and dry ground,
having the benefit of Sunshine all the year long. Jason Mainus (a most famous
Civilian) so loved a Musk-melon, that he said to one of Pe^n. sac. lib. 4.
Ticin hist.
his friends, Were I in Paradise as Adam was, and this Fruit forbidden me,
Verily, I fear me, I should leave Paradise to taste of a Musk-melon.
Nevertheless let not the pleasant smell or taste of them draw any man to eat
C^spinianus.
too much of them, for they cast Albertus secundus the Cromerus.
Emperor into a deadly flux; Sophia Queen of Poland Platina.
into a numbed Palsy, and Paulus secundus the Pope into a mortal Apoplexy. All
Melons, Pompions, and Cucumbers, are not presently to be eaten out of the
ground (though they be fully ripe) but rather a week after for with delay they
prove less moist, and also less cold. As for our great Garden Pompions and
Melons they may tarry in a warm Kitchen till toward Christmas before they be
eaten, to be more dried from their watrishness, and freed from crudities.

Napi.
Navews, especially Napus sativus, called in English Navew gentle, nourish
something less then Turnips, otherwise they are of like operation. They are
best sodden in pouldred Beef broth, or else with fat Mutton, or pouldred Pork.

Cepae.
Onions are very hot and dry; nevertheless being roasted or boiled in fat broth
or milk, they become temperate and nourishing, leaving their hot and sharp
nature in the broth or embers. The Priests of Egypt abhorred Plut. l. de Iside
and Osiride.
them of all herbs; first because (contrary to the course of other things) they
increase most when the Moon decreaseth. Secondly, because they nourish too
much, and procure lust, which religious men, of all other persons, ought to
refrain. The greater, whiter, longer, sweeter, thinner-skinned, and fuller of
juice they be (such are St. Thomas Onions) the more they nourish, and excel in
goodness: but if they be very red, dry, round, light, and sowrish, they are not
so commendable. Raw Onions be like raw Garlic, and raw Leeks (that is to say,
of great malignity, hurting both head, eyes, and stomach, enflaming blood, and
engendering both gross and corrupt humors) but sodden in milk, and then eaten
Sallad-wise with sweet oil, vinegar, and sugar (as we use them in Lent) they
are hurtful to no persons nor complexions.

Apium hortense.
Parsley nourishes most in the root; for if you choose young roots and shift
them out of two or three warm waters, they lose their medicinable faculty of
opening and cleansing, and become as sweet, yea almost as nourishing as a Carot
being sodden in fat broth made with good flesh. The like may I say of Alisander
buds Dodon. lib. 5. hist. plaut.
which is nothing but the Parsley of Alexandria) being dressed or prepared in the
like manner: otherwise they may be used (as Nettles are) in Springtime pottage
to cleanse blood, but they will give no laudable or rather no nourishment at
all.

Portulaca.
Purslane is usually eaten green in sallades, as Lettice likewise. But being
sodden in wine it is of good nourishment in the Summer time unto hot stomachs,
which are able to overcome it.

Radices Sisari Indici.
Potado-roots are now so common and known amongst us, that even the husbandman
buys them to please his wife. They nourish mightily, being either sodd, baked,
or roasted. The newest and heaviest be of best worth, engendring much flesh,
blood, and seed, but withal increasing wind and lust. Clusius thinks them to
be Indian Skirrets, and verily in taste and operation they resemble them not a
little.

Radicula sativa.
Radish roots of the Garden (for they are best) are either long and white
without, or round like a Turnep, and very black skinned, called the Italian
Radish. Most men eat them before meat to procure appetite, and help digestion.
But did they know (and yet they feel it) what rank belchings Radishes make,
how hardly they are digested, how they burn blood, and engender lice, cause
leanness, rot the teeth, weaken eyesight, and corrupt the whole mass of
nourishment, I think they would be more temperate and sparing of them; yet
were so prized amongst the Grecians, that at Apollo's feast when Turnips were
served in tinn dishes, and Beets in silver, yet Radish roots were not served
but in golden dishes. Notwithstanding, since by nature they provoke vomiting,
how can they be nourishing? unless it be to such rustical stomachs as are
offended with nothing, and to whom resty Bacon is more agreeable then young and
tender pork. Nevertheless since only the heat and biting of radish, are the
chiefest cause why it nourish little or nothing (as Galen says) no doubt if by
steeping in warm 3 de alim fac.
milk, or boiling in fat broth those qualities be removed, it would prove the
less medicinable and more nourishing.

Rapi Silvestris radix.
Rampions or wild Rapes, of nature not unlike to Turnips, eaten raw with
vinegar and salt, do not only stir up an appetite to meat, but also are meat
and nourishment of themselves. In high Germany they are much eaten, and now our
Nation knows them indifferently well; and begin to use them.

Radix Allii ursini.
Ramseys are of like virtue and power with Garlic, and are so to be prepared,
or else they give neither much nor any good nourishment.

Rapae.
Rapes or Turnips, sodden in fat broth, or roasted with butter and sugar put
into the midst thereof, nourish plentifully, being moderately taken; for if
they be undigested through excess, they stir up windiness, and many superfluous
humors in the body. The Bohemians have Turnips as red outwardly as blood,
which I did eat of in Prague, and found them a most delicate meat; yea they are
counted so restorative and dainty, that the Emperor himself nurseth them in
his Garden. Roasted Turnips are so sweet and delicate, that Mavius Curious Plin.
l. 9 c. 15.
refused much gold, offered him by the Samnites, rather then to leave his Turnep
in the Embers.

Radices Eringii marini.
Sea holly roots are of temperate heat and cold, but somewhat of too dry a
nature; yet prove they moist enough to give plentiful nourishment, after they
have been preserved in syrup or candied with ginger, increasing blood, seed,
and lust, and restoring such as by lechery have been much consumed.

Radices Sisari.
Skirret-roots were so sweet and delicate in ancient times, that Tiberius
Caesar, caused the Inhabitants of Gelduba (a certain signory upon the Rhine) to
pay him tribute at Plin. l. 19. ca. ^.
Rome in Skirret-roots; bringing them weekly thither whilst they were in season.
They have a long string or pith within them, which being taken away before they
are thorough sod, makes them eat exceeding sweet; usually they are boild till
they be tender, and then eaten cold with vinegar, oil and pepper; but if they
be roasted four or five together in a wet paper under embers (as one would
roast a Potado) or strained into tart-stuff, and so baked with sugar, butter
and rosewater, they are far more pleasant and of stronger nourishment, agreeing
with all complexions, sexes and ages, being also of a mild heat and a temperate
moisture. Did we know all the strength and virtues of them, they would be much
nourished in our Gardens, and equally esteemed with any Potado root.

Cepa Ascalonites.
Skallions are a kind of little Onions, brought first from Ascalon a Town of
Jewry; very hot and dry, yea hotter and drier by one degree then any Onions.
Cold stomachs and barren weaklings may safely eat them raw to procure appetite
and lust; but they are not nourishing to indifferent stomachs till they have
been perboild in new milk. Some correct them, by mincing them small, and
steeping them a good while in warm water, Pisanel. de. esc. and potul.
afterward they eat them with vinegar, oil and salt, after the Italian fashion.

Spinachia.
Spinache being boiled soft and then eaten with butter, small currens and sugar
heat together upon a chafing dish, gives no bad nor little nourishment to
dried bodies, and is only hurtful to such as be over-phlegmatick.

Fragulae.
Strawberries of the garden, be they white, red, or green (but the red are
best) being once come to their full ripeness in a warm Summer, and growing in a
warm ground, are to a young hot stomach both meat and medicine. Medicin to cool
his choler and excessive heat; meat by his temperate and agreeable moisture,
fit at that time of the year to be converted into blood; especially being eaten
raw with wine and sugar, or else made into tart stuff and so baked: howsoever
they be prepared, let every man take heed by Melchior Duke of Brunswick how he
eats too much of them, who is recorded to have burst a sunder at Rostock with
surfeiting upon them. Cranz. lib. 9. cap. 9. Hist. Vandal.

Radix spirae albae.
Thistle-roots (I mean of the white thistle when it first springs) are
exceeding restorative and nourishing, being sodden in white*stued broth, or
else baked in Tarts, or in Pies like Artichoks: few men would think so good
meat to lie hidden in so base and abject an herb, had not trial and cookery
found out the virtue of it.

Rapae rotunde.
Turnips (in commendation whereof Moschio the Grecian wrote a large volumn) are
nothing but round Rapes, whereof heretofore we writ in this Chapter. Plin. l. 9
ca. 15.


Nastureia aquatica.
Watercresses and Town-cresses nourish raw and cold stomachs very well: but
for hot or indifferent stomachs they are of a contrary nature. Xenophon says,
that the 1 Cyropaed.
Persians children going to School, carry nothing with them to eat and drink,
but Cresses in the one hand and Bread in the other, and an earthen cruse at
their girdle to take up water in: whereby we may perceive that they agree well
with moist natures, and such as are accustomed to drink water: Otherwise no
doubt they nourish nothing, but rather over heat and burn the blood.

As for Anise, Blites, Blood-wort, Broom-buds, Gapars, Calamint, Clary, Dill,
Fennel, Galangal, Hisope, Marigolds, Mustard Seed, Mints, Nettles, Orache,
Patience, Primroses, Rosemary, Saffron, Sage, Samphire, Savory, Tamarisk,
Tansy, Tarragon, Time, Violets and Wormwood: howsoever they are used sometimes
in broths, pottage, farrings, sawces, salads and tansies; yet no nourishment is
gotten by them, or at the least so little, that they need not, nor ought not to
be counted amongst nourishments.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of such Fruits of the Field, as are nourishing.
THe chief fruits of the field are Wheat, Rye, Rice, Barley, Oats, Beans,
Chiches, Pease and Lentils.

Triticum.
Wheat is divided into diverse kinds by Pliny, Columella, Dodonaeus, Pena and
Lobelius; it shall be sufficient for us to describe the sorts of this Country,
which are especially two: The one red called Robus by Columella, and the other
very white and light called Siligo, whereof is made our purest manchet. Being
made into Furmity and sodden with milk and sugar, or artificially made into
bread; Wheat nourishes exceeding much Dios. l. 2. c. 78. Gal. 1. de alim.
fac. cap. 2.
and strongly: the hardest, thickest, heaviest, cleanest, brightest and growing
in a fat soil, is ever to be chosen; for such Wheat (in Dioscorides and Galens
judgment) is most nourishing.

Secale.
Rye seems to be nothing but a wild kind of wheat, meet for Laborers,
Servants and Workmen, but heavy of digestion to indifferent stomachs.

Oriza.
Rice is a most strong and restorative meat, discommendable only in that it is
over-binding; very wholesome pottage is made thereof with new milk, sugar,
cinnamon, mace and nutmegs: whose astringency if any man fear, let him soke the
Rice one night before in sweet Whey, and afterward boil it in new milk with
sugar, butter, cloves and nutmegs, leaving out cinnamon and mace. Thus shall the
body be nourished, costiveness prevented, and nature much strengthened and
increased.

Hordeum.
Barley used any way in bread, drink or broth, is ever lib. de alim. fac. cap. 9.
cooling (says Galen) and engenders but a thin and weak juice. Before we use
it in broths or Ptisan, it should be clean hulld, and washed in many waters.
The decoction of Barley in chicken-broth, strained with a few blauncht almonds,
and sweetened with sugar, and rosewater, is a very covenient meat for sound men,
but more for them which are sick and abhor flesh.

lib. 6. cap. 20. de rer. var.
Cardan says that Galen makes mention of a kind of Barley in Greece* growing
without a husk, and hulld by nature; which place he never cites, because he
was mistaken; for through all Galen I could never find any such thing, though
of purpose I searched for it very diligently. The best Barley is the biggest and
yellowest without, and fullest, closest and heaviest within; it is never to be
used in meat till it be half a year old, because lying causes it to ripen
better, and to be also far less windy. Being made into Malt by a sweet fire and
good cunning, it is the foundation of our English wine, which being as well
made as it is at Not^ingam, proves meat drink and cloth to the poorer sort.
Parched Barley or Malt is hot and dry, but otherwise it is temperately cooling
and less drying. That Wheat and Rye is far Plut. in. Not. Quest
more nourishing then Barley. Plutarch would thence prove, because they are half
a year longer in the earth, and are of a more thick, sappy, and firm substance.
But Rice (being counted and called by Tragus German Barley) disarmeth that
reason, which is not sowed till March and yet is of as great or rather greater
nourishment.

Avenae.
1 de alim. fac. cap. 14.
Oats termed by Galen the Asses and Horses provender, are of the like nature
with Barley, but more astringent, especially being old and thorough dry. Had
Galen seen the Oaten cakes of the North; the Janocks of Lancashire, and the
Grues of Cheshire, he would have confessed that Oats and Oatmeal are not only
meat for beasts* but also for tall, fair and strong men and women of all
callings and complexions: but we pardon the Grecians delicacy, or else ascribe
it to the badness of their soil, which could bring forth* no Oats fit for
nourishment. Choose the largest, heaviest, sweetest, fullest and blackest to
make your Oatmeal groats of, for they are least windy and most nourishing.

Fabae.
Beans were first a field fruit, howsoever (to make them more sappy) they have
lately been set and kept in gardens. Pythagoras forbad his Scholars to eat of
them (especially coming once to be great and black-taild) because they hinder
sleep and procure watchfulness (for which cause they were given to Judges as
they sat down in judgment) or else in sleep cause fearful and Suidas.
troublesome dreams, as you may read in Tullius second book of Divination;
wherefore howsoever Camatherus (Immanuel Commenaeus his Secretary) ventured for
Nicetas l. 3. de reb. Immanuel.
them, or men now affect them in these days; assuredly they are a very hurtful
meat, unless they be eaten very young, and sod in fat broth, and afterward
(being freed of their husk) be eaten in the beginning or midst of meal,
buttered thoroughly and sufficiently sprinkled with gross pepper and salt; then
will they nourish much, and too too much increase seed to lusty wantons.

Ciceres.
Chiches of England are very hard and unwholesome; but in Italy and France
there is a kind of red Chich, yielding a sweet, fine and nourishing flour:
whereof thick pap or pottage being made with sugar, you shall hardly find any
grain or pulse of comparable nourishment; as my most honorable good Lord, the
Lord Willoughby of Eresby, in his most dangerous consumption did well testify.
Perhaps this broth was that, for a mess whereof Esau sold his birthright; for
no pulse but this makes a red pottage.

Pisa.
Pease are not fully so windy as Beans, and also of better nourishment, because
they are less abstersive. French-pease, Hasty pease, and Gray-pease, be the
tenderest and sweetest of all others; for the common field-pease or green-pease
is too hard of digestion for indifferent stomachs. Take the youngest, and sees
them thoroughly, butter them plentifully, and season them well with salt and
pepper; so will they prove a light meat, and give convenient nourishment in
Summer time.

Lentes.
Lentiles were so prized in Athenaeus time, that one wrote a whole treatise in
their commendation; and Diogenes Athe. l. 4. c. 18.
commended them above all meats to his Scholars, because they have a peculiar
virtue to quicken the wit. Let us (for shame) not discontinue any longer this
wholesome nourishment, but rather strive to find out some preparation, whereby
they may be restored to their former or greater goodness.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Variety, Excellency, Making, and true use of Bread*
The dignity and necessity of Bread.
BRead is a food so necessary to the life of man, that whereas many meats be
loathed naturally, of some persons, yet we never saw, read, nor heard of any
man that naturally hated bread. The reasons whereof I take to be these. First
because it is the staff of life, without which all other meats would either
quickly putrify in our stomachs, or sooner pass thorough them then they
should, whereupon crudities, belly-worms and fluxes do arise to such children
or persons, as either eat none or too little Bread.

Again, Neither flesh, fruit nor fish are good at all seasons, for all
complexions, for all times, for all constitutions and ages of men; but Bread is
never out of season, disagreeing with no sickness, age, or complexion, and
therefore truly called the companion of life. No child so young but he has
Bread, or the matter of Bread in his pap: no man so weak, but he eats it in his
broth, or sucks it out of his drink. It neither enflameth the choleric, nor
cools the phlegmatic, nor over-moistneth the sanguin, nor dries the
melancholic.

Plut. Symp. 7.
Furthermore it is to be admired (says Plutarch) that Bread does of all other
things best nourish and strengthen both man and beast; insomuch that with a
little Bread they are enabled for a whole days journey, when with twice as
much meat they would have fainted. Wherefore it was not a small threatening,
when God said he would break the staff of bread; without which our meat gives
no strength (as I said before) but either corrupts in the stomach, or is
converted to slimy crudities; we may also remember, that of all compound meats
it is the first of all mentioned in the Scripture, namely in the third of
Genesis; where God threatens Adam that in the sweat of his brows he should
eat his bread. Again in the Lords Prayer we ask for all bodily nourishment in
the name of Bread, because Bread may be justly called the meat of meats, as
without whom there is no good nor substantial nourishment. The Italians have a
Proverb, That all troubles are easy with bread, and no pleasure pleasant
without Bread. Signifying thereby, our lives to consist more in Bread, then in
any other meat whatsoever,

To conclude, when Christ would describe himself unto us whilst he lived, and
leave a memorial unto us of himself after death: his wisdom found no
Hieroglyphical character wherein better to express himself (the only nourisher
and feeder of all mankind) then by the sight, taking and eating of Bread: so
that I may boldly prefer it above all nourishment, being duly and rightly
used, as agreeing with all times, ages, and constitutions of men, either sick
or sound; which cannot be verified of any one nourishment besides.

Upon which and some other things, arose these questions and sayings,

Whether eating of crusts of Bread, and sinews of flesh, make a man strong?

Whether Ashes be Physic, and moldy Bread clear the eyesight?

Money and Bread never brought plague.

Bread and Cheese be the two targets against death.

The Authors and Inventers of Bread.
Who was the first Author or Inventer of making Bread, I will not take upon me
to determine. Pliny ascribes lib. 7. cap. 56.
it to Ceres; who seeing what hurt came to men by eating of Acorns, devised a
means how to pound Corn into Meal, and then to work, form and bake it into
loaves and cakes. Pausanias ascribes it to in* Ar^ad.
Arcas, Jupiter, and Calistoes son. But without all question Adam knew it
first, whosoever was the first that made it; yea since it is the strengthner of
life, no doubt as he and his son knew how to sow Corn, so they were not
ignorant or unpractised in the chief use thereof.

The differences of Bread.
Concerning the differences of Bread, some are taken from the meats we eat; for
the Romans had panem Ostrearium, which they only did eat with Oisters. They
Plin. l. 18. c. 11.
had also their dainty Bread, made with honey, spice and flour: they had also a
hasty cake, called panis speuticus learned first in Greece; likewise their
bread differed in baking, some being baked upon the hearth, others broild it
upon gridirons, others fried it like pancakes, others baked it in ovens, others
sod it in seam like fritters; others boild it in water like cimnels, being
called panes aquatici; which the Parthians taught them.

But the chief differences are in the variety of matter, whereof they consist;
and the variety of goodness, which I will declare in order. Some Countries
(where Corn was either never sown at all, or being sowed cannot prosper) make
bread of such things made into meal as their soil yields. The Oritae, Green
landers and Plin. i. 7. cap. 2. Diod. lib. 3. c. 3. Herodot. li. 2.
North-Icelanders make it of dried fish, which being thorough dried in the Sun,
they beat it first with hammers, then pound it with pestils, and form cakes
with water, which they tossed at their fires, made only of great fishes bones
(for they have no wood) and eat it instead of Bread; yet live they well, and
look well, and enjoy pleasures (says Hector Boethius in his Scottish History)
abounding in children, strength and contentment, though not in wealth. The
Brasilians make Bread of the root of a herb ressembling Purcelane, and of the
barks of 2. lib. de gest. Emanuel.
trees as Osorius writes; whom I may believe, because I have eaten of the same
Bread, brought home by Sir Francis Drake. The most part of Egyptians make
Herodot. li. 2.
Bread of Lotus seed, resembling poppy: but they Diod. lib. 3. c. 3
which dwell by the River Astupas made it of dried roots beaten to powder, which
they formed like a Tilestone, and baked it hard in the Sun. Like Bread made the
Plin. l. 2. c. 43.
Thracians of Tribulus or water-nut roots, and the Arabians of Dates. But the
best is made of Grain, which the Romans for 600 years after their City was
built, had not yet learned: and was not afterward publicly Alex. ab* Alex.
lib 3. c. 11. ex. Plinio.

Suet. in vita. Iul. Cae.


practiced by bakers, till the Persian wars. As for wheaten bread it was so
rare in Caesar's time, that none knew how to make it save his own Baker. And
again white manchet was so hard to come by in the Grecian Luc. in dial. de
merc. cond
Courts, that Lucian protested a man could never get enough of it, no not in his
dream. Spiced Bread was more ancient; for Diogines loved it above all meats,
Laer. in. vita. Diog.
and Hippocrates and Plato make mention of it. Brown-bread was used in
Philoxenus his age and long before; who having eaten up all the White-bread at
the Sophists Athen. lib. 1. Dionyss 3.
table, one set him a great brown-loaf on the table, on whom he bestowed this
jest: Ho la! not too much, not too much good fellow, least it be night too
soon. Thus much of the ancient making of Bread; now let us consider.

The usual mattter of Bread.
First, whereof Bread is made in our days, Secondly how it is made, Thirdly
when, and in what order, Fourthly in what quantity it is to be eaten.

Touching the first: Bread is usually made of Rye, Barley, Oats, Missellin or
pure Wheat* Rye-bread is Gal. de ali. fac. Isaac. in partic. Diaet.
cold and of hard concoction, breeding wind and gripings in the belly,
engendring gross humors, being as unwholesome for indifferent stomachs, as it
agrees with strong bodies and labourious persons; yet opens it, and cures
the hemorrhoids.

Averrh. 5. Col. Psel. de. pr. and caen. ^at.
Barly*Bread is little or nothing better, being tough and heavy of digestion,
choking the small veins, engendring crudities, and stuffing the stomach.

Oaten-bread is very light being well made, more scowring then nourishing if
the Oat-meal be new, and too much binding if it be old. Howbeit Oats in Greece
are recorded to be so temperate, that they neither stir nor stay the belly.

Gal. 1. de. la. fa.
Misslin or Munckcorn-bread, made of Rye and Wheat together, is esteemed
better or worse, accordingly as it is mingled more with this or that grain.

But of all other Wheaten-bread is generally the best for all stomachs, yet of
so stopping a nature* if it be too fine, because it is of best temper, and
agrees with all natures and complexions

Things to be observed in the well making of Bread.
Concerning the well making whereof, we must have great choice and care. 1. Of
the Wheat it self. 2. Of the Meal. 3. Of the Water. 4. Of the Salt. 5. Of the
Leven. 6. Of the Dough or Past. 7. Of the Moulding. 8. Of the Oven. 9. Of the
baking. All which circumstances I most willingly prosecute to the full, because
as Bread is the best nourishment of all other, being well made, so is it simply
the worst being marred in the ill handling.

1. Concerning the Wheat, it must be thorough ripe ere it is gathered, two
months old ere it be thrashed, and a month or two old after that (at the least)
ere it be grinded. Choose ever the yellowest without, and smoothest, growing in
a hot and fat soil, hard, white and full within, clean thrasht and winowed,
then clean washed and dried, afterward grossly grinded (for that makes the best
flour) in a Mill wherein the grind-stones are of French Marble, or some other
close or hard stone.

2. The Meal must neither be so finely grinded (as I said) least the bran
mingle with it, nor too grossly, least you lose much flour, but moderately
gross, that the Bran may be easily separated, and the fine Flour not hardly
boulted. You must not presently mould up your meal after grinding, lest it
prove too hot; nor keep it too long lest it prove fusty and breed worms, or be
otherwise tainted with long lying. Likewise though the best manchet (called
panis Siligineus of Pliny) be made of the finest flour* passed through a very
fine boulter, yet that Bread which is made of courser Meal (called (...) of the
Grecians) is of lighter digestion and of stronger nourishment.

3. The Water must be pure, from a clear River or Spring: not too hot least the
Dough cling, nor too cold least it crumble, but lukewarm.

4. The Salt must be very white, finely beaten, not too much nor too little,
but to give an indifferent seasoning.

5. The Leaven must be made of pure Wheat, it must not be too old least it
prove too sour, nor too new least it work to no purpose, nor too much in
quantity, least the Bread receive not a digesting but a fretting quality. Where
by the way note, that loaves made of pure Wheaten-meal require both more leaven
and more laboring, and more baking, then either course cheat, or then Bread
mingled of meal and grudgins. In England our finest Manchet is made without
Leaven, which makes Cheat Bread to be the lighter of both, and also the more
wholesome; for unleavened Bread is good for no man.

Gal. 1. de. alim. fac. cap. 2.
6. The Dough of white Bread must be thoroughly wrought, and the manner of
moulding must be first with strong kneading, then with rouling to and fro, and
last of all with wheeling or turning it round about, that it may sit the
closer; afterward cut it slightly in the midst round about, and give it a slit
or two thorough from the top to the bottom with a small knife, to give a vent
every way to the inward moisture whilst it is in baking.

7. The Loaves should neither be too great nor too little: for as little Loaves
nourish least, so if the Loaves be too great, the Bread is scarce thoroughly
baked in the midst: wherefore the Francklins Bread of England is counted most
nourishing, being of a middle sise, between Gentlemen's Roules or little
Manchets, and the great Loaves used in Yeomens houses.

8. The Oven must be proportionable to the quantity of Bread, heated every
where alike, and by degrees; not too hot at the first, lest the outside be
burnt and the inside clammy; nor too cold, lest the Bread prove sad and heavy
in our stomachs.

9. Last of all Concerning the baking, it must not stay too long in the Oven,
least it prove crusty, dry and cholerique; nor too little a while, for fear it
be clammy and of ill nourishment, fitter to cram Capons and Poultry, then to be
given to sick or sound men.

Bread being thus made, strengthens the stomach, and carries truly with it
the staff of nourishment. Jupiters Priests (called Flamines Diales) were
forbidden to eat either Meal or Leaven by themselves, yet might they eat lib.
Quae. Romans
of leavened Bread and none other. The reason whereof is alleged by Plutarch.
They might eat no Meal, because it is an imperfect and raw nourishment; being
neither Wheat which it was, nor Bread which it should be; for Meal has lost
(which it had) the form of Grain, and wants (which it is to have) the form of
Bread. They might eat no Leaven, because Leaven is the Mother and Daughter of
corruption, souring all if it be too much, and distasting all if it be too
little: but when a just proportion is kept betwixt them both, Leaven corrects
the Meals imperfection, and Meal resists Leavens corruption, making together
a well rellished mass (called Bread) which is justly termed the staff of life.

Bread* of a day, Wine of a year, Meal of a month.
As for Bunns made with Eggs and Spices, as also for Sugar-cakes, Wafers,
Simnels and Cracknels, and all other kind of delicious stuff, wherein no Leaven
comes; I will not deny them a medicinable use for some bodies, but if they be
usually and much eaten, they rather help to corrupt then to nourish our bodies.

Of the age of Bread.
Touching the age of Bread, As the Egyptians Bread made of Lotus seed is never
either good or light till it be Plin li. 2. c. 20.
hot; so contrariwise all Bread made of Grain is never good till it be fully
cold. Hot Bread is exceeding dangerous Gal. 1. de al. sa.
swimming in the stomach procuring thirst, most Avic. can. 2.
hardly digesting, and filling the body full of wind. Neither yet must it be too
old and dry, for then it nourishes nothing, dries up the body, increases
costiffness, Haly abbas 5. Theor.
and very hardly passes from out the stomach.

Of the use of Bread.
Last of all, Concerning the use of Bread, it consists in the quality,
quantity, and timely taking of it. The inmost crumbs of bread are most
nourishing, and fittest for hot and choleric persons; contrariwise the crumbs
next the crust are fittest for phlegmatic dispositions, unto whom sometimes we
allow the crust it self, or else the crumbs tosted at the fire. Leavened Bread
is also most convenient for weak stomachs, because it is soonest digested; but
if it be too much Leavened, it anoieth them as much in gripings of the belly
and spleen-swellings.

It is questioned by some, Whether Children should eat much Bread without Meat,
aut contra.

Now Bread (so it be not newer then one day) is most nourshing, but old Bread
(as I said before) is most drying.

Concerning the quantity of Bread, we are to understand: that as Drink is
necessary to hasten meat out of the stomach when it is concocted, so Bread is
as needful to hang it up, and stay it in the stomach till it be concocted. For
if we eat flesh, fish or fruit without Bread, it will either return upward (as
it fares in Dogs) or beget crudities and worms (as it happens to greedy
Children) or turn to most cruel fluxes, as it falls out in the Time of
Vintage, and at the gathering of Fruit, when many Grapes, or Apples, or Plums
be eaten without Bread.

Nevertheless overmuch Bread is as hurtful, yea the surfeiting of it is more
dangerous then of any meat. For flesh* fruit or fish, being immoderately taken,
are quickly corrupted into a thin substance, which nature may easily avoid; but
the surfeit of Bread is incorrigible, remaining so dry, hard, and tough in the
stomach, that it will neither be voided upward, nor downward without great
difficulty, resisting the operation of any medicine, stopping the veins, and
dawbing as it were the bowels (otherwise sensible enough, and ready to be
stirred with the least Physic) with a slimy and viscous mortar. Eat therefore
no more then to make a convenient mixture of meat and drink; for as there must
be a sufficient quantity of sand to combine lime and water together; not too
little (lest the mortar be too liquid) nor too much (lest it be tough) but a
certain proportion to be aimed at by the Plaisterer: so a due quantity of Bread
makes a perfect mass of nourishment, which else being too liquid would turn to
crudities by passing over-timely into the guts, or being too thick would either
putrify at length, or at the least wax burdensome to the stomach and choke the
veins. Note also this, that the more liquid and moist your meats are, so much
the more Bread is required: but the more dry and solid they are, the more Drink
is to be taken and the less Bread.

How and when Bread is to be eaten.
Last of all, to speak somewhat of the time, and order to be observed in the
eating of Bread: Howsoever Antoninus that holy Emperor of Rome, did make his
breakfast only of dry Bread, and then presented himself Sueton. in Vita Anton.
Pli.
to all suitors till dinner time: we must conceive, first that he was Rhumatick
through his night watchings and great studying. Secondly, that he was old and
subject to the Dropsy: otherwise he was foolish to prescribe himself that
Diet, or his Physicians mad that persuaded him to it. For as first lime, and
then sand are mingled with water, so first Meat, then Bread should be eaten
together, and afterward drink should be poured Cael l 27 c. 2^. antiq. lect.
on like water to mingle them both. Socrates said truly, that some fools do use
Bread as Meat, and some use Meat as Bread. For some will break their fast with
Bread, which commonly is dangerous: others will eat at Dinner a little Meat and
too much Bread, which is almost as unwholesome: others will end their Meals
with drink and meat, when reason and experience shows, that the upper mouth
of our stomach is best closed up with Bread and dryness; in the sealing and
closing up whereof perfectness of concoction does greatly consist.

Cael. lib. 9 cap. 13. A. L.
Cyrus the greater, being asked daily by his Stuard, what he should provide for
his Supper, never gave him other answer then this, Only Bread: showing us
thereby, that as our breakfast must be of the moistest meats, and our Dinners
moderately mingled with dryness and moisture; so our Suppers should be either
only of of Bread, or at the most of meats as dry as Bread; especially in these
Islands and moist Countries, so subject to rhumes and superfluous moistures.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Salt, Sugar, and Spice.
Plut. 4. Sympos quaest. 4.
THere was a sect of Philosophers called Elpistici, commending Hope so highly
above all virtues, that they termed it the sauce of life; as without which our
life were either none at all, or else very loathsome tedious and unsavory. May I
not in like manner say the like of Hom. 1. Iliad. Plat. in Timae*
Salt* to which Homer gives the title of Divinity, and Plato calls it
Jupiters Minion? for tell me to what meat (be it flesh, fish or fruit) or to
what broth Salt is not required, either to preserve season or relish the same?
Nay bread the very staff and strength of our sustenance, is it not unwholesom,
heavy and untoothsom some without Salt? Wherefore in the same Temple Neptune
and Ceres ever stood together, because no Grain is good unsalted, be it never
so well spiced or sugared, or otherwise artificially handled. Besides this, the
famous Warriors in old time, accustomed to hard and sparing Diet, howsoever
voluntarily they eschewed flesh and fish as meats too delicate for Soldiers
stomachs, living only upon bread, onions, leeks, garlic, town-cresses and
roots, yet they did eat Salt with every thing, as without the which nothing was
deemed wholesome. And truly what is flesh but a piece of carrion and an
unsavory carcass, till Salt quickens graces and preserves it, infusing thorough
out it (as it were) another soul? what is fish but an unrellished froth of the
water, before Salt corrects the flashiness thereof, and adds firmness? yea
milk, cheese, butter, eggs, tree-fruit, garden fruit, field-fruit, finally all
things ordained and given for nourishment, are either altogether unwholesome
without Salt, or at the least not so wholesome as otherwise they would be.

Plutarch moves a question in his Natural Disputations, lib. Quaest. not*
Quaest. 5.
why Salt should be so much esteemed, when beasts and fruits give a relish of
others tastes, but none of Salt? For many meats are fatty of themselves, Olives
are bitterish, and many fruits are sweet, many sour, diverse astringent, some
sharp, and some harsh; but none are salt of their own nature: what should be
gathered of this? that the use of salt is unnatural or unwholesome? nothing
less. It is enough for nature to give us meat, and elsewhere to give us
wherewith to season them. And truly since Salt may either be found or made in
all Countries, what needed fruit, flesh, or fish to have that taste within
them, which out wardly was to be had at man's pleasure.

Herot. lib. 2.
Now if any shall object unto me the Egyptian Priests, abstaining wholly from
Salt (even in their bread and eggs) because it engendereth heat and stirs up
lust: Or Apollonius (Herophilus his Scholar) who by his Physicians Plut. in qu.
not.
counsel abstained wholly from any thing wherein Salt was, because he was very
lean, and grew to be exceeding fat by eating hony-sops and sugared Panadoes: I
will answer them many ways, and perhaps sufficiently.

First, that long custom is a second nature, and that it had been dangerous
for the Egyptian Priests to have eaten Salt, which even from their infancy they
never tasted.

Again, whereas it was said, that they abstained from it for fear of lust, no
doubt they did wisely in it; for of all other things it is very effectual to
stir up Venus, whom Poets fain therefore to have been breed in the Salt Sea.
And experience teaches, that Mice lying in Hoyes laden from Rochel with Salt,
breed thrice faster there, then if they were laden with other Merchandise.
Huntsmen likewise and Shepherds seeing a slowness of lust in their Dogs and
Cattle, feed them with Salt meats to hasten coupling; and what makes Doves and
Goats so lusty and lacivious, but that they desire to feed upon salt things?
Finally remember, that lechery (in Latin) is not idly, or at adventure termed
Salaritas, Saltishness; for every man knows that the salter our humors be, the
more prone and inclinable we are to lechery: As manifestly appears in Lazars,
whose blood being over salt, causes a continual tickling and desire of venery,
though for want of good nourishment they perform little.

Wherefore whosoever coveteth to be freed of that desire with the Egyptian
Priests (which is an unnatural thing to covet) let them altogether abstain
from Salt in every thing; but look how much they gain in impotency that way, so
much they lose of health another way. For as sheep feeding in salt Marshes
never dye of the rot and be never barren, but contrariwise are rotted as well
as fatted in fresh pastures: so likewise whosoever moderately uses Salt shall
be freed of putrefaction and stoppings, and live long in health (no disorder
being elsewhere committed) when they which wholly abstain from it both in bread
and meat, shall fall into many diseases and grievous accidents, as did
Apollonius himself for all his fatness; and as it happened to Dr. Penny, who
after he had abstained certain years from Salt, fell into diverse stoppings,
cruel vomitings, intolerable headache and strange migrams, whereby his memory
and all inward and outward senses were much weakened.

Remember here, That I said whosoever moderately uses Salt; for as wholly to
refuse it causes many inconveniences, so to abuse the same in excess is no
less dangerous, engendring choler, drying up natural moisture, enflaming blood,
stopping the veins, hardening the stone, gathering together viscous and crude
humors, making sharpness of urine, consuming the flesh and fat of our bodies,
breeding salacity and the colt evil, bringing finally upon us scabs, itch,
skurfe, cankers, gangrena's and foul leprousies. They which are cold, fat,
watrish and phlegmatic, may feed more plentifully on salt and salt-meats then
other persons: but choleric and melancholic complexions must use it more
sparingly, and sanguineans must take no more of it, then lightly to relish
their unsavory meat.

Our Wiches in Cheshire afford so good Salt (through God's singular Providence
and mercy toward us) that I am eased of a great labor in showing the
differences of salt. Only thus much I leave to be noted, that Bay Salt is best
to make brine of, but our white salt is fittest to be eaten at table. Finally
since not only we in England, but also all other Nations, yea the old Romans
and Grecians (as Pliny and Alexander remember) placed Salt ever first at the
Table, and took it last away (insinuating thereby the necessary use thereof
with all kinds of meats) let us conclude with the Scholars of Salern, in good
rhyme and better reason. Sal primo debet poni, non primo reponi,
Omnis mensa male ponitur absque sale.


Here I might speak of Sal Sacerdotale Aetii, called the Priests Salt, mingled
with many sweet herbs and spices to preserve meats: as also of Chemical Salts
drawn from wormwood, cinnamon, cloves, guajacum and other infinite simples; but
since they are rather medicinable then belonging to ordinary diet, I have reason
to omit them.

Now if any will mervail, why I should write thus much in the commendation of
Salt, when by general consent of Writers it is not nourishing: I answer, That
it is, and that not only accidentally, in making our meat more gracious to the
stomach, hindering putrefaction, and drying up superfluous humors; but also
essentially in it self, being taken in his just and due proportion. For our
bodies has and should have humors of all tastes; yea the firmest element of
our body is nothing but Salt it self, and so termed by the best (though the
newest) Philosophers; which will hardly be preserved without eating of Salt.

Hence comes it that Soldiers, Sea*men and Country-labourers, accustomed to
feed usually upon hanged* Beef, Salt-bacon, and salt fish, have a more firm
flesh and greater strength then ordinary Citizens and dainty Gentlemen. And if
Salt-meats (not over-salted) be generally held to give the best nourishment,
why should we deny that Salt nourishes?

A Woman eating much salt when she is with Child, brings forth a Child
without Nails.

Salt in pottage is forbidden in hot agues.

They which eat much Salt and Vinegar have burnt livers, and live unsound.

Of Sugar.
Sugar or Suchar is but a sweet, or (as the Ancients term it) an Indian Salt.
The best Sugar is made of the tears or liquor of Sugar canes, replenished so
with juice that they crack again. Other sorts are made of the Canes themselves
finely cut, and boiled so long in water, till all their gumminess gather
together at the bottom, as Salt does in Cheshire at Nantwich. The best Sugar
is hard, solid, light, exceeding white and sweet, glistring like snow, close
and not spungy, melting (as salt does) very speedily in any liquor. Such comes
from Madera in little loaves, of three or four pound weight apeece: from whence
also we have a courser sort of Sugarloves, weighing seven, eight, nine or ten
pounds apeece, not fully so good for candying fruits, but better for syrups and
Kitchen uses.

Barbary and Canary Sugar is next to that, containing twelve, sixteen and
seventeen l. weight in a loaf. But your common and course Sugar (called
commonly St. Omers Sugar) is white without, and brown within, of a most gluish
substance, altogether unfit for candying or preserving, but serving well enough
for common syrups and seasoning of meat.

Of the powder of which Sugar our cunning Refiners make such white and glorious
Sugar in show, that albeit it be neither sweet, light nor kindly, yet they feel
an unspeakable sweetness by that art, or rather trade, or rather mystery, or
rather (if I am not mistaken) flat couzenage and apparent knavery.

Concerning the uses of this worthy and sweet Salt; they are many and good. For
whereas honey is hurtful to choleric complexions, Sugar is incommodious or
hurtful unto none; yea it is so mild and temperate, that lib. 8. cap. 4. meth.
med.
Galen does not disallow it to be given in agues. Furthermore it nourishes
very plentifully, yea it makes many things to become exceeding good meat (by
conditing, preserving and conserving) as Citrons, Limons, Orenges, Nutmegs,
Ginger and such like, which of their own nature do rather hinder nourishment
and procure leanness. Besides this, it delights the stomach, pleases the
blood and liver, cleanses the breast, restores the lungs (especially being
candied) takes away hoarseness, and asswageth drought in all agues, giving
also no small ease to enflamed kidneys, and to bladders molested with sharpness
of urine.

Sugar keeps Children from engendring of worms, but being engendered, makes
them stir.

It were infinite to rehearse the necessary use of it in making of good gellies,
cullises, mortesses, white-broths, and restorative pies and mixtures: which
since cooks do and ought chiefly to practice, I will not further usurp upon
their province; only say, Sugar never marred sauce.

Of Spices.
Spices are properly called such sweet and odoriferous simples, as are taken
from trees, shrubs, herbs, or plants; whereof some are growing in England or
home* bred, others fetched from far Countries, called Outlandish spices.

Homebred spices are these, Aniseed, Dill, Fennel-seed, Alcost, Commin,
Carawayes, Clary, Corianders, dried Mints, dried Nep, dried Origanum,
Parsly-seed, dried Gilly-flowers, roots of Galinga and Orris, dried Primroses*
Pennirial, Rosemary, Saffron, Sage, Oak of Jerusalem Bay berries,
Iuniper-berries, Sothernwood, Tansie, Tamarisk, Time, dried Wal-flowers,
Violets, Varvein, Wintersavory, Wormwood, and such like.

Outlandish Spices are these chiefly, Lignum Aloes, Foleum Indicum, Cinnamon,
Ginger, Mace, Cloves, Pepper, Nutmegs, Pills of Citrons, Limons and Orenges,
Grains, Cubebs, and Saunders, etc. which being no nourishment of themselves,
and serving only to Physic uses, I rather ought to send you to the Herbals of
Lobelius, Dodonaeus, Clusius, Turner, and Bauhinus, (where at large you may
hear of their virtues) then to stand here upon them any longer in my Treatise
of nourishments. Wherefore let it be sufficient for me to have set down their
temperatures in the fifth Chapter of this Treatise; and now let me proceed to
discourse of Sawces: wherein (as occasion serves) I will somewhat enlarge my
Treatise of Spices, which I might have handled in this Chapter.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the necessary use and abuse of Sawces, and whereon they consist.
Sym. ^. quae. 4.
PLutarch bouldly affirms that the Ancients knew never any sawces but two,
Hungar and Salt: calling that the night, and this the light of sawces: for as
in the night all colors be alike, so nothing is unsavory to a hungry stomach:
and as the light discerns colors, so salt shows the variety and excellency
of all tastes. Proof hereof we have usually at our Tables, where having tasted
of vinegar or sour fruit, or eaten much sweet meats* the best wine is
presently distasted after it, and the goodness thereof undiscerned till a
little salt be eaten.

Concerning Hunger, I yield unto Plutarch, for without that even salt and
vinegar and every thing is unsavory, according as it is written of the Cooks of
Athens; Cael. lib. 13. cap 25. A. L.
who vaunting by their diverse pickles, sawces, pouders and mixtures to procure
any man an appetite, yet in the end they found it true, that the best sauce is
loathsome without hunger. Dionisius also supping once (after Plut. in Coron.
Hunting) with the Lacedaemonians, most highly extolled their black-broth;
afterward eating of the same another time, without exercise premised, he did
as deeply dispraise it.

lib. de opt. civ.
The like we read of Ptolomy in Platina, and of Socrates in Tullies Tusculanes,
who walked ever before Meat a mile or two, to buy him this sauce of hunger
Anacharsis Plut. de sal. vict rat.
was wont to say, that dry ground is the best Bed, a skin hardened with exercise
the best garment, and natural hunger the best sauce: which addition of this
word natural clears the question; for overmuch hunger tastes nothing better
then overmuch satiety, the one loathing good things because of fullness, the
other commending bad things because of emptiness.

As for Salt, the second sauce of the Ancients, I have already enough commended
it in the former Chapter: nevertheless it is not sufficient, nay it is not
convenient for all stomachs. For even old times afforded two sawces, Salt and
Vinegar, the one for hot stomachs, the other for cold, knowing well enough that
appetites are not procured in all men alike, because want of appetite arises
from diverse fountains.

lib. de tuen. san
Plutarch raileth mightily against sawces and seasonnings, avouching them to be
needless to healthful persons, and unprofitable to the sick, because they never
eat but when they are hungry, and these ought not to be made hungry, lest they
oppress nature by eating too much. But I deny both his arguments; for as many
sound men abhor diverse things in their health roasted, which they love sodden;
so likewise they love some things seasoned after one fashion, which seasoned or
sawced after another fashion they cannot abide, no though they be urged unto it
by great hunger.

As for them that be sick, whosoever dreameth, that no sick man should be
allured to meat by delightful and pleasant sawces, seems as froward and
fantastical as he that would never whet his Knife. And tell me I pray you, why
has nature brought forth such variety of herbs, roots, fruits, spices and
juices fit for nothing but sawces, but that by them the sound should be
refreshed, and the sick men allured to feed upon meat? for whom an overstraite
abstinence is as dangerous, as fullness and satiety is inconvenient.

All which I write, not to tickle the Epicures of our age, who to the further
craming of their filthy corpse, make curious sawces for every meat; or to force
appetite daily where no exercise is used: for as Morris-dancers at Burials make
no sport, but rather give cause of further lamenting; so appetites continually
forced weaken a diseased stomach, either making men for a time to eat more then
they should, or else afterward bereaving them of all appetite. Socrates
compared the Plut* de san. tu.
overcurious seasoning of meat, and these Epicurean sawce-makers to common
Courtisans curiously painted and sumptuously adorned, before they entertain
their lovers; whereby they stir up new lust in withered stocks, and make even
the gray headed spend and consume themselves. Even so (says he) these new
found sawces, what are they but Whores to edge our appetite, making us to feast
when we should fast, or at least to feed more then nature wills? Also he
resembles them to tickling under the sides and armpits, which causes not a
true and hearty, but rather a convulsive and hurtful laughter, doing no more
good to pensive persons, then hard scratching is profitable to a scald head,
wherein yet it delights to his own hurt.

Plut. de sal. Diaet.
There is a notable Hystory written of Alexander and Queen Ada, who purposing
to present the Conqueror with her best jewels, sent him two of her best
sawce-makers, to season and dress his meat, commending their skill exceedingly
in her Letters: But Alexander having bountifully rewarded them for their
travail, returned them with this message, that he had along time entertained
two for that purpose, which made him better sauce to his meat, then any other
could make in his judgment; namely, Nyctoporia Night-marching, who ever got him
a stomach to his Dinner, and Oligaristia littledining, who ever procured him a
stomach to his Supper. Showing thereby that exercise before Dinner and Supper
are the best sawce-makers, because they bring forth hunger, which tastes (yea
which causes us also to digest) all things.

And verily for strong and able persons, what need we prescribe more sawces
then exercise and hunger? Nevertheless because many men's trade of life, and
estate of health is such, that either they cannot exercise themselves abroad,
or else are not able thorugh weakness to do it at home (whereupon want of
appetite and want of digestion, the only founders of sawces must ensue) it
will not be amiss to set down some simples, which may be the matter of sawces
for both those inconveniences.

The most usual and best simples whereof Sawces are made.
If the stomach want appetite, by reason of cold and raw humors furring the
same, and dulling the sense of feeling in the mouth thereof.

Hot Sawces.
Make sauce of Dill, fennel, mints, origanum, parsley, dried gilli-flowers,
galinga, mustardseed, garlic, onions, leeks, juniper berries, sage, time,
varvein, betony, salt, cinnamon, ginger, mace, cloves, nutmegs, pepper, pills of
citrons, limons and orenges, grains, cubebs, and such like, mingle some one,
two, or three of them together, according as occasion most requires, with wine
or vinegar, strong of rosemary or gilly-flowers.

Cold Sawces.
Contrariwise wants your stomach appetite, through abundance of choler, or
adust and putrified phlegm? then restore it with sawces made of sorrel,
lettice, spinache, purselane, or saunders; mingled with vinegar, verjuice,
cider, alegar, or water it self, or with the pulp of prunes, apples, currens
and such like.

As for digestion, it waxes slow and weak, either because the stomach is too
cold, or because the meat is of bad digestion which is put into it.

Sawces for slow digestion.
Cold stomachs must be quickened with sawces hot of spice; and meats hard of
digestion must be helped with hot things: therefore I commend the use of mustard
with biefe, and all kind of salted flesh and fish; and onion-saw with Duck,
Widgin, Teal, and all water Foul; salt and pepper with Venison, and galinga
sauce with the flesh of Cygnets; and garlic or onions boild in milk with a
stuble Goose; sugar and mustard with red Deer, Crane, Shovelar and Bustard.

Sawces for temperate Meats.
But for temperate Meats and speedy of digestion (as Pork, Mutton, Lamb, Veal,
Kid, Hen, Capon, Pullet, Chicken, Rabbet, Partridge, Pheasant, etc.) we must
likewise devise temperate sawces: as mustard and greensawce for Pork,* verjuice
and salt for Mutton; the juice of Orenges or Limons with wine, salt and sugar
for Capons, Pheasants and Partridges; water and pepper for Woodcocks; vinegar
and butter, or the gravet of roasted meat with Rabbets, Pigeons or Chickens;
for if their sawces should be either too cold, or too hot, such meats would
soon corrupt in our stomachs, being otherwise most nourishing of their own
nature. As for the just quantity and proportion of every thing belonging unto
sawces and pickles, albeit Apicius took great pains Plin. li^. 8. and lib 9.
not hist.
therein, writing whole volums of that argument, yet few of those sawces agreed
with most men's natures, and some of them perhaps (if we might peruse those
books) were grounded upon little or no reason; wherefore I leave the directing
of them to particular Cooks, who by experience can best aim at every man's
appetite, and know also sufficiently how to correct that flesh by Artificial
preparation and appropriated sauce, which nature has made queazy or heavy to
indifferent stomachs.

Some have put the question, Whether there be any sauce but appetite? or
whether it be good to use sawces?

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Variety of Meats, that it is necessary and convenient.
PHilo a most excellent Physician having invited Philinus to Supper,
entertained him with all kind of fowl, fish and fruit, killing also as many
beasts, as if he had purposed to celebrate an Hecatombe: But his eloquent guest
(for he was counted the best Councellor at the Bar of Athens) either to reprove
his Friend, or to try his Oratory, accused him at the Table of a double
trespass, the one against himself, the other against nature. Against himself,
because he allured him to surfeit by variety of dishes: against nature, because
nature teaches us to feed but upon meat, and yet Philo himself did Hip. in
Iure jur
feed upon many. But tell me Philinus (for I am a Physician likewise, and sworn
to defend my Teachers no less then my Parents) how is it an unnatural thing to
feed Objections against variety of meats.
upon many dishes? Mary (says he) nature teaches us to feed upon that which
will make us to remain longest in life and health; wherefore if we would feed
as beasts do upon some one thing, we should outlive them; whereas now through
our variety of dishes they outlive us.

Again; do not you Physicians (being but Natures Ministers) dissuade men in
agues from diversity of meats, bringing unto them only some one dish of a
Chicken or Rabbet simply roasted or boiled, neither smelling nor tasting of any
mixture, nor marred, or infected with variety of sawces? Furthermore does not
the Diars Art instruct us, no color to keep so long in cloth or silk, as that
which is made by one simple? And is not the sweetest oil marred by mingling,
which being kept alone by it self would be ever fragrant? even so fares it
likewise in meats, for any one meat of an indifferent constitution will be
easily concocted, when many strive so one with another, whether of them shall
go out foremost into the guts, that one stays too long and is corrupted,
whilst the other is not half changed.

And tell me Philo; why should it not be in meats as it is in wines? does not
variety of wines make bad distribution, and cause drunkenness sooner then if we
kept to one wine? no doubt it does; else had the Law contra Allaenias been
frivolous and vain, precisely forbidding Vintners and Waiters at the Table to
mix one wine with another. Musicians likewise by tuning all their instruments
into one harmony, plainly show what hurt comes by inequality and change of
things. Socrates was wont to say (whom the great Oracle of Apollo has crowned
for the wisest Grecian) that variety of meats is like a common house of
Courtisans, which with variety of faces, trickings and dressings rather empty
then fill up Venus Treasury, kindling rather a flame to consume our lust, then
giving a gentle heat to conserve our lives. Wherefore when the jars of crowders
shall be thought good music, and mingled wines allowed for wholesomness, and
whorish allurements taken for preservers of life; then will I also confess
variety of dishes to be tolerable, and that one man at once may taste and feed
safely of many dishes. In the mean time let me still commend the old Romans,
who judged as ill of common Cael. lib. 9 cap. antiq. lect. La. in vita Dio.
Feasters, as of them which erected a bawdy house: and give me leave to imitate
Plato, who at a great feast fed on nothing but Olives, thinking one dish most
wholesome where many are.

Other Objections against Variety of Meats.
Thus much said Philinus against Philo, as Plutarch writes: whose Arguments I
will then answer in order, when I have first given a further strength to his
assertion, by other proofs and authorities that himself perhaps did never dream
of, namely these.

Cael. lib. 7. cap. 11. antiq. lect.
Rogatianus a noble Senator of Rome, having spent much money in Physic to no
good purpose, fed afterward (by his Friends advice) never but upon one dish:
whereby he was quit of his grief for many years. Epicurus also placing all
felicity in health and pleasure, fed but sparingly Alex. ab Alex. lib. 3 cap.
11.
and simply upon one dish, were it roots, apples, pears, plums or puls-pottadge
(for he never eat fish nor flesh) also he did eat but one kind of Bread, and
never drank but one sort of drink, were it wine or water. Iovinianus Corrozetus
de dict. and fact. memor.
Pontanus being asked, why he never fed but upon one dish: I abstain (said he)
from many meats, that many, nay that all Physicians may abstain from me.

A Cook in Lacon being bidden by his Master to dress Plut. in Lac. Q^est.
him a piece of flesh; he asked of him Cheese and Oil to make the sauce; to
whom his Master answered: away fool, away; if I had either Cheese or Oil, what
needed I to have bought a piece of flesh? whereby we perceive that in old times
men fed only upon one dish, thinking it folly to kill hunger with many meats,
when it may be killed with one.

Epaminondas also being invited to a friends house, seeing their variety of
dishes, departed with these flouting Plut in apo. thegm.
speeches: I will not trouble thee, for I see thou art sacrificing to the Gods,
not making a dinner to thy friend. And yet the tables of the ancient Gods
(being but indeed Devils) had no great variety upon them: For when the
Athenians did celebrate the great festivals Athen. l. 4. c. 3.
of Castor and Pollux, their dishes were only these, Cheese, Mace, Olives and
Leeks; afterward when Solon (to imitate Agamemnons example in Homer) added a
Spice-cake, he was rather counted a giver of ill presidents to men, then any
whit the more bountiful to the Plin. l. 19. c. 4*
Gods.

The like may we say of the Romans, who offered first to their Gods no flesh
nor fish, but a little Orchard and Garden-fruit; and of the Egyptians whilst
the Sab. l. 8. suppl* ^ov. l. 33. hist.
Mameluks ruled over them; and of the Carthaginians, whose famous quaternal
Feast consisted only of four dishes, Dry-figs, Ripe-dates, green-leeks, and
sour milk. Nay to come nearer to our own selves, the Scots (^our
fellow-Islanders and northern-countrymen) Hect. Boeth. in histor. Scot.
beginning the morning with a slender breakfast, did in old times fast till
Supper, feeding then but only of one dish, using generally so temperate a
diet, that not Judges and Kings, but Philosophers and Physicians seemed to have
given them precepts; what need I remember, That Moschus Antimolus the great
Sophister lived Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 3. cap, 11. Athen. l. 10. c. 4 Mar. l. ^.
dec. 1. Plin. l. 11. c. 4^.
all his life time only with figs, Stilpo only with garlic, Saint Genovefue
the holy maid of Paris five and thirty years only with Beans, and Zoroaster
(that silverheaded Nestor) twenty years in the wilderness only with Cheese? or
that the Kings of Egypt fed never upon Diod. lib. 1. c. 6.
more meats, then either Veal or Goslings? whereby we may understand that with
one dish men lived a long and healthful life, and that variety of diseases
sprang first from confusion and variety of meats. It is written Alex. ab Alex.
lib* 5 cap. 21.
of the Romans, that whilst their greatest feasts had but three dishes, the
people were sound, healthful and sober; but when Augustus the Emperor brought
in three more, and permitted the Romans to have three in their houses, and six
in their temple-feasts, his riot is said to have corrupted Rome and brought in
Physic. Also whilst the Plin. l. 8. ca. 50.
Laconians had little dishes and little tables, so that they could neither have
many guests, nor much meat at their board, thrift, wealth and health embraced
one another; afterward all went to ruin when variety of dishes were admitted
their boards enlarged, and after-courses induced Valor. Max.
by the Ionians. The people of Lituania were very frugall, laborious and
healthful says Aeneas Sylvius, 2. com. in Pan.
till Switrigalus made them exceed by his own example, who had no fewer then a
hundred and thirty dishes at a meal: whereupon his own life, and the happy
estate of his subjects was soon shortened. What should I stand upon the Romans
riot in Antoninus Geta, Read.
Commodus (Adrians Son) Vitellius and Heliogabulus, Plin. l 8 ca. 57. Sabel.
lib. 4. ^nead. 7. Cael. lib. 8 ca. 7. A. L. Spar. in vita Ge^ae.
their dominions and times of governing the Empire? when Dormise, timber-worms
and snails were served for dainties; when the livers of great fishes, the
brains of Phesants and young Peacocks, the kernels of Lampreys (brought by
flyboats and light-horsemen out of Spain to Rome) when infinite numbers of
nightingales tongues, the brawnes of Kings-fishers, Pheasants-Combs,
Peacocks-Gizards, and Wrens-livers, were made altogether into one Pie: when
finally three courses came daily to Geta his board, and as many dishes at each
course as there be letters in the Alphabet. But what followed? Marry infinite
diseases, and infinite Physicians; whereof some were so ignorant that they
tormented the people worse then sickness; in such sort that Galen, Herophilus,
Erasistratus, and diverse Greek Physicians were sent for to recover them,
languishing and consumed almost with fevers, whereinto through excess and
variety of meats they were justly fallen.

So likewise fell it out with the Israelites, who in the wilderness longed
first for the fish of Egypt, then for cucumbers, pompions, leeks, garlic and
onions. Then being fed with Manna from heaven, they loathed it because it was
but one meat. East of all Quails came down, yet were they never satisfied with
one meat were it never so good, coveting still change and variety were it never
so bad: wherein both they and we show plainly from what root we are first
sprung. For when our first Parents might eat of all trees and fruits in
Paradise, yet the show, lure and desire of variety made them touch and taste
the unbidden fruit. After the flood when flesh, fish and fruit were permitted
to be indifferently eaten, and blood and fat only forbidden yet we gather up
the blood and fat of beasts to make us puddings, and abstain not (for recovery
of consumptions) to suck the hot leaping and vital blood out of one another
veins. Neither are we contented to feed (as wise men should do) upon wholesome
meats, but we mingle with them venison of wild bears, the flesh of scabby
Cuckoes, the spawne of Whales, Sturgians and Tunnies, and other very loathsome
things, only for varieties sake and delight of change. Licinius though he fed
upon many dishes, yet he must end his meals with a Lamprey-pye. Lucius never
supt without Oisters, nor Sergius without a Dorry: whereupon they were justly
nicked by these names, Licinius Lamprey, Sergius Dorry, and Lucius Oisterman.

Thus im-borne impiety engraffed by propagation from Adam and Eve, has made us
to lose the desire of unity in all things; coveting variety of meats, drinks
and women, yea of Gods and religion; never contented with what is given for our
good, but desirous of that which we snatch for our own hurt.

An apology for variety of meats, answering the former objections.
Hitherto I have spoken much from Philinus own mouth, and more from mine own
in his behalf, to oppugn the variety of meats: now read I pray you with the
like patience, How I shall defend Philo against Philinus, and prove apparently
that variety of meats is both at board, and in our stomachs, most agreeable to
nature, and consequently beneficial to maintain us in health.

First therefore Philinus abused our ears, in saying that all beasts feed only
upon some one kind of meat: For Eupolides his goats, yea and ours to, feed upon
time, mints, hysope, heath, ivy, oken buds, beech, ash, mullen, chervil and
tamarisk, and many other herbs differing no less in taste, smell, substance,
and virtue one from another. What Shepherd is ignorant, that his flock feeds
upon filipendula, daisies, mouseare, cowslaps, lambstongue, milk-wort,
Saxifrage and little mullen? yet work they no worse effect in their stomachs,
then if they had only been fed with grass; what should I speak of the Ostrich,
which devoureth iron and pap together, and refuses no meat, unless men had
also an Ostriches stomach? Only let him serve to disprove Philinus avouching
all beasts and birds to tie themselves as it were to one meat, and not to eat
at once of diverse nourishments.

Secondly where it was affirmed, that brute beasts and birds out live men,
because they are of a simpler diet; I must pardon Philinus being a heathen, and
ignorant of the Scriptures: wherein Methusalem and diverse Patriarchs are
registered to have lived longer, then any beast or bird whatsoever, called fitly
of Homer by the name of Mortals, as upon whom more rots, murrens, aches,
diseases Iliad. 1.
and plagues do light, then usually happen unto men. Nay go to your Raven and
Stag, those longestlivers of all the unreasonable breathers; feeds not the
Raven upon all flesh, eats not the Stag of all herbs, boughs and mast that
comes in his way? ye feeds he not some times upon Snakes and Adders?

Thirdly, the Physicians giving of simple meats to aguish persons, proves no
more that variety is not good for most men, then that because Thersites can
hardly carry his single spear, therefore Agamemnon shall not put on his
complete armor.

Fourthly, the sedition and tumults foolishly feared, and rashly presupposed to
be in meats of diverse kinds, afflicting the stomach either at the time of
concoction or digestion, that reason of all other is most unreasonable. For who
would or can imagine, that Man the Epitome or Abstract of the whole world, in
whom something of every thing (to speak Platonically and yet truly) is placed
and inserted, could live ever, or long in health without variety of meats?
Hippocrates seeing such variety of simples rooted, sprouted and quickened upon
the earth, gathers thereupon very truly and learnedly, that there lie hidden
in the earth all kinds of tastes, smells, liquors, and heats, and that it is
not (as some imagine) a dry and cold dust, void of all taste, heat and moisture.

Much more then may I justly avouch, that many meats may and do best agree with
most men's stomachs, in whose bodies not only firm flesh, but also thin blood,
sweet phlegm, bitter gall, and sourish melancholy is necessary to be preserved:
wherefore let hot meats, cold meats, moist meats, dry meats, bitter, meats,
salt meats, light meats and heavy meats be mingled together in an indifferent
stomach (so that they be well prepared, orderly taken, and no error committed
in time, measure and quantity) no sedition or tumult will arise, no not so much
as if the stomach had taken but one meat; for (according to that Oeconomical
distribution of Empedocles)

Sweet straitwaies will it self to sweet apply,
Sharp runs to sharp, with gall does bitter lie,
Hot drinks and meats to fiery parts ascend,
Whilst cold and moist to watery members tend.
An no marvel, considering that natural heat (like a good Stuard) dissolveth
the mass into a creamy substance, running thorough all himself, that he may
give unto all their due nourishment. Wherefore since this little world of ours
was created full of variety, why should we tie our stomachs only to fruit,
fish, or flesh, when God in his goodness has given us all of them?

Nay furthermore, since man can digest more sorts of meats, stones and mettles
(being rightly prepared) then either the Goat, Raven, or Ostrich, why should
his power be bridled by any unnatural Edict, proceeding rather from the brain
of a senseless head, then from the deep and mature judgment of any Physician?
for sense teaches us, that most compound bodies must feed upon diverse meats,
and that not variety but satiety, not quality but quantity, not simple taking,
but unorderly taking of them, (out of time, out of season, and out of their due
place and proportion) causes that dissension and tumult in our bellies, whence
all manner of dislikings or discontentments Lib. (...).
arise, and at which (to use Hippocrates his words) (...), Nature is distracted,
troubled and (as it were) ^gnasheth her teeth.

As for that Simile of Diars, and the other of Sweetoil, and the third of
Music; they are all more childish, then worthy of an answer.

For simple colors (as white and black) are not the purest, for then the skies
should bear them; yea the purest jewels give most variety of colors and lights
in their own kind. And whereas cloth died with some one simple keeps longest
his color in Philinus opinion, it is little material if it were true;
considering meat is not given to dye our bodies, but to be transformed into our
substance.

Again, though a sweet oil keeps best his scent and perfection whilst it is
unmingled, yet that disproveth not the necessity of mixtures, for whose sake
simples were no less created, then Consonants and Vowels appointed to bring
forth syllables: wherefore I laugh whilst others praise and extol, Guevarraes
folly, who like another Erasistratus (whom he Apishly follows in Guevarra in
his Epistles.
many points) complains of compound medicines, reducing all kind of agues to be
cured with a plain Ptisan, a thin Cucumber milk, and a little water and oil
mingled together. Foolish Bishop I deride thy ignorance, because thou deservest
not to be pitied deriding others. Go to the little Be, thou great Idiote; and
tell me if thou can number, out of how many flowers honey is made. Honey I say,
the sweetest meat, and best medicin Isaac. Belg. lib. de quint. mell. essent.
of all others, yea the very quintesence (as Isaac the Netherlander writes) and
refined marrow of infinite wholesome and good vegitables. Can that imperfect
Creature perfectly convert so many diverse juices into one sovereign meat, and
may not man (the perfectest creature of all others) do the like in his stomach,
when he feeds of many good and wholesome dishes? As for Socrates his
comparison (whom Apollo himself termed the Prince of Sages) I answer thus,

What though variety be to the stomach, as choice of fair women in a Weak man's
eye, causing more strong an appetite then reason or nature would? By the same
argument we might as well reprove cleanliness in handling, skill in seasoning,
and handsomness or neatness in serving in our meats; because when these concur
we feed more largely; which if it be a fault, let Philinus hereafter eat bread
made of meal which was never boulted; and parsneps and raddish never washed nor
scraped; let him eat of boiled meat that was never scum'd, and of Cael. lib. 6.
ant. lect.
dry, lean birds (such as Q. Curtius threw out at the window) never basted, and
of bitter Feldefares never drawn.

But I (and all wise men with me) will consider, that as honesty and delight
may be matched together, so cleanliness and variety is no hindrance to a good
stomach or good digestion, but rather an help and friend to both. Nay it fares
with our stomachs as it does with Sailers; who can easily pull in the sheet
when they have too much wind, but cannot enlarge it when they have too little:
for so likewise it is a small labor or cunning to kill appetite by only
seeing and feeding upon one dish, but to revive it being extinguished, or to
sharpen it being dulled, requires no little art, and consists chiefly in
variety and well dressing of meats.

Item to answer in a word, the law contra Alloenias; I grant the thing, but I
deny the equity: for what greater reason have we to mingle wine and water
(which was never forbidden but at drunken feasts) then to mingle a tart wine
with a pleasant, a temperate wine with a hot Sack, and a scowrer (when occasion
persuades) with Alegant or a harsh binder? therefore to return Philinus his
own Sword into his own bosom: as it is not unlawful (by the law of reason
and nature) nay as it is necessary and expedient to mingle wines for some
persons: so variety of meats taken orderly at one meal, are lawful, necessary
and expedient.

Moreover (to beat him again with his own Similes) I confess all instruments of
music to be tuned to one Harmony: but being so tuned, if the Musicians play
ever (like the Cuckoe) but one Song, will not the ear and head be wearied and
offended? nay will they not in time be both sick? Can the eye see at once many
objects, the ears hear many instruments playing together, and (Philinus) shall
not the stomach as well concoct, keep and digest for the body many meats? but
when reason fails, thou have almost daunted Philo with inartificial
arguments, drawn from antiquity, examples, customs, and sanctions of Senators.

Now if by the like arguments I confirm Variety, I doubt not but like a
Scholar I may cry quittance* but if furthermore I confute thy Authorities, as
being either falsified or unaptly applied, thou shall live in my debt till the
next Audit.

Wherefore to begin with Rogatianus, albeit for many years he was delivered of
the gout, yet Caelius avoucheth not that he was perfectly cured. And Epicurus
though he fed but upon one dish at a meal, yet perhaps at every meal he fed on
a several dish. Pontanus also was a weak and sickly man, to whom I confess many
dishes (especially being of contrary kinds or qualities) are not to be
permitted. Neither does the Gentleman's answer in Lacon prove more the use then
of one dish at a meal, then his Cooks demand infers the use and mingling of
many meats. But if by the few dishes upon the Alters of heathen Gods, thou
think to prove that men at home feed only upon one meat, thou art much
deceived, for hereafter I will plainly demonstrate that they fed on many. As
for the old Scottish custom, suppose it were true; yet sure I am, that since
King Arthurs days who lived years before Christ, their own Hect. Boeth. l. 9.
Scot. hist.
Chronicler records them to have used great variety of Alex. l. 3. c. 11.
dishes. That Moschus Antimolus lived only with figs, it is no great marvel
when he hated from his Cradel Athen. l. 10. c. 4
all other meat. Stilpo also fed only on garlic, because his poverty was such
that he could buy nothing else. As for Genovefue the holy made of Paris; albeit
Marul. lib. 1. decad. 1.
I suspect Marulus for a common lier, yet he says, that her feeding so long
upon one dish consumed her body, and that upon the Bishops license she was
enforced to Plin. l. 11. c* 42*
eat milk in Lent. Zoroaster was no doubt a most learned Philosopher, who if he
lived twenty years in the Wilderness only with one Cheese, no doubt it was
some great Cheese like to Parmisan, full of variety, and not made of one but
many milks. As for the monstrous riot of the Ionians, Lituanians, and latter
Romans, drawn from the example and imitation of those wicked Princes and
Emperors: I detest and abhor it as much as Philinus, ascribing unto excessive
variety as many mischiefs of body and mind; as temperate variety brings profit,
health, refreshings and pleasures to them Numb. 11.
both. The Jews murmuring does as little please me, for though nature told them
that one meat could not conveniently nourish every man, especially such as were
accustomed forty years together in Egypt to feed diversty; yet when every man
felt that one meat sent by God, did miraculously preserve man, woman and child,
agreeing with all ages, times, persons and complexions, they ought to have been
contented; being as perfitly nourished with one dish, as any of us can be with
many.

Last of all, that example of Adam and Eve is most violently wrested against
variety, whereas rather it is an argument against unity: for suppose they had
at once tasted of all fruits in the garden, could they have been sick upon it?
no verily, but the tasting of one alone (I mean the forbidden one) was the
parent and author of all diseases: wherefore the variety of wholesome meats set
down by Physicians are not offensive, when one dish forbidden may prove
dangerous: as I could prove by many reasons, did not experience clear it with
her sunshine.

Now to answer examples also with examples; though the Kings of Egypt had no
great variety of dishes, yet that they ever fed on two at the least, Diodorus
Siculus Lib. 1. c. 6.
reports. And if the old Romans fed not diversely, why Alex l. 5. c. 21.
had they usually three dishes at their table? The Persians though they had but
few meats, yet they abounded in Salades and Junckets. The old Grecians
contrariwise, used much meat and few Junckets: yea I read that Plato himself
when Socrates and Menippus supped Gell. l. 13. c. 11
with him, had six several dishes at his table (figs, peason, beans,
whortleberries, roasted beech-nuts, and wafers in the end to close up their
stomachs) whereof they all fed, saving that Menippus set aside the wafercakes
with his hand, saying; that a sweet aftercourse makes a stinking breath:
Another time I read, that Plato set before his loving friends and fellow
Citizens olives, herb-salades, diverse kinds of flesh and fish, and last of all
new Cheese; whereby any wiseman may gather, that the ancients fed upon many
dishes of opposite kinds, and gratified their stomachs (which every man's
stomach coveteth) with variety of meats. As for our own Nation (for whom
chiefly I write this Treatise) Hector Boethius avoucheth, l. 9 Scot* hist*
that English men from before King Arthurs days, were accustomed to feed much
and very diversely. lib. 2. histor.
And Paulus Iovius writes thus. The whole nation of English men delight still
(as ever they did heretofore) in feasting and making of good cheer, eating much
meat and of many sorts, prolonging their sittings with music and merryments,
and afterward sporting themselves in set dances.

Wherefore since we are naturally desirous of many meats, and have stomachs
above all other Nations, able to digest them; and custom also has confirmed
our variety of dishes (which cannot even in bad things be suddenly altered
without a mischief) I persuade strong and indifferent stomachs to continue
their used Diet, feeding orderly and soberly of diverse meats. Diverse I say, but
not too many; for I like not (Dubias Coenas) the doubtful feasts of Cardinal
Wolsey, nor the Abbot of Glastenburies Diet (who were served with so many sorts
of dainties that one might stagger and doubt where first to begin his dinner)
nor the ancient tables of London; where (as Diogenes said of Maronia) every
Citizens house (in a manner) was a cooks shop, till plenty of mouths made
penury of provision, and dearth of Corn and Victuals lately taught them
sobriety.

Last of all where the Proverb says, That many dishes make many diseases; it
hurts not our position and defense of variety: for not diversity but
multitude offends our stomachs, that is to say, more diversity of meats then
they can well abide: accordingly as much meat hurts not concoction, but that
which is overmuch taken in too great a quantity, whereof we are now to
discourse in the next Chapter.

As for variety of meats in the time of sickness, let us hear what Galen says.
Diversity of meats are as necessary in sickness (if it be a compound sickness)
as variety of medicines. For a hot liver requires a cooling meat, and a cold
stomach that which is hot; and if a mixed disease have made a mixed
distemperature in any part, there diverse and compounds meats be of necessity
required. Otherwise many meats (especially of contrary kind, substance and
quality) are most hurtful and tumultuous. Com. in 1. de vict. rat. in ac. cap
3. and 3. de vict. rat. in ac. cap. 35. and primo in Eund. cap. 18 whereby we
may easily perceive, that variety of meats is permitted sometimes to the sick,
yea though it be joined with contrariety of kinds.

CHAP. XXX
Of the quantity of Meats.
THat saying of the wiseman, Eat not too much honey, shows unto us; that even
the most wholesome and nourishing meat of all other will prove dangerous and
hurtful to our health, if it be not soberly and measurably eaten. Temperancy
being not only the carver, but also the commander at our tables.

We find likewise several sayings recorded; as, That we must eat by reason and
not by appetite; That straightgirding, makes little eating; That in time of
Famine, though we desire most, satiety is most perilous; That in rainy weather
little meat, little drink, and much exercise within doors is best; That
melancholy persons eat much, Choleric drink much, Phelgmatick sleep much;
Great Livers, great Eaters, that a lean Woman, is a Tavern of blood; That they
which eat little, are never good Travailers. The Spaniard eats, the German
drinks, and the English exceeds in both.

Temperance what it is.
But would you know what Temperancy is? It is a virtue, timely, moderately and
comely using those things, which be truly necessary and natural. For some
things be both necessary and natural without which we cannot live, as Meat and
Drink; others natural but not necessary, without use of which many of us may
live, and live in health, as Venus game: others necessary but not natural, as
strong exercises for some bodies: others neither natural nor necessary, as
overcurious Cookery, making fine meat of a whetstone, and quelque-choses of
unsavory, nay of bad and unwholesome meat. There be two vices equally opposite
to this virtue; Surfeiting, when a man eats more then either his stomach can
hold or his strength digest; and Self-pining, when we eat less then our nature
craveth and is able to overcome.

The first of them (namely surfeiting and excess) though it be a vice of all
other most hurtful to the body and consequently noisome to the mind, yet we
read that whole nations, and Emperors, and Potentates have both esteemed, and
honored and rewarded it for a virtue. Athen. l. 1. c. 1. In A^can.
For the Sicilians dedicated a Temple to Gluttony; and Aristophanes writes thus
of the Barbarians, (...),
(...).
Them only men Barbarians think,
That can devour most meat and drink*


Of this crew was Maximinus the Emperor, who (like our old Abby*lubbers) did
eat till he sweat; yea l. 6. c. 10. en. 7.
Sabellicus affirms, that his one days sweat gathered up in goblets, did
amount to the measure of six Sextaries. Claudius Caesar and Vitellius the
Emperor were Cael lib. 13. c. 2. A. L.
like unto him, eating commonly so much, that they were forced once or twice in
a meal to go out and vomit; and then returned to the table again, giving a
fresh charge to a forelorne stomach. And though Aurelianus the Flan. Vopisc.
Emperor fed moderately himself, yet he exceedingly loved and honored a great
Gourmand, who usually at one meal did eat a Hogg* two Weathers, and a whole
Brawn, drinking upon it a whole firkin of wine poured down his throat thorough
a funnel: Also Firmius Sabel. lib. 10. ex Capitolino.
Salencius did eat a whole Ostrich in a day: and Clodius Albinus (Commander for
the Romans in France) is registered to have eaten at one sitting five hundred
figs, one hundred Peaches, ten Musk-melons, twenty pound weight of Raysins of
the Sun, one hundred Snites, ten Capons, and a hundred and fifty great Oisters.

Neither was our Country always void of a Woolmar, who living (in my memory)
in the Court, seemed like another Pandareus, of whom Antonius Liberalis writes
Ex Boet. in Ornithogon.
thus much, that he had obtained this gift of the Goddess Ceres; to eat Iron,
glass, Oistershels, raw-fish, raw-flesh, raw-fruit (and whatsoever else he
would put into his stomach) without offense; yea as Monica Augustine's Mother
was given to excess of wine, so himself (such are even Godly men's imperfections
at some times) confesses his own pronness and inclination to riot, in these
words. O Lord, thou have taught me to use meat not for lust and wantonness, but
for life and health. Nevertheless Aug l. 10. con.
when I sit down for refections sake, the snares of concupiscence and surfeit
lie in my way like crafty fowlers, and the Maid presumes above her Mistress; so
that it is doubtful, whether Necessity or Riot be commander, and hardly can
Iresist Riots desire, no though it afterward brings me to great pain.

And no marvel, Augustine; for from whence comes soreness and weariness,
heaviness of spirits, dullness of senses, stifness and pain of joints,
unweldiness, belchings, crudities, fevers, distastings of meat, loss of
appetite, and o her tempestuous evils, but from repletion, surfeiting and
satiety? what weakness of body comes by excess of eating; we need no more
examples then this of our own Countrymen, which Boethius notes (in his Scottish
History) of King Arthur and his Knights; who having recovered York from the
Saxons and Picts in spite of their beards, kept there such a grand Christmas,
that afterward fighting again with the Saxons, his Soldiers were found so
weakened with surfeiting, that their arrows could hardly pierce the Saxons furr
d dubblets, being able before to strike thorough their iron armor. What
Scholar has not read of Herodotus, the minstril of Megara (whose girdle in the
wast was three yards and a half long) or of Milo Crotoniates that Athen l. 10*
c.
great Pamphagus? yet they died both very weak men and young, by oppressing
strong nature with too heavy burdens. I he Stoics imputed all diseases to age,
but Erasistratus Pl^t in Gryll.
did not ill to ascribe, either all or most of them to excess: for if a man feed
too much, three principal Marsil. Fici. de ^^end. stud san.
discommodities arise thereof. First, all natural spirits leave their several
standings, and run headlong to the stomach to perfect concoction; which if with
all their forces they cannot perform, then brain and body are over-mastered
with heavy vapors and humors; but suppose they perform it, what follows but
foggy fat instead of flesh; or a the least, such abundance of both, that no
sovereignty nor ability is left for the actions of the mind? which (as Menander
well notes in one of his Comedies.) Desires not to play with Swine,
Nor dwells in hogsheads full of wine.


For Heracletus was of a right opinion, that the wisest soul dwells in the
empty body; which we may partly illustrate by these examples. The moist eye
sees worst; the fullest vessel sounds least, and the Sun hardly shines
thorough a clowdy air: Even so in a full and troubled body, overpeised with
variety and plenty of meats, the eye of our mind must needs be darkened, the
voice of reason cannot be heard, and the Sunshine of understanding cannot shine
into our hearts, being destitute of will, and much more of ability to execute
any thing that is good: Nay through surfeiting we live grovelling and groping
after base delights, as Hoggs do for Acornes, being disabled so much as to
think a good thought.

Hippocrates and Galen say, that the bodies of ordinary great feeders stand upon
a dangerous point, or as you would say upon the Raysors edge; for if they feed
moderately, alteration of custom hazards their health: if they persist in
excess, they are suddenly strangled with Apoplexies, as Caelius has well
noted. Cael. lib. 17 ea. 11. A L.


To prevent all which sicknesses both of body and mind, oh what severe and good
laws were there made by Ma. sat. 3. c. 17.
Fannius Didius, Licinius Crassus, Cornelius Sylla, Lepidus, and Antius Restio
against Riot? yet the concord of vices so prevailed, that lust continued
excess, excess brought forth unruliness, unruliness contempt of Government,
whence came fatal destruction to the Roman Monarchy.

Hector. Boeth* hist. Scot.
The Scots punished their belly-gods in this sort; first they filled their
bellies as full of good meat as ever they could hold, then they gagged them,
and threw them into the next river with their arms piniond, saying; Now as thou
have eaten too much, so drink too much.

Plutarch remembers, that (by the Athenians law) whosoever did flay a living
beast, he should be hanged as a Felon, because they would not have a beast
tormented; which punishment if it were just (as it seemed just in Xenocrates
opinion) then what pains ought they to endure, who by surfeiting not only
torture, but also most unnaturally seek to kill themselves, making their graves
with their own teeth, flaying and unskinning themselves as it were of reasons
robe, yea ensouling their bodies (being dedicated Temples to the holy Ghost) as
much as in them lies with the form of swine?

The second vice (namely Self-pining) is as far from Temperancy on the right
hand, as surfeiting erreth on the left. SoZomenus makes mention of a Munck in
Caelosyria, Sozom. lib. 6. eccl. hist. c. 34.
called Battheus, fasting voluntarily so long, till his teeth were full of
worms. And in the Legendary, S. Francis, S. Bennet, S. Rainulph, and diverse
other men, maids and women are highly extolled for consuming their bodies with
excessive abstinence; which being a thing against nature and Godliness (which
forbids us to scourge or mark, and much more to consume our bodies) it shall
need no confutation at all, especially in this gluttonous age, wherein we are
so far from any such fasting, that we wholly delight in Riot and Feasting.
Only let me say thus much out of Hippocrates, that a very thin and precise
Diet is not to be prescribed to any one of indifferent health and strength; no
scarce to any (except their disease be exceeding sharp) which are very weak.
For the prescribing of meat by drams or ownces, drives many fears into a weak
man's mind, takes al alacrity from the heart, makes* a man jealous of his own
fingers, daring to eat nothing with cheerfulness, because he ever suspecteth
that he eats too much. Hence came that Hippoc.
golden Aphorism (though not registered in his Aphorisms) (...)! An over-yeelding
lengthneth the grief,
But timely permission makes it brief.


As for Temperancy (which I can never enough reverence or commend) would to God
it were as well practiced of every particular man, as it is necessarily
required to be in Physicians. First that by long life they may (with Galen and
Hippocrates) get perfection in that art which they profess: whereas now many
Physicians are buried under a Doctors name, before they ever tasted of Hygea
her cup, or saluted Panacea a far off. Secondly if they by surfeiting or
fasting hurt their own bodies; how shall their doctrine be followed by their
Patient, when it is broken and crossed by themselves?

Xenoph. 1. Pae*
The rude Persians are recorded to have ever fed so temperately, that to spit
or blow their nose, was both execrable and punishable amongst them. Likewise
they (as also the Romans) permitted any man to give him that yawned a blow on
the ear; because spiting and sniveling and yawning, are only the fruits of
fullness or idleness: Much more should learned Physicians moderate themselves,
who give laws to others, and not rashly run into that excess, which even the
savage Scythian and Persians ever abhorred.

Athen. l. 2* c. 2.
It is also recorded of the Spanish Women, that a certain girdle is kept of
some two foot long in every Town, which if any woman's belly exceeds in compass
(unless it be by child-going) they are counted detestable and infamous: Let it
be therefore a greater shame for us Physicians, by ill example to purchase our
own discredit, and also to lessen our skill, and shorten our lives Cic. 3.
Tusc.
as much as lies in our own power: for Theophrastus falsely accused nature, in
that she gave long life to Ravens and Crows (whom it little profited) and but a
short time to men, and the shortest of all to Students, whom reason would have
to live long for the mutual benefit one of another, and the public good of the
Commonweal. More justly he might have accused men and Students themselves, for
abridging their natural days by surfeiting and drunkenness, chambring and
wantonness, excess and riot; considering that nature ever most preserves and
tendereth the most worthy creature, did it not destroy and ruinate it self.

Timotheus having supped with Plato, and eaten (contrary to his custom) very
moderately, slept very quiely that night, finding neither cholick to awake him,
nor belchings in the morning to annoy him; wherefore as soon as he awaked, he
brake forth into this exclamation, with a loud voice: How sweet, how sweet are
Platoes Marfil. Fic. de Sanit. stud. tu.
Suppers, which makes us in the night time to sleep, and in the morning to
breathe so sweetly! Yea but (some will say) how shall we know when we have
eaten enough? At whom Democritus would have laughed a month together, and
perhaps have returned them this answer; Fools and Idiotes that you are, know
you when your Horse and your Hawke and your Dog has enough, and are you
ignorant what measure to allow your selves? who will urge his Horse to eat too
much, or cram his Hawke till she be over gorged, or feed his Hound till his
tail leave waving? and shall (man the measurer of Heaven and Earth) be ignorant
how in Diet to measure the bigness signs or strength of his own stomach? knows
he by signs when they are over filled; and is he ignorant of the signs of
repletion in himself? namely of satiety, loathing, drowsiness, stiffness,
weakness, weariness, heaviness and belching? Does not every man know, that
Enough consists not in filling the paunch, but in taking sufficient to
maintain nature, which no doubt is satisfied Plut. 4. sympo^ Cloth your self
warmly, and feed sparingly.

Vesti te cal^o and mangia poco


with a little, as Solon said at the wisemens feast, Summum, imo divinum bonum
est nullo vesci alimento; proximum vero and natural quod a minimo. It is (said
Solon) the greatest, yea the divinest good thing of all other, to eat no meat:
and the next unto that and most natural is, to feed as sparingly as may be.

But can you not prescribe one certain measure or quantity fit for all men? no
verily, for to prescribe to all men (or to one man at all times) one certain
quantity of meat, were to make a coat for the Moon; which if either Jupiter her
Father, or Latona her Mother could have done, they would long ere this with
some robe or other have covered her inconstant body, increasing or decreasing
every moment. And verily Hippocrates Hip. de. vet. me
has truly written. The quantity of meats ought not to be appointed by weight,
number nor measure; but by sense and ability of our stomachs: for some cannot
digest much, others are offended at a little; others are not satisfied till
their maw be filled, others have too much when it is half filled.

It were strange to recite, what great store of meat some have eaten and others
daily, do eat without offense; Aristotle in his Politics, calls the Fencers
and Wrastlers Diet of his time (...), a necessary Gourmandise; because through
abundance of exercise (which consumes spirits and humors) they were enforced
to lib* 1. cap. 6. Cosmocrit.
eat both much and often. Nay Cornelius Gemma affirms, that he saw whilst he
lived an aged woman, which from her infancy fed in excessive measure, eating
something continually every hour, besides her ordinary meals of breakfast,
dinner and supper, which were of an incredible quantity: In the end dying with
abundance of fat and flesh (for the caul of her belly weighed twenty pounds)
they perceived all this to come from a peculiar and special temperature, called
of the Grecians (...): for her liver was greater and heavier then all the rest
of her bowels laid together; exceeding red, and swelling with store of blood
and wind. Surius and Bruyrinus, Sur. com. rer. in orb gest. B^u. lib. 3. de re
cib. cap. 5. Schengh. lib. 3. obs* med.
and Schengkius tell of many others, who lived long in health though they fed
excessively, having as it were an Ostriches stomach joined with a Dogs appetite.

On the contrary side, some may as well live with hunger and long abstinence a
great while, according as I have Hip lib* de ca.
read in many Authors. Hippocrates thinks, that if a man abstain from meat and
drink seven days, he cannot escape death; yea when some afterward were
persuaded to eat, their meat never passed thorough them, because the hungry gut
(called jejanum intestinum) was Plin. l. 11. c. 54 Athen. l. 2. Dip Alb. l. 7.
de any Alex. B. pract. lib. 12 c^p. 11 Jac. syl. Consil. contra famem.
by abstinence clung together. But Pliny saw the contrary, and Tinous Aunt lived
two months together without meat or drink. Albertus, Alexander Benedictus, and
Iacobus Sylvius, write yet of more strange and incredible abstinence both of
men and women; which truly I would have registered amongst the lies of the
golden Legend, Ioub dec. 1. ^a^ad^^* 2.
and the Abbot of Ursberg his Chronicles, had not William Rondeletius and honest
Ioubertus written the like of a French gentlewoman, living almost three years
without any sustenance of meat, bread, broth or drink; who afterward was
married and conceived a child, which she brougth well forth and happily alive:
By all which amples we may easily gather, how absurd the fashion and custom
was before Plutarchs time: when every man did Plut. 2. Symp.
not carve for himself, but was carved unto by another; and that (after the
College fashion) so equally, that none had more or less then his fellows:
which order howsoever it pleased Hagias the Sophister, because feasts in Greek
are called Divisions, and the Masters of feasts Great Dividers, and Servants
Carvers, and Moera and Lachesis (being the Goddesses of feastings) were called
so of equality of division; and that peace is maintained where equality is
kept, and that Agamemnons Soldiers (as Homer testifies in sundry places) had
every one alike measure and weight of victuals: yet (by his leave) neither is
humanity therein observed, nor geometrical proportion kept, nor nature
imitated. For tell me, what humanity can we call it, to give a man less then
his stomach wants? what geometrical proportion is that, which gives as much
to the half-full, as the empty vessel? and how dare we prescribe one quantity
to all, when men's stomachs be as diverse in quantity of receipt and ability of
concoction, as their faces be differing in appearance? so that it is too little
for one which is too much for another, and no certain measure, nor number, nor
weight is to be prescribed to any man: but every one to feed according as his
stomach is able to concoct; which (to use Hippocrates his phrase) though it
have lib. de. sal. diaet.
no ears, yet has it intelligence to beg his own, and wisdom to discern when
it has enough; willing us not to eat till we have an appetite, nor to eat so
long till we have none. This rule Galen observing (amongst many other) he was
seldom sick, and lived (as Sipontinus writes) 140 years.

Also let us remember, that in youth, health and winter we may feed more
plentifully, as also after exercise and at our own own ordinary table: But when
we are at great feasts, or forced to eat upon strange meats (be they never so
finely dressed) let jealousy be our carver, Suet. in vita. Aug. Laert. in vita
Diog.
after the example of Augustus Caesar, and also of Plato: who at great feasts
fed only on some known dish. I have read somewhere, when they of Thasis
invited Alexander to a feast, that he fed well upon their fat mutton and beife,
and gave away the forced dishes and curious Quelqchoses not to his own
Countrymen and Soldiers, but to his captives and slaves: saying, That he would
rather they were all dead, then that any of his own by surfeiting upon any
unknown meat should be never so little sick.

And thus much of the just quantity of meats; which Physicians may aim at by
long experience, prescribing a full Diet to them that be sound and strong, and
accustomed to much feeding, a moderate diet to them that be indifferent, and a
thin diet to such weaklings and sick persons as require neither much nor often
feeding.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of the quality of Meats.
Hipp. de sal Di. Galen com. in aph. so. lib 1.
HIppocrates and Galen bids every man both in health and sickness, beware what
kind of meat he most commonly uses; for like food like flesh, like meat like
nourishment.

[And therefore we find that some have Quails stomachs, and may eat poison: A
Woman by custom drank the juice of Hemlocks usually. Gal. lib. 3. simpl.
medic. cap. 18. And a Maid fed usually (by custom) upon Napellus Spiders, and
other poisons, Caelius lib. A. L. 11. cap. 18. Mithridates the younger used
continually a counterpoyson made of poisons, in so much that when he would have
poisoned himself (being by his son Pharnaces vilany betrayed to Lucullus) he
could not do it, and therefore killed himself by the help of a Frenchman, Plin.
lib. 23. cap. 9.]

Gal. com. 4* de vict. rat. in ac. cap. 10.
All which cautions are particularly set down by Hippocrates and Galen, though
scatteringly and by pieces in several places* that I need not add to his own
words; which I have aphoristically set down in these sentences following,
because no man ever did the like.

Gal. com in aph. 50. lib. 1. Gal. com. in ap* 12. l. 1. and com. de sal.
diaet. c. 7* and com. 5. in 6. epi* c. ^. and com. in aph. 3. lib. 3.
1. Let every man take heed, what quality his meat is of; for custom begets
another nature, and the whole constitution of body may be changed by Diet.

2. We should take those kinds of meats which are best for our own particular
bodies, for our own particular age, temperature, distemperature and complexion.
For as every particular member of the body is nourished with a several juice:
so laborers and idle persons, children and striplings, old men and yound men,
cold and hot bodies, phlegmatic and choleric complexions must have diverse
Diets.

Gal. com. in aph. 18. lib. 2.
3. Young, hot, strong and laboring men's stomachs may feed of meats, giving
both an hard and a gross juice, (as beife, bacon, poudred-flesh and fish, hard
cheese, ryebread and hard eggs, etc.) which may nourish slowly, and be concocted
by degrees; for if they should eat things of light nourishment (as veal, lamb,
capons, chickens, poacht-egs, partridges, pheasants or plovers, etc.) either
their meat would be too soon digested, or else wholly Gal com. 2. de vict. rat.
in. ac. cap. 36.
converted into choler. Contrariwise milk is fittest for young children, tender
flesh for them that are growing, and liquid meats for such as be sick of sharp
diseases.

Furthermore if any man's bowels or body be too dry, a moist diet of suppings,
and boild meats yields him a remedy, but if it be too moist, all his meats and
diet must tend to dryness.

4. de fac. simp. cap. 7.
4. Sweet meats are unfit for young children and young men, and hot. stomachs;
for they corrupt childrens teeth, and turn most into choler in young men's
stomachs, but they are good for old men and cold complexions; yea honey it self
agrees with them.

4. de simpl* fac. cap. 19. and. 5. ejusdem. cap. 25
5 Bitter meats engender choler and burn blood, giving no general nourishment
to the whole, howsoever they be acceptable to some one part.

Gal. de alim. fac. l. and ca. ult.
6. Sharp spices (which I have particularly named before in the fifth Chapter
of this Book) are most unfit for tender bodies, whose substance is easily
melted and enflamed, howsoever strong men may eat them with gross meats.

Gal. 2. de vict. rat in ac.*
7. Sour meats and sharp together (as limons, orenges, citrons and vinegar)
offend cold stomachs and sinewy parts: but if they be cold and astringent (as
sorrel, quinces, cervisses and medlers) they are not so offensive, nay they are
profitable to all stomachs being eaten last, unless the body be subject to
fluxes.

Gal. 3 de fac. alim. and 3. de loc. af^. cap. 6.
8. Meats oversalted how dangerous they are, inflammations, leprosies, sharpness
of urine, and great obstructions happening to such as use them much, do
sufficiently declare, agreeing with none but strong bodies; as Sailers,
Soldiers, and husbandmen, accustomed to Gal. com in ap. 18. lib. 2.
hard labor and much toiling.

Gal 5. de. al. f^*
9. Fatty meats are not good but for cold and dry stomachs; for in sanguine and
choleric stomachs they Isa. de univers. and parti. diaeta.
are soon corrupted, in phlegmatic stomachs they procure looseness and hinder
retention: Only they are fit for men naturally melancholic, giving to them a
kindly warmth, and also a most convenient and proper moisture.

Gal. com. in aph* 3. lib. 3.
10. All meats should be given very hot to cold and raw stomachs; but cold
meats to cold stomachs are very hurtful. Pityllus had so cold a stomach (says
Suidas) that he made a sheath for his tongue, to swallow down his pottage
scalding hot: and Eunapius reports the like of Proaeresius the Sophister; yea
I my self have known a Shropshire gentleman of the like quality.

Gal. com in. aph. 3 l. 3.
11. When any man is sick or distempered, let his meats be of contrary quallity
to his disease: for health it self is but a kind of temper gotten and preserved
by a convenient mixture of contrarieties.

Now in what degree most particular meats be hot, cold and dry or moist, is
sufficiently declared above in the fifth Chapter, where I have largely set down
the differencies of meat both in kind, substance, temperature and taste,
whereunto I refer you.

12. Above all things take heed that you eat not through hunger of a meat,
which either naturally or accidentally Gal com. in aph. 38. lib. 2.
you loath; for as the pleasing meat is best concocted (yea though it be
somewhat of the worst kind) so meats loathed, turn into wind, belchings,
vomitings and cruel gripings, because the stoamch does not affect Gal. com. 4.
de vict rat. in. ac. cap. 89.
them. But what meat is fittest, and most agreeable to every man's taste, humor
and nature; rather proper experience does teach us, then any man's judgment can
direct us.

13 Let a strong and good stomach taste of all things, Hip. de sal. vict. rat.
but not feed upon them as nourishments; yea, it is good in health to taste every
thing, least we refuse that in sickness which perhaps we shall have most cause
to feed on: Pl. desan. tu^n.
as it happened to Titus the Emperor, whose over-nice feeding and bathing
hastened his death.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of the Time, Order and Manner of Eating.
Meat well chewed is half digested. It is ill to talk much at meat* Where an eg
is best to be opened.
AThenaeus in his Feast of Sages says, that the old Grecians lived very
temperately; but yet he says that usually they made three meals a day, one
early in the morning, another at noon, and the third at night. The first was
called (...), because it was nothing but a sop of bread soked in a little wine.
The second was called (...), because it was made of home-bread things, which
are thought to give the best and strongest nourishment.

The last was called by two names, (...) signifying a late eating, and (...)
because it required care and cost. In Plutarchs time Breakfast was called
(...), because they did only taste and go. Dinner was termed (...), as being a
noon-meal. Supper was called (...), for that it was not private (as Breakfast
and Dinner) but either common amongst neighbors, or at least with all their
own household. How Beavers called procaenia, and sleepdrinks called prohypnia
and metacaenia came up, none have yet thoroughly determined, though here
amongst laborers, and in Germany amongst gentlemen they are ordinarily put in
practice.

Breakfasts are fit for all men in stinking houses or close Cities, as also in
the time of pestilence, and before you visit the sick; for empty veins draw
deepest, and what they first receive (be it good or bad) with that they cleanse
or infect the blood. Contrariwise where the air is pure clear and wholesome, it
is best to fast till dinner, unless you be either of growing years or of a
choleric stomach, for then you must not in any case be long fasting.

Dinners and Suppers are generally necessary and convenient for all ages, times
of the year, and all complexions; especially in these northern parts of the
world, where inward heat being multiplied by outward coldness, our radical
moisture would be soon consumed, if it were not restored by a double meal at
the least.

Whether Dinner or Supper should be largest.
Now whether at Dinner or Supper we may feed more plentifully, is a great
question amongst Physicians; either because they affirm too generally on either
side, or because they were ignorant of distinctions: lib. 2. para. c* ^1
Some are just of Leonard Fuchsius his opinion, that our Supper should be the
larger of both, for these reasons. First, because as we may eat more in Winter
then in Summer, our inwards being then hottest, through repercussion of heat by
external coldness; so the night lib. 6. epi. sec. 6. and 1. aphor. 15.
resembling winter (as Hippocrates notes) no reason but that then we should
feed most. Secondly we may then feed more largely because sleep ensues, with
whom blood, heat and spirits return more inward to the belly, Hip. 6* ep. sec.
5. and aph. 29.
bowels, stomach and all parts of concoction, then when by light exercise or
musing they are distracted upward, downward, and outward to other parts.

Hip ibid. ap. 10
Again, look what exercise is to the joints and muscles, that is sleep to the
bowels: that is to say, look how labor and exercise does warm the one, so does
sleep and quietness l. 1. de ca. sym.
warm the other. Galen likewise writes thus; whilst a man sleeps all motive
and sensible faculties seem to be idle; but natural powers are then most
active, concocting meat not only better in the stomach and guts, but also in
the veins and whole habit of the body. lib. 1. cap. 97.
Paulus Aegineta is of the same judgment, writing thus. Sleep is a ceasing or
rest of animal faculties, proceeding from the moistning of our brain with a
sweet and profitable humor; which whosoever takes in due order quantity and
time, he receives thereby many singular commodities; namely good concoction of
meat, and digestion of humors, and ability to labor easily and cheerfully
after digestion: where he adds this reason of better concoction in sleep out
of Hippocrates. Hib. 6. ep. tom. 4 aph. 12.
(...), etc. He that is broad waking is hottest outwardly, but he that soundly
sleeps is hottest inw ardly.

Now if any shall object, that no sleep can be wholesome or sound after supper,
because it is taken upon a full gorge. I answer him thus, Physicians write not
to idiotes and fools, but to men of sense and reason; whom common sense may
teach, that they are not (like swine and beasts) first to fill their bellies,
and then presently to sleep upon it, but to sit or walk easily after supper for
an*hour or more; to settle their meat to the bottom of their stomach, that it
may prove less vaporous to the head, and be sooner concocted lying nearer the
liver.

Furthermore when I said, that we should feed more largely at Supper then at
Dinner, I meant nothing less then to counsel men to gorg themselves up to the
top of their gullet; but to advise them of both their meals to make Supper the
larger, for the reasons alleged, and for infinite reasons besides which I
could set down.

For whom large, or sparing Suppers be most convenient.
Nevertheless I do not so generally set this down, as that it is best for all
persons, but for them only which be sound and in health: for if any be
troubled with great headache, or rhumes, or nightly torments of any part, their
Supper ought to be very little, slender and dry, and also to be taken very
timely in the evening; that nature being freed all night time of other offices,
may only attend concoction of the diseases cause.

Last of all, I except also them which have long been accustomed to small
Suppers and long Dinners; because Hip. 2. aph. 50.
the imitation of a long custom (though it be evil) breeds no common or
petty danger. Laurence Ioubert Dec. 1. parad. 8.
in his eigth Paradox written to Camusius the King of France his Secretary,
wonderfully striveth to oppugn this opinion; but profitting no more with his
head and hands, then the mouse in the tar-barrel does with her feet; for when
he has done all that he can, he only proves that better digestion is in the
day time, and not better concoction, as hereafter (upon some other occasion) I
will plainly demonstrate to the learned.

How often a man should feed in a day.
Furthermore I would not in like manner have any man think, that I prescribe
two or three meals, and neither more nor less to all persons: for Children may
feed much and often; old men little and often: where Plut. in Gryll.
by the way note this out of Plutarch, that old age is not ever to be stinted by
years, but by decay and loss of natural strength.

For in some Nothern Countries (and he names ours) few men are old at half a
hundred years, when the Ethiopians and Southern people are old at thirty. They
are long young and lusty, because much feeding restores decay of moisture, and
outward coldness preventeth the loss of in-borne heat. These contrariwise are
soon old, because outward heat draws out their inward moisture, which should
be the maintainer and food of their heat natural.

Also I permit unto true laborers and workmen to feed often (yea four or five
times a day if their work be groundwork or very toilsome) because continual
spending of humors and spirits, challenge an often restoring of the like by
meat and drink.

Finally whosoever by some natural and peculiar temperature, or else upon any
sickness, is enforced to eat often; it were against art, reason and nature to
number and stint his meals. Claudius Caesar had so gnawing a stomach, that he
could eat at all hours, And Aulus Vitellius, Suet. in vita claudii and vitel.
(even at his Gods service and sacrifice) could hardly refrain from snatching
the meal and oil out of the Priests hand: yea he baited at every Village as he
rid upon the way, and swept clean the Amery in every Inn. Contrariwise some
either by nature or custom eat but once a day, others only twice, and some
thrice: as you may read in Benevenius, Ferdinandus Mena and Bartholomaeus Ben*
c. 108. de abdit. Ferd. Mena l. de med. feb. c. 51. Barth. An in picta Po^si
cir* ca finem.
Anulus; and as I my self can also witness by diverse of our own Countrymen, if
I purposed or thought it needful to produce their names. The like may I say of
set hours, to dine or sup in; for albeit I could ever wish and think it
generally wholesomest, to dine before the highest of the Sun, and to sup 7. or
8. hours after dinner; yet if any be accustomed with Augustus Caesar, to Sue*
in. vit. Au.
eat only then and as often as he is hungry I forbid him not to discontinue his
own course, albeit I rather impute it to a foolish use, then to any inward
prescript or motion of nature. Caelius therefore not unwittily terms lib. 9.
c. 3. A. L.
Courtiers by the name of Antipodes; for as it is day with them when it is night
with us, so Courtiers and Princes eat when all others sleep; and again
(perverting the order of nature, and setting as it were the Sun to School)
sleep out the sweetest part of the day, wherein others eat and work.

Cael. l. 7* c. 9. A. C.
Concerning the manner of eating, it is not alike in all Countries. The Jews,
Grecians and old Romans did eat lying and declining to their right sight. Only
the Illyrians sat boult upright as we do now, with a woman placed (after the
new Hans fashion) betwixt every man. Masinissa did most commonly eat and walk,
yet sometime Ath. l. 10. c. 1^*
Leon^. l. 4. c. 3.
he did also eat standing, and sometimes leaning after the Roman guise, but he
never sat at his meat: because he thought eating to be one of the slightest
services to be don of men, upon which they should neither stand, lie nor sit
long. For mine own part, I prescribe no other manner of eating, then we have
recieved and kept by long tradition. Nevertheless, that declining toward the
right side was the best manner of position in feeding, Ioa. c* 13. v. 23.
the example of Christ and his Apostles do sufficiently prove, who (when they
had choice of rites and manners) observed ever that which was most wholesome,
seemly and natural.

Now how long we should sit at Dinner and Supper, though it be not set down
precisely by Physicians, yet generally we may forbid too long or too short a
time. Switrigalus Duke of Lituania never sat fewer then six hours at Dinner,
and as many at Supper: from whom I think the custom of long sitting was
derived to Denmark; for there I remember I sat with Frederic King of Denmark,
and that most honorable Peregine Lord Willoughby of Eresby (when he carried the
Order of the Garter) 7. or 8. hours together at one meal. Others feed quickly
and rise speedily; but neither of those courses be allowable: for as too long
sitting causes dullness of spirits, and hinders the full descent of meat to
the depth of our stomachs; so too speedy rising causes an overhasty settling,
and makes it also to pass out before it be well concocted.

To conclude, mince or chaw your meat finely, eat leisurely, swallow advisedly,
and sit upright with your body for an hours space or less; for longer sitting
is not requisite for the body (howsoever some affect it) nay it is rather
hurtful unless it be confirmed by long custom, or made more tolerable by
reason of some pastime, game, or discourse to refresh the mind. But of all lib.
de* remed. utr fort.
long sitters at the table, farewell Hugutia Fagiolanus, who (as Petrarch
reports) lost both the City of Pisa and Lukes at one Dinner, because he would
not arise (though a true Alarm was given) to repel the enemy, till his dinner
were fully ended, which usually was protracted two or three hours.

Last of all, Concerning the order of taking of Meats, The first course in old
times was called frigida mensa, the cold service; because nothing but Oisters,
Lettice, Spinache, cold salades, cold water and cold sawces were then set on
the table; which order was clean altered in Plutarchs time, for they began
their meals with wine, Plut. 8. symp.
hot pottage, black or peppered broth, and hot meat, ending them with Lettice
and Purcelane (as Galen did) to suppress vapors and procure sleep; which
example is diligently to be followed of cold stomachs, as the other is to be
imitated of them which are over hot.

Likewise that the most nourishing meat is first to be eaten, that ancient
Proverb ratifieth Ab ovo ad mala; Cael liq* 7. cap. 17. A. L.
from the eg to the Apples; wherefore I utterly mislike our English custom,
where Pheasant, Partridge and Plover are last served, and meats of hard
concoction and less good nourishment sent before them. As for fruit (if it be
not astringent, as tart apples, pears, soure-plums, quinces, medlers, cervises,
cornels, wardens, sour pomgranates, and all meats made of them) it should be
eaten last.

Contrariwise all sweet and moist*fruit (as ripe melons, gourds, cucumbers,
pompions, old and sweet apples, sweet pomgranates, sweet orenges) and all
things either fatty, light, liquid and thin of substance, and easy of
concoction, should be first eaten, unless we be subject to great fluxes of the
belly, or choleric dispositions of stomach, and then the contrary course is
most warrantable. For if slippery and light meats went foremost into hot
stomachs, they would either be burnt before the grosser were concocted, or at
the least, cause all to slip downwards over-soon, by making the lower mouth of
the stomach too too slippery. And verily I think that this is the best reason,
wherewithal to maintain our English custom, in eating biefe and mutton
foremost before foul and fish; unless the reason drawn from use and custom may
seem more forcible*

Finally let me add one thing more, and then an end of this treatise; namely
that if our breakfast be of liquid and supping meats, our dinner moist and of
boiled meats, and our supper chiefly of roasted meats, a very good order is
observed therein, agreeable both to art and the natures of most men.

FINIS.

