A MIGHTY VICTORY IN IRELAND: Obtained by the Lord Inchequin, near
English-mans-Hill.

The Lieutenant General Kilkettoth, and 4000 more slain, 40 Colors taken, 8
Wayne load of powder and Ammunition taken, with 6000 Arms, and all their Bag
and Baggage.

AND Taken prisoners 31 Captains, 19 Lieutenants, 17 Ensigns. And the Lord
Taffe totally routed.

WITH The Names of the Chief Officers that were slain on the Lord Inchequins
party.

And all the particulars of the fight, and a List of the particulars of the
Victory.

November 29. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbott.



Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1647.

A Letter from Munster in Ireland, of a great Victory obtained by the Lord
Inchequin against the REBELS.
Right Honorable,
THe Lord Inchequin received a Letter from the Lord Taffe, General of the
Irish Rebels about Munster, that he was now with an Army in the field; and
would fight him, if he durst draw near, with as many hundreds as he would.

The Lord Inchequin returned him answer, that he should find that he was not
afraid to meet him in the field, and accordingly his Lordship joined what
strength he could make to draw into the field against the Rebels (our men at
that time were very low, and in much want of provisions, should they have laid
still and let the enemy destroy their quarters.

The Lord Taffe marched with his Army near Mallo, and with him was joined
Alexander Magdonell, (commonly called Kilkittoth) who destroyed so many
Protestants in Scotland: and with him a considerable party of Redshankes, and
he was Lieutenant general of the foot.

The whole number of the Rebels Army were 7500. foot, and 1200. horse well
armed, and a good train of Ammunition with them in the field, marching on to
destroy our quarters in Munster.

The Lord Inchequin on Friday November 12. 1647. had notice where the Rebels
Army was, and his Lordship having got together 4000. foot, and 1200. horses
(all the strength he could make, besides those that must of necessity be left
to keep Garrisons) he marched toward the Rebels.

On Saturday November 13. his Lordship discovered the Rebels near Mallo, and
drew near to him.

The Lord Inchequin sent a challenge to the Lord Taffe (who was then on the top
of a great hill, called Knocknegaoll, in English it is called the English-mans
hill) to come down from the hill, and he would, (though with a smaller number)
fight with his whole Army: But the Lord Taffe returned answer, that he was so
much a soldier, that having gotten the advantage he would keep it.

Hereupon the Lord Inchequin moved toward the Rebels, front to front, to
invite them to come down, but they would not stir.

Then his Lordship withdrew parties to the other sides of the hill, and sent up
several parties of Musketeers to charge the Rebels, and at last got one part
of the hill, and the wind side, but the Rebels, had routed one of our parties
of foot on the other side of the hill, whom his Lordship with a reserve (which
he had ready) soon relieved, but we lost at that time some 60. men.

The Lord Taffe still kept the hill, being confident to have destroyed all the
English (upon a superstitious observation of an old prophecy that is in
Ireland that an English-mans hill, (for so the place was called) Magdoneth
shall much English blood spill. And this he attributed to himself, because
that whereas it did formerly belong to Magdoneth it was now in his own hands,
presuming that himself should be the man that should then destroy the English;
Alexander Magdonel being then his Lieutenant general, but blessed be God, the
Lord disappointed their hopes.

The Lord Inchequin (in this business) deported himself gallantly (and indeed
we were in great danger that the Rebels would have compassed our men round,
there being no place of retreat for our men, yet God put such a courage into
our men, that there was a very great influence to perform their utmost against
the Rebels.

The despute by parties lasted some two hours, until at last, the Rebels
began by little and little to descend from the top of the hill, and then the
fight was very fierce, but lasted not long, for in half an hour they were
touted and broken. And no quarter was given to the Irish Rebels, nor to the
Redshankes.

The Lord Inchequine charged many of quallity of the enemies party, amongst the
rest, one his Lordship pursued to a wood, and there slew him, a confederate
Officer; And his Lordship did so cut the Rogues that he brake his Sword into
three pieces.

We lost Collonell Gray and Major Brown, and other who fought gallantly, Sir
Robert Trever, Judge Martial was slain near our Carriages, (for the Rebels
had come up so close upon us that they had seized some of our Ordinances and
Wagons) but were beaten off again, Sir William Bridges was slain in the left
wing of Horse.

The whole number of the Rebels slain were about 4000. many of which were
killed in the pursuit; and of our men were slain about 120 in all, that is
the most we have lost.

We have not taken many of the Common Soldiers prisoners, for that would have
hindered the victory much, and besides the Officers (according to the in closed
list) were diverse that escaped after they were taken, but those which are
expressed in the List are all secured prisoners in custody.

The Lord Taffe himself hardly escaped with some few others, and all those who
fled are dispersed several ways, so that it is believed they will hardly
escape.

There are some of the Nobillity of Ireland, and others of the General
Assembly (Knights and others) of Kilkenny that were slain, but I cannot (as
yet) give you a list of their names.

This is a great blessing, the Lord grant that we may improve it to his glory.
So prays

Your Honors humble Servant, WILL. MORE.
Dated at our Quarters in the field near Knocknegaoll the 13. of Novem. 1647.
A LIST of the particulars of the great Victory obtained by the Lord Inchequin
the 13. of Novem. 1647. at Knocknegaoll in Munster in Ireland.
Slain of the Rebels,
Alexander Magdonell (Kilkittoth) Lieutenant General of the Foot, 4000 and
odd slain, whereof diverse considerable Officers.
Taken prisoners
1 Collonell, 1 Lieutenant Colonel, 1 Major, 31 Captains, besides 9 that
afterward escaped, 19 Leiutenants, 17 Ensigns, diverse inferior Officers, and
some few Common Soldiers.
Taken besides,
38 Colors of Foot, 2 Colors of Horse 6000 Arms, 4 Waine load of Powder, 4
Waine load of other Ammunition, All their Carriages, bag and baggage.
Slain on the Lord Inchequeenes party
Sir Robert Trevers, Judge Marshall Collonell Sir William Bridges, Collonell
Gray, Major Brown, 120. Soldiers and other Officers,

FINIS.

