A Mighty VICTORY Over the IRISH REBELS Obtained by Colonel Jones, at Lynceyes
Knock near Trim, August 8 instant

Where was slain upon the place,

The Earl of Fingall, Lieut General Burn, 7 Colonells* 5 Lieutenant
Colonels, 6 Majors, 300 Officers and Gentlemen, 3000 common Soldiers. General
Preston totally routed, wounded and fled, The Earl of Westmeath taken 40 field
Officers and Gentl. 1500 Prisoners, 40 Colors taken, 4 piece of Ordnance, 1000
Muskets, 5000 birding pieces, pistols, and other weapons, 20 Carriages, 10 load
of powder, match, and Ammunition. 2000 Sheep, 650 Head of Cattle, General
Prestons Cabinet, all his bag and baggage.
WITH A List of the names, and the particulars of both sides.

DVBLIN, Printed for Charles Ryley, and to be sold against the Castle-gate,
1647.

A Mighty VICTORY Over the IRISH REBELS, Obtained by Colonel Jones, at
Lynceyes Knock near Trim, August 8. instant.
May it please your Lordships.
OUr Army marched out of Dublin Aug. 1. instant under command of Colonel Jones
our Governor, 4000. horse and foot, with two Demiculverins, and five
Field-peeces; our men as well armed as we could, and what powder, bullet and
Ammunition could be spared from the City, and quartered about Port,
Castle-Knocke, and parts adjacent, but our foot and carriages, could not go
far that night.

August 2. We marched into the County of Kildare, where we had advertisements
by Scouts sent out by Colonel Jones, that Maynoth Castle was surrendered to
Preston, and that Sir Henry Titchburn had been surprised by 3 Troops of the
Rebels, and that some Gentlemen and officers of note; the Rebels refusing to
give quarter, which did much raise the spirits of our Soldiers against them:
The Rebels had fetched some prey from Dublin, and sent out parties to plunder
other places, and we took that day some prisoners. A Council of War was
called, and ^y an unanimous vote it was resolved to fight with Prestons forces
before Trim, if they did not raise the seige, and accordingly preparations were
made.

August 3. We had intelligence that Preston had raised his siege from before
Trim, and that he was resolved to march toward Portlester, and that the number
of his horse and foot were about 8000. and that there were diverse Lords and
Commoners of the general Assembly of Kilkenny in the army, who were as
Commissio^e^s, and that orders were given out by their directions, and agreed
to at a Council of War, that no quarter should be given to the English
Protestants wheresoever they took them; and that the Rebels in their retreat
did do much mischief at Killicrosse, ^ronny, and other Towns where they
came, and that night we had intelligence of other forces coming toward us
from the North to join with our Army.

August 4. 2000. foot, and 600. horse were added to us, the British, Colonel
Coot, and Sir Henry Titchburne being joined with us, which made up our number
about 7000. horse and foot, which were appointed to a general Randezvouz. That
day we had a confirmation of the certainty of Prestons Army drawing off, and
what was before advertised, and the whole Army was put into a posture, and in
our march we found, that many Papists Gentlemen that are Irish inhabitants left
their houses, and were gone to the Army.

August 5. A Council of war was called, And it was resolved to give battle to
Prestons Army if they would fight, if not to pursue them, and a commanded party
was appointed to take the carriages, and put relief into Trim.

August 6. We marched toward Trim, from whence the Rebels were not gone far,
so that we gave them an alarm, whereupon Colonel Jones drew his Army toward
the Kings County to impede Prestons marching toward Kilkenny, which was about
forty miles distance from them, and Colonel Jones intended to drive them
Northward or fight them.

August 7. Both Armies faced, and drew into batalia near Linceyes Knock, and
both parties planted their Ordnance, and ordered their bodies, Preston being
resolved only to defend, but Colonel Jones was resolved to fall upon them if
they advanced not the next day, and that night some Scouts met, and our horse
brought in some of their cattle.

August 8. Colonel Jones sent out a forlorn hope which did scrimish with
them, but the Rebels had a very great advantage in the ground from which they
would not move. But Colonel Jones had given order for the battle, which was
very hot and sharp, as you may see by the enclosed list of those slain and
taken prisoners.

This was a day wherein the Kingdom of Ireland was at the stake to be won or
lost; but God be praised who has given his servants the victory, and given
strength to our Forces totally to defeat that great and bloody Army.

Colonel Jones fought so desperately, that we were in continual fear of his
life, and would by no means be persuaded, but rushed upon the Rebels with
such courage, that it put a mighty spirit into the whole Army; he slew many of
the Rebels officers and others.

Sir Robert Kings son did brave service, killed the Rebels Lieutenant general
of horse with his own hands, and diverse others: and to speak uprightly, Col.
Long, and so all our officers and soldiers, did so good service, and fought
with so much spirit and courage, as ever I saw an Army, or could be expected
from them.

Had the loss been ours, Ireland had been lost, God giving us the day (in
which the Rebels are totally routed) now this Kingdom may be saved (through
Gods blessing) if supplies come speedily from England.

As for his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, I know that nothing will be wanting
from that Army, if they have but encouragement and assistance, moneys and
Ammunition provided, for naked men cannot help us.

We are still in pursuit of the Rebels, and take prisoners. I am very weary,
and so we are all; therefore I desire your Lordships to accept of this account
from

Trim. August 8. 1647 Your Lordships humble servant Robert Moore.

A List of the Irish slain and taken prisoners in the battle at Linceyes
Knock by Colonel Jones, Aug. 8. 1647.
Slain upon the place,
Earl of Fingall. Hugh mac Philonell Burn Leivetenant General of the Horse,
Collonell Fitzgarret, Colonel Brown. Collonell Butler. Colonel Warren,
Colonel Plunket. Colonel Synnot. Colonel More, Lieuten. Colonel Mead.
Lieutenant Col. Rotchford. Lieutenant Col. Butler. Lieutenant Col. Reyly.
Lieutenant Col. Mac Arthy. 6 Majors. 300. Offices, Commissioners, and
Gentlemen. 5000. Foot Soldiers, and inferior Officers 140 Troopers, and
inferior Officers of Horse. General Preston shot and fled. Col. Preston the
Generals Son sore wounded. Diverse Officers and Soldiers hurt.
Taken prisoners
Earl of Westmeath. 40. Field Officers, and Commissioners of the Assembly at
Kilkenny. 300. Horse, and Horsemen. 1200. Foot.
Taken besides,
40. Colors, and Standards. 4. Pieces of Ordnance. 1000, Muskets, 3000.
Birding Pieces and other Guns, 2000. Pikes, and other weapons. 3000.
Serviceable Horse. 150. Oxen. 500 Cowes. 2000. Sheep. 20. Carriages. 16. Load
of pwoder, Match and Amunition^ General Preston Cabinet of writings. 8000.
Horse and Foot totally routed. Colonel Jones had a Lieutenant and 30. more
slain, Colonel Long and 200. more wounded.
FINIS.

