Protection proclaimed (through the loving kindness of God in the present
Government) to the three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland: WHEREIN The
GOVERNMENT Established, in the Lord Protector and his Council, Is proved to be
of DIVINE INSTITUTION; AND The great Stumbling Block of thousands of Christians
(in regard of his Title) removed; proving it to be none other than what has
been given to those whom God has made instrumental for his Peoples Deliverance
of old.

Written to satisfy unsatisfied Consciences, By JOHN MOORE, a well-wisher to
the peace of our English Jerusalem.

-- Pray for the peace of Jerusalem -- Peace be within thy walls. -- For my
brethren and companions sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee.

-- Thus says the Lord, I will restore unto thee Judges as at first, and
Counselors as at the beginning.

London, Printed by J. C. for Henry Fletcher, at the three Cups in Paul's
Churchyard, near the West End. 1656.

The Author's Address to God, before he put Pen to Paper, to write the ensuing
Lines.
GReat God of heaven, thou God of Truth, do thou my thoughts direct,
That I may write but what is right, of Him who does protect
(Subordinately to thy self) this Land wherein I live:
A spirit of Discerning, Lord, do thou unto me give;
That I may clearly apprehend thy mind in this great Change,
And from thy mind and will therein, let not my spirit range.
Let no contempt of him that rules harbor within my breast,
Since under him, through providence, tranquillity and rest,
And peace for tender Conscience is ratified by Law;
A privilege of Liberty which England scarce ere saw.
Let every tender Conscience be satisfied likewise;
Yea, such a Liberty Lord grant, that all of us may prize;
And from our very hearts and minds acknowledge 't from above,
And own it as a special Pledge and Emblem of thy love;
That thou have given us one to rule, whose soul desires the good
Of all thy servants in this Land, who for the Truth have stood.
To his Highness OLIVER By the Providence of God, Lord Protector of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and Dominions thereunto belonging: J. M. wishes length
of days with Peace and Safety here; and eternal Life with Christ in glory
hereafter.
My Lord,
WIth the poor widow, I have put in my Mite into the Public Treasury of
acknowledging the Lawfulness of submitting to the present Government, in which
the Eternal God has invested Your Highness at this day. I have taken the
boldness to present it to Your Highness, for these Reasons:

First, because, of all men, you are most concerned in it.

Secondly, because, of all men, it belongs most to you, to patronize and
protect the weak acknowledgements of submissive affectionate Obedience.

Thirdly, that you may know that God is still owning you, and working for you,
not only by his Providence, in protecting your Person against the secret
Combinations of a common Enemy; but by the more immediate working of his
Spirit, to the satisfying of the Consciences of many unsatisfied servants of
Christ, whether the present Government, with its endowments, be of God or no;
in which my own soul was very lately unsatisfied.

Fourthly, that under your Protection and Patronization, it may bring forth
some fruit of Satisfaction to the Consciences of some others (though never so
few) that are yet at enmity in their spirits against the Title and Dignity of
the Government.

I have presented it to public view, for this Reason:

That the world may know, that I am neither afraid, nor ashamed, to own,
acknowledge, and confess, the good hand and providence of the God of heaven and
earth, in exalting your Person to that Honor and Dignity, and placing you as
his (hitherto) undaunted and unwearied Servant in subordination to himself, to
sit at the Helm of Government as at this day. Where sitting to govern, it is
the unfeigned desire of my soul, for You, and those Honorable men in Counsel
with You, That the Spirit of Christ may be your Guide, the Power of Christ your
Lifeguard, the Laws and Ordinances of Christ the Basis and Foundation of
yours, the Glory of Christ your greatest Aim, the Advancement of the Gospel
your greatest Glory, the Flourishing of it your chiefest Joy: That you neglect
no opportunity of doing good, when Christ commands it to be done, and in your
power to do it: That in all your Undertakings and Counsels, you may lay your
selves open to the all-seeing eye of God; that so you may escape that Curse,
which the Prophet Isaiah pronounces against those that seek deep to hide their
counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who sees
us? and who knows us? Isai. 29.15. That your Body may possess as resolved a
heart to keep touch with God, in performing Vows and Promises made to him, as
there was in Jephthah, who was once a General, and a subordinate Protector in
the hand of God, of his people Israel from the hand of the children of Ammon;
who having opened his mouth unto the Lord, was so careful of his promise, that
he parted with the dearest thing he had in the world, his only child, for
beside her he had neither Son nor daughter. Judge. 11.30, 31, 34, 35.

The further desire of my soul for your Highness, is, That God would give you
(not only) a spirit of discerning, to see where injustice and iniquity does
yet remain and continue amongst the people; but also a free and resolved spirit
to improve such power as God has put into your hand, for the speedy reforming
and purging of it out: That your Council Chamger may be free from evil
Counsels, and false-hearted dissembling Counselors: That both your Highness
and your Council may be of one heart and one mind, free from all manner of
dissension and discord; because that

Concordia parvae res crescunt,
Discordia magnae dilabuntur.
That your Courtly Attendants may be men of upright and faithful hearts,
fearing God, and hating Vice: That all other inferior Officers, in their
several places subject to the Power by which they act, may discharge their
duties with care and conscience, void of Dissimulation and Hypocrisy; not from
Fear, but Affection to the Government which they seem to own: That the Army and
Navy may be at peace in themselves, free from the least Mutiny: That all
unsatisfied Consciences touching the Legality of the Government, may be
satisfied: That all heart-burnings of the People against it, may be quenched,
through their causless complainings in the streets, of Tyranny and Oppression.
And lastly, That the God of heaven would more and more enrich your Valiant
heart with all such endowments of Grace, Wisdom, and Virtue, as becomes the
mind and person of a Christian Potentate, is and shall be the continual prayer
of

Your Highness most affectionate Servant, upon all just Commands, John Moore,

The Epistle to the Readers.
My Friends, (if I may call you so)
I Dare be bold, many of you will admire and wonder (especially those of you to
whom I am known) at this my public Testimony of affectionate Loyalty to the
present Government, having hitherto scarcely given the least solid Testimony of
it: for I must confess, at the first appearance of it, I was (as many thousands
beside) troubled in my mind, and unsatisfied in my conscience concerning it;
and the reason why, (as I now apprehend) was, because (according to the
determinate counsel of God, who works all things after the counsel of his own
will) it was brought forth and established, before it was so much as thought
of; so that the sudden appearance of it, did startle many thousands of
tenderhearted Christians, lest Christ thereby should lose his honor and
glory: out of which tenderness to the honor of Christ, many dear servants of
God, without deliberate consideration, or without waiting to know the mind of
God in such a Change; did presently, rashly, and (in my apprehension)
unadvisedly, give public testimony of the dislike of their spirits to the
Government, and the enmity of their hearts to the Person to whom God has given
it.

Whereupon, the Common Enemy (although before, utterly vanquished in the Field)
seeing his dear Friends and Companions declare their open enmity against him,
and their dislike of the Government, do take to themselves fresh Courage, and
re-animate themselves, to plot and contrive his death, who had so many times
jeoparded his life, for the peace and safety of his new declared Discontented
Friends.
Enemies; nor is it unknown to England, that at length it brake forth into an
open Hostile Insurrection, which if it had taken effect, what could those his
discontented friends have expected, but the utter ruin of themselves and their
Families* and the absolute undoing, yea beggary, of all their innocent friends
in England? for their dislike of the present Government would not have quit
them of their former enmity against the Royal party of the Kings Army, unless
they would (as others had done before them) return to their vomit.

But by this time, me thinks I hear some Reader say, that I have wrote this
Testimony of my affection to the Government established in the Protector and
his Council, for some by-ends and self-respects, and not from a real
satisfaction of Conscience. I do therefore give such to know, that I take God
to witness, who knows the secrets of all hearts, and as I believe I shall one
day stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to give an account of my faith,
and all deeds done in the flesh from thence, That it is from a fully-satisfied
Conscience, of the lawfulness of submitting to it, and from a full resolution
to the utmost of my power to own it, so far as it has hitherto declared it
self, yea, though it be to the laying down of my life, which with his Higness,
to whom God has given the Power, I have heretofore been free and willing to
do: having still, (as I have always had, since I had the least knowledge of
the worth of Christian Liberty) this Motto upon the Shield of my mind:

Praestat emori per Virtutem, quam per Dedecus vivere. Esteeming it a thousand
times better to resign my Heart-blood for the Testimony of my Conscience, at
the feet of an Enemy, than to live in contempt and disgrace in obedience to his
will. The same resolution I find to be in Sampson, (although I am a worm and
nothing in comparison of him) who, rather than he would live in disgrace to the
Philistines, (whose professed Enemy he had formerly been) and be a laughing
stock to them; he desired of God, that he might die with them: a remarkable
pattern, and worthy of a serious survey of all English godly men, (and else)
that have openly engaged against the late King and his party; that if we
(through our own divisions and dissatisfaction one toward another) should
suffer a vanquished Enemy to break in upon us, it would fare full as evil with
us as it did with Sampson: all that we have would soon be taken from us, the
eyes of our comfort would soon be put out, and we should see that Freedom and
Liberty that we have in the Gospel no more, our consciences bound to all their
impositions with brazen Fetters, and be forced to grind in the Mill of their
cruelty; not a bit of bread should we eat, but with sorrow of heart: our lives
would be bitter to us; yea, our lives would be a heavy burden to us: every one
of us from the highest to the lowest, would be a Sampson to make them sport and
pastime, and the main Petition of our Prayer to God would be for death.

So that there is no way left us visibly appearing to escape these things, but
to retain the strength of affection to the present Government; under which, we
sit down under our Vines and Figtrees of spiritual freedom, and none to make us
afraid.

Now Reader, whoever thou art that have formerly engaged with him whom God has
exalted to the Supreme place of Civil Government in subjection to himself over
the three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and yet can not fully
close with him in it, nor art satisfied in thy conscience whether thou may
lawfully do it; If the Testimony of the Word of God recorded in Scripture
especially, or if Reason will satisfy thee, I have here presented thee with
both; by which I my self was convinced, and my conscience satisfied.

If it be the change of the Government it self, consider, that such an
extraordinary and unheard of change of Government in a Christian Nation, could
not have been, but by the special hand and determinate counsel of God, who
works all things after the counsel of his own will.

Secondly, is it the exaltation of his person, from a low estate, to such a
height of greatness and honor, that is a stumbling in thy way of affection?
consider what the Scripture says, Psalm 75.6.7. Promotion comes neither from
the East, nor from the West, nor from the South: but God is the Judge; he
puts down one, and sets up another. Compared with 1 Samuel 2. 7, 8. The
Lord makes poor, and makes rich; he brings low, and lifts up; he raises
up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to
set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the Throne of Glory: for the
pillars of the earth are the Lord's, and he has set the world upon them. But I
pray thee, without prejudice of Spirit, or hatred of Heart to his person whom
God has exalted amongst us, Consider the persons whom God has of old exalted
over his people for their protection and safety. What honor and glory did God
exalt Joseph to, whose Father Jacob was but a Shepherd? Moses was a poor
Shepherd, yet chosen of God to be a Governor of his own people. Joshua the Son
of a poor Israelite, and a Servant of Moses, after his death had the command of
Government over the people; because he followed the Lord fully: and the Lord
emboldned him with a courageous heart, that he did animate the Captains that
were with him, to tread upon the necks of five Kings; saying, Come near, put
your feet upon the necks of them. And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be
dismayed, be strong and of good courage; for thus shall the Lord do to all your
enemies against whom ye fight. After the death of Joshua, the people fell away
from following the Lord, and the Lord afflicted them by the hands of the
Midianites. And they cried unto the Lord, who for his Names sake appointed
Gideon to be their Protector from the spoil of the Midianites: who being but of
a mean Family in Israel, spoke thus unto the Angel of the Lord: O my Lord,
wherewith shall I save Israel? behold, my Family is poor in Manasseth, and I
the least in my Father's house. And the Lord said unto him, Surely I will be
with thee, and thou shall smite the Midianites as one man. After the death of
Gideon, in their distress he gave them Jephtha, one of a small reckoning
amongst them in their prosperity. After Jephtha, Sampson was given them to be
their Deliverer from the hands of the Philistines. Thus did God of old appoint
men of his own choosing, to be Head in the Government of his people* and
furnished them with parts suitable thereto; and raised them from a low estate
to honor and renown.

Thirdly, is it the Title of Protector, that thou stumblest at? then consider,
that the Title of Protector was a Title given to the Governors of Israel long
before they had a King to reign over them: for I will ask thee this single
Question, What difference there is between a Protector and a Savior. I find
then in Scripture, that this Title of Savior God has formerly conferred upon
those Worthies that have been faithful Instruments in his hand to go in and out
before his people against his and their Enemies: which Title Nehemiah
acknowledges; chap. 9. 27. Therefore thou deliveredst them into the hands of
their enemies, who vexed them; and in the time of their trouble they cried unto
thee, thou heardst them from heaven, and according to thy manifold mercies thou
gave them a Savior, who saved them out of the hand of their enemies. And
this Title I clearly apprehend shall continue to those that shall be for the
time to come instrumental in the hand of God for the safety of his people; God
having promised by the Prophet Isaiah, That he will restore to his people
Judges as at first, and their Counselors as at the beginning, that Zion shall
be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness; and the Title
that they shall have at that time, when such deliverance shall be wrought,
shall be Saviors or Protectors, there being no difference as I know between
Salvation and Protection: and that this shall be the Title of honor which God
will give to such (a better name than that of Sons) read the last Verse of the
Prophet Obadiah, where it is thus written: And Saviors shall come up on Mount
Zion, to judge the Mount of Esau, and the Kingdoms shall be the Lord's. But
because I have written somewhat more of my mind concerning these and other
Scriptures of like nature, in the ensuing Treatise; I shall refer thee to it
for thy further satisfaction; desiring, that thy judgment may not be blinded by
thy own will: which if it be not, I hope thou will have as much satisfaction in
reading it, as I had in writing it; which is the main desire of

him who unfeignedly desires the Peace and Welfare of his Country, J. Moore.

A Word to the Servants of Christ in Covenant with him through Grace, and in
fellowship together under the Ordinances of the Gospel.
I Do wonder and admire that so few of you have given public Testimony of your
affection to the present Government, established amongst us through the
providence of the Almighty; which makes me conceive it has an ill savor
amongst you, or out of a tenderness of Conscience to the exaltation of Christ's
Kingdom, and longing for his reign, you cannot fully close with it. Now I
beseech you Brethren, (from the tender love of my Soul to the Peace and Welfare
of your Souls and Bodies) that you will without prejudicate thoughts weigh
these two or three Considerations in the balance of your Spirits.

First, consider, That the chiefest ground of all our Engagements,
Watchfulness, Weariness, Painfulness, the shedding of our own and friends
dearest Blood; yea, the Prayers and Tears that have been offered before the
Lord in your several Congregations, has been for the full Enjoyment of Freedom
and Liberty in the service of Christ, from the coercive compulsions of bloody,
persecuting, penal Statutes: and now it is granted both from God, and by Oath
from his Highness the Lord Protector to the utmost of his power to be protected
in it (as if we were already weary of it) we hate the Instrument by which it is
confirmed.

Secondly, consider the frame of your own Spirits at present, with what they
once were, when such Freedom and Liberty was precious to you: would you not
once have owned almost any civil Government that would have granted that
spiritual Freedom which we now enjoy? I dare be bold, that if the late King had
proclaimed such Liberty to his Subjects, he had been alive to this day, except
sickness had cut him off; and that the people of God in England, formerly
called by the name of Puritans, to whom such Freedom was precious, would have
laid their Bodies and Estates at his feet, to manifest their affection. And
pray you, what is the reason that we are so dull, so dead, and so void of our
public manifestation of affection to him, that with the often hazarding his
life has been made instrumental in the hand of God to purchase it for us? yea,
we are so far from declaring our affection, that a great part of us swell with
hatred toward him; an evil requital for his labor of love toward us: for if
you well consider how many fell away to the Enemy, and sought our destruction;
and others that had been admirable Instruments for a season, threw up their
Commissions, refusing to act any further; and how he, (I mean the Lord
Protector that now is) never refused to act for that Freedom we now enjoy; but
like another Joshua or Caleb followed the Lord fully in the work that he was
called to, and left us not till we had enjoyed that Liberty in the Gospel that
we long looked for, (except we are blind, and cannot see when good comes:) I
say, If we consider these things, we have not the least cause to manifest the
least disaffection, either to the Government, or the Person to whom it is
given; but contrariwise, hearty affection, with all cheerfulness that we can.

Thirdly, Measure the disposition of your Spirits with the Saints in the
primitive times of the Gospel, and you will find, that such peaceable Liberty
which we enjoy under the present Government, was of such worth to them, that
they could pray for Kings, and all that were in Authority, that under them they
might lead a peaceable and a quiet life: and acknowledge, that the Powers that
were, were ordained of God; although at that time they were generally Enemies
to Christ, and Persecutors of his Gospel. And lo, we are so different in our
Spirits, from the qualifications of theirs, that we cannot own that power to be
of God, that has made provision for the peace and tranquillity of the servants
of Christ, in the Freedom of their Consciences, and is tender of their welfare.

Now I beseech you dear Friends, if Freedom and Liberty in the service of
Christ be of any account with you; be not sullen in your Spirits, put away that
peevishness of heart that is yet remaining in any of you against the Government
estabished amongst us: say not, That is not of God, that is a furtherance to,
and a countenancer of godliness: call not that your Enemy, which has vowed
your Protection: let us not say to him that has stood to the face of Pharaoh
for us, Who made thee a Judge and Ruler over us? as the Israelites did to
Moses. But let us unanimously close with and own him, that has so cheerfully
engaged for our safety, when others left us: for in all probability, our
murmuring and repining at his exaltation, may continue fresh plottings and
contrivings of the common Enemy to take away his life; and from thence foster
their hopes of enslaving us again.

Now that you may consider these things with an equal hand, for the preventing
of your own ruin, and the loss of the most precious Liberty in the World; and,
that the Lord would open the Eyes of our Judgments, that you may see where you
are, is the unfeigned desire of him, who desires to commend himself to every
one of your Consciences in the things presented to you, and remain

Your poor Friend, and unworthy Fellow Servants in the Bonds of Peace, J. M.

Protection proclaimed, etc. The present Government established in the three
Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. is of God.
THE great Creator of Heaven and Earth, who by his providence supporteth the
whole Creation, has made of one Blood all Nations of Men, for to dwell on the
earth, and has determined the times appointed, and the bounds of their
Habitation; even he that works all things after the counsel of his own will,
though man know it not, and perceive it not; without whom there is not a
sparrow falls to the ground, nor the hair from a man's head; who has bounded
and limited all his Creatures, so that their bounds and limits they cannot pass
without him: the Sun, and Moon, and Stars in their constant course are
subservient to his will, the Sea keeps its bounds at the command of the
Almighty; yea, every little Water course observes its Makers will: the same God
by his determinate counsel, has bounded and limited the sons of men, both in
their habitations and power, beyond which they cannot pass; Moses the servant
of the Lord witnesses, Deuteronomy. 32.7, 8. saying, Remember the days of old,
consider the years of many generations, ask thy Father and he will show thee,
when the most high divided to the Nations their inheritance, when he separated
the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of
the children of Israel. The same God, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever,
by the same power will, and counsel, has bounded, limited, and put an end to
the power and reign of the Norman Race of Kings and Queens in England; yea, the
time of the late Parliaments Government was limited by God. So that let them
all be discontented never so much, fret, chafe, and rage; yea, nil they, will
they, they must stoop to the determinate counsel of Jehovah's will: so that by
the Divine institution of him, who has wrought all these things after the
counsel of his own will, is the present Government established in Oliver
Cromwell, (subordinately to God) the entitled Lord Protector thereof; and
whosoever he be that denies it, or speaks against it, denies the Omniregency of
God, and the Ordinance of his will: for the Scripture says, That promotion
comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south: but God is
the Judge; he puts down one, and sets up another.

But for further satisfaction, (to my Country in general, and in particular to
all those that have heretofore engaged for that Liberty we now enjoy) that the
present Government established in his Highness and his Council, is of God, I
have inserted these Arguments following.

First, that Government and Rule that answers the main desire and request of
God for his people, must needs be of God. Now if it be proved, that this
Government is correspondent to the main request and desire of God for his
people on earth, then it must be of God: and that it does so, I prove it thus:

God's main desire for his people on earth is, That the powers below touch not
his Anointed, and do his Prophets no harm; but, that they may serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life.

Now this Government has answered the desire of God herein, and has made
provision for their peace and safety, and has vowed their protection: so that
they may without fear of any penal, bloody, persecuting Law, worship him in the
administration of the Gospel with Freedom and Liberty, without confines of time
or place.

Therefore of God.

God has promised by his servant Obadiah the Prophet, That Saviors shall come
up on Mount Sion to judge the Mount of Esau; yea, this I say, that such shall
come, and one is, that shall judge, condemn, and throw down the Mount of Esau.
Esau was a Persecutor of his Brother Jacob, because he had obtained the
blessing of spiritual things, and himself went without them. Now by this Mount
of Esau, I understand the Mountainous Power of Persecutors of the Servants of
Christ for their Faith in him, which shall in due time be consumed like
stubble, and by degrees come to naught, by the hand of those whom God shall
send as Saviors for the same purpose.

Object. I know that this will be objected: If this Government be so careful of
the Freedom and Liberty of the Servants of Christ, why then are so many eminent
Servants of Christ restrained in prison?

I answer, Although the Lord knows I have both in private and public prayed
for their deliverance, and that the difference between them and the Lord
Protector (by whom they are imprisoned) may be reconciled; he to them in loving
kindness and favor, and they to him by acknowledging the hand of God in
exalting him to the Government in which he is invested: Yet I say, That they
are not imprisoned as they are Servants of Christ, nor is it for their
Conscience in the worship of Christ, in the Faith of the Gospel, that they are
restrained of Liberty: but for their discontent, dislike, and dissatisfaction
toward him, and the Government which God has put into his Hand: and for my
part, I think it no indiscretion nor cruelty for any man to tie down (for a
time) that hand that cannot hold still, but must be scratching at his body till
it bleed, and so endanger the whole to destruction: caetera mitto loqui; lest
any should think that I either wish or desire their restraint from their
Liberty, which the Lord knows I do not, but from my very Soul desire their
enjoyment of it; so that it may stand with the peace and preservation of the
whole body.

Secondly, Consider that the ways and workings of God, especially in things of
such great concernment as the Rule and Government of his people, do not answer
the expectation, thoughts, nor will of man. I know, that if this Nation had
been divided into ten parts, nine of them would have had the yoke of the Norman
Race to have continued: if there had been one part of ten left, nine parts of
that one, would have subjected themselves to the yoke of a Parliamentary
Government; now that God might cross the expectation of man, and let us know,
that our thoughts herein were vain, he did upon a sudden bring forth and
establish such a Government that we least thought of; that less of Man, and
more of God might be seen in it.

When the time of Readiness Reign over Israel in God's Decree was accomplished, he
commanded the Prophet Samuel to leave off grieving for Saul; telling him, That
he had rejected him for being King over his people; and told him, That he had
provided for himself a King amongst the Sons of Jesse the Bethlemite, one that
was not so much as thought of, (in regard of ruling over them for the future)
not in all Israel. The Prophet at first was afraid to go, for fear of Saul,
that he would kill him; but at last he did go: and when he came and beheld his
Sons, he found the secret will of God clean contrary to his thoughts and
purpose: for when he beheld Eliab, he thought him to be most likely, and did
purpose to anoint him for a future Governor of the people; but the Lord said
unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, nor on the hight of his stature,
because I have refused him; for the Lord sees not as Man sees; for Man
looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart; and the
most unlikely to carnal apprehensions, did God make choice of to be the
Governor of his people, and by his Decree anointed him in Spirit for the same
end, long before he came to the Government.

And truly for my part I do confidently believe from my very Soul, that from
the beginning of these late Wars, the Lord did secretly Decree, and in his own
purpose set apart Oliver Cromwell (our entitled Lord Protector) to be the head
Governor, below himself, of all the people in the three Nations; Although at
the beginning of these late Wars, it was as unlikely for him to be Lord
Protector of three Nations in the judgment of man, as it was for David (in the
apprehension of his Father and Brethren) to be Ruler over Israel. But let all
the Servants of God know; yea, let every individual Soul in the three Nations
know, That the counsel and determinate purpose of God will stand as an
irresistible prick against all that spurn at it, and a sharp thorn in the sides
of all his enemies. For as the Heavens are higher than the Earth; so are the
ways and counsels of God higher than the ways and counsels of Men, and his
thoughts transcending theirs. What earthly powers, what plottings and
contrivings of an Enemy, what ragings, swellings, tumults of vanquished Foes,
what murmurings repinings, or discontents of any people, shall reverse the
thing that God has purposed to bring to pass? God is not a Man, that he should
lie, neither the Son of Man, that he should repent: has he said it, and shall
he not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? for whatsoever
the Lord pleases, that does he in Heaven and in Earth, and in all places.

This therefore shall henceforth be the Petition of my Soul, Thy will be done
in earth as it is in heaven: Let God make haste to complete his purpose.

This also shall be my Souls melody, which I will sing with a joyful noise in
my heart, Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and for
evermore: From the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same, the Lords
name is to be praised. The Lord is high above all Nations, and his glory above
the Heavens. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who dwells on high? Who
humbles himself to behold the things that are done in Heaven and Earth. He
raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill,
that he may set him with Princes, even with the Princes of his people, Amen,
Hallelujah.

That Government that gives Christ the chiefest honor due unto him, is of God.

The greatest honor that belongs to Christ here below, is, That he may bear
Rule without interruption in the hearts and consciences of his Servants:

If this Government then do leave the power over the consciences of the
Servants of Christ solely to him, then it is of God.

But this Government does so:

Therefore of God.

I shall say no more to this first thing, namely, That the Government is of
God, until occasion of reply (which I look for) does engage me to it.

Secondly, As the Government is of God, so there is none more deserving to sit
at the helm of it (in subordination to God) then Oliver Cromwell, the present
entitled Lord Protector.

First, if constant, faithful, unwearied, undaunted Service, accompanied with
Magnanimity, Valor and Courage, for the Liberty and Freedom of the people of
God in England, from the bloody and persecuting Statutes and Laws do deserve
it, then does he deserve it: his Constancy has appeared, in that he was in
continual service day and night. His Faithfulness, in that he never betrayed
the least of his Trust, but proved from first to last, as true as steel to his
Country. His Unweariedness, in holding up his hand by Commission, when others
let theirs fall; for if he had threw up his Commission when others did theirs,
when the Scots twice invaded us with a numerous Army, I believe we had been in
a miserable condition before now. His Undauntedness has the whole Army seen:
he was never known to decline action, although the advantage have been never so
great against him; for the most part, if not always, charging in the Front of
his Army, against the most resolved Enemy; and seldom, or never did he retreat
without Victory.

I have heard with my own Ears, some gallant Sparks of the Cavalry say; That he
was the most gallant resolved General that ever drew Sword in Christendom,
since the time of Scanderbeg; and, that if it were against a Foreign Nation,
they would as faithfully and as cheerfully serve under his Command, as under
any one in the world: And that at last the very name of him was such a terror
to them, that they could not force on their Men to fight, if they knew he was
in the Field.

A valiant and a courageous General strikes terror to the heart of an Enemy,
although the number on his party be but few. The very name of Gideon struck
terror into the hearts of the Midianites that lay as Grasshoppers for multitude;
yea, at the very report of the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon, they fled and
were discomfited, though he had but three hundred men with him.

The Prowess and gallant Atchievments of the Army (since he was their Head in
chief) in bringing to subjection a potent enemy in three Kingdoms, and settling
them in peace and quietness, (except a few hotspurs that bit their tongues with
the very anguish of their spirits against him; and clandestinely making a pit
for his life, they fell into it themselves) has made all the Nations stand
amazed with admiration. His Understanding and Judgment both in religious and
civil affairs, is acute and sharp; whereby he is able to judge the differences
of the one, and with wonderful policy to act in the other for the protection
and safety (in civil affairs) of the three Nations.

Therefore laying aside all envy, heart*burnings, dislike, contempt, hatred,
enmity, meditations of division, murmurings, repinings, grudgings, at the
Government, and at the honorable Exaltation of the Person who (in submission
to God) is dignified with the Titie of Lord Protector, it behooves all the good
people of the three Nations, cheerfully and cordially to submit unto it, and
acknowledge it a Mercy that God has placed such an one over them, that has
been a chief instrument in his hand, an invaluable Liberty to purchase for
them; and is tender and careful of the continuance of it: for, for my own part,
I look upon it as one of the greatest mercies that ever England enjoyed, and
that it behooves all the faithful in the three Nations to submit unto it, let
them consider these things.

First, Seeing that if there must be a Government till Christ shall come, let
such a Government be acknowledged that comes nearest to Christ: and truly for
my part it is clear to me, that this Government now established, comes nearer
to Christ, (for reasons before alleged) then any that I have read of since
Christ's incarnation; whose coming is prepared as the morning, which breaks
forth clearer and clearer to the perfect day: Let us not then be angry at the
Sun, because it is not in the height of the Firmment, so soon as the day
breaks; but let us wait upon God as he moves in exaltation, for he that
believes will not make haste; learn what that means, and be not like the
Israelites of old, who fell out with Moses, because they did not presently
enjoy the land of Canaan, which he had promised them.

Secondly, consider that there can be no breach made against this Government,
but by Civil discord and bloody division amongst our selves; and except we
delight in embruing our hands in one another blood, we will not hearken to any
Seditious Principle. And I beseech you, dear Friends and Countrymen, lay to
heart the miserable desolation of Jerusalem; who though they were exceeding
strong, and Victorious against an enemy, whilst they were united; yet what
bloody slaughters, and unheard of massacres were wrought amongst them, by the
civil discord of Seditious Captains, and their siding one against another!
truly my very heart has bled within me to read of it. What ruin and misery
did the seditious discord of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, and those two hundred
and fifty Princes of the congregation that came to Moses and told him that he
took too much upon him to rule over them! the earth opened her mouth and
swallowed up part of them; and fourten thousand seven hundred were consumed by
a noyson Plague: which shows the great wrath of God revealed from heaven
against seditious principles amongst his own people, quarreling at that
Government and Governor whom he had placed over them. Now I beseech you, if
you would not have your Country made an Akeldama, nor the channells of your
Cities and Towns run down with blood; if you would not see your Wives and
Daughters ravished before your faces, and the brains of your little ones dashed
against the walls: if you would not hear your children cry to you for a bit of
bread when you have none to give them, and your selves stagger and reel in the
streets for want of bread to support you feeble bodies? would you not be dragged
by the hair of the head from your several meetings in the worship of God? would
you not have your blood mixed with your Prayers? would you not have the eyes of
all your comforts put out? would you not grind in the mill of a cruel enemy?
if you love your lives and liberties, or any thing that is dear; if you value
christian liberty at any price; if you count it worth any thing, let no
principle of sedition against the present Government be entertained amongst
you, least you repent it when it is too late.

There is no other way left to the enemy, for to break in upon us, but our own
sedition and divisions; consider how forward the Devil has been in all ages to
blow with his mouth at such a coal, and what unquenchable flames he has blown
them to; it is that the enemy stands gaping for, you cannot do them a greater
pleasure; how do they laugh in their sleeves when they hear of such a thing!
It Is Nuts for them, you cannot offer them a greater present, 'twill make them
more pastime then all the Play Houses in London: Remember how the Lords of the
Philistines sent for Sampson to make them sport; the Nations that are round
about us that are our enemies, they hate us already with a bitter hatred, and
wait for an opportunity to do us any mischief they can: this way they hope to
break in upon us, even our disaffection to the Government, and divisions
amongst our selves; if you think it cannot be, why Jerusalem thought the same,
yea their enemies thought so too: Jeremiah in his Lamentations, breaks forth
into these words: The Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world,
would not have believed, that the adversary and the enemy should have entered
into the gates of Jerusalem. Lam. 4. 12.

Let us frustrate all their hopes then, of bringing us into a twofold slavery,
of conscience, and body, by a resolvedness of heart to submit unto that
Government, under which we enjoy unspeakable liberty; considering that in the
destruction of it, lies our absolute ruin and misery: For I must tell you,
whosoever you be, that cannot see it, and own it to be of God, ye are either as
a common enemy possessed with desperate envy, or else as seeming friends with
rash judgment of blind zeal. But for my own part I am satisfied in this one
thing, that there have been very few in former ages (if any at all) whom God
has made choice of, and by providence kept and preserved, to Rule over his
people, but some of their friends have either enviously maglign'd them, or else
clandestinely sought their harm. Joseph speaks to his brethren, of God's
exalting him above them; and they presently conspire his death. Moses (although
he had oftentimes endangered his life before Pharaoh, for the Israelites, and
was instrumental in the hand of God for their freedom; yet) could scarcely get
a good word from many of them: they could ask him, Who made him a Ruler and a
Judge over them? And Corah and his confederates could tell him to his face,
that he took too much upon him, they were as good as he. It is written of them
in the Psalms, that it did proceed from envy: Psalm. 106.16. They envied Moses
also in the Camp, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. Gideon found but small
kindeness at their hands, for all his service done for their safety; So that
Ephraim chid him very sharply: the like requital had Jephtha from Epbraim;
because he did not acquaint them with his proceedings, they threatened to burn
his house over his head: Sampsons friends for his service, could bind him and
deliver him to the Philistines: how often was Saul's Javelin cast at David
enviously, because the Lord was with him, and had exalted him into the peoples
affection and love?

So that its no marvail though he whom God has made instrumental for the peace
and tranquillity of his people in England, do meet with the like ingratitude
from some of them. I have observed this for a real truth, that if envy do fancy
evil in a good man, it will both write and speak against him, as if he were the
vilest man alive; because it is both blind, and is such a passion that will
have no pacification,

Did ever any General in this world, engage for a people, and obtain Victory,
but he was made Ruler over them? Would not a Virgin if she be forcibly ravished
against her will, and should be delivered out of the ravishers hand by some
other man? Would she not all the days of her life, love, and honor and
respect the rescuer? sure I think she would, or else she were very ungrateful.

Is not the conscience more pure then the body? the defilement of the body is
nothing to the pollution of the conscience; the ravishment of the body is
nothing to the forcing of the conscience.

If then he has stood up faithfully and stoutly, to rescue us from the bloody
penal persecuting Laws of Tyranny over the conscience; if we do not all the
days of our lives, love, honor and respect him, we are as ungrateful a people
both to God and to him the instrument in chief as ever were in the world, and
cannot in conscience desire any good from him. But the reasons (as I
apprehened) why so many Christians zealously professing Christ, are unsatisfied
in their conscience, at the establishment of the Government, are these.

First, the sudden appearance of it, contrary to their thoughts and
expectations; because their thoughts and minds were contented and satisfied in
the Government of a Parliament, not thinking in the least, that God would have
established any other Government in the Nation; the appearance of such a
Government, which was directly contrary to their faith and premeditation of
heart, startles their Spirits, and fills them, not only with doubt whether it
be of God or no, but with absolute persuasions, that it was not of God.

Now then, my dear Friends, I would ask you this single Question, If God will
restore to his people, Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the
beginning, then whether or no that the ancient Commonwealth of Israel was not
governed by Moses as a Protector, who also had Counselors with him; by Joshua,
Gideon, Jephtha, and the rest, before either Kings or Parliaments? So that I
clearly see in the establishment of this Government, the beginning of God's
work in fulfilling his promise of primitive restitution of Judges and
Counselors, as at the beginning, before they were governed either by Kings or
Parliaments. All the Promises of God are yea, and Amen: Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, but not one jot or tittle of the promises of the Lord, till all of
them be fulfilled. And I am sure that is one.

Let us take heed then of murmuring at the appearance of the fulfilling of
God's promises, lest God hide it from us again, as he did from the Children of
Israel in Egypt, God having told Abraham above four hundred years before, That
they should be Strangers in a Land that was not theirs, and that they should be
afflicted four hundred years, and that afterward he would bring them forth of
it: the time being come that God would accomplish his promise in his own secret
will and determinate counsel, he did purpose to make it good by the hand of
Moses; who, when he was full forty years old, God put it into his heart to
visit his Brethren, the Children of Israel; and seeing one of them suffer
wrong, he defended him, and avenged him that was oppressed, and smote the
Egyptian: for he supposed, that his Brethren would have understood, how that
God by his hand would deliver them; but they understood it not. And when he
would have made peace betwixt two of his Brethren that were at strife, one of
them asked him, Who made thee a Ruler and a Judge over us? at this saying,
Moses fled* And forty years more affliction did God continue unto them for this
one Murmurer. Let our English Israelites consider this, and take heed of
murmuring and repining at the good hand of God in giving us a faithful and a
careful Governor of his peoples Liberty, lest God withdraw his hand, and leave
us and our children to a farther trial of Bondage.

The second I apprehend was and is this: they did not wait upon the Lord, nor
seek unto him by prayer to know his mind and will in such a sudden Change: so
that in stead of waiting upon God, and seeking unto him by prayer to know his
mind and will therein; supposing it not to be of God, because it was
contradictory to their thoughts and expectation; they rather bent their minds
and studies to find out something of corruption in it, that might make it
appear not to be of God; and finding something in it, which their Spirits did
not disrelish, they could not be satisfied that it was of God: whereas I am
confident, if they had waited upon God, and sought unto him by Prayer, to know
his mind and will in such an extraordinary change, they had been satisfied,
and could not but have seen it to be of God.

A third Reason was: they were afraid, lest way would have been made by it, for
the induction and bringing in of such false worships, as would embondage the
free Spirits of the zealously godly people in the three Nations; whereas
provision is made to the contrary, and their protection vowed; yea, and we
shall enjoy it, if we do not wilfully deprive our*selves of it, and by our own
divisions make ourselves a prey to our enemies: for that Proverb is certain
true,

Whilst the Bore and Lion strives,
The Eagle waits for both their lives.
The meaning is, whilst Friends contend,
Their Foes will spoil them in the end.
A fourth Reason was, Because they were not made acquainted with it; and so
like Ephraim, against Jephtha, they were displeased with him, though he had
deserved no such thing at their hands.

Fifthly, being formerly their equal, they took it ill (many of them) that he
should be exalted to rule over them: therefore many of them thought, and do
still think, that he has taken too much upon him. Corah and his Accomplices
told Moses as much; but the Holy Ghost commands us to rejoice, when a Brother
of low degree is exalted: for such a one is most fit for it, especially being
endowed with suitable qualifications, as none alive I think can deny, but that
our present Lord Protector is, and as prudent Counselors for his Assistants.
So that in such a Government, and such Governors to manage it; let all the
welaffected people of the three Nations rejoice, Amen.

FINIS.

