THE Apprentices VVarning-piece.

Being A Confession of Peter Moore, formerly Servant to Mr. Bidgood, Apothecary
in Exeter, executed there the last Assizes* for poisoning his said MASTER.

Wherein is observed such lamentable expressions proceeding from him, as may
produce a trembling to all who read or-heare thereof, and be a warning to such
lewd servants who walk the same steps, lest they receive the same punishment.



LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Henry Walker. 1641.

The Apprentices warning-piece.
TO hear good counsel is not sufficient, but to make use of it is the thing
which is required of al men. Here is example prescribed for all yongmen, that
they may learn to rule themselves according to Gods holy Statutes; let them
mark well the relation of this penitential confession, and by him which made
it be sure to take warning. But first of his parents, which are a very
sufficient couple; their chief delight was in him their son Peter Moore.
Whilst he was young they sent him to School, where he proved an indifferent
good proficient. At length he grew to such ripeness of years, that they bound
him as an Apprentice to Master Humphrey Bidgood, an Apothecary in Exeter; with
whom for a certain space he lived very well, and was willing to obey their
commands in every thing. But the devil (which does envy the happiness of all
mankind) was vexed to see him tread the paths to goodness, wherefore he by his
alluring bait, called pride, provoked him to forsake piety, and embrace
iniquity; as you shall now perceive by his confession writ with his own hand.

The confession of Peter Moore at the place of Execution.
BEing brought to the common place of execution upon a sledge, bowing his body
to the people round about him so well as he could, he spoke after this manner.

All you good Christian people which are come hither to see me dye, let me
desire you to give attention to what I shall now declare, who has now scarce
one quarter of an hour to live: my parents are scarce unknown to any here
present: but as for my unhappy master, (the more wretch I for making him so) he
was better known to you. I was an Apprentice to Master Humphry Bidgood,
Apothecary, too good a master for so ungracious a servant; notwithstanding, for
a time my service was not disliked of, neither had it still, had I not wanted
grace. Being in the prime of my youth, the devil by his allurements and wicked
enticing, made me partaker of each damned vice, so that my heart being puffed
up with ambition, I began to scoff at Gods holy Ministers, profaning
Sabbaths, and taking Gods holy name in vain. But yet still was I provoked
further to evil courses, so much alas, that you could scarce name a sin
wherein I had not been an actor. Pride waxed daily more and more strong in me,
in so much that I began to kick at service, my time seeming too long and
tedious to me, wherefore in all haste I did run to my parents, that they out of
hand might buy out my time, which they rebuking me denied, saying, I made more
haste then good speed, in so much as I had not skill enough as yet to manage a
shop of any consequence. Then went I again to my master, seeming to be
contented to serve out my Apprenticeship, and so had done, had not my mistress
been too cruel toward me; never permitting me to remain quiet; for daily she
was cause of such strife, that I grew desperate, and as one weary of life which
makes me now to pray that never any young man may have so bad a mistress as she
was to me.

Daily was my heart more and more filled with discontent, still meditating of
nothing but mischief, which at length thus did work my fatal overthrow, for
being still greedy to be freed from my Apprentiship, I acted a deed which now
does make each Artery to quake, and total body to tremble: for I seeing a
mess of pottage about dinner time provided for my Master, I most unnatural
servant put powdered white Mercury into it, so privately that no man could
perceive me, which so soon as he good man had tasted, presently began to swel,
and a while after died.

Thus Judas like traterously did I betray my master unto death, but yet was not
found out, but yet the Lord whose judgments are always just and true, caused
many toward me to have a great mistrust, and laid the fault to my charge,
which I most impudently denied, which so soon as my father and mother did
hear, upon their knees weeping with brinish tears came and desired me to
confess the truth, which I denied, notwithstanding my conscience told me that
I lied; in the same mind I went to my fathes house and received the Sacrament,
still denying the heinous murder committed upon my Master, but God at last
revealed it, and I was sent to prison, to answer for the Death of my Master,
where I thought my self to be secure from being found out, because I did the
act unseene. All the while I lay in prison, I had the keys thereof in my own
custody, with which I might have both freed my self and others; the devil
daily tempted me to run away, but God he would not have it so, for to go
thence I had not the least of power, until such time as the Assizes did begin,
that I should answer the death of my Master, where I was most justly judged to
die, my conscience still telling me no man did the deed but I. One there is in
this City whom I pray that the Lord may forgive, God he knows that I speak
nothing concerning him at this present for any malice I bear to him, but to
clear my own conscience.

His name is White a Papist, who did oftentimes seduce me to abuse Gods
Ministers, and to spend my time in that Diabolical study of reading Magic,
in which I took too much delight, which now does very much oppress my soul:
All young men which are here present, and did behold me drawn hither upon a
sledge, take warning by me, and let your study be, first, to please your
heavenly Master, and then your Masters upon earth.

Contemn the devil, despise the world, and abhore lust; Hence, hence, with
pride which is the devils darling, away with lust which is the devils chief
attendant, away with magic spells which lead unto the devil.

When I am dead let the cause of my dying be engraved upon a stone that all
may know wherefore I did die, and thereby take example. Pray, pray for my soul
good christian people, that notwithstanding my horrid offense, the gate of
heaven may not be barred against me: Again, again, and again I earnestly
entreat your prayers.

Now farewell dear father, a thousand times farewell O mother, also farewell to
all my dear friends and kinsfolks.

Wipe, wipe your eyes, and each one cease his mourning, for I am now exchanging
a lump of mortal clay, for immortal bliss; which that I may receive, grant,
grant most merciful father. O receive me, receive me into thy bosom, for
behold, I come, I come, I come; so soon as which words were spoken he was
turned off the ladder and so died.

FINIS.

