More happy and joyful NEWS FROM IRELAND: OR, The victorious Proceedings of
the Protestants in that Kingdom, from the 28. day of March, to the 6. day of
April, 1642.

SHOWING, In a most real, and exact Relation, how these four famous Pillars of
Protestant Religion, the Earl of Ormond, the Lord Jones, the Lord Moor, Sir
Henry Titchburn, and Sir Richard Grenvile, with 4000 men, and 6 Fieldpieces,
gave Battle to the Rebels, near Cork, killed 5000. men, took some of their
Commanders Prisoners.

The Rebels being in number 13000. conducted the great Rebel Donmadoff, and
the Lord Mountgarret; who after a long and tedious Battle were forced to fly,
leaving great store of Ammunition behind them, such a tryumphant Victory the
Protestants never had, since the Rebellion.

Whereunto is annexed the Copy of a Letter sent from Mr. Hunt in Ireland, which
was read in the Honorable House of Commons, and commanded immediately to be
Printed.

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed for H. Lundon, 1642.

MORE JOYFUL AND Happy News from Ireland.
ON the 29. of March, the Earl of Ormond, and the Lord Moor, etc. marched from
the City of Dublin with 4000. men, and 6 Fieldpieces, toward the City of
Cork, they having in telligence, that 13000. Rebels had besieged the City,
under the Command of General Donmadoff, but by Gods gracions Providence they
were presented; for the Earl of Ormond gave Command, that Sir Richard Grenvile
should lead the Avantguard of the horse, consisting of 300. To the Avantguard
of the Horse were joined these foot Companies, to wit, Colonel Binleys Guard,
led by his Lieutenant, consisting of 300. and 50. foot; after these marched the
Regiment of Sir Charles Coot, consisting of 3 English Companies.; after these
marched the Regiments of the Earl of Ormond: first his his own Companies, then
the Lord Jones his Companies, next the Lord Moors, in all accounted to be 3000.

The Battle was commanded by the Lord Jones.

The Reet was commanded by Sir Charles Coot, and Sir Richard Grenvile, the Army
consisted of 40000. and upon the 1. of April, our Army had a great Battle
with the Rebels, who consisted of 13000. men, which lasted for the space of 3
days; but at last, the Rebels seeing their men fall down so fast among them,
retreated back, thinking to escape by fligh, were pursued so close by our light
Horses, that they lost in all to the number of 5000. men, of our Party 800. we
also obtained 14. Colors, 4. Fieldpieces, etc. such a victory they have not
had since the Rebellion.

The Battle being ended, our Army returned home with great joy and triumph, and
intend to go forth again upon the 13. or 14. of this month. (God willing.)

Another famous Battle fought by Sir Richard Grenvile, Captain Barrowes, and
Captain Ogle, April the 3. 1642.
Upon the 3. day of April, Sir Richard Grenvile, etc. marched toward, the
City of Kildare, with 1000. men; but they had Battle given them by 300.
Rebels, and after a long and tedious fight, the Rebels fled; in this Battle
were slain 1400. of the Rebels, with very little loss of our side.

The Earl of Cork and Colonel Monro has given given the Rebels another great
Overthrow, hard by Kingsaile, and has taken two Castles from them, but the
Rebels increase in abundance, and receive Aid and Ammunition from foreign
Parts daily, and commit most wild and cruel Outrages upon the poor
Protestants, whersoever they come.

We want both men and money; for we can hardly get any to pay our Soldiers:
Yet are they well content with what they have behaving themselves very well,
and fighting against our Foes with most puissant Courage, the like were never
known; The God of Heaven send us many such Victories, that the Rebels may be
suddenly subdued.

The Lord President of Munster, and 1500. English has given the Rebels a great
Overthrow before Kildare, and slew two thousand of them.

Good News from Ireland, read in the Honorable House of Commons, and
commanded immediately to be Printed.
SIR,
I Have written by the two last Posts, and now I have gotten a lame hand, but
having good News, it shall trot to impart it unto you.

The last Saturday, the Lord Moor; and Sir Henry Titchburn sallyed out of the
town, and fell upon the enemies, and drove them out of their trenches, and
raised their Siege, slew above 350. of their men, and took many of their Chief
Officers, and have relieved themselves bravely, and took 150. of their Muskets,
and a field full of Pikes, we having lost, as some affirm, no men. Here are
some of our Captains come by Land, so that this News is true.

Upon Monday our forces went out, four thousand foot, and 500 Horse, they are
already within 5 miles of Tredagh, by the way, Lieutenant Colonel Read came in
to our men, and submitted, if he had not done it, he could not have fled: he is
sent hither, and lodgd in the Castle I do believe we shall now get good store of
corn out of the Country, which will keep the price from rising, Our men are not
expected home this week, pray God keep them safe. Sir Rhilomy O Neal was in the
Battle, but was fain to fly.

With my true love, I rest, Your affectionate Friend. R. Hunt.

It is this Day Ordered, that this Letter be forthwith Printed.

Hen. Elsing, Cleric. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

