THE Scotch Military Discipline LEARND FROM THE VALIANT SWEDE, And collected
for the use of all worthy Commanders favoring the laudable profession of ARMS.

By Major General Monro,

Being now General of all the Scotch Forces against the Rebels in Ireland,
communicates his Abridgement of Exercise, in diverse Practical Observations for
the younger Officers better insruction; ending with the Soldiers Meditations
going on in Service.

LONDON, Printed for William Ley at Pauls-Chaine. 1644.

COLONEL MONRO TO HIS HIGHNESS THE PRINCE ELECTOR PALATJNE OF RHJNE, wishes
health, and happiness.
AFTER seven years March in the wars of Germany with one Regiment, it being
rent in the battle of Nerlin, at last I retired unto Britain, to levy
again, for the further advancement of the good cause, and being at the Court
of England, attending employment, to express my love, and most humble re^^^cts
unto your Highness, having bin an eyewitness the accidents most remarkable,
which occurred in Germany, during those seven years wars, though a rude, and
ignorant Soldier, I was bold to set pen to paper, to discharge a long seven
years troublesome Expedition, in short Duties and Observations of service,
co^taining a true and simple narration of the principal occurrences which
happened in the course of this war, without omitting one days March, in
three years under the Magnanimous King of Denmark, nor thereafter, in four
years March with the Royal Army, under the fortunate conduct of his Majesty
of Sweden of never dying memory.

Being induced thereto, chiefly, to testify my humble respects unto your
Highness, to whom I have ever vowed my best endeavors of service: next, to
express my love, and thankfulness to my country, and to my dear Camerades,
Britains, Dutch and Swedens, (companions, not of wants, but of valor)
eternizing their memory, who after death, like Phoebean Champions, ride
triumphing in spite of envy, being praised by their enemies, for having
valorously resisted their assaults, till they died standing, serving the
public, through their great love to your Highness Royal Mother, the Queen
of Bohemia, your Highness self, and the remnant of the Royal Issue. Hoping
therefore (for their sakes departed of worthy memory) my pains may be
acceptable unto your Highness, for their sakes alive (that long for a new
Leader) I have been bold, to send unto your Highness at this time, worthy
Counselors, whose counsel your Highness may be bold to follow, and their
virtues, being most Heroicke and examplary, may be imitated by your Highness,
in going before us, as our new Master, Captain and Leader, being descended, of
the valiant Bruce, and of the first King of the Stewarts, through your
Highness Royal Mother Elizabeth, Queen of Bohemia, Jewel of her sex, and
the most resplendent in brightness of mind, for a woman, that the earth does
afford.

That great Monarch Alexander the great showed his humanity (in the wants of
old age) to a poor and decrepite Soldier, being weary with great travel in
the way, and lent him his own cha^re, for to warm him by the fire: and being
upon his deathbed (for all the pangs and pains of Death) he disdained not to
shake hands with the meanest and poorest of all his Soldiers. So Mighty and
Illustrious Prince, I, though a poor Soldier, do Dedicate unto your
Highness, these my dutiful Observations and Expeditions. Your Highness being
eminent, as your dignity high, has made me presume on your Highness
goodness, which, I know, is full of pardons for those, that reverence your
Highness person, as I do. That I have prefixed your Highness name, was my
duty, as to my Patron and Superior, to whom I am ever most bound, especially
in discharging of this my duty. Neither do I pay this tribute unto your
Highness, as to add any thing unto your Highness knowledge, being already
enriched with notable virtues, but rather to express my love and dearest
respect, in all humility to him, whom I have vowed to follow (if my breath may
last so long) till your Highness enemies be overcome.

Daigne therefore, Noble and Illustrious Sir, to let pass this my tedious
expedition, and shallow observations, under the name of your Highness
Patronage, to whom I wish the Roman Empire, for a possession, as it was
extended of old, from the River Euphrates, at the East, to the Ocean Sea, at
the West, the fertillest part of Asrica, at the South, and the Rhine, and the
Danube, at the North; which to possess, come, Noble Sir, unto the field, and
fight before us, Britains, Jrish and Dutch, who long to see your Highness to
fight with good luck and victory, with strength and power, with wisdom and
understanding, etc. against your Highness enemies, till your Highness Royal
Mothers Throne be established, after her sacred Majesty, in your Highness
Person.

Vouchsafe then, Noble Sir, of your gracious generosity, favorably to accept
of my well wishing, and of these my Observations, and esteem the Author
thereof to be for ever

Your Highness most humble and obedient serviture, ROBERT MONRO

TO THE READER.
NOble, worthy, courteous, and loving Reader, if J could persuade thee to
believe what profit the diligent and serious Soldier does reap by reading,
and what advantage he gains above him, who thinks to become a perfect
Soldier by a few years practice, without reading: Truly, thou would use
thy earnest diligence as well in the one as in the other; for J dare be bold to
affirm, that reading and discourse does as much or rather more, to the
furtherance of a perfect Soldier, than a few years practice without reading.

For out of my own experience, in my profession, having seen as many rare
occurrences, and accidents of war by practice (as has not been seen the
like in many years before) which shall appear evidently by the subsequent
Observations of one Regiments service: Nevertheless, J must confess, that
reading and discourse of wars, enable the mind more with perfect knowledge,
than the bare practice of a few years. Therefore, what these years past J
have collected, by the one and the other, following the laudable profession of
Arms, under the mighty and potent King of Denmark, the space of three
years, and since under his Majesty of worthy memory the Invincible King of
Sweden, his Crown, and Confederats, in four years; gathered together for the
good, profit, and furtherance of thee and my Country: whereby I hope the noble
and worthy minded Reader, shall be allured and animated to follow the Traces of
those worthy Cavaliers mentioned in my Observations, of most worthy memories:
Whereof some, from mean condition, have risen to supreme honor, wealth, and
dignity; though others perished in the way of preferment; for whose sakes, my
Sword shall be ever ready against the common Enemy, that ruined the old and
worthy Regiment; the memory whereof shall never be forgotten, but shall live in
spite of time; and its virtues and fame be made known to all those interessed
in the quarrel. The example of those brave spirits (noble and worthy Reader) I
hope, will allure you to follow their virtues, that you may be partaker of
their honor, for the further credit of our Nation. Therefore, worthy Reader,
what you find here, if you please, like; but howsoever, remember always to
censure sparingly the writings of the shallow-brained Soldier, not adorned
with eloquent phrase; but with truth and simplicity. Plinius says, there was
no book so little worth, but might be profitable in some things. Caesar from
his youth had his Observations: and the Be out of the most poysonable herbs
suckes the honey. Please to read, and thou shall find something to delight
thee; at least thou shall see my thankfulness to my Camerades and Country, and
examples of frequent mortality, to make thy use of. And as the stars take
light from the Sun; even so from Histories, men draw knowledge and wisdom.
Let me entreat thee therefore, when thou would avoid care, to look on
those observations, and by our examples amend thy life, and I shall be glad of
thy profit, and not envy thy estate. If you ask; why I wrote these
Observations? It was because I loved my Camerades. If why I published them,
know it was for my friends, and not for the world, for which I care not, nor
for any that is ungrate; but those which accept well of this, will encourage me
betime, to take greater pains for their sakes, if they view them. Farewell.

EX NAVFRAGIO VICTORIA GENEROSI DOMINI DN. ROBERTI MVNRO TRIBVNI MILITARIS, EX
PROSAPIA BARONVM DE FOVLES ORIVNDI.
Anno M.D.C.XXX.
ACcipe, Posteritas, Scotici miranda Tribuni,
Quaeque dedit virtus, mente sequace tene.
Vandalicas postquam GUSTAVUS venit in oras,
Panus in Arctoum qua mare fundit aquas,
Prussiacis satagens Regi succurrere turmis
MUNROUS credit seque suosque salo.
Provehitur spatio haud longo. Mox turbine magno
Venti adversantes incubuere mari,
Fluctibus indomitis jactatur Martia pubes,
Ac perit hostili in littore quassa ratis.
Attonitos Ductor verbis solatur amicis,
Et docet ut rupta puppe natare queant.
Subsidium lacerae monstrat fragmenta earinae,
Queis tandem in littus naufraga turba venit.
Postremos inter remoratur puppe Tribunus,
Dum salvos socios regiaque arma videt.
Praemia virtutis mox insperata sequuntur,
Vt, quae passa mari, jam meminisse juvet.
Ipsa sibi virtus pretium mercesque laborum,
Viribus accrescens, quaeque stupenda, patrans.
Magna peracturos terra quis crederet illos,
Queis vestes madidae ac languida membra vado?
Hos tamen hostilem MUNROUS ductat ad urbem,
Et RUGENVVALDO sumere fraena jubet.
Infractos animis quum cernit, frangitur Hostis,
Ac propere victus Suedica jussa capit.
Navem unam perdens urbem lucratur and arcem,
Mercator felix, corda movente DEO.
Hujus in auxilio sperans MUNROIUS Heroes
Ponere morigeros spemque fidemque docet.
SCHIFELBENVM URBS ET ARX MARCHIAE BRANDENBVRGJCAE A GENEROSO DN. ROBERTO MVNRO
been defensae.
ANNO M.D.C.XXX.
VIncere praeclarum est: sic and been parta tueri.
Plurima MUNROI laus ab utroque venit.
Vt RUGENVVAL DUM rara virtute subegit,
Sic SCHIFELBENUM dexteritate tenet.
Vrbem ipsam linquit, nimium quia viribus impar,
Atque Arcem firmat Martia gnava manus.
Figuntur muros circum justo ordine pali,
Et nova congeritur gleba ligonis open.
Arcto sic spatio firmatur rara caterva,
Quae diffusa nimis debilitata foret.
Hostis adest. Vrbe ex media contendit ad Arcem.
(Nam pars exterior tuta palude manet)
Densis in tenebris satagit conscendere muros,
Ac ruptis portis mox aperire viam.
Fallitur ast mulium, cauto stratagemate victus,
Artem cum tenebras vincere posse videt.
Vicinis Arci tectis MUNROIUS ignem
Subjicit, ac propere noctis opaca fugat.
Hosticus apparet p^ssim per compita miles,
Ac denso plumbi tactus ab imbre cadit.
Post alii abscedunt: Vrbemque Arcemquerelinquunt,
Colbergam ut celeres obsidione levent.
Exstinguit flammas and jussa incendia victor,
Inque domos reliquas laetus ab Arce redit.
Solatur Cives: Mos hic est Martius, inquit,
Vrbs salva ut maneat, pars violanda fuit.
Discite Ductoris virtus quid provida possit,
Et grati Proceres pramia ferte Viro.
IOANNES NARSSIUS Anastasii F. Dordraco-Batavus, Med. D.

ILLVSRTI AC GENEROSO DOMINO, DN. IOANNI SINGELAIRE, COMITIS CATHENESIAE FILIO,
VICETRIBVNO SCOTO, Pro liberate Germanica ad Neomarcam in superiore Palatinatu
fortiter vita defuncto.
Anno MDCXXXII
EPITAPHIVM.
QVI singulares, Lector, Heroes amas,
Specta Johannis busta Singelairii.
Prognatus ille Comite Cathenesiae
Cum foenore Patri reddidit magnum decus,
Bellator ingens, providus, fortis, pius.
Batavo atque Regi militavit Cimbrico,
Servire dignus maximo tandem Gotho,
Ductor Tribuno proximus Munroio;
Vbique terror hostibus, carus suis.
Cum Francofurtum, quam Viadrus alluit,
Peteretur armis, primus in muris fuit.
Post Lipsiana clade vicit Tillium,
Pars magna Procerum, quos Polo virtus beat.
Talis frequenter visus, and regi intimus
Neomarcam ad urbem morte praecoci (heu!) perit,
Et Dunawerdae membra deposuit sinu,
Duodetricenis haec ubi annis gesserat.
Triumphat astris victor hostis ac necis,
Orbemque memorem Scoticae gentis facit.
Joannes Narssius Anastasii F. Dordraco-Batavus, Med. D.

ILLVSTRI AC GENEROSO DOMINO, Dn. ROBERTO MVNRO, TRIBVNO MILITARI, Epitaphium.
INgenti clarus ROBERTUS robore MVNRO,
Qui Baro de Foulles, Munroidumque caput:
Bina cui Legio peditumque equitumque ministra,
Quam sociat Patriae ac Relligionis amor,
Lipsiacis postquam certavit gnaviter oris,
Et passim Austriacis Martia damna dedit,
Hostili tandem prostratus vulnere multo,
Vlmiaco liquit membra caduca solo.
Spiritus exsuperans ingenti robore mortem
Heroum in Superis praemia digna capit.
Discite, Germani, grataque evolvite mente,
Pro vobis fortes quot cecidere viri!
Pro vestra Heroes quot liberate necantur
Gente Caledonia Munroidumque sati!
IO. NARSSIVS, M. D.
Ann. 1633.
ILLVSTRI AC GENEROSO DOMINO, Dn. IOANNI MVNRO, TRIBVNO MILITARI, Epitaphium.
HOC recubat tumulo Scotica de gente Tribunus,
IANVS qui MVNRO clarus in Orb fuit.
Dicti de Fowls illum genuere Barons,
Queis Aquila and rugiens dat sua signa Leo.
Qu^rum nunc annis sexcentis bisque tricenis
Nomine sub MVNRO stemma decusque vigent.
Hic pietate gravis, ac servantissimus aequi,
Castus, and intrepido pectore bella gerens,
Militis effraenis rabiem dum voce coercet,
Vnius ingrati fulmine tactus obit.
Lugent hunc Sueones: Luget Germanica tellus
Herois fidi dedecorata nece.
Imprimis, una genuit quam matre, propago,
(Nati nempe novem, nata quaterna) dolet.
Cum quadragenis quatuor been vixerat annis,
Vt vivat melius mors inopina dedit.
Vrbs Rheno incumbens, Bacchi quae dicitur Ara,
Dat requiem membris, hoc decorata bono.
Spiritus aethereas Heroum scandit in oras,
Ac desiderium linquit in orb sui.
IO. NARSSIVS, M. D.
Ann. 1633.
MONRO HIS EXPEDITION, AND OBSERVATIONS.
The first Duty discharged in Holsten at Crempe.
THE old Proverb is, A good beginning makes a good ending, and to lead a good
life, is the way to a happy death. Immediately after our landing at Loughstad
on the Elve, by command of his Majesty of Denmark, we were quartered in the
fat and fertile soil of Holsten, nothing inferior in fertility to any part
of Dutchland, except in Wines, having Corn in abundance, to the increase
Communibus Annis of the twenty eight Corn, Wheat and Barley: in milk, nothing
inferior to Holland, and for the most part inhabited by Hollanders, especially
the Cities. This Soil has also abundance of fresh and salt water fishes;
their Gentry live like Noble men; and their Communaltie live like Gentlemen.
During our enquartring with them, our entertainment was answerable to our
charges, where some Officers had allowance of a piece a day for keeping good
Order. Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Forbesse had the Command over the Regiment in
the absence of the Colonel, being hindered by sickness. Shortly after our
going over, the Lieutenant Colonel departed this life, being a Gentleman of
much true worth, and a valourous Commander, much regrated by the whole
Regiment. Immediately after his death, Captain Sanders Seaton was by his
Majesty's Patent made Lieutenant Colonel to the Regiment, who did bring a
strong Company of well exercised Soldiers, which were joined to strengthen the
Regiment. Captain James Dumbarre, who did get Lieutenant Colonel Forbesse his
Company, was placed Sergeant Major, Captain Sinclaire, Captain Boswell, and
Captain Ennis Companies were reduced to strengthen the other Companies of the
Regiment, which being made complete, were mustred, clothed, and paid of their
muster-moneth. Who then would disdain to follow wars, might be thought
unwise. The Baron of Fowls coming over a voluntier, was allowed a free Table
to entertain an Earl, being ordinarily above sixteen persons at Table; his
Visitors, horses and servants entertained accordingly.

The Regiment mustered received colors, wherein his Majesty would have the
Officers to carry the Danes cross, which the Officers refusing they were
summoned to compeare before his Majesty at Raynesberge, to know the reasons of
their refusalls; at the meeting none would adventure, fearing his Majesty's
indignation, to gainestand openly his Majesty's will, being then his Majesty's
sworn Servants: and for the eschewing of greater inconvenience, the Officers
desired so much time of his majesty, as to send Captain Robert Ennis into
England, to know his Majesty of Great Britains will, whether or no, they
might carry without reproach the Danes Cross, in Scottish colors: answer
was returned; they should obey their will, under whose pay they were, in a
matter so indifferent.

During the tedious winter, the Regiment was well exercised, and put under good
discipline, as well the particular companies, as the whole Regiment, so that
mine eyes did never see a more complete Regiment, for bodies of men, and
valiant soldiers; as shall be seen in the discharge of their duties, begun
with the sheding of Duch-bloud.

A Duch captain, having out of a mad humor mutilated a soldier of my
Captains company of one finger. The soldier complaining to me, I made my
Lievtenant-colonell acquainted with the manner, who sent to the Captain to
know his reason; The Captain, not repenting of the wrong done, but rather
bragging he would second the first, with a greater: he coming through my
Quarters, I being exercising the company, the Sergeant overtakes him, and
almost killed him, who made no defense, neither pressed ever to be repaired of
his wrongs. This duty begun with the shedding of Duch-bloud by one of my name,
and kindred. In the continuance of the story, you shall hear much blood shed,
of all Nations in Europe, and of ours not the least. But of my friends, and
mine, too much.

The first Observation.
THE land of Holsten full of prosperity at this time, having all things in a
golden swim, and waving carelessly in a swallowing plenty, having her heart
full of pleasures, disdaining what was to come, ruin seized upon this land
within six months, after our rising from quarters, to our first expedition,
toward the Waser stream. At our coming into the land, the proudest sort of
them, disdained soldiers, saying, they had no need of strangers, they were
sufficiently able themselves to hold out the Emperors forces, their passes were
strong, their power in Arms were mighty of Horse and foot, as any Province
in Germany; notwithstanding whereof, in a short time, they felt the wrath of
Heaven, and were ruinated in the midst of their fortunes. I wish my Country,
by a timely prevention to avoid the like, by suspecting the smooth stream,
being ordinarily deepest; lest they should become subject unto their enemies,
their land wasted with fire, and sword, their buildings, and plantings
destroyed, their riches, and Jewels made spoil of, their wives abused, and
their daughters deflowred, themselves banished, and their Religion persecuted;
in so much that their Pastors flying to the Altar for refuge, were cruelly put
to death. Since therefore their enemies are our enemies, we ought to beware.

We ought also not to deny our betters in things indifferent, lest the askers
love wax dry, and his revenge grow great: for to a generous spirit, as it is
hard to beg, so it is harsh to be denied. Our Officers refusing to carry the
the Danes Cross in their colors, disobliged his Majesty so far, by their
denialls of a thing indifferent, that after the death of our worthy Lieutenant
Colonel Arthur Forbesse, Lievetennant-Colonell Seaton was preferred against
the Officers wills, who once placed, would refuse nothing unto his Majesty he
would command.

By his Majesty's authority, against the Colonells will, Captain Duncan
Forbesse, and Captain John Forbesse, for alleged insufficiency, were put off
their command, and their companies given to others, whom his Majesty favored.
But time that alters all things, having favored them, they were restored to
their companies again.

When we have good days we slight them, when they are gone, we sink under the
wring of sorrow, for their loss; and want teaches us the worth of things more
truly: and it is a true saying, Blessings appear not, till they be vanished.
Our Officers that were discontented under the King of Denmark without reason,
having had both good quarters, and money, there after in other services would
have been contented with less. We ought then,

Certainly, a good resolution is the most fortifying Armor a discreet man can
wear; that can defend him against all the unwelcome frowns, that the poor
world puts upon him: with this, we can be servants as well as Lords, and have
the same inward pleasantness in the checkes of fortune, that we carried in her
softest smiles; It was Zantippe's observation, that she ever found Socrates
return with the same countenance, that he went abroad withal. I wish no man
so spiritlesse, as to let all abuses press the dullness of a willing shoulder:
for resolution is always necessary in the waine of fortune, to save us from
discontentments, that usually deject us. A wise man makes the trouble less by
fortitude, when a fool stoupes to it. The world has nothing so glorious as
virtue, which is like the passage of Haniball over the Alps, a work of trying
toil, of infinite danger, but once performed, it lets him in unto the worlds
Garden, Italy leaving him a lasting fame.

My Chief and cosen, the Baron of Fowls, being in his travels in France a
little prodigal in his spending, redacted his estate to a weak point, being
advised by his friends timely to look to the wounds of his house and family,
and to foresee the best cure to keep burden off his estate, having engaged his
Revenewes, for teene years, to pay his Creditors, he went beyond sea a
voluntier to Germany with Mac-Keyes Regiment, well accompanied with a part of
his nearest friends: and having the patience to attend his fortune, his first
employment was to be a Captain of a company of Scots soldiers, leavied by
himself, and there after advanced to be a Colonel of horse and foot of
strangers, under the invincible King of Sweden of worthy memory.

Thus far of the Barron of Fowls in my first observation, Cavaliers borne of
less fortunes to follow his virtues in being patient, though their preferments
come not at first, loving virtue for her end.

Here also we see by the example of the Dutch Captain formerly spoken of, that
pride in a noble nature is as rare to be found, as humility in an unworthy
mind; and arrogancy is a weed that ever grows in a dunghill, and no
circumstance can make the expression of pride laudable: for the affronting man
by his own folly, Dutch Captain was, who, out of his pride and arrogancy,
would second a first wrong with contempt, was taught humility, in so much, as
he was made beholden to those for his life, whom out of his pride he had
offended.

The second duty discharged, of the rising of the Regiment from Quarters going
on their first March.
THE Colonel recovered of his sickness took shipping from Scotland to
Holland, and from thence over land to Holsten, accompanied with Captain
Mac-Kenyee, and Captain Pomfrey, arrived in the latter end of March Anno 1627
in Holsten, where he was welcomed by his Regiment. At his coming, orders were
given, his Regiment should be brought in Arms at Eittho, where his Majesty
would take their Oaths of fidelity. The Regiment being come together at the
Randezvouz, was drawn up in three divisions, artending his Majesty's coming,
in good order of battle, all Officers being placed according to their
stations orderly, Colors fleeing, Drums beating, horses neying, his Majesty
comes royally forward, Salutes the Regiment, and is saluted again with all due
respect, and reverence, used at such times; his Majesty having viewed Front,
Flancks and Rear, the Regiment fronting all ways toward his Matie., who
having made a stand ordained the Regiment to march by him in divisions, which
orderly done, and with great respect, and reverence, as became; his Majesty
being mightily well pleased, did praise the Regiment, that ever thereafter was
most praise worthy. The Colonel, and the principal Officers having kissed his
Majesty's hand, retired to their former stations, till the Oath was publicly
given, both by Officers, and soldiers being drawn in a Ring by conversion, as
use is, at such times. The Oath finished, the Articles of wars read, and
published, by a Bank of the Drummer Major, and his associates, the Regiment
remitted marches off orderly by companies, to their quarters, to remain till
orders were given, for their vp-breaking. The next day the Colonel, and
Lieutenant colonel, were commanded to march over the Elve with seven
companyes, and to beset the Town of Stoade with two companies, and then to
march with the other five toward the Waser stream, to join with the English
forces commanded by General Morgan, being four Regiments of foot.

The Sergeant Major Dumbarre, with the remnant four companies, was commanded
toward Lawenburg, fearing the enemy was to cross the Elve: our orders duly
followed, we are thus severed, marching to our several Randezvouz, entering to
take pains, for our former too much pleasure and riot, used in our winter
quarters:

On this expedition toward the Waser stream, Boswell coming after the
Regiment was killed by a number of villainous Boores, ever enemies to soldiers:
the Cavaliers death was much regrated of all that knew him, and no reparation
had for his death. But the Boores being fled, the Dorpe was burnt off.

Being thus joined to General Morgan his forces, where we remained ten weeks,
having had great duty in watching, many alarummes, but little service, so that
our soldiers longing for service said, the Emperialists were no enemies; yet
when the service was once offered, the smart came with it in great.

Our Lieutenant colonel and his company did march from us toward Lawenburg,
and joined with the other four companyes, and the Sergeant Major Dumbarre was
sent to command the Colonells division on the Waser, the Colonel being gone to
solicit moneys for the Regiment, seeing the English Regiment did get weekly
means, whereas we were entertained on proviant bread, beer and bacon.

The second Observation.
NOthing procures more faithful service, then the Masters liberality. Forsake
your selves, take up your Cross, and follow me: if we faint at this, and not
prove as resolute Soldiers, the next would be harder (the reward of Poultrons)
depart from me you cursed unto everlasting fire, I know you not. While then we
have peace, and quietness, Jesus Christ thy Savior, and Redeemer, the head of
all principalities, and powers, and let thy desire be, to be with him, in the
land of the living. Then let the Heavens rejoice, let Satan flee, and Hell
tremble, and let thy Conscience cry, Christ is my Savior; the world thou must
despise, Heaven thou must desire, and in truth say, Christ is my Savior;
without this assurance, all our knowledge, all our glory, all our honors, are
imperfect, and of no effect: lest therefore, thou should check me, being but
a vain Soldier, saying, it is a good world, when the Fox begins to preach,
leaving thee to God, I will return to my observation, on my Regiments March,
the continuance of it, for nine years successive, in breadth, in length, in
circle, in turning, in returning, in advancing to, and from our enemies, in
weal, and woe, from the Baltic Sea, to the Waser stream, from the Waser
stream, to Rapine in the Mark, from Rapine to Wesmar on the Baltic Coast,
from Wesmar by water unto Holsten toward Ouldenburg, from thence by Sea, to
Hensberrie in Holsten, from thence to Denmark, where in two years time, we did
Circuit the Island, with several Marches, by land, and expeditions by water,
being alike able for both, not like to the High Dutch, whose head nor stomach
cannot endure the water. Being thanked of, by his Majesty of Denmark, having
made peace with the Emperor in May 1629. from Denmark our expedition by water
(having taken service anew, under the Lion of the North the invincible King of
Sweden) did continue toward Spruce, from thence to the Baltic Coast again,
and from thence to the River of Danube, that runs from the foot of the Alps in
Swaubland to the Adriaticke Sea, and, had our Master of worthy memory lived, we
had crossed the Alps into Italy, and saluted the Pope within Rome. But the
loss of this Lion to lead us, was the loss of many, and of this old Regiment,
the remains whereof are yet on the Rhine, where with twenty thousand Scots
like them, I would wish to be, to do service to the Jewel of Europe, the
Daughter of our King the Queen of Bohemia, and to her Princely Issue.

My first advancement to preferment (through the love of my Colonel,) was on
this first March, being without contradiction, though not without envy, placed
to command, as Major over the Regiment, in the Major his absence.

So Jacobs blessing, bred Esaus hate, nature having made some as Antipathits to
virtue, they were made sick by my health. But for me, if another excel me in
virtue, I will make him my example to imitate, not my block to stumble on: If
in wealth, I Will with him bless God, for his plenty, seeing God has enough
for me, and him both.

The killing of Captain Boswell on this March, should be an advertisement to
all Cavaliers, coming after a Regiment, or Army, upon March, to look well
unto themselves, not offering any occasion of offense, being weakest, for the
Rascal sort of Communaltie, are ever soon stirred to mischief, especially an
Army having past by, which, for the most part, never goes through Dorpe, or
Village, but some notorious Villain commits some insolency or other, for which
often times, the Innocent does pay.

Having joined after our March to General Morgans forces upon the Waser, being
quartered in open Dorpes, the enemy not far from us, it was my fortune to
have the first nights watch, as Captain of the watch to oversee all Guards,
the Avenue to the Dorpe on all Quarters, being well beset, with convenient
Guards, and Centries, under silence of night General Morgan, accompanied with
four Gentlemen with firelocks to try us, being young Soldiers, gave fire on
our outter Centry, our Centry having discharged, retired to the next Centry. I
called the guard to their Arms, finding the Alarm continuing, caused the
Sergeant of the Guard, with twelve Musketeers, advance to Skirmish with them,
to know what for Alarm it was, and to see what hinder hault they had: the
General Morgan finding us discharging the duty of understanding Soldiers,
gave presently notice unto the Sergeant, what he was, and desired to speak
with the Captain of the Watch, whereupon the Sergeant conveyed his Excellence
unto me, to the place of my Guard, being the Randezvouz for the Regiment in
case of Alarm to draw up unto, and finding the most part of the Regiment, on
sudden with their Colors in good order, praising them for their good
watch-keeping, his Excellence asked for the Colonel, and went to see him.

It is the property of our Nation, Alarm to be in readiness before any other
Nation, though at other times, on watches, or repairing to their Colors, on
Marches or in Garrison, they are more careless than others. But once coming
to earnest, or in great extreamitie of danger; to give them their due, they are
not inferior to any Nation, so far, as I did ever see, or learn of others,
older Commanders than my self. Yet many false Alarums, as we had on the Waser
make Soldiers, and the most diligent, at last careless, till they feel the
smart of some sudden surprise, to rouse them, the better to go readily to
their duties.

The want of pay at the Waser made our soldiers a little discontent, seeing the
English get due weekly pay; Nevertheless, I did never hear of our Nations
mutiny, nor of their refusal to fight, when they saw their enemies, though I
have seen other Nations call for Guilt, being going before their enemy to
fight, a thing very disallowable in either Officer, or Soldier, to prefer a
little money to a world of credit.

It is a great part of a Colonels duty, timely to foresee for all things
necessary, that may give content to those under his command, lest being justly
discontented, he might be greived, whiles it were not in his power to help
himself, or others.

The liberality of a Colonel and his care in foreseeing, for his Regiment,
returns to him oftimes with triple profit, being with moderation familiar with
his Officers, making them, as humble friends, not as servant, under command,
and he ought by all means eschew to come in question, or public hearing
with his Officers: the only means to make himself famous, and his Regiment
of long continuance.

The third duty discharged of our March from the Waser toward Bysenbourg on
the Elve.
HAving thus remained the space of ten weeks under the command of General
Morgan on the Waser side, we got orders to break up, and to continue out march
over the Elve under Hamburgh, and from thence, toward Bysenbourg Skonce, to
join with the rest of our Regiment, the Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel
being absent, Major James Dumbar commanded then in chief, receiving all
necessaries fitting for our march, as ammunition; proviant, and wagons, for
our baggage, our sick soldiers being cared for, were left behind, and we
brake up from the Waser the tenth of July 1627. a Regiment of Horse being
commanded with us for our Convoy to the Elve, the first night we quartered at
Rottenburg a strong pass, having a great Marrish on both sides, accessible
only by one narrow causey which leads through the marrish to the Castle,
which is well fensed on both sides with Moates, Drawbridges, and slaught bomes,
without all.

The next day our march continuing, in the morning our fore-troopes having
gotten Alarm retired on us, whereupon we drawing into Battle, resolved to
fight, and provided our selves accordingly for the enemies coming, which being
found, but a false conception, nothing followed on it, but the continuance of
our march, without further interruption.

The next night we lying in Quarters, our Guards orderly disposed, before day
we had another Alarm, our duty duly discharged of all, both horse and foot,
if the enemy had come we were provided; But the Alarm proving false, we brake
up, continuing our march toward Buckstehood appointed for our first
Randez-vouz: where we were commanded to send to his Majesty at Stoade, for
receiving of further Orders, and a company of Horse being directed with me, for
my convoy, I was made choice of, to go to his Majesty for bringing Orders unto
the Regiment. His Majesty being absent, Orders were given to me by a General
Commissary to continue our march thorough Buckstehood and to quarter over night
in the old land by the Elve side, till the next day we should cross the River
of the Elve at Blanckeneas, and from thence to march by Hamburgh through their
Territories, and pass toward Lovenburgh, where we quartered a mile from it,
continuing our march the next morning toward Bysenburgh, where we quartered in
the fields, for five nights, till we knew of his Majesty's further resolution.

The third Observation.
ALl marches are occasioned by the accidents of the warfare. The reason of this
march was the enemies Army drawing strong to a head in Luniburgh land, of
intention to force a passage over the Elve to come the easier to Holsten: his
Majesty being weak of foot in this quarter, having no great fear of his
enemy on the Waser, where we lay before; we were therefore called to join
with the rest of our Regiment at Bysenburgh. Another reason of this march was,
the Kings forces in Silesia being also weak of Foot, standing in great need
of a timely supply, we being able to endure a long march, his Majesty resolved,
after besetting well the pass on the Elve, to send us for a supply unto the
Silesian Army: Nevertheless many times we see in wars, though things be
long advised on, and prosecuted after advise duly, yet the event does not
always answer to man's conjectures: For it is a true old saying; Man proposes,
but God disposes.

A Commander having the charge of a Regiment,

He ought also, for his march ever to have good intelligence, lest his enemy
should circumvent him. He ought also to order his march, according to the
countries situation he marches thorough, appointing his Randez-vouz nightly,
short, or long, as his Quarters may fall in best security.

He ought also to keep his Officers and Soldiers in continual good order of
discipline, without suffering the one, or the other to fall off from their
Stations, without great and urgent occasions; and if any of them chance to fall
off, he is obliged to foresee to their timely returns.

Likewise he ought not in any manner of way suffer violence to be used to
Boores, or strangers in his march, and if such does happen, he is obliged to do
justice to all, and to see examplarie punishment done, to terrify others from
the like. He ought also, to be careful to give none under his command just
occasion of complaint, for want of their dues, either in quarters, or in
distributing of their victuals, according to their strengths. He ought also on
his march to be provident, in causing to bring their Proviant timely to their
Randevouz, or Hawlts; seeing it to be rightly distributed, for avoiding of
contentions happening most commonly at such times.

Also he must foresee before he makes a hawlt, that the ground be convenient
where he draws up, whether he be in fear of an enemy, or not; and at such
times, he must be careful, that centries be duly placed, at all parts
needful, and that no man be suffered to wander, or go astray, from the
haulting part, for fear he be to seek, when occasion should present either to
break up, to march, or otherwise, in case of Alarm, to have his Officers, or
soldiers wandering, while as the enemy should charge, were a gross error.

Likewise, he ought to be of strict command, and authority to punish those that
on a march leave their Arms behind them, or that are careless in keeping
their Arms both fix, and clean. In quartering either in village, field or
City, he must give orders for his posts to keep Guards upon, and he ought
himself to recognize all avenues, and inquire of the known countrymen, the
passes, whereby his enemies may come unto him, and of the distance he is from
his enemy; he must also direct parties on all quarters of Horsemen to get
intelligence, and Conschaift of his enemy, lest unawares he should be
surprised.

Likewise at his upbreaking from quarters, he should take notice of all
complaints, and do justice accordingly: And he should have a special care of
the sick, either to transport them, or to foresee for their good usage, in
case necessity, or weakness force him to leave them behind. He ought also,
to foresee before he march for his Guides and to give charge to keep them from
running away; and he ought to learn of the guide the inconveniences on the way
that may be hindersome unto his march, that timely he might provide a remedy.
His Guide should also know how far to go, that when he comes his length, he may
timely provide for another. He ought also to learn the best way for his
Baggage, and Ammunition to march on, and in case of suspected danger, he ought
to ordain a guard of Musketeers with a sufficient Officer to command for their
convoy, and if it be such way, as that on occasion his Ammunition cannot be
steadable unto him, in such a case he must not part from his Ammunition
wagons; but rather to keep one way, though it should be far about.

He ought never for pastime, or pleasure, on a suspected march near an enemy,
to go from the sight of his Troops; for fear he should be absent in greatest
need, or that some misfortune might happen between those he commands
himself, or against others incurring in their ways. If occasion of service
offer, he must never be dejected, but to encourage ever his own most in the
greatest extremity, showing testimonies of his inward valor and setlednesse
of mind, by his bypast experience, testifying he is no Novice, not taking
counsel of others, when he is with resolution to rancounter a brave enemy.

He must be of judgment to consider on the sudden his enemies design, and
timely he ought to oppose his enemy, either with few, or with many, as he finds
his best advantage, And if his enemy be too far stronger than he, he must
timely resolve how to make a safe retreat, being forced thereto; Preserving his
soldiers, to a fitter opportunity: for once far engaged, the retreat will be
the more difficult to make without great loss; He ought always to keep a
good reserve of fresh, brave, resolute fellows to keep faces on their
enemies, while as others should be forced to turn back on them: at such
times, and in such occasions the resolution, the courage, and the judgment of a
valourous Commander is best known; for many can advance rashly, that have
never the wit, or judgment to retire bravely, as is ordinarily seen in many
such Commanders, more stout, than wise. But lest I should enter too far to this
purpose in this observation, for fear to be blamed my self for not retiring
in time, it being a large field I entered in, let this suffice for this march of
the Leaders duty.

Now to retire, being quartered a mile from Lovenburgh in a Dorpe, where the
Boore for fear quit his lodging, so that for want of provision we were forced
to send our Suttler called John Matheson, toward Lovenburgh: in his absence
our Boys made use of his rugge to cover their faces; in drowning of Bee-hives,
the rugge being rough did lodge a number of the Bees, which, when the Boys had
drowned the Be hives, they threw away: The Suttler coming late home we being
a bed, went to rest; and putting off his clothes, drew his rugge to cover him,
but as soon as the Bees found the warmenesse of his skin, they began to
punish him for his long stay, That he was forced roaring like a mad man, to
rise, and throw off his rugge, not knowing (though well he felt) the smart of
his sudden enemies; we called to him, asking, if he was mad: he made no answer,
but still cried the Devil had bewitched him, in piercing him in a thousand
parts, still rubbing and scratching, crying with pain, not knowing the reason,
till a candle was lighted, and seeing the Bees, threw his rugge in a draw-well;
The gentle reader may judge whether, or not, he was punished, for his long
stay. Thus Seria mista jocis.

The fourth duty discharged of our march from Beysenburgh to Rapine in the
Mark, and of the storming of Beysenburgh Skonce.
HAving rested here three days on the fields, till our Colonel came from
Hamburgh with a months means to the Regiment, our moneys paid, we got orders
for a new march toward Rapine in the Mark, where the old Markegrave fon
Turlaugh lay at Haggelberge with a part of his Majesty's Army, and the enemy
lay against him on the other side of the Haggell, our orders were to divide our
Regiment again, and to leave Major Dumbarre with four companies to beset
Beysenburgh Skonce, the enemies army being then within five miles of it, ten
thousand strong of foot besides Horse. The other seven companies were
ordained to march with the Colonel and Lieutenant colonel toward Rapine, as
said, is; we severed not without tears, both of Officers and soldiers. But he
that serves a master, must obey. The first night our Camerades accompanied us
to our quarters. The next morning our march continuing, news overtakes us, the
enemy is set down before Beysenburgh Skonce. In the relation of the service I
must be succinct, being loath, having not seen the service, to set any thing
in Record, but what I know to be truth, neither can I be particular in the
declaration of this service done by our countrymen, though it be generally well
spoken of, over all Germany, yet I must say somewhat, and if my Report diminish
from their credit, I protest it is not for lack of love, but for want of
information.

The enemy hearing we were marched,

The enemy longing to be repared of this their bravade, resolved to storm the
Skonce at all quarters, but finding resolution joined with valor against him,
after long fighting in vain, he is beat off from the walls, and forced to
retire at that time, with the loss of five hundred men at least. But having
redoubled his forces the next time, sets on with greater fury than before, but
is beat off the second time also, with loss; the third time he adventured,
and, as was reported, the Scots defenders, as is well known, behaved
themselves so well, that the enemy storming the walls, the defenders for want
of powder threw sand in their enemies eyes, knocking them down with the Butts
of muskets, having been diverse times Pell, mel through others; at last the
enemy is forced to retire without effectuating any thing.

Yet, gentle Reader, think that at such play, the loss was not only of one
side, but of both, for in defense of this Skonce being so often stormed; that
ever praiseworthy Captain Learmond, Brother to my Lord Balcomy, being twice
shot with a musket, received deaths wound, and after died at Hamburgh, in
perfect memory, discharging his duty Christianly to God, as he did during his
life time both to God and man.

For his sake, and in remembrance of his worth and valor, the whole Officers
of the Regiment did wear a black mourning Ribben: in this conflict also was
killed his Lieutenant, called David Martin, an old, stout and expert Officer:
many other valourous fellows, that were there, carried the true marks of their
valor imprinted in their bodies, for their Countries credit. There was also, a
Scottish Gentleman under the enemy, who coming to scale the walls, said aloud,
Have with you Gentlemen, think not now you are on the streets of Edinburgh
bravading: One of his own Countrymen thrusting him through the body with a
Pike, he ended there. This Skonce so well maintained by our Countrymen, is to
their praise recorded at length in the Dutch Story of the Danes wars, where
the curious Reader may learn more of it. The enemy finding this opportunity
to fail, at another pass above this on the Elve watched by Dutch surprising
the watch, did come over the Elve: the news coming to his Majesty, he
presently sends Orders in the night to Major Dumbarre, who commanded the Skonce
to retire, and to bring off his Cannon, and to cut off the bridge, and then to
come by water with his troops to Lovenburgh, and to beset the Castle thereof
with two Companies, and to retire with the rest to Lukstad, which accordingly
was done, to their great credit.

Major Wilson being set with two Companies on the Castle of Loven, the enemy
falling down, General Tillie leading the Army, coming before the Castle,
does summon it to render, the Major refusing, he is besieged, the enemies
Batteries having played a little on the Castle, the Major parlees for accord,
before the parle, General Tillie is shot through the thigh, pledges delivered,
the accord agreed on, he should march out with bag and baggage, Drums
beating, Bale au Bouche, with a Convoy granted to them to Lukstad, Major: at
his out-comming his Colors are taken from him, having forgot to insert them in
his Accord, he complaining of the breach is bidden read it, and finding it was
so, was forced to march without Colors to Lukstad, where, for his oversight,
he was set from charge, with disgrace, and the Company restored again to the
right Owner, Captain Duncan Forbesse, and incontinent Major Dumbarre, with
four Companies, was commanded to beset Statholder Ransove his Castle of
Bredenberg in Holsten; the enemy having already fallen into the Land. Which
discourse I must now leave, and prosecute the continuance of our march toward
Rapine.

After this service the renown spread so abroad, where ever we came, that the
Gentry of the Country were ready meeting us, providing all necessaries for us.
The Duke of Wymar, the Dukes of Meclinburgh, with a number of gallant Ladies,
did visit us in our March, to congratulate with us the good fortune, and good
service, done by our Camerades. But if we should look to the outside of
Soldiers, these four Companies were the meanest of our Regiment to the
outward appearance. Our March continues to Rapine, where we were to receive
further orders of General Major Slamersdorffe: our orders were to draw up in
Battle before the Town of Rapine, where the General Major would come, and
see us, his intention being to bring the Town under Contribution, otherwise to
fright them with inquartring of the Regiment: his intention effectuated, we
were led in quarters or Dorpes, for three days to rest us, seeing our
intentions were to march unto Silesia.

The fourth Observation.
IN this observation, though the duty be suddenly discharged, we have much to
amplify the observation; first, by reason of the dispute that did arise
betwixt his Majesty and the Colonel, for offering to Cashiere some of his
Officers for alleged insufficiency, by the information of some malignant
Spirits amongst our selves, whose names I will suppress, and the reasons also,
letting some other tongue, not mine, divulge their shame. At this time also
before our rising to this expedition we were discontented of the division made
of our Regiment, being absolutely divided by his Majesty's authority, without
the consent of our Colonel, who would have been loath to have left Captain
Learmond behind, that had done him so many notable good offices, and this
noble Gentleman of famous memory, at his leave-taking of his Colonel, my
brother and me, being then his intirest Camerades, with tears revealed unto
us, whom he thought was the plotter of his stay, and withal did with grief in
a manner foretell his own fall, alleging we should never meet again.
Therefore, for the love I bare to my dear Cammerade, I will point at the heart
of those, who had a hand in the separation of the Regiment. I must therefore
crave pardon a little, to express my duty for the loss of this noble, and
virtuous Cavalier, whose heart and eyes were ever fixed upon virtue, and upon
his love to his dear friends. He hates not, but with cause, that is unwilling
to hate at all. And it is the end that shows the difference betwixt virtue and
vice. Fie then upon those judgments, that, for their own aims, hatch the
Ruin of their Camerades, in fore-thinking, and pursuing evil. And as the
discharge of my last duty was Tragical, the reasons of it I will set down
obscurely, pointing at some, that every man may examine his own conscience,
that had any hand in plotting, or hatching, (by villainous policy, bred of
envy,) the ruin of their Camerades, the reward whereof does still awaite them
with shame in a killing ambush, when the Lord of Hosts will bring to light the
hidden plots of the malicious man. Here I could make some to blush, that I know
plotted the fall of their Camerades. But I will be dumb, doing by them, as
Joseph thought to have done by Mary, in seeking to cover blemishes with
secrecy, lest I should wound some so with my pen, as to make them by their
Camerades, to be push't out of Company. But I will rather show my charity to
the delinquent, by concealing of his fault, and tell him of it in secret, than
openly to divulge his mischief, seeing I wish his amendment before the world
should know his amiss: I will not therefore be too harsh, or virulent, hoping
for his penitency, wishing God may enlighten his conscience, that while he has
time, he may crave pardon for his hatched evil. Being sorry for the loss of
these two worthy Cavaliers, of famous memory, Learmond and Dumbarre, for whose
sakes, with grief I have pointed thus obscurely at the forger of these
Cavaliers fall, whose name I will suppress, though my heart knows him well;
and hoping time may change him to another man, I will let him be his own
Beadle, and for his punishment, I would not care, though he were made to sing
an Invective against himself. But I pray God, we may be freed of the like our
selves, and not to look upon another, with a Beamed eye, but rather to be our
own Antidot's, against all the poison that another is able to spit upon us.
Let us then have our eyes fixed upon virtue, and we shall find a beauty, that
will every day take us with some grace or other: For the world has nothing so
glorious in it as virtue, when she rides Triumphing, as both these Cavaliers
do after death, in despite of their enemies, like Phoebean Champions, praised
by their enemies, for resisting their strongest assaults, are now renowned in
despite of envy, and the abusive world. Associats in this memorable conflict,
and hot storm, are not to be forgotten, but to be praised for their valor.
For though, as I said, by appearance to look but on their outsides, they were
the meanest in show of our whole Regiment: yet God that gives hearts, and
courage unto men, made them the instruments of our Regiments first credit in
the wars of Germany. They were, I confess, led by brave Officers, which were
seconded and obeyed by resolute and stout Soldiers, that gained victory, and
credit, over their enemies in extremity, by casting sand in their eyes. This
victory puts me in mind of a pretty Story, showing that some times the meanest
things, do help us much against our enemies, especially, when the LORD will
bless our fighting, with mean Instruments, fighting for us for his own glory.

Iovianus Pontanus reports of Alphons being resolved by assault to take in
Vicaro, his Soldiers having at the first past the countersharpe and fossie,
scaling the walls, the Inhabitants not able to repulse them with stones, and
the enemy unawares having surprised them, that they got not leisure to arm
themselves, they threw Bee-hives amongst the enemy, which being dispersed,
sticking under their Arms, and in their faces, forced the enemy to retire,
uneffectuating his design. Read Iovian in his seventh Book of Alphons his
deed, Cap. 2.

Jerome Osorius reports the like Story, of one Captain Baregue, a Portugal,
in his eighth Book of Portugal, who by throwing Bee-hives on his enemies,
made them to retire. The like was done of late in Hungaria, on a Fort belonging
to the Bishop of Agria, near the Turks, which with the like help was
relieved of a sudden assault, the Soldiers not having time to go to their
Arms, used this mean, and were saved thereby. We see then, that an immortal
good name is attained unto by virtue, and not by villainy.

Here also in this conflict we see, notwithstanding of the enemies eager
pursuit with fury, that resolution at last prevails; for the defenders having
at first resisted their fury, the enemy with loss being forced to retire, the
assailers were discouraged, and the defenders encouraged. Therefore it is the
duty of a brave Captain, that is to be assailed, to resist the beginnings
well, and then the end must needs be glorious.

In such occasions,

Of all professions men of our profession ought to look nearest to their
credits, being attained unto by much toil, and travel; and is lost with
little. Therefore it is said, that a valourous man his credit hangs, as it
were, at one hair, and one little error or oversight in command, can
obnubilate all his former glory. Circumspect then had we need to be, to
preserve this credit, so dearly bought, and easily lost.

We must not then look to the outside of a man, but unto his virtues; for he
that judges men of our profession by Physiognomie, shall oft-times be
deceived; for he that is not stout by nature in our profession, having served
out a seven years prentiship under such a Leader, as the magnanimous King of
Denmark, such a one, though not stout by nature, by frequencie of danger is
made stout, as a sword, fearing nothing, not death it self. And Soldiers thus
used with danger, for the love of their Leaders, to gain their favors and
good opinion, will undertake the hazard of the greatest dangers for their
Commanders sake. Such then, that have traveled well, should by due have rest,
since the Crown is laid up and ordained for him that fights well. On the other
part, to end this observation, as I did begin, there is no punishment more
grievous, than the public ill will of all men; especially for just causes.
And in my opinion, it is better to be buried in oblivion, than to be evil
spoken of to posterity.

The first Duty discharged of our Retreat from Rapine to Wismere on the
Baltic Coast.
HAving rested eight days at Rapine, of intention to have marched toward
Silesia, to join with the Army there, God that disposes all things by his
providence for our best, provided that we went not; for the Army there being
beaten, and put to rout (whereof few escaped) The enemy after his Victory
following down to usward, and having crossed the Elve behind us, our retreat
toward the Kings Army in Holsten was hindered, the passages being all beset by
the enemies forces, so that there was no other passage free for our Army to
pass through, but only to retire toward the Baltic Sea, to patronize the
Isle of Poule for our safety, till such time as shipping should be provided by
his Majesty to transport us unto Holsten. Orders then were given to the whole
Army, to march with all celeritie from Rapine unto the Randezvouz, being
appointed at Perlesberg, where having come together, we were near ten thousand
strong of horse and foot, being sufficiently provided of Artillery and
Ammunition answerable to the strength of our Army. Our march in great haste,
night and day, continues toward Wismere, being afraid of our enemies, we
feared we should not gain so much time, as to put our Army in assurance,
within treaches, before the enemies coming: but being more affrighted, than we
had reason, coming there betimes, we entrenched our selves within a Close
Leager, before the Isle of Poule, a mile from Wismere: Where we made a
drawbridge over the passage to the Isle, and fortified it with Skonces and
Redoubts on both sides; where we lay five weeks, till his Majesty provided
shipping for our transportation unto Holsten, and fearing contrary winds might
keep us long on the Isle, it being in the Harvest time, we provided the Island
with Corn and Cattle taken off the Country about, sufficiently to have
entertained us the whole Winter in necessity. In this Leager we had abundance
of flesh, and of drink, but we were slightly provided of bread and salt, where
a Soldier had but one pound of bread allowed him in ten days, if that he
took it not off the field. Our Scottish High-land men called this Leager the
flesh Leager, and justly, for the Soldiers were so cloyed with flesh, that
Oxen flesh was let lie on the ground, Wismere did prove very discourteous unto
us, in not suffering to help us, with any thing they might spare for our money,
but rather through their pride abused our Officers and servants, that entered
their Town to buy necessaries.

The fifth Observation.
HEre we have represented unto us, the mutability, of humane estates, and
especially of wars, the when ele turning, we that looked to go forwards, were
forced to retire, humane affairs being opposed as a mark to all the shots of
coffeehouse; so that we ought not to rejoice too much in a calm, or prove
faint hearted in a storm. We read of a Roman Captain, who did tremble being
victorious, as being uncertain how long his good fortune might continue. And
the Romans (as Scipio told the Ambassadors of Antiochus) were not puffed up by
victory, nor cast down by loss. And Augustine said, this life of ours, was
doubtful, blind, miserable, made of a flood of humors, ebbing, and flowing.

Notwitstanding whereof, it is the duty of a wise Commander to make use of the
time, by diligent foresight, and wise deliberation, to save himself, and
others so long as he may, and not to be dejected, at every buffet unconstant
fortune does give him.

As this old General his resolution at this time, having an enemy before him,
was good, the enemy coming also behind him, took his march betwixt both, and
did come fortunately to his wished forecast, putting himself and his Army in
assurance. This old General was of good experience, but not fortunate, neither
were they fortunate whom he served, though of invincible courage, and of great
understanding in wars: for, to give his Majesty of Denmark his due, no man
breathing, I think, carries a stouter heart then he does: Yet I have seen his
Majesty far dejected in spirit, through great loss, and no wonder, as you
shall hear more particularly set down in the seventh observation.

In this Retreat we were not void of fear, but suspecting the worst, every
man bethinking himself of his best safety, to eschew an appare^t overthrow, a
thing at all times most dangerous in an Army. Our Horsemen, being afraid of a
retreat by water, and consequently the loss of their Horses, for want of
shipping, and which was more, they feared the loss of their goods, and their
own imprisonment: but it was in vain they should torment themselves before
hand, for things without their powers to eschew. But they ought rather to have
made use of the present, and to have foreseen the future so far as lay in
them, resolving patiently against all crosses and to refer the event to God.

Here also I did observe the inconvenience that comes to soldiers, through
eating much flesh without salt, or bread, which did bring diseases in the
Leager, so that many died of pestilence and flux: but of our Nation fewest, for
to speak truth, I never did see more durable men against all Toil, travel
and tediousness, than they were.

Likewise I did observe first here, H. F. obs.
in flattering the victorious, and in persecuting of the loser, which is ever
well seen in all estates.

When we are happy in the springtide of abundance, and in the rising flood of
plenty, then the world would be our servants: but when these pleasant waters
fall to ebbing, then men look upon us, at a distance. Wherefore adversity is
like Penelopes night, which undoes all, that ever the day did weave. And our
misery is so, that we can never try a friend, but in the kieke of malignant
chance: so I confess he is happy, that finds a true friend, but he is happier
that finds not extremity to try him.

The sixth duty discharged of our expedition by Water from Wismer to
Heligenhoven, and of our service at Oldenburgh.
HAving remained five weeks in this Leager, during which time, preparation was
making, for the transportation of the Army unto Holsten; seeing the Emperors
forces come from Silesia, and Tillies Army were joined very strong, which
barred our passage from coming into Holsten by land, which made us ship our
Army for going unto Heligenhoven; and from thence to the pass of Oldenburgh in
Holsten, of intention to ly secured there, till the rest of his Majesty's
forces might join with us. The Army then consisted of eight thousand Foot,
and Horse, besides those that were left behind on the Island under the command
of General Major Slamersdorse.

Having all safely landed, at Heligenhoven: we marched toward the pass of
Oldenburgh, where arrived before night, our Leager was drawn out into the most
convenient part, for maintaining of the pass, where the first night we begin
to work in the Trenches, and continue working the whole night, and the next
day, till noone, that the enemy was seen marching toward the pass, in full
Battalions of Horse, and foot, which before three of the clock had planted
Batteries, to play with Cannon on our Leager and to force a passage over the
pass, which our General perceiving, gave orders, to double the Guards both of
Horse, and foot; As also strongly to Barricade the pass, and to cast up in
the night a redout before the pass: the night drawing on being dark, silence
was over all, on both sides of the pass.

But the day clearing, the Guardes on both sides begin the skirmish, the
Cannons on both sides begin to discharge, the Horse Guards charge one another,
till ours were forced to give ground; the foot Guards beginning to fight, the
reliefes were commanded on both sides to second their own, the service growing
hot; and the pass in danger of losing.

My Colonel in all haste was commanded to march with the half of his Regiment
to maintain the pass; The Colonel commanded me, Hugh Rosse, was the first
that felt the smart of the Cannon Bullet, being shot in the leg, who falling
not fainting at his loss, did call courageously, go on bravely Camerades, and
I wish I had a Treene, or a wooden leg for your sakes; in this instant of
time, and, as I believe, with one bullet the leg was also shot from David Rosse
son to Rosse of Gannis. The service thus hot, both of Canon and musket, many
were hurt at the ongoing, where I received a favorable mark, being hurt in
the inner side of my right knee, with the end of mine own Partizan, being shot
off, by the Cannon bullet. And we drawing near to the pass, The Dutch, that
were on service being all fled but the Captain, the pass near lost, my
Colonel draws off a plotton of Musketeers of the Right wing, being most of
them brave young gentlemen of the Colonells own company, which in all haste
with an Officer were directed to maintain the pass, which being hardly
pursued, sundry worthy young gentlemen did lie on the place in the defense of
it, and sundry were hurt, as Andrew Monro, Hector Monro, Alexander Tullough,
Arthur Forbesse, and diverse more, of common soldiers. By this time, the rest
of the Colonells division were not idle from service, the reliefes going often
on, and the rest doing service along the pass, having a hedge for their
shelter, The Body of the Pikes standing, for two hours in battle, under mercy
of Cannon and musket, so that their sufferings and hurts were greater both
amongst Officers and Soldiers, than the hurt done to the Musketeers, that were
on service, for few of their Officers escaped unhurt, as Ensign Ennis, Ensign
Stewart, Ensign Monro; diverse also were killed, as Andrew Monro, Ferwhar
Monro, and Murdo Powlson was killed with a Cannon. John Monro with a few
Musketeers was commanded in a flat Champange to encounter the enemy, who forced
the enemy to retire, so that the pass was cleared again by Captain John his
valor, much to his credit.

The first division of our Regiment having thus maintained the pass for two
hours hot service, then comes from the leager, for relief of the Colonells
division, the Lieutenant Colonel, with the other division nothing inferior
to the first, who falling on fresh with man-like courage, the other division
falls off, to refresh themselves: during their Camerades being on service, at
the very entry the Lieutenant Colonel was hurt, Sr. Patrick Mackey and John
Forbesse of Tullough, both Captains were hurt; Lieutenant Andrew Stewart,
Ensign Seaton and Ensign Gordon were also hurt, and many gentlemen and common
Soldiers were killed. This service continued in this manner from seven a
clock in the morning, till it was past four in the afternoon, first began,
with the half of the Regiment, who were relieved by the other half, which
continued till midday; after that the service not being so hot, as before,
they went on to service by companies, one company relieveing another, till
night that it grew dark, and then darkness, the enemy of valor, made the
service to cease.

During all this time, our Horsemen stood bravely in Battle under mercy of
Cannon, and Musket, besides the foot, attending to second us, in case the
enemy had set over, and forced the pass, which once he adventured to do, but
was suddenly beaten back: all this while, the General the Duke of Weimar, and
both the Armies, were witnesses to the manly and brave carriage of this
praiseworthy Regiment.

In the evening before night ammunition on both sides growing scarce, and
darkness coming on, the service begins to bear up: by this time, there is a
Barrel of beer sent us, from the Leager, the Officers for haste caused to
beat out the head of it, that every man might come unto it, with hat, or
head-peece, they flocking about the wagon, whereon the Barrel lay, the
enemies Cannonier gives a voley to their beer, which, by Gods providence,
though shot amongst the midst of them, did no more harm, but blew Barrel and
beer in the Air, the nearest miss that I did ever see; for many of them were
down to the ground, whereof my brother, Captain Obstell of worthy memory was
one.

At night the service ceast, I was sent by the rest of the Officers to the
Leager to my Colonel for Orders, to learn of the General, who should relieve
us at night: My Colonel did go to the Generals Tent, and I with him, to have
his Excellences resolution, who having Nobly accepted of the Colonel, did
praise him and his Regiment, requesting him, that as the Regiment had done
bravely all day, in being the instruments under God of his safety, and of the
Armies, he would once more request him, that his Regiment might hold out the
inch, as they had done the span, till it was dark, and then they should be
relieved, as he was a Christian; And drinkeing to me, I returned with a
Resolution to my Camerades, leaving my Colonel in the Leager: And as it grew
dark, Weimar his earnest and diligent entreaty, having proved our good friend,
in urging to take us first off. The General having resolved to retire from the
enemy, with the whole Army, by reason Ammunition grew scarce, and we having
deserved best, were first brought off, getting orders to march in the night to
ships.

The sixth Observation.
THe wise Ancients said, it was the principal thing in all things to look
unto the end: but it is the property of our Nation to be over wise behind the
hand; as we were after the service, having lost thereat a great many of our
friends, we ought to have been the more circumspect again. But our condition
is so, that no experience can make us wise, till we be soar beaten by others,
and then we will grow kind one to another.

Amongst the Romans none was admitted to the dignity of a Commander, till first
he had past a prentiship under a brave General, where he was taught the use of
Arms, and Novices durst not be so bold, as to intrude themselves in this
honorable profession, in any degree, to take command on them, without long
practice, and experience, as was requisite to undergo a charge in so high a
calling, and of such importance, as to lead others: Nevertheless, the ground
work or foundation of Military discipline once well laid, then they were
suffered to advance by degrees unto high charges, proposing recompense, and
reward unto those, that did merit, and to that effect, they invented several
sorts of Crowns, for the reward of their travells, and wisdom: Amongst
others, the Crown called Obsidionall was ordained, for those that entered first
the besieged places, being of the most esteem of all crowns, which was made
of the Root of the Herbs, or grain, that had taken Root within the place
besieged; also those that first scaled the walls, were wont to get a crown of
the Herb Woodbinde, or Parietaria, Pellitory growing on the walls, and those
that first entered the enemies Ports by force, had also a crown given unto
them; And the crown Castean was ordained, for him that first entered the
enemies Trenches, and brake the Palesades, making way to enter unto the enemies
Leager: Also a crown was given unto those of the Navall Army, that first
entered the Enemies Galleys, or ships on Sea, this Crown was made of gold,
representing the Combat, and the General a foot, being victorious, had given
him a crown made of Hats, and Miters, and triumphing in a chariot, he carried
a Hat made of Laurel. At last, these crowns were made of Gold, laid over with
precious stones. They had also given them, for recompense of their travels,
Chains, and Bracelets, all to the end they might accustom themselves to
virtue, and to the discipline and toil of wars. Who then would not desire to
be of this society, to get a crown for well doing? On the contrary, Cowards,
Poultrons, and Effeminate persons, were disdained, degraded and put off charge,
while the valiant were honored, advanced, and recompensed, as the Turk does
practice to this day; to the disgrace of Christians neglecting discipline, till
they are overthrown. It should then be the duty of brave Generals to make
choice of brave and virtuous Commanders, not asking of whom they come, but
where, and how long, have they practiced to be virtuous. Then we see here, what
was the custom of the Ancient Romans, in choosing the virtuous, that had past
their prentiship, and not Novices to be Commanders: for we see, that the love
of the Public brings honor, pleasure and profit to the virtuous, who think
on it sincerely; But those, that would raise their fortunes by the ruin of
others, shall never prosper.

The reason of our coming to this pass of Owldenburgh was, to have stayed
there in safety from our enemies, till we might join with our friends; but the
Enemy prevented us, in coming betwixt us and our friends: then there was no
remedy, but to hold him up at the pass, till our Army might join with us, and
of this intention we resolved for best, to maintain the pass, as we did, till
Ammunition grew scant, and then we were forced to retire to our ships.

This King is powerful by Sea, and is mightily well furnished of all things
necessary for wars, of Arms, Artillery, Ammunition, victuals, money, and
what else is requisite to set forwards a war; and, which is more, a noble, and
a liberal Master, as ever I did serve.

Here also I observe the slownesse of our General, that did not patronize the
pass some few days before the Enemies coming, that it might have been
fortified: for it was no time for us to fortify the pass in the night, when
the enemy came before us, and the next day, we were not suffered to work,
being otherwise employed. Another oversight was, that our General did not know
certainly, how we were provided of Ammunition, for though we had Lead in
abundance, we wanted Bullets in the time of need. Whereupon the General was
accused, after our coming into Denmark, and the blame was found in the
Commissary, that had the charge of the Artillery, Et jure, for they were all
Rogues, and deceived his Majesty, that trusted them too much. Nevertheless, I
cannot excuse the General of being ignorant of the provisions ordained for the
Army; seeing he was certain of the enemies coming: for it is most sure, if
we had been provided of Ball, we were sufficiently bastant to have kept the
pass against our Enemy, since it came not in the Enemies power, till we had
left it voluntarily in the night. The enemy also retiring from us, hearing the
Rhinegraves forces were coming behind him, of intention to join with us. I
observed also, that the General was too slow, in the encouragement of his
Officers and Soldiers, having delayed his exhortation to the very time of our
going on service. And it is easy, at such time, to Prognosticate by the
countenance going on service, how they are affected. But never men went on
service with more cheerful countenances, than this Regiment did, going as it
were, to welcome death, knowing it to be the passage unto life, especially
fighting in a good Cause, against the enemies of the Daughter of our King, the
Queen of Bohemia, for whose sake, our Magnificke and Royal Master did
undertake the wars, and for her sake, we resolved to have followed such a
courageous Leader, as the Earth this day affords none stouter, as mine eyes did
witness diverse times: And for her sake, I persuade my self, our noble
Colonel did engage his estate, and adventured his person, to have ^on her
sacred Majesty good service. I did also observe this day, that the best way to
eschew danger, is not to perceive it; for a man well resolved perceives no
danger, neither does any thing seem difficult unto him, that may import his
credit. And the best Commanders, in my opinion, as they are in measure remiss,
not seeming prodigal of their lives, though resolutely adventurous; and for
me, I love a man that is modestly valiant, that stirs not till he must needs:
for he that is conscious of his inward courage, is confident to show it to the
world, when he will; but a man prodigal of life, oft-times indangers himself
and others; for though he have courage to lead them on, he lacks wit and
discretion to bring them off, in case of eminent danger. And at such times, as
I condemn him that runs away first, I cannot allow of him, that, out of
ostentation, will stay after all his Camerades are gone, till he yield himself
prisoner, or die unnecessarily there, where he might have preserved himself
with honor for a better occasion. I have also observed, that a base fellow
has been killed running away, when a valiant Soldier stood to it, and came
off with credit.

I did also remarke the invincible courage and resolution of that worthy
Gentleman Lieutenant Rosse, who having lost his leg, wished for a wooden or
Treen leg, lying on the ground, as the example of pity, that he, who was
endued with such courage, and Christian resolution, had not time in the
warfare, to have given the world greater proof of his valor.

Here also I must condemn those arrogant Spirits, who contemn God and Fate,
that while as being on service, and being hurt, may retire with credit, and on
the contrary will be so foolishly valiant, as to stay on a second hurr, worse
than the first; as became that day of a young Gentleman of my name, and
kindred, who being shot in the Arm with a musket bullet, would not at my
desire retire, but slighting his wound stayed on service, till he was shot dead
in the head. David Monro Ensign,

Here also I did observe, that the former distractions amongst the Officers of
the Regiment were taken away, having been companions of equal danger against
their enemies, made them love one another the better ever after: for Captain
John Monro, helped Lieutenant colonel Seaton, being shot, to his horse,
having on the march two days before fallen horribly out: which verifies the
Scots Proverb, Dogs will part Swine, and make them agree amongst themselves.
We see oft-times, that those that are feeblest themselves, are most ready to
speak Derogatively of others. Here I might infer diverse instances, yet I
will infer, and only point, for the present a little at those unluckie
dispositions, that cannot endure any but themselves to be well thought of, for
if one be justly praised, or advanced in recompense of his virtue, they will
presently dismount his virtues, and stabbe him to the heart, obnubilating his
brightest glory, with a Butt of Detraction bred of envy, nastie indeficient
minds devising spots, where they find them not, a base office to make his
tongue whip a worthy man. If I knew vice in another, I would nobly show my
charity in concealing it, if he be absent; if present, I would not flatter:
for the valiant man his tongue is ever the greatest coward in absence, for it
is not good to deprave the fame of the absent, with a viperous Tongue:
Therefore my advice were to thee, in such a case, to do like the wise man, to
learn somewhat by thine enemies outrage, as King Philip of Macedon learned
well the lesson, who many times thanked his enemies for their outrage, which
made him afterward the more wise, more circumspect, and more settled: for
nothing gives a man more good experience, than wars, laws, love, and
detraction: And for Detraction thou ought to be so wise, if thou be made the
mark for Calumniators to shoot at, let them shoot, as they please, I would be
hard, they should not pierce me. Being armed with a good Conscience, we should
not care for their shooting, for though it sometime take root in the ears of
some hearers, yet thy comfort should be, that one day, he shall kill himself,
soon or late, as the poysonable birth kills the mother: and such fellows should
be punished, as thieves: seeing the one bereaves men but of their substance,
but the other bereaves them of life, and death, and of their dearest friends
also. And he should be holden as such a one himself, till he brought his
evidence; as the custom was of old: and for my self, I never found better
remedy against them, than to disdain them, as coming about the ears of a
deaf man, that did not hear them, and this I found to be the best bridle, to
curb their tongues, for in the end he would hold his peace, and turn his
tongue another way: but I must confess, the tongue of a Calumniatour has
sometimes offended me, and grieved me much, but they profited me, in making me
the more circumspect and diligent, in thinking on all circumstances, that might
conserve my credit and reputation, to be avenged on them. And with the
Proverb, which I know to be true, I will conclude this point, things that
grieve us, should lead us to repentance, seeing that which destroys,
instructs; and God oft-times, cleanses the inward man, by the outward, by the
contrary course, leading us to our wished for Harbor: for there is no such
great discommoditie, but brings commodity with it; for those that are stinged
by Scorpions, though at first it be very dangerous, yet at last, the hurt being
cured by convenient remedies, it brings fruit with advantage, as experience
has taught, neither Fly, Be, nor Wasp can harm those thus cured.

To conclude then this point of Detraction, circumstances, which he may
remember. Therefore we should be loath unnecessarily to bring our selves in
question, in speaking evil of others: for commonly, at such times, cowards, or
feeble men, that are not in action themselves, see more than others that are
better employed: yet the feeble man is ever readiest to detract, for to prevent
his own insufficiency, too well known to others. But after this days
service, our detractions, and distractions also, were almost taken away, being
companions of the like danger, against our enemies: And I inferred this
discourse of detraction, by reason, that at such service commonly men do
speak, as they do favor, or rather, as their envy carries them; which fault
as being too much in use in all estates, especially amongst Soldiers, I would
wish from my heart that it might be eschewed.

Here also I observed, that want of circumspection in command, especially over
young Soldiers, as we had to command, do many times cause great
inconveniences to follow, as was seen in the blowing up of our powder, whereby
our Colonel was burnt in the face, and many more. Here I might speak somewhat
of the hurt and inconveniency, that does happen many times by Cannon, and
powder, but I will refer it to a fitter place, to be spoken of.

Likewise I cannot here omit to speak somewhat of the resolution of some
particular Soldiers, that were hurt on this service. Hector Monro of Cool,
Camerades, which helped him off, going farther with him than he thought needful
for his safety, or their credit, he wished them to retire, and discharge their
duties against the enemy, as they had sufficiently done toward him. Hugh
Murrey being desired in time of hot service, to go and take off his brother
being killed; he lacking powder said, going toward his dead brother, I will
first empty my brothers Bandeliers, as I have done mine own, to be revenged
on his enemies, before I take him off: in the mean time, he was shot in the
eye himself, and that wondrous favorably, the Bullet some few days after
having come forth at his nose, which is most true, though seeming incredible.
This day also I observed an ill custom too common to all Generals, that they
make most use, in time of desperate service, of those that do best serve them,
and when once they have experience of their valor, they never omit to employ
them on the most dangerous exploits; and for reward, they only do commend
their valor, when others are scarce remembered at all.

Here also I did see, that on hot service, with credit, not running away, and
the best exhortation a Leader can give common Soldiers is, to show himself
courageous, and then, without words, with a sign, some will follow him, in
imitating his example.

Here also I did observe, that the Dutch are not the best Soldiers in
extremity of danger, though I confess for the discharge of all duty,
otherwise very obedient, till it come to extremity, and then commonly they
make a Cloak of coffeehouse, and call for money, as they did this day.
Likewise I cannot say, but Horsemen are useful many times, as they were here;
yet in my opinion, in their service, they are not to be paralleld to foot: For
at the in-taking of Towns, and in hilly and mountainous Countries, that are
straight by nature, they are not useful, neither can they do but little
service, yet for their great charges, they are much harder to be entertained:
Therefore my choice shall be ever, as most credible to command on foot, and if
I were worthy to advise a King, or a General following wars, I would wish
him to esteem more of his foot Officers, than of his horse: then fewer should
serve on horseback, and more on foot; and as his Charges should be less, his
profit should be the more, his Army the stronger, his Country less spoiled,
his contribution to maintain his Army, the better paid, his treasure richer,
his Victories more frequent, and more durable, his Conquest the better
maintained.

This I dare presume to affirm to be all true, out of my little experience,
and which is more, all the time I have served, where I have heard one fault
imputed to a body of foot, I could instance ten defects in our Horsemens
service: for the worst sort of them being too much given to plowndring, makes
them neglect their duties, which fault also is too Common amongst many of their
Leaders, though I have known some honest men amongst them free from this
imputation: and for a King, or Prince, that must defend his Country, by sea,
(as our noble Mr: the King of Dennarke was) I would advise him, as unprofitable
for his service and country, not to encertaine strangers in this kind, so
being their charges would far surmount the benefit that could redound by their
service, yet I cannot say, but the Rhinegrave his Regiment was the only
Regiment under the King at this time, that did best service, which was ever
praise worthy.

Likewise, I have found by experience that those who fight best in occasions,

Likewise I would advise all worthy Soldiers, and Officers going on service,
if they can, never to want some moneys about them, that, if they chance to come
as prisoners in undiscreete hands, they may cast a bone in the dogs teeth, to
curry favor of the cruel curre.

I did also observe here, that continency is a virtue very necessary for a
Soldier, for abstaining from many inordinate appetites, that follow his
profession, that he may the better suffer hunger, cold, thirst, nakedness,
travel, toil, heat, and what else patiently, never mutining for any defect:
for it is the greatest victory we can attain unto, to overcome our selves, and
our appetites. Likewise I did observe, that Kings, and Generals are very
courteous to Cavaliers, while as they stand in need of their service, Wymar
been our friend we had bin left behind at the pass, and been prisoners the
next day with the rest of the Army. It is therefore ever best to do well, come
after what may; for virtue in despite of envy, will not want a reward: And a
stout Mariner that has ridden out the storm with loss, as we did this day,
rejoices in the calm, when it comes; and he is said to merit the Crown, that
has fought valiantly.

It is also very necessary, that at such service, as this was, if we have time,
that we be careful, to bring off our Camerades bodies killed on service, that
died honorably before their enemies, to be laid in the bed of honor, in
burying their bodies, as becomes Christians. We are also tied in duty to our
Camerades, that were with us in danger, if either they be wounded, or
mutilated, to care for their safeties, so far as lies in our power: And we
must not prefer the safety of our own bodies, to the public weal of our
Camerades, and countrymen dead or living, but we ought, with the hazard of our
own lives, to bring off the dead and hurt.

An example of this duty, we have in the person of the President of Chassangne
treating of the Jews law, that did command, that the bodies of their dead
enemies should not lie unburied. Casar caused to be buried the head of his
enemy Pompey, and wept at his death, as Valerius Maximus reports in his fifth
book, and sixth Chapter. Hercules is thought to have bin the first that
ordained to bury the bodies of those killed on service, and David calls them
blessed, that were so thankful, as to have buried Saul. Judas Macchabie did
cause to bury the bodies of the enemy killed in battle, and Alexander
restored unto the mother of Darius the dead body of her son, Hanniball did
bury, the body of his enemy Marcellus, as Valerius affirms. It is also
expedient, for the commonweal, that the bodies of the dead be buried: and
Leonard Darez reports that Cyrus, Alexander, and Caesar did recommend their
funerals to their friends, as Lieutenant Rosse did his to his Captain and
me, which we performed in the best manner we could, for the time. If Pagans had
such regard to their burialls, Christians should be more careful, whose bodies
sometimes were the receptacles of the holy Spirit, and of the immortal soul
created to Gods own Image.

Here also I would report the commandment that we read in the second chapter
verse 23. of the fourth book of Esdras. Where thou find the dead, put them
in the grave (with a certain mark) and I will give thee the first seat in my
resurrection: and the wise Ancients said, men should look unto the end. My
exhortation then is to all my worthy countrymen, and women, that were
interessed in our losses in this days service, to consider, that when these
gentlemen, and Cavaliers were borne, that they were marked and ordained to die
honorably, fighting in the good cause; and for the liberty of our Kings
daughter, the Queen of Bohemia and her distressed Royal Issue, under the
magnanimous King of Denmark our Master, who for her Majesty's liberty, did
hazard not only his life, but his crown; let them then that are interessed,
as said is, in this our loss consider again, that they died with great
honor, and reputation, seeing they live eternally in their fame, having laid
down their lives, as servants of the public, if not for their country, yet
at least, as cannot be denied, for the liberty of their Kings Royal Issue: It
then became them well, to have died standing. Therefore those mothers, Vicia,
mother to Futius Geminus, who was killed at Rome, for having wept at the death
of her son, that had lost his life in the public service, as reports
Tacitus in his 6 book of his Annals, and our Savior in the Evangelist Saint
Luke does forbid the widow to weep for her son that was dead, and St. Paul
writing to the Thessalonians says, Brethren I would not have you ignorant of
the estate of those that are asleep, to the end you do not over-mourne, as
those do, that are without hope. Therefore, let us forbear all tears for
those departed, and if we should mourn, let us mourn with tears, even those
most precious tears for sin, these are the Christian tears, that should be
shed from our hearts, to reconcile us unto God, those tears are as the blood
of the soul, hurt and wounded with the sense, and feeling of our sins,
before God these are the tears, that draw Gods mercy upon us, as David cried
unto God in the 56 Psalm. Thou have counted my wanderings, and put my tears
in thy bottle, are they not in thy Register? Therefore though we be grieved at
the loss of our friends, and at the loss of the day; Yet o God, make us
thankful unto thee, for our deliverance, that we may rejoice at our own
safety.

The seventh Duty discharged of our Retreat from Owldenburg unto Assens in
Denmark by Sea.
HAving thus past the day at Owldenburg, the night (the friend of Cowards)
coming on, what we durst not have done by day, being favored by the
mooneshine, when all were wearied with hot service and toil in the day, begun
to take rest, and refreshment by their fires, in the Leager all Guards
relieved, and centries set out, being all of us, after a great storm in a
quiet calm, we begin to take our retreat to the water: our General being full
of fear and suspicion goes before, and our Colonel also; we follow, having
the avant-Guard according to our Orders for going a shipboard, which orders
were willingly obeyed, perceiving the danger was to follow, and in
consideration that long before the Lieutenant Colonel Sr. Patrick Mac-Gey and
Captain Forbesse being hurt had retired for their safeties toward the Isle of
Feamor, and from thence to Denmark to be cured. I supplying the place of the
Major, our Regiment orderly retiring from the enemy, Captain Mac-Kenyee and my
brother Obstell, who before were companions in the day of danger, in the night
did march together leading off the Regiment to be secured, and I bringing up
the Rear, accompanied with some other Officers; we had no doubt of our safe
retreat: the whole army being behind us made us halte the oftener, taking
pains to bring up our hurt and sick men; we marched but softly, Py a Pyano:
at last by ten a clock of the night we arrived on the shore, and drew up in
battle attending the Colonells command for shipping, who had gone himself
unto the Road amongst the ships, to provide shipping, but could get no
obedience, the fear was so great amongst the mariners; having heard the
roaring and thundering of cannon and muskets in the day, fear so possessed them
all, that they lacked hands to work and hearts to obey: and the Colonel
coming a shore without bringing of ships to receive us, we made use of the
time, our Camerades the horsemen having come before us, who ever begin
confusion, were without orders, forcing ships to take in their horses, and had
already possessed the whole Bulworke and shipping with their horse, I asking my
Colonells leave, drew our whole Colors in front, and our Pikes charged after
them; our musketeers drawn up in our rear by divisions, fortifying our rear
in case the Enemy should assault us in our Rear, and then I advanced with our
Colors along the peer, our Pikes charged we cleared the Peer of the
Horsemen, suffering them to save themselves from drowning, where they found the
Channel most shallow, and advancing thus to the end of the Peer, we seized
upon one ship with some horses in it, where we set our Colors, and making that
ship launch off a little from the shore for fear of being aground, having
manned the shipboat with an Officer, and some musketeers, we sent to force
other ships out of the Road to launch in and serve us, until such time as the
most part of our Regiment were shipped except some Villains, who were gone a
plundering in the Town; but not knowing the danger they were in, they stayed
all night from us and were taken by the enemy the next morning. Thus having
shipped our men we were forced to quit our Horses and baggage: the Officers
that were most diligent, as Captain Monro and my brother Obstell, were busied
the whole night ferrying soldiers from the shore, especially the sick and
wounded, who were not able to help themselves: In the morning I shipped three
boatefulls of wounded and sick men, till at the last I was beaten from the
shore by the enemies horsemen. And my Colonells ship being under sail laid up
to the wind, attending my coming with the last fraught, and then we followed
the Route of the fleet, seeing the enemies Army drawn up in battle, horse,
foot and Cannon, and our Army of Foot and horse opposite unto them; where I
did see six and thirty Cornets of horse, being full troops without loosing of
one Pistol give themselves prisoners in the enemies mercy, whereof the most
part took service: As also I did see above five Regiments of foot, being
forty Colors, follow their examples, rendering themselves and their colors
without loosing of one musket. Judge then, judicious reader, though we were
sorry for the loss of our Army, if we were glad of our own safeties: I
think we were, and praised be God with no discredit to us, or our Nation; for
none can be blamed that does what he is commanded: thus following our course
the third morning we arrived before Flinesborrie, where our Randezvouz was
appointed, and having sent a shore for some victuals, whereof we stood in
great need, no man was blamed to provide for himself at such time, when the
whole Country was to be left to our enemies mercy.

His Majesty being there, after hearing the certainty of his great loss,
resolved to secure Denmark; having lost Holsten and Yewiland we got orders with
expedition all of us to ship, and to hold forth our course unto Assens in
Denmark, where his Majesty promised to meet us to dispose further of us, for
his Majesty's service, and we making sail follow our course and orders. At our
parting the Rhinegrave with his Regiment did come thither the enemy at his
heels, and he at spurs following the King, till he had gotten the pass made
good betwixt Holsten, and Yewtland, and his Majesty once safely arrived in
Denmark, the Rhinegrave quitting Yewtland unto the enemy follows the King unto
Denmark: We landed at Assens of our Regiment eight hundred Soldiers besides
one hundred and fifty wounded and sick men and being put in good quarters, we
rest us, leaving the enemy to rest in the fat land of Holsten, and Yewtland,
having a good broad and deep fossey betwixt us, we were by Gods mercy secured.

The seventh Observation.
HEre we see that the loss of a day, Holsten and Yewtland, so that here below
we have no assured estate, from the King to the Clown, whereof we have
frequent examples in Histories, which should make none of all estates to glory
too much, either in their peace, or prosperity, as the Holsteners did: for
though now thou be in peace and security, as they were before this day, thou
oughtst to look unto thy self, and to prevent the worst better than they did.

Therefore to discharge a part of my duty to my Countrymen and friends, I
mind here somewhat to touch the misery of man through the inconstancy of
humane affairs. Isidore writes, that it was the custom at Constantinople in
the days of the Emperors Coronation, while as he sat in his Throne, a Mason
came to him, presenting stones, that he might choose which he would to make his
Tomb of, thereby putting him in mind of the inconstancy of humane fragilitie.
We read also of a simple Citizen in Italy, that became one of the most
powerful men in Italy, and coming to the dignity of a Prince, being thirty
years, without interruption, in great prosperity, tranquillity and peace,
yea ever in the most dangerous time of war, and his Children raised to high
honors and dignities; this man thinking himself to be above the wind, a
whirle-winde of wars, unlooked for, came on him and his from Florence, that
he with his wife and children were taken prisoners, and sent to Millane, his
goods consiscated, he was shut up in close prison, and died miserably: the
Venetians appropriating unto themselves all his money he had in Bancke.

We read also of one Francis Force, that through his heaping up of wealth came
to be made Duke of Millane, and after that entitled himself to be the Son of
Fortune, and the Oracle of the Princes of Italy, being many years in
prosperity, was afterward chased from his goods, as the Holsteners were then,
but having recovered his lands and goods again, he grew so insolent and proud
of his prosperity, that at last he was taken prisoner, and was kept till death
in prison; mocked of the whole world, for his pride and greediness. The same
Author Guicchardine in his seventh Book in the 157, does record of the
Bentioles chased out of Bullon, where they long were in peace, the subjects of
Millane being forbidden to receive them, the chiefest of them died of grief,
having never before tasted the Cup of adversity: And so became of sundry in
Denmark, that for fear did send away their goods by shipping unto the Craggs
of Norway, to be kept there, whereof some were lost by Sea, and the owners
afterward died of grief, not having the courage to undergo patiently their
Cross. The Lord of his mercy preserve my Country and Friends from the like
Visitation. Let no man therefore flatter himself with prosperity, riches, or
honor, as Agapetus advises us in his Politic Aphorisms. All are borne
alike, come of dust, our glory then should be of virtue, and not in riches,
prosperity, or honors; for we should esteem of nothing so much, as of Gods
judgments, praying his Majesty continually to divert them from us, esteeming
more of our souls, than of deceivable riches, whereof the possession is
uncertain, as was seen at this time, both in Holsten and Yewtland, their
riches went faster away than they came, and though they could have enjoyed
them, yet at last they were forced to leave them to others. Since therefore we
can carry nothing with us, but our good name, let us be ever careful of that,
discharging, so far as we may, with a good Conscience our duty to God and
man, and this Heritage we cannot be robbed of, though the world should turn to
nothing.

Here we see this magnanimous King his estate falling for his love to his
Niece, the distressed Queen of Bohemia, and her Children, Magnanimous King was
not dejected, but with a courageous resolution makes use of the time, retiring
to one corner of his Kingdom, to prevent the loss of the whole, being
naturally fortified with a broad graffe, as the Isle of Britain; being strong
of shipping, having his Majesty of Britain to friend, and the Estates of the
united Provinces, he was careless of the Emperors forces by Sea or Land, not
being able to harm his Majesty more than they did.

By this example we may see, what advantage our Sovereign, the Kings Majesty
of great Britain, has over all foreign Kings in Europe, through the
situation of his Dominions, being mighty in power of men, shipping, and
money, is able to make war abroad, where he pleases, and to make a safe
Retreat, when he pleases, being Master at Sea, as he can easily be, terrifying
his enemies with one Army abroad, and a strong Army at Sea, he can offend
whom he will, and retire when he list, forcing all Europe to be in fear of
him, and his Majesty in fear of none, but of the King of Kings. The Lord
therefore preserve his Majesty, his Children and Subjects, from the power of
foreign enemies; and I wish a great part of my friends and Countrymen were
so far addicted, to seek the restitution of her Majesty of Bohemia, and her
Royal Issue, as I am; the wars then should never end, till they were
restored, and I avenged of my friends blood, and mine own, shed in the
quarrel.

Here also I did observe his Majesty's circumspection, in preventing the
Emperialists, in coming by water unto his Kingdom, having beset all Finland
with strong Garrisons of Horse and Foot, which kept strong guards, and good
watch by night and by day, at such places on the Coast, as was most in danger
of the enemies over-setting, till in the end, the enemy was forced to retire
his Army, leaving but a few men in Garrison in the Towns, which lay on the
Coast, which Garrisons his Majesty with shipping did often visit, to their
great hurt, with strong parties, retiring again, having done his exployt,
Magnanimous King, to my knowledge, deserved to have been worthily thought of,
and well spoken of, for his noble enterprizing of the war, being Leader and
General in so good a cause. And though the success was not answerable, I dare
be bold to affirm, it was none of his Majesty's fault, for his Majesty not
only bestowed much in advancing of it, but also did hazard himself and his
Crown in maintaining of it. Nevertheless, there are always some Cynicks,
that do bark at his Majesty's proceedings, without reason; where we may see,
that no man, no nor Kings themselves can escape the lash of censure, and none
can eschew to be traduced by the ignominious aspersions of the malevolent
tongue. Therefore it is good to do well, and then we need not care what is
said; except the sayer put his name to his assertion, and then he may be made
to foot his Boule, in maintaining of it, or unworthily to refuse it. Here also
I did observe, that no Armor nor pass could remove the Generals fear; for
having once imagined the enemies overcoming, he was never fully settled, till
he was safe a shipboard. And therefore I did see at this time that verified,
that when man distrusteth God, it is then just with God to leave man to
himself: for after our Retreat, being on the Road, the General, being
thronged in his own Ship, could not command a Ship to transport his servants,
till I forced a Ship for his Excellencies service; which should teach all men
in Authority, while they have command, to command with discretion, lest the
wheel should turn, and then they should be beholding to those, whom before
they commanded.

Here also I did see mutinous Soldiers well rewarded, and it may be sooner
than they thought; for the day before those that called for money when they
were commanded to go on service, the next day I being a Shipboard did see them
turn slaves unto their enemies being taken prisoners, robbed both of Clothes
and money, and kept long in bondage, being forced to serve against their
Conscience, such was their folly in calling for money when it was no time to
tell it. Having at this time left our horses and baggage to our enemies, I
observed somewhat on the love of men to those beasts, and the love of beasts to
their Masters, as worth the noting, to confirm the kindness that should be
entertained amongst Christians, and men of one profession; Obstell, of worthy
memory, had a Horse of our own Country-breed, that was so familiarly
acquainted with his Soldiers, and with the noise and touch of Drum, that the
whole day on our march, when his Master went a foot, he unled followed the
Drum a little aside from the Company, halting when they halted, and moving
when they moved fast or slow. Another Horse I left, that being in Wismer
Leager, having rode out one day to a wood, half a mile from the Leager, to
cause to cut timber, leaving my Horse standing alone, and my Cloak on my
Saddle, a Rutter coming by, unknown to me and my fellows, steals my Horse
away, who finding himself in strangers hands, skips loose, and runs to our
Leager, being chas't and hunted at by more than a hundred Horsemen, out-runs
them all unto the trenches, and running through the Leager, stands before my
Tent, my Camerades wondering what became of me, thinking I had been killed by
the Horsemen, come and make search for me, and finding me, tell me of my Horse.

These beasts I have remembered for their love, for which I will set down some
particulars concerning the address, fidelity, and bounty of some Horses;
whereof I have formerly read. Pliny protests their praises cannot be
expressed. We read of the Numidians, that were so much redoubted of the
Romans, that in their wars, they would at spurs, run their Horses in
midst of their enemies, without a bridle to govern them. In the Battle of
Cannes, Hanniball returning the next day on the place of Battle, to look
more narrowly to the place, a Roman Knight half dead, hearing the noise of
people, lifted up his head, of purpose to have spoken, but his voice failing,
died: with the last gasp, by Hanniball there road a Numidian on that dead
Knights Horse, who knowing his Master, begun to move his ears, to bray, and to
leap, and rebound with such fury, till he casts the Numidian to ground, runs
through the dead bodies, and stands before his dead Master, and leaning down
his neck and shoulders, shows the desire he had that his Master should leap
on him, to the great astonishment of Hanniball, and his followers. We read
also in the wars of Germany, in the year 1176 the Dukes of Saxon forced by
Arms to submit themselves to the Emperor Henry the fourth, giving the
Emperor for pledges of their fidelity, two young Princes, Sons to a
Marquess, which were carefully kept in a Castle, that was very strong, the
Captain whereof moved by Compassion, and won by some presents, suffered them
sometimes to go abroad to take the air, and to ride their Horses thereabout:
The Captain going a hunting, takes these young youths with him, the prey found
and hunted, she is followed by all, not thinking of any other thing: The
youths spurring hard out of sight, follow their course till they come to the
River of the Maine, where they request a Fisherman to transport them in his
little Cane or Boat to Mentz, offering him their little scarlet Cloakes for
pay: The Fisherman helps them from their Horses, and takes them in his Boat,
and rows down the River, their Horses swimming after them to Mentz, where
they and their Horses were graciously welcomed.

Pliny writes, that Horses wept at their Masters deaths, and it is recorded,
that the Horse of Caesar wept: foretelling his Masters death, and I persuade my
self, the gentle Reader could add somewhat to this purpose, if he listed, but
thus far to animate Christians to love, respect, and cherish their Camerades,
and not to kill and backbite them,

Here I must not forget that duty I owe to the remembrance of that worthy
young Gentleman, Arthur Forbesse, Son to a worthy Cavalier, of famous memory,
Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Forbesse, being a worthy valourous son, descended
of a valiant Father. This young Gentleman being deadly wounded on service, and
with hazard brought unto our Ship, within two days dyed. Likewise a Gentleman
borne in the Isles of Scotland, called Alexander Mac-Worche, being wounded in
the head, and shot in the arm, the enemies Horsemen shooting at him with
Pistols, he leapes from the shore, with his clothes on, notwithstanding those
wounds, and swimmes to my Cosen Captain Monro his Boat, and being brought in
died the next day, and was much lamented for of his Camerades, as a Gentleman
of great hope.

I did also observe here, the inconvenience that happens to many brave Officers
and Soldiers given to plundering, gathering together a little booty for
spending, which brings them commonly into their enemies hands, their punishment
being far more grievous, than their purchase was delightful, and yet I
think, the Guilt is worse than the punishment. To which purpose I will only
here infer one Story. A Pythagorian bought a pair of shoes upon trust, the
shoemaker dies, the Philosopher is glad, and thinks them gain, but a while
after his Conscience touches him, and becomes a perpetual chider, he repaires
to the house of the dead, casts in his money with these words; There take thy
due, thou live to me, though dead to all besides. Denmark, merits praise:
for by the preservation of Denmark, his Majesty, like a skillful Gamester,
recovered again all that he lost. Therefore we ought never to grieve for any
thing past, but for sin, and for that always. And he spoke well, that said,
He that has himself has lost nothing.

The eight Duty discharged of our Quartring and Mustring in Fune, and of the
Colonels going for a Recreute unto Scotland.
HAving happily arrived in Denmark, at Assens in Funland, our Colonel goes a
shore to understand of his Majesty's will and command, and being graciously
welcomed, is made to dine at his Majesty's Table: after dinner his Majesty
discharging then the duty of a General Quartermaster, who wrote with his own
hand the names of the dorpes ordained for our Quarters: as also did appoint a
fair Hoffe, to receive all our wounded and sick men, where they were to be
entertained together, till they were cured, and to that effect, his Majesty
graciously ordained skillful Chirurgians, diligently to attend them, being an
hundred and fifty, besides Officers; then we got orders to land the Regiment,
and to draw up in a convenient part, till our sick and wounded were first
directed to quarters, and then to appoint our Watch (viz.) two Companies to
watch at Assens, then having gotten Wagons, for transporting of our Colonels
baggage and spare Arms, the several Companies Quarters dealt out, the
Furriers sent before, to divide the Quarters, every Company led by their own
guids, we marched off severally, by Companies, as our several ways did lie
unto our Quarters, where we had rest for our former toil, and good
entertainment for our spare diet, so that in a short time, we were all
sufficiently refreshed, without fear of an enemy. Nevertheless, our Watches
were duly and orderly kept, and relieved by course, every second night: then
Orders were given by the Commissaries to give in our Rolls, for mustering of
us, that his Majesty might know, what loss we had sustained on service, and
that those that served well might be rewarded: we mustered sick and whole
near nine hundred men under Arms, besides Officers, having lost on service,
four hundred men, that were killed in the place, and taken in our retreat.
Before our coming to muster, News was come to his Majesty of the loss of the
Castle of Bredenberg in Holsten, Stathoulder, Ransowe his chief residence,
where Major Dumbarre did command, and was killed. The particulars of this
service I refer to the next Duty discharged.

The Major being killed, I having discharged the duty in his absence, by my
Colonels respect to me and his Majesty's favor, I had Patent given me, under
his Majesty's hand and Seal, as Major to the Regiment: as likewise Captain
Lermond his company then at Luckstad, being vacant, through the death of the
Captain at Hamburgh, was also disposed unto me; and orders were given unto the
Commissary, that mustred us, according to my Patent to place me, as
Sergeant-Major over the Regiment, which all duly obeyed by the Commissary, the
Drummer Major, accompanied with the rest of the Drummers of the Regiment, being
commanded, beat a bancke in head of the Regiment. The Commissary having his
Majesty's Patent in his hand, makes a speech, signifying his Majesty's will
unto all the Officers of the Regiment, and without any contradiction placed me
Segeant Major, and delivering me my Patent takes me by the hand, as the
Colonel did, Lievetenant-Colonell with the whole Officers of the Regiment,
wishing me joy, with the general applause of the whole Soldateska, which
ceremony ended, the Regiment marched off, by companies unto their several
quarters as before; The Colonel conveyed by his Officers unto his quarters,
the Officers were appointed the next day, to meet at the Colonells quarter to
receive money, and to understand further of the Colonells resolution,
concerning the standing of the Regiment. At their return the next day, they
received two months pay for the Officers, and one months pay for the
Soldateska, with promise of winter clothes. But the Soldiers coming into a
good fat soil, clad themselves honestly, which made them want commisse
clothes; Yet none of us could say, but we served a liberal, and a bountiful
Master: the money first paid by the Commissaries, they give orders in his
Majesty's name for keeping of good discipline over the Regiment, whereby the
Boores should not complain on the Soldiers Isolencie, which they needed not
to use, getting willingly from the Boores both meat, and money, with some
clothes: Nevertheless, there were always amongst the one and the other, some
churlish Rascals, that caused complaints to be heard which made our proforce
or Gavileger get company and money, for discharging his duty: for neither
Officer, nor Soldier escaped due punishment, that was once complained on,
until such time, as his Majesty was satisfied with justice, and the party
offended. Thus continuing in our duty, the Colonel anew does Capitulate with
his Majesty, for bringing over from Scotland a thousand men to recreute the
Regiment. Scotland, and for the most part the Captains went themselves,
leaving their Lievetenants in their absence to command their companies. The
Lieutenant Colonel taking a fore-loofe, did go unto Holland: I being left to
command the Regiment, the Colonel and his Captains Sr. Patrick Mac-Gey,
Captain Annane, Captain Monro of Obstell, Captain Forbesse, Captain
Sinclaire, Captain John Monro, and Lieutenant Robert Stewart, the Barron of
Fowls followed them in the spring, for leavying a company also. They being
gone, I was commanded by his Majesty to take orders from General Major
Slamersdorph then resident at Odensee in Funeland, who immediately after their
going away, commanded me to take my quarters in Assens, where we kept our
watch, seeing that part of the country was most in danger of the enemies
pursuit; where I had question with the Major of the Rhinegraves Regiment of
horse, who should give out the orders in the Garrison, which did bring an
emulation betwixt our Soldiers and the horsemen, so that in several
rancounters had in the Garrison, three or four on each side were killed. To
prevent this disorder, the General Major with some other associats came to
Assens and held a Council of war, the business considered, the Major of
Horse is removed to another Garrison, and Rut-master Cratsten is put with his
Troops in Assens, and the command of the Garrison was given unto me.
Notwithstanding whereof our camity with the horsemen did continue a long time,
till the Rhinegrave himself had given orders to his whole Officers,
examplarily to punish those insolent Rutters, who should be found to live
otherwise then brethren with the whole Scots Regiment, so that by that time the
coldness removed, we lived at more quiet during my being there, which was not
long.

The eighth Observation.
FIrst here we may see the wisdom and magnanimity of this King not cast down
with the loss of his Army, nor with the loss of the half of his country, but
preventing his further loss for the safety of his country, and good of his
Subjects, he with expedition, draws himself and the remnant escaped of his
Army within Denmark, to preserve them for a second fitter opportunity; As also
to encourage his Subjects, that through fear, were on the flight by water unto
other Nations, carrying their substance with them, fear coming unawares,
having heard of their Kings loss and overthrow abroad, fame dispersing the
rumors of the loss, Caesar spoke like Caesar, when he bad the Mariners fear
nothing. And this invincible and Magnanimous King, though ruffled by Caesar,
yet he encourages his subjects, by exhorting them to fear nothing, going at
all times himself betwixt them and all dangers, he being the first many times
engaged, and the last coming off, casting as it were, through his valor, a
kind of honor upon God; believing in his goodness, casting himself in
danger, trusting and confiding in his care only. Not like an unworthy coward
that eclipses his sufficiency, unworthily doubting that God will bring him off,
unjustly accusing God, his power or his will, making himself his own Savior,
he becomes his own confounder.

But this magnanimous King setting his care upon God, and using the lawful
means, for his country, and kingdoms preservation, winning the love of God,
and of his subjects, establishes himself, and his Throne in despite of his
enemies. Here also I have observed that good service done to a noble and
liberal Master, as this King was, cannot be without reward: Therefore let the
servant deserve, and the Master will recompense, if he be such a just Master as
we served, where both loved each others, for their generous worthiness. Who
ever then is a servant, if he suppose his lot hard, let him think on the other
part, that service is nothing else but a free man's calling, and comfort himself
with the example of Kings, that are but servants (though more splendid) for the
commonweal; and as this King our royal Master served for his country, let us
that are servants serving strangers serve truly where we serve, for our
countries credit, our own weal, and our eternal fame which must live after
us. This magnanimous King through the experience he had of our former true
service, is desirous to have more of our countrymen to serve him, as we may see
by the new employment laid on our Colonel and his Officers; Also on diverse
other Noblemen of our country, to bring unto him three other Regiments as
Nidesdale, Spynie and Murckles Regiments, we being the first that showed them
the way to be employed by his Majesty.

Here I will exhort all brave Cavaliers, of mind to follow the laudable
profession of Arms, not to grudge, though their advancement or preferment come
not at first, but with patience to awaite on Gods blessing, since preferment
comes neither from the East, nor from the west. But it is the blessing of the
Lord, given by man as the reward of virtue.

Who ever then would be famous by preferment, let him first study to be
diligent and virtuous in his calling, and then doubtless God will dispose of
him as he thinks best for his own Glory.

Here we see that the Barron of Fowls, of worthy memory, thought it no
disparagement at first to follow my Lord of Rhey and his Regiment, as a
voluntier, till he had seen some service, and attained unto some experience,
and then beginning with a company, coming at last with credit to be Colonel
over horse and foot, and that to animate others of his name, and kindred to
follow his example, rather to live honorably abroad, and with credit, then to
encroach (as many do) on their friends at home, as we say in Scotland, leaping
at the half loaf, while as others through virtue live nobly abroad, served
with silver plate, and attendance.

Officers of one Regiment ought to live as brethren together, not envying one
another advancement, entertaining no other emulation, then the emulation of
virtue, every one serving truly in their Stations, till such time occasion may
be offered, for their advancement by degrees: for though their patience may be
the longer, their credits will be the more, and their contentments at last will
make them forgo and forget their former toil, and disturbances having come to
their proposed mark, though not altogether to their wished end. Frederick the
second in the code of Justinian, bearing that the laborers of the ground might
live peaceably with assurance over all, staying in their villages, laboring
the ground, so that no man should be so bold, as to presume to take any such
men prisoners, or to offer them any violence in destroying their Beasty all, or
in taking their goods from them, condemning them to death that did contemn,
or violate his ordinance.

And Cyrus going to war, commanded no man should trouble the laborers.
Xerxes commanded the like, saying, the wars were against those that carried
Arms, not against Shepherds.

Bellisarius that brave Commander under the Emperor Justinian, was so strict
against soldiers that troubled the Boores, that the soldiers going by the
fruityards durst not throw down one Apple, and for his good order kept,
victuals were cheaper in the Camp then in Towns.

Procopius in his third book of the Goths wars in Italy reports, that
Totilas King of the Goths observed the same strict discipline in Italy,
suffering the Boores untroubled, for paying the contribution.

Nicephor Gregorius affirmed, that while as in the front of an Army marched
insolency and violence, orderly came in the rear defeat and ruin. And now a
days the Turks do observe stricter discipline in their Armies then Christians
do; in so much that their Captains must not suffer their Soldiers to go into
Orchards or Vineyards, as they march by. And as order is necessary in an Army,
so it is in a Regiment requisite to be kept, and punishment also to be used, for
banishing all villainy from a Regiment, as Gluttony, Drunkenesse, Whoredom,
Opression, Playing, Diceing, Roaring, Swaggering: for it is not seemly that
those, who should overcome others, should suffer themselves to be overcome with
any such notorious vices; neither ought a brave fellow to vaunt of his valor,
since it is not tolerable to kill men with words, without coming unto blows;
But he that comports himself modestly is to be commended.

Here also we see that the Emulation and strife begun amongst Superiors and
Officers of quality, Rhinegraves horsemen, which was wisely prevented and taken
away by the wisdom of their Commanders, that carried mutual love and respect
to each others: for the mutual good deserving of both Officers, which was the
chief instrument of their reconcilement, and taking away of their jarres, and
idle quarrelling, arising of ostentation, an unworthy fruit growing out of
Dunghills, withering faster then it grows, their jarres thus once removed,
thereafter our love waxed so great, that where we chanced both to be on one
service, as at Wolgast, where we stood in need of help, the Rhinegraves
Regiment, especially Rutmaster Hoomes under God made our Retreat safe, as you
shall hear in its own place.

Here also I cannot pass over with silence the love that ordinarily is seen
betwixt Officers, and their followers: being once put under good discipline
they will undergo any thing for love of their Commanders and Leaders, who have
taken pains and diligence in excercising them in the perfect use of their
Arms, and in leading them bravely on occasions before their enemies, in making
with exercise their bodies strong, and their hearts valiant, then I say, what
will they not undertake for the love of their Leaders? Truly, I must confess,
they will stand a thousand times more in awe to incur their Officers wrath,
whom once they loved through love, than in any wise, thorough fear of any
punishment, that may be enjoined unto them by Laws: and if they love and
respect their Officers, for fear to offend, even in their Marches, for their
Officers credits they will march so orderly with Arms in their Rancks and
Files, that you would think a whole Regiment well disciplined, as this was,
were all but one body, and of one motion, their ears obeying the command all
as one, their eyes turning all alike, at the first sign given, their hands
going to execution as one hand, giving one stroke, yea many strokes all
alike, ever ready to strike, or hold up, as their Commander pleases; and thus
exercised they were, that their enemies in all Rancounters could not but duly
praise them, calling them the Invincible old Regiment: which always
rancountred with them on all occasions, so that Mac-Keyes name, was very
frequent, through the glorious fame of this never-dying Regiment, never wronged
by Fortune in their fame, though diverse times, by their enemies valor, they
sustained both loss and hurt: but would to God, we had always met man to man,
or that our Army had consisted all of such men, and such Officers, whereof, I
was the unworthieft! If so had been, our conquest had extended so far,
Romans of old did extend the limits and borders of their Empire, which for my
wish I would bestow on the Prince Elector Palatine, borne by the Jewel of
Europe, the Queen of Bohemia his Royal Mother; and if it were at my
distribution, he should have all from the River Euphrates at the East, to the
Ocean Sea at the West, the fertillest part of Afric at the South, and the
Rhine and the Danube at the North; and yet I durst affirm, that his
Grandfather King JAMES of blessed and never-dying memory, might merit a far
greater possession for his Grandchild, the Illustrious Prince Elector
Palatine of the Rhine; and to have an Army of such men, under his command, to
be avenged on his enemies. I would wish their clothes nor mine own, came
never off, till his enemies were made his footstool to tread on, or to show
mercy, at his Highness pleasure: And for my wish, his Army should be all of
Britains, Dutch, and Irish, such as Vegetius describes the Roman Soldiers
of old: and I, as one though unworthiest of a thousand Britain Officers, would
undertake to make such brave lads to dwell Summer and Winter in Tents, ever in
readiness to fight with our enemies, and to endure all incommodities, for the
credit of such a Master, banishing far from him with valiant hands well armed,
all the craft, power, and subtlety that his enemies were able to devise
against him: And we should, for his sake, be contented with such allowance as
the Imperial Laws allow a Soldier, being only so much as might maintain
life, or so much as Beasts get that are put to diet, and we should be content
to march with such expedition, without intermission, without quarter or
Garrison, as need requires, never staying behind, but always advancing,
consenting willingly to undergo correction, if we did to the contrary: but to
march ever orderly in Rancks, as the way lay rough or even, foul or fair, as
our Colors and Leaders went before us; Never quitting our Rancks, but with
license, till the cause were won, or that our Masters Throne were
established. And if otherwise we went astray, we should be content to quit our
allowance: and if this discipline were not strict enough, we should be content
to have his Highness and Royal Mother restored, to do as our Fathers did
coming out of Egypt, marching along the spacious and wide Desert, that our
Randezvouz might be appointed and set, till we arrived in Cades, that is to
say, in the holy Land, where being victorious, we should bid our Master
farewell, and rest with our Fathers.

The ninth Duty discharged of Major Dumbarre his Service at Bredenberg.
THis noble Cavalier, of famous and worthy memory, having done notable good
service at Beysenburg Skonce on the River of the Elve, as was formerly set
down, at his retiring to Lugstad, he was commanded with four Companies of
Scots, and certain Dutch, the enemy having fallen into Holsten, his order was
to beset the Castle of Bredenberg, being a pass, but not strong, nor fortified
in Forma. As I was informed by a valourous little Captain, Captain William
Lumsdell, who then was Ensign to the Major, who only at that time escaped
with his life, from the fury of the enemy, being within the house, while as the
rest, in the fury, were put to the sword: This Gentleman who informed me, was
with the Major walking abroad near to the house at the enemies first
approaching, so that the enemy unawares did come so near, that they retiring
to the Castle, had scarce time to draw up the drawbridge, when the enemy with
his forces, being, as was thought, ten thousand strong, led by Tilley, had the
house environed on all quarters. The enemy sends a Trumpeter, summoning to
render the place, which was refused. Whereupon they entered to approach, and the
Defender resists. The service thus begun, Comoedian-like, ends very Tragically,
the whole Court and lodgings running with blood, with which the walls and
pavement are sprinkled with our Scottish blood, to be viewed and seen to this
day. To be particular in the discharge of this duty at large, not having seen
the service, I will not, lest I should err in giving notice unto the world, of
things I did not know; but by report, which ordinarily holds not so true, as
things we have both known and seen. In this house of Bredenberg there was a
great number of men, women and children, besides the Soldiers, that had taken
their flight thither, as to a place of refuge, at the enemies first coming into
the land. There was also in this house great store of riches, belonging to the
Lord of the house, and to the Fugitives, that was brought from the Country. The
Major valourously defended the place for six days, until the time they had
approached unto the moate, and shot two several breaches in the wall, and
being so near, the enemy directed a Drummer unto the Major, to see if he would
Parle; But the Drummer returned with an answer, that so long as there was blood
in Dumbarres head, that house should never be given over: which answer so
incensed the enemy against them, that they swear, if they got the upper hand
over them, they should all die without quarters. Shortly after the answer was
returned, the Major was shot dead in the head with a fire-lock; The rest of the
Officers were ashamed to Capitulate for an Accord, the Major having refused:
immediately after, Captain Duncan Forbesse was killed, and after him,
Lieutenant Harbor, and then Captain Carmichell, who had no charge there, but
came by accident to visit his Camerades before the Enemies coming, whose
fortune was not to eschew the payment of that debt by longer continuation. The
Enemy then passing the Moate or Fossey, with a general storm, scorned all
quarters, and being entered, cruelly put all to the sword, making no difference
of quality, age, nor sex, but all alike cruelly put to death: so that five or
six at most escaped, whereof Ensign Lumsdell miraculously was one.

The Enemy before this house was taken, as I was informed, lost above a
thousand men, which made the Enemies cruelty the greater; and of our Regiment
were killed above three hundred. And it is reported, that after the fury was
past, they made inquisition for the Majors body, and having found it, they ripped
up his breast, took out his heart, sundered his gummes, and stuck his heart
into his mouth; they also killed the Preacher, who being on his knees, begging
life, was denied mercy.

The ninth Observation.
Happy is he who opens the fruitful earth, and croppes her plenty from her
fertile bosom, tasting the harmony of peace, singing away his labors all day,
having no note drowned with noise of Drum nor Cannon, but sleeps with peace
at night, not over-awde by the Tyrants of the earth, leading the Rancks of
blood and death, as these cruel murderers did at this time, by their monstrous
and prodigious massacre, breaking the peace of God, swimming in Christian
blood, without mercy to Officer, Soldier, or Preacher, heaping up wrath on
their own souls, against the day of their appearance before that great Judge,
that shall judge both the quick and the dead.

Out of our enemies cruelty used here,

Was there greater perfidie in the world than was used here at the in taking of
this house, willingly to harm the dead, and the innocent? For to wrong an
innocent Preacher, was savage, beseeming a beast, not a man; and to give a
stabbe, as was done here, for the innocent smile of an Infant, was devilish
black at the heart. We read in the Turkish Story of a child, that struck an
intending murderer into a swound with offering to embrace him. Would to God,
all those that refuse mercy, were so stricken dead, to terrify such tyrants as
they were! And I persuade my self, none but villainous persons, being
Commanders ever suffered the like to have been done without moderation: but, I
hope, haughty and violent minds will never bless the owners; but that by
Domineering they shall fall like Duft.

This worthy Cavalier, of famous memory, after his death thus unchristianly
used, let no man judge by his end, that he in his life time used any man but
generously: for I dare affirm, though sometimes he was subject unto passion,
it continued not long, he being of a good, sweet, and mild nature, and very
kind and constant, where he professed friendship, and as devout in the
profession of his Religion, professed in Scotland, as became a good Christian
being sincere. Parle, while as there was no appearance, either of relief, or
holding out: to which, I cannot otherwise answer, than he answered himself to
some of the Officers that were most inward with him, which was, that he was
sorry the charge of the blood of so many souls did lie on his shoulders. But
if he should give over that house, he was persuaded, the King his Master would
cause to hang him, seeing he had enemies about his Majesty, who would make him
die, though innocent. Therefore he resolved to die honorably, rather than his
name should be brought in question, and then to suffer at last. Here also we
see a poor Minister in his last Act giving good example, not terrified with
the horror of death, nor cruelty of his enemies, but on his knees being denied
of mercy from man, begs mercy of God, dying as a Martyr, persecuted unto Death.

A happy death to him, being resolved with God and his Conscience, to die
innocently, like a valiant Soldier of Christ, encouraging others, even in the
last Act of his Calling! A happy man, dying in sincerity, time shall not
outlive his worth; he lives truly after death, whose pious Actions are his
pillars of remembrance; for though his flesh moulder to dross in the grave,
yet his happiness is in a perpetual growth, no day but adds some grains to
his heap of glory.

The tenth Duty discharged of our March unto Lowland, leaving three Companies
in Fune.
MY Colonel and his Officers being parted for Scotland to bring over a Recrew,
I being left to command the Regiment: In November I received orders from his
Majesty to leave three Companies in Funland and to march my self, with the
other four Companies, and the Regiment staff unto Lowland: the reason of our
march was: the Emperialists having by shipping crossed the Belt, and taken the
Isle of Feamor under their contribution, Lowland the Queen Mothers dowry being
next unto it, and without soldiers, his Majesty was afraid the enemy out of
Feamor might set over with shipping, destroy the land, and retire again,
seeing there was no fortified City within Lowland, though it was the Fertilest
soil within Denmark: to prevent this inconvenience, I was ordained to march
thither, and to quarter the Companies in the most convenient parts of the land,
and to remain there during his Majesty's will, having only charge to watch
where our Garrisons lay, and the Boores were ordained to watch night and day
along the coast, at such places where the enemy might land: This march though
short was tedious, being in the midst of winter the ways deep and foul,
being fat clay ground, the best and fertillest part in Denmark; and the march
was the more troublesome, that we were forced in the winter time to cross the
Seas over the Belt twice.

Marching through Langland, having quartered there a night, there happened an
odious complaint to be made on a soldier called Mac-Myer of Monro his Company,
for forcing the Boores daughter, where he quartered. The Boore complains to
the Commissary, and the Commissary to me; to satisfy justice, we called a
Council of wars (having our Auditor with us) of the Regiment Officers; the
business exactly examined, according to his Majesty's Articles, the soldier
was condemned to die, and to be shot at a post, to terrify others by his
example from the like heinous sin: The soldier getting time for that night
to prepare himself for death, the minister instructing him of his duty, the
next morning the companies drawn to Arms, a Guard was directed to see the
execution, the soldier courageously and Christianly resolved, being tied to a
post was shot dead by his camerades, who without any delay executed the command
laid on them by the malefactor, whose Corpse was presently buried. The next day
having shipped, we crossed over unto Lowland, where, according to his Majesty's
orders, we were well quarteredand courteously received. The Colonells company
and Sr. Patrick Mac-Geys with the staff, were quartered with me in Marbe,
Captain Mac-kenyee his company were quartered in Rubee, and Captain Monro his
company in Necoppine, where the Queen mother did remain.

The tenth Observation.
HEre I did observe that wisdom and virtue were the best Guards of safety,
lowland, being the richest part within the kingdom, for corn a magazin, and a
garner for foreign countries: it abounds also in all sorts of fishes, the
ponds belong to the gentry, making great commodity of their fish, being sold in
the cities and country, that are not licentiat to have the like of their own.
the gentry of this land are much given to policy and economy, following the
example of their king, having great stalles and stables, containing above four
hundred oxen, and their stables some threescore horses, being well fed and made
lusty, they are sold to the germans, which yearly brings unto the gentility
great store of money: this island abounds in dear and wild foul.

this country is also plentiful of wood for building of ships, where his
majesty every year has some builded by his own master builder, a worthy
gentleman begotten of scots ancesters, called mr. sinclaire, who speaks the
scottish tongue, and is very courteous to all his countrymen which come
thither. the citizens also of this island, being very rich, build ships for
their own use, and some they sell unto strangers.

my host the burgomaster of marbo, sometime furnished his majesty for building
of his ships, to a reckoning of one hundred thousand rex dolors, so that in a
word, in this little i will of lowland I did observe virtue to be habitual in it,
and so was the peoples goodness distributive unto us and our soldiers, so
that during our residence there, we were so welcome, that all things smiled
upon us, where it was my fortune one night to have gotten his majesty to be my
ghuest, having then my quarter in the burgomasters house, and though he was a
king, I persuade my self he was contented with his entertainment, being both
good and rare, whereof truly I had a good deal, but my ghuest departed by
three of the clock in the morning without bidding me farewell; yet being his
majesty's will, I was well pleased, having sat up all night I was not for
attendance in the morning, which his majesty at his departure graciously did
excuse.

to return then to my observation, the King of Kings and giver of wisdom. To
live is common, to be wise and good particular, and granted to a few: many I
see wish for honor, for wealth, for friends, for fame, for pleasure; I desire
but those two; virtue, and wisdom, which both I saw in this Magnanimous King,
and in his country people following his Majesty's example. We find not a man
that the world ever had so plentiful in all things, as was Solomon: yet his
request was but one of these two, though indeed it includes the other; for
without virtue, wisdom is not; or if it be, it undoes us at last: and to
return to my observation, in my judgment it may be said of this Magnanimous
King, as was said of Caesar, Semi-Deus est: for as he is valiant, Ex utroque
Rex, being valiant and wise, a Prince of an excellent spirit, capable of all
good things, as I have seen, and observed in him: he is learned in the
liberal sciences, and understands well the Mathematics and the practice of
fortifications, as a soldier studied in the Laws, joining Arms with Justice,
two great helps for the government of a Princely dignity: he handles well his
Arms, and is expert in riding of horses, a strong man for wrestling, as all
Europe affords, able for to give strokes, and the levellest shooter with a
piece, that ever I did see; for with a pistol he never misses a dog in the
head he shoots at; for experience in warfare, nothing inferior to the greatest
Captains we read of, easy to come to, and very affable, patient to bear
with heat, cold, hunger, and most durable in travel; and if I were to wish
for the personage of a man, mine eyes did never see his like, for a stately
majesticke person, whom ever I will greatly respect and love for the good
received, and shall be ever ready to serve him against all his enemies, my
Gracious Sovereign only excepted, and his dearest Sisters Royal Issue, to
whom I have vowed my best service.

Here also in this Kingdom I did observe, Charles called the wise, who having
seen France ruined by the former wars, under his predecessors Philip and
John, Normandy and Piccardie possessed by the English, and having Edward the
third to deal with, the best and happiest King ever England had, who defeated
the French in two Battles. This Prince resolved to keep the rest, finding it
to be as good to govern by counsel as by force of Arms, he did nothing
rashly nor unfore-seene, but his designs were all well prem editated and
digested, making choice of men wise, valiant, and knowing how to command in
wars. Edward seeing his sword thus blunted, and the course of his victories
by the wisdom of Charles interrupted, said, who did ever see one out of his
chamber to give a man so much ado without Arms? Thus Charles was so wise,
that his enemies did make no difficulty to praise him, for he not only freed
his people from misery, but also gathered afterward a great treasure for his
son, being called rich, as he was wise, and being respected of his subjects,
and of his enemies, as this Magnanimous King of Denmark is, for his prudence
after his wars, is as much to be commended, as his valor was in preserving
his subjects and Throne from his enemies, being redacted to a corner; and his
counsel served also well, for the good of his subjects, the estate of his
Throne, and for the recovery of his losses. And therefore Cicero said, that
counsel availed for the good of the State as well as Captains, for it is often
seen in effect, that by the good advice of the one, the others have happily
drawn, and governed their swords; And in another place he says that Agamemnon
General of Greece, did never wish for ten such great Captains as Ajax was,
but rather ten wise counselors, as Nester was, which made Cicero so often to
proclaim the honor due to eloquence above valor, saying, Cedant arma togae,
concedat laurea linguae: but joined together, as in this Magnanimous King of
Denmark, they work one to another hands, for the establishment of his Throne,
which I wish so long to continue as the world. Here also we may learn to
eschew vice by the punishment inflicted upon this soldier for his
exorbitancy, in having ravished a virgin of her honor, he was bereft himself
of life, by Gods justice, punishing man for sin examplary to others.

Against this sin of ravishing Emperors ordained punishment, Canonists
treates more meekely with ravishers, suffering them to marry those whom they
ravished: But the Lord judgeing more severely, steeping his rods in viniger,
ordaines stricter punishment for such malefactors. To eschew therefore the
committing of such villainies, I will here set down some remedies to hinder man
from such vices, that we may eschew the like punishment. Evil speeches corrupt
good manners; and with Wolves we learn to howl and cry. Dina the daughter of
Jacob desiring to see what was not convenient, neither for her shamefac'tnesse,
nor for the respect she ought to have carried to her fathers house, was
ravished, violated, and was the cause of greater evil. The fourth remedy is to
keep both women and maids in a convenient modesty of a chaste behavior,
without which there is a door opened to all villainy and filthiness, which is
able of virtue to make vice. The other remedies are, to live soberly and
virtuously in ourcallings, eschewing evil company and filthy communitations,
loving rather to take pains in our callings, remembering our duty we owe to
God, in not delighting in any uncleanness, that we may eschew the malediction
hanging over the heads of those, which continue in their filthiness without
repentance, abusing the long suffering and patience of the Lord our God and
Father.

To conclude this observation, there are laws and justice observed as well
among soldiers, (viz.) a competent number of thirteen of our own Regiment,
Officers, Captains, Lievetenants, Ancients, Sergeants and Corporalls, till our
number be full: our Proforce or Gavilliger brings in the complaints, and
desires justice, in his Majesty's name, to the party offended, and to his
Master the Kings Majesty or General, that fuers or leads the war; and every
Regiment is bound to have an executioner of their own, which if the Regiment
wants, the Colonel is obliged to hire another to do the execution for
payment, and sometimes as the crime and the person is respected, that is to
suffer, he is honored to be shot by his camerades, or beheaded, not suffering
an executioner to come near him. Other slight punishments we enjoyne for
slight faults, put in execution by their Camerades; as the Loupegarthe, when a
Soldier is stripped naked above the waste, and is made to run a furlong
betwixt two hundred Soldiers, ranged alike opposite to others, leaving a space
in the midst for the Soldier to run through, where his Camerades whip him
with small rods, ordained and cut for the purpose by the Gavilliger, and all to
keep good order and discipline; for other lesser faults, there is ordained
slighter punishments, as Irons, standing at a poast, his hands bound up above
his head; likewise sitting on a Treen or wooden Mare, in some public place,
to make him ashamed of his fault: As also sometimes to stand fix or seven
hours longer than ordinary at the centrie posture; as I was once made to stand
in my younger years at the Louver gate in Paris, being then in the Kings
Regiment of the Guards, passing my prentiship, for sleeping in the morning,
when I ought to have been at my exercise, for punishment I was made stand
from eleven before noone, to eight of the Clock in the night Centry, Armed
with Corslet, Headpiece, Bracelets, being Iron to the teeth, in a hot Summers
day, till I was weary of my life, which ever after made me the more strict in
punishing those under my Command.

The eleventh Duty discharged of our expedition by water unto the Isle of
Feamer, and of the in-taking of it.
THE twenty-second day of March 1627. his Majesty having come in person to
Lowland with two thousand five hundred foot, having appointed Randezvouz at
Rubie, I had orders to repair with all diligence to the Randezvouz, with the
four Companies commanded by me of our Regiment: his Majesty's intention being
to ship at Rubie, to fall on the Enemy upon the Isle of Feamer, as being too
near in neighborhood unto Denmark: for preventing of their evil, his
Majesty resolved to visit them before they should visit his Country, and in
the extremity of a bitter frost we were all shipped in open Skouts or Boats,
where we lay three days with contrary winds in the Road very much perplexed,
and troubled with the extremity of cold weather, being hard frost and snow:
the storm continuing we were appointed to come ashoare, and to retire to our
former quarters, till orders were sent us to rise again, so that the sixth of
April we shipped again. And on the eighth we anchored before the Island,
where the enemy with diligence planted Ordnance for hindering of our landing.
But was repayed again by our Ordnance ten for one: During which service, we
were landing our Soldiers with small Boats by twenties and thirties. The enemy
with Cannon and musket giving continual fire on us, till at last seeing a
strong body of Soldiers landed, and he having no horsemen to second his foot,
he was compelled to retire his Cannon, making his Retreat to a strong Fort they
had built of purpose on the Island, leaving the rest of the Island and the
Cities at our mercy; the Towns being of no strength.

Before it was dark we were all landed, with our Cannon and Ammunition,
incamping for that night in the Fields, keeping strong Guards and diligent
watch. The enemy being discouraged, we had not so much as one Alarm. The next
morning his Majesty marched toward the Fort with his Forces and Artillery,
and having himself recognosced or spied the Fort, retired, giving orders for
our several quarters: Our Soldiers were entered to work the approaches, which
were ordained and assigned to us to approach on. The enemy being scarce of
victuals, and knowing of no relief, resolved as his best course to Parle, and
having sent forth a Drummer, which being received, and the Parle granted,
pledges being delivered Hinc inde, the accord goes on, and is presently agreed
upon. The conditions granted to the enemy were somewhat hard, (viz.) that they
should leave their Arms, Baggage, and Ammunition within the Fort, and that they
should come forth in his Majesty's reverence, of mercy, or of none; which
accordingly they did undergo. But before their out-coming, there was a
prohibition given to all our Soldiers, that no man should wrong or injure
them: Nevertheless, at their coming out, the Country Boores (ever cruel to
Soldiers) remembering the hard usage of the Soldiers to them in the Winter
time, seeing them come forth unarmed, ran violently upon the Soldiers,
knocking them pitifully down, they caused great disorder, so that in the fury
the Count of Mongomrie, Colonel to a French Regiment, was knocked to the
ground, and left for dead, being taken for a Walloone, or one of the enemies
Officers. This insolency of the Boores continued (in killing the poor
Soldiers) till by his Majesty's charge, I was commanded to put my Soldiers to
Arms to suppress the Boores, which was presently obeyed by my Soldiers, who
again robbed the Boores of that they had taken from the enemy, and withal
were well knocked. The Tumult appeased, the enemies were sent away by Boats to
Holsten, where they were put ashoare, and left; his Majesty then refreshed his
Troops for three days, during which time, the Island was brought under
Contribution to his Majesty, and a Governor with a Garrison being left on the
Island to keep them in obedience, and to hinder the enemies return, we were
commanded to be in readiness for a second Expedition.

The eleventh Observation.
SCipio said, Gavilliger and his Irons best employed, insolency domineering, so
that when we came to endure hunger, thirst, and cold on our ships, we were
grown so effeminate, that we could not sleep without a good bed, our
stomachs could not digest a Gammon of Bacon, or cold Beef without mustard, so
far we were out of use, till this Magnanimous King came to lead us, who in a
short time, without the help of Physic, cured our cloyd stomachs, hardened
our effeminate sides, in stead of a warm Chamber, made us contented with a
hole dug in the ground, to let the wind and Bullets flee over us, making
hunger our best sauce, giving us employment, and to our Gavilliger rest and
ease at home.

O how bright then does the soul of man grow with use and Negotiation! Now
could our Soldiers having made a little booty on this Island, speak like
Cleanthes, when he had labored and gotten some Coin, he shows it his
Companions, that he then could nourish another Cleanthes: even so our Soldiers
showing and telling their Camerades of their booty, they rejoiced the hearts
of their Leaders, whom before they had offended by their exorbitancy in their
idleness, bringing joy with profit, when they were exercised in their
Callings, banishing mischief from themselves by their diligence: for it is one
of our greatest happiness in our Calling, to have a mind and love to virtuous
exercises, raising us daily to blessedness and contentation; for every one
shall smell of that he is busied in, and every noble Action adds sinews to
the virtuous mind: where on the contrary, surely he must be miserable, that
loves not to be diligent in his Calling, when he ought to employ himself; for
if he grows no better, yet sure it keeps him from doing worse, not having time
by his idleness to entertain the Devil. When our enemies least looked for
us, then came we with Bellona, summoning him to the Combat, but he obeyes not,
and for his cowardice we degrade him of his Arms, and banish him to some other
corner to lurk in, seeing he lacked the courage to have made us sport at our
landing, or to have given us an Alarm in our Quarters; to have once tried what
for Soldiers we were, or what resolution or conduct we had: for he ought to
have busied us at our landing, as well with the spade and the shovell, as with
the Pike and the Musket, and so we could have said, we had an Enemy, as we had
not, but a flying dastard or coward.

This Fort was scurvily given over, which any resolute Commander could well
have kept for three days, during which time, he had added to his own
reputation, and subtracted doubtless from ours, by diminishing of our number,
which at last would have made him get better Conditions of Quarters, and a more
honorable Accord: for in such a case, I would choose before I came in my
enemies Reverence without Arms, rather to fight to the last man, and if I
chanced to be the last, I had rather die, being resolved, with resolution
having Arms in my hands, than unawares, being unprepared, to be knocked down
miserably, when I looked not for Death.

Here I did see the Ingenier that built this Fort (who in time of working did
oftentimes beat the Boores to make them work) for his cruelty he was most
cruelly beaten again, and he running to his Majesty's feet for refuge
(thinking thereby to escape) was on his knees crying for mercy, so hard pursued
by the multitude, that before his Majesty he was cruelly beaten dead, as the
reward of his former tyranny, and so would God.

Here also we see, that oftentimes the Innocent does suffer with the Guilty,
as happened to that worthy Cavalier the Count of Mongomrie, being cruelly beaten
by the rascal multitude: which should teach all Cavaliers bearing charge at
such times, to look unto themselves in attending their Master or General on
horse back, when an overcome enemy is marching out of strength or Town, or
otherwise they ought to be on the head of their charge attending their duty;
or if for pleasure they would look on, they ought to be on their Guard, lest
being taken for private men, they might be disgraced receiving a Disaster, as
this Cavalier did.

Happy therefore are those who can eschew evil by the example of others. Here
also we see, that the best means to suppress the insolency of the tumultuous
multitude, is a band of well commanded soldiers with Arms, who are ever good
servants, but more often cruel Masters. It is then the duty of a General in
such cases, peremptorily to see that his accord be kept, which otherwise being
broken causes much evil and mischief to follow. His Majesty as he was
diligent in the intaking of this Island, so we see him careful of the keeping
of it, as his conquest, by leaving a Governor with a Garrison in it, to be his
retreat, in case of need, out of Holsten. We read that Guishcardin in his
history of the wars of Italy in his first book, accuses under hand the
French, that did enlarge their territories by Arms, and did not maintain and
keep their conquests, but on the contrary did ruin themselves in the end.

The Emperor Augustus, having read the great conquest of Alexander in the
East, he did wonder that Alexander did not take care to keep them, as he
traveled to win them. It is said of Pyrrhus King of Albany, that where he
once set his foot, he was conqueror there. But was ever unfortunate in
keeping his conquest; and therefore the King Antigonus compared him to a
gamester at dice, that lost his own in hope of gain. Examples we have of this
at home without wars.

Leonard Darrez in his 3. book of the wars of Italy against the Goths,
Totilas King of the Goths being made Conqueror of Rome, in his Harrangue made
to his army concluded, that it was harder to keep a country conquered, then to
win it: for in conquering oftimes (as here) the cowardice of the enemies
helps more then our own valor, and to maintain our conquest we had need of
valor and justice. That custom of the Turks is commendable, that when he
enters into his Chapel, the bed man of the Temple going before him, cries out
aloud, that he remember, that the Empire attained unto by Arms and justice,
Plato called the wisest and most honorable amongst the Grecians, says, the
people are ungrateful, cruel, barbarous, envious, impudent, being composed of
a Mass of fools, naughty, deboist, and desperate: for all that is spoken by
the wise, displeases the people that are incensed. And Baleus writing the lives
of the Popes, writes of Pope John the twenty third being asked what thing was
farthest from truth, he answered, it was the vulgar opinion, for all things
they praise merit blame, what they think is but vanity; what they say is but
lies; they condemn the good, and approve the evil, and magnify but infamy:
And Nicholas Hanap Patriarch of Jerusalem, in his book of the unconstancy of
the people, has a whole chapter apart to this purpose, and Arrianus in his
first book praises much the wisdom of Alexander the great; in taking away
from the people of Ephesus the means to mutine against the chief men of the
Town: for some of the mutiners being executed Alexander forbids to search, or
punish the rest, knowing that if once the popular could loose the rain, there
was nothing to follow but mischief, where the innocent might suffer as well as
the guilty, as witness here the Count of Mongomry, that ran the hazard of
death, being long bedred after his beating, without sense or feeling. And
Thucydide did in his third book, speaking of those of the Isle of Corsu, did
feel the evil of a sturdy popular having license to do evil, how much it
was to be doubted, in so much that the Massacre being so cruel, that there was
no villainy left unpractised, and such strange things he writes of, that the
Fathers did suffocate their own children, and those that were run to the
Churches for refuge, were cruelly put to death; who pleases may read the
story, where it is set down more at large. As also to read the late Massacres
in France, from the year 1560 to this present time, especially the Massacre of
the twenty fourth of August 1572 in the chiefest Cities of the Kingdom,
continuing without respect of age or of sex, as well against the dead as the
quick, as says Lactance in his sixth book and second chapter: humanity was so
far gone from men; that to take away the life of their neighbors was but
sport, being become beasts drunk with custom of blood, not sparing the
innocent, but doing to all, what the hangman does to malefactors. Therefore
Quintus Cur^ius says properly, that the deep Sea in a tempest has not more
waves, then the tumultuous multitude has changes; Titus Livius in his fourth
book of the third Dec^d says, so is the nature of the people to serve as
slaves, or strike like Tyrants. Read also Thomas Fasell in his tenth book of
the second Decad of the history of Sicilie, a memorable example of sedition,
moved in Palerne^ of Sicilie, where John Squarelazop was chief leader, amply
described in brave terms, he having seen the Tragedy himself, where he
complains of the ruin of the City, Justice and Laws being abolished, avarice
rife, and pride did reign and domin^^r (a pleasant story to read and make use
of) in the day robbing unpunished, spoiling the Church in all confusion.
Arist^tle says well, that such changes come by them that have eaten up their
^wne, and have no more.

There was also sedition moved at Lisbone, in the year 166 by the fantasies of
the multitude, that was a flood that took away almost all the Jews, that were
turned Christians, whereof there were killed above a thousand, and the Massacre
continuing three days was never appeased, till at night the third day Arius
Silvius and Alvare of Caster gentlemen, and chief of the Justices, came with
men of war in Arms to Lisbone, and appeased the (...). The Kings Majesty
hearing the news of this horrible sedition, being much grieved did presently
send unto Lisbone two of the chiefest of the Court, to wit; Iackes Allmod and
Iackes Lopes, with full power to punish the Malefactors of such cruelty, where
publicly there was executed a great number of the seditious popular, and the
Priests, that moved them to the sedition, were first put off their charge, then
hanged, then burnt, the Judges and Magistrates that were sloathfull to
suppress that popular rage and fury, were some deprived of their estates, and
condemned to great penance, and the Town it self was deprived of their
privileges and honors: I pray God to keep my country from the like. Who
pleases to read the story, it is much worth, and of great observance for any
good Christian.

Another notable story of the like we have in the beginning of the Reign of
Charles the fifth successor to Ferdinand King of Spain and Sicil, in whom did
fail the race of the Kings of Aragon; the people being moved by a Monk
continued long in seditions one after another, till God did remove it at last,
and since they lived peaceable.

To conclude then this point, Plutarch said well, that one man could not be
master and servant of the people, otherwise, perforce it behooveth him to fall
into inconveniencie; as we read in the fable written of the serpent, the tail
whereof came one day to quarrel the head, saying, he would go his day about
foremost, and not go always behind, which being granted unto him by the
head, he found it worst himself, not knowing how or where to go, and became
the cause that the head was all spoiled and rent, being compelled against
nature to follow a part without sight or hearing to lead it. The same we have
seen happen unto those who in the Government of the public would do all
things to please the multitude, and being once tied to that yoke of slavery,
in all things to will and agree with the common and lower sort, that oftimes
are rashly moved and without reason, howsoever they cannot thereafter come off
and retire, hinder or stay the fury and rashness of the people. And therefore
the great servant of God Moses did properly comprehend in the blessings
promised unto the Israelites their obedience to Gods laws, that the Lord might
establis^ them in the first rank a head; in brief that they should be as
Masters, ant should not be subject. Read Deuteronomy. 28.

The twelfth Duty discharged of our expedition by water to Aickilfourd in
Holsten, and of the intaking of it.
THe eleaventh of April 1628 we got orders to ship again, and being shipped
we sailed along the coast of Holsten, till we arrived before Aickilfourd, where
lay a Garrison of the Emperialists, being five hundred strong, half Dragoniers
and half foot soldiers, having anchored while we were providing for our
landing, the Town being no strength the Dragoniers marched away, leaving the
Captain of foot to defe^^ the place, who had a Skonce without the Town, with
a running line from the Skonce to the Port of the Town, and thinking us to be
but a weak flying party, that durst not remain long on the land, seeing the
enemy lay strong of horse, and foot near by, he resolved as his best, to
defend the Skonce without, whereunto he drew his strength: his Majesty
commanded us to land our forces, and to storm the Skonce, he staying a
shipboard looking (...) us, we land in all haste, being almost two thousand
foot of several Nations, English, Scots, Dutch, and French: all about equal
strongth; we threw dice for the Avangard, who should fall on first, concluding
those threw most should have the leading, and so successively to second one
another, having thrown sixes, the honor of the Avangarde or leading fell on
me and mine; the English falling next unto us, having put our selves in order,
and dealt out Ammunition, recommending the success to the Lord, by our preacher
Mr. William Forbesse, companion of our dangers, and having directed Ensign
Allane to recognosse or spy the best advantage, being retired, I commanded
Captain Lieutenant Carre with fifty musketeers to a broken house, that
flancked on the Skonce, giving him orders to give fire from thence on their
backs, as we marched to them in front, and in case of their retreat to the
Town, to cut off their passage, or at least to march in with them. Thus done,
I gave charge to my musketeers that no man should give fire till I commanded,
but to follow their Leaders still in good order. The ground we were to advance
on to the Skonce, was plain as pavement; the Skonce not being high, our
resolution was to storm without giving fire, and as we advanced those of the
Skonce did give three several salvees of musket thundering amongst us, whereof
some felt the smart, and Captain Mac-kenyee was favorably shot in the leg,
and I more favorably in the hilt of my sword, which afterward I gave to
Mac-kenyee. The most hurt was done to the English marching after us, led then
by Captain Chamberlain, a worthy and a valorous gentleman. Carre, giving fire
on their flancks wany were hurt, and the Captain shot in the Arm seeing us
give no fire, but marching hard to storm, he quit the Skonce and retired to
the Town, and enters the Port before us, shutting us out, and leaving a few
hurt men behind him; we brake down the Stacket, and the Town not walled, we
entered the broad side, and follow the enemy to the marketplace, thinking he
would fight us there. But he retired into the Church, and shutting the doors
defends the Church, shooting out he did us great hurt: our Soldiers not having
forgotten their cruelty used at Bredenberg, resolved to give no quarters, and
with a huge great ladder and the force of men we ran-forced the door and
entered. I thinking to get the Officers prisoners, entered withal, but could not
find them: incontinent perceiving a great quantity of powder spread a thwart
the Church, fearing the blowing up of the powder, I commanded every man upon
pain of death to retire, the word not well spoken, the powder blew up, blowing
the top of the Church, above a hundred were killed, and a number burnt
pitifully, and I with Lieutenant David Monro standing behind me, was also
pitifully burnt: the blast past, Captain Chamberlain entering, finds the
Officers, and gives them quarters as his prisoners: of the soldiers few or
none of two hundred and fifty escaped. The Town was plundered, and his Majesty
fearing the coming of the enemies Horsemen before our retyring, we got orders
every man to ship again as we might best.

The twelfth Observation.
THis service being but short, having had ado (as formerly) with a slight
Enemy, my observation must be the shorter: but to my great grief, as we found
afterward the next day, this days service was but like a pleasant
Weathergall, the forerunner of a greater storm; for they made booty this
day, that had not the happiness to enjoy it eight and forty hours, as you
shall hear in the next Observation.

Our hap here and good-successe in making of booty was soon restrained: no
man, no beast, no creature, but has some thing to ballast their lightness.
One scale is not always in depression, nor the other lifted ever high, but by
the Beam is ever kept in motion; nothing but has some thing to awe it: man
with man is awed and defended, the world is but a perpetual war, and a
wedding. When the Assyrian fell, the Persian rose, when the Persian fell, the
Grecian rose; the loss of one man is the gain of another. It is vicissitude
that maintains the world. Hodie mihi, cras tibi. The dying Fly lectures out
the worlds mortality, and though frequent, miserable man never thinks of his
end, till it be too late, ever epicuring our selves with this worlds joy, till
at last we are seized on unawares.

Here I must not forget the memory of our Preacher Master William Forbesse, a
Preacher for Soldiers, yea and a Captain in need, to lead Soldiers on a
good occasion, being full of courage, with discretion and good Conduct, beyond
some Captains I have known, that were not so capable as he: at this time he
not only prayed for us, but went on with us, to remarke, as I think, men's
carriage, and having found a Sergeant neglecting his duty, and his honor at
such a time (whose name I will not express) having chidden him, did promise to
reveal him unto me, as he did after their service, the Sergeant being called
before me, and accused, did deny his accusation, alleging if he were no
Pastor that had alleged it, he would not lie under the injury; the Preacher
offered to fight with him, that it was truth he had spoken of him; whereupon I
cashiered the Sergeant, and gave his place to a worthier, called Mongo Gray, a
Gentleman of good worth, and of much courage. The Sergeant being cashiered,
never called Master William to account, for which he was evil thought of, so
that he retired home and quit the wars.

Some men perhaps will blame our Conduct here, for pursuing men retired to a
Church, being a place of refuge. First, I answer, our orders we had of our
Master, were to beat our enemies, in taking them Prisoners, or by killing
them, which we could not effect, neither the one nor the other, without entering
the Church.

Secondly; They having banished the Gospel, and the Preachers of it out of the
Church, we had good reason to banish them, who had made of the house of God a
Den of thieves and murderers, as they were at Bredenberg, having killed our
Camerades, and massacred our Preacher, being on his knees begging mercy, and
could find none.

Thirdly; They treacherously retired themselves to a Loft apart in the Church,
for their own safeties, and left trains of Powder to blow us up at our entry,
which made our Compassion toward them the colder; for when the subject of our
hatred is sin, it cannot be too deep; and for my own part, I refused not to
show compassion on those, who did beg it of me, and what others did in their
fury, I did tolerate, not being powerful to hinder them: yet truly my
compassion was so much, that when I saw the house ordained for Gods service
defiled with their blood and ours, and the pavement of the Church covered over
with the dead bodies of men, truly my heart was moved unto the mild streams
of pity, and wept, as is reported of Caesar, when he heard how Pompey died.
For in my opinion, pity, Fabius did conquer, as well by delaying, as Caesar
by expedition. To end this observation, reason teaches us to cast the blood of
the slain upon the unjust Authors of it. That which gives the mind security,
is a just cause, and a just deputation; let me have these, and of all others, I
shall think this one of the noblest and most manly ways of dying.

The thirteenth Duty discharged upon our expedition by water to Kele, and of
our service there.
HAving retired all unto our ships, his Majesty made sail again along
the Coast of Holsten, till we entered before night, betwixt two lands that go
up unto Kele, where by six a Clock at night we set sail, within musket shot of
the Town: the Commander over the Garrison does keep himself and his people
very wisely silent and close, making his Majesty suspect there was no
Soldiers in the Town, providing for the worst, he expected his advantage at
our landing: the whole night he was busied, and very provident, in working a
running trench along the Coast, near the height of a man under ground, over
against our ships, within the Pallessads, unseene or known of us, where in
the dead of the night he lodged, and placed a thousand Musketeers, giving them
charge, never to shoot, nor appear, till first our Soldiers were almost
landed: his Majesty not expecting the like, by seven of the Clock in the
morning, turns the broad sides of five great Ships and two Galleys on the
Town, and shoots at once, for the space of an hour, so fast as they could
charge, seaventie half Cartowes at every Salve, through and through the Town
houses, where many were lamed of legs and arms, and freed of lives.
Nevertheless, the Soldiers within the Town never gave one shot of Musket
during that time, but the Sling-pieces from the Town were spreading their
Bullets thick amongst our Fleet, which for the most part, shot over, doing us
no great hurt: in the end, our Cannon leaving shooting, his Majesty sent
orders to set a party of two hundred Musketeers a-shoare, we that were
Officers met together in the Admiral ship, and agreed to command out the
party, and having cast Lots, it fell on the Dutch: they suspecting the danger,
delayed, desiring the rest to command our alike, which we refused; seeing the
Lot had fallen upon them, except his Majesty would give a second command for
it: thus contesting, we go together toward his Majesty, to know his
Majesty's further resolution, and we show his Majesty of the Duchess delay, on
whom the Lot had fallen; his Majesty considering better resolved, the party
should be commanded proportionally of all Nations alike, and to cast Lots who
should send a Captain to command them, the lot falling upon the English, they
command a Lieutenant that supplied the place of his Captain in his absence,
the party made ready, were sent from his Majestics Ship ashoare, being twelve
Musketeers in every Boat, with their Muskets in readiness; the enemy
perceiving them coming, gives a Salve of a thousand shot amongst them, twice
before their landing, so that the half of them were killed: yet the
Lieutenant valourously led on the rest, and begins the fight ashoare, and
continues the skirmish hot on both sides for one half hour, till the most
part of our party were killed, their powder spent, and perceiving no relief
was to come, his Majesty having considered the danger, the relief, though in
readiness, was stayed. The Lieutenant being the last man, retired with credit,
being thrice shot, did come off, and died the next night. A Sergeant of
Captain Mac-Kenyee his Company, called Mac-Clawde, an old expert Soldier, and
a diligent, son to Neale Mac-Clawde, was killed, and twenty-two Soldiers of
the thirty that I commanded out of our Regiment, the rest being wounded, for
fault of Boats, came swimming in their clothes to his Majesty's Ship, and
were taken in.

The party thus lost, the enemy begun to thunder amongst our Fleet, with
two half Cartowes and six Sling-pieces, where leaving our Anchors, he was
thought the best Master that had his Ship first under sail: His Majesty's Ship
being the last, was twice shot through, and two Constables were shot in two in
the waste. Thus forced to retire with great loss, we hold on our course
toward the Isle of Feamer again.

The thirteenth Observation.
IN time of this hot service, no man could perceive any alteration in the
majesty of this King his Royal face, but rather seemed notwithstanding of his
loss, as it were, triumphing over his enemies, and comforting others, God
amongst the Pagans, was extraordinarily changeable, sometimes taking part with
one, and sometimes with another. In a word, this Magnanimous King did abate
nothing of his former courage, or of his gravitie: So that his very enemies, if
they had seen him at so near a distance as I did, they could not but have
humbly reverenced his Majesty for his magnificke stature, higher than any
ordinary man by the head: yet ashamed he was, to stoop for a Cannon Bullet,
when they flew thickest.

And for the accomplishment of his virtues, Nature has given him an
extraordinary rich Presence, to wit, a face as manly as possible may be seen,
worthy of a great King, well mixed in complexion, his eyes flaming and shining,
full of courage, his beard brown, his nose A quiline, or Imperial, his voice
manly, winning the hearts of those that see or hear him; in effect, A Royal
King, full of assurance, without any fear at all, in respect of man: yet full
of Majesty, amiable to his friends, and terrible to his enemies.

Here then we may see, that it is the LORD that Guards and keeps Kings and
Princes from imminent dangers that environ them, whereof Histories both ancient
and modern, are full of examples of the miraculous deliverance of great
personages from dangers.

One notable Story I will bring to confirm this divine protection, in saving
Titus son to Vespasian, appointed for the ruining of Jerusalem, to subdue and
punish the Jews. Flavius Joseph in his sixth book and second Chapter of the
Wars of the Jews, records of him, that before the siege was laid to the
Town, of mind to recognize, he fell unawares amongst an Ambushcade of his
enemies, where then it was known, as much as ever, that it is the LORD who
disposes of the moments of war, and of the life of Kings: for though Titus
had no headpiece nor Corslet on his back (having not gone to fight, but to
recognize) of an infinite number of shot, shot at him, none touched him, though
many were shot behind him those darts shot aside at him, he rebated them with
his sword, and those shot low, he made his horse skip to eschew them. The Jews
perceiving his resolution, made great noise, exhorting one another to run at
him, and to follow him where ever he went. A rare example of a rare
deliverance, where we see that he is well guarded, whom the Lord keeps. Here
also we may see, what difference there is betwixt Commanders, he in Feamer
showed himself no Soldier; neither yet the Captain in Aickleford: but this
brave follow that commanded in Keele, preserved himself and others, and that
with credit; where we see, that where wisdom and valor do mere, oft-times
the success is answerable; and a man's discretion is seen when he abides a fit
occasion, as this brave fellow did: where I sinde always, that those are the
best Commanders, that are resolute and remiss, not hunting before he sees his
prey, and then with advantage, if he would catch,

Here also, experience dear bought did teach us, English Cavalier did,
especially being in the public view of the King his Master, his Camerades,
and his enemies, carrying their Characters from service, as the marks of his
valor, without fainting, though wounded to death.

Here also our Scottish High-land-men are prayse-worthy, who for lack of
Boats, made use of their virtue and courage in swimming the Seas,
notwithstanding of their wounds, with their clothes, showing their Masters,
they were not the first came off, but with the last; following the example of
their Leader, they would not stay to be Prisoners, as many do at such times,
and never return.

I did also observe after this days service, an alteration in the common
Soldiers behavior, while as before we were to send out a party of commanded
men, we were troubled with the Soldiers, striving who should go out on the
party, every one desiring it should be he, but after this days smart once
felt by their Camerades, they learned to be more wise, and to stay till they
were commanded, and then they obeyed, though not so freely as before.

Here also I will entreat thee, Judicious Reader, to give me leave to digress
somewhat, to discourse a little of Sea Fights, which occurred in the discharge
of the last duty, though not properly belonging to my scope. Yet in this
retreat-making, as we were in danger of killing, so were we in danger of
drowning, by the enemies Cannon piercing our ships, repaying us for the hurt
done by our Ships and Cannon to their Town and Soldiers, having in one
hour discharged amongst them an infinite number of shot.

To give then notice to the Reader of his Majesty's power by Sea, I will relate
a Story of a Sea Fight, that happened betwixt the Swedens and the Danes, which
was in the year 1564. the thirtieth of May: the Story is written by Gasperence
in his Commentaries of the Swedens wars, as follows.

Amongst other ships, says he, there was one which in greatness and
excellent equipage, went beyond all humane apprehension, so that many affirmed,
Swedens, in their language, was called Makelesse, that is to say, Matchless,
carrying two hundred pieces of Ordnance. The Swedes Admiral, trusting much in
this ship, did employ his whole force against the principal Dane ship,
called the Fortune, furiously cannonading her, till he had shot her fourteen
times under water, and above one hundred times above water, on her Masts and
Shrowdes: the Conflict of the first day being doubtful, both the Armies being
much endangered, the next day the Danes being sure of one side, next the land,
and on the other side, having the Swedens Fleere, that pressed to make them
ground, but the wind turned so, that the Danes having the wind at best, they
chased the Swedens Fleet, scattering them so, that the Matchless being almost
overthrown by the strength of the Danes Fleet, was driven on a bank of sand,
where she was burnt by the Danes with wild fire, which the Danes launcht
within her; the Admiral of the Swedens, called Iacques Bagg, and Arrold Troll,
Counselor of the Kingdom, and a Lord called Christopher Ander, were taken
prisoners. The Swedens finding their best strength lost fly, being followed of
the Danes, whose ships being shrewdly battered by the Cannon of the Swedens,
that it was impossible to sail, or keep the Sea longer, but were forced to
harbor till they were helped. Where we see, by the ruin of this great Hulck,
that GOD is not pleased when men make such Cities of Timber; but on the
contrary, ruins them, not suffering any to grow proud of their might.

Paul Jove in his seaventy book records a story of a Sea-sight, that happened
betwixt the French and the English: Two English Ships having pursued one French
Ship, of an extraordinary greatness, called the Cordeliere, having sought long
with Cannon, with fire-staves, and with Artificial fire pots, in one instant
were miserably consumed by fire, having lost above two thousand men, burnt,
killed and drowned, and lost in ground thought incredible, near two hundred
piece of cannon, as reports Hubbert Waleus, who amply has written this story;
and of the loss of those ships, he writes in his addition to the History of
Gagwine.

Athene makes mention of some worthy observation, in his fifth book, and fifth
Chapter. Ptlomy Ph^adelph King of Egypt had a great number of ships; amongst
which were two, each one having thirty ranks of seats, called Trigniti-remes,
so that they were marvelous great, and Ptolomy Philopater caused to build a
ship, of two hundred and eighty cubits in length, and of f^rty eight cubits in
hight from the Keele to the Poupe, with four hundred Mariners, and four
thousand Rowers: and that ship of Hieron Prince of Siracuse, built by the skill
of Archimedes, was yet greater then this other, according to the report of
Athene, who reports things seeming incredible being a worthy Author, which
according to his account did carry two thousand Tons, being a prodigious
monster, so that there could not be found a sure harbor for that City built of
timber, so that Hieron did send a present of all the wheat and provision
within her to the King of Egypt, for the relief of his country. Plinius
writes of another ship in Clandius Caesar his time, that carried six score
thousand bushells of corn, whereof the mast was so great that four men could
not fathom it, where we may see, how these Princes of old delighted in making
of things out of measure.

More of this we may read in our own story, of the ships built by King James
the fourth King of Scotland, whereof one was such a huge great ship as ever was
seen on our seas: she was so great, that Henry the eight and Francis the
first, Kings of England and France through jealousy caused to build every one
of them a greater ship then the Scottish ship, which being made ready, and put
to Sea, were improfitable for Navigation, and this Scottish ship also was
improfitable, being lost by Admiral Hamilton on an exployt at Bristoll. Where
she being robbed of her equipage, she rotted on that coast by succession of
time.

At Venice this day we bear of a fair ship, but not in comparison of these
for quantity, of which Justinian writes as follows, above water she is
garnished with Columns, many in number, gilded with fine gold. Whenany Prince
or great man coms to Venice, the Duke and Senators to do him honor, lead him
unto this ship, where before the mast on the highest stage or degree, is set
the Duks chair, where the Prince is set amongst the Ambassadors, and the Lords
of the privy council, and all men about, on banks set lower, all the Senators
with great silence and gravity, sitting on those banks under them, are those
that lead the ship, even by force against the stream, though the wind be
contrary.

The territories of the Duchy are seen, with the Dukes buckler, clad and
covered with black, the ship is covered with Tapestry of velvet or scarlet,
well bound that the wind may not discover those under it; at the Rudder there
is to be seen, the Portrait of Justice in clean gold, having in the right
hand a naked sword, and in the left a balance: she is called Bucentaure, bu
signifying great, and centaure, as the most ancient mark of ships built in the
time of Sebastian Siano Duke of Venice; at the coming of the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa, for treating of the peace betwixt the Pope and the Venetians.

Osorius writes of the mighty ship of Dian, which alone fought against the
whole fleet of King Manuell, and at last was taken: and in another place of
the same story, he speaks of a great ship, called Resse, that fought valiantly
against the Portugalls, and they being entered into her, there was made on the
sudden an artificial fire, that so affrighted the pursuers, that they quit
the Reffe, retiring the farthest they could from her, which fire did not burn,
being artificially made, and the makers of it could extinguish it when they
pleased.

To conclude then this observation and discourse of ships; I did observe here
before Keele, fire being entered into one of our ships, and the soldiers
throwing salt water on it, it still burnt the more, till I made them throw
fresh water, and then it was quenched, having before read the like in Plutarch
treating of the natural causes. And Venice seated on the sea has been often
in danger of burning, as Sabellicus writes in his sixth book in the story of
Venice, where he reports that the Temple St Mark was almost all burnt, and the
Dukes Palace was preserved with great difficulty; which verifies, that fire and
water are good servants but evil masters. God make us thankful for this
deliverance, and from many more since, having been in danger of fire, water,
sword, famine, pestilence, and from the cruelty of our enemies.

The fourteenth Duty discharged at Grottenbrode in Holsten.
THis Magnanimous King, yet still preferring the good of his country before his
own rest and quiet, with the hazard of his person, landed again in Holsten,
his forces not exceeding three thousand foot without horsemen: of intention,
there to bring his Army together, he drew out himself a Royal Leager with a
strong Forte in the midst of it, having the Isle of Feamer sufficiently
provided of victuals and of Ammunition, to furnish his Army during that
Summer, and leaving the most part of his strength a shipboard, he advanced
himself with a thousand men, to a Dorpe called Grottenbrode, a mile from the
shore, naturally well situated, which might be put in defense with little
pains, to hold up an Army. His Majesty having drawn the draught of the
Retrenchment, the Boores set to work, I with the English and two Dutch
companies, were made choice of, to Guard his Majesty and the workmen; the
enemy lying strong with horse and foot, within two miles of us. The first
nights watch was laid on me and my soldiers: by break of day, a Corporal and
twelve horsemen of the enemies were sent to try our watch, or rather, to betray
us, which were holden up by our outer centry, who calling to the Guard, the
Guard taking Arms: I directed a Sergeant, and a Corporal with twelve
musketeers to advance, and to speak with those horsemen: The enemies Corporal
finding himself wrong, pretended an excuse, alleging he was come to offer his
service to his Majesty, and then retired: whereof incontinent I did inform
his Majesty, who presently considered he was a spy sent from the enemy: before
midday he returned with fifteen hundred horse, and some Dragoniers; our
intrenchment not ready, we draw to Arms, his Majesty directing the two Dutch
companies to beset the passes, and finding his person in danger retired, with a
few musketeers, and leaving me and the English, being of equal strength to
defend the Dorpe, promising to provide me of ammunition, and to send us relief:
his Majesty thus retired, I caused a barricade of wagons to be made a hundred
paces without the Dorpe, where I placed a Lieutenant and thirty musketieres,
giving him charge, if the enemy should advance to discover, or recognize, then
to give fire on them, and not otherwise; This done, the rest of our Soldiers
were placed for maintaining the entry of the Dorpe, and the English were
appointed, as our reserve, to lie at Arms, to be in readiness to second us;
the enemy finding us provided, and their foot not being come up, they stand in
Battle, and direct two Troops of horse to try the passes, meaning to come
betwixt us and our ships, to cut off our retreat, but finding we had the pass
beset with musketeers, they were forced to retire back, with the loss of
three horsemen.

By this time, his Majesty did send Colonel Holck unto me (being come loose
from the enemy on Parole to solicit his Ransom) to desire me, if the enemy
forced entrance unto the Dorpe, that I should retire to the Churchyard, which
was but cold comfort, so being his Majesty had no intention to relieve us, and
consequently, at last we should be the enemies prisoners, after losing of our
Colors, which grieved us most. But I desired the Colonel to show his Majesty,
that seeing I knew of no relief, if the enemy pursued us hard, I would choose
rather to set the Dorpe on fire behind us, and then commit my self, and the
rest to the hazard of fortune in making our retreat, rather then to become
prisoners to the enemy. The Colonel gone, we pressing to make a fair show of
a slight game, doubling our Guards before night, and making great Guard-fires
in view of the enemy, his foot not come up, and seeing our resolution, he
retired before night, where incontinent we embraced the opportunity, and
leaving some Dragoniers behind us, we retired to our ships, giving orders to
the Dragoniers to follow after us, so soon as they thought we were safely
retired. Before midnight, the enemy having gotten his foot joined with him,
returned to the Dorpe, and the next morning advances toward us, till he was
holden off by the fury of our Ordinance of the ships. In the mean time, his
Majesty had above four thousand Boores at work, finishing the Leager, and
royal Fort in the midest of it, whereon were placed eight pieces of Cannon,
the Fort being higher then the Leager, did command the fields about, which
being complete, the two Dutch companies were left to maintain the Fort, and
the rest had orders to ship their men and to retire to Lowland, his Majesty
having understood, that the enemy had beleagerd Trailesound. The second night,
after our going away, the enemy coming to pursue the Fort, the Dutch retire
quitting the same, and their Cannon also, with the loss of fourscore men, so
that his Majesty's pains taken in Holsten was in vain, the Dutch retiring
from it unfoughten.

The foureteenth Observation.
IT is much to be lamented, when Kings, Pericles, who said that when the
public state was ruined, he that lived well at his ease, for his own
particular, should not escape unruin'd, where on the contrary, the public
state being well, the poor feel the less discommodity and is comforted in
some manner. Caesar was of this opinion, when he said unto his Captains and
Lievetenants, no man could so well establish his condition, as that it could
not perish, if the public state were hurt: But if the public state did
flourish, he might help and mitigate all the misery of all particular persons.
And the Emperor Antony called the Debonnaire, was of that mind, when he took
away the pensions of some pensioners of the public, that did no service,
saying, there was no people more cruel, or more villainous, then those that did
eat up the public. Would to God this magnanimous King had done so with a
number of his Commissaries, that had misguided his rich Treasure, and were the
undoing of his Army, where they should rather have died then wronged their King
and country, and should rather have left by will and testament to their
children, an example of their fidelity and honesty, then a rich Patrimony.

The Rogues, the Commissaries did much differ in their love to their King and
Country, from that worthy gentleman of famous memory, we read of in our own
Stories, called William Seaton, who is worthily recorded of, for his love to
the public, preferring it to his own children, who being Governor of
Barwicke, he and his wife did choose rather to quit their own lives, and the
lives of their children, then to give over the place unto the English, choosing
rather to keep it, for the weal of the public, and for the honor of their
King and Country: preferring the publiqueweale, to their own particular: the
story I need not amplify, being well known. This Magnanimous King, scorning
the attempts of his enemies, cease not still to hazard his own person and
Crown for the safety of his people: for he trusted and confided so much in
God, that he knew well the Scepter was ordained for those that slighted it, and
not for those did cover it greedily, as his enemies did.

Here also we see that the enemies forces being drawn toward Trailesound,
minding that way to come unto Denmark, his Majesty was diverted from his
resolution, and was forced to join with Trailesound to make a defensive war,
for the safety of his Country and people, for if the enemy had gotten
Trailesound, he had an easy way to come into Denmark, wherein there were no
great strengths, and getting shipping, Artillary and Ammunition, (whhereof his
Majesty was well provided) he had then the pass open unto Britain, when he
pleased. But he was wisely prevented by his Majesty and his Council, God
bringing things to pass according to his secret decree, and not according to
the will of man.

Here also we see, that it is the duty of a General lying near an enemy, to
know all avenues well, and betimes to beset them well with diligence, and good
watches; for if this pass at Gottenbrode had not been timely well beset, his
Majesty might have fallen into the enemies hands, the passage being cut off
betwixt his Majesty and the ships.

Also in all extremities, it is the duty of Commanders to encourage their
inferiors, otherwise the passengers may be afraid, if the Skipper or
steersman gives over: as Commanders do look to their own credits, so they
ought to be careful of their followers saferies.

The English and our Nation are good seconds, Nation; as happened here at
Grotenbrode, where I did see fifty English and Scots chase above a hundred
Danes, with swords into the sea, deeper than their waste, running into the Sea
for their safeties, whereupon there was a complaint made unto his Majesty by
the Commissary on my Camerade Captain Chamberlain and me, for not suppressing
our Soldiers insolency, from abusing of the Danes Soldiers. The occasion of
their quarrelling was, the Danes Boores being commanded out for the Kings
service, and for the defense of their Country, they had forty days provision
with them, and being well furnished with dry Beef and Bacon, while as our
Soldiers did get nothing but hard Biscuit and Beer, they devised that one
coming behind the Danes Soldiers for taking up his knapsacke, while as
another should cut the strings before, and then to run away with it; this
Stratagem being often practiced by the English and Scots against the Danes; at
last, the Danes resolved being stronger in the fields than they both were, to
fight for their Knapsackes: the occasion being offered, they yoke or join
with swords, and fight in the Leager, and the Danes were forced to give ground,
and to retire within the Sea for their safeties, sundry on both sides being
hurt, their Officers appeased the Tumult, and after Captain Chamberlain and
I, though innocent of the fault, were mightily chidden by his Majesty: his
Majesty assuring us, if the like happened again, he would punish us, and not
our Soldiers, which made us afterward look more narrowly to their behavior
and carriage, making them live more peaceable with their Camerades, in not
oppressing them; for it is a hard time when one Wolf eats up another.

The fifteenth Duty discharged of our March from Lowland to Alzenheure, and
from thence to Trailesound by water.
THE eight of May 1628. I being at Copemanhagen, soliciting for our Regiment,
orders were given unto me, to be sent to Lowland and to Fune, to make our
Regiment march in all haste to Alzenheure, and there to attend for their
orders: the orders I did direct to Captain Mac-Kenyee, commanding him to keep
good discipline in his March, and strict, being in his Majesty's own Land; he
receiving the orders breaks up the twelfth of May from Lowland, and continues
his March to the Randezvouz. The Garrisons also in Funeland break up the said
day, and continued their March toward their Randezvous. On the March through
Zeland, Captain Mac-Kenyee his Soldiers being quartered in a Dorpe, the
Boores take Arms, stayed not to be led by their Officers, but entered the
skirmish with the Boores, where at the first Salve, four of the Boores were
killed dead, and sundry hurt, the rest fly away, leaving the Dorpe to the
Souldiersto be quartered in; the blame of this accident was laid on the
Commissary appointed for the Convoy, who being absent was to answer for the
wrong; but the Commissary caused for revenge, a Boores daughter to complain on
three Soldiers of Captain Mac-Kenyee his Company, alleging they had all
three forced her, so that the Soldiers were apprehended, conveyed in Irons to
Copemanhagen, to be examined there before the General Commissary, the
State-holder and me: who being examined, no proof was found against them but
accusations, whereupon they were remitted to prison till further trial, where
there was an act made, they should suffer no trial, except I were present.
Nevertheless, in my absence, they were all three executed, (viz.) Donald
Rosse, James Dumbarre, and Alexander Caddell, who went to death without
acknowledging the fact, still pleading their innocence. The Lieverenant
Colonel Alexander Seaton, being then come from Holland, was ordained by his
Majesty in all haste to ship three Companies, and to go with them for the
relief of Trailesound, I being appointed to stay for the other Companies
coming; they being come to Alshenure, were shipped also, and arriving at
Copemanhagen, it behoved me in all haste to ship, and follow the Lieutenant
Colonel, for relief of Trailesound being hard beleager'd, where I entered the
twenty-eight of May, and was no sooner drawn up in the Market place, but
presently we were sent to watch at Franckendore, to relieve the other Division,
that had watched three days and three nights together uncome off, that being
the weakest part of the whole Town, and the only post pursued by the enemy,
which our Lieutenant Colonel made choice of, being the most dangerous, for
his Countries credit; where we watched forty eight hours together, till we
were relieved again by the other Division, and so Singulis noctibus per vices,
during six weeks time, that my clothes came never off, except it had been to
change a suite or linnings.

The fifteenth Observation.
THis Town of Trailesound being hard beleager'd by the Emperialists, they
desired humbly the protection and assistance of his Majesty of Denmark, which
was willingly granted unto them: having accorded on their Conditions, his
Majesty made choice of our Regiment to be sent thither, having had sufficient
proof of our former service, in his Majesty's presence, and under command of
others his Majesty's Generals; So that before others we were trusted on this
occasion, where we did come with a timely relief to those Burgers, that were
wearied and toyled with watching, and also hurt by their enemies, whom they had
beaten from their walls twice before our coming.

In this accident, Zeland betwixt the Boores and our Soldiers, we may see the
Antipathy that is betwixt Soldiers and Boores, where the one cannot with
patience endure the sight of the other, without some present jarre, so that it
were impossible to make them agree together, if Military Discipline were not
strictly observed, and the transgressors exemplarily punished.

Here also I cannot omit the oversight committed by those Belly-gods the
Co^missaries, that serve the public State worst, yet are oft-times best
recompensed; whose neglect on this March, was the cause of shedding the
innocent blood of the poor Laborers, and of the Soldiers also: and it was
pity, such a King should entertain so many of this sort of belly-gods, that
studied nothing so much, as to fill their own Coffers, and to raise their
houses, without any care had of the Public Weal.

Here also I cannot allow of that vain custom amongst the Officers, that will
make a bad choice for a little ostentive credit, having the good in their
election, to make choice of the worst; for in occasions against our enemies, we
should rather take all advantages, as of strength, of ground, of Sun and
wind: and shall he not be thought yet unwiser, who may be the Instrument to
save his people on service, that willingly will make choice of a place to lose
them.

No menagrie in my opinion comparable to that which spares the lives of men
from losing, and I persuade my self,

Here also I did observe, that frequent danger does encourage the feeblest
Soldier, who by daily dangers, and the familiarity made with death, in
stepping every day over the bodies of dead men, who perhaps never before had
seen one die naturally, much less to see daily and hourly examples of
violent death, learning wit, by bypast losses, and experience had in the
exercise of our Calling, being hardened with toil and travel. Therefore, in my
judgment, no man is more worthy of the name of a Soldier, than he that
indures best wearisome toil and travel in this honorable Calling, not
withdrawing the shoulder, but by pushing it forwards courageously, having once
begun: for though in all affairs of this kind, the beginnings seem hard and
difficult, yet soon after we find it lighter, according to the measure of our
advancement, and reward in the end, we enjoy still the greater contentment, as
became of me the first time my friends led me up a steep hill, when my breath
begun to fail me, looking behind, and seeing what way I had put by, the rest
to the top of the hill seemed nothing unto me, being so near the end of my
travel, but was pleasant rather than tedious. And therefore we use to say, He
that begins well has half ended.

At our entry in this Town, our travel and toil once begun, continued night
and day for six weeks, till we grew hard with travel, yet not hard, as many
of the Dutch, that are hard against the Musket Bullet, this proof we lacked.
He that shows himself honest in his calling and Travells, the Travel passes,
the honesty remains: But on the contrary, when we have taken delight in
evil, the delight passes, and the evil remains. Happy therefore are those
who travel in well-doing; for when the pains are gone, then do they enjoy
the pleasure.

We read of Cincinnatus brought from the plough to the Senate, to be made
Consul for his Travel: the like we read of Quintus taken from his plough to
be Consul also; a great change. No wonder then to take a man from the plough
to be a Soldier; as the Porter of Fowls, called Mac-Weattiche, who, in this
Town of Trailesound did prove as valiant as a sword, fearing nothing but
discredit, and the down-looke or frown of his Officers, lest he should offend
them.

The sixteenth Duty discharged of our Watches and Accidents, that occurred in
this Town, before the Enemy did storm our Works.
THE twenty-eight of May 1628, not without danger both by water and from land,
we entered the Town of Trailesound, the Imperial Army lying before it, having
their batteries near the water; at our in-coming they shot our Mast, having
grounded before our in-coming, we ran the hazard both of drowning and
killing; but being again without hurt come off, our Camerades wearied of
watching, immediately after our entry we relieved the watch at Franckendor,
being the only Poast in the Town most pursued by the enemy.

The order of our watch was after this manner: Hollomne; the other three
Companies were ordained by four a clock afternoon, to parade in the Market
place, and afterward to march to their Poast at Franckendor, without the
walls on scurvie outworkes, which were but slightly fortified with a dry
Moate, the enemy lying strong before us, and approaching near, we fearing a
sudden on-fall, those that were relieved of the watch by five of the clock,
were ordained again to meet by nine of the clock at night, and to watch
again on the by-watch, till four of the clock in the morning, whereof the
one half were appointed to he in readiness at their Arms without the Port
near the works, while as the other half were appointed also to lie in
readiness at their Arms on the Market place, to attend all occasions of
Alarums, either within or without the Town: and thus we watched nightly,
relieving one another, for the space of six weeks.

The rest of the Posts, above the walls, were also beset by the Dutch, but
none had the half of our duties to discharge, by reason the whole approaches
were made by the Enemy to us, as being the weakest part. Notwithstanding of
this our great nightly watch and duty kept, the Burgers of the City did prove
very ungrateful and unthankful to us, in not quartring our Soldiers, as they
ought to do: for Captain Monro his Company did lie on the streets four
nights unquartred, till the fortnight that they came off the watch, unknown to
their Officers, they went to the Burgo-master his own house, and said, they
would quarter with him, if there were not orders taken for their quartring, but
receiving a soft answer, they retired for that night: in the mean time, the
Burgo-master did complain to Colonel Holke, then Governor, who did cause to
assemble a Council of war, where the Lieutenant and Company were both
accused, as mutiners; the Lieutenant proving he knew nothing of it, and that
the Soldiers had done it without his knowledge, he was assoyled and made free
by the sentence of the Council of war: But the Company were ordained, being
divided in three Corporalships, that out of every Corporalship one should be
hanged, who were to draw Billets out of a Hatt, which were all blankes, till
one had the Gallows on it.

The order and sentence of the Council of war being duly obeyed, three were
led aside, and committed to prison, to be resolved against the execution, and
the rest were remitted to their Quarters, of the three ordained to be executed,
it was concluded again, by the intercession of the Officers made to the
Governor, that one might suffer, who again being two Scots and a Dane, having
drawn lots, it fell to the Dane to be hanged, the Governor himself being a
Dane also, he could not of his credit frustrate justice, seeing before he was
so earnest to see our Nation punished for a fault, whereof he was rather guilty
himself, not having appointed them quarters as he ought, so that the Dane
suffered justly for a Danes fault.

The Captains of some Companies being absent in Scotland, having gone for
recruets, the duty being great, Lieutenant Saunders Hay was made Captain to
Annan his company, being informed the Captain was to remain in Scotland:
Ensign Gordon being made Lieutenant to Sr. Patrick Mac-Gey, being long sick
in Lowland, and having a little recovered, on his journey to Trailesound, at
Copmanhaggen in Denmark, died suddenly being a resolute brave young Cavalier,
and of good parts, was much lamented.

He being dead Ensign Gawin Allen was made Lieutenant, and Patrick Dumbarre,
a young gentleman, of worth and merit, was advanced to be Ensign.

During our residence here, our orders were so strict, that neither Officer,
nor soldier was suffered to come off his watch, neither to dine or suppe, but
their meat was carried unto them, to their post. The enemy approaching hard,
and we working fast, for our own safeties, where sometimes, we salyed out, and
did visit the enemy, in his Trenches, but little to their contentment; till at
last, the enemy did approach right under our work, where sometimes, being so
near, we begun to jeere one another, so that the Dutch one morning taunting
us, said, they did hear, there was a ship come from Denmark to us, laden with
Tobacco and Pipes,

We did also nightly take some prisoners of them, sometimes stealing off their
centeries, which made many Alarums in the night, and in the day time. Here a
man might soon learn to exercise his Arms, and put his courage in practice:
and to give our Lieutenant Colonel his due, he had good orders, and he did
keep both Officers and soldiers under good discipline, and he knew well how
to make others understand themselves, from the highest to the lowest.

The sixteenth Observation.
WHen Cannons are roaring, and bullets flying, he that would have honor must
not fear dying: many rose here in the morning, went not to bed at night, and
many supped here at night, sought no breakefast in the morning: many a Burger
in this City, by one Cannon bullet at once: who doubts of this, he may go and
see the relics of their brains to this day, sticking on the walls, under
the Port of Franckendore in Trailesound.

It is said, that valor is then best tempered, when it can turn out of stern
fortitude, unto the mild streams of pity: who could behold these accidents,
and not be moved with pity and compassion? and who will not weep at the
casual miseries our calling is subject unto, in following ofttimes the leading
of an ambitious General, yea and of an ambitious Captain, yea the following
of an ambitious Soldier, delighting sometimes to tread over his enemies, as
happened many times unto us during this siege?

Who then is more compassionate, in peace or war, then the martial man?
Observe generally, and you shall find, that the most famous men have both
courage and compassion; of which in this City we had need; of courage against
our enemies, and of compassion to our friends, Camerades, and sometimes to our
enemies.

You see here we were made to keep double watch, as wise men ought to do: for
when we kept steady watches, the enemy could not harm us much, being wary of
our selves, and he that can do this, he surely merits the name of a good
Soldier, but oftimes, we are our own worst enemies, and killing our selves we
need no other enemy against us. Therefore at such a Siege as this was,
sobriety and temperance were requisite to a Soldier, as well as valor to
defend him from his enemies.

Here our enemies were our pedagogues teaching us virtue, every moment minding
us of our duty to God and man: yea minding us both of Death, and of Judgment:
here we needed no dead man's pawe before us, to mind us of Death, when Death it
self never went night or day with his horror from our eyes, sparing none,
making no difference of persons, or quality, but aquo pede, treading alike on
all came in his way, whose hour was come.

Here I wish not the gentle reader to mistake this insurrection of Monre his
company for a mutiny. It was not; neither against their Officers, nor yet in
prejudice of their Masters service. Therefore I would rather term it, a rude
ignorance in seeking their due, though unformally, whereof their Officers had
no part, and therefore were made free by a Council of wars, but the
unthankefulnesse of the Citizens (in sparing their means from feeding of those
that kept them, Athenians did bring those guilty of unthankefulnesse before the
Justice, to be punished, and that justly; because he that forgets a benefit
received, without making any satisfaction, does take away humane society,
without which the world could not subfis^ and therefore such Citizens, as would
not acknowledge the good received, ought to be banished the City, as
unthankefull, for a man evil in particular, cannot be a good member of the
public, as many villainous traitors were in this Town of Trailesound during
the Siege, that for their particulars would have sold the Town, and the common
good to their enemies; such fellows some of them were made slaves, being not
worthy the name of free Citizens: and the Canon law makes the ungrateful the
most detestable of all men; And therefore they were cruelly punished.

To make then the ingratitude of the Citizens of Trailesound toward Soldiers
the more odious, I will infer the Stories of Beasts here to accuse them;
Elian writes of a Dragon mindful of the good done to him (as these Rogues were
not) in these terms, in his thirteenth book. In Achaia there was a Town
called Petra, where a young boy did buy a Dragon very little, feeding it
diligently, making of it, playing with it, and making it ly in his Bed, till it
became great, and a Dragon in effect: those of the place fearing some evil by
it, did cause it to be carried unto a desert: the boy becoming a man also, and
certain years after, returning from a feast, with some of his Camerads, they
met with Robbers, and crying out for help, there comes the Dragon running on
the Robbers, killing some, putting the rest to flight, saves the life of him
that had done him good. A memorable acknowledgment to convince those of
Trailesound.

We may join to this story, the memory of the Lion healed by Androt the Roman
slave, whose life afterward the Lion saved. The story is written by Gellius
and Elian, and also now set out in verse by Dubartas, in the sixth day of the
first week.

Here also we may see the profit and benifit good order does bring uno the
observers of it: though we thought hard, not to be suffered to come off our
Posts for our ordinary recreation, nor yet to sleep from our Posts, we found
at last the benefit redounded unto our selves: for while as the enemy pursued
us hard, we were at hand to defend our selves, and to maintain our credits;
otherwise, it had become of us, as it became in the Swedens wars in Germany of
Magdeburg on the Elve, and of Franckeford on the Oder, being both lost through
negligence and careless watch, which made much innocent blood to have bin shed
in both. And therefore I cannot but praise the worth of my Lieutenant
Colonel, for his good order and strict discipline kept in Holke his absence,
being in Denmark at his wedding, we being then in greatest danger of our
enemies.

The seventeenth Duty discharged of the storming of our Poast, and of our
losses and the enemies.
THe twenty sixth of June 1628, the Duke of Fridland Walenstine General to the
Imperial Army, having come to visit the beleaguering, and finding Felt
Marshall Arnehem had line six weeks, and not gotten it in, the General being
offended, at his coming he did Recognosse the whole Town, and finding our
Poast to be the weakest part thereof, by reason of the situation and of the
insufficiency of the works, the wall not exceeding the hight of a man, he
resolved to pursue it by storm, swearing out of a passion he would take it in,
in three nights, though it were hanging with Iron chains, betwixt the earth
and the heavens. But forgetting to take God on his side, he was disappointed by
him, who disposes of all things at his pleasure, being the Supreme watchman
himself, that neither slumbers nor sleeps.

We having then gotten intelligence of Walenstine his coming, we looked the
better unto our selves, and having in the evening or twilight set out our
Perdues, we strengthened all our Poasts, and we placed our by-watch in the
Ravelin, to be in readiness, as also I commanded four score musketeers, under
the command of Captain Hay, to sit by their Arms and to be in readiness, to
supply all defects might happen by a timely succors, as they should be
commanded; likewise I caused to double all centries, and so sitting down to
rest us, we were passing the time by discourse, betwixt ten and eleven a clock
at night, when as our centry gives fire and calls us to our Arms: at our
rising we find the enemy approaching above a thousand strong, with a shoute,
Sa, Sa, Sa, Sa, Sa, Sa, thus it went on cheerfully, and every man to his
Station. The worst was, we had without a half moon unfinished, where Ensign
Iohnston was with fifty musketeers, that were forced to retire under ground one
after another at a sorting Port, where some were lost before their entry: they
being entered, then begun our soldiers to make service, and I give charge to
Quarter Mr. Bruntfeild, a valorous gentleman, Mac-kenyees quarter, being next
the enemy, was hardest pressed, where I having visited him, did send him fifty
musketeers of supply, and then I did visit Lieutenant Beaton his Poast, whom
I found both careful and vigilant in resisting the Enemies entry valiantly,
with his associats, who were two capable Segeants called Embrey and Simpson,
who were both killed this night.

Then I did visit the Dutch quarters, being betwixt me and the Ravelin: which I
thought to be in least danger. The Cavalier their Captain being a Beamish
gentleman, both stout and diligent, the most part of his Soldiers, the Dutch
having left him, he was much over-prest with the enemies, them also I was
forced to supply with fifty musketeers of our Nation, under the command of
Captain Hay, otherwise the enemy had fallen in betwixt us and the Raveline.
But this valorous gentleman the Beamish Captain being killed; Captain Hay by
his valor maintained the Poast, till the fury of the enemy begun a little to
settle. In this time, for one hour and a half, the service being hot, sundry
were killed of us, but three for one of the enemy, which finding himself
resisted with valor, being relieved by a fresh supply of another thousand men,
set on more furiously then before, where sundry of our Officers were shot, as
Lieutenant Beaton, Ensign Dumbarre, Lievete. nant Arburthnot, quarter Mr.
Bruntfield, and my self; diverse others were killed, as Sergeant Mac-kenyee,
Sergeant Young, Mo^sieur Gordon, Monsieur Stewart, Monsieur Tullough, all
gentlemen of my Colonells company, with diverse more, and Captain Mac-kenyee
was also shot favorably a thwart the Belly, and I being wearied and grown
stiff with my wounds, being helped off, did meet a fresh relief coming to us,
led by Lieutenant Andrew Stewart, a valorous gentleman, and of good conduct,
Brother to the noble Earl of Traquare: I did exhort them en passant, to carry
themselves well, they answered me cheerfully, as became resolute Soldiers,
who were desirous to vindicate their camerades blood against their enemies: the
relief being come, the service went on a fresh on both sides, the enemy
storming again with the third relief, which continued so long, till a number
of our Officers more were killed and hurt, as Lieutenant Stewart, Ensign
Seaton, Ensign Ennis, Captain Arms, Andrew Monro, and diverse more were hurt.
During this time, our Lieutenant Colonel was busied within the Town, in
commanding the reliefes, and in sending orders to the other Poasts to look
unto themselves, who would not miss one man to succor or help us in our
greatest need. Notwithstanding, that the whole force of the enemies was
employed against us alone.

The second relief that came to our Poast, was led by Colonel Frettz,
Swedens, who, though not admitted to Command, out of his generositie, being
accompanied with his Lieutenant Colonel Mac-Dougall, and his Major, called
Semple, with fourscore Musketeers, voluntarily did come to succor and help
our Nation; who at his first coming, received deaths wounds, whereof he died
shortly after. His Lieutenant Colonel also was taken prisoner, and was
missing for six months, we not knowing whither he was dead or alive. The Major
also was killed instantly at his first coming to service; so that the last
time, and on the last storm, by the break of day the enemy was once entered
our works, and was beat back again with great loss, with swords and pikes
and butts of Muskets, so that the day clearing the enemy was forced to retire,
having lost above a thousand men, and we near two hundred, besides those who
were hurt. He that was on this nights service from the beginning to the ending,
being in action, might avouch he did escape danger. The enemy forsaking our
works unconquered, the graffe filled with their dead bodies, equal to the
bancks, the works ruined in the day time could not be repaired, which caused
the next nights watch to be the more dangerous.

The seventeenth Observation.
THE Emperor Alexander Severe had reason to say, that Military Discipline did
conserve and maintain the Estate: And so might the magnanimous King of
Denmark say of this service, and the Town of Trailsound, the Citizens of it,
before this time being sluggish, dissolute, cowards, spend-thrifts and
voluptuous, are now by this Discipline made active, menagers, valiant, sparing
and honest: the thanks whereof they owe unto our Nation, whose bones lie in
their ground, and to our Countryman, who since has been their Governor, for
the reward of his virtue, was appointed by his Majesty of Sweden, of worthy
memory, and set to Command over them and their City. And it is most sure,

During the time of this hot conflict, none that was whole went off at the
coming of the relief, but continued in the fight assisting their Camerades, so
long as their strength served, ever esteeming more of their credit than of
their safety, through the desire they had to be revenged of the losses
sustained by their Camerades. On the other part, it was reported of Walestine,
that he was so eager to get in the Town, that his Officers retiring off servce
being hurt, he caused to shoot them dead, calling them Cowards for retiring
with so small hurt. Here also I purpose to speak somewhat of the Emperialists
custom, entering on service, shouting like Turks, as if crying would terrify
resolute Soldiers: No truly; we were more encouraged, having long expected
for their coming, being all of us well resolved for the Combat, we were greedy
of honor, and therefore we longed to try our enemies valor: Seeing we were
more overjoyed of their coming, than any wise terrified; and we received them
with Volees of Cannon and Musket in their teeth, which fair and well come was
hard of digestion unto some of them: and it might be well said of them,
Proverb is amongst the Bactrians, that the dogs did bark more than they did
bite, especially the Fleet Curres; for true courage consists not in words,
neither ought we to look for much courage, where we hear many boisterous
words. But on the contrary, true valor does consist in the greatness of
courage, and in the strength of the valiant Arm, and not in the Tongue: and
the first people, that did practice this loud crying of martial resolution,
and of rejoicing in battle, were the Israelites, who in the most part of their
fighting used those cries, as testimonies of their faith, and of their earnest
calling for the help of the Almighty. And a Lord of Afric being to fight
against the Portugalls, his Troops ready to fight, he said unto them, they
should not cry but strike hard, for says he, those men whom you see, are not
accustomed to be afraid with words nor voice; for it is not in cries, but in
valor, that men should establish the hope of Victory. Nevertheless, we read
in Histories, that the Romans, and other warlike Nations, were wont in
Battles, as to this day in approaches, even as in fields, to cry alowd: and
therefore we say among our selves at home, that he is to be pitied, that is
surprised with the cry of his Enemies. We read also of the Savages, whom the
French do call Tokniambous, that before they come within half a mile, they
cry like Devils at the first sight of their enemies, redoubling their cries
coming near hand, sounding their horns, lifting their Arms here and there in
a boasting manner, fighting so long as they are able to move hand or foot,
never giving ground or turning back till they die.

Tacitus reports, that the Germans of old, did sing going to fight: and we
read of Cate the Censor, that he taught young men to fight standing in one
place, and he used to say often, that words were more powerful to terrify,
and to chase an enemy, than the strokes of the hand. And the same Cato said, he
loved not the Soldier that did shake his hands marching, that staggred with
his feet in fighting, and snorted louder in sleeping, than he did cry coming to
fight. And Caesar said, that in every man was seen a certain moving and
natural readiness and promptitude, that kindled them with a desire to fight:
which Generals and Commanders of Armies ought diligently to intertaine, and
not extinguish. Macedons also began their fighting with crying and shouting;
and Curtius reports, that as soon as the Armies saw one another within shot of
Musket, the Persians began to cry furiously, and the Macedons, though fewer in
number, did so answer them, that the tops of the Mountains and Woods resounded
again to the Echo of their Cries. The like we read in our own Story, where
the Author in his ninth Book makes mention of Henry Piercie Earl of
Northumberland, and Regent of England at the East, being come unawares into
Scotland with seven thousand men, was driven away by the Boores and Herds, by
the help of Stone-Bagges, as they are called to this day in our High Lands of
Scotland, being used by the Inhabitants to fright Wolves, and to chase Dear
and other Beasts from their grasings: the Instrument is made of dry skins
made round like a Globe, with small stones in it that make a noise, as they did
near the English Camp, that their Horses brake loose through the fields,
where after long flying they were taken by the Boores of the Country. If then
we should cry at all, let it be such a noise as may terrify our enemies, being
strong, courageous, and brave.

Plutarch reports, that the cry of Soldiers made a Raven flying in the air to
fall down being astonished: and Titus Livius says, that when the multitude of
people did imbarke, that few or none were left in Italy and Sicile, coming
together, and crying, the Birds astonished fell out of the air: and Paulus
Aemilius reports the like, that when the Christians besieged Tire, a Pigeon was
seen in the Air, which made the Christians raise such a noise, that the
Pigeon fell down, as if it had been stricken with thunder, and that they
found a Letter about the neck of the Pigeon, that the Sarazens had sent to the
besieged, showing they should be soon relieved, if they would take good
courage, and maintain the Town for certain days: and the Christians having
men with them, who understood the same language, did write another Letter,
which they tied to the neck of the said Pigeon, and let him go; which Letter
carried, that the besieged had need to look to themselves, that they had
given good proof of their valor and fidelity, and that their Fortune was,
not to give them hope of relief; the passages being closed up by their
enemies, and the Tyrians thus deceived, give over the Town unto the Christians.

The like we read practiced at the siege of Harlam, which made the Town hold
out long: and it is certain, such Poasts are made fall down with the noise of
crying, and of Cannon and Musket, so that their packetts are taken from them.
Here also was wonderful, the loss and damage done by Cannon, especially the
Morters of the enemy, carrying Bullets of Stone within the Town of three
hundredth pound weight, Franckendore, where we went out to our watch, above
seven hundredth and sixty shot of Cannon, the noise whereof was heard above
thirty English miles. Also we read, that at the Battle of Lepanto, in the
year 1572. where the Turks were defeated with great loss, that the noise of
the Cannon was heard from the place, above sixty Scottish miles. But on the
Sea they are heard a great deal farther, as having neither hill nor wood to
hinder the sound in the Air.

Here also I did observe, how happy it is when Officers and Soldiers love one
another, refusing to undertake no danger to supply their Camerades, their lives
being dearer unto them than their own: which was evident by the timely
relief, which discouraged the Enemy, and made them at last perceiving their
own loss to be great, having effectuated little, in the end to settle. To
speak in particular of any man's valor, at this time, seeing to my knowledge,
I perceived no defect neither in Officer nor Soldier; but so far as to my
grief, I did speak of the Dutch that left their Captain, which since I
confess to be a warlike Nation, being now long hardened by the custom of
wars, but on desperate service, as this was, I would wish, if I had liberty
to choose, other seconds: neither can I commend those Dutch that would not send
us relief in our great danger; for though we ought to look to our own
houses, when our neighbors are on fire, yet Christian compassion ought to move
us to supply the defects of our brethren; but when Soldiers and Officers
prefer their ease, Camerades in danger, then such may be justly called
simple, without moderation, abandoning their Camerades, they lose their good
name, and bring their reputation and valor in question. Who will not then
blame such, and who will not praise those, that in extremity, contemned life
and their ease, to relieve their Camerades: as Colonel Fretts his Lieutenant
Colonel and Major did, fighting against our enemies? Him then I esteem as a
valiant Soldier, that fights against the enemy, embracing wounds for his
Mistress, and that is contented to lie on the ground, being weary, and that
makes no difference of food to serve his appetite, without sauce; being
contented with a nod for a sleep; to such a Soldier nothing is impossible or
hard to attempt; and such Soldiers to command were my choice, that cared not
for gold nor money, but for credit: and Soldiers have most fear when they are
best fed, best clad, best armed, and when their purses are best furnished; but
when the Soldier glories in his poverty, then does the Army flourish, then
do they overthrow their enemies. And therefore it was the saying of Demetrius
to Xerxes King of Persia, going to make war in Greece, that Greece did ever
entertain poverty, and lodged virtue brought in by wisdom and severe
discipline: by which means their dominion remains unconquered, so long as
they were enemies to vice, and were glad in their poverty, as may be well
spoken of our own Nation at home, that has suffered and done so much and more
for our freedoms, than any Kingdom in Europe, which this day makes our
Sovereign to say, Nobis haec invicta miserunt centum and septem proavi, being
left unconquered in his succession of one hundred and seven Kings: for what
have we to do with gold or great riches, so long as we can command our own
appetites and desires? And if we thirst after gold, let us valiantly bring it
from a far with credit, to enrich our Country with, and to supply the
necessities of our poor at home; and then having served long credibly abroad,
his Majesty our Sovereign may grant unto us after our dismission from other
service, the liberties and privileges which were granted by Charlemaine unto
his Soldiers, after he had subdued the Saxons and Lumbards, Kings, if by
chance you commit any excess. It is a good thing and worth commendations, to
have defeated Kings, assaulted Towns and Provinces, Strengths and Castles. But
it is a thing much more worth commendations, to overcome your own passions, a
marvel surpassing all marvailes, that he who did overcome so many, at last
overcomes himself. The first and best of all Victories, which cannot be
attained unto without contemning of riches.

To conclude then this observation, happy are those Cavaliers that ended their
lives in the defense of their Countries credit, a brave interchange, where
worthy Cavaliers, in undergoing a temporal death for eternal fame and glory,
gain life after death. Miserable is the brevite, and more miserable the
uncertaintie of life. Since then, we are sure we cannot live long, and
uncertain if we live at all, being like leaves on trees, we are the sport of
every puff that blows, and with the least guste, may be shaken from our life
and nutriment: we travel, we study, we fight, that labor may pay us the loss
of our ill expended time, while death whiskes about us with a Pegasean speed,
flies unawares upon us, and with the kick of his heel, or the dash of his
foot, we are driven down to dust, and lie there. Many a stout fellow this
night at Trailesound, and five weeks before, Pilgrim of one night, not being
sure to see the morrow.

The eighteenth Duty discharged of the second nights storm at Trailesound and
of the success thereof.
THe Lieutenant Colonel having visited me the next day at my lodging, being
not able to stir out of my bed, he declared unto me the loss sustained by
the Regiment, both of Officers and Soldiers, and he suspecting the enemy would
storm again at night, being battering the walls furiously the whole day,
Frankendore near eight hundred shot, he desired to hear my opinion, how I
would have the Poaste beset at night with the Regiment; my advise was, to cause
beat a bancke by the Drummer Major; and the whole Drummers of the Regiment
athwart the City, commanding upon pain of death, that all Officers, and
Soldiers able to carry Arms under the Regiment should repair at parad time,
to the market place, there to receive further orders, and that at their coming,
to appoint all the Officers, that were not hurt, to command the whole
Soldiers, to be all put under the Colonells company, till such time, as the
Recreuts should come from Scotland, and then every man should be suffered to
serve again under their own companies, as before, and this order being
followed, they would be well commanded having sufficient Officers to lead
them, giving them orders how to behave themselves, in case the enemy should
storm their works, seeing they were not able to defend them long, being weak
of forces, and the works almost ruined the night before.

This determined, the watch being drawn up, they march to the former Poast,
getting orders from the Lieutenant Colonel, if the enemy should press them
hard, they should retire themselves orderly to the Ravelin, and quit the outer
works, seeing that from the Town wall, and Ravelin, they were able with
Cannon and musket to cleanse out the enemy again.

So entering on their watch, and the night being come on, the enemy furiously
did invade them, and they defended the works a long time, till in the end
being pressed hard, they retired according to their orders, to the Ravelin,
whereupon the enemy followed them with a shout and a cry, as if the Town had
been won, which did put the Burgars, and the rest of the Soldiers that were
on other Poasts, in great fear, thinking all was past recovery.

Notwithstanding of this sudden fear, our Soldiers valiantly and bravely
defended the Ravelin with Pikes and fire-workes, the enemy having advanced
bravely to the cutting of the Pallessades, pressing also to undermine the
Ravelin by working under it, which our folks did hinder, by countermineing.

The enemy also, had another fortell, or advantage by reason of a new work,
which was uncomplete, betwixt the Ravelin and the outward works, where he did
lodge himself, having the new works as a Breastworke, to defend him from our
shot.

The night thus past furiously on both sides, not without great loss, being
well fought, both of the pursuer and defender, in the morning our Soldiers
some of them being Armed with Corslets, head-peeces, withhalfe pikes, Morgan
sternes and swords, being led with resolute Officers they fall out, Pell mell
amongst the enemies, and chase them quite out of the works again, and
retiring with credit, maintained still the Triangle or Ravelin; The enemy
considering his loss, and how little he had gained, the Town also being not
void of fear, thinking the third night, the enemy might enter the walls,
being thus doubtful on both sides, the enemy sends a Trumpeter, to know if
they will treat for conditions, our Lieutenant Colonel having the command,
for the time (in Colonel Holke his absence) I think was glad of the offer, to
prolong time, till his Majesty of Denmark might send a fresh supply. Pledges
delivered hinc inde, a still-stand or cessation of Arms was concluded on by
both parties, for a formights time, then Articles were drawn up, to be advised
on, which continued in advising certain days, Denmark had folk in readiness
to come in all haste with Colonel Holke, for their relief. Whereupon my Lord
Spynie, a Scots Noble man, with his Regiment, with sufficient provision of
money and Ammunition, were sent unto the Town, and being entered, the treaty was
rejected, and made void.

At this time also Sr. Alexander Lesly, (an expert and a valorous Scots
Commander) with some Swedens forces, was sent to govern the Town, his Majesty
of Sweden having condescended with his Majesty of Denmark, that his Majesty of
Denmark should dismiss the protection of Trailesound in favor of his Majesty
of Sweden, and to that effect the Danes forces should be drawn out of the
Garrison, for to give place to the Swedens; in the mean time, the command was
turned over upon Sr. Alexander Lesly, whom Colonel Holke did assist with the
Danes forces, till they were removed, the absolute command being given to Sr.
Alexander Lesly, as Governor for his Maj sty of Sweden.

In time of the still-stand, I took a foare loffe under my Lieutenant
Colonel his hand, and scale, to go by Sea to Copmanhagen, to be cured there,
seeing no Chirurgian in Trailesound would undertake to cut the bullet out of my
knee, without hazarding me to be lame, which to prevent, I choosed rather,
though with infinite pain, to keep the bullet a fortnight, till I came to
Copmanhagen, where happily I found better cure.

The eighteenth Observation.
TWo things we must respect, so long as we live,

He whom before I was wont to obey and visit, came now, and visited me, I not
being able to stir, my Lieutenant Colonel came to comfort me, having need
to be comforted himself by good advise, how to defend the works the second
night, a general fear having possessed the hearts both of Burgers and
Soldiers, and I, to encourage him, did tell him a story of Augustus the
Emperor, who being near death commanded, that after his decease, all his
friends should clap their hands, and laugh unfainedly, as the custom was when
a Comedy was well acted: even so said I, though I was sorry at our loss; yet I
was glad for being hurt, when I looked to be killed, and having acted my part
of the play, for that time, and retired off the Stage, all I could do was but
to mind my Camerads of their duties. In the mean time, the Enemies cannon
having shot four great bullets of a hundred and sixty pound weight, out of
morters, through the top of my lodging even to the bottom, where I did lie,
affrighting me still, when my feet were not able to shift away my body; yet
recommending my soul to God, I resolved, he was well guarded, whom the Lord
had a care of, and having delivered me from many dangers, I still confided he
would not suffer me to be smothered under walls: For which and all his
blessings I do infinitely thank his Majesty, in giveing me time to do any
thing, that may please his Majesty, for my deliverance.

To make my Lieutenant Colonel laugh, Murdo Mac-claude borne in Assen, a
Soldier of a tall stature, and valiant courage, being sleeping on his watch,
awakened by the break of day, and jogges two of his Camerades lying by him,
who did find much fault with him for sturring of them, he replied, before long
you shall be otherwise sturred, a Soldier called Allen Tough a Loghaber-man,
recommending his soul to God, asked him what he had seen, who answered him,
you shall never see your country again, the other replied, the loss was but
small if the rest of the company were well, he answered no, for there was great
hurt and death of many very near, the other asked again, whom had he seen
more, that would dye besides him, sundry of his Camerades he told by name,
that should be killed: the other asked what would become of himself, he
answered, he would be killed with the rest: in effect, he describes the whole
Officers by their clothes that should be hurt: a pretty quick boy near by
asked him, what would become of the Major, meaning me, he answered, he would be
shot, but not deadly, and that the boy should be next unto me, when I were
hurt, as he was.

This discourse ended, I wished my Lieutenant Colonel to set all care aside
and to look to himself, and to the credit of his Nation, in maintaining of
the place, till the relief should come, and so we parted.

Here I did observe, that no city, be it never so strong, or so well beset, nor
no Armor, be it of what proof it will, is able to encourage a fearful
heart, as in this City, and at this time, were many of the Burgars, Soldiers,
strangers, Officers, of women and children, who were tormented by the fear of
death, and of their means, whose fear was generally so great, that they were
bereft both of wisdom, and courage, as people given over, so that their fear
in some sort did frustrate their lawful defenses: the like I did never see,
neither wish to see again, for the enemy could not, though victorious, put
them in a worse habit, nor make them seem more miserable,

Notwithstanding of this fear, which possessed the burgars, and those
Soldiers that had not been on occasion, yet our Nation, that are ever most
courageous in greatest extremity, failed nothing of their wonted valor, but
having once retired to the Ravelin, maintained it courageously, repelling the
enemies valor, with resolution built on virtue, and love of credit, so that
they made their enemy with great loss, to be frustrate of his hoped for
victory, finding the valor of the Scots tempered with constant resolution and
vigorous spirits, his fury was made to setle by little and little, till at
last, resolution, the strong Armor of the descreete Soldier prevailed against
all the shuffles and cries of the enemy, and the defender, seeing the storm
past, and the tempest cease, he laughes and smiles, with as much honor, quiet
and safety, as before he suffered toil, grief, or injury.

Here we see the use of treaty, and still-stand (or truce) ordained of Policy,
that every man may press to win his own aims. The Soldiers that in six
weeks before, were wounding, and killing one another, are now coming and
discoursing together as friends, where I did remarke and observe, that it is
much easier to be reconciled with an enemy, then to conquer him.

Now in time of these still-stands, by discourse they press to find out one
another actions, and to observe one another faults and excursions, treasuring
up against the day of advantage, for the confounding of one another, at their
first out-falling, and like the Crocodile, they slime one another way, to make
one another fall, coming in occasions again: and therefore it was the answer
that Seneca gave unto himself, when he asked Quid est homini inimicissimum? he
answered, Alter homo. Our enemies studies are the plots of our ruin, leaving
nothing unattempted, which may induce our damage, and the danger is ever most,
when we see it not. Yet I think, he that can be a worthy enemy, can,
reconciled, be a worthy friend; and he that, in a just cause, can fight against
us, Trailesound, in keeping their Masters love to the best, for their loyalty,
and in making their enemies think well of them, and love them for their brave
carriage and valor.

Likewise I did observe here the benefit that arises to a Kingdom, City or
State through a good Government; and what a blessing it was to a Town
perplexed, as this was, to get a good, wise, virtuous and valiant Governor, in
time of their greatest trouble, which shows that we are governed by a power
above us: for oftimes, that, which we desire or fear, does seldom happen.
This City having feared the Emperors tyranny to come over them, desired the
King of Denmark as their protector, yet God, by his providence, gave them
another, to wit, the invincible King of Sweden, who provided them an able
Governor in their greatest need, to wit, Sr. Alexander Lesly, who immediately
after his entry took the command upon him, keeping both the Dane, their
Soldiers, and the Burgars under his command, and direction, as worthy of his
authority, flowing from the King his Master of most famous and of never dying
memory, it faring then with Trailesound, as with Sara; Scots Governor to
protect them, whom they looked not for, which was a good Omen unto them, to get
a Governor of the Nation, that was never conquered, which made them the only
Town in Germany free, as yet, from the Imperial yoke, by the valor of our
Nation, that defended their City in their greatest danger.

To conclude then, for the love I bear to the Crown, that does protect them,
knowing their dispositions by experience to be froward, factious, and proud,
having as yet some Wolves amongst them, that the fold may be quiet, let the
factious heads be made higher by a pole than their bodies, cutting off the
tumultuous; whereby their Governor, by a majesticke awe, may keep the rest in
a strict subjection, lest slacknesse and connivence may undermine an unsettled
Government; for it is no cruelty to deny false men liberty, that are so
infected, though there be some honest men amongst them; let them serve their
Governor, and let him bear the sway, as becomes the dignity of the place,
that having once won the field, he may be sure to keep it: for though I hate
the evil people, for their former unthankfulness to our Soldiers and Nation,
yet the love I bear to their Protector and Governor, makes me thus plain;
whose happiness I wish to endure while there remains a stone in the City,
and his fame eternally.

The nineteenth Duty discharged of the out-fall made by Spynies Regiment, and
of their Retreat made good by Captain Mac-Kenyee.
THE treaty dissolved, the new supply being come out of Denmark, Sir
Alexander Leslie being made Governor, he resolved for the credit of his
Countrymen, to make an out-fall upon the Enemy, and desirous to confer the
credit on his own Nation alone, being his first Essay in that City. Spynies
Regiment, being their first service, to make the out-fall, ordaining Captain
Mac-Kenyee, with the remainder of our Regiment, in the Lieutenant Colonel his
absence, to second them, for making good of their retreat.

My Lord Spynie being present with his Regiment, consisting of brave and
valourous Officers, being all worthy Cavaliers of noble descent, and of good
families, having action, valor, and breeding answerable to their charges, they
were desirous to gain honor and credit against a powerful enemy, with whom
they were to be engaged; they went on with boldness and confident resolution,
and falling into the enemies works, they forced the enemy to retire, and to
give ground, even to the body of their Army: And delighting in the shedding of
their enemies blood, who had shed so much of their Country blood before, they
pursued them hard, following them unto their maine reserve or battle, where
they seized on their Cannon: but the enemy being too strong, and his forces
still augmenting, they were made to retire with the loss of some brave
Cavaliers, especially the loss of Sir John Hume of Aiton, the first Captain
of the Regiment, who, after many bloody wounds received, was taken prisoner,
being a brave resolute Cavalier, of good carriage and moderation in all his
actions, who after died of his wounds with the enemy, being a prisoner long,
and was much lamented of all that knew him.

Here also was killed the valourous Captain Mac-Donald, who in valor
succeeded his worthy predecessors; for with his own hands, as is credibly
reported, he killed with his sword five of his enemies, before he was killed
himself. Diverse also of these Officers were hurt, as Capt: Lundesey of
Bainsho, who received three dangerous wounds, Lieutenant Pringle, who was hurt
also, and diverse more, they being made to retire, their powder being spent, to
make their retreat good, falls up Captain Mac-Kenyee with the old Scottish
blades of our Regiment, to suppress the enemies fury, they keeping faces to
their enemies, while their Camerades were retiring, the service went on afresh,
where Lieutenant Seaton his Company alone led by Lieutenant Lumsdell (in
absence of their own Officers, being then all under cure) there was lost of
Seatons Company above thirty valourous Soldiers, and the Lieutenant seeing
Colonel Holke retiring, desired him to stay a little, Scots could stand and
fight or not. The Colonel perceiving him to jeere, shook his head, and went
away: in the end Captain Mac-Kenyee retired softly from his enemy, keeping
faces toward them with credit, till he was safe within works. And then made
ready for his march toward Wolgast, to find his Majesty of Denmark.

The nineteenth Observation.
HEre we see, that when his Majesty of Denmark did quit the protection of
Trailesound unto his Majesty of Sweden, Sir Alexander Lesly being made
Governor, following the example of Justinian the Emperor, to put his
authority in practice, He commanded out a party, and was obeyed by those he
commanded: which should encourage all brave Cavaliers to serve well and
faithfully, where they serve, without spot or blemish, that in the end they may
expect so great a reward, from so great a Master, as we see here bestowed for
valor and fidelity upon our Countryman, being trusted with such a charge on a
frontier Garrison, though a stranger, before his Majesty's own Countrymen;
where he again following the example of Alexander the Great, who caused a
Combat to be fought with one of Darius Captains, before the Army should
fight, and his Captain returning victorious, he (I say) took that as a good
presage of his future fortune, in beating of Darius his Armle. Tacitus says
also, that the Germans were wont to fight, and try their valor, first after
this manner, by parties, for presages of greater service to follow. And we
find, that the valourous General Scanderbegge, King of Epirus, did fight many
Combats himself, for to give good presages of future victories, whose fortune
was till his death to be ever victorious. The like fortune I heartily wish to
this noble and worthy Cavalier, happy already and blessed in bringing honor to
his Country, being in all his time, beyond apprehension, happily excellent.

To conclude then this observation, here we may see the been fit of good order,
where those that were in great danger, are happily preferved by the goodness
of good order and discipline, and by the timely succors of their valourous
Camerades, taking the enemies blows and shots in their own bosoms, to rescue
their friends from danger, to the great praise of that noble Spark, Captain
Mac-Kenyee, being full of worth, oriental Diamond, shining amongst the
greatest Stones, who did scorn to turn face from his enemies, but retired
orderly, offending his enemy in defending his friends, till both he and they
were returned with credit, though with loss: for where order is kept, as in
this retreat was done by that noble Spark, all things flourish and thrive,
and I wish from my heart, he had followed his profession; for though he be
honorable enough, as he ^s, none can blame me for wishing him better, he
having once commanded me, and shall still while I live.

The twentieth Duty discharged of the Regiments March to Wolgast, and of their
Retreat unto Denmark.
HIS Majesty of Denmark having given over the protection of Trailsound unto
the King of Sweden, immediately after he did ship some forces of foot and horse
in Denmark, which he did land at Wolgast in Pomeren, of intention to patronize
the Dukedom of Pomeren against the Emperor: And being come to Wolgast, his
Majesty did recall the remainder of our Regiment from Trailesound, who were
not then four hundred strong at their out-coming, having lost in six weeks
near five hundred good men, besides Officers; the Regiment led then by
Captain Mac-Kenyee, in the absence of his Superiors, he continued his March
toward Wolgast, where they joined with his Majesty's Army: being no sooner
arrived, they were instantly commanded on service. The enemy having fallen
strong against his Majesty, he did plant fourteen pieces of Ordnance, and
played on the Kings battle, till his Majesty perceiving the danger, not being
bastant to resist the enemy, retired confusedly in great haste to Wolgast; and
having lost without fighting the greatest part of his Army, our Regiment and
the remnant of Spynies Regiment had been cut off, Hoome and some of his
Camerades, of the Rhinegraves Regiment of horse charged the Enemy thrice,
keeping them up till the most part of his Countrymen were retired in safety,
and then were made by their enemies to retire at the spurs themselves, having
endangered their own safeties for the good of their Camerades. His Majesty
finding the enemy pressing hard, fearing much to be surprised or taken, he did
give Captain Mac-Kenyee charge to command the whole Scots that were there, and
diverse others, and to skirmish with the enemy before the Ports, till his
Majesty were retired, and then to make his retreat over the Bridge, and to
set it on fire, which the Captain did orderly obey, doing his Majesty the
best service was done him in the whole time of his wars, not without great
danger of the Captain and his followers, where the Bridge once burning, he was
then the happiest man that could first be shipped; Ensign Lindesey brother to
Bainsho was shot with a Cannon-Bullet in his shoulder, and notwithstanding was
brought off, and miraculously cured.

The Regiment thus shipped, they met with their Colonel, being come from
Scotland with the Recreut, who retired with his Majesty unto Denmark, and
were mustered.

The twentieth Observation.
IN defense of this Town of Trailesound, our Regiment did lose near five
hundred men, and of the remnant escaped, both of Officers and Soldiers, I do
not think one hundred were free of wounds received honorably, in defense of
the good cause. Who will then say, but that blood was better lost than kept,
when it returns with advantage, having brought eredit to themselves and
Country? Let none then mourn for the loss gotten so honorably. Let none
then, I say, bedew their eyes for them we left behind us, seeing the gain is
equal to the loss, if not more; for them we had, we knew were not always to
stay; yet what we have gained, is permanent and eternal; those we lost, I
confess, we loved, yet that love ought not to be so violent as to undo our
selves with wanting of it. Neither can we so slenderly forget their memory,
being our noble friends, and who were ornaments to our Regiment and Country,
and helpers of our credits. Shall we not then be sorrowful for their losses,
that lost themselves to make us renowned in their deaths, and, while they
lived, were our most faithful and loving Camerades, even unto their last
breath? But since they are gone before us, to take in quarters in heaven,
following their great Captain, who has made the way open for them, being
stricken, as Job says, by the hand of the Lord, and yet placed at his right
hand, shall we be sorry for them? No; we will rather rejoice, and think we
must follow them, when we have fought that good fight against our enemies, we
shall be crowned with them in glory, and rejoice following the Lamb where ever
he goes, and till then his right hand will sustain us, as before; for he is
our helper, and has sworn by his right hand, and the Arm of his strength,
that he will not forsake us, till we rest with him in glory.

Here also we see, that his Majesty having trusted our Nation more than his
own, or the Dutch, he does leave them engaged with the enemy, till his
Majesty's retreat were made sure, both first and last. Where we see,
Mac-Kenyee did here, being a generous act, for the safety of a King, which
ought to be recorded; to vindicate his honor from oblivion, whose memory
merits to be rewarded, that others might imitate his noble example.

Here also we see, that sufferance in a noble manner causes love, for that
young Cavalier Henry Lindesey, then an Ensign, not able to help himself, his
Camerades loving him dearly, and the more for his noble sufferance, they helped
him off from the cruelty of his enemies, to preserve his life for a better
occasion, who by Gods providence was miraculously healed, having lost a great
part of his shoulder, a wonder in an age, such wounds to be cured.

The twenty-one Duty discharged at Copemanhagen, where the Regiment was
completed again with the Recreut.
AS all things are preserved by a glorious order; so his Majesty after his
retreat, begins again to make up the body of an Army, to be settled all
Winter in quarters within Denmark, that against the Spring he might either
beat the enemy out of Holsten, or otherwise with his sword in his hand, make
an honorable peace: after which resolution taken, there was order sent to my
Colonel, to bring his Regiment to the fields, and to reform the weak
Companies, that have no Recreut brought over, and to strengthen the rest of the
Companies, till the Regiment was made complete.

Sir Patrick Mac-Gey having stayed in Scotland, his Company was cashiered, and
Captain Annans also, in place whereof the Colonel did get from his Majesty
two Companies, that were sent over by Colonel Sinclaire, (viz.) Captain
George Stewart, and Captain Francis Trafford, which were both joined to the
Regiment. The Lord of Fowls having leavied a Company in Scotland, joined also
to the Regiment, and John Sinclaire was made Captain Lieutenant to the
Colonels Company, Lieutenant Stewart being married, having stayed in Scotland
with his wife, his place was given to Eye Mac-Key, and William Brumfield was
made Ensign to Captain Mac-Kenyee. The Lieutenant Colonel having quit the
Regiment, I succeeded to his place, and his Lieutenant Andrew Stewart, the
Earl of Traquairs brother, succeeded Captain to the Company, Ensign Seaton
being made Lieutenant, the Captains brother William Stewart was made Ensign,
Tullough his Company was recreuted, and was full by his old Officers Beaton and
Johnson: John Monro his Company being recreuted, long David Monro was made
Lieutenant, and long William Stewart Ensign; Captain Monro of Obstell his
Company being complete, William Carre was made Lieutenant, and Hector Monro
Ensign. The Regiment thus complete was mustred, and received a months means,
together with a reckoning of their bypast rests, with an assignation on his
Majesty of great Britain, for the payment of the moneys.

The Regiment thus contented, the Colonel, Captain Monro of Obstell, and
Captain Mac-Key returning for Britain, the Regiment being left under my
command, was directed to winter Garrisons, as follows.

The Colonels Company commanded by John Sinclaire as Captain, John Ennis
Lieutenant, and William Mac-Kenyee Ensign, were quartered in Langland,
Captain Monro of Fowls his company was sent to lie in Feamer, Andrew Monro
being his Lieutenant, and John Rhode Ensign.

Captain Monro of Obstell his company was quartered there also, and the
foresaid Officers.

Captain John Monro his company and his Officers were also quartered there.

Captain Forbesse of Tullough his company and Officers were quartered in
Malline in Skoneland. Captain Mac-Kenyee his company and Officers foresaid,
were quartered with me in Malline in Skoneland. Captain George Stewart, Robert
Hume Lieutenant, and John Sanders Ensign, were quartered in Alzenburgh.

Captain Francis Trafford his company, being Welsh, with his Officers were
quartered in a Dorpe in Skoneland.

Captain Andrew Stewart his company and Officers were quartered in London in
Skoneland.

My company which was Lermonds, with the Officers did lie in Garrison in
Luckstad in Holsten.

The Officers that were reformed went to seek their employments ( viz.)
Captain Sanders Hay went to Sweden, and was made Major to Sir Patricke Ruthven
in Spruce.

Patricke Dumbarre was made Captain to a Company of Danes Soldiers. There
happened also a misfortune this Winter in Feamer, where Lieutenant Andrew
Monro, a valourous young Gentleman, was killed in Combat by a Dutch, called
Ranso, and Lieutenant William Mac-Key succeeded in his place, being made
Lieutenant to Fowls when William Gunne was preferred by me, as Ensign to the
Colonells Company: the rest of the Garrisons lay in quiet all Winter, during
which time his Majesty's Commissioners lay at Lubeck, treating for a peace with
the Emperor.

The twenty-one Observation.
IN the Firmament we see all things are preserved by a glorious order; the
Sun has his appointed circuit, the Moon her constant change, and every
planet and Star their proper course and place, the Earth also has her
unstirred stations, the Sea is confined in limits, and in his ebbing and
flowing dances, as it were, after the influence and aspect of the Moon,
whereby it is kept from putrefaction, and by struggling with it self, from over
flowing the land. So that in this world, order is the life of Kingdoms,
Honors, Arts: for by the excellency of it, all things flourish and thrive; and
therefore we see, that this order is requisite to be observed in nothing more
than in military discipline, being the life of it. Regiments then maintained in
good order, the Army can be but well ordered, and the Army well ordered, the
King and country cannot but stand, both in peace and war, for seldom we see
any goodness in the refusing to obey good orders. And we hear ordinarily,
that one bad voice puts twenty out of tune, and that it is the chief property
of a good Soldier, first to learn to obey well, in keeping of good order, and
then doubtless, in time being advanced, he cannot but command well, so that
here in ordering of this, as in all things, we see vicissitudes and
alterations, some Regiments made up and continue in flourishing order, other
Regiments reduced taking an end, as occasion and accidents of war do happen,
Spynies Regiment was reduced, and my Lord of Rhees Regiment is made up again.
Where we see, that as vicissitude maintains the world; even so concord is a
great means of continuance, as discord is too often of discontinuance, and
ruin. Likewise we see, that no estate is free from mutability, and change,
which is the great Lord of the World, who will be adored and followed as soon
as order does fail: but where order is kept,

My cozen Lieutenant Andrew Monro being killed in combat, I have more then
reason to condemn and disallow of that miserable sort of fight, where oftimes
the victorious puts himself in a worse case, both of soul and body, than he
that is killed. Yet this kind of fighting hand to hand, called Monomachia,
has bin much practiced, both amongst Pagans and Christians, even amongst all
Nations, as it is yet. Of old it did serve for proof of things hidden, being
in one rank with the burning iron, and scalding water, to the end men might
discern the innocent from the guilty: this kind of violence of proof was so
common, that Fronton King of Denmark made a law, as reports the Saxon history,
that all differences whatsoever should be decided by the combat, and Leoden
reports, that yet to this day they observe the same in Muscove. But wise men
finding this custom deceivable, in deciding the truth, and so uncertain, that
many times the innocent does succumbe; and therefore it was forbidden by the
civil, and canon law, as is evident by several ancient constitutions,
inserted in the Decretalls.

Notwithstanding whereof, amongst the Romans it became so common, as to be
thought but a sport; which made the name of fighters esteemed of amongst the
Romans, as we read in the Cod. Titulo de gladiatortbus, and therefore this
custom being displeasing unto the Emperor Justinian, he commanded all should
be subject unto the Judge, and said, that valor without justice, was not to be
allowed of. This combat betwixt those two was well fought of both, in presence
of many witnesses; where it was thought, that the Dutchman was hard, so that a
sword could neither pierce him, nor cut him. This fashion of fighting is so
common, that we need not illustrate it by examples of Histories, either
ancient or modern; but who so would satisfy their curiosity in this point,
let them but read Preasack his Cleander, a story well worth the reading. And
truly daily experience teaches us (as in this accident) that the end of
combats does show often that he, Quintus Curtius, where Dioxippus the Athenian,
that brave fighter being all naked, and smered over with oil, as the fashion
was then, with a hat of flowers on his head, carrying about his left Arm a red
sleeve, and in the right hand a great batton of hard green timber, durst enter
in combat against Horrat Macedonian carrying on his left Arm a bucler of
brass, and a short pike in the right hand, a jacdart-staffe as we term it, or
something like it, and a sword by his side: at their approaching, Dioxippus
with a nimble slight, and a pretty cunning shift of his body, eschewed the
stabbe or thrust of the staff, and before the Macedonian could have wielded
the Pike, the other does break it in two with his cudgel, and quickly closing
with his adversary gives him such a knock on the shinnes, that he fell to the
ground, his heels above his head, took his sword from him, and would have
killed him with his batton, had not the King saved him. Thus much of combats,
which for my part, though I cannot allow of, nevertheless I should be loath to
refuse to fight in a just quarrel, but would rather refer the success to
God, to determine of, then to let that be called in question, which is dearest
unto me.

The twenty-second Duty discharged being the last under his Majesty's service
of Denmark, of our expedition by water unto Holsten.
HIs Majesty being resolved in April 1629, with his sword in his hand to
conclude a settled and a sure peace with the Emperor; or otherwise to free
Holsten and Yewtland from the tyranny of the Imperial Army, and to that effect
his Majesty did gather his forces together to a head in Denmark, where they
were to be shipp't for landing at Angle in Holsten: so that orders were given
to me, his Majesty having provided shipping, to transport our Regiment from all
quarters, and to meet at Angle. Before our parting, Captain Forbesse of
Tullough, and Captain Andrew Stewarts Companies were put on war ships to lie
before Wismar, I having shipped with the rest of the Regiment, we sailed unto
Holsten, and landed at Angle: where the Regiment being come together, we were
one thousand four hundred strong besides Officers, and having lain at Angle
till the peace was concluded, his Majesty did thank off, or dismiss his Army,
save a few number that was kept a month longer, till the enemy had marched out
of the country: we being discharged of service, and having gotten our
honorable passes we were directed, by his Majesty to the Rex-marshall toward
Funeland, with orders from his Majesty, that he should reckon with us, and give
us contentment accordingly. The reckoning made, we were forced to accept of two
parts, and to discharge the whole, having made no reckoning but for us who were
present, leaving our Colonel being absent, to make his own reckoning
thereafter with his Majesty.

Likewise his Majesty did give orders to the Rex-marshall to provide shipping
and victual for our Officers and Soldiers, to transport them for their
country, which accordingly was obeyed. As also his Majesty did give orders to
ordain us, both Officers and Soldiers free quarters in Alzenheur, till the
ships were ready to sail. So that we being free from our honorable Master
his service, we were ready to embrace new conditions from a new Master.

The twenty-second and last Observation on our Danes service.
HEre concluding our Danes service, we see that the end of wars is peace, and
that the end of this peace was the beginning of greater war, under a new
Master. Happy therefore is that man, or that Regiment that can say, while as
they are thanked off, we have served truly and with credit our last Master;
and then they may be assured of a second Master, having won a good name, as
this Regiment did, under his Majesty of Denmark, in whom the least omission
could never be found, much less to have committed any gross error worthy
imputation: And therefore we were Graciously dismissed, and honestly rewarded
according to the time.

Captain Andrew Stewart (brother to the noble and worthy Earl of Traquaire)
being soliciting business at Copmanhagen contracted a fever and died there,

Likewise John Hampeseede, an old true servant to my cozen the Barron of
Fowls, he dying of a fever at Angle leager, was honorably buried there.

This Danes war thus ended, was the beginning of a greater war, as is said:
for the Emperor (in Summer 1629. The Danes peace being made in August 1629)
did send assistance of men unto the Pole, against his Majesty of Sweden, under
the command of the Felt-marshall Arnhem, which the next summer did bring the
sword of the Sweden against himself. So that we see there is nothing here on
earth to be expected by us, more then a continual warfare. Lord therefore make
us daily to war in that spiritual warfare, serving truly the King of Kings
and Lord of hosts, fighting that good fight against our spiritual enemies,
where he that overcomes, receives for a reward (instead of worldly glory) an
immortal Crown of Glory in the Heavens.

The Colonells Observation of the Kingdom of Denmark.
HAving had the honor to have dined with his Majesty at his Table, then in the
gorgeous, and pleasant Palace of Freddesborree, taking leave of his Majesty,
having kissed his hand, I retired to Alzenheur; where I began to think, that
this King could have said of his whole Kingdom, as Scipio said, you see not a
man amongst all those, but if I command him, he will from a Turret throw
himself into the Sea: even so this Magnanimous King, to my knowledge, was of
absolute authority in his Kingdom, as all Christian Kings ought to be in
theirs ever obeyed in the Lord, without asking the head a reason; Why do you
command us thus? For we read that the favor of the Lord was in Judah, in
giving them one heart in doing, and obeying the commandments of the King, and
of their Magistrates and Principalls, as I did clearly observe in this
Kingdom of Denmark the goodness of government, for the flourishing of the
Kingdom; where Totus orbis componebatur ad exemplum Regis. He commanding, they
obeyed; both lived in prosperity, the Ruler or King Heroic, wise, noble,
magnanimous and worthy.

The Gentry, Citizens and Communalty obedient, which made their joy and
felicity to continue, in despite of their mighty foes, and that by reason of
his Majesty's Government in military discipline, who does entertain a great
number of Officers yearly, having good allowance for commanding of Soldiers
trained up in peace, against war, such as Colonells, Lievetenant-Colonells,
Majors, Captains and other inferior Officers, which are still entertained at
the countries charge, in exercising of Soldiers for his Majesty's emploiment,
being alike ever ready in all Provinces for peace or war. Would to God we
were so well provided in our own country at home, and then we needed not to
fear any foreign enemy, that are enemies to God, to our King, and to our
Religion.

And for the better maintaining of war, no Kingdom or King I know, is better
provided of a Magazin, then this magnanimous King, for Arms, brass ordnance
(whereof every year his Majesty does cast above a hundred pieces) being
sufficiently provided of Ammunition and of all sorts of fiery Engines, to be
used by Sea or Land, together with Armor sufficient for to arm a great Army
of Horse. His Majesty is also sufficiently well provided of shipping, and
yearly does add to the number, which ships are built by two worthy
Scottish-men, called Mr. Balfoure, and Mr. Sinclaire, being both well accounted
off by his Majesty, who in like manner has a Reprobane at Copmanhagen, for
making of Cords and Cables for his shipping and Kingdom, where I was informed,
that in twenty four hours time, they were able to furnish the greatest ship
the King had, of Cables and of all other tackling and cordage, necessary to set
out the Ship.

Likewise by his Majesty's Artizens within the Kingdom, all sort of stuffes
and silks are woven, sufficient to serve the Kingdom, and his neighbors that
please to buy.

Moreover this Kingdom is worthy commendation, for the order of Justice and
Laws, having their Law Books deciding all controversies amongst them, and if
it come to any great difference, the Kings Majesty, as being above the Law,
sits in judgment as the Interpreter and Director of Justice, and according to
his Princely dignity, mitigates as pleases his Majesty the law, and decides
the controversy.

This Kingdom also is praiseworthy, for the purity of their Gentry, being as
ancient and noble, as any other Kingdom, and can brag of a puter and cleerer
blood of Gentility, then many Nations can: for they never ally or enter into
marriage with any inferior to themselves, be they never so rich, if they be
Burgars or Plebeians, they never marry with them; and if one of their daughters
will, through love, miscarry in her affection, to marry a Citizen, they will
not thereafter do so much as to honor her with their company, but on the
contrary, she loses both her portion and honor, not suffering her to carry
the arms of her family.

Moreover, this Nation is praiseworthy for their entertaining of learning, and
of the liberal Sciences professed in their own Universities, where their
children are well taught and trained up, after a noble and heroic manner,
within their own Kingdom, not only in their Studies of the liberal
Sciences, but also in their exercise of body, as fencing, dancing, singing,
playing of Instruments, and riding of horses, and what else are noble
Recreations, as learning of foreign languages, Spanish, Italian, French,
Dutch, and such like, and afterward their youth being well traveled,
returning from their Travells, they attend on the Chancellarie, as
under-Secretaries to Statesmen, to enable them to be profitable members in the
Commonweal. And being foris familiat, according to their gifts and qualities,
they are preferred to Government and charges under his Majesty, in all
Provinces of the Kingdom of Denmark, Tewtland, Holsten, and Norway.

His Majesty also is praiseworthy, for his Oeconomie in keeping of
Storehouses to feed Oxen, and stalles for keeping of milch Cowes, whereof is
received yearly great income of moneys, for Butter and Cheese made in great
quantity by Hollanders in Denmark, Holsten, and Yewtland: which parts abound
also with all sorts of Fish, which inricheth his Majesty's treasure infinitely,
together with their trading by Sea to the fishing in Greeneland, bringing great
commodity to the Subjects, in serving themselves, as also in bringing of money
into the Kingdom, by furnishing of others. Also this Land abounds in Corn,
which makes great cheapnesse in this Kingdom, where I have lived nobly
entertained with two servants for twelve shillings sterling a week, being a
whole winter in Garrison at Malemce in Skoneland. Where I did see and observe
the custom used by the Danes Gentry in their housekeeping, wherein they are
not prodigal, but yet very noble, not differing much from our own customs at
home, entertaining many persons attendant, but not with costly or dainty fare,
but abundant in meat and drink; obliging also they are in entertaining
strangers of fashion; they keep long Tables, at which there sit sometimes
above thirty persons: ordinary Tables they use besides, ordained for the
attendants of the family, who sit not till their Masters have half din 'd or
sup't: they keep also many horses, hounds and hawks, with attendance
answerable, which makes their families great.

Here I did observe, that the Subjects do follow the example of their King, in
their apparel, in their virtues, and Oeconomie, where I did see virtue to
have been alike habitual in King, Gentry, Citizens, and Country, being all in
their degrees extraordinary rich, not only in money, but also in Jewels and
plate; nothing inferior, in my judgment, to any neighbor Country. It was
observed in the Court of the Emperor Maximilian the second, a good Prince and
a virtuous, that many Lords and great Seignieurs not only clad themselves
according to the color he wore, but also had the same vessels and movables:
the greatest Ladies also followed the Empress; so that those kinds of
clothing that before were disdained and out of request, were then followed,
all being clad with skins and leather. The Emperor and the Empress not
disdaining to carry and wear them, the rest followed: the pearls and precious
stones did rise to the great price, that they are now at by the rich, that made
the price so high, that the poor could not attain unto them. To show this by
example, we read of Sabina Poppaea, to whom nothing was wanting, but shame and
honesty, being extremely beloved of Nero, had the color of her hair yellow,
like Amber, which Nero esteemed much of, in singing Verses made on her on the
Cittern: and from this came that the whole Damsels of Rome and Italy did like
best to have that color of hair in their Buskins, Bracelets and clothing,
and the Amber, which before was in no esteem, became very dear, seeing Nero
esteemed of it; which makes Pliny report, speaking of the Comoedians apparel,
that they carried so much Amber, that it was admirable to behold; which shows,
that the examples of great personages have great power, in matters of moment
and consequence, as it has in things of less importance.

For as Villeius Paterculus spoke of the Emperor Augustus, a good Prince
teaches his Subjects to do well, and as he is the greatest in estate, even so
he is the greatest in example, the people casting their eyes on their Prince,
sitting high, in sight of all, they delight narrowly to consider all he does
and says, and they look unto the most hidden things of his actions, as
through little holes: and therefore before all places, the Kings Court ought to
be holiest, and cleerest of all vices, and endued with most honesty, which
betimes will make the whole Kingdom conform. To confirm this, we read in
our own story a memorable example; how the King Iosina took pleasure and
delight to discourse much with Physicians and Chirurgians; in a short time the
Lords and Gentry did accommodate themselves to the Princes humor, that many
ages after, there was no noble family in Scotland, that was not expert and
well taught in dressing and healing the wounds of the body. A knowledge very
necessary for men of our profession, that oft-times are lost for want of good
cure. And we read, that King JAMES the fourth, following the laudable custom
of his Ancestors, was very expert in this kind, in healing of wounds. A noble
knowledge of so noble a Prince, and so great a Captain, as he was! And the
common Proverb is, that the little pretty dogs or puppies do any thing to
please their Mistresses; and we say, he smells of the pot he has licked. Here
then you see the power of good and bad examples.

To conclude then. Let us learn by the good examples aforesaid, to follow the
virtuous examples of our noble Master and King, not neglecting the service and
duty we owe to the King of Kings, since our lives here are but like bubbles of
the water, now seen, now vanished.

THE TABLE OF THE FIRST PART.
A. Page. Letter. THE Affronting man should be taught the way to his duty. 4 B.
Andrew and Ferwhar Monroes killed at Ouldenburg. 18 Q. No Armor is able to
resist fear. 30 B. The Ancients of old, before they fought, cansed to sound
their Trumpets and beat their Drums, and made their Soldiers cry hard, 70
Q. A sound Advise in distress is most comfortable to friend. 73 W. The
Appealer oftimes does receive the reward of his Temerity. 84 I. Andrew Monro
killed in combat. 84 I. B. Booty made by oppression never blesses the owner
long. 52 Z. That Blood is not to be accounted lost, which is shed for a noble
Master. 5 D. Bruntfield a valorous Officer hurt at Trailsound. 68 M. A Bemish
Captain being a valorous Cavalier, was killed resisting the storm at
Trailsound. 68 M. Boistrous words betoken not much courage. 70 P. C. Captain
Lermond received his deaths wound. 11 L. Captain Mackey and Captain Forbesse
of Tullough shot at Oldenburg. 18 Q. Captain Mack-donald having valorously
behaved himself, was slain at Trailsound. 78 C. Captain Mackenyee as a pure
spark amongst Diamonds did shine amongst Officers for his valor at
Trailesound. 79 E. Captain Boswell killed by Boores. 4 C. Captain Mackenyee
under God, was the instrument of his Majesty of Denmarks safety at Wolgast. 81
G. Change has no place to ruin, though well to alter where order and concord
is kept, as was in our Regiment. 83 H. Captain Andrew Stewart, brother to the
Earl of Traquare, died at Copmanhagen, and was buried there. 86 K. Captain
Monro his valor in clearing the passage. 18 Q. Citizens of Trailsound compared
to the Swordfish, having weapons but wanting hearts, and had quaking hands
without use. 76 and Colonel Mackey with his own division defends the Pass at
Oldenburg. 17 P. Colonel Mackey had his face spoiled with Gunpowder. 18 Q.
Colonel Frets a Leeflander was slain on our post at Trailsound. 69 N. Count
of Mongomery cruelly beaten by the Rascal Boores, being mistaken. 47 V. The
nature of the Common people, is to serve as slaves, or to strike like Tyrants.
40 X. A Caveat for making Booty. 32 E. Citizens of Trailsound forgetting
benefit, were more unthankefull then beasts. 66 L. Charlemaine his privilege
granted to those had served well. 72 T. A Cavalier ought patiently to attend
his preferment. 3 B. Continency in all things is most necessary for a Soldier.
25 X. Men ought patiently to undergo their Crosses, and not to despair, as
some did in Denmark. 86 and. He that thinks on deaths Casuality, ought
neither to be careless nor covetous. 86 V. Cowards may be compared to dogs,
that do bark more then bite. 70 P. The Cruelty was great the enemy used in
harming the dead and innocent. 40 K. D. It is a worthy and brave enterchange
when men attain unto eternal fame and glory after Death for a temporal
Death. 41 L. The strictness of Discipline is the conservation of an Army. 36
G. It were impossible to make Boores and Soldiers agree together without the
strictness of Military Discipline 62 F. It is never good in plenty, to
Disdain Soldiers, lest in adversity they may prove unusefull. 2 A. The
observance of Discipline is the maintaining of Kingdoms, Cities and
Commonwealths. 69 O. Dumbarre renowned in despite of envy. 13 L. It is the
Duty of valorous Commanders, to care for the burial of the slain though their
enemies. 25 Y. We are Drowned in the mud of vice and slothfulness, while we
want business, and have no foe to awe us. 46 T. E. An English Cavalier being
deadly wounded, retired bravely at Keel. 55 B. Ensigns six of Scots shot at
Ouldenburg. 18 Q. A rare Example of strength and courage in Ensign David
Monro. 21 S. Emulation of Superiors by example grows amongst inferiors. 37
H. The whole Officers were hurt except one Ensign Ihonston. 68 M. He that
wilfully continues an Enemy teaches his enemy to do him a mischief if he
can. 77 A. Though the Enemy be unworthy, reconcile with him to be freed of his
scandalous tongue. 77 A. The Enemy studies all the plots of our ruin, and the
danger is ever most that is least seen. 77 and. Experience teaches that
neither Fly, Be, nor Waspe can harm those that are healed of the sting of
Scorpions. 22 T. The best Exhortation a Leader can give Soldiers, is to show
himself valorous. 23 W. Enemies prove oftimes good pedagogues, setting both
death and judgment before us. 66 K. F. Fear does put us in a more horrid habit
then any enemy can do. 22 F. It is not good to Feel the ill of the sturdy
popular having once loosed the reine. 48 W. Friends that are trusty, the best
companions of danger. 14 M. To be a Follower of the popular sort is a vain
thing. 50 Y. The Foot is always more useful in wars and less chargable
then Horse. 23 W. Fortune having crossed his Majesty of Denmark in his wars
abroad brought the sword of his enemies within his own Kingdom. 29 A. G. The
Germans are commonly friends to the victorious et e contra. 16 O. Germans of
old did sing, going on service. 70 P. Those that thirst after Gold, let them
bring it valiantly from afar, to supply the poor at home, or to decore and
enrich their Country. 72 S. A man is glad to come off with credit being hurt,
as I was at Trailsound, where I thought to be slain. 75 Y. Ill Gotten gains
is far worse then losses with preserved honesty. 31 D. Gentlemen, three of my
Colonells Company slain at Trailsound, Gordon, Stewart, and Tullough. 68 M. H.
Honor compared to a chaste made. 31 D. Happy are those that travel in
well-doing, for when the pains are gone then do they enjoy the pleasure. 63
G. Hugh Murray, his brother being slain, would not carry him off till he had
been revenged, and then himself shot in the Eye, the Bullet came out at his
Nose. 23 V. Hector Monro being shot in one foot, would not retire till first he
emptied his Bandeliers, and being shot then through the other foot, was
carried off by others. 23 V. We ought never to glory too much in peace or
prosperity, as the Holsteners did, but rather to prevent the worst. 28 and.
The Highland Soldier his predictive Dream seen at Trailsound. 75 Z. I. A
just cause and a just deputation, is that which gives the mind security. And
he dies well that dies fighting for a just cause. 53 and. Justice the
strictest that is observed amongst Soldiers. 44 S. An Isles Gentleman being
deadly wounded, did swim with his Clothes and wounds to escape the fury of
his Enemies. 32 D. K. As foreign Kings make use of Cavaliers in their need, so
they ought with reason if not rewarded, make their retreat to their King and
Master, being disdained without respect. 25 X. Our Knowledge is of none effect
without assurance in God through Christ. 5 E. The King of Denmark deserved
praise for enterprising the war, though the success was not answerable. 30
B. The King of Denmark commended for his care. 32 E. The King of Denmark
contrary to fear through his valor did cast a kind of honor upon God
confiding in his care only. 35 F. The King of Denmark did establish his Throne
in despite of his Enemies. 35 F. Kings are but servants, though more splendid,
for the Commonwealth. 35 F. The Kings Majesty of Denmark commended. 43 O. The
King of Denmark did comfort his Officers after their loss sustained before
KEEL. 29 A. Kings are kept and guarded from eminent danger by the Lord. 29 A. A
King or a Prince that undertakes toil and travel in his body for the safety
of his people, is commendable. 59 D. L. Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Forbesse
dyed in Holstein. 1 A. A Leaders duty set down at large. 8 G. Lieutenant
Martin killed at Bisenburg-Skonce. 11 I. Lieutenant Hugh Rosse having lost his
leg, wished he had a wooden Leg. 17 P. Lieutenant Colonel Seaton shot at
Ouldenburg. 18 Q. A Lieutenant and thirteen Soldiers killed with one shot of
Cannon. 65 K. The Love of horses wonderful to their Masters. 30 C. Lieutenant
Colonel Seaton commended for keeping strict Discipline. 66 L. Lindesey of
Bainshow a valorous Cavalier, received three dangerous wounds at Trailsound. 78
C. Lieutenant Lumsdell in time of hot service desired Colonel Holk, being
retiring, to stay and to see if the Scots durst fight. 79 D. M. Major Dumbar
his custom commendable going on service. 40 L. The Majesty of a King ought
never to be denied by his subjects in things indifferent. 1 A. Major Wilson his
oversight in making his Accord lost his Colors. 12 K. The meanest things do
help against the Enemy, as the casting of sand and Bee-hives. 13 L. Murdo
Poulson killed at Ouldenburg by the Cannon. 18 Q. Mutiny should ever be
detestable in all estates, as amongst Soldiers. 48 W. The multitude tumultuous
has more changes than the deep Sea in a tempest has waves. 24 X. The
Makelesse, the Sweden Ship, by report, did carry two hundred pieces of
Ordnance. 56 C. No Menagrie comparable to that which spares the lives of men.
63 G. N. A Nation being enemies to vice, and glad in their poverty, they may
happily remain unconquered. 72 S. O. Officers are well rewarded when their
followers are well disciplined. 37 H. The opinion Subjects do conceive of
their Princes care in the conservation of his Kingdom moves them to obedience.
43 P. Officers by their noble carriage, and good example, do often encourage
their followers to well-doing. 55 B. Officers ought never out of ostentation to
make choice of a weak Post to defend, as Seaton did at Trailsound. 62 F.
Officers or Soldiers that prefer their safety before the relief of their
Camerades, may be justly called simple. 72 S. P. The Properties of a valiant
Soldier. 72 S. Poule Leaguer called the Flesh-Leaguer, where a great Oxe-hide
was sold for a Can of Beer. 15 N. The public State being ruined, he that
lives at ease for his particular, shall not escape from being ruined. 59 D.
Panick fear entering into Town, Strength, or Army, is most dangerous in the
night. 73 W. Our Piety toward God, and our reputation amongst men, are the two
things we ought to respect so long as we live. 75 Y. Pity never shines more
clearly, than when she is clad in steel. 53 Z. A Pigeon carrying a Letter
unto a beleaguered Town, taken and let loose. 71 Q. R. Resolution is the most
fortifying Armor a discreet man can wear. 3 B. A Roman Captain did tremble
being victorious. 16 N. Our Regiment was beholding to Duke Barnard of Wymar. 19
R. A Relief in time is the most comfortable thing can come to a Soldier in
time of hot service. 23 W. The Roman Empire too little for a possession for the
Prince Elector Palatine. 37 I. Ravishers were punished with the loss of life
and goods. 44 Q. Remedies to hinder men from vice. 44 R. Rutmaster Hoome and
his Camerades helped to make the Scots retreat safe at Volgast. 80 F. S. Scots
readiest of all Nations to take a true Alarm. 7 F. A Scots Suttler punished by
Bees for his long stay. 10 H. The Scots at Bisenberg resisted well the Storm.
11 I. Soldiers of all professions should look nearest to credit. 14 M.
Sinews are added to the virtuous mind by noble actions, and every one shall
smell of that he is busied in. 46 T. Scots Highland-men before Keel; in
necessity made use of their swimming, though wounded, in their Clothes. 55 B.
Scots and English in foreign war ever good seconds. 60 E. A Soldier at
Trailsound made a pretty reply to his Camerade being jeering. 65 I. A Story
notable of a Dragon and a Lion. 66 L. Sergeant Mackey and seven more killed in
one night at Trailsound, being all of our Regiment. 68 M. A Stratagem whereby
the Boores in Scotland made the English Horses to break loose. 70 Q. Seven
hundred and threescore Shot of Cannon in one day were shot upon Frankendore in
Trailsound. 71 R. Spiney's Regiment entered into Trailsound. 74 X. Soldiers
are in policy like to the Crocodile, for, to make one another to fall, they
slime the ways. 76 and. Sir Alexander Lesly being made Governor of
Trailsound, conferred the credit of the first out fall on Spiney's Regiment. 78
C. Sir John Hume of Ayton being pitifully wounded, was taken prisoner and dyed
with the Enemy. 78 C. A Servant that does endanger his own life for the
relief of his Master, testifies his true service, as Mackenyee did. 81 G.
Sufferance in a noble manner begets love, as Henry Lindesey dyed at Wolgast. 80
T. T. Treaty or Still-stand the use of it. 76 and. Trailsound became
flourishing by their hopes, having got Sir Alexander Lesly for their Governor.
77 B. V. Virtue and wisdom are the best guards of safety. 42 M. VV. The
Watch on the Elve surprised. 24 X. Wounds gotten with credit are the best
tokens of courage in a Soldier. 23 W. Women are forbidden to shed tears for
their children that dyed standing serving the Public. 26 Z. The wise man is
only the cunningest Fencer. 42 N. Watch in beleaguered places is the maine
point to be looked unto. 64 H. In Wars Summum Ins is found to be Summa
Injuria. 64 H. Walestein his pride was great when he caused to kill the hurt
Officers retired with slight wounds. 69 O. A worthy Enemy reconciled can be a
worthy Friend. 77 A. That man is wise that is kind to his Friend and sharp to
his Enemy, but he is wiser that can entertain his Friend in love and make his
Enemy like him. 77 A.

THE LIST OF THE SCOTTISH OFFICERS IN CHIEF (CALLED the Officers of the Field)
that served his Majesty of Sweden, Anno, 1632.
THE Marquess of Hamilton General of the British Army. Sir James Spence
General over Scots.

Sir Patrike Ruthven, Governor of Vlme, and since General.

Sir Alexander Lesly Governor over the Cities along the Baltique Coast, and
since Felt-marshall over the Army in Westphalia.

General Major James King, since Lieutenant General.

Sir David Drummond General Major and Governor of Statin in Pomeren.

Sir James Ramsey General Major had a Regiment of Scots, and since was
Governor of Hanaw.

Colonells that served then of Scots.
My Lord of Rhees Mackey Colonel to a Briggad of Scots.

Sir John Hephurne Colonel succeeded to command the Scottish Briggad, and
since was slain in France.

Sir John Ruthven Colonel to a Briggad of Dutch, and since General Major.

Sir James Lumsdell Colonel to a Regiment of Scots.

Alexander Ramsey Colonel and Governor of Creutzenach.

Robert Lesly Colonel to a Regiment of Scots.

Robert Monro Baron of Fowls Colonel of Horse and Foore over Dutch, and since
died of his wounds at Vlme.

John Monro of Obstell Colonel to a Regiment of Scots, and since slain on the
Rhine in the Weteraw.

Lodovicke Lesly Colonel to a Regiment of Scots, which was Sir John Hamiltons.

Robert Monro Colonel to a Regiment of Scots, which was my Lord of Rhees.

James Carre Colonel to a Regiment of Scots, and since General Major.

Sir Fredricke Hamilton Colonel to a Regiment of Scots and Irish.

The Master of Forbesse Colonel to a Regiment of Scots.

Alexander Hamilton Colonel to a Regiment of Scots.

The Earl of Crawford Lindesey Colonel to a Foot Regiment of Dutch, and
since slain.

William Baily Colonel to a Regiment of foot of Dutch.

Sir James Hamilton Colonel to a foot Regiment of Scots.

John Forbesse Colonel to a foot Regiment of Dutch, slain in France.

Hugh Hamilton Colonel to a foot Regiment of Dutch.

Sir William Ballentine Colonel to a foot Regiment of English.

Sir James Ramsey Colonel to a foot Regiment of English, and since died at
London.

Alaxander Forbesse called Finnesse Forbesse Colonel to a Regiment of Finnes.

Walter Leckey Colonel to foot.

The English Colonells served then.
Colonel Austin Colonel to an English Regiment served in Germany.

Sir John Cassells Colonel to a foot Regiment of English, English Colonells.
which was levied by Sir Thomas Conway; who was cast away on the coast of
Denmark with his Lieutenant Colonel George Stewart.

Sir George Fleetwood Colonel to a foot Regiment of English that served at
this time in Spruce.

Scots Colonells that served at this time in Sweden, Leefland and Spruce.
James Seaton Colonel to foot of Swedes.

Colonel Kinninmond Colonel to foot of Swedes, since dead.

Colonel Thomson Colonel to foot of Swedes, since dead.

Colonel Scot Cloonell to foot of Finnes, since dead.

William Cunninghame Colonel to foot of Scots, in Spruce.

Francis Ruthven Colonel to foot of Dutch, in Spruce.

Sir John Meldrum Colonel in Spruce to foot.

Lieutenant Colonells who served then, whereof since some have been advanced.
Thomas Hume of Carolside Lieutenant Colonel of Horse; since a Colonel in
France.

Lieutenant Colonel Douglas since a Colonel of Horse in Germany under the
Swede.

Henry Muschamp Lieutenant Colonel, since was a Colonel and was slain at
Nerling.

Alexander Lesly Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel to foot.

Alexander Cunninghame Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel to foot.

Lieutenant Colonel Vavazer, since a Colonel to foot.

William Gunne Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel to foot of Dutch.

John Lesly Lieutenant Colonel, since Colonel to foot of Scots.

Lieutenant Colonel Finnesse Forbesse, since a Colonel.

Alexander Forbesse called the Bald, Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel.

Robert Stewart Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel.

Hector Monro Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel, and being made Knight
Baronet died at Hamburg, and was buried at Buckstehood in the Oldland on the
Elve.

Sir George Douglas Lieutenant Colonel, Lieutenant Colonells.
since Ambassador for his Majesty of Great Britain, in Spruce, died in
Germany, and was transported and buried in Scotland.

George Lesly Lieutenant Colonel, since Colonel.

John Lindesey of Bainshow Lieutenant Colonel, since slain at Newbrandenburg.

Lieutenant Colonel Monypenny, Lieutenant Colonel to horse.

Alexander Lindesey Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in Bavier.

John Sinclaire Lieutenant Colonel, was slain at Newmarke.

William Stewart Lieutenant Colonel, succeeded to Sinclaire.

Henry Lindesey Lieutenant Colonel to Lesly the younger.

William Lindesey Lieutenant Colonel to Horse.

James Henderson Lieutenant Colonel to Foot.

Sir Arthur Forbesse Lieutenant Colonel to foot, was slain in combat near
Hamburg.

Robert Weere Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in Saxony.

John Lyell Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

James Dickson Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in the Paltz.

Sandelens Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in the Paltz.

William Borthwicke Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

Macdowgall Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in Schwabland.

James Hepburne Lieutenant Colonel, since slain in France.

Robert Hannan Lieutenant Colonel to foot, died in Alsas.

John Monro Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

Robert Lumsdell Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

William Herring Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

Sir James Cunninghame Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

William Spence Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

John Ennis Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

Poytaghee Forbesse Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

John Forbesse of Tullough Lieutenant Colonel, was slain at Nerling.

George Forbesse Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

Alexander Hay Lieutenant Colonel of Dragoniers.

David Leslie Lieutenant Colonel to Horse.

James Drummond Lieutenant Colonel to horse.

Kinninmond the elder Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

Kinninmond the younger Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

Francis Sinclaire Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

Gordon Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel to foot of Dutch under the
Crown of Sweden.

John Henderson Lieutenant Colonel, since a Colonel under the Emperor.

William Troop Lieutenant Colonel slain in the Paltz.

Potley Lieutenant Colonel to foot, under Sir George Fleetwood.

Arthur Mon-gorge Lieutenant Colonel to foot.

James Mongomry Lieutenant Colonel slain in combat.

Scots Majors.
Major Ruthven slain at Nerling.

Major Mill.

Major Cunninghame.

Major John Forbesse.

Major David King, slain at Nerling.

Major Bodwell slain at Wertzburg.

Major Mackenyee, since General adjutant under the Felt-marshall Lesly.

Major Sidserfe slain at Nerling.

Major David Monro.

Major William Falconer.

Major Francis Sinclaire

Major William Keith.

Major Sanderson.

Major William Bruntfield died of his wounds at Buckstehoode in the Oldland.

Diverse Captains and inferior Officers of the Nation followed the Army being
in charge, whom J omit out of this List.

MONRO HIS EXPEDITION JN GERMANY.
The first Part.
Months. Weeks. Days. Dutch Miles. TVesday the tenth of October 1626. from
Cromartie in Scotland to Lugstad on the selve by Sea, Days 5 300 We wintered
in Holstein in good Quarters, Months 6 From Lugstad on the Elve we marched to
the Weser stream above Bremen, Days 4 12 On the Weser stream we remained
weeks Ten. 10 The tenth of July 1627. we marched from the Weser to
Bucstihoode, Days 3 12 From the Oldland we crossed the Elve at Blanckenesse
and continued our Expedition to Beysenburg on the Elve in Mechlenburg, Days 3
10 At Beysenburg we rested Days five. 5 From Beysenburg to Rapin in the Mark
of Brandenburg we marched, Days 6 18 At Rapin we rested day, Eight. 8 From
Rapin we retired to the Isle of Poole on the Baltique Coast, having marchea
Days 6 28 At Poole Leaguer we rested five weeks. From Poole by water to
Heligenhoven, Days 2 40 From Heligenhoven we marched to Oldenburg, Day 1 3 At
Oldenburg we were days three. 3 From Oldenburg we retired in a night. 1 3 From
Heligenhoven on the Coast of Holsten to Flensborre by water, Days 2 40 From
Flensborre to Assens in Denmark by water, Days 5 50 Having arrived in
Funeland in Denmark we were quartered in Denmark till we went to Trailsound,
being Eight Months. 8 From Assens in Funeland we marched unto Lowland and
crossed the Palt twice being on the March, Days 5 14 Having arrived at Marbo
in Lowland, we quartered our Companies in Marbo, Rubie and in Nicoppen, where
we lay in good Quarters four Months. From Marbo we marched to Rubie in a Day.
1 4 We lay three days and nights in extremity of cold weather in open Boats
before Rubie, attending a fair wind, and in the end were forced to land and
march a Day back. 1 4 The sixth of April we marched to Rubie again in one
Day. 1 4 From Rubie we sailed to Feamer, and landed in a Day. 1 16 From Feamer
to Aikel-ford by water along the Coast of Holsten in one Day. 1 16 From
Aikel-ford again being shipped we sailed along the coast before Kyel in one
Day. 1 18 From Kyel we returned by water unto Grottenbrodde in Holsten, Days 2
34 At Grottenbrodde in Holsten we lay weeks three, where we did work and
complete a Royal Leaguer and a Fort within it. From Feamer to Rubie by water
we sailed back unto Lowland. 1 16 From Rubie to our Quarters in Marbo and
Nicoppen, where we lay weeks six in good Quarters. 1 4 From Lowland to
Alzenheur in Denmark we marched through Falster and Zealand, Days 4 18 From
Alzenheur we sailed unto Trailsound in Pomeren. 2 60 At Trailsound being
beleaguered we lay seven weeks, where we had great pains and sustained great
loss. From Trailsound we marched unto Wolgast, Days 2 6 At Wolgast we
remained days Ten. From Wolgast we sailed to Copmanhagen, Days 2 60 At
Copmanhagen in Denmark the Regiment was made complete again, and we were
quartered in good Quarters during Eight Months without any hostile Employment,
being treating for a peace. In April 22. we shipped at Malmee in Skonland in
Denmark, and sailed unto Holsten toward the Isle of Angle, in days 3 60 We
lay at Angle in Holsten till the Peace was concluded in the latter end of May
1629. that we were thanked of or dismissed by his Majesty of Denmark, and were
shipped again from Holsten to Alzenheur, being by water Days 3 60 Summa Miles
by water and land traveled under his Majesty of Denmark in three years. 898

MONRO HIS EXPEDITION IN GERMANY UNDER HIS MAJESTY OF SWEDEN, of blessed memory.
The second Part.
Time. Dutch Miles. IN June 1629. sent from Alzenheur to the Pillo into Spruce
first three Companies, and then three by water, Days 4 100 These six Companies
did lie a whole year in Garrison in Brounesberry in Spruce without hostile
Employment. The thirteenth of August 1630. shipped at the Pillo in Spruce, and
landed the eighteenth at Rougenvald in hinder Pomeren, being at Sea, Days 5 80
At Rougenvald we lay nine weeks in good quarters. From Rougenvald to Colberg
we marched, Days 2 7 From Colberg we marched to Shevelbeane in the Marck. 1 5
From Shevelbeane to Griffenberg in Pomeren, Days 1 5 From Griffenberg to
Primhausen we marched, Days 2 7 At Primhausen in extreme cold weather we lay
in the Fields three weeks. From Primhausen we marched to Statin, Days 2 9 At
Statin we lay Months two, getting weekly pay. From Statin we marched to new
Brandenburg, Days 3 10 At Brandenburg we rested after the in-taking of the
Town Days three. From Brandenburg we marched to Trepto and from thence to
Letz in Days 2 7 At Letz we rested three days, and then marched to Damaine. 1
1 At Damaine we lay days three before the Town was taken in, and marched to
Trepto, Days 2 5 At Trepto we lay three days, and from thence marched to
Malchen in Macklenburg, in Days 2 6 At Malchen we remained days eight, and
marched to Fridland in days 2 6 At Fridland we remained days eight, and
marched to Anclam in Days 2 6 From Anclam having layn there days four we
marched back to Fridland in Days 2 6 At Fridland we lay days six at our
back-comming, and then marched unto Swede, in Days 3 12 At Swede we rested
days eight, and then marched to Francfurt on the Oder, in Days 5 15 After the
in-taking of Francfurt we marched to Lantsberg on the Wart, and lay before it
days eight ere it was taken, in days 2 9 From Lantsberg we retired to
Francfurt back in Days 2 9 At Frankfurt we rested weeks five and then
marched to Berlein in the Mark Brandenburg, in Days 3 11 From Berlein we
marched to Spando, day 1 4 At Spando we rested days four, and marched then
to Spotsdam. 1 4 At Spotsdam we lay days ten, and retired to Spando back.
1 4 At Spando again we lay days ten, and then marched back to Berlein. 1 4
At Berlein we lay Days four, and then marched to Barno in Days 2 9 At Barno
we lay Days twelve, and then marched to old Brandenburg in Days 4 15 At old
Brandenburg we rested Days ten, and then marched to Rawtenaw in Days 2 5 From
Rawtenaw we marched to Tangermond on the Elve in Days 2 6 From Tangermond we
marched to Verben down the Elves side in Days 2 5 At Verben we lay in Leaguer
Weeks five, and then marched to Vyttenberg on the Elve in Days 6 22 At
Vittenberg in Saxon we lay days eight, and then crossing the Elve, marched to
Dieben in Days 2 5 At Dieben we lay Days three, and then marched to the place
of Battle called Gods-acre near Leipsigh, in days 2 5 From the place of
Battle, we marched to Leipsigh 1 2 At Leipsigh we lay Days three, and then
marched back to Hall in Days 2 5 At Hall we rested Days nine, and then we
marched to Ertfurt in Duringland Days 3 9 At Ertfurt we lay days eight, and
then marched to Smalka over the Walt in days 2 6 From Smalka to Mainigane in
Franconia, Day 1 3 From Mainigane to Millarstot Day 1 3 From Millarstot to
Nistot on the Sale in Franconia, Day 1 3. From Nistot to Hammelburg Day 1 3.
From Hammelburg to Gemund on the Maine Day. 1 3. From Gemund to Carlstot on the
Maine Day 1 2. From Carlstot to Vertzburg Day 1 2. From Vertzburg to Oxenford
on the Maine in a night 1 4. From Oxenford back to Vertzburg Day 1 4. At
Vertzburg we lay near five Weeks, and then marched down the Maine to
Procelden in Days 2 6. From Procelden we marched to Vertzhem Days 2 6. From
Vertzhem to Miltenburg Days 2 6. From Miltenburg to Sultzbach Day 1 4. From
Sultzbach to Steinhem Day 1 1. From Steinhem to Offenbach, before the Ports of
Frankfurt 1 1. From Offenbach the seventeenth of November we marched through
Francfurt unto Heghst Day 1 2. At Heghst we rested four days, and then
crossed the Maine and marched by Darmestot unto the Bergstros toward Oppenhem
Sconce Days 2 6. At Oppenhem before the Sconce was gotten in we lay in the
open fields in extremity of cold, and then crossed the Rhine and took in
Oppenhem Town and Castle, where we rested three Days. From Oppenhem we
marched to Mentz on the Rhine in days 2 5. Before Mentz we lay in extreme cold
weather four days in open fields, before we got it in, and then rested the
Army there for ten Weeks. From Mentz we marched near Frankfurt in day 1 4.
From Francfurt we marched to Asschaiffenbourg on the M^i^e in day 1 5. From
Asschaiffenbourg we marched unto Franconia toward Estenfeld in Day 1 4. From
Estenfeld we marched to Lor in Day 1 4. From Lor we marched to Gamund in Day 1
4. From Gamund we marched to Carlstot in day 1 2. From Carlstot we marched to
Tettelbach in Franconia in day 1 4. From Tettelbach we marched to Oxenford in
day 1 4. From Oxenford we marched to Vintzin in day 1 4. At Vintzin we rested
three days and then we marched to Volmarsdorffe in day 1 4. From Volmarsdorffe
to Furt on the Pegnets in day 1 4. From Furt to Schwabach Day 1 3. At Schwabach
we rested two days, and marched to Weysenburg days 2 6. From Weysenburg to
Nerling Days 2 6. From Nerling to Donavert Day 1 3. At Donavert we lay before
it was taken days two, and rested thereafter days three, and then crossed the
Leacke at Rhine in Day 1 2. From Rhine to Ausburg Day 1 5. From Ausburg to
Aichstad in Baviere Day 1 4. From Aichstad toward Engolstat Days 2 7. From
Engolstat to Gaisenfels Day 1 2. From Gaisenfels in Baviere to Morsburg Day. 1
4. At Morsburg we rested four days, and from thence to Landshude Day 1 3.
From Landshude to Freisin Day 1 4. From Freisin to Munchen Day 1 4. At Munchen
we lay three weeks, and then marched back to Donavert in days 4 15. From
Donavert back to Veysenburg Days 3 9. From Veysenburg to Furt on the Pegnets
Days 3 9. At Furt we lay days eight, and marched then to Lauffe 1 4. From
Lauffe to Harsburg in Day 1 4. From Harsburg in the upper Palatinate to Amberg
Days 2 7. From Amberg back to Harsburg days 2 7. At Harsburg we lay weeks
three, and then retired to Nurenburg in days. 2 6. At Nurenburg we lay in
Leaguer three Months till the succors was come, and then we braveerd the
Imperial Leaguer. From Nurenburg to Newstad days 2 5. From Newstad to Vintzen
days 2 6. From Vintzen to Dunkelspeill days 2 6. From Dunkelspeill to
Donavert days 3 9. From Donavert to Rhine on the Leake day 1 2. From Rhine to
Newburg on the Danube day 1 3. From Newburg to Rhine back day 1 3. From Rhine
to Ausburg day 1 5. From Ausburg to Aichstat days 2 6. From Aichstat to
Lantsberg days 2 7. From Lantsbers to Ausburg days 2 5. From Ausburg to Rhine
back again days 2 5. From Rhine again to Ausburg day 1 5. At Ausburg the
Army did lie after his Majesty's death, near three Months without any
hostile imploiment. From Ausburg to Vlme in February 1633 we marched days 3 9.
From Vlme to Memming we marched days 2 6. From Memming to the Pass at Kempten
days 2 7. From the Pass we marched back to Middelhem in Schwabland days 2
7. From Middelhem to Kauffebeyren we marched days 2 7. From Kauffbeyren to
Kempten we marched day 1 4. From Kempten back to Pibrach days 2 7. From
Pibrach to Munderkin on the Danube days 2 6. From Munderkin to Retlingam in
Vertenbergland in a night 1 5. From Retlingam to Eslengan day 1 4. From
Eslengan to Munderkin back days 2 6. From Munderkin to Pibrach back days 2
6. From Pibrach to Vlme on the Danube days 2 6. From Vlme to Donavert being
the end of the second part of the Expedition, which we marched in days 3 9
Summa Dutch Miles of the March made under his Majesty of Sweden and the Crown
in Germany in four years, extends to 779.

THE MANNER OF OUR ENGAGEMENT WITH HIS MAJESTY of SWEDEN, in Anno, 1629. And
of the Colonels Journey and mine unto Sweden in February, 1630.
Our Regiment thanked of by his Majesty of Denmark in May, 1629. my Colonel
being in England, I hearing his Majesty of Sweden (much engaged against the
Pole in Spruce) did stand in great need of a supply of Foot, thought then, it
was a fit time for me being out of service, to offer my service unto his
Majesty of Sweden, whereupon I did direct David Martins Auditor with my
letters, and warrant to his Majesty, to treat with his Majesty for a
Commission, and money for bringing unto his Matie a Regiment of Foot, over
which my old Colonel should command. His Majesty condescending to my desire,
dispatcheth my Commissioner back again with a Commission, and moneys to me in
the Colonels name; and in his absence I did direct as a beginning of the
Regiment, Fowls, Captain Monro, and my own Captain, being three Companies
of the Regiment unto Spruce, before the Colonels coming from England, and
after there were sent unto Spruce three Companies, (viz.) Major Synnots,
Captain Bullions, and Captain Lermond's Companies, which six for that year,
remained in Garrison in Brownesbery in Spruce; other six Companies of the old
Regiment, the Colonel directed from Holland to Sweden, in November 1629. where
they remained in Garrison till May, 1630. when they were sent into Dutchland,
commanded by the Colonel, whose Company was led by Captain Lieutenant Gunne,
Lieutenant Colonel Lindesey his Company was led by Lieutenant Pringle,
Captain Sinclaire, Captain Moncreife, Captain Ennis, and Captain Beaton,
made out the other six Companies of the Regiment: Captain George Stewart, and
Captain Francis Trafford, having quit their Companies for their better
preferment: Captain Monro of Fowls being advanced to be a Colonel of Foot,
his brother Hector Monro succeeded as Captain to his brothers Company, which
was under me in Spruce: thus far then may suffice, for the manner of our
Engagements.

My Colonel and I, having wintered both in Denmark, in February 1630. we
crossed the Sound and took our Journey unto Sweden through Skonland. In our way,
we were nobly and courteously entertained by the Governor of Warden Castle,
and from thence were mounted with the Governors best Horses, being convoyed by
his servants, till we entered in Gottenberge, where we rested two days, till
the Governor did provide us of Passes, guides and horses, toward his Majesty,
then at Stockholme in Sweden; where on our journey we did visit that worthy
Cavaliere, Colonel Alexander Hamilton, at his Worke-houses in Vrbowe, being
then employed in making of Cannon and fire-workes, for his Majesty of Sweden;
from whence the Colonel did convey us to his Quarter, where we were kindly
entertained and welcomed by him, and his Officers: From thence we continued
our Journey, and did visit Captain Sinclaire at his Quarter, where we were
well also entertained, having stayed with him on Easter Sunday, and from thence
we travailed to Stockholme, where we had first the honor of his Majesty's
presence and conference; after kissing of his Majesty's hand, we took our
lodgings where we stayed certain days, his Majesty being making preparation
for the transporting of his Majesty's Army unto Dutchland.

The first Sunday after our coming, his Majesty did invite the principal
Cavaliers that were in Town of our Nation, for to accompany his Majesty at a
Feast appointed in honor of the Order of the Garter, where, Thirteen
Cavaliers of our Nation did sit at his Majesty's table, and were Royally
entertained; This Feast past, his Majesty having ordered his Foot Army in the
Fields, after his new order of Discipline of Briggades, then first brought in
use, at which time his Majesty having showen unto my Colonel and his Officers,
the Order of his Majesty's discipline, in which Order, his Majesty commanded
to put my Colonels Regiment, which was presently obeyed, insomuch, that his
Majesty was so well pleased with the capacity of my Colonels Soldiers going so
orderly and readily to their Duties, that his Majesty did wish in open
presence of the Army, that all his Foot were so well disciplined as my Colonels
Regiment: for which, his Majesty would be content to be indebted of a huge
great sum of money, and having caused the Regiment march by toward their
Quarters, his Majesty did mightily and much praise the Regiment for their good
Order; saying, he hoped one day, to get good service of those men for his
moneys; shortly after this, his Majesty did Ship his Army for Germany, with
which, my Colonel and his Regiment went also: I having gotten his Majesty's
Patent over a free Squadron, of the Companies that were in Spruce, I was
directed to the Rex Chancellor there, with Orders from his Majesty to his
Excellence, to direct me and my Squadron with all diligence, after his Majesty
unto Dutchland; according to which, having arrived in Spruce, and delivered my
Commission to his Excellence; I was immediately directed to my Garrison to order
the Companies for a Muster, and being mustered, and paid of two months
means, there was Shipping provided for me and my Companies at the Pillo, in
August 1630. for transporting of us into Dutchland, according to his Majesty's
will and Orders given unto me to follow his Majesty, and our Ships being
victualed, we attended the wind.

THE SECOND PART, OF MONRO HIS EXPEDITION UNDER HIS Majesty of SWEDEN,
discharged in several Duties and Observations.
The first Duty discharged in the Swedens service of our Expedition by Water
from Pillo in Spruce unto the Coast of Pomerne at Rougenvalde.
THE twelfth of August, 1630. having received his Excellence Orders the Rex
Chancellor, for to Ship my Soldiers at the Pillo, and from thence to transport
them unto Dutchland, toward Wolgast in Pomerne, in obedience to the orders,
having divided the Companies at the Pillo, my own Company, Captain Hector
Monro's, and Captain Bullions Company, were put with my self in a Ship of his
Majesty's called the Lilly-Nichol; The other three Companies, ( viz.) Major
Senotts, Captain John Monro's and Lermonds, were put on another Ship of his
Majesty's, called the Hound, our Horses and Baggage being put on a small Skoote
or Boat, the wind favoring us, we being victualed for a week, we make sail
from the Pillo toward Pomerne, having calm weather for two days: The third
day with a strong wind, and a great tempest from the West, we were severed
from the Fleet, and our Ship striking a leake, we were driven unto Burnehollem
Road in Denmark, where the tempest being past, we go a shore, to victual
our ship anew: the wind favoring us, we weigh Anchor again, and setting
sail, we take our course to wards Wolgast, being near the Coast, the wind
contrary, we were not able to double our Course, and our ship being leake, we
durst not adventure far from land, and putting forty eight Soldiers to pumpe
continually by turns, they were not able to keep her dry, and being
overcharged with much water, though there blew a great wind after us, we made
but a slow Course, our resolution was, being turned back, and before the
wind, to make for Dantsick, as our best refuge: But keeping so near the land,
Dane, and a Scot, called Murdo Piper) thinking by swimming to gain the shore,
were both drowned, the Mariners setting out one Boat after another, were both
broken, and they being feeble fellows they lost courage; thus under the mercy
of the raging Seas and waves, going higher then the Mastes over the ship sides,
we patiently attended the Lords mercy with prayers, till One of the clock the
next day, during which time, I forced the Mariners and Soldiers, that could
best work, having cut the Masts, and the ends of the Cross yards, with Deals
and the Deckes of the ship to make a floate; being made, it was tied to the
ship within with Towes, hanging at it, which the waves could carry ashoare, the
floate thus ready, with strength of men was let down by the Ships side,
whereon four of the most courageous Soldiers did adventure to go, some
Boores a shore having got hold of the Towes, that were bound to the Floate,
with the help of the waves, draw the Float ashoare, and being drawn back to
the ship, we did continue in this manner ferrying out our soldiers, till at
last the most part were landed, who being landed sought along the Coast, and
finding a Boat, did bring it with Horses on a Wagon, whereof we made use in
landing the rest of our soldiers, whereof I remained the last; till I saw our
Arms landed. But our Ammunition and Baggage being lost, we were in a pitiful
fear, being near unto our Enemies, and above Twenty Dutch miles from his
Majesty's Army, being without fix Arms, and lacking Ammunition, we had
nothing to defend us, but Swords, and Pikes, and some wet Muskets, the enemy
being near, our resolution behoved to be short, where having learned of the
Boores, how near the Enemy was unto us, I suffered none to go from us, lest
we might be discovered to our enemies.

After advisement I sent Captain Bullion with a Guide, to the Captain of the
Castle of Rougenvalde, belonging to the Duke of Pomerne, offering if he would
furnish us some fix Muskets, with some dry Ammunition and Bullets, we would
cut off the Enemy that lay in the Town, and defend Town and Castle from the
enemy for his Majesty, till such time as his majesty might relieve us, the
proposition so pleased the Captain; that he gave way to my suite, and
withal, he, for fear of such suspicion, goes unto the Country, having sent
a Gentleman with Ammunition to me, to convey me a secret way unto the Castle,
where I should receive Fifty muskets, my Captain retiring to me, with the
Gentleman and Ammunition, I marched till I came safe to the Castle, and then
from the Castle falling on the Town, with commanded Musketeers, under the
command of Captain Bullion, I stayed my self with the reserve, my folks
entering the Town, the Enemy a loft drew to Arms: thus service begun; my
party being strongest, some of the enemy shot, the rest got quarters and
mercy, our Watch duly set, the Keys of the Town and Castle being delivered
unto me, my greatest care was then, how to put our selves in safety against our
Enemies, being at Colberge within seven miles of us, I begun to learn from
those on the Castle, what passes did lie betwixt us and Colberge, I was told of
a little River did lie two miles from us, which was not passable but at one
Bridge, where I went to Recognosce, and finding it was so, I caused them to
break off the Bridge, where I did appoint a company of Boores, with Arms, and
Horses by them to watch the pass, and if in case the enemy should pursue them,
they had Orders from me to defend the pass so long as they could, commanding
them also at the first sight of the Enemy to advertise me, whereby they might be
supplied, and I put on my Guard.

Being retired from the pass, immediately I did send a Boore on Horseback, in
the night, to acquaint his Majesty of Sweden (the Army then lying at Statine
twenty Dutch miles from us) with the manner of our hard landing, and of our
happy success after landing; as likewise, disiring to know his Majesty's will,
how I should behave my self in those Quarters, the Enemy being strong, and I
very weak, his Majesty returned for resolution unto me, that I should do my
best to fortify, and beset the passes, that were betwixt me and the Enemy, and
to keep good watch, and good order over the Soldiers, and not to suffer them
to wrong the Country people, whom I should press to keep for my Friends.

This Order being come, I begun with the Country Boores, first, to fortify the
Passages without me, and next to make Skonces and Redoubts without the Town,
as also to repair the Fortifications about the Castle, and in cleansing of the
Mote, that it might be deeper of water; the other parts also without me, I
brought under Contribution to his Majesty, by sending parties of Dragoniers
athwart the Country, in Hinder Pomerne, betwixt me and Dantsicke, being twenty
Dutch mile in length, which all in short time I did bring under contribution to
his Majesty. As also the Enemy having had a Magazin of Corn, at Rougenvalde,
and Stolpe, by our landing here, was made good for his Majesty's use and his
Army.

Being thus busied for a few days, another ship of the same Fleet, being long
beaten with the tempest at Sea, at last was forced for scarcety of victuals, to
Anchor on the same Coast, being four hundred men, of Colonel Fretz Rossa his
Regiment of Dutch, his Lieutenant Colonel called Tisme Howsne did come ashore,
entreating me to supply him with victuals, which I did. In the mean time he
asked my advice, if he might land his Soldiers there, I told him I had no
counsel to give him, seeing there was no necessity of his landing, and which
was more, his Orders were to land at another part, so that he had to advise
whether he should follow his Orders, or for second respects if he might
neglect his Orders, so that on all hasards he landed his people also, which
were quartered with me in the Town: Shortly after, he would conrest with me
for command, which bred a coldness betwixt us. Whereupon I again advertised
his Majesty of our difference, defiring his Majesty might dispose of the
Command; his Majesty offended with the other, did send an absolute warrant unto
me, to command him, and the whole Garrison at my pleasure, for the well of his
Majesty's service, during our being there, where we remained nine weeks,
fighting and skirmishing with the enemy, till Sir John Hepburne with his
Regiment was sent by his Excellence the Rex Chancellor from Spruce to relieve
us.

The First Observation.
HAving thus by the providence of God happily landed again on the fair,
fertile, and spacious Continent of Dutchland, with a handful of old
experimented Soldiers, able to endure all misery, toil, or travel, being
valourous to undertake any peril or danger, they were to be commanded upon,
being led by such a General as GUSTAVUS the Invincible, their new Master was:
(under whose command and conduct, as their supreme Leader, and me, as his
Majesty's and my Colonels inferior Officer, they marched from the Coast of
Pomerne, out of Rougenvalde, through Dutchland, unto the foot of the Alps in
Schawbland.)

This City of Rougenvalde in Pomerne, lies midway betwixt Dantsicke, and
Statine, being alike distant, twenty Dutch mile from both, and is a pleasant
seat, being one of the Duke of Pomerne his chief Residence, not distant above
one English mile from the Sea, it does abound in Corn, Fruit, and store,
Cattle, Horses of good breed, Fishponds, and Parkes for Dear, and pastorage,
whereof it has enough, where we were nobly entertained, and kindly welcomed
of the inhabitants, especially of the Captain and his civil Bedfellow, to
whom, under God, we were beholden for our fafeties, the Remembrance whereof we
ate bound never to forget.

Here, I did remarke as wonderful, that in the very moment when our ship did
break on ground, Sergeants Wife a shipboard, who without the help of any
women was delivered of a Boy, which all the time of the tempest she carefully
did preserve, and being come ashore, the next day, she marched near four
English mile, with that in her Arms, which was in her Belly the night before,
and was Christened the next Sunday after Sermon being the day of our
thankesgiving for our Deliverance, our Preacher Mr. Murdow Mac-kenyee a worthy
and Religious young man, having discharged his part that day, after with much
regrate did sever from us, and followed my Lord of Rhee our Colonel unto
Britain.

Being thus escaped from danger of sea, and from our enemies, I did keep the
Soldiers ever exercised in watching, in working, in parties against our
enemies, lest that resting from Hostile employment, they should become
seditious, immodest, and turbulent; and to this effect, when they were not
employed in parties against the enemies, I sent them by parties in the Country,
on Military execution, to bring the possessors under Contribution to his
Majesty, making them hate and renounce the Emperialists, whom formerly they
were forced to obey; so that by this means, the Country was brought into
subjection to the King, and my Soldiers were put under as good discipline and
command, as any served his Majesty; which discipline made their concinuance the
longer in the service: where it was rare to find one Regiment in an Army,
that did change so many Officers as they did in four years, as the
Observations on their duties will clear to the world, in despite of their
Enviers whatsoever. But I hope no worthy spirit or Hereicke mind will think
an evil thought of the virtuous.

We may see here, that in the greatest extremities, both Officers and Soldiers
have greatest need of Courage, and Resolution: For nothing should seem hard to
daring men, that are of courage, which never does beget, but the opinion and
censure of virtue. For we see at this time, that to dare was the beginning of
victory, being better to hazard to save our selves and others, then to be the
instrument to lose us all by flying, as some of our Officers advised me at our
landing, to march back to Dantsicke, which if we had, the enemy getting
intelligence, he could with ease overtake us, and cut us all off, as he did,
some years before, cut off in the same Country three Regiments of Dutch who
were going to serve his Majesty against the Pole.

Here also, I found by experience, that the steadfast, and invincible vigor of
the mind rising against crosses, does help much, especially where necessity
requires such resolution. For being in the greatest extremity of danger,
resolving with God, I thought as my safest course to bide Gods leisure, I sat
on the Gallerie of the ship, being assured it would be the last part, that
would remain together of the whole, and being so near land, I was never
dejected and cast down, nor did I doubt of our safe landing, seeing we had
victuals and were in hope, the storm would not continue, being in the midst
of August.

Here we may see by this Christian advertisement, that no part of our life is
exempted or freed from grief or sorrow: But on the contrary, Nurses, certain
beginnings of the evil to come, our misery growing as does our age; and we see
it true: for the godly; they sigh and groan under the burden of their
adversities, having no comfort they can enjoy, but out of the written word of
God, a fruit whereof the wicked has no part. Therefore they said well, who
said, that Philosophical precepts were not so powerful to heal the wounds of
the soul, as are those of the word of God.

Men of our profession ought ever to be well prepared, having death ever before
their Eyes, they ought to be the more familiar with God, that they might be
ever ready to embrace it, not caring a rush for it when it came, doing good
while they may. For now we flourish, in an instant we wither like Grass; now
we stand, presently we fall, our life carrying with it when we received it, the
seed of death, and that which did begin our life, does open the door to it, to
go away: For in our birth, our end did hang at our beginning; and, according
to the custom of that worthy Emperor, our actions should be ever before our
eyes, as if presently we were to appear in Judgment, before the Eternal our
God, and that cry should never depart out of our ears, cried unto Philip King
of Macedon, Philippe, memento mori, Philip remember, thou must die: For man
shall never behave himself as he ought in this World, except at all times he
have death before his eyes, thinking on the hour and moment of his departure
always, contemning the Exterior things of this World, giving himself unto
the inward cogitations, that do profit the soul and the life thereof,
rejoicing beyond all things in the Testimony of a good Conscience.

The second Duty, discharged of our march from Rougenvalde to Colberg, and
from thence to Shivel-beane, and of our service there.
SIr John Hepburne being sent with his Regiment (from Spruce) to relieve us, I
was ordained with my Folks to march before Colberge, where General Major
Kniphowsen did command in the Blockering thereof (which I did) and being come
there, a Poaste was assigned for us to watch at. In the mean time, the
General Major getting intelligence, that the enemies Army (lying at Gartts and
Griffinbawgen, on the Oder) had intention to relieve Colberge, and so being in
his march, he must needs pass by the Town and Castle, of Shevelbeane in the
Mark, being a pass distant but five miles from Colberge, he thought
expedient, to Recognosce the place, by sending of Colonel Hepburne thither,
with a Troop of Horsemen for his guard, and convoy; who having seen the
place, advised Kniphowsen to beset it with a Garrison, being of consequence to
hold up the Enemy, if he should march thereon with the Army, whereupon I was
made choice of, with my Folks to beset it, being sent for in the night to
break up, and to march thither in all haste; I had command to speak with
Kniphowsen in my going, for receiving further Orders.

The Companies marched by; I following my Orders desired to know what the
General Major had to command me, who gave me Orders in writing, I should march
thither, and in case the enemy should pursue me, I should fight to the last
man, and not to give over the Castle, though I should be forced to quit the
Town: Receiving Orders for some Ammunition, I took leave of Kniphowsen, and
continued my march to Shevelbean, then laid almost waste with Pestilence, the
Inhabitants being fled away, I had slight quarters for my Soldiers, which being
quartered, having visited the Town and Castle, I appointed the manner of our
Watch, and did beset the Poastes, from our Guards, which were kept both in the
Town and on the Castle, and then I sent Orders to the Boores of the
Graveshaft, to come in the next day, with Spades, Shovels and Axes, for to
repair the works, that were almost ruined, being a scurvie hole, for any
honest Cavalier to maintain his credit by.

Before my coming, two Troops of Bawtees Horsemen ( viz.) Major Roustene, and
Long-fretts, were quattered there, who getting intelligence the Army was to
march upon me, being Horsemen, quit the Garrison to our selves, and took them
to the Fields, to join with their Colonels Regiment, being near hand, so that
our Quarters thus enlarged, we were glad to be rid of their trouble, as they
were to eschew the Enemies coming, serving better in the Fields, then they
could do within Walls; The Horsemen gone, I was evil sped, for being put on
such a place with such orders, appointed to fight to the last man, where no
Cavalier with credit could hold out twenty four hours, being pursued by an
Army, except the Lord extraordinarily would show mercy: Nevertheless, getting
three days longer continuation before the enemies coming, we did work all of
us night and day, till we had Stacketed the Wall about, the height of a man
above the Parapet, having made a breast-worke of earth within the Walls round
about, with Traverses within, for clearing out the Enemy, if he had entered at
a breach; our Work ended, and our Ports Ranforced with Earth to resist the
force of Pittards; we see in the afternoon the Enemies squadrons of Foot and
Horse, about eight thousand strong, marching unto us, having Artillery
conform, we finding them marching within reach, I caused to salute them with
two small shot, wherewith a Rut-master, and a Lieutenant of horse were killed,
which made the rest march out of distance: The Army drawn up in Battle
without reach of our Canon, they sent a Trumpeter summoning us to a treaty, he
was answered; we had no such Orders, but we had Powder, and Ball at their
service. Whereupon they commanded a Captain with a hundred and fifty
musketeers toward the Port, directing proportionally to the rest of the
Ports: our soldiers in the beginning before the Ports killed of them above
thirty soldiers, and two Livetenants, I not being able to maintain the
Town, retired with my folk on the Castle: I being retired, the Burgers made
up, set open the Ports to the enemy, giving him entrance, who did bring in
his whole Artillery, and Ammunition to the market place, and then sent to me a
Drummer to see, if I would render up the Castle upon good conditions, then they
were in my power, but if not, I should have no quarters afterward.

They got their first Answer again, and then the service begins anew on both
sides, and they begun before night to plant their Batteries, within forty
pace of our walls, which I thought too near, but the night drawing on, we
resolved with fire works, to cause them remove their quarters, and their
Artillery.

Having thrown some fiery Granades on the houses, and seeing they wrought no
effect, I hired a stout soldier with a Pike to reach a firye Ball I had made
(upon the top of the next house that lay to the Castle) which in the end was
fired, so that the whole street did burn right along betwixt us, and the
enemy, who was then forced to retire, both his Cannon, and soldiers, and not
without great loss done unto him by our soldiers, by means of the firelight;
where other two Officers, and eighteen of their soldiers were killed.

The day clearing up, I fell out after with fourscore Musketeers, and took
thirteen Crabbats prisoners. The Army leaving us for that time they marched
forwards for the relief of Colberg, and I retired to the town to comfort the
Burgers, for their loss sustained by the fire, caused through necessity,
having no other means to escape our enemies fury.

I being retired to the Castle, and the enemy marching to Colberg, having made
up eighteen Dragoniers to march after the enemy for bringing me intelligence,
if his Majesty's forces from Statin were come betwixt the enemy and Colberg,
my party retiring shows, that the field Marshall Gustave Horn, and Colonel
Mackey, that commanded the commanded musketeers, were joined with Kniphousen,
Bawtish, and Sir John Hepburne; and were lying overnight, before a passage
betwixt the enemy, and Colberg.

The next morning being dark till nine aclock with a thick mist, the horsemen
charging one another, they came in confusion on both sides, being affrighted
alike, retired from each others with the loss of fourscore men on both sides:
The particulars whereof I will not set down, having not seen the service,
though I was within hearing of their Cannon and Muskets both.

Two horsemen of Bawtish Regiment, that had charged through the enemy came, and
reported to me openly, in presence of many soldiers, that the Swedens were all
beaten, I being offended at the manner of their report, I caused to imprison
both the horsemen, till I knew greater certainty, and calling my soldiers
together, I was prepared for the enemies return. But he passing by a mile from
us, I sent Dragoniers to cut off his passage, giving them charge to cut off the
Bridges, but his Dragoniers being there before mine, to be quit of their ill;
my Dragoniers returned again in safety, allowing passage to their enemies:
within few days after, having escaped this inconvenience, I was recalled from
thence, by his Majesty's order, to join with the Felt-marshall Horn, then at
Griffinberg, with a party of the Army, where before my departing, I took an
Attestation, from the Amptman of the Castle, of the good order and Discipline,
that was kept by us there; And being glad I was rid with credit of such a
place, I marched to Griffenberg to find the Felt-Marshall.

The second Observation.
THe foresight of a wise Commander availes much,

This Cavaliere Kniphowsen, though he was unfortunate, he had both the Theorie
and Practick befitting a Commander; whom once I did hear say, that one Ounce
of good Fortune was to be preferred before a Pound weight of Wit; which he
knew well by his own experience; and to my knowledge, though he was
unfortunate himself, yet Cavalieres under his command, could learn by him
much good order and discipline.

And though in his lifetime, he loved not our Countrymen; Nevertheless, for
the love I carried to his virtues, I would not omit to make mention of his
worth. No fear of danger, or death can be an excuse to a man, to serve the
Public in his calling.

Before I was commanded to enter this Town, the Infection was great; yet none
of us did forbear to converse with the Sick, though daily examples of
mortality were frequent amongst us; for on our Watches, we knew not the clean
from the foul; Nevertheless, it behoved us all to pass on our duties, as we
were commanded; and though I know no reason for it, fewer Soldiers dyed of the
infection than Burgers.

Yet one rare Spark, Andrew Monro, who being but Eighteen years of age,
though little of stature, no toil nor travel could overset him; and as he
was stout, so he was merry, and sociable without offense, such another was his
Cozen John Monro, Kilternies grandchild, who dyed of a burning Fever, being
alive without fear before his Enemy, and of a merry and quick disposition: I
made only mention of their names, because they lived virtuously, and dyed with
far more credit, then if they had dyed at home, where their names had never
bin recorded for their worth and virtues.

It is the duty of a Commander, to whom a Frontier Garrison is put in trust,
timely to foresee all wants, and defects about the place he is trusted with,
as to repair the works, to provide it with victuals, with powder, with Ball,
Match and Arms; for it were not good he had his materials to seek, when he
is resolved to begin his work.

Likewise his workmen, if they be not sufficiently furnished beforehand, he
will be forced to dismiss them, before his work be credibly ended: his
overseers must be also good and diligent, otherwise, there may be too many
crevises in their building, and he himself must give good example in
overseeing all, and in foreseeing of all inconveniences, not trusting unto
others, to discharge those duties, he is bound to discharge himself; and in
case of extremity of danger, he must ever be the first himself to look unto
it, and the last in coming from it, otherwise he can neither maintain the
place, nor his credit.

He must also be very modest, and secret, in not revealing the dangers he
fore-sees, but be amending of them, for fear to discourage others.

Likewise we see here, that it is alike with a Commander keeping a strength
sometimes, as it is with a body, whereof some members are infected with a
Canker, that to preserve the body they must resolve to lose a member, as it was
with us at this time, being forced to burn a part of the Town, to preserve
the rest and our selves; otherwise, all must have been lost.

But God favoring us by the wind, that obeys when he commands, and the
Element of the Fire also, supplying the defect we had of Water in our Graffe
(being but dry on that side) we were guarded with fire in stead of water, and
that bravely.

The Enemy being gone, we preserved the rest of the Town in quenshing the
fire.

Here also, we may see the benefit we reap, Denmark and the Emperor. For if
his Majesty of Denmark, had not built Luckstad on the Elve, he had hardly
recovered Holsten again; even so this Garrison being set here, gave time (by
the holding up of the Enemy) to his Majesty's Forces, that were come from
Statin, to be before the enemy at Colberge; for if they had fought better, I
had observed the more.

The third Duty discharged of our March to Prymhaussen near Stargard, and
from thence to Statin.
Being recalled from Shevelben we joined with the Felt-Marshall Horn, at
Griffinberg; taking our march toward Prymhaussen, a great Dorpe near
Stargard; his Majesty being then at Colnoe, drawing his Forces together, he
intended to try the Enemy before Winter, having met with the most part of his
Forces at Prymhaussen, the word was spread, his Majesty had dealt out winter
Quarters, to move the enemy to do the like, that they drawing to Quarters,
his Majesty's Army being together, they might take advantage of the Enemy
being settled in their Quarters.

We having stayed with the Felt-Marshall, Scotland, accompanied with Major
Monro, Captain Francis Sinclaire, Master Hugh Mowat, and Lieutenant Barrie;
they being gone, his Majesty commanded I should march to Statin, and join with
the Regiment, and to receive Orders from General Major Lesley, being
Commandant for the time; where, by the way at Colnoe, I did speak with his
Majesty, who told me, he was to prefer Captain Bullion, (being one of my
Captains then) to be General quarter Master to Horse; As also showed to me,
that he had employed my Colonel for new leavies, and therefore he had
recalled me to remain with the Regiment in his absence, recommending unto me
diligence, in keeping good Discipline, and in defending of the Posts, which
should be entrusted to our watching, seeing we were to watch on Here Tyvell
his Post: Thus his Majesty's admonitions received, I was dismissed, to
continue our march to Statin, where we being no sooner arrived, but General
Major Lesly appointed me my Quarters and Post to watch at.

The next day his Majesty directed Captain Dumaine to me, with an Order under
his Majesty's Hand and Seal to place him Captain over Bullion's Company. The
Order I reverently received, and appointed the Cavaliere the next day in the
afternoon to come to me, seeing the next morning I was to ride to his
Majesty, being loath his Majesty should diminish my privilege, having the
freedom by his Majesty's capitulation to place the Officers of the Regiment,
as they were vacant, and not his Majesty, having once disposed of that
privilege.

Being come to Colnoe, I moved Sir John Hepburne to accompany me toward his
Majesty to assist me; his Majesty asked whether I had placed the Captain, or
not; I answered, that finding it prejudicial to his Majesty's service, I had
resolved to acqu^int his Majesty first therewith, seeing the Cavaliere, though
otherwise sufficient, he lacked Language, to command the Company being Dutch,
his Majesty replied, he would soon learn so much Dutch, as to command a
Company; and thus said, his Majesty asked, on whom would I bestow the Company;
I answered, to a Cavaliere that deserved well of his Majesty, called David
Monro, then my Lieutenant: his Majesty turning to General Bannere, replied
disdainfully, what shall I think? He would place his own Cozen, and not obey
my Orders: whereupon I returned to place Captain Dumaine in obedience to his
Majesty's will, for that time.

Major John Monre gone for Britain with his Colonel, disposed his Company to
his Lieutenant William Stewart, who was younger Lieutenant, then David Monre,
yet once coming before him, he was still elder Captain, and consequently
nearest preferment, under that Regiment, through this change only.

Likewise, by the death of Major Synnot at Statin, Captain John Sinclaire,
being a worthy Cavaliere, was preferred to be Sergeant Major, and Synnots
Company was put by the Lieutenant, and disposed to Captain Semple: In like
manner Lieutenant Pringle, dying at Statin, Henry Lindesey was advanced to be
his brothers Lieutenant.

During this Harvest, 1630. the Pest raged so at Statin, that diverse brave
Soldiers of the Regiment, were buried there; Nevertheless, a great deal
fewer dyed of them, then either of Dutch, or Swedens, which was seen on our
march toward Brandenburg, being stronger then other Regiments, that at their
landing were twice stronger then we; for no extremity of Hunger, Pestilence,
or Sword could ever make one of them run away from their Colors.

The Colonel being gone for Leavies, Obstell to bring over a Regiment of Foot
for his Majesty's service, Major John Monre being preferred to be his
Lieutenant-Colonell, and Captain Ennis his Major, being gone for Scotland
after the in-taking of Brandenburg.

The Colonel gave another Commission for a Regiment of English to Sir Thomas
Conoway, to whom Captain George Stewart (a brave and a valorous Gentleman) was
preferred to be Lieutenant-Colonell, and Captain Mongorge Major; but the
misfortune happened, that in their over-going, both the Colonel and
Lieutenant-Colonell were cast away, being drowned on the Coast of Denmark, and
afterward, the Regiment having three lost Companies by Sea, the overplus were
commanded for a time, by the Major, which afterward were disposed by his
Majesty to Sir John Cassels to be made up again to a Regiment.

At this time, Colonel Lumsell having brought over also a Regiment of Scots,
Captain Robert Stewart came over his Lieutenant Colonel, having served at
first as Ensign and Lieutenant to Captain Macken-nyee under this Regiment,
and there after came again unto Spruce, Captain under Sir John Hamiltons
Regiment, in May 1629. And was preferred after the In-taking of Virtzberg,
having been before at the Battle of Lipsigh: during this time we lay at
Statin, his Majesty did take in both Garts, and Griffen-hagan, and after
retyring to Statin, did prepare for his march toward new Brandenburg.

The third Observation.
AS Vicissitude maintains the world; so all temporal things here below are
subject to Changes and alterations; for the world it self was never wholly
under one long; and in Commandment changes are most frequent, being caused
through the manifold accidents occuring in Wars, as by the frequency of our
mortalities, in the profession of Arms; And also by the several intentions of
men, according to their capacities and several wits, which tending some times
to good, sometimes to evil, and often to nothing, or to worse.

Likewise by example,

Here also we see, that sometimes it is easier speaking with Kings by their
inferiors, then to proud Generals, that although they bear the title, lack
the discretion, that should season their Commands. For we find often times many
of them do Command more through absolute authority, then through either love,
respect or reason to their Inferiors: and for my part, I had rather follow
with little means a Commander, who would respect me in reason for his love,
then to follow a proud General, for greediness of means, that taking the
snuff in his nose would affront me without reason; such Generals I did never
follow, neither will follow (though I should quit the wars) for my own
contentment.

We see often times, that the faults of the Inferiors are laid on the shoulders
of their Colonels, which should make Superiors to make the better choice of
their Officers, especially in eschewing those, as pestiferous, who are inclined
to factions, or given to sow sedition amongst Camerades, such are circumspectly
to be avoided by the sound judgment of the Colonel, desirous to live in
peace, with those who ought to be his friends, that he may be the more able to
offend his Enemies. When both love and fear are in the hearts of the
inferiors, then the Command is not burdensome, nor the obedience slavish; for
sometimes, as good obeys, as he that commands, the Title only with the
authority being laid aside.

Sundry Cavalieres, Denmark, we see in the beginning of this new War; for
having attained to a little experience under this Regiment, they are now like
the Eagles birds, that how soon they can but flee, they take Command on
themselves, and that most worthily, knowing, that it is ambition grounded upon
virtue, makes the meanest Soldier mount from the lowest centrie, to the top of
honor to be a General; as some of our worthy Countrymen have done under the
Crown of Sweden, to their eternal glory.

To conclude this Observation as I begun, seeing all things here are but
human, unstable, and but waves, and tossing, wherein there is nothing sure,
but that, which is tied to the Anchor of true Piety: fot our very life, brings
many things with it contrary to our expectation. Therefore, we ought not to
ask when, or where, but we should be ever mindful how we are prepared; for
they live ill, that think they shall live ever. Men will command, and be
commanded so that they may live, but not live so, as they are commanded to live
well.

The fourth Duty discharged of our March to New-Brandenburg, and of the
In-taking of it.
HIs Majesty after overcomming his Enemies at Garts, and Girffin-Hagan, having
retired to Statin, and made preparation for a happy new-yeares march in the
beginning of January, 1631. We brake up from Statin, taking our march toward
New-Brandenburg, the earth clad over with a great storm of Snow, being hard
frost, we carried along great Canons of Battery, and a number of small Canon,
being well provided of all things belonging to Artillery; our little Army
consisting then of eight Thousand Horse, and Foot, having left the rest of the
Army under Command of the Felt-Marshall Horn, before Landsberg in the Mark:
our march the first Night went no further, then beyond the pass of Lacknets,
where we quartered over night: breaking up the next morning, we continue our
march for three days toward Brandenburg, where there lay in Garrison as
Commandant, Colonel Marizane with Five hundred Horse, and twelve hundred Foot;
being as complete to look on, as you could wish.

His Majesty, being come by Three a clock in the afternoon, within shot of
Canon to the Town, drew us in Battle, and then divided out the Poasts, where
the Briggads should lie; commanded out the Horse watches, to lie without the
Foot, other Troops were also commanded forth for battering the Streets, and
the rest of the Horsemen, being directed to Quarters, The Foot battle
ordered, Drums beating, Colors advanced, and flying, every Briggad by
divisions marched to their Poastes, where being arrived, their Watches duly
set, the rest were settled in their Quarters, being Commanded, both Officers and
Soldiers, not to stir out of Quarters from their Arms, but to attend on
Orders.

In our by-going, being within distance of Cannon to the Town, we were saluted
with Cannon, Hagbuts of Crocke, and with Musket; where, within a short time,
we rendered unto them their exchange with the interest; the service continuing
so long, as they did (the night bringing silence over all, till day begun to
break again) and then at our Poast there lay before the Port, a little
Tri-Angle, with a Water-graffe about it, and a Drawbridge, we passing through
the Graffe, that was not deep, stormed the Tri-Angle, and made the Enemy
retire within the Town walls, who fearing a general storm, did presently
cause to beat a Drum, desiring a Parlee, which was granted; pledges delivered
hinc inde, the Treaty went on, and the Accord was made, and subscribed; they
should march out with bag and baggage, Horse and Foot, with full Arms, which
should have a Convoy to Hagelberg, and so accordingly they marched out; and
then his Majesty to refresh the Army, caused to make Quarters for the whole
Foot within the Town, where we lay two nights well entertained.

His Majesty having a greater enterprise in hand, he commanded out a Thousand
choice Musketeers toward Trepto, two miles from Brandenburg, and the enemy
being acquainted with their coming, he did retire to Dameine, the Leader of
the party leaving two Companies in Trepto, marched forwards with the party to
take in a Castle on a pass lying in his way, betwixt Trepto, and Dameine;
whereon were fifty commanded musketeers; who after a little defense made for
their credit, did capitulate for quarters, being afraid of the Armies coming,
they gave over both Castle and pass. His Majesty (leaving a few number of
commanded men in Brandenburg, with a Commissary, for ingathering of
Contribution, and Proviant for the Army) he did break up, and marched toward
a little Town, Dameine, called Letts: where in the Castle there lay above six
hundred men of the Imperialists, that might have foughten for good quarters;
but being careless of their Watch, our commanded Musketeers, having past the
Bridge, were suffered to enter within the Castle, before the Garrison could get
to their Arms, and being thus surprised, they got worse quarters, then if they
had fought.

The Soldiers and Officers that first entered, made good booty; and having got
gold chains and money in abundance, by reason the Emperialists had lain long
there, who though they gathered the whole money of the Country, yet they had
not the wit to transport it away, being silly simple Italians, and without
courage, the poorest Officers that ever I looked on, and unworthy the name of
Soldiers; for though they knew of our march, they suffered themselves
pitifully to be surprised.

The Fourth Observation.
NOtwithstanding of the extremity of cold, we see his Majesty's diligence,
neglecting no time, making use of Winter, as of Summer, being an expert
General, who in his judgment was nothing inferior to the greatest General
we read of, as do witness his valorous actions. He seeing at our coming to
Brandenburge, what advantage the ground yielded to the enemy, to have hindered
our coming unto it, As also perceiving what hurt the enemy was able to have
done us, before our down-lying (having known their strength, that were within,
both of horse and foot) if he had been a resolute, and a courageous
Commander, as he was not, he had tried our fore-troopes, before our coming
so near, which made his Majesty judge they would not hold out long.

Here at this time, a young Cavaliere desirous of honor, and greedy of good
instruction, could have learned from this King the way to command well; as
likewise with order to direct all things fitting, how to pursue any place or
strength he came before, as his Majesty did there, being the first part,
wherein I did observe his Majesty's dexterity in Command, discharging the
duties of several Officers, being but one man, he never doubted to put in
execution what he once commanded,

Such a General would I gladly serve; but such a General I shall hardly see;
whose custom was; to be the first and last in danger himself, gayning his
Officers love, in being the companion both of their labors and dangers; for
he knew well how his soldiers should be taught to behave themselves,
according to the circumstances both of time and place, before they were led to
fight, and being careful of their credits, he would not suffer their
weakness, or defects to be discerned, being ready to foresee all things,
which did belong to the health of his soldiers, and his own credit. He knew
also, the devices and Engines of his enemy, their Counsel, their Armies,
their art, their discipline: As also the nature and situation of the places
they commanded; so that he could not be neglective in any thing belonging to
his charge; and he understood well, that an Army being brickle like glass,
that sometimes a vain and idle brute was enough to ruin them; and to break
them, like the bricklest glass that is.

His Majesty's further diligence, after the intaking of Brandenburg we see, he
giving neither time, nor leisure to the nearest Garrisons that were at hand, to
resolve, what they had to do; for one strength was no sooner taken, but
incontinent, the commanded Musketeers, and horsemen, were presently closing up
the passages of the rest, before they could either retire, or send for supply;
And so being long, sleeping in a careless security, some of them were taken,
before they could be prepared for to fight, or to take about their ports or
bridges; so far were they out of use with hunting, and making good cheer,
that they were surprised, inter pocula: having regarded their bellies, more
then their credits.

Where I did see, the saying of the Prophet cleared, that says, Men do annoy
themselves, in gathering goods, and cannot tell who shall enjoy them; For I
think the Italians never minded, that the riches which they gathered in
Pomeren, should be suddenly transported from the Sun unto the Northern
cragges and cliffes of Sweden; being led by the Lion of the North, the
Invincible King of Sweden, of never dying memory.

The fifth Duty discharged of the Intaking of Dameine by Accord.
General Major Kniphowsen, being come with a supply of horse and foot to our
Army at Letts, and being joined with us, his Majesty did give him orders to
desire from the Colonells of all Regiments of foot and horse (according to a
Swedens custom used at such times) the List of their marching men, and of
their sick, the Lists being severally given; our Army did effective consist of
fifteen thousand men, of foot and horse, able to fight.

The next morning every Regiment of foot, according to custom, was commanded
to have a competent number of Cannon baskets ready made, to be transported the
next day on Wagons before Dameine, which we were to beleaguer; Therefore this
preparation was made before hand for the Batteries, the wood being scarce and
far from thence.

The fourteenth of February, we did break up, horse and foot, and marched
toward Dameine from Letts, our horsemen were directed to lie without us, on
both sides of the Town alike, so that the Town could get no supply, without
they would first beat our horsemen, and next our foot; His Majesty remaining
with the Infantry, as his choice, we encamped on a hill, and about it within
Cannon shot of the Town, being our best Quarters in the extremity of the
cold, without house or shelter to defend us from the wind.

At our first drawing up in battle, Robert Rosse, one of our Regiment, was
killed with the Cannon, being blowing of Tobacco before the Regiment; died
instantly, and was transported to Letts, where he was honorably buried in the
Church, whose last words were worth the noteing, saying, Lord receive my Soul.

His Majesty having first disposed of the Horsemen, in giving them their
directions, the foot was standing in battle, under the mercy of the Cannon,
behind this hill for two hours, while his Majesty was in viewing and
recognoscing both Town and Castle: which done, the Guards were commanded forth
to their several Posts, to the Artillery, and to his Majesty's baggage, then
his Majesty directed General Major Kniphowsen, and his Forces, with the
thousand commanded Musketeers, to take in the passage that went to the Castle,
on which service was commanded Here Tivell his Lieutenant Colonel, called
(...) who commanded the party; under whom was, with the commanded men of our
Regiment, Lieutenant George Heatly, the service beginning hot on both sides,
striving for the pass, the Lieutenant Colonel was killed. At which time
Lieutenant Heatly being shot, notwithstanding, behaved himself valourously,
being the first with his Musketeers that cleared the pass from the enemy, in
making them give ground, he possessed the mill on the other side of the pass,
till the rest of the commanded Musketeers did follow the enemy to the Castle;
where Kniphowsen with his Forces did advance, the pass being free.

His Majesty having given Orders where the Batteries should be made, giving
General Banier charge to attend the Army, as it begun to grow dark, his
Majesty accompanied by Colonel Tivell, went to appoint the place where the
approaches should begin, where the Guards should be kept that were to guard
the workmen, in case of an out-fall: where presently both the Guards, and the
men that should work, were commanded forth, with sufficient Officers to
oversee them. Likewise there were men commanded from every Regiment
proportionably, for making the Batteries, and a strong Guard was appointed to
guard the Cannon against an out-fall; others were commanded from every
Regiment, to make more Cannon Baskets, and the Furiers, with Convoyes, were
ordained to return to Letts, for bringing of Proviant to every Regiment.

This all orderly done, he that had meat in his Knapsacke, being free of
duty, could invite his Camerade to supper, and make merry till he were
commanded on duty himself, where diverse did eat that were not sick on the
morrow.

The enemy perceiving the next morning the Guards by the approaches, saluted
them with Cannon and Musket, and were saluted again, though not so kindly as
friends do one another. The service continued the whole day, his Majesty often
visiting the Castle, being hardest pressed, as of most consequence; for the
Castle once won, the Town could not hold out.

Upon the Castle were seven Companies of Colonel Holks Regiment,

The next morning Captain Beaton of our Regiment, having the guard in the
Trenches, the enemy falling out strong, the Dutch retired and gave ground,
while our folk maintained their Poast valiantly in sight of his Majesty, who
commanded General Bannier with some Musketeers of Here-Tyvells Regiment and
ours (led on by Major Potley an English Cavalier of good worth) to second the
Guards, and to beat back the enemy in plain champagne, General Bannier
advanced, the enemy playing hard with cannon on them, Notwithstanding whereof,
entering the skirmish, the enemy was beat back not without great loss on
both sides, where I cannot but commend Bannier his carriage, being in sight of
his King, as his Majesty did commend our Nation for their good behavior and
charity: for a Captain of Banniers Regiment being left for dead on the field,
his countrymen for fear, refusing to bring him off, he was voluntarily brought
off by our countrymen, to their great praise, who after disdaining his
Camerades and thanking our countrymen, he died of pain and agony before night.

After this show made of courage, by the besieged, they being discouraged,
desired a Parle, where Major Greeneland an English Cavalier then serving the
Emperor, was sent out to make the accord with his Majesty, pledges delivered
by both, the accord agreed on was subscribed; where it was concluded, the
Governor should march out with flying Colors, and Arms, and with two pieces
of Ordinance, with b^g and baggage, and a convoy to the next Imperial
Garrison, providing the Governor should leave behind him all cannon, being
threescore pieces of Brass, all store of Ammunition and victual, and all spare
Arms, and to march forth precisely the next day by twelve of the clock.

But had the Governor the Duke of Savellie bin so valorous,

The enemy thus marched away, and his Majesty having beset the Garrison,
heareing General Tylly with a strong Army had taken resolution to visit his
Majesty in Maclenburgh, he stood not long on advisement, but out of hand
disposed of his Army courageously, wisely, and circumspectly, as the event did
witness his Majesty's good command an resolution: Damaine, beset with Swedens,
General Bannier was ordained to stay there, for to command the Garrison, and
to keep correspondence with his Majesty's, and with others in case of Tyllies
coming: General Major Kniphowsen was sent with his own Regiment, and six
companies of my Lord of Rhees commanded by his Lieutenant Colonel Bainsh^w to
lie at new Brandenburg, Major Sinclair with two companies was ordained to lie
at Triptowe, the Grave Fonottenburg with his Majesty's Regiment of horse, and
my squadron of Foot was appointed to lie at Malchene, his Majesty himself
with the rest of the Army were to lie at Pooswell, being the pass unto
Pomeren, and to the Oder, Felt-marshall Horn being recalled with his forces
from Landsberg, was ordained to lie at Freedland: all having their instructions
and orders in writ, which they durst not pass one jot, to the end, that where
ever Tyllies Army would settle, the rest of our Army from the several
Garrisons, should come together to relieve the party besieged, if his Majesty
thought fitting. So leaving Damaine, having lost three hundred men before it,
our march houlds out, according to our several orders and instructions.

The fifth Observation.
ALL things were achieved unto here, by the goodness of a glorious order,
being seconded with skillful and valorous Officers and Soldiers, obedient even
unto death, every one by revolution keeping his certain time and turn, and
that with strictness, each being greedy of their own honor and advancement,
under this noble King and General who liked of no wicked Soldier, living out
of compass and rule; such as were birds of the Devils hatching, all such were
banished from this Army, that was led by Pious and religious Gustavus of never
dying memory; who could not abide any that would profaine Gods ordinance, or
that refused to give obedience to good orders.

Here at Letts, before our rising to Dameine, I could not but pity, though an
enemy, the Italian Governor, that commanded in Letts, who suffered himself,
the place, and his followers to be surprised, knowing of the Armies approach:
for we see by his example, that goods evil conquest with great pains, are
soon lost, going away with wings swifter then the wind; whereof Histories are
full of examples, Hugolene Gerrardesque Depise, as records, Paulus Aemilius in
the eighth book of the French story. This Hugolene being a Commander for the
Pope over the Guelfes, having chased a part of the Gibelins that were with the
Emperor, terrifying the rest, he became so greatly renowned amongst his own
folk, that he commanded what he pleased, and was made Lord and Governor of a
City (as this Italian was here) being accounted noble, rich, magnificent, and
learned, he was married, having good issue, he abounded in all riches, more
then he could desire or wish, being counted happy, and at his case according to
his own mind, and the opinion of his friends; he made a feast on his birth
day, and having assembled his friends; being merry he fell in commendation of
his own worth and honor, extolling himself above the Clouds so far, that
he begun to ask of one of his nearest friends, if he thought he lacked any
thing to make him happy: the other considering the uncertainty of worldly
affairs, and the deceitful vanities thereof that perish in a moment, when the
Lord pleases but to breath, said; certainly the wrath of God cannot be far
from this thy great prosperity. Incontinent the Forces of the Gibelins beginning
to stir, unexpected come about the lodging, break in through the Ports kill
his children, and take himself, who begging life being refused, was miserably
murdered, and all his goods taken by the enemy in Italy, in the year 1288. to
teach all mortal men not to glory too much in uncertain riches, that come but
slowly and go away swiftly.

Those men that are meanly risen, may justly be checked here, that when they
have attained unto wealth, Hugolene. Nevertheless some fantastic Officers,
that cannot govern themselves nor their wealth, they will hunt and hawke, with
trains on Princes bounds (as I have known some do being abroad) thinking
themselves equal to Princes, whereof they were far short, and they will have
their silver plate, their gold, their silver, their Jewels, their Coaches,
their horses, their trains, and Officers of household counterfeiting greatness
and great men, having, it may be, but little worth besides, suffering
themselves in their Pomp to be surprised, their goods taken from them, and
then to be cast in a close dungeon or prison, till they die for want, the
reward of their pride; whereas it had been better, they had lived with greater
sobriety and modesty, and then if misfortune should happen unto them, they
would be the more respected, and consequently the sooner set at liberty.

I have read of Cavaliers that served long and truly with credit, whose minds
were not set on outward things perishable; but rather their hunting was after a
good name, renown and credit to leave behind them, when all other things
might be stripped from them; which in my opinion were more to be commended then
those that would counterfeit worth being without it. But on the contrary, I
have known some Cavaliers, that hunted after credit, did gain much renown,
and were rich in credit, though poor otherwise, leaving no more household
stuff behind them, but a spit and a pot, being so given to sobriety in their
life times, that sometimes they were contented with a morsel of dry bread from
a soldier. Not that I would have any Cavalier, that has merited well,

Here also by the example of a worthy Master and Leader,

His Majesty walking alone on a marrish that was frozen, of intention with a
prospective glass, to spy into the enemies works, the Ice breaking his
Majesty falls up to the middle in water, being near my Guarde, where Captain
Dumaine did command, who seeing his Majesty fall in went toward him, of
intention to help him out, which his Majesty perceiving, lest the enemy might
take notice of them both, his Majesty wagged his hand that the Captain might
retire, which the enemy perceiving, shot above a thousand shot of Musket at his
Majesty, who at last wrought himself loose, coming off without hurt, and sat a
while by our guardefire.

The Captain being a bold spoken gentleman, well bred, and of good language,
begun very familiarly to find fault with his Majesty, for his forwardness in
hazarding his Majesty's person in such unnecessary dangers; on whom, at that
time, the eyes of all Europe were fixed, expecting their freedom and reliefes
(from the tyranny of their enemies) to come from his Majesty, and in case any
misfortune or sinister accident (as God forbid) should happen unto his Majesty,
what then would become of his Majesty's confederates, and which was worst, what
would become of many brave Cavaliers of fortune, who had no further hopes then
to live, and to be maintained under his Majesty their Leader?

His Majesty having heard the Captain, patiently thanked him for his good
counsel, and he could not but confess his own fault, which he could not well
help, seeing his mind was so, that he thought nothing well done which he did
not himself, and so went to dinner, where before he changed his wet clothes,
in a could Tent, he called for meat, and dined grossly, and taking a great
draught of wine went and changed his clothes, and immediately coming forth
again, while as the enemy had fallen out, as was said before in the discharge.

The time of this out-fall, our Soldiers being commanded under Major Potley to
beat back the enemy, going on service, there happened a merry Accident to one
of our Countrymen (then Ensign to my Colonells Company) called James Lyle,
being in sight of his Majesty, going down a a steep hill, the enemy playing
hard with Cannon, the Ensign happened to fall forwards, the wind blowing off
his Periwigge, which tumbled down the hill, the Major swear a great oath, the
poor Cavaliers head was shot from him, and seeing him rise again without his
false head, swear the Cannon had shot away the skin, with the hair of his
head being bald.

His Majesty at this time also seeing a Dutch Captains cloak about him going
on service, commanded to recall him, and to command out another, which was a
disgrace to the Captain, whom his Majesty openly reproved, saying, If he had
intention to have fought well, he would have felt no cold, and consequently the
carrying of his Cloak was needless.

In this mean time his Majesty looking on, from the enemies Battery a Cannon
Bullet came so near his Majesty, though he was really stout, he was made to
stoop, and behind his Majesty, the thigh was shot from a Swedens Captain,
belonging to the Artillery, who died the same night.

Here I cannot let pass an oversight unworthily committed by General Major
Kniphowsen, Swedens, having got command from his Majesty to let no Officer nor
Soldier come within the Town, till the enemy was marched out; Kniphowsen
pressing in was put back by the Captain that commanded: Whereupon Kniphowsen
not knowing what direction the Captain had, or from whom, he lifting a
Battoun, brake it on the Captains head, which was evil thought of by his
Majesty and the whole Officers of the Army. Nevertheless, we never heard of
the Reparation: so that I would never wish my noble friend to lie under an
affront, though done by any foreign King, for if I could not be revenged, I
would serve against him to be revenged, if not of him, yet at lest of his, for
which I crave pardon, having spoken rather like a Soldier than a Divine, for
nothing should divert my heart sooner from my Superior, than disdain or
contempt.

The sixth Duty discharged of the Intaking of Brandenburg, and of Mayor John
Sinclaire his escape out of Trepto.
General Major Kniphowsen with his Regiment and six Companies of my Lord of
Rhees Regiment, commanded then by Lieverenant Colonel Lindesey, were appointed
to lie in new Brandenburg: when as the enemy lay down before Brandenburg, I
was recalled from Malchene with my squadron to join with Feltmarshall Horn at
Freedland, being commanded to leave a Captain with a hundred Musketeers
behind me of commanded men to beset Malchene: at this time also Major
Sinclaire with his own Company, and Captain Semples, were commanded to beset
Trepto, which lay but two miles from Brandenburg; his Majesty with the rest of
the Army, being at Posewall, Tilly with his Army being engaged in the
beleaguering of Brandenburg, consisting then of twenty-two thousand foot and
horse, having twenty-six pieces of Ordnance, with all furniture answerable, he
beleaguered Brandenburg, thinking his Majesty being so near, might be moved
to engage his Army with disadvantage to relieve it: But his Majesty being more
wise, and having had a greater design in his head, he suffered Tilly to try
his Fortune against a place of no such importance, as to engage a King and a
Crown, a Country and an Army, in relieving of it; and his Majesty relying
much on the wisdom, discretion, and valor of General Major Kniphowsen, as
that of himself he was sufficiently able to make an honorable Accord, when
better could not be. And in the mean time, to divert the enemy from him, his
Majesty did make a Carracole with the half of his Army toward Swede on the
River of the Oder, where he built a ship-bridge over the River, and caused to
fortify it with Skonces, that in his option he might come and go on both
sides of the River, till Feltmarshall Horn might join with him.

General Tilly hearing the King was marched, Brandenburg so much the harder,
with continual shooting of Cannon till a Breach was made, and then out of time
Kniphowsen did send his Lieutenant Colonel with a Drummer to the breach, to
desire a Parle, but being neglected by the enemy, as too late. The Parle
refused, Lieveteuant Colonel was killed, the enemy having given Orders for a
general storm, which going on, Lieutenant Colonel Lindesey and Captain
Moncreiffe were both killed, and Lieutenant Keith and Ensign Haddon, were
also cut down in the fury, with many a brave Soldier besides, who being
denied Quarters, fought valiantly to the last man.

The other Scots Officers of the Regiment, being within the Town, as Captain
Ennis, Captain Gunne, Captain Beaton, and Captain Lermond, with their
Officers and Soldiers, were for the most part, taken prisoners, with
Lieutenant Lyell, and some other inferior Officers, Captain Ennis being on
another Poast without the Port, which was not stormed at all, the enemy having
entered on the other side of the Town, where in the fury they did put the most
part to the sword, and coming through the Town Port, upon Ennis his Poast
behind him, he and Lieutenant Lumsdell did leap into the Graffe, and saved
themselves through a marrish from the fury of their enemies, and came to us to
Freedland. Brandenburg thus taken in, a party was sent toward Trepto, where
Sinclaire did command, getting orders to take it in also. But Sinclaire did
behave himself valiantly in falling out upon the enemy, who retired again
without great hurt, and maintained the Town for two nights, till he had
received Orders from the Feltmarshall to quit it in the night. And after that
he did join with us at Freedland.

The Feltmarshall knowing that Brandenburg being taken, the enemies Forces
woudl march upon him, and he having Orders and instructions in writing from his
Majesty, he retired with his Army over the pass toward Ancklam, the enemy
advanced to Freedland, finding us to be gone, they retired in haste back to
Brandenburg, and from thence they march back again to Rapine, suspecting his
Majesty had marched before them toward Magdeburg: Tillies Army being marched,
we retired to Freedland, Greame, with some Dragoniers, was sent to Brandenburg
to take Order for the hurt and sick, whom General Tilly had left behind him,
which were plondered, and some others killed by the Ensign and his Soldiers,
who had also run the same hazard by the enemy his Crabatts, had they not
retired in time; after whose return, my Musketeers being come from Malchene,
we were ready to march.

The sixth Observation.
THE cruelty and inhumanitie used here by Tillies Army, giving so ill
quarters to our Nation, to Burgers, and to those that served at the Altar, was
not long unpunished, at such places, as they least expected.

And General Major Kniphowsen was not void of blame, Kniphowsen had embraced
Tillies offer when he might, our worthy Camerades had not suffered as they did,
which sufferance after that made Cavaliers being freed out of prison, to seek
Conditions elsewhere for their advancements, such as Captain Enuis, being
first made Major to Colonel Monro of Obstell, was afterward Lieutenant
Colonel to the Master of Forbesse, after the death of that worthy Cavalier Sir
Arthur Forbesse. Likewise Captain William Gunne, being come out of prison, was
after advanced by Sir Patrick Ruthven, General Major and Governor of Ol^^, to
be his Lieutenant Colonel over the Dutch in Schwabeland.

Captain Beaton was made Major, and afterward Lieutenant Colonel to young
Colonel Skeutte.

Captain Lermond also was advanced to be Captain of Dragoniers, and James
Lyel, having served long under Sir John Ruthven his Regiment, the Regiment
reduced, and the Captain leavying again for the French service, was
pitifully murdered by knaves in Westphalia.

Henry Lindesey advanced to be Captain of his Majesty's Leeffe Regiment under
Grave Neles, Alexander Lesly the younger: Captain Brumfield was made Major to
Colonel Gunne, and after that Regiment was reduced, being under Sir John
Ruthven, was pitifully hurt in Combat, and then resolutely died of his wounds
at Buckstechood, being much lamented by all that knew him, for as valourous and
expert an Officer, as any of his quality was under our Army: so that we see
here, that though the Regiment suffered great loss at Brandenburg,
nevertheless the valiant Officers were advanced according to their former good
carriage.

Likewise I cannot with silence here pass by the valourous carriage of Major
John Sinclaire at Trepto, in making a fair show of a bad game, while as the
enemy came before Trepto with a party of a thousand Musketeers, he not having
a hundred Musketeers within the Town in all, nevertheless fell out with
fifty amongst a thousand, and skirmished bravely and orderly with the enemy,
and retired again with credit, making the enemy think that he was a great
deal stronger within walls. I confess as it was well ventured, so the
Cavalier was beholden to Fortune, in coming so safely back. But I will not
advise my friend to make use of the like; for if the enemy had happily got a
prisoner of his, who could have showed his true strength, that might have
caused the loss of all. But the Cavalier did hazard fair to gain credit: for
as he was valourous in Conduct, and amongst others, even so being fingled out,
he feared no man, as you shall see in the subsequent observations before we end
our march.

Here also I did observe the difference betwixt the King our Master and old
Tilly; where I did see his Majesty, though younger, out-shoote the elder in
experience, who by winning of a Dorpe (which was afterward slighted) with the
loss of two thousand men, over and above the toil sustained by his Army, and
the loss of some cannon, he lost Francford on the Oder, where three thousand
were put to the sword, in requital of his cruelty used at Brandenburg.

The seventh Duty discharged of our march to Swede, and of our reformation
there, being made into Briggades.
Tillies Army being marched back to Rapine, the Felt-marshall with his Army
did break up from Freedland with Horse, Foot, and Artillery toward Swede to
join with his Majesty, continuing our march for three days to the pass at
Lecknetts, where we rested two days, sundry Officers having taken Forloffes of
his Excellence to go unto Statine, to provide themselves of clothes and
necessaries, expecting for a long march, where I went also to see my wife and
Family; and having stayed but one night, our march continued so far in
prosecuting our victories, that the enemy coming betwixt me and home, I was not
suffered in three years time to return, so long as his Majesty lived, which
was much to my prejudice.

Being arrived at Swede on the Oder, and joined with his Majesty's Army,
Briggades both horse and foot, where Sr. John Hepburne being made Colonel of
the Briggad, his Regiment, Colonel Lumsdells, Stargates and ours, made up the
Briggad, where Lumsdell and I had the Battle, Colonel Hepburne his Regiment
made up the right wing, and Colonel Stargates the left, which on our march was
changed by turns, and thereafter was still called the Scots Briggad commanded
by Hepburne. Sundry other Briggads were made up, as the yellow or leeffe
Briggad, commanded by the Baron Tyvell, the blew Briggad, commanded by Colonel
Winckle, and the white Briggad called Dametts, where having lien some few
days, we were preparing for our march toward Francford on the Oder.

The seventh Observation.
General Tilly was no sooner marched with his Army, but incontinent, the
Felt-marshall did follow his example, to join with his Majesty. Where we may
see, that these two wise Generals did soar in the skies with their Armies,
casting boards like war ships, to get advantage one of another.

We see here that Cavaliers, Dutch wars, was deprived for two years, from
the sweet society of his Queen; which should teach women, and men of meaner
quality, after their examples, to be patient in absence; for more love was
never betwixt two, than was betwixt his Majesty and his Queen, no love could
go beyond their love each to others, except the love of Christ, God and man,
toward man. For the love of this Queen, to her husband the King, did equal
the love of the wife of Hieron, whom we read of in Plutarch his Apophthegmes
for her rare continence and respect carried to her husband, she never felt the
breath of another kiss, but her husbands. Which in my opinion, this Queen of
Sweden could well for her love to her husband have done, if it were possible,
as is reported by Plinius of Arria, wife to Cecinna Paetus, who being condemned
to die, with liberty to choose the form of his death, his wife going to visit
him, did exhort him to die valiantly with great courage, and taking good night
of her husband, she struck herself with a knife in the body, and drawing out
the knife again presented it to Paetus her husband, with these words, Valnus
quod seci Paete, non dolet, sed quod tu facies: as one would say, the wound I
gave my self hurts me not, but the wound which you shall give grieves me. We
read also of Portia, Cate his daughter, and wife to Brutus, who hearing of her
husbands death, in despite of all that were about her, filled her mouth with
hot burning coals, and was suffocated for grief. We read also a memorable
story of the wives of the Menyans, recorded by Plutarch in his fourth book of
Illustrious women, their husbands being in prison and condemned to death, for
having enterprized against the King of Sparta the Lacedemonian custom being to
execute their malefactors in the night, these noble women, under pretense to
speak with their husbands, being appointed to die, got license of the Guards
to go within the prison, and having put themselves in place of their husbands,
whom they made to put on their Cownes, taught them to cover their faces with
vailes, as being extremely sorry, carrying their heads downward, they escaped
out of their hands.

Having inferred this discourse on a Queen, yet wife to the best Soldier in
our days, lest Soldiers wives should be worse thought of than others, having
seen more love, more indurance, better obedience, and by appearance more
chastity in them to their husbands, we read written by Barnard Scardeon in his
third book of Padua, that Blanch Rubea of Padua, being retired with her
Baptist de la Port, within the fortress of Bassean, pertaining to the
Venetians: Acctolen banished out of Padua with all his forces, assailed the
said place, being valorously defended, it was impossible to get it, but by
Treason; Baptist not losing courage, though surprised, running unto the Port
with his Arms in his hand, but suppressed by the multitude of his enemies
having gotten entry, he was killed by the hand of Acciolen; his wife Blanch did
fight valiantly in the conflict, being armed with steel and with courage,
far beyond her sex. The enemy being victorious, she was taken perforce, and
brought before the Tyrant, who being ravished with her beauty, at first making
much of her, then desires to ravish and bereave her of her honor, she
defending her self by words and prayers of entreaty escaped his hands, and
finding the window open skips down, where she was found sore hurt, and half
dead, but by the diligence of good Chirurgians, she was made whole as before,
and was solicited by the Tyrant again, which she refusing to yield unto, being
bound was forced by the Tyrant, she keeping her grief within herself, gets
liberty to go see the dead body of her husband Baptist; and pretending to do
some ceremonies about his Corpse, and having opened the Grave, she crying,
streached herself in the Grave, and violently with her hands pulls the stone
that covered the grave over her, and her head being bruised, she died presently
above her husband: in the year 1253.

The Ancient Germans did marry their wives, Cornelius Tacitus reports, one
husband married but one wife, being but one body and one life. And Theogene the
wife of Agathocles said, she was companion of his troubles and adversity, as
she was of his prosperity: and being in love my self with the virtue of such
women, rare to be found, I will yet enrich this observation with a notable
example, that happened in the year 1466 betwixt Bonne, Lumbard or Greeson, and
Peter Br^nore of ^arme, as the Italian story records, which I here represent in
favor of virtuous women, to encourage that sex more and more to the like
virtue, being so pleasant where ever it is found to be seen. Bonne borne in
the Woalkie of Talhine, in the country of Greeson, in which place Peter Brunore
Parmesan one day walking alone, a brave Cavalier, and a Knight well
experimented in wars, leading his Army, in passing by he sees this young
Damsel feeding her sheep in the fields, being little of stature, of brown
color, not pleasant, or fair to see to, but very merry, playing then with her
fellows; wherein she showed a certain quickness of spirit, that the Knight
Brunore looking on her attentively, observing all her gestures, and hoping of
some great good of her, caused to take her, and lead her away with him against
her will; that in time being accustomed with him, he made her diverse times
change clothes, and clad her at last like a boy, by way of pleasure and
recreation of spirit, leading her often a hunting, and using her to ride, and
spur horses, and other exercises, wherein she showed her quickness and
dexterity; and though the Cavalier did keep her but for pleasure, recreation,
and pastime; nevertheless, she did set her self to serve him with a love and
diligence incredible, in such sort, that willingly she could endure all manner
of labor, trouble or toil of body or of mind, that Brunore could not
undergo, and went ever with him, as with her Master, in all his journies,
assisting him in all dangers, following him on foot, and on horseback,
through dales and mountains, by water and by land, with an entire and
faithful obedience, without over-leaving of him, or without grudging in any
sort: she went also with him toward Alphonse King of Naples, for at that time
this Cavalier and Knight Peter Brunore, did serve under Francis Sforce which
party he after quit; but having afterward changed his mind, he resolved to
quit Alphonse King of Naples, and to retire to serve his former Master, the
Count of Sforce, and while as he was making preparation for his flight, the
business not being so privily carried, but that the King perceiving it,
secretly caused to apprehend Brunore, and cast him into prison, where he was
kept long without hope of relief; Wherefore Bonne being restless, till she
should see the day when the Knight Brunore were at liberty, she went to all the
Princes and Potentates of Italy, and to the King of France, to Philip Duke of
Burgoigne, to the Venetians, and to many more, of whom she attained letters in
favor of her dear and wellbeloved master, so that Alphonse won by such
requests and the entreaty of so great men, was as it were constrained to set
Brunore at liberty, and gave him unto that valorous warrier that did for him;
who having gotten him loose, to do yet greater service to her Master, did
obtain so much by her means at the Venetians hands, that they accepted of
Brunore unto their service, and was made Leader to the Army of so great a
Republique, and there was a great pension ordained for his entertainment, by
which deeds of friendship, the Knight did know the faith, the virtue, and the
valor of his Bonne: he esteemed it not honest to keep her longer as a
servant, as he had done till then, but married her, keeping her as his lawful
wife, making still great esteem and account of her, Venetians, his enterprises
still coming fortunatly and happily to pass. This valiant Dame of his was
still seen in Arms, when occasion was offered to fight, and when it was
needful to lead the Infantry, going before, she appeared like a Magnanimous
Leader and warrior, being very capable in warlike matters, whereof she gave
diverse times good proof, especially with the Venetians against Francis Sforce
at that time Duke of Millaine, where she made her self known, while as the
Castle of Panon besides Bresse was lost, her courage did appear so great, that
every one did wonder at it, for being armed from head to foot, showing her
self more courageously then any other at the storm, the Targe on her arm,
and the Cutlesse in her hand, she was the means the place was recovered. At
last the Venetians having great confidence in Brunore, and in the counsel and
valor of Bonne his Lady, he was sent for the defense, and keeping of Negrepont
against the Turks, where by the Fortifications, they two made while they
remained there, the Turks had never the courage to hurt or impeach them; in
end, Brunore dying, and buried with great respect and honor, Bonne his Lady
returning toward the Venetians, for to get her husbands pension confirmed to
two of her sons, and mutual loyalty. Who likes to read a pleasant story to
this purpose, let him read Nauclerus treaty of the Emperor Conrade the third,
in his wars against Guelly Duke of Baviere, who was forced for his safety, to
retire within Rhinesberg, where the Town being taken by accord, by the
persuasion of Ladies, he would grant no other condition, but that the women
should transport themselves out of the Town in safety, with so much as they
could carry, and no more, where one taking the Duke on her back, the rest of
the wives their husbands, the accord thus kept, and the Emperor Conrade moved
to compassion, beholding their love and virtue, pardoned the Duke, and restored
the Town to their former liberties. And Bodin in the preface of his history
reports that Laurence de Medices was healed of a grievous disease, by reading
of this story without any other help; I wish it may work the same effect upon
all those that read it, especially the Female sex, in making them follow the
virtuous examples of these noble Ladies, in loving their husbands beyond all
other things whatsoever, and those that will not be moved thereto, I wish them
the death of that Roman Lady, reported of by Quintus Curtius and Titus Livius,
Publia Cornelia Annea, who lived twenty years without once offending of her
husband, and seeing him die, contracted such grief for his death, that she
threw herself into the grave with her husband, where she died, and lay with
him. This wish I hope cannot be taken in ill part by the virtuous Ladies; that
are like Cornelia: but I fear there is none such at all. To conclude then this
point of my observation; in my judgment, no women are more faithful, more
chaste, more loving, more obedient nor more devour, then Soldiers wives, as
daily experience does witness, and none have more reason to be so, then some
of them, whose husbands do daily undergo all dangers of body for their sakes,
not fearing death it self, to relieve and keep them from dangers. To the end
you may see, that the noble parts and virtues before mentioned, are not proper
alone unto the Feminine sex, I will here infer some notable examples of the
good will, love and faithfulness of husbands to their wives, especially
Soldiers, whereof amongst many, for the present, I will, to content the
Reader, mention two or three, that are notable, whereof one happened at this
time in our warfare, worthy to be recorded, of that noble, valorous, pious and
worthy Cavalier, the Felt-marshall Gustave Horn; Sweden; the Cavaliers love
was so great, that in the extremity of her sickness, he never suffered her to
be out of his arms till she died, and then caused her to be put in a Silver
Coffin, that she might be transported for her country, to be buried amongst her
friends; and his love was so great unto her, that after her death, though a
young man, he could never be moved to lead his life with any other woman.
Another example we read in the story written by Pliny and Valerius Maximus,
that is very notable to this purpose. Sempronius Gracchus, finding two serpents
coming out of his bed, enquired of Theologues what might that accident presage?
they answered, that if he killed the she serpent, his wife should die, and if
he killed the he serpent, he should die himself; he loved his wife Cornelia so
dearly that he commanded to kill the he serpent, and shortly after he himself
died. Also that which we read of Meleager son to Danneus is notable, who
would not rise out of his chair, for the relief of the Town he was in,
Cleopatra his wife came to him, desiring his help, and telling him, the enemy
was already entered the Town, and was setting the houses on fire; this
stonyhearted man, who before could be moved by nothing, at the desire of his
wife, went to Arms against the enemy, and repulsing them back, saved the
Town from wrack and ruin, and the Citizens from death: for this Meleager (as
all honest men ought to do) esteemed his wife and himself but one; so that he
could deny her nothing. Here it may be, some will allege, he was John Thomsons
man. I answer, it was all one, if she was good: for all stories esteem them
happy, that can live together man and wife without contention, strife, or
jarres, and so do I. And, in my opinion, no wife can be ill, that wants the
gall; for the gall in the body is the seat of choler, from which the love of
man and wife should be free, and as of gall, so of despite, of anger and of
bitterness.

The eight Duty discharged of our March to Francford on the Oder, and the
intaking of it, the third of April 1631.
THE twenty-fourth of March 1631. his Majesty having disposed of his Army, in
putting them in good Order of Briggaddes, horse and foot, through the several
occasions and accidents happening in war, his Majesty before his march,
finding the enemy lay strong in the Silesian and at Lansberg, lest he might
fall down unto Pomeren and Mark, to disturb the new forces that were
expected to come from Spruce, and from Scotland, his Majesty directed
Feltmarshall Horn, with a part of his Horse that crossed the bridge at Swede
unto Pomeren, and the Wart, to collect the forces there, for to be fured and
led toward the Wart and Lansberg, to give the enemy somewhat to think on,
while as his Majesty might march with the rest of the Army (consisting then
of ten thousand foot and horse) toward Francford, whereunder the command of
the Feltmarshall Tuffenback, and the Grave Fon-Sehonberg Governor of Francford
on the Oder, there were drawn together of the Emperialists near nine thousand
foot and horse. General Tilly, with this maine Army then lying at Rapin,
after his return, from Brandenburg with two and twenty thousand foot and
horse, his Majesty then not being sure, neither of his brother in law the Duke
of Brandenburg, nor yet of the Duke of Saxon, though the League was ended with
the King of France, his Majesty's affairs thus standing doubtful, we marched
toward Francford, with a resolution to pry into the enemies designs, more
than any ways resolved for a beleaguering, having such strong enemies and
Armies about us, without assurance of our pretended friends and confederates:
yet having continued our march till within a mile of Francford, our enemies
retiring out of all quarters were come into one body at Francford, who having
joined, we did hear the enemy was almost as strong within, as we were without,
and he having of us the advantage of the Town behind him for his retreat, we
expected no other thing, than that the enemy should come out, and offer us
Battle. Wherefore his Majesty himself discharging the duty of a General
Major (as became him well) having sought the aid and assistance of Sir John
Hepburne, Francford, or not at all; knowing of the neerenesse of our enemies,
and of the great strength they had together: and seeing we were not sure of the
Princes, we resolved the taking of time was the best for us; and incontinent,
his Majesty commanded out the most part of his Cavalerie, to make a Carracolle
behind us, betwixt us and Berleine, fearing General Tillie with his Army
might come behind us, whiles we were engaged with the Town, keeping only of
all the Cavalerie the Rhinegrave and his Regiment, besides the Infanterie, in
case of out-falling, to second us against the horsemen, that were within the
Town.

The Cavalerie thus directed, his Majesty then perceiving the fear of his
enemies, having voluntarily fiered their fore-Towne (took their fear as a
presage of his future victory) commanded a part of the commanded Musketeers to
go in, through the fore-Towne being on fire, and to lodge themselves, being
advanced to the very port, till such time as his Majesty should dispose of the
rest of the Army, in directing every Briggade apart to their several poasts.
The yellow and the blew Briggade were directed to lodge in the Vineyards on the
side of the Town next Castrene, being commanded to advance their guards before
them, while as the rest of the Briggade should lodge and lie in one body at
their Arms, to be still in readiness in case of an out-fall; the white
Briggade, called Damits Briggade, was appointed to lodge in the fore-Towne, to
guard the commanded Musketeers that lay betwixt them and the danger, at the
Port right under the walls. Hepburne his Briggade was commanded to lie near
unto the other Port, and to advance their guards also; the rest of the
commanded men to lie near unto the other Port, and to advance their Guards
also; the rest of the commanded Musketeers being commanded by Major John
Sinclaire, were commanded to lie on a hight near a Churchyard, that was
direct before the enemies works, besides which, there was a Battery made, and
the Artillery and Ammunition of the Army (as commonly was usual) was placed
behind our Briggade, and the Rhinegraves horsemen behind us; all things thus
ordered and placed, commanded folks out of all Briggads were commanded out
proportionally for making of Cannon Baskets, and for casting of Trenches.

Then, according to custom, Tyvell went to Recognosce near the wall, where
Colonel Tyvell was shot in the left arm, his Majesty then making openly
great moan for him, alleging he had no help then, but of Hepburne; in the
same instant my Lieutenant David Monro was shot in the leg with a Musket
Bullet, and my Major John Sinclaire, commanding the commanded Musketeers near
to his Majesty, where the Battery was making, the enemy hanging out a Goose in
derision, they presently fell out above two hundred of them upon our Guard, who
received them with volees of Musket, and they being too strong for the guard,
his Majesty commanded the Major to send an Officer and fifty Musketeers more
to second the Guard. Nevertheless, the enemy still pushing our guard
backwards, making them give ground, incontinent his Majesty commanded the
Major with a hundred Musketeers more to fall on, and to resist the enemy in
relieving the Guard, which the Major suddenly obeyed, making the enemy retire
with greater haste than he advanced, where their Lieutenant Colonel and a
Captain were taken prisoners, and after the Major taking in a Churchyard,
that lay right before the enemies works, and keeping his Guarde there, he did
keep the enemy under awe, so that we were no more troubled with their
out-falling, though diverse of our Officers and soldiers were hurt by them
from their works, the Churchyard being no shelter for our Guard, that lay
just under their works. On Sunday in the morning, being Palme-sunday, his
Majesty with his whole Army in their best apparel served God; his Majesty
after Sermon, encouraging our soldiers, wished them to take their evil days
they had then in patience, and that he hoped before long, to give them better
days, in making them drink wine insteade of water they were then drinking,
and immediately his Majesty gave orders unto General Bannier, to command all
the Briggads to be in readiness, with their Arms, against the next orders:
this command given, some of the commanded men, that were under Sinclaire,
suspecting a storm, provided themselves of some ladders.

By five of the clock in the afternoon, his Majesty coming toward our
Briggade, called for a Dutch Captain under Hepburnes Regiment named Guntter,
and desired him to put on a light corseles, with his sword drawn in his hand,
and to take a Sergeant and twelve other good fellows with him, and to wade
through the graffe, and then to ascend to the top of the wall, and to see if
men could be commodiously lodged, betwixt the mudwall of the town, and the
stone-wall, and then to retire so suddenly as they might, which being done, his
Majesty getting resolution, that there was room betwixt the two walls to
lodge men, the Briggads being already in battle, they fall on at a call, the
Captain being retired without hurt; whereupon his Majesty directed Bannier and
Hepburne with our Briggad, to pass the graffe, and to storm; And if they
repulsed the enemy from the outward wall, to lodge under the stone wall,
betwixt both the walls, and if the enemy fortuned to retire to press in with
him; the like orders given to the rest of the Briggads, all being in
readiness, his Majesty having a number of Cannon great and small charged on
the batteries, caused to give notice at all posts, that when the Cannon had
discharged, the first Salve in the midst of the smoke, they should advance to
the storm, as they did, where in passing the graffe, we were over the middle
in water and mud, and ascending to storm the walls, there were strong
pallessades, so well fastened and fixed in the wall, that if the enemy had not
retired from the walls in great fear, we could not, but with great hazard,
have entered.

The enemy feebely retiring, our Commanders and Leaders following their orders
received from his Majesty, we press to follow in after the enemy, at a great
sallying port, that was betwixt both the walls, that opened with two great
leaves, where they entered: after their Retreat, they planted a flake of small
shot, that shot a dozen of shot at once; besides which there were set two
pieces of small Ordinance, that guarded also the entry, and musketeers
besides, which made cruel, and pitiful execution on our musketeers, and
pikemen, the valorous Hepburne, leading on the battle of pikes, of his own
Briggad, being advanced within half a pikes length to the door, at the entry
he was shot above the knee, that he was lame of before, which dazzling his
senses with great pain forced him to retire, who said to me, bully Monro, I am
shot, whereat I was wondrous sorry, his Major then, Banier being by, and
exhorting all Cavaliers to enter, Colonel Lumsdell and I, being both alike on
the head of our own Colors, he having a Partizan in his hand, and I a half
Pike, with a headpiece, that covered my head, commanding our Pikes to advance
we lead on shoulder to shoulder, Colonel Lumsdell and I fortunately without
hurt, enter the Port, where at our entry some I know received their rest, and
the enemy forced to retire in confusion, being astonished at our entry, they
had neither wit nor courage, as to let down the Portcullis of the great Port
behind them, so that we entering the streets at their heels, we made a stand
till the body of our Pikes were drawn up orderly, and flancked with
Musketeers, and then we advanced our Pikes charged, and our Musketeers giving
fire on the flancks, till the enemy was put in disorder.

After us entered General Banier, with a fresh body of Musketeers, Lumsdell and
I in another, having rancountred the enemy again, they being well beaten, our
Officers took nine Colors of theirs, which were to be presented to his
Majestic, and the most part of the Soldiers were cut off, in revenge of their
cruelty used at New Brandenburg, but some of their Officers got quarters, such
as they had given to ours.

This Regiment defeated, we directed an Officer with a strong party to
possess the bridge, and that to hinder their escape: their passage being cut
off, they were also cut down themselves, till the streets were full of dead
bodies, and that the most part of our Soldiers and Officers disbanded to make
booty, leaving me and a few number of honest Soldiers to guard my Colors,
which disorder, I confess, stood not in my power to remedy. Thus far for
Lumsdells part and mine, which I dare maintain to be truth.

And as I have spoken truth of our own Actions, without ostentation, which no
man can controlle that is friend to virtue: I will now relate other men's
Actions, so far as I know to be truth by relation of my honest Camerades.

Lieutenant Colonel Musten, being appointed to command the Musketeers of
Lumsdells Regiment, and of my Colonells, then under my command he seeing us
entered did follow after us, and commanded those he led on execution apart,
giving no better Quarters than we did. The Dutch also remembering the enemies
cruelty used at Brandenburg, they gave but slight Quarters.

Major John Sinclaire, George Heatly, being both resolute and stout, were the
first that came over the walls with ladders, who at their first entry having
but a few Musketeers with them, they were charged on the streets by the enemies
Curassiers, or best horsemen, where they were forced to stand close, their
backs to the wall where they entered, and to give several Salves of Muskets
upon the enemy, till they were made to retire.

Likewise after we were entered, the yellow and the blew Briggads, being
esteemed of all the Army both resolute and courageous in all their exploits;
they were to enter on the Irish quarter, where they were twice with great loss
furiously beaten off, and were cruelly spoiled with fire-workes thrown by the
Irish amongst them. But at last they having entered, notwithstanding the
inequality of their strength, the Irish though weak stood to it, and fought
with sword, and pikes within works a long time, till the most part of the
Soldiers fell to ground, where they stood fighting, so that in the end,
Lieutenant Colonel Walter Butler, who commanded the Irish, being shot in the
arm, and pierced with a pike through the thigh, was taken prisoner, so that
the next day, it was to be seen on the poast where the best service was done:
and truly had all the rest stood so well to it, as the Irish did, we had
returned with great loss, and without victory.

The fury past, the whole street being full of Coaches and rusty wagons
richly furnished withal sorts of riches, as Plate, Jewels, Gold, Money,
Clothes, Mulets and horses for saddle, coach and wagons, whereof all men that
were careless of their duties, were too careful in making of booty, that I
did never see Officers less obeyed, and respected than here for a time, till
the hight of the market was past: and well I know, some Regiments had not one
man with their Colors, till the fury was past, and some Colors were lost the
whole night, till they were restored the next day, such disorder was amongst
us, all occasioned through covetousness, the root of all evil and dishonesty.

At last the execution past, his Majesty entered himself, being guarded with
the Rhine-Grave, and his horsemen, who immediately were commanded to cross the
bridge, and to follow the enemy at their heels, being on flight toward
Glogoe, where the Felt-marshall Tuffenbacke, the Count of Schonberg, and Mount
De Cucule had retired with such as escaped.

His Majesty having but scarce quartered in the Town, the fire beginning to
burn the City accidentally; Orders were given with stroke of Drume with a
Bancke beaten in all streets, that all Officers and Soldiers, under pain of
death, should repair presently to their Colors, on the other side of the
Oder, in the outer works, where Sr. John Hepburne was ordained to command
within the works, except such as were appointed to guard the Ports of the
Town, his Majesty's quarter and the Generals lodging on the market place,
where a strong guard was kept to suppress plundering, and the insolency of
Soldiers. Nevertheless these orders proclaimed and published, many disobeyed
remaining in the Town for plundering.

In this conflict, the enemy lost near three thousand men, besides the
Officers that were killed (viz.) four Colonells, Herbenstine, Heydo, Walestine
and Ioure, and above thirty six Officers were killed.

Likewise there were taken prisoners, Colonel Sparre with five Lieutenant
Colonel of Dutch and one Irish Cavalier, that behaved himself both honorably
and well; Colors also they did lose, as I did see the next day made Count of
before General Bannier, forty one, and Cornets of horse nine.

On our side were lost also at least eight hundred men, whereof the blew and
yellow, for their parts, lost five hundred.

His Majesty also did get here a great deal of provision for the Army, as
Corn, Ammunition, and eighteen pieces of Ordinance.

The next day his Majesty appointed General Major Lesly as Governor over the
Town, giving him orders to repair the ruinous works, and walls, as also
orders were given for burying of the dead, which were not buried fully in six
days,

The next day we were ordained to assemble our Regiments, and to bring them
together in Arms, that they might be provided of what they wanted of Arms,
having lost many in their disorder.

The eighth Observation.
HIS Majesty going to rancounter his enemy, before his rising from his Royal
Leager at Swede, did wisely dispose of his Army, in making it into Briggads,
that coming unto the action, he should not need to think on the Theorie, when
it were time to practice, as many young Commanders are forced to do, beginning
to learn of others, that which is defective in themselves, who are to be
pitied, that undertake to lead others being ignorant themselves: but this
wise General, at this time, did not only order his Army,

Secundo, his Majesty does forecast with himself, what the enemy, being strong
might intend against him, and accordingly, he foresaw wisely how to prevent
him, in dividing his Army, by sending the Felt-marshall on the one side of the
Oder with a part of his Army, going himself on the other, leaving the bridge
and passage at Swede well fortified and beset with Soldiers, to the end, that
which of both Armies might be constrained to retire over the bridge, being safe
might then conveniently join with the other.

As his Majesty was wise in foreseeing what might happen, he was also
diligent, in taking time of his enemies on the sudden, before they could come
together; so that after this victory obtained, his Majesty did not only get
elbow room by the enemies removing over the Elve and the Oder; but also he did
gain time to settle his affairs with the Princes; for those who would not
before this victory, scarce keep correspondence with his Majesty, afterward
his Majesty having freed their country from their enemies, they were then
content to entreat for his friendship, by their Ambassadors, and he like to a
cunning gamster, taking the Ball at the right rebound, embraced their
friendship, and confederacy, having bound them up, in a more strict manner then
before, till in the end, they were forced to dance after his pipe.

Here likewise I did observe, that it is never good, to trust too much unto our
own strength, inter pocula, before that the storm went on, though hearing the
noise of our Cannon, they fell a laughing, as wondering what the Swedens meant,
thought they to fly over the walls, and granting he could enter, were they not
so strong as he? Many more idle discourses they had, extolling themselves in
their pride, boasting of their strength and courage, not setting God before
them, they disdained and contemned their enemies, but suddenly in an instant
they found their own follies, being brought unto fear and astonishment, so
that at last, their wits confounded, and consequently their actions confused,
and their enemies, though weak instruments, by the power of the God of Armies
were made strong and courageous, for punishing them in repaying of their former
Barbarity, and cruelty used by them at new Brandenburg, where we see, the lord
repayeth their wickedness, when they least expected.

Tiffenbacke, the Felt-marshall was much to blame for his command, being so
strong within the Town as we were without, that he did not adventure to fight
us in the fields, or at least, to have tried our conduct and valor, with a
strong party: his not daring to adventure with us made us the more courageous
and resolute to seek him, though with disadvantage, having once found him to
be a timorous enemy, keeping himself close within walls, for we know well,
the greater his strength was within, if once we entered, his confusion would be
the greater: for a multitude within a strength especially horsemen, many
servants and baggage breed ever confusion, for avoiding whereof, the Governor
had the more reason to have tried us in the fields; whereby he had encouraged
his Garrison, who seeing he durst adventure to meet us without, being retired,
they would not be afraid within walls.

So it is never good to resolve to be always the defender, but rather
according to the time, Gustavus being Illustrissimus himself, and the
favorite of Fortune, to whom all things succeeded fortunatly by taking of
time, the most precious of all things, especially in wars, which sometimes
helps as much as virtue it self.

The forwardness and courage of Major John Sinclaire, and of his Colleague,
Lieutenant Heatlie, is not to be over-past, they being the first gave good
example to enter this Town, in going over the walls with ladders, with a
weak party of fifty musketeers, that ventured to follow them, which were
hardly received by the enemies horsemen, nevertheless they valorously defended
themselves, and made their enemies to retire with loss, so that, as my
intention here, is not to over-praise my friends virtue, I would not on the
other part be filent in giving them their due, answerable to their merits, and
no more.

We see also by experience daily, that at all times, as here, no man ever
served God for naught, who rewards men, though not through merit in respect
of his Godhead, of whom we can merit nothing, yet of his infinite bounty is
ever ready to reward them truly that do serve him: his Majesty with his Army
having served God in the morning, at night he was made victorious over his
enemies.

And that his Majesty in the afternoon on the Sabbath pursued his enemies,
there was a necessity in it: Tillies Army being on their march for the relief
of the Town, his Majesty was forced to take the opportunity of time, which
once being past does never return.

Here we may see the evil, that sear brings within a City or Strength
causing disorder and confusion, but if all those within this Town had stood to
their defense, as Lieutenant Colonel Butler did and the Irish, Francford had
not bin taken.

Therefore, when resistance is not made, as it ought to be, the victory is
easily attained: for nothing encourages more, then good example, Et contra.
And I did observe here, that no nation esteemed good Soldiers, are inferior
to the Dutch in maintaining a storm, or in extremity of danger, they being
otherwise good Soldiers for obedience to command, in watches, marches, working
about works, and in doing all other duties befitting their profession, being
in company of others.

Pike-men being resolute men, shall be ever my choice in going on execution, as
also in retiring honorably with disadvantage from an enemy, especially against
horsemen: and we see oftimes, as we found here, that when musketeers do
disbandon, of greediness to make booty, the worthy pike-men remain standing
firm with their Officers, guarding them and their Colors, as being worthy the
glorious name of brave Soldiers, preferring virtue before the love of gold,
that vanishes while virtue remains.

This vice of avarice is alike common to the superior Officer,

It is the duty of valiant Commanders, and of brave Soldiers, when ever fire
enters into a City, strength or Leager, suddenly with their Arms to repair
to their Colors, lest at such times, the enemy being near hand should be
ready to take advantage: but here the baser sort of Soldiers, neither for
obedience to his Majesty's command, nor for love of their Officers, nor of
their own credits, would stir to attend their Colors, though the enemy had
showed himself to pursue the City.

Here also, the enemy was to blame, for leaving provision and Ammunition behind
them, whose duty it was rather to destroy it by fire or water, then to leave
it to their enemies. But we see, there is no counsel against the Lord invented
by man, able to work, blessed be his name for ever.

The ninth Duty discharged of the intaking of Laudsberg on the Were by accord.
THE fifth of April 1631. his Majesty having left Francford on the Oder well
beset, under the command of General Major Lesly, who had direction to see the
fortifications repaired, as likewise, General Bannier was left to command over
the Army, his Majesty having taken two and twenty hundred commanded musketeers,
eight hundred horsemen, twelve piece of Cannon great and small, with Ammunition
answerable, with spades, shovels, and axes, where the Colonel of the Artillery
called Leonard Richardson, was commanded to go with them for to attend his
charge: As also Colonel Hepburne was commanded to lead the party, and I was
sent as Lieutenant Colonel, to second him in this employment. Colonel
Hepburne having viewed the party, and taken notice that all things were in good
order, commanded the party to march, having had a blacke-smith, that dwel't at
Landsberg, for our guide, we continued our march, the first day, being come
within four miles of the Town, we quartered at a pass on the high way, and
the next morning breaking up, we marched forwards, till on the way, our fore
troops did meet with a Regiment of Crabbats, where, after long skirmish and
loss sustained by both the parties, in the end, the Colonel that led the
Crabbats being deadly wounded, retired to the Town, casting off all bridges
behind them, which hindered us for a day.

The eight of April, we lay down before a skonce royal, built on a strong
pass, betwixt us and the Town. This skonce well fortified was well provided
of Cannon; It had also a wide Graffe of running water, and a drawbridge, which
was taken up at our coming, and then they discharged their Cannon on us; where
at first there were killed some six Soldiers: the night drawing on, our
watches set forth, I was appointed by his Majesty to be Captain of the watch,
being ordained to oversee the making of the Batteries: As also I was commanded
to set forwards our works, both for intrenching, and for running our lines of
approach to the skonce, wherein I was so busied, that the whole night I went
never off my feet, but from one part to another, having had sundry Alarums,
though not of continuance.

His Majesty having taken quarters in the nearest Dorpe, he left two Rutters
to attend on me, that if the enemy should fall out against us, incontinent one
of them might be sent to acquaint his Majesty, who having rested for that
right, coming before day to visit the works, and finding them not so far
advanced as he did expect, he falls a chiding of me, notwithstanding of my
diligence used the whole night, in keeping the Soldiers still at work, with
the small number of materials we had to work with. But no excuse, though
true, would mitigate his passion, till he had first considered on the
circumstances, and then he was sorry he had offended me without reason. But his
custom was so, that he was worse to be pleased in this kind, than in any
other his Commands; being ever impatient, when works were not advanced ^o his
mind, and the truth is, our Country Soldiers cannot endure to work like the
Dutch; neither when they have taken pains, can they work so formally as
others.

Our batteries being ready against the morning, the whole day our Cannon
played on the Skonce so fast, as they could be charged, but to no purpose, the
earthen wall being so thick and so well set together, that they scorned us and
our Cannon both.

His Majesty seeing nothing to be effectuated this way, resolved to try a
second way, by the advice of the Blacksmith, that knew all the passages
toward the Town, notwithstanding that the whole land on that side was covered
over with water: This Blacksmith advised his Majesty, to cause a Float-bridge
to be made, and then setting over the water, he would lead us through shallow
passes, where we might come behind the Skonce, cutting off their passage from
the Town, and then the Skonce wanting relief might be ours.

According to this plot, Dowbatle, with two hundred and fifty Dragoniers for
foot, and me with two hundred and fifty Musketeers to follow the Blacksmith,
and to surprise the enemies Guard, which being done by us, we were commanded to
make the place good, till Colonel Hepburne with a thousand Musketeers should
be sent after to second us, Dowbatle and I having fortunately surprised the
Guard, making them retire to the Town, leaving the Skonce in our power;
Colonel Hepburne being advanced toward the Skonce, took it in on accord, and
the Soldiers were made to take service, and their Officers made prisoners.

In this time Dowbatle his Dragoniers having followed the enemy with hot
skirmish within shot of their walls, his powder being spent, desired I should
fall on and relieve him and his, as I did, continuing the service till we made
the enemy retire over a bridge that was hard by the Town, so that I was
forced, for our own safeties, having lost diverse Soldiers, that were killed
with the Cannon, to divide my Soldiers, making the half of them to cast up a
running Trench, while as the rest were hot skirmishing with the enemy, being in
danger of both Cannon and Musket, but my Soldiers once getting in the ground,
we fortified our selves against their Cannon, and resolved in case of their out
falling, to maintain the ground we had formerly won, with the loss of our
blood, having lost in one half hour above thirty Soldiers, whereof fix were
killed with the Cannon.

The enemy finding the Skonce was lost, and us so far advanced on the
strongest side: Feltmarshall Horn with his Forces marching on the other side
that was weakest, they presently did send a Drummer on our side to parle for
quarters, whom I received, and being hood-wink't, he was sent with a Convoy to
his Majesty, who condescended to the Treaty, and pledges being delivered, the
Treaty went on; the Accord subscribed, his Majesty came and thanked Dowbatle
and us, for our good service, where large promises were made unto us of reward,
and to Colonel Hepburne also, for taking in of the Skonce.

The enemy being strong in the Town, and above twice our strength, his
Majesty resolved to send to Francford for more Forces, both of horse and
foot, to come to him before the enemy was suffered to march out of the Town,
to whom conditions were granted to transport four pieces of Ordnance, and the
Soldiers to march out with full Arms, bag and baggage, with Drums
beating, and flying Colors, and a Convoy of Horsemen toward Glogoe.

His Majesty having beset the Garrison, as soon as they marched out, having
seen their strength, we were ashamed of their carriage, being the eldest
Troops, and the choice, by report, of the whole Imperial Army, who cowardly
did give over such a strong Town, being without necessity, and in hope of
relief.

One of my Captains called Dumaine, Lansberg, being removed to Francford died
there, and being buried, my Lieutenant David Monro was preferred to be
Captain of his Company, and Ensign Burton was made Lieutenant, and Bullion
his brother having taken his pass, my Sergeant Andrew Rosse was made Ensign
to Captain David, and William Bruntfield was preferred to be my Lieutenant,
and Mongo Gray Ensign.

This Town being taken, both Pomeren and the Marks of Brandenburg were
cleared of the Emperialists, being sent up unto Silesia.

The next Sabbath, his Majesty, that was ever ready to reward good servants
for virtue, he caused to make our guide the Blacksmith (being a stout fellow
and a crafty) Burgo-master of the Town, who did get from his Majesty two
hundred Ducats besides.

His Majesty on the Sabbath day in the afternoon suffered the principal
Officers of his Army (such as General Banier, and Lieutenant General
Bawtis, and diverse others) to make merry, though his Majesty did drink none
himself; for his custom was never to drink much, but very seldom, and upon
very rare considerations, where sure he had some other plot to effectuate, that
concerned his advancement, and the weal of his State.

The ninth Observation.
THis Town of Lansberg being a Frontier Garrison lying near the borders of
Pole on the Were, the having of it made Pomeren sure, and the Mark, giving
unto his Majesty the freer passage unto Silesia; and therefore it was that his
Majesty did use the greater diligence and celeritie in obtaining of it, with
as great honor and reputation, as could be imagined, in respect of the
inequality of strength betwixt us and our enemies: As also in consideration of
the situation of the place, being on the one side fortified by nature, yet
beyond nature and probability of reason. This strong Garrison was forced to
yield to Gustavus, who was Mars his Minion,

It is commonly seen, that those who fear least are commonly overcome, as
became of Francford on the Oder, and this Town also: and though victory we see
be from God, yet to overcome an enemy, the courage and skill of Commanders is
very requisite and necessary.

Here also we see the goodness of intelligence; for had his Majesty not
gotten the Blacksmith, or some other like unto him, to have been
intelligencer and guide to win through the shallow Trinkets he led us, to the
Damme upon the head of their Watch, who were surprised; hardly could we have
overcome this Town, on such a sudden, for without this good of intelligence,
which is so necessary, and of so great a moment in wars, nothing, or very
little can be effectuated in unknown places. For good Intelligencers are so
requisite in an Army, that no means ought to bespared on them, providing they
be trusty: for one design or secret of our enemies well known, may bring all
the rest we desire to a wished end, or at least, preserve us and ours from
danger. This Blacksmith, that was our guide in leading us toward our enemy,
at our first on-going on service, the enemy playing hard with Muskets,
nevertheless he went on without fear, under-taking alike danger with our
selves, but finding in time of hot service some falling besides him, our powder
being a little wet, and not giving so good report as the enemies did, he then
said, he would return to his Majesty, and send us better powder, yet I
think, though here there did appear some lack of constant resolution in him,
that time, exercise, and frequency of danger would make him a brave fellow,
being of a strong and a good able body, but in my opinion, the stoutest of men,
till they be a little acquainted with the furious noise of the Cannon, will
naturally fear and stoop at the first.

Likewise his Majesty was to be commended for his diligence by night and by
day, in setting forwards his works; for he was ever out of patience, till once
they were done, that he might see his Soldiers secured and guarded from their
enemies; for when he was weakest, he dug most in the ground; for in one
year what at Swede, Francford, Landsberg, Brandenburg, Verbum, Tannermonde,
Wittenberg, and Wirtzburg, he caused his Soldiers to work more for nothing,
than the States of Holland could get wrought in three years, though they
should bestow every year a Tun of gold: and this he did, not only to secure
his Soldiers from the enemy, but also to keep them from idleness. When they
were not employed on service, they were kept by good discipline in awe and
obedience, and that with as great moderation, love and discretion as could be.

And his Majesty knew well,

Moreover, nothing can more discourage a City, Fort, or Strength, that is
beleaguered, than when they see their secrets discovered, and their passages
from relief cut off; as it was seen of those that yielded up the Skonce to
Sir John Hepburne, being contented to come in the Colonells mercy, seeing
themselves barred from all relief.

Likewise the duty of Leaders,

Here also we found by experience, that the spade and the shovell are ever good
companions in danger, without which, we had lost the greatest part of our
followers. Therefore in all occasions of service, a little advantage of ground
is ever profitable against horse, foot, or Cannon. And for this it was, that
the best Commanders made ever most use of the spade and the shovell, and that
in such ground as was found most commodious for their safeties.

We see also here his Majesty's disposition in entertaining his Officers kindly
after victory, esteeming them not as servants, but as companions in his mirth,
as a wise Master ought and should do to those he finds obedient to his
Commandments, encouraging them another time to undergo any service or danger
for his sake, that was so kind and familiar with them, joining their hearts as
well with his love, as with his bounty; for he knew well nothing was more able
to bring victory next under God, than good Commanders: As also his Majesty
knew, that to be courteous unto his Officers was the way to triumph over his
enemies.

The tenth Duty discharged of our March to Berlin, and from thence to Spandaw,
and back to Botsaw.
THE eighteenth of April 1631. the enemy being marched out of Landsburg
toward Gloge, his Majesty having beset Landsburg with a Garrison, we marched
back to Francford on the Oder, where we did rest us with the Army till the
twenty-ninth of April, during which time, there were Ambassadors going
mutually betwixt his Majesty and the Duke of Brandenburg: at last having
condescended on some points, his Majesty brake up with the Army, and marched
toward Berlin, and were quartered by the way at a pass called Pance, being
one of the Duke of Brandenburgs hunting houses, and from thence we marched to
Berlin, Spandaw was delivered in his Majesty custody, where incontinent
Colonel Axellilly, with four hundred Swedes were left in Garrison, being a
strength one of the fastest in Germany, fortified well with Fossees and
Countersharpes of free stone, and an earthen wall above, having one hundred and
fifty pieces of Cannon on it, and Arms for twenty thousand foot and horse,
with Ammunition answerable; Provided also sufficiently with store of victuals
for an Army of ten thousand men for a long space: and though the Garrison were
Swedes, they were sworn to obey the Duke; and his Majesty was obliged by his
Royal word past to the Duke, to restore it again when ever the Duke desired
to have it, if the Duke of Saxony should not join with his Majesty against
the Emperor.

The third day after the agreement, the whole Army brake up, and marched to
another pass, three miles from Spandaw, called Spotsdamme, where we lay not
intrencht the space of ten days, till his Majesty's Ambassadors were returned
from the Duke of Saxon, with an answer, that the Duke would not assist his
Majesty for the relief of Madeburg, neither yet would the Duke grant to his
Majesty free passage through his Country, which was the loss of many poor
souls within Madeburg, being cut off by the cruelty of General Tillies
Army, having surprised the Town that was never taken before, sparing neither
man, woman, nor child, but putting all alike cruelly to death, and in the end,
the Town was burnt down, which was occasioned by the breach of the Dukes
promise, in not assisting his Majesty of Sweden, being on his march to relieve
it.

His Majesty not assured of the Duke of Brandenburg behind him, our Army
turning faces about, we marched back to Spandaw, and lay down in the Fields
in order of Battle, where we remained certain days, till such time as it
behoved his Majesty, for keeping of his Royal word, to restore back to the
Duke the Castle of Spandaw, and his Majesty's Garrison being brought out, it
was manned again by the Dukes Forces.

The castle restored, his Majesty was so incensed against the Duke, Berlin,
which was the Dukes residence; as also he was resolved to take the Duke
prisoner, except he would join in confederacy with him, without the Duke of
Saxon; whereupon our Army did break up, and marched toward Berlin in hostile
manner, and lying down before it, the Duke not able to resist, entered in a
Treaty with his Majesty, and to move his Majesty the more, the Duchess and
her mother with a train of Great Ladies, came to the fields to entertain his
Majesty, with offering in the Dukes name all due respect to his Majesty, and
promising all things should be done by the Duke, what his Majesty would desire.
To which his Majesty answered merrily, that if the Duke would not end with him
friendly before night, he would send the Duchess and all the Ladies prisoners
to Sweden, and the Duke should follow.

Incontinent the treaty begun; the Duke getting short time to resolve, was
forced to end with his Majesty, and to join in confederacy with him;
offensive and defensive, against the Emperor, and that without the Saxons
consent: and in the treaty it was concluded, the Duke should give a great
supply of men, moneys and Artillery to his Majesty, for the advanceing of the
wars, besides the ordinary inquartering of his Majesty's Army; and the
paiments of the monthly contribution, out of the Dukes lands was also agreed
upon, and Commissioners were appointed, for the ingathering of the first
terms contribution: during which collection, his Majesty's Army was laid in
quarters to refresh them, till his Majesty should retire from Statin, being
gone thither to give presence to the Russian Ambassador, and his Majesty being
returned from Statin the twenty ninth of June he quartered in my quarters in
Barnow, where we had orders given us to be in readiness to march to old
Brandenburg on the first of July.

The tenth Observation.
HIS Majesty could never be assured of the Princes friendship, till first he
had forced their enemies to give ground, being made to leave behind them
Pomeren Maclenburg, and the three marks of Brandenburg, without any Imperial
Garrison, except one was left in Gripswald, but so soon as the Duke of
Brandenburg did see the enemy retiring, and his Majesty prevailing; he then
begun to enter in treaty, and to give his Majesty assurance of his loyal
friendship, by subscribing of certain Articles condescended upon betwixt them,
at Barleene in June 1631.

On this march, though short, we had many variable resolutions and changes,
which were caused by the changable accidents happening in the course of this
war, which made his Majesty's resolutions to vary, as the time changed,
sometimes through fear of his strong enemy, sometimes by suspecting the
Princes, who were also affrighted and feared, being astonished in their minds,
they were not able to discern what was most profitable for them, so that their
doubting and fear suffered them not to hazard any notable thing, in assisting
his Majesty against their common enemy; but still lingered to join with his
Majesty, expecting the enemy would prevail, and then they would join with the
Master of the fields, as ordinarily is done over all Dutchland in all degrees,
from the highest to the lowest, they wagge as the bush does resolving ever to
quit their best friends in adversity.

Here we see the inconstancy of the Dukes friendship, that will not be friends
as well in adversity, as in prosperity: for when fortune favors us; all the
world would seem to laugh on us; being far removed from them, they desire his
Majesty for their Admiral, to attend when he makes sail, having seen he did
valiantly ride out the storm, promising again when his sails were full, to
bide by him, and to follow him till death should sunder them. But if they had
bin generously minded, they had embraced the danger, and taken part with his
Majesty when honor was to be got, in the midst of greatest danger; since
common danger does conjoyne the coldest friends, to go together against their
common enemies. Likewise here we may see and observe a Royal King most loyal
in keeping his Princely Parole and promise to the Duke his brother, in rendering
back Spandaw, though to his disadvantage, keeping his covenant, albeit he
should lose thereby, teaching, by his own example, all Cavaliers to keep
their word, though given to their enemies. For his Majesty knew well, that
nothing was to be thought more unworthy in a Prince or commonweal, then to
break word or promise; for of all virtues in a Prince truth is the chiefest,
which once being lost returns not again.

His Majesty taking to heart, Berlin, and got both the Duke and the City into
his power, in interchange of the Castle of Spandaw, which then his Majesty knew
how to get again, as he did shortly after. Where we may see, there is no
Oratory of such force to gain both men and women, as a strong well conducted
Army, as this was.

Here also we may see, what evil oftimes does happen by cunctation, or
delays, as does witness the overthrow and ruin of Madeburg, the Citizens
whereof, in their prosperity, Madeburg lost, the enemy strong, the Dukes
wavering, contrary to his mind and custom, his Majesty retired with his Army
back to Spandaw, and from thence to Berlin, making himself sure of the one,
though not of the other, leaping the Dike where he found it weakest, and
missing to catch a goose, he thought it sure to catch the goselings, though he
was his good brother, he did look to his own standing, fearing General
Tillie and the Saxon might join together, not being far different in
conditions, to make his retreat sure, his Majesty did beset Spandaw again with
a Swedens Garrison.

At this time a great number of Hamburgh merchants, amongst which were some
English, going by the Army with great packes, were seized upon, and their goods
taken from them, whereof his Majesty being made foreseen, orders were given,
that the whole packs, under pain of death, should be brought to his Majesty,
as they were, our Army being very hungry, and almost brought to discontent, for
lack of moneys, his Majesty in a fair way, was content to restore the
Hamburgers goods, providing the merchants amongst them would advance upon Band
and surety, to his Majesty two hundred thousand Dolers, to give some
contentment to his hungry Army which the Merchants condescended unto and
advanced the money, whereof the English advanced no part: Nevertheless they had
favor showed unto the^, in the restitution of their goods, by the request of
the Cavaliers (who interceeded for them to his Majesty) their countrymen both
Scots and English.

This kind of favor shown to Merchants by Soldiers occurres not often: for
sometimes the Soldiers (the worst sort of them) measured the packes belonging
to the Merchants with the long ell, and if this sort of dealing should but only
happen to the churlish Merchant, it were the less to be regarded; English
Merchants to have done worthily, in relieving the necessities of the common
Soldiers of their countrymen, and therefore in my esteem, of all Nations,
for their charity, they do best merit the name of gentlemen Merchants.

We see also here, that notwithstanding of the terms his Majesty did stand
unto with the Duke of Saxon, and with Tillie, who might have come to have made
a visit in Brandenburg his lands, where our Army were laid in quarters:
Nevertheless, his Majesty was not afraid to leave his Army, and to return to
Statin to give presence to the Russian Ambassador, and to dispatch him; being
alike ready to Govern the affairs of the state, as he was to fight against
his enemies, he stayed not long, but having recollected his forces, that were
come from Sweden, Spruce and Scotland; giving them orders to march to old
Brandenburg, his Majesty getting intelligence Tillie was gone from Hessen, he
then begun to make the best use of the time.

The eleventh Duty discharged of our March to old Brandenburg.
THE first of July, the Swedens of Axellily his Regiment, that lay in Barnoe,
and we did break up, having got orders to march to old Brandenburg, being
appointed then for the General Randevouz of our Army to come together at. This
Barnoe is a Town in the Mark of Brandenburg, renowned of old, for brewing of
good beer, which during our residence there with the Swedes, we did merrily
try, till that we had both quarrelling and swaggering amongst our selves, who
before our departure again were made good friends, reserving our enmity, till
we saw our common enemy, and so we marched together following our orders
toward old Brandenburg, taking but easy marches, being without fear of an
enemy, and being tied to no particular diet, we took quarters, where we found
the best entertainment to be, either in Dorpe or Town.

Notwithstanding our easy march and good quarters, there were some under both
the Regiments unworthy the name of good Soldiers, who in their march leaving
their Colors, and staying behind did plunder, and oppress the Boores, for
remedy whereof, the Soldiers being complained on, accused and convicted, they
were made, for punishment to suffer Gatlop, where they were well whip't for
their insolency.

Likewise on this march, some of our Soldiers in their rancks,

Having marched three days, the fourth we arrived at Brandenburg, the Pest
raging in extremity of the heat in the City, we were commanded to quarter
without in the fields, and presently there was a certain quantity of the
works about the Leaguer appointed for us, within four days to complete and
make ready: during which time, Robert Monro Furer to Captain Hector his
Colors, died of the Pest, and was much regrated, being a youth of good hopes.

Here also did dye of the plague, Segeant Robert Monro, Cull-crags son,
Andrew Monro was executed at Statin, for having, contrary to his Majesty's
Articles and discipline of war, beaten a Burger in the night within his own
house, for whose life there was much solicitation made by the Duchess of
Pomeren, and sundry noble Ladies, but all in vain, yet to be lamented, since
diverse times before he had given proof of his valor, especially at the siege
of Trailesound in his Majesty's service of Denmark, where he was made lame of
the left arm, who being young was well bred by his Parents at home, and abroad
in France, though it was his misfortune to have suffered an examplary death,
for such an oversight committed through sudden passion, being Summumjus, in
respect that the party had forgiven the fault, but the Governor, being a
churlish Swede, would not remit the satisfaction due to his Majesty and justice.

The eleventh Observation.
THIS Regiment in nine years time, Denmark, and in Dutch land, had ever good
luck to get good quarters, where they did get much good wine, and great
quantity of good beer, beginning first with Hamburg beer in Holsten, and
after that in Denmark they had plenty of Rustocke beer, and now at Barnoe,
and thereafter they tasted the good Calvinists beer at Serbest, and our march
continuing out of low Germany, toward the upper Circles of the Empire, as in
Franconia, Swabland, Elsas and the Paltz, they were often merry with the fruits
and juice of the best berries that grew in those Circles, for to my knowledge,
they never suffered either penury or want, I being the Leader, but oftimes I
did complain and grieve at their plenty, seeing they were better to be
commanded, when they drank water, then when they got too much beer or wine.
But my choice of all beeres is Serbester beer, being the wholsomest for the
body, and cleerest from all filth or barme, as their Religion is best for the
soul, and cleerest from the dregs of superstition.

Being once at dinner with the Rex Chancellor of Sweden, having drunk good
Seebester beer, he asked me what I thought of that beer; I answered it
pleased my taste well, he replied merrily, no wonder it taste well to your
palate, being it is the good beer of your ill religion. I asked his Excellence
how the good wine on the Rhine would tafte at Mentz, being the good wine of a
worse religion; he answered, he liked the wine and the beer better than both
the Religions. But I said, to be his Excellence neighbor, near Mentz in the
Paltz, at Crewtsenach, I would be content to keep mine own Religion, and to
drink good Rhinish wine for my life time.

Nothing is more necessary on a march,

Likewise we see here, that all that come to the wars, (as many foolish men
do think) are not killed, but some die, through one kind of death, and some
by another; so that we ought ever be prepared and ready, not knowing how, when,
or where to die. Happy then is that man, that is prepared to die, as if he
should die to morrow; for many have I seen rise well in the morning (the time
of these wars) who went not to bed at night. Our care then should be still,
to meditate on the end, that it may be good, and then doubtless we shall die
well.

The infection being great at this time, in Brandenburg I contracted a sudden
fit of sickness, that was vehement, and therefore did not continue above forty
eight hours: It was so vehement, that if I had not suddenly overcome it,
doubtless it had overcome me, but praised be God, then I banished death by
imagination, as I did diverse times before, yet at last, I know he will have
about with me, but my confidence is, that by the help of the Conqueror I will
overcome him in the end, as my Captain and Leader has done, who is gone before
me, and opened a Door to me to enter at, where I may sing Triumphing over my
enemies, with those that follow the Lamb in the Communion of the Saints
blessed for ever.

The twelfth Duty discharged of our March from Brandenburg over the Elve at
Tangermound and from thence to Werben.
IN the midst of July our Army did break up from Brandenburg, and marched
toward Ratenough, the Emperialists having left it, being marched toward
Tangermound, his Majesty advanced with the commanded Musketeers, and a strong
party of horse, who having set through the River of the Elve, they surprised
the enemy at Werben, where a Lieutenant Colonel was taken prisoner, Dowbatle
with his Dragoniers did take in by surprise also Tangermound, before his
Majesty was come with the party, and being come, immediately he caused to set
over the River a ship-bridge, which was fortified before the entry; over which
our foot Army did pass, and our horse with the Cannon, Ammunition and baggage,
did wade through the River, where never one was seen to pass with Cannon
before, so that without impediment our Cannon and baggage for the most part,
came safely through, but those wagons that were lightest, being laden with
Boores trash, as it came lightly, so it went lightly with the stream. Et
merito.

The Emperialists at Carleben, hearing we had crossed the Elve, took them to
their flight, to provide betimes for their winter quarters; Wolmerstat also was
taken by a weak party of our horsemen; having heard our Army had crossed the
River of the Elve, such a fear came among them, that they never looked behind
them, but still fled, directing Poast upon Poast to General Tillie to retire
back from During, being minded unto Hessen, who receiving news of his
Majesty's crossing the Elve, he turning faces about, with his whole Army
continued his expedition backward to find us at Werben, before we could be
entrenched, as he thought.

But where he did but march with his Army in the day time, we with spades and
shovells, wrought our selves night and day in the ground, so that, before his
coming, we had put our selves out of danger of his Cannon.

General Bannier, with the rest of our Army coming after us, took in
Hagleberg in his way, and beset it with a strong Garrison, where General Major
Kagg did command, to whom was conjoined my cozen Fowls his Regiment, after he
had taken the Castle of Bloe in Macleburgh in his march, Bannier did give at
the intaking of this Town and Castle of Hagleberg.

The twelfth Observation.
AT this time I did remarke the great, wonderful, rare and extraordinary mercy
of God toward our Leader the Kings Majesty, and his Royal little Army, which,
before our removing from old Brandenburg, was much infected with the plague of
Pestilence, so that we knew not the sick from the whole: for of our Regiment
alone, Werben, we scarce knew there was any infection amongst us, so that in a
months time, we were miraculously rid of it, and for mine own part, I neither
know, nor can conjecture any reason for it (cheifely being in the dog days,
and in a Leaguer) but the Lords mercy toward his Majesty and his Army, being
at this time, far inferior in strength to our enemies.

Many examples and testimonies of Gods favor toward his Majesty I did observe
on this march: for such terror was put in their hearts, by his Majesty's
victory obtained at Francford and Lansberg, that they fled, where once they did
hear of our coming, being persuaded and informed by their consciences, that,
if his Majesty were victorious, they should get no better quarters, then were
given by them at Madeburg, which made them quit strong Garrisons, before they
would attend or abide the danger.

Wherefore we may plunly conclude,

Likewise here I did rejoice, and was glad, when I did observe that it is not,
nor was not peculiar to any still to have overcome, or to be victorious: the
Emperialists, I know by experience, and so did the Regiment I commanded, had
their time of the victory against the King of Deamarke (where I did learn to
make a retreat) but now being come under another Leader, there Fortune began
to change and to retire from us, we learning under the invincible Gustavus, to
advance orderly, never falling off, but ever keeping faces to our enemy, a
brave lesson learned from a brave Commander. So that we see here, victory
keeps no constant dwelling, being now here, now there, yet we see, that it is
best kept with counsel and virtue, neither can I think, but fortune, and
chance has a great hand in it, for it is a greater matter to use victory well,
then to overcome, and all victors have an insatiable desire of their prosperous
fortune, never appointing an end to their desires; And nothing brings victory
more, next unto God, then good Commanders, whereof King Gustavus the invincible
had many.

Here also at the intaking of Hagleberg, General Bannier did well in giving
the Soldiers some liberty of booty: to the end they might prove the more
resolute another time, for Soldiers will not refuse to undergo any hazard,
when they see their Officers willing to reward them with honor and profit.

The thirteenth Duty discharged at our Royal Leaguer of Werben on the Elve
against General Tillie his Army.
ABout the midst of July 1631 his Majesty's forces being come together of
Horse and Foot, he did resolve to set down his Leaguer at Werben on the Elve,
where the River of the Haggle enters into it, and spying a parcel of ground,
the most commodious that could be had, for situation, and air, having first
the commodity of transportation by water, on the River of the Haggle running
into the Elve at the Leaguer, whereon all provisions could be brought for
maintaining of his Army; He had also the whole country on the other side of the
Elve, behind him as his friends.

This Leaguer lay along the side of the River on a plain meadow, being guarded
by the River on one side, and the foreside was guarded by a long earthen Dike,
which of old was made to hold off the River from the Land, which Dike his
Majesty made use of, dividing it by Skonces and Redoubts, which defended one
another with Flanckering, having Batteries and Cannon set within them, along
the whole Leaguer: he did also set over the River a Ship-bridge, for his
Retreat in need, as also for bringing commodiously of provision and succors,
from the Country, and Garrisons on the other side, as Hagleberg, Ratene,
Perleberg, and others.

In like manner his Majesty did fortify the Town of Werben for his Magazin,
being close to the Leaguer, with works about it, which defended the Leaguer,
and the Leaguer-workes were made to defend the Town also, so that they could
relieve one another being in most distress, and both the Towne-wall and
Leaguer-wall, were so thick and firm of old earth, faced up with new, that no
Cartow could enter into it. The Bulwarks on which the Batteries were made for
the Cannon, were also very strong and formally built, and they flanckered one
another, so that none could find but folly in pressing to enter by storm; And
betwixt the flanckerens were left voides, for letting Troops of horse in and
out, with slawght Bommes before them, where strong guards were kept for
defending the passage.

And on the one side of this Leaguer were planted above one hundred and

The manner we were ordained to watch this Leaguer, every Briggad of foot had
such a portion of the Leaguer appointed for them to watch and maintain by
fight, in case of a storm, which part they had fortified themselves, and
Briggads of horse were ordained to attend particularly on a foot Briggad, to
second them, if that the enemy, at a storm, should beat the foot back from
their Poasts, then the horse Briggad was ready to charge, till the foot might
be recollected by the diligence and valor of their Officers: for besides the
watch ordinary on the Poasts, the whole Briggads of foot stood in readiness
at all Alarums behind the guard, and the horse Briggads did stand in Battle
behind them. Likewise without the Leaguer, there were squadrons of our
horsemen to stand in readiness at one end, that while as the enemies foot
should march on to the storm, our horsemen might charge through to the end of
the Leaguer, where they were to be received again within the Leaguer, being
hardly followed, so that the judicious Reader can easily judge, what a
difficulty it was to storm such a Leaguer.

Being thus provided to welcome our enemy, his Majesty hearing of his enemies
near approach with a strong Army, his Majesty did resolve like a wise
General to try his enemies courage in the Field, before they should come near
to discourage his little Army. And therefore his Majesty commanded out a
strong party of two thousand Musketeers, and a thousand horse, which party he
did lead himself, and finding by his intelligence Tillies Army were advanced
so far, as to Wolmerstat, A^^e omnia, called in unto the Leaguer all the
Garrisons, which were without on that side of the River, whereon the enemy did
march, and getting good intelligence of the enemies fore-Troopes, being four
Regiments of horse, the best of Tillies Army ( viz.) Colonel Harmesteans his
Regimen^ of Curassiers, Mount Cuculies Regiment, Holks Regiment of Curassiers,
and Gerramino his Regiment, which were all about forty two Gornets of
Curassters, being quartered beside Tangermonde, not knowing how near they were
come unto the valiant Gustavus, that, though a King, would not stand on a
Ceremony, to make the first visit unto such valourous Cavaliers of their
worths, and to make his Majesty's visit the more graceful (though less
acceptable well I wot) he did send the Rhine-grave and Colonel Collenbagh,
with five hundred Dragoniers, and their own two Regiments of horse, to salute
them at their quarter in his Majesty's name, honoring them first with a Salve
of Muskets, lest they should think it discourtesie, to have come unto them
without sending before, which being mis-taken by the enemy, the skirmish went
on, Colonel Harmestean was killed, Holke and Coronell Corramine fled, so that
the enemies fore-Troopes were driven to confusion, having lost twenty-nine
Cornets, the Troops whereof were defeated and ruined, so that our horsemen did
make good booty, having gotten horses, and a great deal of riches. The enemy
in this Conflict did lose above a thousand men, and his Majesty's loss was
great also, having lost his own sisters son, the young Rhinegrave, being
killed on his first exployt, being the seventeenth of July; the Cavaliers death
was much regrated by his Majesty and the whole Army, but the exployt ended,
his Majesty did retire toward the Leaguer, having left some Officers and
Horsemen, that had followed in the flight General Tilly, and Colonel Holke,
dogging them to their Quarters, where both hardly escaped untaken. The Swedens
disappointed of their onslaught, retired after his Majesty to their Leaguer,
and having put a terror in the enemies Army, by this defeat; he did get four
days longer continuation, to put all things in good Order against their
coming; during which time, the enemy was busied in recollecting of his
scattered Troops, and in putting his Army in good Order, forgetting of his
revenge.

His Majesty as soon as he came back, Elve, or that he should bide their
coming before the Leaguer, and finding no man to answer him, all turning it
over upon himself, being wise, knowing that Counsel would be allowed of by a
King, but according to event; But his Majesty perceiving their intentions, he
resolved to abide the enemies coming, what ever might follow, and instantly he
gave all Officers and Commanders of Briggads charge to see their works
accomplished, and finished, for if the enemy would stay but three days, he
would be no more afraid of him, than if he were in the strongest Island could
be imagined, being he was assured, GOD would fight for him, and with him, and
besides, he knew he had as good Commanders and Soldiers of horse and foot, as
Tilly was able to bring against him, and which was more, he could get his Army
longer and better entertained than Tilly could get, seeing he had the Country
to enemy, which was his Majesty's friend.

This resolution being taken, Marquess of Hamilton, come then from Britain,
with an Army of six thousand foot, as complete as could be desired to be
seen for personages of men, in complete Arms, being well araide, and
furnished of Artillery, and of all things fitting for the adorning of an Army,
his Majesty being exceeding glad of such a timely supply, he did most heartily
welcome the Marquess, by entertaining him with graceful countenance and
respect, in giving him such entertainment as the time could afford, and in
the interim, his Majesty went along with his Excellence, to let him see the
fortifications and preparations he had made against Tillies coming, which
being so near, made his Majesty after some considerable discourses had with
the Marquess concerning his Army, wherein his Majesty declared he was sorry
the Marquess with his Army were arrived in such parts of the Country, that
was ruined, and not able to entertain his Excellence, and his Army with
bread, much less to be furnished with necessaries convenient for them, or with
such as his Majesty would willingly bestow on them, if the Country, or his
power were able to furnish it. Other private discourses they had together,
concerning the service, that the Marquess with his Army was to be employed
on: And his Excellence having received his Majesty's instructions, being both
pressed by shortness of time, his Excellence was graciously dismissed, to
return to his Army, then being come upon the Oder, being then the most ruined
part within the Empire, by reason both the Armies had lain there above a year
before; which caused that Summer both famine and plague, the smart whereof his
Excellence Army suffered at their first coming, where they died of the plague
above two hundredth a week, so that it was impossible for them to subsist long;
and the plague was so rife, that his Excellence servants and family, were not
free. Nevertheless, Silesia, being more afraid of their coming, than of an
Army twice stronger, and the diversion thus made, was a great furtherance to
the joining of his Majesty with the Duke of Saxon, and consequently of his
Majesty's advancement in Dutchland, and of his victory obtained against his
enemies at Leipsigh; for nothing does more cross the designs of a mighty
enemy, than to hear a foreign supply of valiant men to come to his enemy,
which no doubt, would force to alter his former Designs, which once altered
unadvisedly in haste, might mar the happy event of his former Conclusions.

Likewise, his Excellence being dismissed, the Landgrave of Hessen, and Duke
Barnard of Wymar, did come unto his Majesty, with the offer of their service,
(knowing his Majesty had gotten a supply to his Army out of Britain, which
did encourage them, and the most part of the Towns of the four upper Circles
of the Empire, to offer to join with his Majesty in confederacy, having seen
the appearance of the strong party his Majesty could make, being assured of
the friendship and concurrence of great Britain) they were both graciously
accepted of, and so much the more, that they were the first did hazard with a
private Convoy to come to his Majesty through their enemies; for which his
Majesty did thank them, who the next day were dispatched to return, for
advanceing of the cause in doing his Majesty good service, by collecting of
more forces, as they did soon after.

They being gone, the twenty-two of Inly General Tilly, then with interchange
of Cannon-Bullets, till it begun to grow dark, that he retired his Cannon to
the body of his Army, having lain all night in Battle, without being
intrencht, though strongly fortified without him, with strong Guards, both of
horse and foot, having his Crabbats and Dragoniers without them again.

His Majesty having commanded out strong Horse-guards to watch without the
Leaguer, I was commanded, as least worthy of a thousand, that night to watch
without the Leaguer, with five hundred commanded Musketeers, which were
ordained to lie in readiness, betwixt the enemies Army and the Leaguer,
almost a Cannon-shot from our works, getting orders from his Majesty
himself, how I should keep good watch, and how to behave my self, in case of
the enemies pursuit, and being come the length of the ground appointed for me
to watch on, having consolidated the body of my Musketeers in the safest ground
I could find for them to stand on, their Arms rested, and in readiness.
First I caused set out my Perdues without my other Centries, not trusting the
giving of an Alarm altogether to our horse Centries, and then to the end the
enemy might not surprise us being sleeping, I ordained the half of our
Musketeers to stand for two hours in readiness, till the Centries were
relieved, and then I suffered the other half to rest them, so long as the
other did before; and thus orderly we past over the nights watch, having had
sundry naughty Alarums in the night without continuance. Our duty was to be
the more strict, having received command of his Majesty, not to quit that
ground, except the enemy by greatness of strength, would beat me from it, and
then I should retire orderly skirmishing with the enemy, our faces to them
still, and our Arms, giving fire on them till we came under our walls, so
that, by that means the Leaguer would get time to be in readiness to receive
them.

By the break of day, friend to valor and courage, the enemies Horseguards
begun to skirmish with ours, who being stronger, made our Horsemen to give
ground, the Commander of the Watch sent to me for a supply of fifty
Musketeers, which I accordingly did send, with a Lieutenant, giving him charge
how to behave himself, who having a little skirmished with the enemies
Dragoniers and Horsemen, was made to give ground also, and having commanded out
a Captain with fifty Musketeers more, he was also repulsed, I wondering at
their carriage, advanced to recognosce the bounds they were on, and spying an
advantage of ground, I took out a hundred Musketeers, giving a Captain charge
to remain by the remnant of my Musketeers, and putting a hedge betwixt us and
the enemy, we advanced till we were in even line with them, Salve amongst them,
incontinent we made the enemy retire, so that our Horsemen did advance to their
former stations: His Majesty having heard the service, ordained the Army
should be in readiness, and coming forth from the Leaguer, accompanied with
General Lieutenant Bawtish, and Baron Tyvell, where his Majesty begun to
enquire of me, how all passed, which accordingly I related. But though his
Majesty was pleased, yet he checked me for leaving of the Reserve to another,
when I went on service, which I confess was more suddenly done than wisely,
and ever after, I promised to his Majesty, to avoid the like oversight,
though it succeeded well.

His Majesty incontinent, since they had tried his guards, he would also try
in earnest, what for Officers and Soldiers they did command, and to that
effect, his Majesty sent Orders to the Leaguer to command out eight hundred
Horsemen of Hagapells, and a thousand Musketeers, with four small Fieldpieces
of Cannon, with the five hundred Musketeers I commanded on the Post, which all
being set in order, his Majesty directed the Colonel of his Leefe Regiment
Here Tyvell to lead on the foot toward a Dorpe, that lay near the enemies
Army, and his Majesty with General Lieutenant Bawtish commanded the Horse,
taking the Cannon along with them, and coming near the enemies Guards,
consisting of a thousand Currassiers, having given fire with the Cannon amongst
them, they charged furiously with the Horse in midst of the enemy, and
putting them in disorder, they cut them down from their Horses as they retired
at the spurs, being still followed unto the body of their Army: And our
Musketeers falling up alike, discharging amongst them, the enemy at first in
great fear was almost put in confusion, the most part of their Horsemen being
abroad on Forage, their Guards did stand to their Arms, till the Army was
drawn in Battle, and their Horse spanned, or put before their Cannon; during
which time our Soldiers continued in giving fire amongst them, Tilly made a
show of on-falling on our Leaguer, by making all his Trumpets to sound, and his
Drums to beat, making a great noise, we being prepared to receive them. The
morning being dark, with a cloudy mist, so that none could see, the enemy
being retired with his Army, having broke up, at night, he marched toward
Tangermonde, and the day being cleared up, his Majesty with a strong party
went forth to drive up their Rear, with six small pieces of Ordnance, even to
the body of their maine Army, which consisted then of twenty-six thousand men;
while as we were not in the Leaguer, and at Hagleberg, twelve thousand men,
foot and horse, till afterward that the Feltmarshall Gustavus Horn did come
from the Oder toward Ratene, with four thousand complete Soldiers, and
General Tilly having lain some few days at Tangermonde, suffering daily
losses by his Majesty's parties; at length, through scarcity of victuals, he
was forced to march unto Hall, and in the Saxons Country, being made weaker by
six thousand men than he came down, having had to do with the Invincible
Gustavus, who still did out-shoot him out of his own Bow, having had the
right hand of the LORD for his assistance.

The thirteenth Observation.
HIS Majesty wisely made choice of a fit place for his Leaguer, being
commodious for transportation of victuals unto his Army, without being in
danger of his enemies. In like manner we see his Majesty's wisdom in making
his friends sure behind him ( viz.) the Duke of Brandenburg, the Dukes of
Pomeren and Machlenburg, from whence his victuals and his supplies must needs
come, and as his Leaguer was commodious for furnishing the Army, so it was
commodiously situated for defense against the enemy, the one half, or back,
being naturally defended by the course of the water running by; and on the
other side, it was defended by the Town, and by the help of the old Dike,
which easily was fortified.

His Majesty's wisdom also was seen, by keeping of his Soldiers still in
Action, never suffering them to be idle (as a wise General ought to do) for
either they were employed on marches, or lying still, in working, or in
fighting by parties, or in gross, as occasion offered: For this General knew
well, that he was but the carrion of a man, and not a man, that did live idle,
having in a living body but a dead mind.

Here also I did remarke and observe, Homo homini quid interest: for we find a
great difference betwixt his Majesty's welcoming of Tilly to Werben, and the
Felt-marshall Twifenbacke his welcome made to his Majesty before Francford on
the Oder; who never did present himself in the Fields, though almost as strong
as we were: but here we find the contrary, that notwithstanding of Tillies
strength, being twenty-six thousand men, Gustavus was not afraid to have
invaded his fore-Troopes with a weak party, and did defeat them; showing
unto us the difference betwixt Commanders, by his own valourous example,
encouraging his little Army before the enemies coming; he would not first
meet his enemy with an Army, but having strengthened his Leaguer with Baniers
Forces, and called in his weak Garrisons from danger, and then taking all
victuals out of his enemies way, bringing it within his Leaguer, he then armed
with courage and resolution, adventures to Rancounter his enemy with a party,
and having tried them to their loss, he retired again with credit, preparing
his Leaguer, being strongly beset with men, Ammunition and victuals, he was not
afraid to be taken unawares, as the French were within Philopsburg, not being
provided to oppose their enemies, for their sloth they were cruelly muichered.
Teaching others, by their examples, not to trust too much in security, be the
place never so strong, if they be left unto themselves, and grow careless,
they must needs suffer under the Tyranny of their enemies.

Likewise his Majesty, not trusting to his own wisdom, he did call his
chief Officers to Counsel, asking them, what was to be done (as wise
Commanders ought to do) and finding them all by silence to rely on his
Majesty's will, giving Orders for all things that were to be done before their
coming, he resolved to stand to it, being truly courageous, as he did not
adventure rashly, without asking his Officers advice, knowing once their
resolution agreeable to his own, he was not inconsiderately afraid of his
enemies strength, though mighty and strong, neither was he unprovided against
their coming.

His Majesty's dexterity of Command is seen here, by the order of his
discipline, in giving good orders for watching: First he divided the Posts,
and appointed what footmen or Briggad should watch on the several Posts, as
they were severally fortified by themselves, to the end, no man might blame
their own work, for insufficiency to hold out the enemy. As also he appointed
several Briggads of horse to second the Posts severally, every one knowing
where to repair in time of service: As also he did instruct them of the manner
they were to fight, in resisting the enemies entry: As also in case of their
entry, he did instruct both foot and horse, how and in what manner they should
be repulsed again, promising, according to his wonted Custom, to be a
Companion both of their travells and dangers, and that he should never leave
them, till first they should quit him, and that he would promise as he was a
Royal King.

A worthy saying of a worthy King and General, whose prudence and wisdom in
Command, Arges Eyes were too few for him, not only in respect of the weight of
his Command, but also in respect of the wit and prudence which was requisite for
him.

All other commands belonging to a Soldier are so inferior to this of a
General, that almost they are nothing in respect of this, who amongst others
his great gifts, he must know severly to command, and softly to bear with
others. As also, he must learn patiently to give place to others contumacy,
and he must not only be powerful to strengthen for his own affairs, but
also he must weaken his enemies, and chiefly, he must make war by policy,
without giving battle, or travel (as this wise General did deal twice with
old Tillie) who was forced after a long march, having but visited him, and
seen his orders, to retire again, with the loss of many men, without any
detriment or hurt at all to his Majesty's own little Army, which he kept ever
to the best, by preserving them from their enemies, and by supplying of them,
as they became weak, so that their weakness could never be truly discerned.
Who would not then admire the wisdom and foresight of this General, in
preserving this little Army, at this time, for a second fitter occasion? Who
ever then was so worthy of the honorable title of a Generallas he For though
he had bin no King, he was a brave warrior, and which is more, a good man,
magnificent, wise, just, meek, endued with learning, and the gift of tongues,
and as he had strength of body, and a manlike stature; he had also the
ornaments of the mind, fitting a brave Commander: he knew how to dally, and
weary an Army led by such an old General as Tillie was: for though he did
vaunt, he had beaten two Kings before, in an open field, the third King made
him, for all his experience and old years, to be thought but a child again,
having made him traverse with his Army, before in the winter, from Rapin to new
Brandenburg, and back again to Madeburg, finding the King did lie in suerty
at Swede, till he was gone, and then took in both Francford and Lanseberg: and
again, he made him retire from During to Verben, for a visit, and then forced
him to return again to Saxony, with the loss of six thousand men, without
effecting any thing for his coming, not the least advantage; undoing himself
and his Army by the seasons, sometimes with the extremity of cold, in the
midst of winter, and at this time, he made him march in the midst of the
dog days, for lack of victuals, and his Majesty having discouraged this
old General and his Army, he thought then, it was fit time to follow, and to
search him out, till he was made to fight.

This resolute King did not sleep long, in suffering Tillies bravade made
before Verben to be unrepayed, having the next morning hunted, and chased his
courrasiers with a few number of Haggapells, to the midst of their Army,
having with honor retired again, he thought Tillie was engaged to storm his
Leaguer, in reveng, but all could not wind or draw him to it: But was forced
through hunger to retire, all provisions being taken out of his way, for his
Majesty knew well, when they should be oppressed with hunger at their coming,
they could think on no generous exploit: for oftimes an Army is lost sooner by
hunger then by fighting, and hunger it self is crueller a great deal, then
the sword; For to hunger, and to fight valiantly, does not agree with nature,
and in an Army hunger is more intolerable then the thundering of Cannon and
Musket: Arms do resist Arms, but to resist hunger, no Fort, no Strength, no
Moate or Fossie is able to do it.

To conclude then this my observation, Gustavus, who I knew did fear God; and
I persuade my self, by his example, and after him, by the example of another
Gustavus, Felt-marshall Horn (who truly feared God in his calling without
pride or ostentation) many others under them following their examples (though
Soldiers) did the like. Therefore no wonder, that they and those who followed
them, were happy in their enterprises, having had such Leaders: for that is
most sure and infallible, where most fear of God is, and true piety, there is
most happiness; and this piety is enough to save Princes. And on the contrary,
withouther, Armies can do nothing, Horse or strength of man, gold or money can
do nothing. Let us then following the example of this King, who was Godly,
seek to the King of Kings for his Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, and
then surely all other things will go well with us, as it did with our Master
and Leader.

The fourteenth Duty discharged of our March from Wirben to our Leaguer at
Wittenberg.
THE certainty of General Tillies march with the Army unto Saxony being come
unto his Majesty, and that he was to join at Leipsigh, with the forces were
come to him from the upper Circles of Germany, as also out of Italy; which
being joined together, his resolution was to spoil the Dukes country, or to
force him to turn Emperialist: which being understood by his Majesty, his
Majesty very wisely resolved to prevent him in this, as he had done in his
former intentions: And therefore with diligence, bringing together the whole
strength of his horses, with two thousand Dragoniers, he marched toward
Rattino, where Feltmarshall Horn did lie, with a part of the Army, to whom he
gave orders to be in readiness, on his first advertisment, as also, he
appointed General Bannier, to recollect and bring up such forces as were
levied in the Marks of Brandenburg, and to be in readiness at his Majesty's
appointment for a march.

In like manner his Majesty did leave the care of commanding the Leaguer at
Werben to General Lieutenant Bautis, so far as concerned the command of the
Cavalerie, and Sr. John Hepburne was ordained to command, and to care for the
foot, which being done, his Majesty continued his march toward the pass of
Wittenberg, for to meet Felt-marshall Arnham, who was appointed by the Duke of
Saxon to treat with his Majesty, for confirming of the Aliance and confederacy
formerly treated betwixt his Majesty and the Duke, in time of the Treaty, his
Majesty being in hopes, of a happy conclusion, he did direct orders to the
Felt-marshall Horn, and to General Lieutenant Bawtis, to break up with both
their forces of horse and foot, and to march toward Wittenberg. Likewise
order was sent to Colonel Cagge to break up from Haggleberg, with his
Regiment, and with Colonel Monro of Fowls his Regiment, for to join both
with the Army, on their march (which continued orderly to the Randezvouz
appointed to meet with the Felt-marshall being within four miles of
Wittenberg, where we did come together, and immediately the Felt-marshall did
put the Army in good order of Battle, horse foot and Artillery; The baggage
also was placed and directed to march a part from the Army.

On Sunday the twenty eight of August 1631. we continue our march toward
Wittenberg, where a mile from the Town we rejoiced at the sight of our Master
and Leader, Gustavus the invincible, who with the party did join with us, and
immediately he took the pains to bring that Royal Army in order of Battle,
where on the sudden, his Majesty's dexterity in command did appear to the
great contentment of the whole Army, and marching a while in Battle order,
having halted near the part, where our Leaguer was appointed to be, we were
commanded to incampe for that night on the field, as we stood in Battle. The
next morning, the Leaguer being divided in several quarters, and our
Quarter Masters, and Furriers, having made their right designation of every
Regiments quarter, and having divided their quarters proportionally amongst the
companies, they being ready, every Briggad whose quarters were first designed,
marched unto the Leaguer, possessing themselves with their Quarters, they begun
orderly to place their Colors and their watch; then every particular
Cameradship did strive, who could best provide themselves of convenient
lodgings, where we were to rest for a week.

Lieutenant Colonel John Monro, being come before his Colonel from Scotland
with a company, he was made to march from Statin to Werben, and from thence to
Wittenberg, Scotland, Robert Monro, Kilternes son, out of love, to see his
friends, who contracting a fever at Wittenberg, died there, and was honorably
buried.

The fourteenth Observation.
HIS Majesty, like a wise and prudent General, we see would not stir from
his Loaguer at Werben, till first he was made certain by good intelligence,
Gustavus was, getting intelligence of the enemies design with celerity, he
took his horses and Dragoniers with him, and leaving his foot and Cannon, he
advanced to the pass of Wittenberg, for to prevent Tillie, who was striving to
make the Duke turn Emperialist; but Gustavus wisely taking the ball at the
right rebound, he did turn the Duke, by Gods providence, both soul and body
good Swede. Where clearly we may see the Lords powerful hand and providence
in this, as in all humane affairs, suffering things sometimes to take delays.
Notwithstanding of man's instant urging, the Lord deferres to his appointed
time, that the glory may be given unto himself alone, and not to man's wit or
policy. For as the Rudder in a ship does with a little motion govern all the
shipe even so, God the director and governor of the world, does move the
whole, himself not sturring. And as there is one God in the heavens, that
governes all the frame of the earth, so the Lord has his Substitutes on earth,
whom he has made above their fellows in judgment, and herolike virtues, yet
he himself keeps the Prerogative above them all in commanding them,
Wittenberg, to go Conjunctis viribus against their common enemy the house of
Austria, and the Catholic league.

It had been good for Madeburg this union had been sooner concluded, but the
Lord would not have it, seeing their punishments, by General Tillies Army
(their scourge) was decreed long before. But now the Duke of Saxon terrified by
their example, thinks it better to prevent such another wound, by joining with
his Majesty, being made wary by others fall: for it is better late to thrive
then never, and it is better to prevent evil, then to suffer; and it was
better for the Duke of Saxon, to blush in time, then out of time to grow pale;
for now being taken at the rebound, Tillies. Army being at Lipsigh, seeing his
own house on fire to be relieved, he offers his service to his Majesty; damning
himself, soul and body, if ever he will forsake his Majesty and his Crown,
if then he would but help him to beat the enemy out of his country again: So
that he, which could not be tied with one knot before, is now hard tied by
four great points, which he was made to condescend unto, on his honor and
credit, to have bin kept unviolable. And his Majesty getting him once thus
bound, the way to make him sure, was to make him fight, that having dipped his
hands once in the blood of his enemies, he was not suddenly to be cleansed, and
this was the manner to tie him harder, then the custom was of old amongst the
Germans, who were wont (when they entered in confederacy) to draw blood in a
Goblet of both their brows, and drink of it mutually, for the more strict
observance of their fidelities to each others. But shortly after this
confederacy was made, much German blood was drawn, and of other strangers
blood, to make the tie so much the harder, and before the tie was broke, his
Majesty's blood was shed, to the perpetual disgrace of him, that after his
Majesty's death, forgetting his honor and credit, did violate his confederacy
made with the crown, as with the King our Master, of never dying memory.

The fifteenth Duty discharged of our March over the Elve at Wittenberg to
Diben.
THE Conjunction agreed upon betwixt his Majesty and the Duke of Saxon, all
things sealed and subscribed, his Majesty gave Orders to break up with the
Army, and to cross the Elve, over the bridge at Wittenberg, for to join with
the Dukes Army; the orders were obeyed with great contentment, and entering
into Saxony, we quartered the first night not far from Diben, the place
appointed for our Randez-vouz; the next morning we marched thither, and were
drawn up in battle on the Fields, where in the after noone the Dukes Army
arrived, being drawn up in bartaile within Cannon shot of us, the whole
Officers of our Army, were commanded to be in readiness on horseback, to
convey his Majesty for to welcome the Duke and his Army, which for pleasing
the eye,

This show seen by his Majesty and his Officers; his Majesty returning; the
Duke with his followers did convey his Majesty to the sight of our Army,
which being called to their Arms, having lain overnight on a parcel of plowd
ground, they were so dusty, they looked out like Kitchin-servants, with their
uncleanely Rags, within which were hidden courageous hearts, being old
experimented blades, which for the most part, had overcome by custom the toil
of wars; yet these Saxons gentry, in their bravery, did judge of us and ours,
according to our outsides; thinking but little of us; nevertheless, we
thought not the worse of our selves. The ceremony past, we were all remitted to
take rest for that night in our former quarters: the next morning, by break of
day, we were called up to march, where both our Armies were ordained to march
on several streets; one Randezvouz being appointed for us at night, within a
mile and a half of the enemies Army; where being come to our Randezvouz by
four a clock in the afternoon, and drawn up in battle; our guards drawn
out to watch, were directed to their Posts, and then we resting by our Arms,
as we were in battle, we slept lying where we stood, that in case of a
Alarm, we were not to be found in disorder, being ready to fight where we
stood.

Immediately after the Army was settled in Quarters, news was come to his
Majesty in post, that the Castle of Leipsigh was given over by accord to the
enemy: As also that General Tilly with a mighty and strong Army, was come a
mile from Leipsigh, and was preparing for a Fight: which news did no ways
alter his Majesty's countenance, being resolved before for the like, to have
sought him to Fight. So that being both willing, and so near, it was easy
bringing them together; our baggage was appointed to go back to Diben, our
horse and foot watches were strengthened, and we were in readiness, and
refreshing first our bodies with victuals, we slept till the next morning.

The fifteenth Observation.
NOthing earthly is more pleasant to be seen, Austria, and the Catholic
League their mortal enemies. Who would not then, for their liberties that were
banished, (that they might one day retire to their possessions) who would not,
I say, be willing, yea more, who would not rejoice (having such a Leader as
Gustavus was) to hazard their lives for the weal of the public; yea more,
for the promoting of Christ's Gospel? Surely for mine own part, I was most
willing and wished long to have seen a day, wherein I might hazard my life in
this quarrel, in being one of the number of Fighters, before I did come at it;
for many reasons, but especially for the liberty of the daughter of our dread
Sovereign, the distressed Queen of Bohemia, and her Princely Issue; next, for
the liberty of our distressed brethren in Christ; and thirdly, for my better
instruction, in the profession of Arms, which is my calling; for having before
seen many occurrences that did belong to our Calling, I longed to have seen a
Battle fought in the Fields in such a quarrel, being led by such a
magnanimous King, of Heroic spirit, that had much more on hazard that day than
I had, who had only to hazard but my life and credit; while as he a King was
to hazard his life, his Crown, his reputation, and all for strangers.

Having thus the night before meditated, I found a motion rejoicing my heart,
in making me resolute, to fight in this Cause; being tied in duty, not only
for my person, but also tied to give Counsel and direction, as the Lord did
enable me, by giving instruction, good heartning, and good example to others,
who were bound to follow me, as I was bound to follow my Master the King;
seeing the Lord by his providence, had brought me thither, with a number of my
friends to follow, and obey him, as they were bound by oath to obey me. And
then I thought with my self, after I had awaked from sleep, going on to
march, that my life was much like a tale, and that we should not care how long
this life of ours should last, but that we should be careful, how well our
life should be acted: for it is no matter, where we end, if we end well; and
we should not ask, when, or where, but we ought to be ever mindful, how we
are prepared going to fight. Nature did beget us miserable, we live
over-burthened with cares, and like a flower, we vanish soon away, and dye.
Our hunting then here, and our care should be only for a perpetual good name
to leave behind us, that so being absent we are present, and being dead, we
live.

The sixteenth Duty discharged on our Fight at Leipsigh.
AS the Lark begun to peep, the seventh of September 1631. having stood all
night in battle a mile from Tillies Army, in the morning, the Trumpets sound
to horse, the Drums calling to March, being at our Arms, and in readiness,
having before meditated in the night, and resolved with our Consciences; we
begun the morning with offering our souls and bodies, as living Sacrifices
unto God, with Confession of our sins, lifting up our hearts and hands to
Heaven, we begged for reconciliation in Christ, by our public prayers, and
secret sighs, and groans; recommending our selves, the success, and event of
the day unto God, our Father in Christ, which done by us all, we marched
forwards in Gods name a little, and then halted again, till the whole Army,
both the Dukes, and Ours, were put in good Order: our Army marching on the
right hand, and the Dukes on the left, our commanded Musketeres marching in the
Van-Guarde, being in one body before the Army consisting of three Regiments,
Scotts, and one Dutch, all Musketieres, led by three Scotts Colonels, men of
valor and courage, fit for the Command concredited unto them, being made
choice of, as men, that could fight Exemplarie to others: (viz.) Sir James
Ramsey, called the Black, Sir John Hamilton, and Robert Monro Baron of Fowls;
we marched thus, both the Armies in Battle, Horse, foot, and Artillery,
till about nine of the Clock in the morning, we halted half a mile distant
from the Imperial Army; that were attending us in Battle; consisting of
forty four thousand men, horse, and foot, our Army, consisting of thirty
thousand men, whereof, to my judgment, His Majesty's Army; were eight
thousand foot, and seven thousand horse; The Duke also, would be eleven
thousand foot, and four thousand horse; having refreshed our selves with
victuals, leaving our Coaches behind us. The whole Army did get green
Branches on their heads; and the word was given, God with us: a little short
speech made by His Majesty, being in order of Battle, we marched toward the
enemy, who had taken the advantage of the ground, having placed his Army on a
place called Gods Acre; where their General did make choice of the ground most
advantageous for his foot, Artillery, and horses; he also did beset the
Dorpes, that environed the ground, which was left for us, with Dragoniers and
Crabbats: to incomber our wings by their evil Neighborhood: yet,
notwithstanding of all the advantages he had of Ground, Wind, and Sun; our
magnanimous King and Leader; under God, inferior to no General we ever read
of, for wisdom, courage, dexterity, and good Conduct, he was not dejected;
but with magnanimity,

Behind these four Briggads were drawn up the three Briggads of Reserve,
with their Artillery before them, standing at a proportionable distance behind
the other four Briggads, with the like distance betwixt them, as was betwixt
the Briggads of the Battle.

The Briggads of horse which had Plottons of Musketeers to attend them, were
placed on the right and left wings of the foot, and some were placed betwixt
the Battle of foot and the Reserve, to second the foot as need were; other
Briggads of horse were drawn up behind the Reserve of the foot Briggads.

The Felt-marshall Horn, General Banier, and Lieutenant General Bawtish
were commanded to over-see the Horsemen, his Majesty, the Baron Tyvell, and
Grave Neles, were to command the Battle of foot; Sir James Ramsey, as eldest
Colonel, had the command of the fore-Troopes, or commanded Musketeers; and Sir
John Hepburne, as eldest Colonel, commanded the three Briggads of Reserve: Our
Army thus ordered, the Duke of Saxon and his Feltmarshall Arnhem, having
ordered their Army (whereof I was not particularly inquisitive of the manner)
they were ordained to draw up on our left hand, and being both in one front
thus ordered, we marched in Battle a little, and then halted again, till his
Majesty had commanded out some commanded Horsemen, on the wings of the Army,
a large distance from the body, to scour the fields of the Crabbats; we
marched again in order of Battle, with Trumpets sounding, Drums beating,
and Colors advanced and flying, till we came within reach of Cannon to our
enemies Army, then the magnifick and magnanimous Gustavus the Invincible,
leads up the Briggads of horse one after another to their ground, with their
Plottons of shot to attend them: As also he led up the Briggads of foot one
after another to their ground, during which time we were drawn up according to
our former plot, the enemy was thundering amongst us, with the noise, and
roaring whisling and flying of Cannon-Bullets; where you may imagine the hurt
was great; the sound of such music being scarce worth the hearing, though
martial I confess, yet, if you can have so much patience, with far less
danger, to read this duty to an end, you shall find the music well paid;
but with such Coin, that the players would not stay for a world to receive the
last of it, being over-joyed in their flying.

By twelve of the Clock on wednesday the seventh of September,

By half three, our Cannon a little ceasing, the Horsemen on both wings
charged furiously one another, our Horsemen with a resolution, abiding
unloosing a Pistol, till the enemy had discharged first, and then at a near
distance our Musketeers meeting them with a Salve; then our horsemen discharged
their Pistolls, and then charged through them with swords; and at their return
the Musketeers were ready again to give the second Salve of Musket amongst
them; the enemy thus valiantly resisted by our Horsemen, and cruelly plagued by
our Plottons of Musketeers; you may imagine, how soon he would be discouraged
after charging twice in this manner, and repulsed.

Our Horsemen of the right wing of Finnes and Haggapells, led by the valourous
Feltmarshall Horn, finding the enemies Horsemen out of Order, with resolution
he charged the enemies left wing, forcing them to retire disorderly on their
battles of foot, which caused disorder among the foot, who were forced then
to fall to the right hand; our Horsemen retiring, his Majesty seeing the enemy
in disorder, played with Ordnance amongst them, during which time, the force of
the enemies Battles falls on the Duke of Saxon, charging with Horse first in
the midst of the Battles, and then the foot giving two Salves of Musket
amongst them, they were put to the Rout, horse and foot, and the enemy
following them cried Victoria, as if the day had been won, triumphing before
the victory; But our Horsemen charging the remnant of their horse and foot,
where their General stood, they were made to retire in disorder to the other
hand toward Leipsigh; our Army of foot standing firm, not having loosed one
Musket; the smoke being great, by the rising of the dust, for a long time we
were not able to see about us; but being cleared up, we did see on the left
hand of our reserve two great Battles of foot, which we imagined to have
been Saxons, that were forced to give ground; having heard the service, though
not seen it, we found they were enemies, being a great deal nearer than the
Saxons were: His Majesty having sent Baron Tyvell to know the certainty,
Hephurne, to cause the Briggads on his right and left wing to wheel, and then
to charge the enemy, the Orders given, his Majesty retired, promising to bring
succors unto us.

The enemies Battle standing firm, looking on us at a near distance, and
seeing the other Briggads and ours wheeleing about, making front unto them,
they were prepared with a firm resolution to receive us with a salve of Cannon
and Muskets; but our small Ordinance being twice discharged amongst them, and
before we stirred, we charged them with a salve of muskets, which was repaied,
and incontinent our Briggad advancing unto them with push of pike, putting one
of their battles in disorder, fell on the execution, so that they were put to
the route.

I having commanded the right wing of our musketeers, being my Lord of Rhees
and Lumsdells, we advanced on the other body of the enemies, which defended
their Cannon, and beating them from their Cannon, we were masters of their
Cannon, and consequently of the field, but the smoke being great, the dust
being raised, we were as in a dark cloud, not seeing the half of our
actions, much less discerning, either the way of our enemies, or yet the rest
of our Briggads: whereupon, having a drummer by me, I caused him beat the
Scots march, till it cleared up, which recollected our friends unto us, and
dispersed our enemies being overcome; so that the Briggad coming together, such
as were alive missed their dead and hurt Camerades.

Colonel Lumsdell was hurt at the first, and Lieutenant Colonel Musten also,

The Battle thus happily won, his Majesty did principally under God ascribe
the glory of the victory to the Sweds, and Fynnes horsemen, who were led by the
valorous Felt-marshall Gustavus Horn; For though the Dutch horsemen did behave
themselves valorously diverse times that day; yet it was not their fortune to
have done the charge, which did put the enemy to flight, and though there were
brave Briggads of Sweds and Dutch in the field, yet it was the Scots Briggads
fortune to have gotten the praise for the foot service: and not without cause,
having behaved themselves well, being led and conducted by an expert Cavalier
and fortunat, the valiant Hepburne, being followed by Colonel Lumsdell,
Lieutenant Colonel Musten, Major Monypenney, Major Sinclaire, and Lieutenant
Colonel John Monro, with diverse others Cavaliers of valor, experience and of
conduct, who thereafter were suddenly advanced unto higher charges. The
victory being ours, we encamped over night on the place of Battle, the living
merry and rejoicing, though without drink at the night-wake of their dead
Camerades and friends, lying then on the ground in the bed of honor, being
glad the Lord had prolonged their days for to discharge the last honorable
duty, in burying of their Camerades.

Our bone-fiers were made of the enemies Ammunition wagons, and Pikes left, for
want of good fellows to use them; and all this night our brave Camerades, the
Saxons were making use of their heels in flying, thinking all was lost, they
made booty of our wagons and goods, too good a recompense for Cullions that
had left their Duke, betrayed their country and the good cause, when as
strangers were hazarding their lives for their freedoms.

Our loss this day with the Saxons, Collenbagh, Colonel Hall and Addergest;
and of the foot Colonells, the Barron Tivell, being all of them brave and
valorous gentlemen, we lost also four Lieutenant Colonells, together with a
number of Rutmasters, Captains, Lievetenants and Ensigns.

Of the Saxons were lost five Colonells, three Lieutenant Colonells, with
diverse Rut-masters and Captains, and of inferiors Officers many.

To the enemy were lost on the field near eight thousand, besides Officers of
note, such as the Felt-marshall Fustenberg: the Duke of Holsten, the Count of
Shomeberg; old Geuerall Tillie hurt and almost taken; a number of other
Officers of the Field were killed, and taken prisoners. They lost also thirty
two pieces of Cannon, with three score wagons of Ammunition, and their
General, and Papingham were chased toward Hall, and from thence were forced
with a small convoy to take their flight for refuge to Hamell on the Waser.

The sixteenth Observation.
FIrst then we see here the goodness that follows on that laudable and
Christian custom, used by those, that do first begin the works of their
calling with their true humiliation to God by prayers, in acknowledging their
sins and unworthiness, and in renouncing trust or confidence in any thing
but in God alone, knowing their own wisdom, strength and valor to be of no
moment, without the special aid and assistance of the Almighty and powerful
God; who alone can teach our fingers to fight, giving victory with few as with
many.

And therefore it was that this Magnanimous and religious warrior, with his
whole Army, publicly did call on the Lord, praying for his assistance against
his enemies, and for a happy event of the day, before he begun to set his Army
to work against their enemies, the enemies of God and the true Catholic and
Apostolic faith; which they had endeavored to subvert with the professors of
the truth, to hold up and maintain the man of sin and his erroneous
doctrine, by the power of the house of Austria, and of the Catholic League.
We see then, this duty being religiously and piously discharged by his Majesty
and his Army, the fruit was answerable to their desire: having obtained
victory over our enemies by the good command of his Majesty, and the ready
obedience, dexterity and valor of his Majesty's supreme Officers of the field;
who in all charges did direct those under them to the ready discharge of their
duties, every one of the whole united body of the Army following the example of
their head and Leader, Austria; and for to tear and strip naked that old proud
and Ambitious General Tillie of his former glory and honor; for having
bragged and vainly gloried, he had conquered two Kings before: here now the
Captain of Kings, and King of Captains does victoriously Triumph, having
robbed him of glory, and clipped the wings of the Empire with his little Royal
Army.

Likewise, next unto God, a second help unto this glorious victory, was the
great execution made by his Majesty's Cannon; and though ever before, Tillie
did pride himself all his life time in the course of the wars, in his
dexterity of his great Cannon; here from a Master he was turned again unto a
prentice, being cunningly over shot with Cannon, so that his Cannon, and three
score wagons belonging thereto, were taken from him by Gustavus the first, and
most valiant Captain of the world, with the help of the nation which was
never conquered by any foreign enemy, the invincible Scots; whose prayers to
God were more effectual through Christ, then theirs through the intercession
of Saints.

The third cause of this glorious victory, was his Majesty's good discipline
houlden over the Army, horse and foot, not suffering them without great and
extraordinary punishment, to oppress the poor, which made them cry for a
blessing to his Majesty and his Army.

The enemy on the contrary provoked the wrath of God against themselves and
their Army, for their cruelty used in torturing the poor, and forceing their
moneys from them did further their punishment, and his Majesty's glorious
victory.

The fourth help to this victory, was the plottons of Musketeers, his Majesty
had very wisely ordained to attend the horsemen, being a great safety for them,
and a great prejudice to the enemy, the Musket ball carrying and piercing
farther then the Pistolet: As also the great celerity used in charging and
discharging of our small cannon brought the enemies battle in disorder, to
the furtherance of this victory: As also the extraordinary care and diligence,
that was used by his Majesty, and his Officers, in seeing and foreseeing of the
defects and disorders amongst our selves; which being suddenly remedied, was
also a help to this victory: And last of all, the invincible courage and
resolution both of Officers and soldiers in standing firm, Notwithstanding of
the fury of their enemies; and which was more, they were no ways dismayed or
discouraged at the flight of the Saxons, but thought it their greatest glory to
be victorious without them; standing resolutly till they saw the back of their
enemies, the undoubted tokens of their glorious victory.

His Majesty's Army on this service as at all times, might be called truly
valorous, for those are called valorous Captains, and holden for such; that
when their Camerades are flying, they notably with hands, voice and wounds (if
wounded) sustain the fight, doing at once the duty of Soldiers and of
Captains, by those means, bringing back, and restoring the suspected loss
unto victory, for their credits. For as ignorance does easily precipitate men
into danger, even so to a generous heart nothing can seem difficult or
fearful, being once resolved to fall on,

Here also the resolution of our horsemen on this service was praise worthy,
seeing they never loosed a pistol at the enemy, till first they had discharged
theirs: for the enemy being fierce and furious; while as ours were stout and
slow, the enemy was made weary when ours were fresh, which made the enemy being
weary, and charged with a fresh succor, being once set on going, they followed
hard their victory, not giving them time to breath, or recollect their forces
again, till they were utterly defeated; that the night and darkness was
their best safety. For I did observe here, that the duty of valiant Commanders
is to know not only the nature of their enemies, but also their spirit, and
wherein they pride them most: we ought to make our best use for to deceive and
out-shoote them in those same things wherein they delight and trust most unto.
Likewise this day I did observe, Saxons were) are afraid of death; who seeking
their safety in flying, they were miserably cut down by their enemies.

I did likewise observe this day, that it is not the multitude does the turn,
but under God it is good command, good conduct, art, and skill in handling the
weapons of our warfare, and in taking the occasions in time that beget victory.

Therefore he that would labor an Army as Gustavus did, that eschewes danger,
when he should fight, as our Camerades did the painted Soldiers the Saxons,
with their plumed Officers; which feathers served them I think in their
flight, for tokens rather to cut them down by, than for their safeties.

Courage should grow by frequencie of danger, the only way, in my opinion, to
fear nothing, and then he may be called stout, before the maker of a quarrel
at home, who once drawing a sword, when he knows of twenty Parters, or
Redders, is there called stout; but when he comes abroad to the wars, Nam
ardua and difficilis virtutis est via, tamen, nil tam difficile est, quod non
solertia vincat; And death it self is never bitter, when it leaves an
immortal, and glorious name behind it; Vivit enim post funera virtus: and
animus moderatis laboribus adjuvatur, immoderatis autem abluitur.

To conclude then this observation, we see that as courage in wars is much
worth, for obtaining of victory: so is the wisdom of a General or Leader in
wars, as Gustavus was, of so much worth, even in the obtaining of this
victory, that the spirit of him alone, and skill in direction, was better than
thousands of armed men. The enemy being in this Battle near twelve thousand
men, at least, stronger than we; yet Gustavus alone on our side was better, and
of more worth to us, then that multitude to our enemies.

We see then here,

Here also we see, that a good cause and a good quarrel is ever to be had, if
thou would have victory over thine enemies; and who would wish a better
quarrel then we fought for, this day being for the relief of our distressed
friends, and for the liberty and promotion of Christ's Gospel; or who would
not hazard, in such a quarrel, especially against such enemies, that had
banished the daughter of our dread Sovereign, and her royal Issue, from her
Kingdom and Dignities?

O would to GOD I had once such a Leader again to fight such an other day; in
this old quarrel! And though I died standing, I should be persuaded, I died
well; and I wish, that as we have received the light of truth happily, that
fought in that quarrel: even so we may happen to restore that light again
pleasantly; that as we did overcome that day our carnal enemies; even so we
may overcome in our last fight our spiritual enemies; that after death we may
be crowned with immortal Glory.

The seventeenth Duty discharged of our March from the place of Battle
toward Leipsigh.
HAving merrily past the night on the place of Battle, with variety of
pleasant discourses of our several observations of the day; having hunted a
Fox, escaped with his life, he had a torn skin, and a bruised body; and
being long chased, in end he got a hole to hide him in: for sure he did think,
there was no long safety for him, if often he did but meet with such cunning
hunters; that had laid all passes for him, to keep him in: for though, at this
time, he had stripped away his tail, yet his train (for the most part) were
either taken or killed.

Other Discourses we had of plenty, and of want, being some of us extremely
hungry, others pined with extraordinary thirst, having no water near unto us,
nor vessels to bring it from a far, our servants being left far behind us,
who were plundered by those cowards that had fled from us, who also furnished a
great part of our nights Discourse, having wondered at their carriage, that had
such external shows, with so few inward gifts of the mind.

The night thus past, the day peeping, every one, that missed a loving friend,
or a Camerade, went near to the ground, on which they sundered, making
diligent search to find them, either dead or alive; sundries of both were
found, the dead were put under ground, being honorably buried like soldiers,
that had given their lives for the weal of the public, the wounded were
convoyed unto Dorpes, where Chirurgians were appointed to attend their cure.

By nine of the Clock, the Army was drawn up in Battle, where the
difference was great, betwixt our show then, and the sight of the day before;
His Majesty having overviewed the Army, he took the most part of the
Horsemen with him, and commanded to march toward Leipsigh with the rest of the
Army, to be rested there till further Orders; and His Majesty with the
Horsemen advanced after the enemy; prosecuting the victory, in taking Order
with those they had left behind, for making their Retreat sure, whereof there
were left at Leipsigh three thousand men, whom His Majesty in his by-going
gave Orders to pursue, and advanced to a Castle called Morshberg, where there
were a great many of the enemy, who rendered themselves, and took service.

Our March continuing to Leipsigh, at our coming there, Diben: during which
time, the Saxons were coming together, their fear being past at Leipsigh,
where Felt Marshall Harnam was appointed, with the Dukes forces, to take in
both the Town and Castle, which immediately were given over on accord.

The seventeenth Observation.
HEre we found the Proverb verified, Job was not so miserable in his
affliction, as he was happy in his patience. Which should teach all men of our
Profession to bear their disturbances and troubles patiently; that in end they
may come to their wished for credit and honor. For he is not worthy the
sweet, that cannot suffer the sower; neither is he worthy to be made
participant of such mirth, as we enjoyed this night, that ran away in time of
danger.

Here also we see,

Here also we see, that death is fatal unto all, both to feeble and
courageous, but a glorious death is only proper unto the valiant; who oftest
does eschew death, when the fearful perishes in an instant; and therefore it
is that the valiant man does choose rather to die honorably, than to live in
ignominy, as the feeble does; but these died here valiantly; the brightness of
their Actions, done in their life time, remains firm in the minds of men unto
all ages; And to their posterities in writing, never suffering their memories
to rotte with the time; whose burialls, though mean, on this place of
Battle, yet they are commemorations of their virtuous lives to posterity;
whose killing was no punishment (say the world what they list) but rather the
beginning of their glory: And therefore, how ever a man dies, he dies well that
dies in Christ, ending his days with honor.

At this days service I was rich in friends, that helped to the obtaining of
this victory with credit; but soon after we found the fruits of mortality,
death having seized more on our kindred, than on any other Family of our
Nation, that were employed in this war; and the unthankfulness of those we
served has been such, that those who suffered most, were least rewarded; as
we may justly say, having lost our Master and King, who did see our actions,
and had rewarded them, had he lived. And though I will not vaunt, neither of my
friends, nor of our travells, none can blame me to say, as the Puppie said, we
Dogs killed the Hare, since we were with the rest at Leipsigh, the center of
Germany, which was, and is, and shall be Seeds Belle, till the cause be won,
and those we fought for be restored; and then I would be content to lay up my
sword, and live a retired life, serving God and the Public at home, as we
did abroad.

The eighteenth Duty discharged of the intaking of Hall and of the Castle, and
of our March from Leipsigh to Hall.
HIS Majesty having left Felt-marshall Harnam with the Dukes forces, to accord
with Leipsigh and the Castle, the eleventh of September, we continued our march
toward Hall; and coming at the appointed Randezvouz, we halted in the fields,
where we were to quarter over night; his Majesty accompanied with a great and
honorable train of Cavaliers, lighted from his horse on the head of our
Briggad;

His Majesty taking horse again with his Royal train, he directed General
Bannier to go and distribute the three thousand foot prisoners that were
willing to take service, under the Dutch Regiments: Whereupon, I approached
unto his Majesty, entreating his Majesty to consider the great loss our
Regiment had sustained on all the former occasions of service, that seeing we
were become weak like to other Regiments; Therefore his Majesty might be
graciously pleased to give order to General Bannier, that I might have all the
Britains and Irish that were amongst the prisoners, to strengthen our
Regiment, which his Majesty granting, directed a Cavalier with me unto the
General, commanding I should have them: I was overjoyed, thinking to get a
recreut of old Soldiers; and the Cavalier having declared his Majesty's will
unto the General, the General said, with all his heart I should have them,
and when I had made trial to find out the number; there were but three Irish
amongst them all, and being disappointed of a strong Recreut, I did over-see
those, to follow their Camerades; and being returned, his Majesty asked me how
I sped; I told his Majesty, Britains were so far addicted to his Majesty and
the cause, that few of them served the Emperor, whereupon I entreated his
Majesty for some Dutch; but his Majesty refusing, promised to put me and the
Regiment alone upon an occasion, where I should get, not only the prisoners,
but good booty also.

The next morning continuing our march toward Hall, the most part of my folks
were commanded for the intaking of the Castle of Hall, the party being
commanded by the Colonel of the Artillery, Captain William Stewart, Clare his
brother, then Captain under our Regiment, was commanded with the commanded
men, the Castle being taken by accord, we did get fifty old Soldiers that
took service under our Regiment.

His Majesty on the Sabbath day in the morning went to Church, to give thanks
to God for his bypast victories, this church being the Bishops Cathedral
seat, I did hear there sung the sweetest melodious music that could be
heard, where I did also see the most beautiful women Dutchland could afford.

The next day the Duke of Saxon, Hall, to congratulate his Majesty's victory,
and was invited to sup with his Majesty, where they made merry, and the next
day held counsel how to maintain the wars, and how they should prosecute
their victory, where it was concluded, that his Majesty with his Army should
advance toward Erford, and, then over Duringer Valt unto Franconia; and that
the Dukes Army should march unto Silezia, and toward the Crantzis, or
Frontiers of Bohemia. After this conclusion, his Majesty sent post unto Spruce
to call the Chancellor of Sweden from thence, to he at Hall as Legate for his
Majesty, to disburden him of the politic affairs, having burden enough of
the military employment, and of the receiving and dispatching of foreign
Ambassadors; and till the Chancellors coming he did leave Colonel Winckle with
a strong Garrison in Hall, having wisely foreseen both the way, how to
prosecute his victory, as also to maintain his Conquest.

The eighteenth Observation.
THIS great Army of General Tillies being defeated, did separate themselves in
great Troops and bands, especially the foot; who ought ever to stand well,
and fight with courage bouldly in field, and not to suffer themselves to be
rent; though the horsemen should run away,

Here we see, that the foot Soldiers suffer ever the greatest loss in
extremity, and they have ever least gains, though most credit: but we see his
Majesty with clemency does follow the example of the ancient Romans, who, of
all victories, thought that victory best, which least was stained with blood,
having given quarters and service to three thousand Imperial Soldiers,
without drawing one drop of blood.

Likewise we see here the continuance of his Majesty's industry and diligence,
as well in prosecuting his victory, as he was valiant in obtaining of it, in the
one as in the other vindicating his own honor, and the honor of his noble
friends, showing, after the fury was past, his clemency and meekness toward
his enemies; yet who ever was more valiant than he, being ever in all his
on-sets a Leader? And as we see his Majesty's valor and diligence, in
prosecuting his victory: so we see also his care, in supplying the weakness
of his Army, as a wise General should do, in not letting his enemies see the
weakness of his Army, which ought never to be known to those, who would
rejoice at the same.

Likewise here I did observe a great thankfulness in a King, in acknowledging
openly in view of an Army, the good service done by his servants: wherein I did
especially see his love to our Nation beyond all others, that did serve him, to
make other Nations emulous of their glory, in following of their virtues; and
though his Majesty used them here,

Likewise we did see here, how few of our Nation are induced to serve those
Catholic Potentates: and for my part, I find the reason good: for if we have
any enemies in Europe, it must be those, that would not only overthrow our
estates at home (if they could) but also would force us (if it lay in their
powers) to make shipwreck of our consciences, by leading us unto Idolatry.

Moreover we see here, that his Majesty and the Duke of Saxon having once been
companions of danger together, they were then entertaining one another
familiarity, in renewing of their friendship, confirmed again with the German
custom, in making their League the firmer, by drinking brother-ship together,
where I having entered the Hall, and being seen by his Majesty, I was presently
kindly embraced by houlding his Arm over my shoulder: wishing I could bear
as much drink, as old General Major Ruthven, that I might help his Majesty
to make his Guests merry, and holding me fast by the hand, calling to the Duke
of Saxon, declared unto him, what service our Nation had done his Father and
him, and the best last, at Leipsigh: commending in particular to the Duke,
Colonel Hepburne, and Lumsdell, and having called Colonel Hepburne unto him,
he did reiterate the former discourse, and much more, in commendation of the
Scots.

In the continuance of this war in Germany (as the sequel of the Story will
prove) from the Balticke coast unto the Alps and Tyroll; where Colonel
Hepburne was sent out as Colonel, to command a party, I was sent with him, as
his second, being ever much obliged unto him, not only for his love on those
occasions, but also for his good counsel, he being long before me in the
Swedens service. And as we were often Camerades of danger together; so being long
acquainted, we were Camerades in love: first at College, next in our travells
in France, at Paris and Poictiers, Anno 1615. till we met again in Spruce at
Elben in August 1630. Hepburne has done, who is generally so well known in
Armies, that he needs no testimony of a friend, having credit and reputation
enough amongst his enemies.

To conclude then this observation as I begun it, I cannot but commend his
Majesty's wisdom and foresight, in bringing the Rex-chancellor Oxensterne on
the Dutch bottom, to be second to his Majesty, and to free him of a part of
his buthens, by placeing him at Hall (as Legate) being Centrum Germania.

The ninteenth Duty discharged of our March from Hall toward Erfort in
Duringland.
HIS Majesty having left Colonel Winckle at Hall as Governor, with a strong
Garrison to command the Town, he ordained and left the Duke of Anhalt as
Stat-houlder, Madeburg: having taken leave of the Duke of Saxon, after many
protestations and promises of mutual friendship; our march did continue
toward Erfort; and before our up-breaking, the Castle of Leipsigh was given
over by accord unto the Duke of Saxon: and the Dukes Army was also marching
toward Silesia and Bohemia.

The seventeenth of September, our first nights quarter was taken at a Dorpe,
two miles from Hall; where those of Erfort being so displeased at our coming,
as unwilling to entertain such Guests (they being all Catholics, Jesuits and
Monks) being mightily afraid, they did send their Commissioners before them,
to treat with his Majesty, but his Majesty did give them their answers, by
Duke William of Wymar, that they should quit the Catholic faction, and give
their oath of fidelity to his Majesty of Sweden, and that they should take in
his Garrisons within their Town, and render up to his Majesty the Castle of
Eryackburg, with the Colleges to come in his Majesty's will; who should suffer
them to be untroubled in their Religion, paying their contribution to the
wars, like the other Burgers and country.

The Commissioners thinking their conditions to be hard, they took leave of
his Majesty, promising to refer the business to the Town and Clergy: and
they being departed, the Duke of Wymar with a Regiment of horse was directed
after them; having charge to ride as hard as they could, and entering the
Ports with a few horse at the first, commanded the Guard to lay down their
Arms, which hardly they could refuse, the rest being so near; they entered the
Town and marched peaceably unto the market place, which caused an
extraordinary fear amongst the Burgers, and yet a greater terror amongst the
Clergy.

The Council being called to come on the market place, they were commanded to
render the Town keys unto the Duke; who getting the keys, the Town was
taken without blood.

The twenty two of September, his Majesty having quartered the greatest part of
the Army without the Town, he entered the Town with eight thousand men foot
and horse, which were all quartered within the Town, and Cloisters; having all
free entertainment, in abundance; some of the Clergy removed themselves, those
who pleased to stay, were not troubled but in their means, and his Majesty
promised unto the Town and Council the free enjoyment of their former
liberties.

His Majesty having rested the Army some few days, Duke William of Wymar was
made Stat-houlder,

My cozen, the Baron of Fowls, with his Regiment of foot, being left there in
Garrison, took afterward Patent of the Duke of Wyman for leavying a Regiment
of horse, which he after brought to pass.

His Majesty giving direction for repairing the fortifications of the Town,
there were Orders given to the Army to be in readiness, for to march over
Durengerwalt unto Franconia, and the Regiment had orders to provide their
Soldiers sufficiently of Pikes and Muskets, being desired to send unto Erfort
for such as they stood in need of.

The nineteenth Observation.
HIs Majesty as he was valourous and diligent in conquering; so he was
careful to maintain his Conquest: the one being as necessary as the other.
Likewise we see his Majesty's wisdom, in appointing the Duke of Anhalt (in
respect of his power in those quarters) to be Stat-holder at Hall, and over the
Stifft of Madeburg, till the Chancellor of Swedens coming, where we see, that
His Majesty, for his own Aims, Lutherans, but made a like use of them both.
For though the Duke of Anhalt was a Protestant, he being powerful in those
Quarters, to do His Majesty service (being Father in law to Duke William of
Wymar) this Command was imposed upon him.

Here also at Erfort, being the first part in Dutchland belonging unto the
Catholic League, as appertaining to the Bishopric of Meniz,
notwithstanding, we see His Majesty clemency toward the Papists, in using no
violence against them, save only, Iure Belli, as those who were conquered by
the sword; His Majesty did exact of them contribution to the wars, and
their fidelity in giving their Oaths to be true unto His Majesty, in doing
no harm unto his person or Army; by entertaining correspondence with his
enemies, and on those terms, His Majesty was pleased, to let them remain
untroubled in their consciences, and those that were scrupulous to give this
Oath, were suffered to depart in peace, and those who were contented to give
it, could not say, they were injured.

Here then we see, that Princes Charters are no others over their conquered
lands, than their sword, and the Oath of fidelity.

It is reported of Peter Count of Savoye, that he coming to give his Oath of
fidelity to the Emperor Otto the fourth, he came presenting himself before
the Emperor, the one half of his body clad over with cloth of gold, and his
left side clad over with glittering Armor; the one, to testify the honor and
respect he carried to the Emperor; the other, how ready he was to fight
against his enemies, or those that durst speak evil of His Majesty: and
being asked for his Charters, which he had of lands given him in time of
wars, he drew his sword, saying; here they are, signifying thereby, that
brave warriors, Kings or Princes had no better right than their swords.

Here also we see, that nothing is more powerful, to bring our enemies to an
accord, than a strong Army, while as they want strength to oppose them; for
the Conquest will render and give such conditions to the Conqueror; as he
pleases to further, good or bad.

We see also here as formerly, His Majesty in respect of the Duke of Wimar his
power in those Quarters (which in effect is great) appointed him Stat-houlder,
and supreme Commissioner in His Majesty's absence, in governing the Country,
and in strengthening the Army, by leavying of forces, of horse and foot,
being a fit man for such employment, that part of the Country being the most
populous part in Germany, and cheapest to entertain them, through the
fertility of ground in those parts, rendering increase beyond any part of
lower Germany.

The twentieth Duty discharged of our March toward Wurtzburg in Franconia.
THE twenty-six of September, During-vault with a strong Army. And therefore
being minded to march unto Franconia, to visit the Bishops of Bamberg and
Wurtzburg, he took the one half of the Army with himself, crossing over the
Vault toward Konickhoffen and Swinfort; and directed Lieutenant General
Bawtish, and Sir John Hepburne, with the other half of the Army, to march
over the Vault unto Franconia, upon Smalka and Newstat, the Randezvouz
appointed for the Army to meet at was Wurtzburg on the Maine, being the Bishop
his chief residence, where there was a great City and a strong Citadell or
Castle, wherein lay a strong Garrison, and the most part of the riches of the
Country, being esteemed by them as impregnable, in respect of the Situation,
being seated on a high hill unaccessible, save only from the Town, so that it
was hard to do it any hurt by Cannon, being so strong by nature, and fortified
with diverse out-workes, on the accessible side that lay to the City.

The Army thus divided, and marching alike to one center or Randezvouz, his
Majesty was provided to take in the strengths that lay in his way, and
Bawtizen and Hepburne had Orders to bring under Contribution such Cities, as
they marched on, as they did.

His Majesty took in his way Konickhoffen by accord, being strong, and having
beset it with a Garrison, he marched from thence to Swinfort, and took it in
also; and having beset it with a Garrison, the Burgers being made to give their
Oath of fidelity, Duke Ernest of Wymar was appointed Stat-holder over
Franconia.

In this time we marched over the Vault to Smalka, and from thence to Newstat,
Milerstad, Gemond, and Carlestat on the Maine. The first night we quartered on
the side of the Vault next unto Franconia, in a City called Smalka, where we
were well quartered; and the next morning we marched to Mainigen, from thence
to Mellerstat, and then to Newstat on the Salt, from thence to Hamelburg, from
thence to Gemond, and from Gemond to Carlstat; and these six Cities we took in
by accord; and having gotten a Composition of moneys of them, they being sworn
to give their obedience unto his Majesty, having quartered in them as we past,
they were free, paying the moneys they had promised, and the monthly
Contribution. In this march, though the General Lieutenant commanded in
chief, and made the Accord most to his own advantage; having got of these
Towns above fifty thousand Dollers, whereof he made neither account to his
Majesty, nor yet was he any ways beneficial to the Colonells, who did the
service; but put all in his own purse; neither yet did be acknowledge Sir John
Hepburne with the least token of his bounty, whose merit, at this time, was
not inferior to his own.

His Majesty having taken in Swinfort, and beset it, Wurtzburg, and coming
before the Town, he summoned them to render, whereupon they did send Father
Ogleby, Abbot of the Scots Cloister at Wurtzburg, to capitulate with his
Majesty, in the behalf of the Burgers, who got granted unto them the like
accord, as was made with Erfort, in all degrees; the accord subscribed, his
Majesty entered the Town the same day that our forces arrived at Carlstat,
being within two miles of them that night.

The City given over, the Castle refusing to hear of any Treaty, they
begun from the Castle-workes to plague his Majesty's Army with Cannon; where
ever they could lie or stand, within or without the City, on either side of
the Maine, they were cruelly tormented by the enemies Cannon; so that at last
it went on in earnest on both sides, for his Majesty having had intelligence,
that General Tilly with a strong Army of fifty thousand men, being joined
with the Duke of Loraine, were coming for the relief of the Castle; his
Majesty resolved, that taking of time was best, and that it behooved him on
the sudden to have it, or not at all.

This Castle being a strong Strength, sequestered on a height from the Town;
and the Soldiers as they retired from the Town, they did break off one Arch
of the Bridge, to hinder his Majesty's passage over the Bridge unto the Castle;
being the only way he could get to it; and the Castle-workes did so command
the Bridge, that a single man could not pass over without great danger of
life, being the whole Bridge did lie open just under the Castle; where there
was one long plancke laid over the broken Arch, being distant in height from
the water, near eight fathom, so that it seemed a hazard or torment to any
man, to pass over along the plancke; where some valourous Officers and
Soldiers would rather adventure to go before the mouth of the Cannon, than to
cross over the plancke, though there were no danger of the enemies Cannon or
Musket, which still played furiously on that pass of the Bridge, to hinder his
Majesty's Soldiers in setting over; where at first, two valourous Gentlemen of
our Nation, being brethren, were killed on the Bridge (viz.) Sir James Ramsey
his Major, called Bothwell and his brother.

Nevertheless, before our coming from Carlstat, being within two miles;
Dutchland, during the continuance of the wars; And therefore Sir James Ramsey
and Sir John Hamilton were made choice of, with their Regiments by his
Majesty, who knew both their worth and valor, being persuaded, if they
refused it, none would undertake the service after them; the passage being so
dangerous, and of such hazard, that without great difficulty, there was no
probability to gain much credit there; and his Majesty resolved, except
those Cavaliers with their followers, would make way to others, the wished
event could not be hoped for at that time, seeing the enemy was within three
days march to relieve it; and to the end, they might show good example to
others, they were commanded, with their fellows, being all Musketeers, to
cross the Bridge, and to beat the enemy from the water side, and then to
force a passage for the rest of the Army toward the Castle; the orders were
as hard, as the passage was difficult, yet Cavaliers of courage, being daring
men, and once resolved, nothing could seem difficult unto them, to gain
honor and credit to themselves and Country; especially being made choice of by
a King, out of his Army, to give testimony publicly, in view of the whole
Army, of their valor and resolution exemplary, forcing their enemies to give
ground for them and theirs, having had not one foot of ground on that side of
the water, till they should gain it at their landing: for I was none of the
actors, nor yet of the spectators, till I had viewed it the next day, being
informed particularly by my Camerades of the manner of their on-falling.

The bridge day over the Maine, Salves of muskets on them before their landing;
Nevertheless, Sir James Ramsey and Sir John Hamilton, in obedience to his
Majesty's commands, with a few Soldiers adventured to cross the River with
small Boats; their Soldiers giving fire before their landing, and in their
landing, against their enemies: and being happily once landed, and beginning to
skirmish, their Soldiers they left behind them, who before durst not
adventure to cross along the plancke, seeing their Officers and Camerades
engaged with the enemy, to help them, they ran over the plancke one after
another so fast as they could run; till at last they past all and made a
strong head against the enemy; till, by the valourous Conduct of their Leaders,
and their following, they forced the enemy to give ground, retiring unto their
works.

Their Leaders, desirous to gain further honor and reputation, pursued the
enemy so hard, till they had beaten them out of a Torn, they had fled unto. At
which time, Sir James Ramsey was shot lame in the left arm, and then his
Camerade Sir John Hamilton succeeding him both in command and courage;
notwithstanding of the enemies strength and great fury used against them,
having disputed with long service for the ground; at last it was made good by
Sir John and his followers; till such time his Majesty had set over after them
the most part of the Army, so that they were blocked up on all quarters, and
forced to remain within their works; till that against night, the service
being ceased, we with the rest of the Army were come from Carlstat, and
quartered that night without the Town on the other side of the Maine.

His Majesty before day, Swedes, and some Dutch Regiments, to storm the
enemies works, who having kept slight watch, were unawares surprised by some
Swedes, that had entered with ladders over the wall, so that a panick fear
having possessed them, they retired in disorder from their Post; and the
Swedes and Dutch followed so hard, that they had not time to draw up their
drawbridge, neither yet to let down the Portcullis of their inward Ports;
being so amazed, our people flocking in after them, cut them down as they were
found, giving no quarters at all, so that they that entered first made the best
booty, though least service. Here fortune favored his Majesty miraculously
at this time, beyond men's expectation, as formerly; having got here a great
deal of riches; as also many Cannon, and great store of Ammunition; and of all
sort of victuals abundance. The fury past, his Majesty set a Governor on the
Castle, and a Garrison, which was strong, and he gave Orders presently to
begin to repair the works, seeing General Tilly, with his Army, were
drawing near; and his Majesty having got intelligence, that they were
quartered within two miles off Wurtzburg, according to his accustomed manner,
his Majesty with a party of Horse and Dragoniers fell upon their nearest
quarters in the night, and defeated four Regiments of their Horse, and retired
the next night unto Wurtzburg, attending when the enemy would seek for his
revenge.

The twentieth Observation.
HIs Majesty at this time, as formerly, used great expedition in marching unto
Franoonia, knowing it was one of the Circles of the whole Empire, that was of
most importance for the enemy; being a strait and a strong Country, by reason
of the strengths within it: And therefore it was, that he divided his Army in
crossing the Vault, at diverse places; that his Artillery might pass the sooner
through. For he knew, who ever was Master of Wurtzburg, he commanded the whole
River of the Maine, and consequently, whole Franconia; which fortunately
happened, according to his Majesty's deliberation.

Here also we see the evil that comes of greediness, in making general
Commanders to be hated by those that follow them; for Bawtizen having got a
great sum of money of these Towns, by the help and service of the foot, it
became him, according to right and discretion, to have shared with the
Colonells, who commanded the Briggads and Regiments; but seeing his want of
discretion in not acknowledging them, they being once joined again to his
Majesty's Army, would never consent to be commanded by him a foot-step
afterward, for ought his Majesty could do, having dealt so niggardly with
Cavaliers of their worth, so that his Majesty was forced to direct him to
command elsewhere.

This greediness is the most pestiferous root, that ever grew in a general
Commander; for on this march, Soldiers were usually commanded to lie in the
Fields, and not suffered to quarter in the Towns,

Here also we see, that of old, our Nation was much esteemed of abroad,
especially the Clergy, who in all Kingdoms, as in Germany, had their
Cloisters, as here, and at Erfort; and he was a Scots man, that brought the
Christian Religion first into Franconia, but was evil rewarded, being there
afterward murdered.

It was the custom observed ordinarily by his Majesty of Sweden, to make use
of our countrymen on service, wherein he desired they should show themselves
examplary to others, as at this time, he made choice of Sr. James Ramsey and
Sr. John Hamilton, to be the first should adventure, of the whole Army, to
force the enemy to give way to his Majesty to set his Army over the Maine;
where, on that bridge Major Bodwell and his brother being killed, were buried
in Wurtzburg Church, leaving the Trophie of their valor amongst strangers, in
honor of the Nation, that was ever glorious abroad.

Sr. John Hamilton disdaining the orders his Majesty did give, for storming the
Castle, having employed the Sweds and Dutch on the storm, neglecting him and
the Scots, who had made the way to the rest, in the extremity of the danger,

Here then we see that no strength, be it never so strong, is able to hold
out, when as God does not watch the Fort, the watchman watches in vain, and
we see by the submission of Franconie after this victory, that the victorious
Ensigns are ever followed: for where Fortune does favor, there the Commons
do follow, and their study also with their favor follows the victorious.

Here also we see General Tillie, Leipsigh, in less then five weeks time, he
draws together again a strong Army, with Fifty thousand men, and lies downs
within three miles of his Majesty's Army, but his Majesty having wisely beset
the passes on the Maine, before his coming, winter drawing near, and the
country being a streite country by nature, for woods, hills and water; As also,
furrage and provision for horses being taken out of his way, his horsemen in
that country were made unprofitable for him to stay there, for lack of
entertainment, which was defective for his foot also, so that it was
impossible for him to stay long; so seeing his Majesty had resolved in that
country, and for that season to make a defensive war, having divided his
Army, both horse and foot within Towns and strengthes, he suffered Tillie to
ruin his young Novices with marches in cold weather, who being for the most
part French and Italians, could not endure the cold air of that country being
hilly: His Majesty having beset all the Garrisons on the Maine stream, he
suffered Tillie, as he did the year before, in Pomeren and Madeburg and the
Marks, to traverse with his Army in the cold, while as he lay still with his
Soldiers within the warm stove; and when he found the storm over past, he
was ready to neglect no time.

The twenty one Duty discharged at Oxenford on the the Maine in Franconia.
HIS Majesty having intelligence, that General Tillie had intention to have
fallen on Oxenford, to patronize the pass over the Maine, where his Majesty
had sent but one hundred and fifty musketeers, whom he judged to be too weak
for defending of the Town, and considering with himself, the enemy might
likewise pursue Wurtzburg, having made but a faint at Oxenford; and perhaps his
intention might be to pursue both alike, his Majesty under night coming alone
on horseback from the Castle, toward my quarter, being then in the remotest
part of the whole Town, I being at supper, his Majesty's foote-man told me,
the King was below, and desired I should come unto him; being come to his
Majesty, he commanded me in all haste to bring our Briggad in Arms, and to
draw them up on that part against his return; John Hepburne in his name to
meet him there, which immediately being obeyed accordingly, his Majesty being
returned commanded Hepburne to lead off the Musketeers of the whole Briggad,
being then eight hundred, and to follow his Majesty whether so ever he went,
who commanded me to bring up the Rear, leaving our Colors and pike-men
behind us there, till further orders: we marched on in the night half a mile
without the Town, before we knew whether we were going, or what the exploite
could be that we were going on, having left both our horses and servants
behind us: at last, his Majesty acquainting Colonel Hepburne with his
design, he marched toward Oxenford, being convoyed with four score horses
along the side of the Maine, and we followed with our foot, marching in
seven hours those four miles, and before two of the clock in the morning, we
arrived there, without halt or drawing of breath by the way. At our coming we
were let in along the bridge, unto the market place, where our Soldiers,
after this wearisome march, were commanded to stay by their Arms all night in
readiness, and houses were appointed for the Officers to remain in all night.

The next morning by day light his Majesty did send for Colonel Hepburne and
me, and tells he was going to visit the walls without, and he commanded to
send two hundred musketeers of our Regiment toward the Port before him, which
being done, his Majesty accompanied with some Cavaliers walked out: and the
night before, at his Majesty's coming to Town he had directed fifty horse to
watch half a mile without the Town, by: but the enemy being too far strong,
made our musketeers lose ground in retiring; and his Majesty suspecting the
enemy was backed with stronger forces, his Majesty commanded me, to command a
hundred musketeers more, with a sufficient Officer to march incontinent, for
relief of their Camerades; and commanded me to go withal, and to place them
in the most advantageous ground, which I did, and incontinently the relief
begun the service a fresh, forcing the enemy to retire back over the top of
the hill; which his Majesty perceiving was wondrous glad, saying, the Scots
skirmish well, who had made the enemy quit their ground, which they possessed and
kept: the other side of the hill being all plain, his Majesty commanded out a
troop of horse, for to recognize the enemies design, and calling Colonel
Hepburne unto him he said, he would leave us there, and fearing the enemy might
have a design upon Wurtsburg, he would return thither, being of greatest
moment, and so he gave orders to Hepburne to defend the Town so long as he
could, and then, in case of necessity, to retire over the bridge, and to break
it off behind him.

His Majesty being gone, Colonel Hepburne begun to put all things in good
order, preparing for the enemies coming, casting down houses and walls, which
might serve without the Town for the enemies advantage, as also, cutting down
trees and hedges, which might serve to shelter the enemy; As also making
Scaffolds about the walls, for musketeers to make service from; ordaining the
several posts to be repaired and defended, in case of the enemies pursuit;
ordering also the watches, and by watches, to observe their precise hours,
making also provision betimes for store of Ammunition, and giving diligent and
capable men charge over it, and appointing guards for it, with several other
directions befitting an able Commander to give out at such times; being looking
for a mighty enemy to pursue a skurvy irregular hole; where no Cavalier could
gain credit without overmuch hazard; yet such a Master would be so served.

All things thus provided, the Curriers went night and day betwixt his Majesty
and the Governor, for mutual intelligence, till the third night before day,
the enemies Trumpets and Drums made such a noise, as though Heaven and earth
were going together, continuing as if the enemy were marching to the walls for
a general storm: our horse guards being beaten in under the walls, were
refused of entry, and the out-guards of foot also; and then every man within
walls did repair to their posts, expecting a general storm, and the
pitterding of the ports. The Colonel having visited the whole guards, and made
the Round of the whole Town, seeing all things were in good order, and the
day drawing near, we found the enemy was retiring from us, having begun his
march at midnight toward Newringburg, and the upper Paltz. The day clearing,
our horsemen having come from the other side of the Maine, being led and
commanded by Duke Bernard of Wymar, whereof four hundred were commanded
toward the enemies quarters, to take order with those were left b^inde, who
did get but slight quarters.

The enemies Army being marched, John Hepburne to break up in the night, with
five hundred musketeers, and to march by the enemy, in the night toward
Wintzsen, which (by appearance) was too hazardous. The enemy being too far
before, and in his way also, which made his Majesty to countermand his former
orders against his custom; and then the Colonel being commanded to beset the
garrison, he was recald with the party to return to Wurtzberg. After Tillies
departure, his Majesty caused publish an Edict over all Franconia, that both
Clergy and Laikes, none excepted, should come and swear their fidelity to his
Majesty. Whereupon the full liberty of their profession in religion should be
granted unto them untroubled. As also they should have his Majesty's safeguards
for the conservation of their worldly estates; and in this Edict were contained
a great part of his Majesty's former victories obtained against his enemies,
with the causes and motives, which moved him to undertake war against the
Emperor, together with the success followed his Majesty in this war, in
having freed Porirren Maclenburg, the three Marks of Brandenburg, the Stift
Breame, the Stift Madeberg, Saxon and Duringer, already of the enemy; As also
Franconia, after the in-taking of Wurtzburg, in forcing Tillie with his Army,
that did come for their reliefes, for scarcity to retire unto the upper Paltz,
from whence shortly he hoped to make him retire to Bavaria, toward the Danow
stream, as he had made him to retire before from Leipsigh to the Waser
stream; and at last, he hoped he should bring out of the Emperor and their
Catholic League, against all their wills, a good General peace, unto all the
Evangelists and those of the reformed Religion in Germany; and he hoped to pay
them home again Iure Talionis, in using their lands in Byerland, as they had
done his friends Lands in Maclenburg and Pomeren.

About this time, Madeburg was blocked up by General Banier and the Britains
forces, commanded and led by the Marquess of Hamilton, at which time also his
Majesty's Ambassador of great Britain, Sir Henry Vain, arrived at Wurtzburg,
where his Honor, with his noble train, had the good attendance and respect
due given unto him by the whole Officers, who were there of both Nations, Scots
and English, whom my Lord Ambassador courteously and kindly did entertain,
with such respect as became his Honor to give unto Cavaliers; and those who
followed his Honor, did also keep familiarity alike with both Nations.

At this time also was Lieutenant Colonel Huball sent with a Convoy of Horse,
and a thousand Dragoniers toward Hanow, who took it in by surprise, with very
little loss, where some hurt Officers that were come from Leipsigh were taken
prisoners, being under cure there.

The Town being taken, Huball being but before Livetenant Colonel to the blew
Regiment, having brought a part of the Country under contribution, he gave out
Patents, for leavying of horse and foot, in his own name, having had a sure
muster-place, and the help of Franckford besides: immediately he did get
Commission of His Majesty, for leavying three thousand horse and foot, to be
in two Regiments under his Command; he was thus suddenly made up by one
fortunate exploite, without any great service, or hurt to himself, or those he
did command. At this same time, or there abouts was Prague in Bohemia given
over, by accord unto Arnham General to the Saxons Army.

The twenty one Observation.
HERE His Majesty was put to the trial of his judgment, Wurtzburg, his Army
for the most part being sent from him, under Command of Gustavus Horn toward
Bambridge, as also having weakened his Army, by beseting the Garrisons on the
Maine, not keeping above eight thousand foot and horse by himself at
Wurtzburg, while as General Tillie, Altringer, Feucker, and the Duke of
Loraine had joined their forces together, making up fifty thousand men, of
intention to force a pass over the Maine, to come at His Majesty; His
Majesty being sure, Tillie would not harm the Country being Papists, he
resolved by cunctation, and delays to weary him with a defensive war,
keeping the maine strength of his Army, within Wurtzburg, being well provided
of all furniture for horse and man; he begun to strengthen the Town with the
spade and the shovell, in making of redoutes and skonces without it, in manner
of a Winter Leaguer: he also caused Scaffold the walls round about within the
Town; and fearing his coming on Oxenford, he did the like, discharging all
duties himself, from one place to an other, as became a wise General, that
did foresee the designs of his enemy, by a timely prevention, according to
the accidents, circumstances, and situation of places, seeing his enemies
strong, and himself weak, he took the first advantage.

This charge of a General to an Army is a place of such weight and
importance, Oxenford, not knowing well himself what to resolve, the enemy
being behind him and before him; able to pursue Wurtzburg, and Oxenford alike;
and to my mind if he had, he might have carried both at that time; for our
Army was not only scattered and dispersed; but also we were weak, and, which
was worse, we were all of us discontented; being too much toy led with
marching, working and watching, without any pay or gains for honest men.

At this time, his Majesty stood in need of assistance and good Counsel,
having enemies on all hands, and a strong enemy; the Country also unsure, being
unfriends and Papists, and he being wise, resolved without giving Battle, his
best was, to press to overcome them with the season, with hunger and cold,
with marches and delays, keeping himself within walls, he knew well twelve
Soldiers with a good Officer to direct them, were better, being willing to
attend, than a hundred naked and hungry Soldiers without, whereby his enemies
Army were undone, without hurt or detriment of his own, Wurtzburg, he could
not suffer himself to be beleaguered with a strong Army, in a strait place;
and to go to the Fields with a discontented weak Army (which it behooved him
to do) was not good. The consideration of this forced him to give some moneys
in hand, to content them, and hand-writ, and assignations for more moneys to be
paid unto them out of Newrenberg, within six months afterward.

As also his Majesty knew well the enemies Army near hand, hearing there was
money given out by his Majesty, that it was the only way to weaken and
dissolve the enemies Army, in making their Soldiers run away, and to take
service under his Majesty, which in effect accordingly sell out: for it being
near Winter, and their Army marched away, their straggling Soldiers did
strengthen our Garrisons, having taken service under us; having but heard of
the brute of money, that was given out amongst us. Where we see, how necessary
it was, at this time, in such a dangerous extremity, for this little Army to
have been commanded by a wise General, that steered his course aright in
midst of the greatest tempest, like to a skillful mariner, where an arrogant
fellow, without skill, that had commanded, had made shipwreck of all.

As his Majesty was wise and moderate in his Command; Minion, and Mars his
equal, Gustavus the Invincible; that by his wisdom, and foresight, forced
old Tillie to retire to Nurenberg, having gained nothing but loss, which
retreat was the presage of his future ruin, at the Leacke, where it enters
into the Danow.

Here also we are instructed, as well by his Majesty's politic government, as
by his military; He being alike expert in both, discharging the duty of a
King, and a General, Tam Art, quam Mart: for the enemy was no sooner gone,
but incontinent his Majesty caused serve his public Edicts, for bringing in
the Countrymen, to give their oaths of fidelity; moving them thereto partly
by compulsion, and partly by promises of duty and of liberty to their
Consciences, two strong Arguments to move those to obedience, who had seen
their friends forced to turn backs upon them, from whom, under God, they did
expect Relief to come.

Moreover we see here, that those who are honored by God, congratulate their
good Fortunes and success; as also to Treat with them in matters belonging to
their mutual States and standing: at this time also, there were Commissioners
sent from Vlme, Strasburg, Nurenberg, and Francford, treating with His Majesty
for themselves apart, as free from the body of the Empire: And such feathers
his Majesty was glad to get out of the Emperors wings, knowing the more he
wanted of such feathers, the worse he could fly: and some of them were light,
changing as the wind. To conclude then, whom fortune favoures, the world
laughs on, as may be seen here, by the example of Lieutenant Colonel
Howbalt, after the intaking of Hanow by mere fortune being surprised; which
was the occasion, this Cavalier was so suddenly made up, in getting Command
over horse and foot, from Livetenant Colonel; who, four years before, was
Sergeant under the blew Regiment. Yet notwithstanding the good he had received
under his Majesty and his Crown, he afterward quit them and their service;
in their greatest extreamitie, which was unthankfully done of him, being more
unkindly, then friendly.

The twenty second Duty discharged of our March from Wurtzburg to Francford on
the Maine.
HIS Majesty having beset Wurtzburg Castle with a strong Swedens Garrison,
under command of Colonel Axellille, preparation being made for the march, the
Colonel of the Artillery, Leonard Richardson a Swede, was directed down the
Maine, with the great Cannon, and three hundred commanded musketeers of Scots,
of Sr. James Ramfey his Regiment commanded by Alexander Hanan, being a discreet
Cavalier, of good command and conduct, and valorous also: they had abundance of
Cannon, fire-workes, Ammunition, and all other furniture belonging to Artillery,
with them by water, having got orders to take in all strengths on the Maine,
which lay in their way, where they and he who commanded them, made good booty,
having taken in several Castles, and Miltenburg also, and from thence
continued their course down the water toward Ashaffenburg, a City and a
Castle on the Maine belonging to the Bishop of Mentz, where they had orders to
remain till his Majesty's coming with the Army.

This march continued for five days, where we had nightly good quarters by the
way, being in fear of no enemy we kept the whole march, the Maine on our right
hand, and our horsemen upon the left, having had the Feltmarshall with his Army
lying at Bambridge, betwixt us and the enemy, so that this march, though in
winter, was not so troublesome unto us, as their traveling is to them, who
journey in foreign countries, for to see strange faces, where they must needs
lay out moneys for their entertainment, some of us on this march were well
entertained, and did get money besides to spend at Francford.

Likewise when it behoved travelers to hire guides, Gustavus a King under God,
our Leader, and a powerful Army to convoy us, and at night, the sweet, and
sociable society of our countrymen and strangers, the one to season the other,
which made our march pleasant, along the pleasant and fruitful River of the
Maine, that runs through fair Franconia into the Rhine at Mentz.

Having come with the Army, the length of Hanow, leaving Ashaffenburg behind
us, we marched to Steinhem, which presently we took in by accord, where the
most part of the Soldiers did take service, which being done, his Majesty did
send unto the Lords of Francford, desiring them for the well of the professors
of the Evangell, to take in a Carrison, with a protestation, if they refused to
do it willingly, it behoved him otherwise to deal with them, which was not
his desire.

They having taken the proposition, for two days, in advisement, his Majesty
the sixteenth of November, did let quarter the Army before their Ports in
Offenback, Ober and Nider Rode; the next day they consented, his Majesty's Army
should march through, leaving six hundred men in Garrison in Saxenhowsen, the
Lords giving their Oath to secure the Garrison of Saxenhowsen of all dangers,
and on the seventeenth of November his Majesty with the whole Army in comely
order marched along the bridge, from Saxenhowsen through the Town of
Francford to wards Hechst, where there lay two miles off the Town a Garrison
of the enemies. In this march through Francford, such order was kept without
any disorder, as if it were the solemn procession of a King and his nobles in
parliament, every one admiring of his Majesty's good order and discipline kept
over his Army.

The nineteenth of November, Hechst was taken in by his Majesty with accord,
where the Soldiers for the most part took service. The next day the Army
lying still in Dorpes, his Majesty returned to Francford, and met with the
Landgrave of Hessen, the Landgrave of Darmstat and with the Earls of the
Vetro, where it was agreed amongst them, for the defense of the Land, to join
in one confederacy, where the Castle of Russelshem was given unto his Majesty
by the Landgrave of Darmstat, whereon two hundred Scots of Colonel Lodowick
Lesly his Regiment were set, under command of Captain Macdowgall.

The next day being the two and twentieth of November, his Majesty returned to
Hechst again, and having put forth the Papists, placing his own Preachers, on
Sunday his Majesty thanked God, that he had gotten in Francfort without blood
or stroke of sword. His Majesty caused to set over a ship-bridge at Hechst,
and sent ships before Mentz, to block it by water, till his Majesty with the
Army crossed the Maine, and marched by Darmstat in the Bergstrasse, of
intention to have gone for Heidelberg, but retiring down near the Rhine,
having quartered the Army, his Majesty with a party did visit the Skonce of
Openham, and thereafter resolved to take it in.

The twenty second Observation.
THIS march being profitable as it was pleasant to the eye, Maine, where the
Towns and pleasant Flects lie by the water, not distant, in many places, half
an English mile from one another; being one of the pleasantest parts, and
wholesomest for air that I did see in all Germany, having a great Traffic by
water from thence unto the west sea, by the Rhine running northward unto
Holland. This Town of Francford is so pleasant for air, situation, buildings,
traffic, commerce withal Nations, Germany, and consequently of Europe;
seeing no continent in Europe is comparable unto Germany, for fertility,
riches, corn, wine, traffic by land, pleasant Cities, fair buildings, rare
orchards, woods, and planting, civility, as well in the country as in the
cities; their Dorpes and Flects walled about; The Boores inhabitants having
their wines in Sellers set in great, rife or plentiful as water, to entertain
their friends, in a bountiful manner, especially along this pleasant River
of the Maine.

Here at Frankford is the Mart, called the Francforter Mass, whether the
Merchants resort from all parts of Europe for the mutual interchange of money
and wares: Hither also are brought twice in the year from all parts of E^repe,
the travells and books written by the learned of all sciences, and of all
controversies of Religion, to be transported again from thence, for the use of
other Kingdoms.

The inhabitants of Francford, we see here are content to take in his Majesty's
Garrison in Saxonhousen, without compulsion or losing of blood: and this kind
of conquest is the best conquest, when we conquer more by love then by force;
where they, by their timely yielding, preserved their Town, their buildings,
their orchards, their houses of pleasure undestroied, when others through their
pride stood out, till they were punished by the ruin of their Towns, the
losing of their movables, as their gold, their silver, their rich cupboords,
their Jewels, their ornaments, their orchards, their gandens, in regard of
their pride in time of their plenty.

But this City of Francford was made wise,

Therefore the Lords of Francford did well, in preferring good conditions of
peace before an uncertain war, especially against such a Heroic King as
Gustavus was, then the Patriot and Protector of their faith and Religion, and
consequently of their freedom, and their countries freedom, and for their
rewards, to my knowledge, they were enriched three years together (by the hant
of the Army) with the substance of the four upper Circles of Germany; which in
the end they rewarded with unthankefulnesse, and doubtless will be punished for
it sometime.

Here also we have the power of example; F^^^^ford having taken his Majesty of
Sweden for their Protector, following their examples, the two Landgra^es Hessen
and Darmstat, with the Earls of the Veteraw desire also to be in the
confederacy, and were most gladly accepted of. Vlme, Nurenberg and Strasburg
ended also their confederacy with his Majesty after the example of Francford,
promising supply of men, money and victuals for the Army, Ammunition and horses
for the Artillery, with abundance of Arms for horse and foot, with powder,
ball, match, wagons, spades, shovells, Pikes, mattockes, axes and all other
things fitting for the advancement of the wars. Here was a great conquest
without stroke of sword, showing unto us the number of friends we get, when
fortune smiles on us: but how soon this H^roicke Person is but once gone, and
that fortune begins to frown, then these variable friends quit their
confederacy again, following the strongest, for which one day the sword of
their enemies will come amongst them, with hunger and pestilence. At this time
the Queens Majesty of Sweden was come to Statin, and from thence on her
journey toward Francford. Here also the Kings Majesty of Bohemia was come to
visit his Majesty of Sweden, Francford, and was wonderfully well liked of by
the whole Communalty of the Cities and Countries, where ever his Majesty did
come.

Here also the Marquess of Hamilton did come unto his Majesty again, being
followed like a Prince, and well respected by both the Kings. The Ambassadors
of Britain and of France were there also, and the Rex-chancellor of Sweden
being come with the Queens Majesty and Sir Patricke Ruthvene come from Spruce,
were all made welcome to this Court then at Francford, which was not inferior
to the Emperors own Court, in respect of great confluence of people, that
came from all parts to congratulate the Lion of the north his victories, and to
admire his fortunes, being so increased in two years time, that all things
succeeded happily unto his Majesty according to his own hearts desire.

The twenty third Duty discharged of the intaking of the Skonce at Oppenham,
and his Majesty's erossing the Rhine.
HIS Majesty having viewed and well recognosced the Skonce on the Rhine, over
against Oppenham, the River being interjected betwixt it and the Town, his
Majesty did lead Colonel Hepburnes Briggad, and Colonel Winckles being the
blew, with some cannon, great and small before it, where his Majesty did stay
till the Batteries were made, and the approaches begun, then leaving the
command on Colonel Hepburne, with tempestuous cold weather, with hard frosts
and snow, we lay down on the fields, having no shelter, but some bushes by the
side of the Rhine.

The Skonce was really fortified with Fossees, that were broad, deep, and full
of water, with a drawbridge over the Moate, and the Skonce was well beset with
a thousand men, and well provided of victuals, fire and Ammunition, having free
passage at their pleasure without danger, from the Town unto the Skonce, and
back again: The Castle and the hill on the other side of the Rhine, being
mounted high, their cannon from their batteries did cleanse and scowre the
fields about the Skonce, being a razed Champange, and plain without any
shelter of their batteries; on the other side they plagued us still with
cannon, especially in the night time, while it behooved us to have fire, which
was their mark, so that sundry were lost, and one night sitting at supper, a
Bullet of thirty two pound weight, shot right out betwixt Colonel Hepburnes
shoulder and mine, going through the Colonells Coach; the next shot killed a
Sergeant of mine, by the fire, drinking a pipe of Tobacco. This night the enemy
made an out-fall,

The next day in the morning, knowing his Majesty had crossed the Rhine, they
did capitulate with Colonel Hepburne, who did give them, being Italians, more
honorable quarters then in truth their carriage did deserve, having got
license to march out, Bag and Baggage, with full Arms, with a convoy to the
next Garrison, they being marched, his Majesty having crossed the Rhine in the
night, where the Spaniard made some resistance, but in vain, his Majesty
having got over, the next morning he marched toward Openham in the Paltz, on
the one side of the Town, and we setting over also, we pursued the Town and
the Castle on the other side, but Sr. James Ramsey his musketeers being led by
their Major, finding a privy passage about the Castle, they stormed over the
walls, coming betwixt the outward Skonce and the castle, and finding the
drawbridge down, on a sudden they entered the Castle, and put all to the
sword: the rest of the enemy finding the Castle to be in, they run all to
storm the Skonce, on which were nine Companies of Italians, John Hepburne, who
was not only a Colonel unto them, but a kind Patron, putting them in good
Quarters till they were armed and clad again. But their unthankfulness was
such, that they stayed not, but disbandoned all, in Bireland; for having once
got the warm air of the Summer, they were all gone before Winter.

The twenty-third Observation.
HERE then we see,

In this point of recognoscing his Majesty's judgment was wonderful, as in
all other practical duties fitting a great Commander, and as his Majesty's
judgment was great and good, so he was of that mind, nothing in this kind
could be well done, which he did not himself, neither could his Majesty
abide, at such times, as he went to recognosce, any other to accompany him in
the danger, other reasons doubtless His Majesty had, which were only privy
unto himself. This point how necessary it is, for a great Commander to be
judicious of no Soldier will doubt.

Here also we see, His Majesty made no difference of season, or weather, in
prosecuting his enemy, when ever he found any advantage. And therefore it was
His Majesty's wise resolution, to cross the Rhine, while General Tillies
Army, in the Winter time, was farthest from him, and making but a faint here
before Oppenham, his aim and design was to cross the Rhine at an other part
by shipping, that while the enemy was busied in defense of the Skonce, His
Majesty might cross at an other part: for the Army once crossed, the Skonce
was lost, for want of supply; and His Majesty once over, the whole Paltz and
Mentz were in fear.

Nothing is more powerful to resist resolution, said of the Oak, being hard
timber, for to cleave it a sunder, there must be wedges made of it self, that
hardness may overcome hardness. My advise then to all brave fellows watching
in trenches, or guarding Cannon, while as the enemy would try their valor by
out-falling, in assailing them, at such times, let the defender do as was done
here, leaving the use of the Musket, as being more unreadie, let them make use
of their pikes, meeting their enemies in the teeth, with a strong firm body
of Pikes, (after the old Scots fashion, used by our Predecessors, that fought
pell mell; with two-hand swords, till one of the parties did quit the field)
for though they suffer loss, sure they must win credit, that repulse their
enemy, rather than disgracefully suffer their Cannon to be nailed, or their
brains knocked out in trenches, while as they take them to the uncertaintie of
the musket. Therefore let resolution be ever present, repulsing force with
force; for if thou would be esteemed amongst the number of brave fellows,
thou must resolve to show thy self resolute, courageous, and valiant, going
before others in good example, choosing rather to dye with credit standing,
serving the public, than ignominiously to live in shame, disgracing both thy
self and Country. Who would not then at such times choose virtue before vice;
glory, honor, and immortal fame, before an ignominious, shameful, and
detestable life?

His Majesty crossing the Rhine, did take with him the Scots, which were
there, of Sir James Ramseys Regiment, of old Spense his Regiment, and of My
Lord Rhees; being landed, the Spanish horsemen having furiously charged, the
Scots, with a little advantage of a hedge, stood by His Majesty against the
Spanish horsemen, and with a strong body of pikes, and salves of musket,
resisted valiantly the horsemen, till the rest were landed, to relieve them. As
also the next day, the Musketieres of Ramseys Regiment, that on all occasions
were wont to show their valor, were the first stormed the walls, at Oppenham;
as they were the first, with their Camerades, that accompanied His Majesty, at
his landing in the Paltz, testifying how willing they were to oppose danger, in
sight of their King and Master, revenging themselves on the Spaniard (a cruel
enemy to the Daughter of our King, and Sister to our Dread Sovereign, the
Queen of Bohemia) whom before they had removed, by force of Arms, from the
sweet land of the Paltz, where at this time, they were fighting, Behemia her
Husband, and his Royal issue, being under the Conduct of the Lion of the
North, the invincible King of Sweden, their Leader; who was careless (as he
said himself that night) to incur the feude, or the enmity and anger, both
of the House of Austria, and King of Spain, to do service to his Dear
Sister, the Queen of Bohemia. Who would not then, my dear Camerades,
Companions, not of want, but of valor and courage, at such a time, being the
time we all of us longed to see, who would not (I say) press to discharge the
duty of valourous Soldiers and Captains, in sight of their Master and King,
having crossed the Rhine, fighting for the Queen of Soldiers, being led by
the King of Captains, and Captain of Kings; who would not then, as true
valourous Scots, with heart and hand sustain the Fight, discharging at once
the duty of Soldiers, and valourous Captains, by that means so far as in
them lay, restoring the Paltz, contemning death, striving to get victory over
their enemies, and freedom of Conscience to their distressed brethren long
kept in bondage, and under tyranny of their enemies, the space of ten years,
till the coming of this magnanimous King, and great Captain; who in six
months time after, did free the Paltz of all Spanish Forces, setting them at
liberty; having brought the Keys of all Goales with him, and opened the
doors, not only of all prisons, but also of all houses and Churches in the
Paltz, that had been closed ten years before, through the banishment of the
owners, bringing them back to their houses again, and having removed the
Idolatrous worship of Papists out of their Churches, suffered them again to
serve God peaceably in their former true, undoubted and only pure profession
of the Faith of Christ's Gospel.

The twenty-fourth Duty discharged of our March to Mentz, and of the intaking
of it.
HIS Majesty having laien here at Oppenham some three days, till the rest of
the Army were come over at Oppenham, and at Stockstat, the Army being come
over, the Spaniards were afraid to stay in any place, that was not wondrous
strong; and their fear being so great, they quit Stagne setting it on fire; as
also the Lotterings Garrison did quit Worms, having first abused the Town
with plundering, and other intolerable damage and hurt, they retired all unto
Frankendall, being strong by fortification, they made it strong of men, having
retired above eight thousand Spaniards within it, who being blocked up, had
never the resolution or courage once to have fallen forth on the Swedens Forces,
but kept themselves close within walls.

His Majesty taking his march toward Mentz, which before was blockt up, on
the other side of the Rhine next to Francford, with Ships, and with the
Landgrave of Hessens Forces, his Majesty about the midst of December, in
cruel tempestuous weather for frost and snow, coming before it on a Sunday in
the afternoon, and having himself rode about the Town, on the Paltz side,
and recognosced both works and walls, the Army standing in Battle, his
Majesty having first commanded the Horsemen, some to quarters, and some on
duty: The foot Briggads were commanded toward their several Posts, where
Colonel Hepburnes Briggad (according to use) was directed to the most
dangerous Post, next the enemy; and the rest to theirs. The night coming on,
we begun our approaches, and prepared for making ready of our Battles,
where, according to custom, men were ordained to make Cannon Baskets, some to
provide materials, some to watch, some to work, some to guard the Artillery,
and some to guard the workmen, and some to guard the Colors before the
Briggad: the day approaching, having made ready the Batteries in the night; as
also having wrought in the approaching by day: the service on both sides
begins with Cannon and Musket, so that our Cannon off the water, and from
the other side, did shoot blancke within the Town, which made great terror
amongst the Inhabitants, the Bishop being removed toward Cowblance, he did
leave two thousand Spaniards within the Town, who were in doubt of the Burgers
fidelity, neither yet did they expect any relief, and the Town being wide of
circumference, more than they were able to beset, they begun betimes to think
on Accord; yet, they resolved, to make it the more honorable, their best was
to prolong time.

Colonel Axallilly, a Swede, being come to visit his Majesty, Hepburne and
me, on our Post, by our Guard-fire, being merrily discoursing, that if a
misfortune should happen unto him there, what should be thought of it, having
had no charge, he having foretold a mishap unto himself, the next day after
dinner hard by me, the leg was shot from him with a Cannon Bullet, who after
that was carried by my folks unto his lodging, and being cured, served after
with a treene or wooden leg.

At this Siege our Briggad did sustain more hurt than the rest of the Army,
being most employed on all commands, both in respect of their valor, and of
the good conduct and fortune followed them, and their Leaders.

The third day, the Skonce without the Town being hard pressed, and we having
on our quarter approached to the walls, and the Town, from the water, and
from the Landgrave side, having sustained great loss by their Cannon. The
enemy finding there was no hope of relief, he entered in a Treaty, and gave
up the Town on accord; being suffered to march out without Arms, they were
conveyed to Cowblance: they being gone, Quarters were made for the whole foot
within the Town, where three days before Christmasse we were quartered, and
remained there, being lodged in the extremity of the cold with the Hopstaffe,
to the fifth of March 1632.

The twenty-fourth Observation.
HIS Majesty of Sweden having crossed the Rhine, the Prisoners that were long
banished, being ten years out of the Paltz, were then encouraged by their
liberty attained unto, through the valor and wisdom of his Majesty of
Sweden, who did bring the keys of the prison, Franckendale, as unto the
strongest corner of their feeble hearts, where it was evident to see, their
removing from all was drawing near. Franckendale being blocked up, and
victuals debarred from them, it was impossible for them to subsist long.

I did observe here, at the in-taking of Mentz, that toil, travel, danger and
resolution were our best means, in getting this Town in three days time; our
Cannon having from the Hessen side so spoiled the Burgers on the streets, and
within their houses, finding their own hurt, being stronger than the Garrison,
forced the Garrison to Accord, by that means preventing their own ruin, and
the loss of their goods, if the Town had been taken by storm of hand. And
therefore, for sparing of their City, they promised his Majesty, for keeping
good order, threescore thousand Dollers.

Likewise I did observe, by Axallillies loss of his leg, hurt comes to men
in that kind, as a presage of worldly luck, in getting, as they say,
something to the sore foot; for he, before this, being but mean in estate and
employment, was afterward made rich by governements. Diverse others I could
instance under our Army, were advanced to riches, after receiving of mean
hurts, and on mean occasions of service, as this was, being but a looker on.
But for me, let me have health, and glad poverty with credit, for riches I
desire not, if that I may have more of credit than others; and that shall be my
prayer, to keep my mind in an invincible place, that external things move me
not: neither would I suffer fortune to be able with her threatenings to pierce
me, having tried sharper that could not dare. Let us then be content with our
lot, and though the means we should live on, be detained from us, yet let us
wrong no body by oppression, in conquering by unlawful means, and doubtless
the Lord will conserve our healths, and sustain our bodies with sufficiency,
and so being honest, we need never be ashamed to be thought poor in men's
esteem, being rich in Christ.

Here also I did observe, Mentz, that did get both Prisoners and spoil with
the best Quarters, when others, that deserved better, were worse quartered in
empty houses, while as other Colonells and Soldiers, of far less
deserving, were making up of estates for their posterity, in better Quarters,
within the Paltz and Franckonie.

But on the contrary; valourous men their labors and travells ought to be
rewarded, with honor and profit, by those they did truly serve. For if great
undertakings in this kind, before Towns, in extremity of danger, were nobly
recompensed with great rewards; that would encourage men again to refuse
nothing to be undertaken, that was honorable: and on the contrary; nothing
discontents worthy men more, than to be rewarded like Cowards; and those that
stood out the danger, like those that durst not lift head when the storm blew;
and when the hope of reward is the comfort of men's labors, than all toil
seems to be easy: and it is a hard thing, when the diligent and industrious
is disappointed of his hyre, and when he is rewarded with injury, who did merit
well; this of all evils, is most unsufferable, when he must suffer loss that
expected help: for on the contrary, it were more just, that notable virtues
should be notably rewarded, with badges of honor, to make all others tread in
the glorious path of virtue, and well-doing.

The twenty-fifth Duty discharged of my March with a party to the Mosell.
WHile we lay at Mentz, his Majesty having heard that the Spaniard had set
over a strong Army at Spier, of intention to fall on the Rhinegrave his
Regiment of horse, lying in the hinder Paltz, betwixt Bachrach and the Mosell,
who having no foot forces with him, his Majesty made choice of me, to be sent
unto him with a party of five hundred commanded Musketeers, for to assist him
in maintaining the Garrisons in those parts, from the incursion of the
Spaniard, and his Majesty hearing of the Queens coming toward Francford,
leaving orders with Duke Barnard of Wymar (then Governor of Mentz, and
commander over the Army in his Majesty's absence) to direct me away with the
party to the Rhinegrave, his Majesty being gone, I was sent for by the Duke
to receive my Orders, which were, I should receive five hundred commanded
Musketeers, with sufficient victuals and Ammunition, and then to ship them at
Mentz, and to go down the Rhine toward Bachrach, and there to send to the
Rhinegrave for further orders, but before my departing, I took orders in writ
from the Duke, how to carry my self in obeying of the Rhinegrave his commands,
and immediately I went and received the party, being in readiness on the
marketplace, with Proviant and Ammunition for the voyage, and being shipped we
went down the Rhine toward Bingen on the Noe, that runs by Creutznach through
the Paltz into the Rhine at Bingen, where Sir James Ramseys Regiment did lie in
Garrison, out of which there went with me of that Regiment a Captain with a
hundred Musketeers; being shipped, we continued our course toward Bachrach,
where being landed, I desired from the Governor (being a Captain under the
Red Regiment) Quarters for my Soldiers,

The next day leaving the party to make good cheer, I went to the Rhinegrave
to receive his Commands, who directed me to march to a Dorpe within two miles
of Coblentz, and to quarter there till further Orders; I retired to the party,
and forcing the Captain to send fifty Musketeers with me; we followed our
Orders, and quartered within two miles of Coblentz.

The Rhinegrave having gotten intelligence where some of the Spaniards did lie
in quarters, with his Regiment falling into their quarters, he did defeat two
Regiments of them, that were come over the Mosell before the Army.

The next day, he advertised me, he was to advance with his Regiment toward
Spier, near the Mosell, to attend the enemies coming, and if he were
distressed, he would advertise me, whereby I might timely beset the Strengths.

The Spaniard having set over his Army at Spier, being ten thousand strong,
getting intelligence of the Rhinegraves Quarter, they marched on it, where he
lay in open Dorpes, in a manner trusting and reposing too much unto himself
and his strength, Hume of Carrelside, who was a Cavalier of courage and of good
experience, finding by intelligence the enemy was approaching on his Guard, he
advertised his Colonel timely to draw out on horseback, and to expect his
enemy in the field, who did take no notice of the first advertisement, till the
Rutmaster rode to him, and advertised him to draw to the fields, he commanded
him again to retire unto his watch, he knew his own time, the Rutmaster
scarce returned, when he with his watch were charged by three Troops, which
charge he received, and charged them again, and then retired on the Colonels
quarter, being so hard followed, that by the Colonel was on horseback, he was
environed by three Regime^ts of the enemies, whom he bravely charged home, with
four troops of his, and making them to retire, he did caracolle about from the
enemy, having suffered loss on the charge. The young Grave of Nassaw, then a
Rutmaster, being hurt and taken, and diverse more inferiors being retired, he
commanded Rutmaster Hume with the other four Troops, to make astand before
the enemy; to hold them off till such time he were retired.

The Rutmaster seeing the enemies strong, coming up in full squadrons one after
another, he drew up very wisely his four troops in the entry of a wood, making
a large and broad front, whereby the enemy might judge, he was stronger than he
was; as also, that they might think he had Musketeers behind him in Ambuscade
for a reserve or hinderhalt, which made the enemy give them the longer time,
and the better opportunity to his Colonel to retire with ease. The Rutmaster
finding the enemy to fall off a little, he retired his troops at an easy
trot, till he overtooke the Colonel, who thought before their coming, they had
been all cut off.

Immediately the Rhinegrave sent to me to beset the Garrisons (as I did) and
then he sent Post unto his Majesty, acquainting his Majesty how all had
past, and of the enemies strength; which his Majesty having known, he drew
his Army together at Mentz, with a resolution to fight with the Spaniard,
before he were suffered to relieve Franckendale, but the enemy hearing of his
Majesty's preparation, they retired over the Mosell again, and they being
retired, I was recalled with the party unto Mentz, where having left a
Captain and a hundred Musketeers with the Rhinegrave to be disposed on, having
got orders to that effect from his Majesty, which afterward were all cut off
by the enemy; the rest of the party dismissed, I retired to my Commands.

The twenty five Observation.
THE duty of an Officer leading a party is almost alike to the duty of a
General leading an Army, sufficiently provided of all things necessary for
such service, as he is commanded on, of Ammunition, spades, shovels, materials
for his Cannon and Pettards, with his Guides to convey him from one place to
another, till he come to the end of his intended march, doing all things by
wise and deliberate steadfastness, in Command without wavering, not altering
his Orders, as he must answer to his General, to whom he is to give account:
and his best is, to have his Orders in writing, that in case of variance
betwixt Commanders, Writing may bear him thorough, when Orders by mouth will
be denied: neither ought he in his command to be timorous or rash, but rather
resolute and remiss, as occasion offers, and on occasions apart, when his
Command must be relative to another direction, that is but subordinate to a
General, he must deliberat wisely what to do, and he must foresee the best
and worst of things; but having once deliberated, let him be as resolute in the
execution as he can.

Likewise here we see in the Rhinegrave a rare example,

Nevertheless, we see him alike beholden to the Rut-master for his
advertisment, as for his safe retreat, having first and last suffered the dint
of the enemies Arms on him, and houlding it off his Commander. A brave example
to be imitated and followed of all Cavaliers, that would gain honor and
reputation.

The twenty sixth Duty discharged of the accidents occurred in our wars
during our lying in Mentz.
THIS following discourse, being no direct part of the discharge of duty
intended of the Regiment: nevertheless for lack of emploiment in my calling,
at that time being idle in Garrison, I remarked, so far as I could by report,
the actions of others, as they occurred then, being out of action my self; yet
I can affirm, what I relate will be found true; if not, let me be no more
blamed than those that gave the intelligence.

His Majesty having gone to meet the Queen being come from Leipsigh to Hanow,
the twenty second of January 1632. Francfurt, where all the Cannons went off,
after their entries. At this time also, the Rex-chancellour Oxensterne came
from Spruce, conveyed by our countriman Sr. Patrick Ruthven, then eldest
Colonel of Scots under his Majesty, being then Governor of Mariburg, and
Colonel of a Dutch Regiment lay there, with whom did come fro Spruce
Lieutenant Colonel Hugh Hamilton, who was Lieutenant Colonel then to Sr.
George Cuningham his Regiment of Scots that lay in Spruce. Captain Mongomery
came also with them, who soon after was made Lieutenant Colonel to a free
Squadron of foot, and after that was killed in combat on horsbacke by the
General Quartermaster Bullion, at first Captain under me. At this time also
came with him Quartermaster Sandelence, who afterward was Captain Major and
Lieutenant Colonel, having ascended by degrees, according to worth and
deserving.

The Chancellor being come, his Majesty and he sat ordinarily all day in
counsel, Cullens Ambassador was treating apart with his Majesty for
neutrality, affirming he had given no assist^nce to the last League, neither
yet was he of the League; As also he affirmed that at the last Westphalia
convention he refused assistance to the rest of the League: his Majesty replied
to the Cullens Ambassador, how hardly and unchristianly they had dealt with
the Evangelists Stends, worse then if they had bin Jews or Turks, in taking
their Churches from them, and in banishing themselves. Nevertheless there were
some Articles proposed unto them concerning the Neutrality (viz.) First of all,
molesting the Evangelists, under whatsoever pretense, to be abolished and put
away. Secondly the free liberty of the Religion to be granted and suffered, and
that the Students of the Religion should be taken as well in the Colleges as the
Papists. Thirdly, in all Cities, the Evangelists to be as free to traffic as
the Papists. Fourthly, they should give no assistance unto the Kings Majesty's
enemies, nor no contribution, nor Bills to answer moneys on exchange. Fifthly,
to give free passage through their land as well to his Majesty's Army, as to his
enemies, not to hinder them of it, both alike. Sixthly, that his Majesty of
Swedens servants should have the Passes open, when they pleased to pass and
repasse. Seaventhly, that his Majesty's Agents might lie at Cullen to see the
Neutrality were justly observed. Eighthly, that his Majesty of Sweden his
friends and confederats, should have free traffic in their Towns and
Territories.

The Cullens Ambassador returned from Francfurt with these slight points to
be granted by their Bishop. The Swedens were come so near Cullen that the
Superiors were reprehended for it by the Clergy out of the Pulpits; Heretics
to come again so near unto their jurisdictions.

By this time the Landgrave of Hessen with his Army, being near ten thousand
strong of horse and foot, for our assistance did lie on the other side of the
Rhine over against us, and from thence they fell strong on the Spaniards which
were in Rinckoe, making them also quit those parts, and the inhabitants for
fear, forsaking their houses, his Majesty promised them his gracious
protection to stay and remain in their hou^es, they paying their weekly
contribution, which they paid before to the Bishop of Mentz.

Being here also at Mentz, the French Ambassador Idid see get audience. The
reason of his coming being to show his Majesty of Sweden, that the Kings
Majesty of France was offended, his Majesty of Sweden had crossed the Rhine
against his paction, France, and therefore desired he should retire again with
his Army. His Majesty answered he did but prosecute his enemy, and if his
Majesty of France was offended, he could not help it, and those that would
make him retire over the Rhine again, it behooved them to do it with the
sword in their hand, for otherwise he was not minded to leave it but to a
stronger; and if his Majesty of France should anger him much, he knew the way
to Paris, and he had hungry Soldiers would drink wine, and eat with as good
a will in France as in Germany. Therefore he hoped his Majesty would be better
advised in sending the next Embassage in milder terms. This interchange of
message went betwixt them, till at last, they were settled on secondary
conditions of a new League offensive and defensive.

At this time the Felt-marshall Gustavus Horn took in Mergenhem on the Sawler
stream, on the Necker, Wmpviniphen, and Necker Olin.

Likewise Kunickstene in the Vetre, was taken in by accord after Mentz, as also
the Spaniard left Vieitzler, and Geylhousen, leaving them both unto the Sweden,
without shot of Musket or Cannon.

His Majesty at this time, caused publish an Edict, where all Merchants of
whatsoever Religion, or Nation they were of, should be free to pass and
repasse with their goods to the Francforder Mass, and that none of his
Majesty's Army of whatsoever condition they were, either of horse or foot,
should trouble them, under pain of death, where the concealer of the wrong
being got notice of should be punished to death, as the Actor.

Likewise the twelfth of January, Babenhousen was taken in by accord, by his
Majesty's order and direction, and in the end of December, Manhem was taken in
by Duke Barnard of Wymar, having surprised their guards, where about two
hundred and fifty were cut off, of the strangers, and quarters and service
given to the Dutch; where a Captain and his Ensign were taken prisoners, and
let loose again, for the payment of their Ransom, and being come to
Heidelberg they were executed by the Governors direction there, for
over-seeing their duties, and these of the League, lying at Heidelberg were
mightily troubled with the neeren^sse of the Swedens neighborhood, having
gorten Manhem, their passage unto the Rhine was altogether cut off from them.
Likewise the Spaniard did quit Garmarsham, and retiring to Franckendale they
had no more in the Paltz but that and Heidelberg, His Majesty wonderfully
having gotten in Creutznach, and the Castle.

Where the valorous courage of my Lord Craven, a Noble and worthily renowned
English Lord, was, to his great commendation, taken notice of by both the
Kings. For he, out of affection and desire to advance the cause, following his
Majesty of Bohemia of worthy memory, at the storming of the works at
Creutznach (in sight of his Majesty of Sweden) leading up his Company of
Volunteers, to the good example of others, gave outward testimony of his inward
courage; in so much that his Majesty of Sweden and all the beholders openly
extolled his Lordships noble and praiseworthy carriage; for having endeavored
so far as lay in him, on this exploit, to make his memory outlive himself.
As afterward his Lordship did show his prowess and Heroicke spirit at the
intaking of Donavert. Where he did merit so much, that I having reason to have
said more, could say no less. His worth being known, his affection to the
cause, and his respects to his Majesty of Bohemia whom he followed, merits a
well deserving reward from his Majesty's Royal Issue.

Before Creutznach Lieutenant Colonel Talbot was killed: and the worthy
Captain Douglas was shot in the arm.

Colonel Alexander Ramsey was placed Governor of Creutznach by his Majesty of
Swede^, as a beginning of reward for his old service and attendance, who loved
nothing better than nobly and kindly to entertain his friends and strangers,
being the common receptacle and refuge of all his Countrymen, that liked to
honor him with their company: As also he was most willing to entertain and
respect strangers of the best quality, and most of all he was peremptory in
maintaining his Countries credit, obliging all Cavaliers to his power: but most
unwilling to be beholden to others, carrying still a noble mind.

At this time, his Majesty being in Mentz, Bingen, Bagherach on the Rhine, and
Shaule, were taken in by Scalade, with a surprise by the Scots of Sir James
Ramseys Regiment, where those within were thrice stronger than those pursued
them, but being once entered the Town, the Inhabitants assisting the Scots,
they put all to the sword, except the Officers that were taken Prisoners by
Major Hanan, a Gen^leman of much worth, valor, and discretion in Command,
whos^ loss was much lamented, he, having died soon after of a Consumption,
was much regrated of all his acquaintance, and of my self in particular, being
my old Camerade.

At this time also the Town of Spier came under his Majesty's protection and
devotion, and leavied three Companies for his Majesty's service; Landaw also
and Crowneweisenburg ^id become good Swe^ens. Landstall was taken in also by
storm, through the help of the Country Boores; shortly after was Elwangen,
Oberwesell, Papart, and Lovensteene taken in by accord. Also the Castle of
Erenfells, and the Towle-house over against Bingen was taken in by the
Landgrave of Hessens folk.

By his time was Damets in Maclenburg given over by Accord, Lowhowsen; as also
W^smer on he Bal^ick Coast was taken in by Accord the tenth of January 1632.
And the Gar^^^^on marched out three thousand strong, being commanded by
Colonel Grame, who having buried some Cannon, robbed the ships, and took
away against Accord a number of Arms. Likewise on his march unto Silesia, he
killed a Swedens Lieutenant; but being followed, the Swedens (at the command
of General ^ott) General Major Lowhowsen having overt ken them, five hundred
were killed, and two thousand taken prisoners that took service; and Colonel
Grame was sent prisoner to Gripswald, to remain there till further trial.

By this time also, Tott his Army marched over the Elve toward Luneburg, being
near fourteen thousand strong of foot and horse, under whom were several
Scots Regiments come from Scotland the Harvest before (viz.) Sir James
Lumsdells Regiment, to whom Robert Stewart was Lieutenant Colonel. The Master
of Forbesse his Regiment, to whom Sir Arthur Forbesse was Lieutenant Colonel;
Sir Frederick Hamiltons Regiment, to whom Alexander Cunningham was Lieutenant
Colonel; Colonel Astins English Regiment, to whem Vavezer was Lieutenant
Colonel; Co^onell Monro of Obstell his Regiment, to whom John Monro was
Lieutenant Colonel; and a Squadron of English, commanded by Lieutenant
Colonel Mon-Gorge, being the Remainder of Sir Thomas Conwayes Regiment; and
Colonel Robert Lesly, his old Regiment of Scots. General Tott his Army being
over the Elve; Colonel Ryneaker, and Curmago did gather all the Emperialists,
and those of the League out of all other Garrisons, toward Stoade, and
Bukstihoode, to defend themselves; where leaving them to some other pen to
write of, I return to the Rhine. His Majesty being making preparation toward
the Dannbe, to visit the Byerforst, and Tillie: where I mind to follow out my
march, our idle time being almost spent.

His Majesty did write unto the States of Holland, to draw sooner unto the
fields, than their custom was, to hinder the Spaniards from s^nding forces
unto Dutchlaud, which letters moved the States to give out Edicts, that all
Regiments and Companies should be complete, under pain of cashiering to draw
to the fields against the first of March. By this time, his Majesty of France
having a strong Army together on the borders of Dutchland, the Catholic
League did what they could, to put his Majesty of France by the ears with the
King of Sweden, alleging his Majesty of Swedens intention was fully to root
out the Catholic Religion; and that he had already banished a number of them
from their Cloisters, which was an untruth; for his Majesty of Sweden banished
none, but those who through fear did banish themselves. But on the contrary,
his Majesty in all places he had taken in, suffered them the free liberty and
use of their Religion untroubled, without troubling of any man's Conscience in
matters of Religion. But his Majesty of France, being better informed, refused
any assistance to the Catholic League, against his Majesty of Sweden; but
wished rather the Catholic League to remain neutrall; and that he would
interpose with his Majesty of Sweden for obtaining the Neutralitie; whereupon
instantly they begun to treat of the Neutralitte; Scharnasse was sent
Ambassador to his Majesty of Sweden to that effect, and his Majesty
proposed, and set down the points he desired of them, if he should yield unto
the Neutralitie.

First, they should give his Majesty and his Army free passage through their
Lands, especially over the Danube.

Secondly, they should take all their Forces from the Emperialists, and be
bound hereafter to give them no more help.

Thirdly, they should restore the Palatinate unto the former estate, and all
others they had taken beside.

Fourthly, they should contribute to the maintaining of the Swedens Army.

The French Ambassador having promised within fourteen days to get the
foresaid Articles confirmed, his Majesty granted a fort'nights Stillstand,
providing the Ambassador would make Papenham retire his Forces out of
Westphalia, and Stifft-madeburg; As also that those Forces the Duke of Bavaria
and the League had in Bohemia, should also retire; and that such parts as his
Majesty's Army had beleaguered or blockered, they should go on
notwithstanding of the Still-stand, till they came to an Accord, or forced to
quit them. The time of this Treaty, the Catholic League found many doubts.

First, that it was hard for them being so much obliged to the house of
Austria, to forsake them in their greatest need.

Secondly, the Catholic Religion, in that case, did lack a strong Protector;
whose like they could not soon find again.

Thirdly, the King of France had his own pretentions in this Treaty, to wit,
to weaken the house of Austria; which his Majesty of France could easily do,
by separating the League from the house of Austria. It was easy then unto him
to transfer the Empire unto another Family: and the League embracing the
Neutralitie, the Crown of France had won their point against the house of
Austria; and if the Neutralitie were not granted or accepted by the League, the
Kings Majesty of France would not quit the Swedens faction; but rather
favourize all their enterprises; whereby, in times coming, he should have the
less cause to fear the house of Austria; Neutralitie was but for mere
policy, to hinder his Majesty of Swedens progress, till such time, as that
General Tilly could make a strong head again, and to win time of his
Majesty to prepare themselves for war.

This Treaty turning to naught without any fruit; neither were the Spaniards
still this time, but having drawn to a strong head, they came over the Mosell
again unto the Paltz, and were beaten back with great loss, and the whole
Paliz made free of them.

In which conflict Master Home in presence of the Rex-chancellor Oxensterne,
before the face of the whole Army, with his own troop, and two other troops
of horse, charged a strong body of the Spanish horsemen, and took nine Cornets
from them, having hunted and chased them, to their great shame, and to the
perpetual credits of the pursuers, especially of the Leader, whose actions
areworthy to be recorded to Posterity.

After this victory obtained over the Spaniard, Sweden did propose certain
propositions and Articles unto the Duke of Bavier, and the Catholic Stends
that were confederat with him. First, to break the Imperial Edict that was
published over the Empire. Secondly, both the Evangelists Religion to be let
free and untroubled by the Papists. Thirdly, Bohemia, Nerlin and Silezia to be
restored in the old manner, and the banished freely to return to their lands
and country. Fourthly, to set his Majesty of Bohemia free again in the Paltz.
Fifthly, the Dukedom of Bavier to be transferred on him again. Sixthly, the
Town of Ausburg to be put in the former estate again, and the exercise of the
Evangelists Religion to be free again unto it as before. Seventhly, all
Jesuits to be put away and banished out of the Empire, as the Pest of the
Commonweal. Eighthly, all Evangelists Cloisters to be restored again, as
well as the Catholic Cloisters. Ninthly, all Cloisters in Wartenburgland, to
be restored again. Tenthly, to choose his Majesty of Sweden, as King of the
Romans.

About the end of January Papinham gathered the whole Garrisons together that
were in Brunswicke lands, Falia, and relieved Madeburg; forcing Banier to
retire on Calbe; alleging he had a mandat of his Majesty of Sweden not to
fight; Papenham, who having relieved the Town, and gotten intelligence the
Duke of Luneburg with a strong Army, was to come on him from Wolfenbetle, he
having left Madeburg, and taken out the Garrison having nailed the cannon, and
destroyed all he could, in casting it into the Elve, which he could not take
with him on wagons; having spoiled their best cannon, leaving the bare walls
to the Swedens; which they immediately beset again with three Companies:
Papenham marched toward Wolfenbetle to meet the Duke of Luneburg.

Likewise Palsgrave Wolfegan William, did also by his brothers intercession,
Palsgrave Augustus, hold on with his Majesty of Sweden for a Neutrality, but
in vain. The fourteen days of still-stand being out, they fell to work
again, every one for himself.

Bamberg also taken by Gustavus Horn Felt-marshall, Tillie come thither with a
strong Army from Nerlin, unlooked for, set on Gustavus Horns forces, the Town
being almost made fast by the Swedens, Tilly with his Army falls on: and the
Felt-marshall having put his cannon away by water on the Maine, retired in
haste with loss upon Harsford, after a long skirmish had with the
Emperialists, and having gotten intelligence of four Regiments of Tillies,
that had past by Halstad, he did break up with the Cavalerie, and in their
quarter in Oberbyde, being but half a mile from Bamberg, falls on them two
hours before day, and defeats two Regiments, to wit, Planck, Hartish and
Merodish the youngers Regiment by fire and sword, where he got but two Cornets,
the rest being burnt in the fire, with their goods: The Crabbats were forced to
swim the Maine, the rest betook themselves for refuge unto the Dragoniers
quarters that lay at Stafflebach, and retiring to the Churchyard, the
Feltmarshall having no musketeers with him, pressed to fire them out, but in
vain, so that he retired again with his Officers on Hasford and Swineford.
These n^wes coming unto his Majesty, he prepared for a march unto Franconia,
bringing the rest of his Majesty's forces together, that were with the
Felt-marshall; and he did send unto During, to the Duke of Wymar, and to
General Banter to bring their forces together, to meet betwixt Nurenberg and
Donavert, to search out General Tilly, and about the midst of March 1632. we
brake up from Mentz, having left the Rex-chancellor Oxensterne, and Duke
Bernard of Wymar, with eight thousand men in the Paltz, to attend the Spaniards
further intentions on the Rhine.

The twenty-sixth Observation.
THE Catholic League, seeing the Spaniard terrified in the Paltz, and almost
beaten away, they begun being members of that head, to quake and tremble for
fear of the Swedens neighborhood, and therefore the Bishops of Mentz, Triere,
Cullen, Wurtzburg and of Bambrick presently resolved, out of their policy, to
treat for a neutrality, pressing, so far as lay in them, to bring the King of
France and his Majesty of Sweden to pull at each others beards; alle^dging the
Swedens intentions were only to subvert the Catholic Religion, and the
professors of Popery, Erford, Wurtzburg, Francford, Hickst, and out of all
other parts where they were: whereupon his Majesty of France notwithstanding of
his confederacy with the King of Sweden was commoved at his crossing the Rhine,
fearing he might bring the Ca^holique League on his side, and then turn his
Arms against France, which suspicions wrought an Embassage from his Majesty of
France, toward his Majesty of Sweden, for treaty of neutrality betwixt the
King of Sweden and the Catholic League, which in the end turned to nothing.
Where we see, that all Potentates and great Kings, do keep no Confederacy nor
League, but only so far as they are helpful for their own aims and
designs; preferring their benefit before the keeping of their covenants; where
we see, that Kings hand-writings or seals, in pactions making, tie them no
more then as nothing, when they find them prejudicial to their own
greatness, and cannot be made to keep their covenants, but with stronger
power. Then we see here, his Majesty of Sweden was nothing moved with the King
of France his threatening (except he would retire over the Rhine again) seeing
he knew his own ability at that time; that being once over the Rhine, he could
march unto France. The consideration whereof made them agree better on
secondary conditions, having past from the first covenant; so that we see there
is no dealing with Kings but on equal terms; and then are they most
reasonable; but the example of Kings, in this point of their covenants, is not
to be imitated by any other inferiors; for in respect of them, though not in
respect of God, they are privileged persons; who cannot be punished for their
faults but by God alone. And therefore, amongst inferiors, nothing is to be
kept more strict next unto faith unviolated, then men's word and promise,
especially promises betwixt old friends. But alas! no friendship is permanent,
seeing many things come betwixt, turning it unto hatred and hostility; for
where love does not grow, the friendship is not durable.

Likewise here we see, his Majesty of France made haste to interpose his
request for the weal of the Catholic League, showing himself discontented
with their usage, to make them the more ready to think on him, before they
should any ways lean in their necessity to the King of Sweden. As also we see
the policy of the League, though in their necessity they seemed to make use of
the King of France his friendship, yet they would not cast off the house of
Austria, and King of Spain their old friends, for the hope they had in their
new friend the King of France, lest their new friend might disappoint them of
their expectations, as he did in the end, missing his own aims.

We see also here the Frenches policy, in making haste to intercede for the
Leagueistes, lest the danger might come on himself; for the King of France
hearing the King of Sweden had crossed the Rhine, he did not stay to bring his
Army together, Mosell, and then sent his Ambassador to Mentz to his Majesty of
Sweden to treat, having his Army at hand, which was the only sure way then to
get the better conditions, knowing the King of Sweden had already too many
Irons in the fire.

Those we see are the best friends, that in necessity keep their paction, as
the Catholic League did at all times unto the Emperor, who otherwise had bin
no Emperor, neither yet had he bin Emperor, had the Evangelists kept together
and hazarded their means and blood, in defense of the public cause, as the
Catholics did in their greatest necessity, once every year setting up ever
new Armies, as one was beaten unto them: their wisdom and constancy were so
great, that presently the next Spring, through their power and diligence, they
had ever another new Army afoote, which in the end made their enemies the
Evangelists weary, sparing their means, Germany, if they would conjoyne their
strengths together constantly against the Papists, they are powerful enough to
free all Germany of Popery, banishing them over the Alps, from whence they
came. And I persuade my self, none that knows Germany, but in his conscience
he must confess this to be truth. But when our fellows in friendship fail
us, as the Evangelists one after another, for a skurvy loss, quit the Crown
of Sweden, the great Duke of Saxon having left them first, Strasburg, Vlme,
Nurenberg and Francford did accept of an unsetied peace, contrary to their
minds, in prejudice of the public, lofing themselves and the public, for
the loss of one day, being without their head, which first brought them
together.

adversity: for his Majesty of Sweden being at Francford, as a victorious King,
he had then, in his prosperity, the conflux of friendship, some seeking his
protection, others his friendship and confederacy, others for fear of the dint
of his Arms, seeking to be Neutrall, who before were enemies; other Kings and
Potentats, Republiques and Cities sending their Ambassadors congratulating his
success; yea, and which was more and rare to be seen, his Majesty of Bohemia
in person came unto him, to offer him assistance Royal, in leavying of an Army
for himself, and was refused, as unwilling other Armies should be in
Dutchland, to be participant of his glory, but his own. Where we see Fortunes
Favourit laughed on by the world, but how soon again Fortune begun to frown
on his successor, who having got but one Buffer, all men would kill him, his
friends (nomine ten^^) as well as his enemies. Where we see clearly that there
is no friend in adversity, except it be a friend in Christ, who will never
forsake or leave us. This then is the friendship we should make to league and
confederate with, our brethren in Christ, with whom we have unity in Faith; if
that we would have our friendship durable and constant: others will change as
the wind blows plenty or penury upon us; being but temporary friends (as many
of the Dutch are) but our brethren in Christ will never totally leave us,
Germans did not to the Chancellor of Sweden) if they succeed unto us in the
true and undoubted Faith. And to verify this, I can bear witness, that
though the enemy did keep our brethren in Christ, that were in the Paltz,
under ten years bondage; Nevertheless that bondage, nor the tyranny used unto
them by their enemies, made them never forget their fidelity and love to their
King and Prince; neither yet could their tyranny make them forsake or renounce
their faith in Christ, but as they continued true to God, so were they
faithful in their love to their King and Master; not only to his Majesty, but
also showed their love and kindness unto us, being his Majesty's friends, whom
they knew to be one in faith with themselves. And therefore they were ever
ready and willing to undergo alike danger with us against our common enemies;
as does witness their assistance given to the Scots of Sir James Ramseys
Regiment, having Conjunctis viribus beaten their enemies on diverse occasions.

The Kings Majesty of Sweden, France, having entertained then in readiness
four Armies at once, his own which he led himself, under which I was still;
The Felt-marshall Gustavus Horns Army, General Totts Army on the Wazer, and
the Marquess of Hamiltons Army, with whom Banier was joined on the Elve. These
four Armies his Majesty commanded alike, and at one time, having the Emperor,
the King of Spain, the Catholic League, and the Duke of Bavier his enemies.
And though the Duke of Saxon had an Army apart, yet his Majesty would not
suffer the King of Bohemia, the Duke of Lunenburg the Landgrave of Hessen, nor
the Dukes of Wymar to lead Armies in Dutchland, but as Subalternes to his
Command. And I think he had reason: for if his Majesty of Bohemia had had an
Army in the fields, it behooved the Swedens to have been subalterne to the
Dutch and Scots, who were then strong in the fields, in commanding strangers,
as they did their own Countrymen. Notwithstanding of all these forces led and
commanded by his Majesty of Sweden, we see that the Empire is like a depth
without a bottom, that cannot be sounded. For though they lost several
Battles, their power was so great, that incontinent they made up Armies
again, one after another, for the space of twenty years together; so that,
with difficulty, they made the body of the Empire to stand, though the wings
were very near clipped by his Majesty of Sweden; who, in three years time,
subdued the most part of the Empire, and with his own little Army, in one
Winter, Paltz of the Spanish Forces (except Heidelberg alone) on which
occasions those of our Nation that followed his Majesty, showed both their
valor and their love, especially those of my Lord Sponce his Regiment,
seconded well by those of my Lord Rhees Regiment, and Sir James Ramseys worthy
Regiment, were well seconded by Colonel Lodowicke Leslyes Regiment, which
formerly were Sir John Hamiltons. These four Regiments of foot having
followed his Majesty's own person in all occasions, were worthy their deeds
should be Registered to all posterity. Other six Regiments of Scots, under
General Tott, and two of English, being younger in the service than the former
four, were also shorter of continuance; whose actions I cannot relate, but by
Information. Therefore I will be sparing, lest I should deregate from their
worth, or oversee my self.

At this time also there were a great many worthy Cavaliers of our Nation under
his Majesty, who, for their long experience and valor, had attained to the
honor, not only to be trusted before others with Governments, but also were
honored in commanding of strangers, both Dutch and Swedeus, whereof some were
employed in Dutchland, some in Sweden, some in Liffeland, and some in Spruce;
all alike serving their Master to his mind, where he liked best to make use of
them for the weal and advancement of his service.

Sir Patricke Ruthven, General Major and Governor of Vlme, Colonel over
Dutch to foot and to horse; Sir Alexander Lesly, General Major and Governor
over the whole Cities, along the Balticke Coast; Sir David Drummond, General
Major and Governor of Statin, over a Regiment of Swedens; Sir John Hepburne,
Colonel over the Scots Briggad; General Major King, Colonel to horse and
foot of Dutch; Colonel Carre, Colonel to foot of Scots; Sir John Ruthven,
General Major, Colonel of Dutch; Colonel Robert Monro of Fowls, Colonel to
foot and to horse over Dutch; The Earl of Crawford, Colonel to foot over
Dutch; Colonel Baily, Colonel to foot over Dutch; Colonel Ramsey, Governor
of Cretesnough, and Commander of Dutch; Colonel Alexander Hamilton, Colonel
of Scots; Sir James Ramsey, Colonel of foot over Scots; Sir William
Ballentine, Colonel over English; Colonel D^wglas, Colonel of Dutch
horsemen; Colonel Hume, Colonel of Dutch horsemen; Colonel Alexander Lesly
the younger, Colonel to foot over Dutch; Colonel John Lesly, Colonel to
foot over Scots; Colonel William Gunne, Colonel to foot over Dutch;
Colonel Kinninmond, Colonel of Swedens; Colonel Hugh Hamilton, Colonel to
foot over Dutch; Colonel Finnes Forbesse, and his brother, both Colonells to
foot over strangers; Colonel John Forbesse, Colonel to foot over Dutch;
Colonel Alexander Forbesse, called the bald, Colonel to foot over Dutch;
which all, with the former twelve Regiments, were employed severally, upon the
Dutch bottom, during his Majesty's time; and since, to the great credit of
their Nation; as likewise other Cavaliers of them were employed in Sweden; such
as Colonel Scot, Colonel Seaton, and Colonel Thomson, others also, were
employed in his Majesty's service in Spruce; as Sir George Fleetwood, Colonel
to foot over English; Francis Ruthven, Colonel to foot over Scots, and
William Kunningham, Colonel to foot over Scots, Alexander Gordon, Colonel to
foot over Dutch; which Officers, with their Regiments, after conclusion of the
peace made with the Kings Majesty of Polle, were also brought into Dutchland,
against the Saxon, and the Emperor. Thus far, on passant, I was bold to
infer, to satisfy the curious Reader, and his Highness, to whom we all
vowed faith and obedience, being formerly led by such a General, as the Lion
of the North, the invincible King of Sweden, who did instruct us all, to do
his Highness service, in all respects, to the sacrificing of our lives, until
his Highness be avenged of his enemies, and most honorably restored to his
Country, credit, honors, and former losses. For we know Germany so well, that
without guides, we can enter their Cities where we know them weakest; having
helped to subdue many of them before; as shall be evident, before our
expedition come to an end. Where we would wish such a Leader as his Highness,
or one of the race, come of the Jewel of Europe, his Royal Mother, for whom
and her royal Issue, we are obliged and resolved yet to fight, till her Throne
be established in despite of her enemies.

Here also we see God will not suffer those Christians unpunished, Gra^e, whose
fault is too common amongst their faction, that hold for a maxim, they are not
bound to keep promise or accord unto us; as was seen on Colonel Monre of
Fowls his Regiment marching out of Stobing; the conditions of their accord
being broken unto them, the Soldiers were forced to serve, and the Officers
were made prisoners. If my fortune were once again to command the Guards in
Memmungen in Bavier (the Dukes chief residence) though I would not break my
word, I would hazard to break my sword, to be avenged on those who keep no
promise or oath, being enemies to God and to his truth, as they did witness by
their cruelty used at Bamberg; where the Felt-marshall being set on unawares,
was forced to retire, having sent away his cannon before him, choosing the
least of two inconveniences, having thought better to endanger a few men in
skirmish, than by standing to hazard the loss of all, and of his cannon. Where
we see that it is hard for a brave Commander to make a good retreat without
cannon, where on the contrary having a little time, with some advantage of
ground, it is casie retiring from the fiercest enemy, who may lose himself and
his Army with pressing too far forwards against cannon.

Likewise there is nothing more able for to make a party of horsemen fortunate,
than a reasonable supply of musketeers ever to attend them, for they are ever
best together: Moreover, we have here a laudable custom of a brave Commander,
as his Majesty was, being as careful in maintaining his conquest, as he was
fortunat in conquering: for before his Majesty would march from the Rhine
toward the Danow, he first established the Rexchancell chancellor of Sweden at
Mentz, leaving unto his care the direction of the Army left in the Palatinat to
attend the Spaniard, which Army was to be led by Palsgrave Christian
Brickafield, being at least eight thousand strong.

The twenty seventh Duty discharged of our Marchfrom Mentz unto Francony and to
Shawbach.
HIS Majesty having got intelligence of the Ruffle, General Tilly had given at
Bamberg to Felt-marshall Horn, and hearing the Feltmarshall was retired on
Swinford, incontinent his Majesty's Army was brought together at Mentz, and
leaving the Rex-chancellor Oxensterne in the Paltz at Mentz, as director, and
to attend on the Spanish forces, till the Paltz were cleared of the enemy.

The sixth of March, his Majesty did break up from Francford, where in the
fields before Aschaffenburg, the Army made a show in presence of his Majesty of
Bohemia, Marquess of Hamilton, and diverse others, men of quality, and having
passed the bridge, we quartered over night in the fields on the back side of
the hill, and the next day continued our march toward Lore, and having sent
before to make provision for the Army in all parts, where he resolved to
quarter, through Franconia being free of our enemies. The next night we
quartered at Erinfield, and our Briggad passing by Gemond we marched on
Carlestat, where we quartered over night: the next day continuing our march, we
joined at night with the army at Tettelbach, where before our upbreaking the
next morning, a fire being entered in the Subburbs, as his Majesty was marching
out of quarter, those of Spences Regiment were blamed for this accident, though
innocent: Nevertheless his Majesty's rage continued the whole day, and we
being separated, his Majesty marched on Kitchen, on the Maine to join with the
Felt-marshall; and we were commanded to march on Oxenford on the Maine, and
from thence to Vinchen, where we again were to join with the Army, having
ever our cannon and Ammunition wagons along with us.

On Sunday in the afternoon, Bohemia did come and salute our Briggad, being
resaluted with all due respect of the whole body of the Briggad, where his
Majesty was pleased to show us, how glad he was of the good report and
commendation, his Majesty of Sweden had given of our good service, the
continuance whereof he heartily wished.

Our Army this day was above twenty thousand men, horse and foot, besides
those did belong to the Artillery, being all in good order, General Tilly
having understood of his Majesty's coming, and of the strength of his Army, he
thought, as best for the safety of his Army, not to stay our coming, and
besetting Bamberg and Fercham with new levied men, taking the old Soldiers
with him, he marched toward Newmarke in the upper Palatinat, having taken all
the best things he could find within the Bishopric of Bamberg with him on
wagons: And having sent his General Quartermaster before him toward Loaffe,
he was met by some of the Swedens party, and being killed, all his letters were
brought unto his Majesty, and before his Majesty brake up with the Army,
Franconia, that all sort of people which had before bin fugitives for fear of
Religion, they were all free to return unto their houses again, not being
molested or troubled in the peaceable laboring of the ground.

Likewise on this march, a strong party of our Army, led by Colonel
Sparereutter, Rancountring with the enemies party by Schawbbishhall, after a
long skirmish the Emperialists were made to retire with loss toward the
Castle of Danberg, where Lieutenant Colonel Buckey, that had the command of
the Emperialists, was sore wounded, a Rut-master of the Crabbats and a
Lieutenant was killed; and above twenty six Soldiers, besides a hundred and
thirty were taken prisoners. The news came to his Majesty on our march, which
we continued from Winsen on Welmersdorffe; and from thence, the next day being
the twentieth of March to Furt, a pass on the River of Pegnets, a mile from
Nurenberg; where the Army lay but one night, so long as his Majesty did visit
Nurenberg; and the next day our march continued toward a little Town called
Schawbach, where his Majesty rested the Army two days, till that the Duke of
Wymars forces, with General Banier coming from During, were come within one
days march of us; his Majesty's intentions being toward Donavert on the
Danube; where my Cozen Fowls with both his Regiments joined with us. His
Majesty of Sweden accompanied with the King of Bohemia and Palsgrave Augustus,
and diverse Princes more, before their coming to Nurenberg, Sweden, but chiefly
their affections most abundantly did extend toward his Majesty of Bohemia,
which is impossible for any tongue to express. But well I know, my eyes did
see their eyes shedding tears of joy, being overjoyed with the sight of two
Kings at once, as they thought, sent by the King of Kings for their reliefes;
and to make their welcome the more respected, the whole City, Burgers and
Soldiers were in their brightest Arms; and being conveyed unto the City, they
were sumptuously banqueted; and in testimony of their love, they gifted unto
his Majesty of Sweden four half Cartowes, with all furniture belonging to
them, together with two silver Globes, one Celestial, the other Terrestiall:
there were also presented unto him drinking Credences many, with some
Antiquities that were rare, and with all testifying their affection in way of
complement, they assure his Majesty that not only with words but with their
whole estate, they were ready to serve the common cause, to, die and live with
his Majesty, in the defense of the public. His Majesty thus taking leave of
Nurenberg, promises to continue their friend, and shows them he was to go
with his Army toward the Danow stream, to see how to get a pass over the
Danow for to visit the Duke of Bavier, and he hoped he would make Tilly with
his Army to retire thence. But Tilly finding his Majesty's Army growing still
stronger and stronger, he retired back unto the upper Palatinat, and from
thence, he crossed the Danow to join with the Duke of Bavaria, to hinder our
coming unto Bavaria; being then, of his own forces, near eighteen thousand
men, foot and horse: But many of them were new leavied folks; and the Duke of
Bavaria had also a strong Army together; but for the most part, they were such
as could not endure the noise or whisling of the Cannon Bullets.

By this time, Henry William Fonselins, being shot in the leg before Bamberg,
was departed at Swineford of a burning fever, contracted through the pain of
the shot; whose death his Majesty of Sweden did much lament.

The twenty-seventh Observation.
THE fifth of March, Paltz, with a bridge over the Rhine, and the Main, where
it enters into the Rhine; where also was begun, as the Trophee of his
victory, the foundation of a City and strength called Gustavus-Burg. Then in
the beginning of the Spring, we sprung forth from the Rhine, toward the Danow
stream, being on this march royally accompanied by his Majesty of Bohemia,
whom his Majesty esteemed of, as of himself, in all quartering ordaining his
quarters before his own; continuing the march, through Franconia in surety,
having the year before freed that whole circle from the enemy, so that the
Inhabitants had given their Oath of fealty unto His Majesty.

This March was pleasant, through a plentiful Country at this time, being a
pregresse befitting two Kings, with a Royal Army, and forces from other
parts joining with us; as we drew near our enemies; we made all sure behind
us, both for our Retreates in case of need, as also for the safety of those
were to come after us; and thirdly, for the furnishing our Army in Ammunition
and victuals, to be brought unto us in case of want.

His Majesty here being of intention to get a pass over the Danow (having
before made the Town of Vlme sure) for his retreat; for the more abundance,
his Majesty resolved to have the pass of Donavert, being the right pass
betwixt Nurenberg and Ausburg.

Before Tillyes Army could join with the Duke of Baviere, his Majesty
resolved it was not best to give them time, Baviere being assured of his
Majesty coming to visit his Country, he closed the passes the best he could;
both Donavert, Rhine, and Ratisbone. And as he did beset well the frontier
Garrisons, before his Majesty's coming, he also very circumspectly betimes
took all victuals out of his Majesty's way, toward Engolstat, as a wise
Commander ought to do, where he made his Magazin, being the only part, he was
assured of for his retreat; and such a part, as he knew well, we were not
able to get without treason; and then being assured he had time to provide an
Army to oppose his Majesty, himself not being taken unawares.

It is the duty of all good Commanders, at their down lying and uprising from
quarters, to be very careful to prevent fire; seeing thereby the whole Army
may be endangered by the loss of men, Ammunition, Arms and Artillery; and
since such loss is irrecoverable, our care should be the greater to avoyde the
hurt. And therefore Order should be given to all Guardes, to make diligent
roundes over the Quarters, to prevent the like accidents, and to give Orders to
the Gavilliger and his servants, to oversee all sires, and to see them quenched,
at all upbreakings, and dislodging: otherwise, the enemy being near, great
inconvenience might happen, and if any enemy, at such times, trusting to our
disorder, should offer to invade us, finding the contrary, it were easy to
beat them back; as also, it were a fit time to try their valor, they being
more than half afraid. But I will advise all you, that desire to gain credit,
to seek out your enemy, rather than to stay his coming unto you, and by this
means, happily you may set up your Trophies in his own Country, to speak to
posterity, as does Gustavus-Burg betwixt the Maine and the Rhine.

The twenty-eight Duty discharged of our March to Donavert, for the In-taking
of it.
THE twenty-fourth of March, his Majesty with the Army continued the march,
from Schwabach toward Donavert upon Ottengen and Pleinfelt, and went before
the Castle of Mansfield on the hill, Dutchland, and finding he could get
nothing done, young Papenham being Commandant there, was advertised by his
Majesty, if that he would not give over the Castle, his Fathers Earldom
thereabouts should be ruind (which he, though unwilling, behooved to suffer)
but the Cavalier regardlesse of his Majesty's threats, did keep out the
Castle, so that his Majesty, for that time, was forced to leave it.

His Majesty leaving a strong Garrison in the Town next to it, he continued
his march toward Donavert, and quartered the Army on the Hill above the
Town: by this time his Majesty of Pole died, as also then Duke Barnard of
Wymar had put a thousand Finnes on the other side of the Rhine, in Bissen, and
beset Spier, at which time the Spaniard again did set over the Mosell, of
intention to relieve Franckendale, but was sent back with shame over the
Mosell by the Dukes Army then left in the Paltz: at which time the Chancellor
Oxensterne being there in person, and Palsgrave Christian Birkafield, Dutch
Regiments marching toward the enemy, to beat the Scots march, thinking
thereby to affright the enemy; but it fell out contrary; the Dutch that marched
in the Van with the Scots march, being charged by the enemy, made a base
retreat, till they were holden up again by the valor of the Scots, that were
there ( viz.) Sir John Ruthven, and his Regiment, having had all his Officers
of valiant Scots, as Lieutenant Colonel John Lesly, Major Lyell, Captain
David King, and diverse others, resolute Cavaliers, that stood to it, with the
assistance of Colonel Lodowicke Lesly, and his Regiment and Officers: being
all old beaten Soldiers, formerly called Sir John Hamiltons Regiment; by their
valor, resisting the enemy, and encouraging their Camerades, who were flying;
the victory, that before was doubtful, is restored again to the Swedens; so
that Palsgrave Christian did swear, in audience of the whole Army, to his
Excellence the Rex-chancellor, that had it not been for the valor of the
Scots Briggad, they had all been lost and defeated by the Spaniard.

Here also was evidently seen, as was formerly mentioned, the valor of
Rutmaster Hume, in view of his Excellence, in defeating the Spanish horsemen,
being far inferior in number unto them, where the Dutch Cavalerie, led by
him, repaired the oversight of their Infanterie, that had the Vanguard. To
return to the beleaguering of Donavert, wherein did lie Hertzog Randolph,
Maximilian of Saxonlawenburgh, with fifteen hundred Soldiers, and five
hundred Boores of foot, wherein were also five hundred horsemen, who finding
his Majesty was come to visit him, resolved to defend the Town so long as he
could, and to that effect, begun with Cannon and Musket to play amongst us,
who seeing his Majesty had caused to plant some Cannon before the Port, to
play along the Bridge, he sallied out bravely, and did beat the Swedens,
that guarded the Cannon, from their Cannon, which they nailed; and a Scots
Captain called Semple, that commanded the Swedens, was blamed, for the Swedens
fault, that did leave him alone; who unwisely, fearing to be taken prisoner,
came off after his fellows, and we having beaten back the enemy; the Captain
was put in arrest, till he were heard before a Council of wars.

Incontinent after that, his Majesty planted Batteries on the hill, for to
play with Cannon on a long stone-house, that lay on the other side of the
River; wherein were a number of foot and horse, come from Bavaria, to
strengthen the Garrison, but their entry was hindered by our timely coming; on
which our Cannon played so hard, till the house was crevised, so that they were
forced to quit it, with the loss of many men, and they being gone, our Cannon
then played hard on the Towne-Ports and walls, doing the enemy great hurt.

The night drawing on, his Majesty commanded Colonel Hepburne, with his
Briggad, to march to a Bridge a mile above Donavert, and to cross over for to
beset the other side of the Town, whereon his Majesty thought the enemy would
press to escape: before midnight the Colonel arriving there, did place our
Musketeers in strong Plottons, by hundreds, in the most advantageous parts, for
offending the enemy; our Pikes and Colors were drawn up in three strong
bodies, or squadrons, and were commanded to stand by their Arms, to be in
readiness, in case of Alarm: And having placed our Centries, Perdues, and
others, by break of day the enemy fell forth eight hundred strong of
Musketeers on our Quarter; the service begun by our Musketeers, we came up
with full squadrons of Pikes amongst them, and entered on the execution, till we
made them throw down their Arms, and cry for Quarters; some for safety
retired back to the Town, Bevaria, as soon as they smelt the smell of their
Fathers houses, in less than ten days they were all gone.

The in-taking of this pass on such a sudden, wrought a terrible fear amongst
all the Papists in Bavaria; in like manner, his Majesty did send Palsgrave
Augustus, with some Forces to Hechstat, a pass on the Danube, which he
immediately took in, and by this time was General Tilly with his Army come on
the Leacke toward Rhine on the River: and having beset it strong, he beset
also all other parts betwixt that and Ausburg, and the Duke himself caused to
take their Arms from all the professors of the reformed Religion in Ausburg,
and having beset it with two thousand Soldiers, he retired himself to
Engolstat.

His Majesty after the in-taking of Donavert, commanded General Bannier, with
a party of four thousand strong, of horse, foot, and Artillery, toward
Newburg on the Danube; but it was beset before their coming, and they retiring
again to Donavert, where our whole Army being joined, we marched toward the
River of the Leacke, of intention to force a pass unto Bavaria, being then
thirty two thousand strong, of horse and foot.

The twenty-eight Observation.
General Tilly knowing his Majesty was so near with a strong Army to be
revenged on him, for the Russle he had given to Gustavus Horn at Bambricke: he
never rested his Army, but continually kept them on foot, attending still our
coming; and we, to verify the desire we had to be revenged on him, did
neglect no time, till at last, we found him out, where we intended to try
Fortune again, which never smiles always on one, but is ever variable,
keeping no constant course, being whiles here, now there; and commonly we see,
that those who have been most fortunate in their time (as this old General
was) they have an insatiable desire of victory, and prosperous fortune, till
near their end, that they are overcome themselves.

Here we see his Majesty's diligence alike, in following of his enemy,
Donavert, being the pass, we were holden up at, which his Majesty with
diligence did get in his power, being so hard pursued, that the enemy got no
time to relieve it, though the Cavalier that defended it, showed himself
resolute in defending of it, as in out-falling on our Guards, which were
Swedens, who having neglected their duty, were blameworthy, as their Captain
that commanded them, who ought to have preferred death before life, ere he had
quite his Post; seeing his standing could have moved others to help him,
though the Swedens left him. But his Majesty having got the victory over the
Town, by the valor of the Captains Countrymen, their intercession then
procured his pardon, though not his admission to his former Command.

Likewise here we see that stone houses are vain defenses against cannon:

Here also as in the continuance of the Story, we see the valor of Hepburne
and of his Briggad praise worthy, being first and last instruments of the
enemies overthrow in gross or by parties, being commanded men: where often we
were well seconded by Ramseys men, seeing those were ever commanded on desperate
exploits, being still appointed the fore-troopes of the Army, well led and
conducted by Major Sidsersse, who was a Cavalier both diligent and valorous,
being also trusted on good occasions for his judgment in command.

As his Majesty was diligent in the taking of this pass, so he was careful to
repair it, by helping of the ruins, and in besetting it again with a strong
Garrison, establishing good order and discipline, having left Colonel
Worbrane, an Osterriker Freber, as Governor, being a man expert in making of
cannon, and in devising of fire-workes; As also he understood well how best to
fortify irregular works as these were. And therefore his Majesty most wisely
did concredit, according to his gifts, the maintaining of this pass to his
care and diligence, which both he did show in fortifying the Town, even so
far as Art could be helpefull to nature.

The twenty ninth Duty discharged of his Majesty's forcing the passage over the
Leacke, and of the intaking of Ausburg.
DONAVERT being taken, Swedena Garrison, caused a great fear and astonishment
to seize upon all the Papists in Bavaria, which made the Jesuits and Monks
fly unto Tilligen, Mynckine, Neuburg, and Engolstat: where above twenty
thousand of the Clergy were unwilling to fight with the Duke against his
Majesty's forces, and seeing Vindligan, the Castle of Oberdorsse, and diverse
other places taken in by his Majesty, those of Neighburg desired his Majesty's
safeguardes, in respect the Swedens were making great booty over all, where
ever they came hanging the Papists by their purse not sharing to torment their
shinnes, as they did in Pomexen and in the Marks of Brandenburg to the
Protestants, in exacting their moneys, which they were made to repay again,
Lege talionis.

General Tilly by this time had entrenched his Army above the Rhine, Leacke,
to hinder his Majesty's passage unto Bavaria, with a strong Army, which lay on
the other side of the River, right against Tillies Army, where his Majesty did
set over a bridge made with boats and plankes, having planted seventy two
pieces of cannon, great and small. In the borders of the River, which did play
cominually into the midst of Tillies Army, who were drawn up in Battle, on
the other side, to hinder his Majesty's passage, but our messengers were so
swift and diligent, that through importunity, they obtained a grant of the
passage, where many were made to lie dead by our cannon; for those that were
not hurt by the Bullets, they were lamed by branches and trees, cut by the
cannon, being they stood in a thick wood, which shooting continued a whole
day, being on the fifth of April 1632; a day ominous to General Tilly, who
was shot in the knee with a cannon bullet; a cruel blow for an old man of
seventy two years, who, being carried from thence to Engolstat, died within
three days, being cruelly tormented with the smart of his wound.

Tilly being gone, the Army discouraged for their great loss sustained; The
Duke remarking his Majesty would force the passage, he thought best in time to
retire, taking his flight confusedly upon Engolstat and Nuburg: after that
Altringer, then a Colonel was shot in the head, and above a thousand did lie
dead on the place they stood on.

His Majesty having crossed over with the Army, he incontinent commanded certain
Troops to follow the fugitives, getting orders to cut them off as they were
found.

This victory happily attained unto by his Majesty, incontinent the Town of
Rhine, being the first frontier Garrison in Bavaria, rendered up, and his
Majesty having beset Rhine with a Garrison, he marched with the Army along
the Leacke side on Ausburg; Nuburg came to his Majesty, making their excuse for
receiving of Tillies forces, and withal they declared, that the enemy had quit
their Town again; and therefore they interposed with his Majesty for
neutrality, which being refused unto them, a Garrison was sent to keep them in
awe, to bring their lands in contribution, and to repair the bridge which was
broken by the Dukes command.

His Majesty having continued his march toward Ausburg, the eighth of April
we lay down before it, and immediately we set over a bridge over the Leacke,
during which time the Commandant spared not his Ammunition, but continually
Cannonaded amongst us; but out batteries being once ready, they received their
interchange, and his Majesty offered the Garrison free passage, and to retire
in safety with his folks, whether he pleased, otherwise there should no
quarter be granted unto them, if they pressed to hold out longer, whereupon
the Governor resolved to accept of his Majesty's offer, and having made his
Accord, on the tenth of April he marched out, and was conveyed toward
Engolstat.

Incontinent thereafter, his Majesty did beset the Town with a strong
Garrison, and the next day before his Majesty entered the Town, all Papists
were ordained to assemble and meet at Leckhousen, where they were set off the
Town Council, that were known to be Papists, and Protestants were placed; So
that the fourteenth of April his Majesty entered the Town, going first unto
the Church called St. Annes Church, and there in presence of his Majesty of
Bohemia, Palsgrave Augustus, and Duke William of Wymar, Duke Hannes of
Howlsten, Markgrave Christopher Fontarlach and Bawden, and other Potentats and
Ambassadors, did hear a Sermon, and praised God for the victory obtained
against their enemies; The Text being taken out of the twelfth Psalm and fifth
verse. For the oppression of the needy, and for the sighs of the poor, I will
now up says the LORD, and will set at liberty him, whom the wicked had snared.

After Sermon his Majesty went to the market place, Swedens Regiments were
brought, and where the Burgers were also enjoined to come to present their
service unto his Majesty, and a table being set openly and covered, a present
was sent to his Majesty from the new set Protestant Council, of Corn, Fish
and Wine, and the next day being the fifteenth of April, his Majesty with the
whole Army, was ready to march unto Bavaria.

The twenty ninth Observation.
GENERAL Tillie being near unto his end, Bambricke, to show the Swedens by
his retreat the right pass unto Bavaria, with his own death. Wherein we have a
notable example of an old expert General, who being seventy two years of age,
was ready to die in defense of his Religion and Country, and in defense of
those whom he served, being then General for the Catholic League: which end
of his should encourage all brave Cavaliers, following the laudable profession
of Arms, to follow his example in life and death, as valorous Soldiers: where
we see, that though death be fatal unto all, yet such a death, as happened
unto this old General, is only proper unto the valiant, who though often
contemned death and eschewed death, during the warfare, yet at last he is
overtaken by Gods Almighty hand and power, though formerly in his lifetime he
had escaped, by the same providence, many dangers. And sometimes we see in the
very entrance of wars, some suddenly taken away, to teach us always to trust
more unto God then unto the arm of man, which is but a vain strength.

Likewise, though this worthy General did fight often, and obtained many
notable victories till this time, against Kings, yet at last he is overcome by
a King, and a more skillful General then he was, and though before the
battle of Leipsigh, he did give no higher title to his Majesty then to a
Cavalier: Nevertheless his Majesty hearing of his death, called him Honorable
old Tilly, whose Acts were so Heroicke in his life time, that after his death,
they were his everlasting monuments, making his memory eternal, suffering his
name never to rot with the time. And my wish were, I might prove as valiant in
advancing Christ's Kingdom (though I should die in the quarrel) as he was
forward in hindering of it; my death then should not be bitter unto my friends,
I leaving an immottall name behind me.

Also here we see the great force of Artillery, either in forcing of passes
against our enemies, or in maintaining of passes with a little advantage of
ground, for seventy two pieces of Ordinance, with such continuance, were of
mighty force to make passage to an Army: for this victory was obtained by the
force of our Cannon alone, which made the enemy run away, before we could
come at them to fight, and the discouragment given unto them, by the loss of
their Leaders caused their disorder, and consequently safety to us in our
passage. Where we see, that as victory is from God, so the help, judgment and
dexterity of good Commanders is furthersome to the victory, as the lawful
means ordained by God.

Moreover we see here, how easy it is for a victorious Army, that is once
master of the Field, to take in Frontier Garrisons, while as they are possessed
instantly with a Panicke fear, especially being taken at the Stot or rebound,
before they have time to digest their fear. But had General Tilly drawn up
his Army out of reach of his Majesty's Cannon, Tillies advantage had bin the
greater to receive them as they came, who might have cut them off by divisions,
which had bin more to his credit: yet we see as the Prophet says, Except the
LORD watch, the watchman watchethin vain. And we see, God would have these
people punished for their former cruelties; and therefore he took away their
judgment, and confounded their Counsel, making them err, till they ran to
their own ruin.

As his Majesty's Judgment in command was great, so his Example was good and
commendable, in giving God thanks in his Church, for his victories and for the
preservation of his life from danger; wherein his Majesty chiefly showed the
example of his Piety and religious exercise, for he knew well that Religion and
Justice were the fundaments of all good society, and being much inclined unto
both, he would win the people by his own example: since of all men it
becomes Kings and Princes worst to be irreligious and ungodly:

The thirtieth Duty discharged of our expedition toward Engolstat.
THE sixteenth of April his Majesty did break up with the Army from Ausburg,
taking his march toward Engolstat, of intention to start the Duke of Bavier
from thence, having left so many of our Army behind us as took in Launceberg,
Mindelhaim, Fussen, Showngow and diverse other parts in Schwabland by accord,
where General Major Ruthven then Governor of Vlme, Vlme and Lindow under his
Majesty of Swedens contribution, and most part of Schwabland also, for which
service his Majesty gifted unto him, under his hand and seal, the Graveshaft
or Earldome of Kirkberg, lying next adjacent to the City of Vlme, which
belonged to the Fuckers of Ausburg, that were made Earls by the Emperor, from
Merchants having turned Soldiers, to serve his Imperial Majesty: which
Graveshaft or Earldom could pay yearly, beside Contribution to the wars,
ten thousand Rex-Dollers, being a good augmentation of pay for an old servant,
who had served long and valourously, without the least blot of discredit, and
retired bravely with means and credit to his Country, carrying the marks of
his valor in his body, being above the waste full of tokens of valor,
credibly gotten in his Masters service; for as he was courageous before his
enemy, he was also fortunate in his Conduct, in obtaining victory beyond his
fellows; and being often singled out, man to man, to make his courage the more
undoubted, he always gave testimony in this kind of his valor, answerable to
the external show and hansome frame of his body, being in personage inferior
to no man, for strength and comely stature.

His Majesty continuing his March toward Engolstat, coming within sight of the
Town, he drew his Army in Battle, horse, foot, and Artillery, where we
stood the whole night at Arms. The next day drawing nearer to the enemies
Army being encamped before us, Ex opposito, on the other side of the Danube,
ready to second the Town on all occasions, which his Majesty considering,
gave order to draw out our Leaguer, and to set men to work after we were
quartered; where, for our welcome, the enemy from the Town did salute us
furiously with Cannon; so that at first, the head was shot from the young
Markgrave of Baden, and his Majesty recognosceing, the leg was shot from his
Horse; diverse others were also here lamed by the Cannon.

The night drawing on,

His Majesty, in the beginning of the night, commanded a thousand Swedens,
being Musketeers, led by sufficient Officers in his Majesty's own presence, to
fall on the Skonce, before the bridge, which was beset with fifteen hundred
foot, and five hundred horse, lying open on the side, that lay next the Town,
that if the enemy should storm and enter, he might be cleansed outagaine with
Cannon and musket, from the Town wall; notwithstanding whereof, the Swedens
bravely advanced, even to the graffe, being ready to storm they were plagued
with the musket, and with fire-workes, that leaving three hundred men killed
about the Skonce, the former stand, to attend the enemies out-coming, to make
us acquainted with the thundering of Cannon; where no man, were he never so
stout, could be blamed to stoop, seeing the Cannon in the night fireing in a
right line before him, he that would not shift his body, to eschew the graseing
of a Bullet, was not to be pitied, if killed through oftentation.

Here death, that cruel fellow, courted all alike, yet none was so enamoured,
as willingly to embrace him, though well I know, many brave fellows were
resolved to meet him, for to give him the foil before he came near.

This night a Soldier though not stout, might pass prentise in our Calling in
one night, for resolution; where having stayed till it was day, we retired to
the Leaguer, with great loss of men, that were killed and hurt, where they
that had escaped the Malheur, were glad to discourse at large of their nights
watch.

His Majesty finding this Town strong by nature, situation, and art, lying on
the Danube, really fortified with a bridge over the River; fortified also
before the entry, and the Town being well provided of all furniture, having a
strong Garrison, and in need an Army to supply it, which made his Majesty,
for that time, rise from it, having gotten intelligence, that the Duke of
Baviers Forces by sleight had taken in Rhinsberg, where the most part of the
Army was sent thither to beset the pass, who immediately after their entry,
disarmed the Citizens, being all Protestants, having quartered above twenty
Soldiers in every house, where also the Duke himself did march with the rest
of his Army, knowing his Majesty was not able to gain credit before
Engolstat, he went away, suffering his Majesty to stay behind, to try his
fortune against the Town, who also did break up, Banier being commanded to
make the retreat, where the enemy having charged, he behaved himself well by
good Command, charging the enemy with small Troops, forcing them to retire,
while as the body of the Army was retiring, the General commanding still
fresh Troops, one after another, to receive the enemies charge, till at last
all were safely retired, and the enemy retired also, not daring to show
himself without the passes on the field, being well beaten at an out-fall by
the Swedens the day before.

The Retreat honorably made, his Majesty continued his march on Mosburg,
having line that night on the Hill at Gysenfels, having in the afternoon
before drawn the whole Army in one Front, Horse, Foot, and Cannon, for doing
the funeral Rites of the Markgrave of Bawden, whose corpse being appointed to
be sent away with a Convoy to be buried; before their departure, the whole
Cannon was twice discharged, and then the whole Musketeers of the Army from the
right hand to the left, did give two salves of Musket, and after them, the
whole Army of horse did give two salves of Pistol. This day also, old
Captain David Ramsey was buried, having died of a consuming Fever.

The next day our march continuing toward Mosburg, where we did lie five
days, his Majesty having sent Felt-marshall Horn, with a strong party of
horse, foot, and Cannon, toward Landshut; where Hepburne with his Briggad was
also employed. The Town not being strong, the enemy, after a little skirmish
made with horse in the Feilds, retired over the water, casting off the Bridge
behind them, they escaped, having left a weak Garrison of foot in the Town
and Castle, to make an Accord, for keeping the Town unplundered, which was
suddenly agreed on, so that before night, we were quartered in the Town, the
enemy being retired, where diverse of our Briggad made booty worth their pains.

The next day his Majesty hearing we had taken in the Town, Memmungen,
leaving Orders for the Felt-marshall to join with the Army at Freisingen,
having got moneys for his Majesty, both from Landshut, and the Bishopric of
Freisingen, for keeping them unplundered.

Hohnwart, Pfafenhowen, being two walled Towns, with the Abbacie of St.
Morris, and the Abbacie of St. George, were also brought under Contribution;
where the Boores on the march cruelly used our Soldiers (that went aside to
plunder) in cutting off their noses and ears, hands and feet, pulling out
their eyes, with sundry other cruelties which they used, being justly repayed
by the Soldiers, in burning of many Dorpes on the march, leaving also the
Boores dead, where they were found.

A strong party of the Dukes Soldiers, thinking to have surprised the Swedens
in their quarters, they fell themselves in the ditch that they prepared for
others, so that very few of them escaped with life out of the Swedens hands.

By this time also Weysenburg not far from Nurenberg, Dukes Forces, having
got some Cannon from the Castle of Weiltzburg: Nevertheless, the Swedens
Garrison behaved themselves valourously, in making an honorable Accord, though
those Papists unworthily brake their promise, for those that would not
willingly serve, were cut down, and the Town by condescending was also
plundered, their wives and children were abused, and the Burgomasters and
Preachers were taken prisoners unto Engolstat, and the Ports of the Town they
razed and burnt.

The thirtieth Observation.
IN this Expedition, as in all the former, his Majesty's wisdom and
diligence, is praiseworthy; for prosecuting his victories so orderly on the
hot sent, as the cunning Hunter does his prey, in giving one sweat after
another, till he kill or derne, in putting the Fox in the earth, and then hook
him out, or starve him.

Likewise, His Majesty also very wisely advancing within his enemies Country;
First made the passes sure behind him, in case of Retreat, or of scarcity of
Ammunition or victuals, most prudently he left General Ruthven at Vlme, as
Governor, being his Magazin-place, and surest retreat; being also made
certain of the Duke of Wittenbergs friendship, who in necessity was able to
furnish him with a great supply of men, moneys, victuals, and Ammunition for
his Army; being then one of the most powerful Princes within Germany. As
also, his Majesty having got Ausburg under subjection, be very wisely left a
part of his Army to subdue the adjacent Cities in Schwabland, Memmungen,
Pibrach, Brandenburg on the River Elve, as also Middleham, Kawffbire, and
Kempten on the Leacke, and Elve; and that by the industry and diligence of
General Major Ruthven, with the rest of the young Cavaliers of the Scots
Nation, that followed him; such as Colonel Hugh Hamilton, Colonel John
Forbesse, Lieutenant Colonel Gunne, Lieutenant Colonel Mongomerie, Major
Brumfield, and diverse other Scots Captains, such as Captain Dumbarre, that
was killed by the Boores near Vlme; who all were obliged to General Ruthven,
not only for their advancements, but also for their means, which they made in
short time, beyond their fellows, who had served longer; by reason their lot
was to have fallen in a fat soil, that abounded in riches, and as their
service to his Majesty was faithful and loyal; so his Majesty was liberal
and bountiful, in advancing them to titles of honor; As also in bestowing on
them Cadoucks and casualties, to enrich them more than others, whose fortunes
were not to be so rewarded, though their deservings were no less; so that
being rich in credit, they care not for the want of abundance of external
things, being inwardly contented through their virtue.

Here also we see, that as his Majesty was circumspect for his retreat, even
so he was fore seeing for the safety of his Army, in not hazarding to engage
it too far with disadvantage against the Dukes Army, and the strong City of
Engolstat; being the best Strength for one within the Empire. Nevertheless,
having once recognosced the City, he would not leave it, till he had shown
his resolution, and left his intrenchment, as the tokens of his worth, in
hazarding to beleaguer it, having an Army to second them; and while as his
Majesty's horse was shot under him, he said, God should call him out of the
world, yet the Lord would not abandon his own Cause, being so just, but he was
assured, God would stir up some other worthier than he, to put a period to
those wars, for the liberty of Gods service in Dutchland; and withal, he
took God to witness, he had no other intention in prosecuting those wars,
but only to pull down the tyranny of the house of Austria; and to obtain a
solid and a settled peace unto all men, that were interessed in the quarrel.

Where, by this his speech, we see, that as he was a brave and a valourous
King; so he was wise at this time in preserving himself and his Army from
losing them before such a strong City. As also we see, that the Conditions of
mortal men have their changes common unto them, that ofttimes they are crossed
by contrary fortunes, as formerly they did prosper; and the Lord does hide the
causes of both from us, to spur us ever to seek to his Majesty, in doing
good; and those good of themselves, as this just King was, who notwithstanding
had need of Gods direction in all his ways and enterprises: which should make
us all earnest in seeking the Lord, to direct us in all our ways; seeing of
our selves we are not able to do any thing that is good; neither ought we to
ascribe any thing of our prosperous success or fortune unto our selves, being
but the Lords servants, and instruments he uses, as weak means of his glory,
and the welfare of his Church on earth. Our daily delight should be then to
learn wisdom out of the actions of others; and like the Be that makes the
honey,

Moreover, here we see his Majesty, though on a march, not neglective to
discharge that last and honorable duty to the corpse of that noble and worthy
Cavalier, the Markgrave of Turlagh and Bawden, by making the whole Army to
give two Salves of Cannon, Musket, and Pistol in comely order, as the Custom
is at such times; where it is to be regrated, how oft-times death does prevent
the expected goodness of many a brave fellow, as this young Cavalier was, the
worthy son of a worthy Father, who carried diverse times the title of a
General.

Here also I would exhort by the way all worthy Soldiers, God, than to tell
over their Beads, being taught, as their best devotion and knowledge of the
mysteries of God tending to salvation, to glory in their ignorance, which makes
many of them to commit any wickedness what soever, to win damnation to
themselves; being once commanded by a Priest, that can make the poor ignorant
believe, that to do wickedly is the way to heaven. Who cannot then see, how
detestable this Doctrine is, that gives people liberty to commit all villainy,
and then to assure them of pardon for it?

The use then we should make of this, who profess another truth, is to abhor
their examples of life, as we do their doctrine; seeing we should know, that
no crime before God is so abominable, as to glory in sin; for where sin
grows, there grows also the punishment: And he that sins openly with an
out-streched neck, as these villains did in Wisenburg, in sight of God and
before the Sun and the world, they offended double, teaching others by their
example to sin.

Happy therefore is the man, who delights not in sin, but happier is he,
that glories not in sin, yea happiest of all, that continues not in sin,
but repents of the evil done, and cease to do so any more.

The thirty one Duty discharged of our Expedition unto Munchen, and of our
abode there.
BEing retired from Landshut, a pretty little Town and Castle in Bavaria,
lying on the Eiser, we continued our march after his Majesty, and marched
toward Frising, where we joined with his Majesty, and encamped over night in
the fields, where his Majesty had intelligence, that Wallestine with a strong
Army, was on his march toward the upper Paltz, which made his Majesty make the
greater haste to visit Munchen, the Duke of Bavaria his chief Town of
residence, having made the Bishop of Frising pay fifty thousand Dollers, and
promise contribution beside, out of the whole Bishopric, and continuing our
march the sixth of May, toward Munchen; on our way, the Commissioners from
Munchen did come and salute his Majesty, offering all kind of submission, for
to spare from plundering of their City, and from ruinating of their houses and
policy. His Majesty lying over night in the fields, within half a mile of the
City, his Majesty commanded Colonel Hepburne with our Briggad to march away
and to make the Circuit of the Town, Eiser, with his Briggad to guard the
bridge, that none should pass or repasse till his Majesty's coming to the
Town, which accordingly we obyed, and guarded the bridge till the next
morning: his Majesty encamped the whole Army without the Town, marching in
with our Briggad alone, where Colonel Hepburnes Regiment had the watch on the
market place, and the guarding of the Ports; his Majesty of Sweden and the King
of Bohemia being lodged on the Castle, I was commanded with our Regiment, and
my Lord Spences Regiment, led by Lieutenant Colonel Musten, and ordained to
lie in the great Court of the Palace, night and day at our Arms, to guard
both the Kings persons, and to set out all Guards about the Palace, where I was
commanded with our whole Officers, not to stir off our watch, having
allowance of Table and diet for us and our Officers within his Majesty's house,
to the end we might the better look to our watch: and the command of all
directions under stayers was put upon me, being then Commander of the Guards;
where I had power over the whole offices belonging to the house, and might have
commanded to give out any thing to pleasure Cavaliers; having stayed in this
charge three weeks nobly entertained.

Here in Munchen the Boarish-Boares alleged the dead were risen, since before
his Majesty's coming, by the Dukes command, the great cannon were buried, side
by side in the Magazin house; whereof his Majesty being made acquainted, they
were dug up out of the ground, and carried away to Ausburg, above one
hundred and forty pieces of Cannon great and small, whereof there were twelve
Apostles, and other Cannon which formerly were taken from the Elector Palatine,
and the Duke of Brunswicke, with their names and Arms on them, of which one
was found, wherein there were thirty thousand Ducats of gold, being a present
for a King.

Likewise in this Magazin house there were found clothes and Arms ready to
cloth an Army of ten thousand foot, which helped our Army much; many other
rarieties were gotten in this house worth much money, which were transported
away by both the Kings. As also all the Dukes servants of his whole household
were there, that bare offices about the house, and the house it self was as
well replenished and furnished, as any Kings Palace needed to be, of all
magnificent furniture, for bed, board and hangings, which were sumptuous and
costly.

Here also about this Palace were pleasant gardens, fish ponds, waterworkes,
and all things yielding pleasure in the most splendid grandeur, that can be
imagined, with a pleasant Tennis-court for recreation, where both the Kings
sometimes did recreat themselves.

Moreover this house was so magnificently situated,

His Majesty having remained here above a fort night, and getting intelligence
of some turbulent uproares made by the Papists Boores in Schwabland, his
Majesty leaving General Banier to command over the Army at Monchen; his
Majesty with a strong party of horse, and two Briggads of foot, marched
toward Memmungen in Schwabland, and having presently stilled the uproare, he
retired upon Ausburg, and from thence to Munchen again, where his Majesty on a
sudden taxed the Town in a hundred thousand Rex Dolours, which the Burgers and
Clergy were willing to give his Majesty, to keep the City unplundered, for
which sum there were fifty of the special Burgers and Clergy given as
pledges unto his Majesty, till payment were made of the moneys against a
certain day; and to that effect; the pledges were sent with a Convoy unto
Ausburg, to be kept there till the moneys were paid.

His Majesty then fearing that Walestine lately made Generalissimus to the
Emperors whole Army, was coming with a strong Army out of Bohemia, and his
Majesty thinking he was to fall with those Forces into the Duke of Saxons
country, and seeing the Duke of Bavier had his Army ready at Rhinsberg, and the
pass open, he might join with Walestine when he pleased, and therefore his
Majesty resolved suddenly to break up with his Army from Munchen, giving
orders all should be in readiness against the twenty sixth of May, to march
toward Donavert, and from thence in haste to Nurenberg.

The thirty-one Observation.
WISE Generals must resolve in time to rule their affairs according to the
occurrences happening in the course of wars; for the Duke of Bavier finding
himself, after Tillies death and his loss sustained at Rhine on the Leacke,
not bastant to rancounter his Majesty's Army in the fields, he very wisely
resolved to make a defensive war, betaking himself with his Army within his
Strengths and Passes, collecting his Forces together at those two places of
Engolstat and Rhinsberg, which his Majesty perceiving, thought again, it was
not time for him to enter in beleaguering of such strengths being so strongly
beset, and so well provided, especially seeing his enemies were drawing strong
to the fields from all parts.

The Spaniard forcing his troops on the Rhine within the Palatinat, Ossa
coming behind him with an Army in Schwabland, the Duke of Bavier lying strong
with his Army betwixt him and Nurenburg, on the passes of Engolstat and
Rhinsberg, Walestine also drawing near to the Duke of Saxon, with a strong
Army to fall into his country, betwixt his Majesty and home; and Papenhaim then
dominiering in the nether Saxon Creitches: in consideration whereof, his
Majesty very wisely resolved to hang the little Towns, Cloisters and Abbacies
belonging to the Papists in Bavaria by the Purse: taking of them on the sudden
all the moneys they were able to give him, and pledges for the rest, promising
unto them, unless they would duly pay their promised contribution unto his
Commissaries, the next time he would burn their Dorpes and houses, and put all
to the sword; whereas then he had used clemency, in hope they would give the
like obedience unto him as unto the Duke their Master. For his Majesty did see,
the enemy forced him by a diversion; And therefore he used his time while he
was in Bavaria; that they might not forget he had bin there: but rather took
tokens with him; as men, money, Arms, rare monuments of antiquity, and rich
Jewels, and which was worse (wherein his Majesty had neither hand nor
direction) many of their houses, Dorpes and Castles were burnt to the ground by
evil and wicked instruments, that repaied burning with burning, using the
Papists at home, as they used Protestants abroad, being near the Baltique
coast, they never dreamed that the Protestants would come so far up as to
repay them under the foot of the Alps. And had Gustavus lived, we had gone
near to warm them within Rome, for their bypast cruelties, where we see, that
God the righteous judge punishes sin with sin, and man by his own
iniquity.

His Majesty leaving no Garrison in Bavaria, to keep the country the better in
awe and obedience, he took Hostages and pledges of special men from them
along with him, to make them the readier to pay the sums they had promised;
As also their contribution: and to make them the loather to rise again in
Arms against his Majesty's Garrisons, which lay adjacent unto them.

The Duke of Baviers forces being retired within their strengths and passes,
finding themselves not Bastant to offend his Majesty's Army, they fall out on
the other side of the Danube, toward the upper Paltz, making their incursions
there, and take in Wisenburg, where they used both Burgers and Soldiers more
unhumanly, then became Christians to do.

In like manner we see here the diligence and celerity used by his Majesty,
according to the occasions that happened, in going so suddenly toward Ossa,
and in returning again at the Poast, with a convoy of Dragoniers toward
Munchen, to break up with his Army, having left Duke Barnard of Wymar with
General Major Ruthven to attend on Ossa his Army, on the borders of Tyroll,
toward Landaw and the Boden sea, till business were pacified.

Here then we see, that his Majesty's diligence and experience in warlike
actions was so great, that his enemies never plotted that enterprise, Tilly did
know) Engines to devise, to pass over Rivers or Fossies or walls, was his
masterpiece (as Tillies death can witness at the Leacke) to plant batteries
or to change, therein he was profound; witness also his crossing the Leacke;
if lines or approaches were to be altered, his judgment then behooved to be
used; in a word he was the Master of Military discipline, being risen from a
prentise, to the great professor of Arts, in this eminent and high calling of a
Soldier: where it is requisite, that as a man is valorous and judicious, so he
ought to be constant in keeping his word and truth inviolable, as this King did
to all his confederats, and to his enemies also. And therefore as a most
precious Jewel, his remarkable example of virtue is to be followed by those,
who would-prove Heroicke and Magnificent as he was.

And therefore I was serious to pry so deep into his actions, as that those,
whom I wish to succeed him in his virtues, may follow his practices used in
the conquest of a great part of Germany: for his spirit alone and skill in
wars was better then thousands of Armed men. The like gifts I heartily wish
to my Noble Patron his Highness, the Prince Elector Palatine, whom I wish to
succeed him, not only in his virtues but in his conquest also.

Seeing then the greatest part of humane happiness does consist in virtue, who
ever then would be wise, let him fix his eyes and his mind to judge other men's
actions, thereby to correct his own, looking unto all that was and is, to
the end that through their example he may learn to better himself; for so long
he shall flourish, as wisdom and counsel are his guides, which both I wish we
may follow.

The thirty-two Duty discharged of our March to Donavert, and from thence to
Furt on the Peignets.
THE first of June our Army did break up from Munchen in Bavaria, toward
Donavert, having left an Army behind us in Schwabland of eight thousand
strong, led by Duke Barnard of Wymar, and General Major Ruthven to at tend on
Ossa; having crossed the Leacke again at Rhine, we continued our march toward
our Randez-vouz at Donavert, where we were appointed to join with the rest of
our Army; and from thence we continued our march upon Weisenburg, being the
pass betwixt Donavert and Nurenberg, where on our march we had certainty, that
Duke Barnard had defeated a Regiment of horse, and taken eight Cornets from
Ossa, and that Hanniball Count of Hobemems was immediately sent prisoner to
Vlme; and Banier was left for a time at Ausburg, for to settle the Garrison,
where the pledges were left in custody. His Majesty very wisely before this
march confirmed his confederacy with the Duke of Wirtenberg being of great
force to advance his Majesty's affairs and the cause, with men, meat and
money, being the next neighbor to Vlme.

His Majesty also at this time did give Patents to Hugh Hamilton and to John
Forbesse, as Colonells to leavie two Regiments of foot on the borders of
Sweetzerland, Protestant Cantons in Sweetzerland, to give no pass through
their country unto the Spaniard from Italy, and that for weighty reasons;
chiefly calling them to memory, that the house of Austria and Spain were ever
great crossers of the liberties of their Commonwealth, and most of all, of the
liberty of their consciences: which Letter was graciously accepted by the
Swcetzers, and the passage after that was closed up.

Our march continuing to to Furt, Aichstat and Tilligen were brought under his
Majesty's contribution, as also Papenhaim Castle was taken in, being the second
marshall house belonging to the Empire, not distant above two miles from
Wysenburg, where before our coming to Wysenburg, the Duke of Bavier his Forces
were retired again, for their safeties unto Engolstat, being led by Crats, so
that without impediment, our march continued to Furt on the Pegnets, besides
Nurenberg: where we encamped again on the fields, the seventh of June, and
remained there till the Lords of Nurenberg invited his Majesty to their City,
where his Majesty was Royally entertained, and bountifully offered what in
their powers lay, to be given unto his Majesty, either for his Army or his
Majesty's contentment otherwise: and in this mean time, the Duke of Bavaria
his forces were joined with Valestine his Army at Egger; having used all the
diligence he could in helping his foot forwards on horseback and wagons:
and in their by-going the seventh of June, they took in Schultzbach in the
over Paltz, having no Garrison in it but Burgers, who defended themselves till
they made an Accord, which was not kept unto them.

The thirty-two Observation.
HEre we see again his Majesty's wonderful diligence, wherein does ever
consist the best part of war; for hearing in Bavaria, that Walestine was
marched with a strong Army out of Bohemia toward the over Paltz; and knowing
the Duke of Baviere had the pass of Rhinesberg free unto the upper Paltz, he
was not able to hinder their Conjunction, if Walestine his design were on
Nurenberg, as it was; his Majesty knew then diligence was to be used for the
relief of Nurenberg; and therefore, Nurenberg, which to have, the enemy he
knew, would not spare either money or travel; for if they could cut off his
Majesty from the help and assistance of this Town, it was the best way to
defend Baviere, Schwabland, and Ostreigh.

Likewise, it was the only means to recover again the Bishopric of
Wurtzburg, and the Dukedom of Franconia, and by that means (if not
altogether) yet far they might, drive back again his Majesty of Sweden and
his Forces, keeping him out of Bavaria; as also out of the Emperors
hereditarie lands. This was their cunning enterprise on Nurenberg, and the
reasons of it, which his Majesty of Sweden, that Heroicke and magnanimous King
took betimes unto his consideration; having had a wake-rife or vigilant eye
over the safety and preservation of this City; seeing it stood of so much
importance unto his Majesty, and unto the whole Evangelists Confederates, that
the enemy should not be Master of it. And therefore to prevent the hurt
thereof, his Majesty used the greater haste out of Bavaria. For his Majesty
knew well, that the opportunity of time was like a swift Eagle, which being at
ones foot may be taken, but when once he mounts in the air, he laughs at
those would catch him, not meaning to return unto them: which moved his
Majesty, not to suffer the Eagle to mount so high, as to be laughed at, but
embracing opportunity, while he had it, he prevented the enemies design by
taking of time, that augments our experience in warfare; which experience gives
us confidence in our behaviors, in the greatest extremity, giving us
resolution and courage against our enemies; as also graces our behavior
toward our friends and confederates.

Here then we see the enemies designs prevented by the diligence, labor, and
danger of the most valiant, the Lion of the North, the invincible King of
Sweden; who was so diligent or wake-rife, that his delight was to try the
Conclusions of Fortune against his enemies; forcing Fortune to make him her
Favorite, Nurenberg, as a good Shepherd goes betwixt the Flock and the
Corn.

Moreover, here we see also the great wisdom of his Majesty, in making his
league and confederacy sure with the Duke of Wirtenberg, before he could
perceive the enemies strength that were coming against him, taking a catch of
time, which being over-seene, could never have been had again; and therefore
it was, that his Majesty used the greater celeritie in binding up that
confederacy, having then his Army under the Duke of Wirtenbergs nose, to force
him to Conditions, if he had not willingly yielded: where we see, that the
power of an Army, led by a King, much avails to bring inferiors to
Conditions, not being able again to resist a Kings power with Force. And as
his Majesty was wise in making his confederacy with the Duke, so he was
diligent in foreseeing to write to the Republique of Switzerland, to get the
passage closed on his enemies behind him; As also we see here his Majesty's
care to supply his Army, by giving Patents to our Countrymen, whose fortunes
were much to be lamented; for having brought their Regiments suddenly together,
they were as suddenly scattered: for both the Colonells being taken prisoners,
they were kept pitifully in bondage for the space of three years, being
neglected of their Superiors, till they were forced to ransom themselves, and
Colonel John Forbesse having afterward taken service under the King of
France, being of short continuance, was much regrated, he being a young
Cavalier, free and liberal, and of good hope.

To conclude then this observation, it was necessity, that vehement fellow,
Bavaria, being the enemy pressed strong against our friends, he was diverted.
Where we see, that necessity in wars admits of no reason, more than in other
things, for seldom it suffers to make choice of times. And therefore it is
holden as the best teacher, that teaches all most diligently, even Kings as
well as mean men, and Armies as well as parties, and parties as private men:
for it brings ever great celerity and quickness with it as it did on this our
march, for the safety of Nurenberg.

The thirty-three Duty discharged of our Expedition from Furt unto the upper
Palatinate.
THE Town of Nurenberg having accommodated and submitted themselves in all
things unto his Majesty's will, for the furtherance of the good cause, they
furnished victuals, Arms, and Ammunition, with Artillery for his Majesty's
Army; and then his Majesty did break up with his Army from Furt, and
marched by Nurenberg toward the upper Paltz, of intention to get betwixt the
enemy and Nurenberg, that where ever the enemy could march, his Majesty might
be provided to follow him, or to prevent his Designs.

The first night our Army lay in the fields at Lawffe, and the next day our
march continued beyond Harshbrooke, where we encamped overnight, till his
Majesty's Troops sent out to Sultzbach, were returned with true Conshaft or
intelligence; which being got, we continued our march toward Fortmanshowen,
and taking it in by Accord, the enemy retired to Amberg.

The Country being destroyed thereabout, having camped two nights in the
fields, Colonel Hepburne and I were commanded with two thousand Musketeers, to
second the Horsemen in case of need. But his Majesty having got sudden
intelligence of Walestines marching toward him, he retired betime to
Harshbrooke again, and we with the Horsemen retired also, Harshbrooke; where
his Majesty hearing of the enemies approaching, having had then but a weak
and a discontented Army, according to his accustomed manner, he thought it was
then fit time to make a reckoning with the Army, for their bypast lendings,
and to cast some thing in their teeth, being much discontented. To satisfy our
hunger a little, we did get of bypast lendings three paid us in hand, and
Bills of Exchange given us for one and twenty lendings more, which should have
been paid at Ausburg, of the Munchen moneys; which we accepted of for
payment, but were never paid: and being thus a little content, we retired on
Nurenberg, making all the haste we could to enclose our selves in a close
Leaguer about Nurenberg, before the enemies coming.

During this time, Walenstine being on his march to us ward, he did take in
Egra and Soultzbatch, and approaching still with his Army toward Nurenberg,
where his Majesty being come before him the sixteenth of June, we resolved,
being but weak, to expect his coming, and in the mean time, his Majesty
directed for Forces from During, and Schwabland, and the Feltmarshall Horn was
sent away toward the Palatinate, and from thence to Elsasse; and his Majesty
engaged to defend Nurenberg, we wrought hard, till we were in surety; and by
this time, being the twenty-sixth of June, Walenstine being joined with the
Duke of Boviere his Army, they marched toward Nurenberg, where they met with
Colonel Dowbattle his Dragoniers, and with four Troops of spare Rutters
horsemen, which being defeated, Colonel Dowbattle was taken prisoner, who
being a valourous Cavalier, of much worth, whereof moved Walenstine, out of his
clemency, to set him free within three days, without ransom; and after that
they approaching to Nurenberg, diverse hot skitmishes past betwixt our horsemen
and theirs; where there was good service done of both parties; for their
credits, in making their first acquaintance, they interchanged a number of
Bullets, welcoming one another unto Nurenberg. And on the twenty-eight of June,
they appointed their chief Magazine for their Army, to be at Fryenstat in the
upper Paltz: and on the thirtieth of June, they came to Schawbach, being then
fifty thousand strong, of horse and foot, we not exceeding sixteen thousand;
and on the fourth of July, they lay down with their Army betwixt the River
Pegnets, and the River Rednets; being betwixt our Army and Franconia, from
whence our Forces, supply, and victuals were to come; and his Majesty for
their welcome, the fifth of July did cut off three Troops of Horse of theirs,
having got their three Cornets, as Bonum omen unto us.

The thirty-three Observation.
HIS Majesty having concluded for to stand to the defense of Nurenberg against
the strong and mighty Imperial Army, led by Walenstine, Baviere; where we
have first set before us the reasons of his Majesty's Conjunction and
Confederacy with Nurenberg against their common enemy.

First being both of one religion, their consciences tied them, not to see one
another hurt or detriment.

Secondly, they saw and considered, that the good arising of the union
redounded alike to both their wealls. Thirdly, the fear they had conceived of
their own weakness, by reason of the enemies strength, made them join the
faster together. Fourthly, their hatred they bare to the enemies of the
Gospel, who sought nothing more then their overthrow and ruin, made them
look the better unto themselves. Fifthly, his Majesty stood in need of the
Nurenbergers assistance, of men, meat and moneys; and they stood in need of
his Majesty's concurrence, to keep the overplus of their means, and the
freedom of their consciences to themselves, and their posterity, by keeping
the enemies fury off them.

All these considered, Nurenberg made up twenty four strong Companies of
foot, that carried in their Colors the twenty four letters of the Alphabet,
which they ordained for a supply for his Majesty's Army, that their City might
be the better watched, for they resolved, their best remedy against fear was
not to fear at all, since they had Gustavus and his Fortunes under God for
their Leader: And therefore they were assured of deliverance from their
enemies, with the loss of a little money, and the spending of a little
provision, which they had long kept in store to sustain them in their
necessities, having had within their walls to sustain daily besides the Army,
eight hundred thousand souls, being no small burden to a Land-towne.

Here also we see his Majesty's foresight in giving a kind of content unto
his Army, according to his custom at such times, the enemy drawing near unto
him, to tie the Soldiers and their Officers to the greater obedience unto his
Majesty's commandments, to undergo whatsoever he was to command them, and for
to grieve the enemies by the rumor of moneys, which then was given out to his
Majesty's Soldiers; the enemies Army might be disbandoned, and moneys being so
rife amongst them, to forsake their own Colors and run away unto his
Majesty's Army.

It must needs have bin an extraordinary great provision, that sustained so
many souls a day within the City, whereunto a great part of the country
people, Gentry and Boores had run together for refuge, being a great number
of people besides the Army, which was sustained for three months together by
the providence of God, the Rector and Governor of the world, and the Fountain
of all goodness; this Omnipotent, Omniscient, and Invincible GOD governing all
and over-seeing all by his providence, at this time did so direct this people
in midst of their troubles, that they having recommended themselves, and the
event of their affairs to this great God, they concluded that it was better to
prevent, then to suffer under the Tyranny of their enemies; And therefore they
fell to work in earnest, for their own safeties and the safety of his
Majesty's Army, being under God resolved to protect them.

The thirty-fourth Duty discharged at Nurenberg, and of the occurrences there.
HIS Majesty having Recognosced the City and situation thereof, finding his
Forces weak in respect of the enemies, he resolved to take all the advantage
he could in setting down his Leaguer, for the preservation of his Army, and
the safety of the City, and therefore he caused to draw the draught of the
Leaguer to go in a circular Orb, Dutch Mark, were toward the South, to the
part called Lightenhooffe; where his Majesty's quarter was, and from thence
toward the west, to the Towns new works, crossing over the water; This
Leaguer being accomplished in ten days, and in full defense, with strong
Skonces, Redoutes, Fossies, batteries, and being well fortified round with
Stakkets, without the Fossie; and at all sorting Ports, being well foreseen
with slaught homes and triangles; well fastened and close; His Majesty then
upon the North fide of the City, made the retrenchment go likewise round the
City, being also well fortified with strong Skonces and Fossies, from the East
unto the West, beginning at the Mark Flect Were, and going round the Inden
boole, even to St. John, and the water closed: Above the water on the hight,
was made a great Skonce, and another great Skonce was made in the corner at
Gostenhooffe, with deep water graffes, having works without it again, and
half moons: also before Steeneboole, over against Schwonnaw there was another
Skonce, fast and strong: Likewise at the back of the Dorpe Steeneboole,
toward the Leaguer, there was another strong Skonce made: likewise toward the
wood at the South, on the street called Rottenbacherstreete there was made an
extraordinary strong Skonce, set about with four crossed Stakkets, of strong
timber, so that there was no means to storm it; the like was made on the
street called Altoffer street. These works, Skonces and Redoutes being
accomplished, a great number of Cannon great and small, were brought on the
works; the Batteries all ready, there could be reckoned in the Leaguer about
this Town, without the walls, of Cannon on their Carriages, above three
hundred, great and small.

Our Leaguer thus fortified, the Imperial Army led by the Duke of Fridland
Walestine joined with the Duke of Bavaria his Forces, consisting both of fifty
thousand men, having the first of July taken in Schawbach; the second day after
they drew toward the Dorpe called Steyne over against Nurenberg, which does
lie about a Dutch mile from the Town; there they begun to pitch a Leaguer, and
from Steyne toward the Flockt called Zerndorfe, the Leaguer being well
fortified, on the seventh of July, the Duke of Fridland made his Leaguer also
toward Zerndorfe on the top of the hill called Altberg; Fleckt-Fort, which was
called the old strength in Dutch, This Fort he caused strongly to pallisade
without the works, with Fossies and Stakkets without the fossie, other great
and strong Skonces; he caused to make, and diverse other strong Skonces on the
old hill, the Fossies and breast works were all fortified with great and strong
Trees, and within the works, were several barrells or hogsheads filled with
sand and stones for throwing, placed on the Batteries, and by this strong and
great Leaguer Valestine did cut off from his Majesty's Army and the Town of
Nurenberg all kind of victuals or provision, could come unto them by the
Axile, thinking thereby to block up his Majesty's Army forceing him to take
another resolution, and then he thought to compel the Kings Majesty to a
peace, according to his mind.

These two Armies thus encamped and set down opposite one against another,
they begun all of them, as they went forth in the country about, to steal, to
rob, to plunder and to spoil the whole country, for to supply with victuals
and other furniture these two great new-founded Cities of short continuance,
though it is certain, many of them did get life-rent-leases of their new built
houses.

Thus having set down the manner of both the Armies incamping, we lay still
one against another a long time, neither giving nor offering offense one to
another, except it were by mere accident in the country, amongst straggling
troops. Nevertheless though we looked on each others, we had our watches
night and day, before one another noses, without loosing of one Pistol, or
without one Alarm in two months time, as if in effect there were a Stil-stand
of Peace.

During this time we were thus looking one to another, the Spaniard finding his
Majesty with the maine Army far off, Paltz, and crossing the Mosel again
toward Alzie; his Excellence the Rex-chancellour Oxensterne having
intelligence of their coming, he did bring his horsemen over the Rhine and
suffered the Spaniard to draw near Mentz, and then marched unto them; in the
mean time the Spanish General Comissary Lookas Cagro did break up with
twelve Companies of horse, giving orders to the rest to follow him, of
intention to fall unlooked for on the Rhine-graves quarter; But he did count
without his Host, the Rhinegraves folk being betimes acquainted of their
coming, and to their help, having got a supply timely sent unto them by his
Excellence the Rex chancellor, the enemy was so welcomed by them, that he was
put in confusion, and then chased so hard, that there were a hundred and twenty
killed unto him, many taken prisoners, and seven Standards of theirs were
taken, as Trophies of the Rhine-graves victory over them.

In revenge whereof shortly after, the Grave son Ridberg with a strong party of
horse and foot did fall upon that part of the Paltz, called Hundsrucke betwixt
the Mosell and the Noe, and coming on Spier, where the Swedens Colonel called
Hornegt without any resistance gave over Spier, notwithstanding of a succourse
was sent unto him from Mentz that was at had: whereupon the Colonel was
afterward brought prisoner to Mentz, to be adjudged there for his evil
carriage.

The Spaniard taking out of Spier Cannon, Ammunition and Arms, with all that
could be found, together with a great deal of money exacted from the Burgers,
he had also an intention on Worms, but in vain, being strongly beset with the
Swedens forces, so that the Spaniards at this time, as many times before, were
forced to quit the Paltz, and to draw back again into Holland; and the States
Army being come to lie before Mastricht, were forced to break up from Spier
with their Army, Swedens getting notice of their upbreaking, desirous to convey
them, the Rex-chancellor and Palsgrave Christian breaks up from Mentz toward
Altson, and the next day they came to Belchin, two miles from the part the
Spaniard had broken up from, and following them hard till they got sight of the
Spanish Army, which the Spaniard perceiving directs his baggage before, and
drew up in battle on a plain near a wood, where incontinent they were
brought in disorder by the Swedens, that they were forced with the loss of
three Cornets and some foot, to retire into the wood, and finding the whole
Swedens Army following up, they resolved with one consent by flying to save
themselves were their best, and taking the night to their help, they marched
so hard as they could. But yet the Swedens continued their march after them,
till the Spaniard coming to a pass in the hills, threw off the bridges behind
them; Nevertheless the Swedens repaired the bridges and followed hard after,
and by Lantericke came in sight of them again, that neither day nor night were
they suffered to rest, so that the Spaniard was forced to burn some of his
baggage on his march, and some he left to the Swedens, that they might, the
lighter they were, come the easier off: in the end a part of them by Lanterick
was attrapped by the Rhine-graves Horsemen, where some were cut down and their
baggage taken. The Spaniard thus in great fear, and confounded by the
hastiness of his march, and the Swedens wearied with long following, were
content at last, the Spaniards should go their way with so little reputation
out of the Paltz, at their last good night, having lost above two thousand men
and their whole Baggage.

By this time also the Boores in Schwabland again began to be tumultuous and
unquiet, so that by Kempten, they drew together very strong, Swedens out of
their lands. But this uproare continued but short; for when the Swedens Forces
drew out of the Garrisons, they killed the most part, and drove the rest unto
woods, to seek their food with the Swine, in burning a number of their Dorpes,
to give them work to think on against the winter, to build new houses, or to
dwell in woods: but repenting their Rebellion, they turned their Arms against
their own Masters, that moved them to rise against the Swedens: and cutting
off a number of them, they possessed their houses, turning good Swedens again,
being beaten with the rod of Correction in their bodies and means.

By this time Duke Barnard of Wymar, with his Troops did cut off above five
hundred men of Leopoldus folk by Fussen on the Leacke, where he caused to
demolish sundry Skonces made up by the Country-Boores, in time of their
uproare, and diverse of their skins were pierced by Musket and Pistol, till
they were taught to be more sober and quiet, on their own charges; and after
this uproare was settled, the Leopoldish Boores again out of Tyroll recollected
stronger Forces, and marched toward the Leacke again on Fussen, and Lansberg,
both strong passes, and got them in; yet in the end all turned to a slight
conclusion: for Duke Barnard of Wymar again, having come upon them with his
Forces; First he took in Lansberg, and then on the sixteenth of July, he cut
off two Companies of Leopoldish Dragoniers, and a Troop of Horsemen, by a
Town called Rosshaupten, where few or none did escape, and in the end,
marching on Fussen, having stormed the Town, they cut off above three hundred
of the Garrison, and took prisoners eleven hundred with their Officers; and a
number of the Country Gentlemen, that were Papists, and sought to save
themselves in that strength, were deceived, their Colors being taken from
them, and above a thousand of their Soldiers were forced to take service.

By this time also a little Flecke, Freidberg in Schwabland near to Ausburg,
treacherously having called some Crabbats of the enemies to their assistance,
they murdered all the Swedens safeguards that lay thereabout; whereupon the
Swedens Forces, to be revenged on them, did fall upon the Flecke, or little
Town, and killed all the male-kinde they could find, and taking their wives
and children out of the Town to the fields, they set the Town on fire; so
that there is no memory left of this Town, for their perfidiousnesse to those
they got to save them from the injuries of others.

I hope the Reader will excuse this extravagancie of discourse, seeing all this
time we lay idle at Nurenberg, being sometimes without employment in our
calling, I thought better to collect at this time somewhat of the actions of
others, than to be altogether idle. Therefore I crave pardon again, to tell as
yet somewhat that happened about this time in the nether Saxon Creitzis, which
I set down in paper, as his Majesty was informed of it, we being then at
Nurenberg without hostile employment.

By this time the Earl of Papenhaim, Saxon Creitzis. First then he had not
only offended the Hessen and Lunenburg, but also by skirmish he made them
feel the dint of the valor, which accompanied him unto his death; and as they
felt his skill in the fields by fighting disbanded in skirmish, so also they
were made to understand his experience in beleaguering of Towns, having taken
in before their noses, their Army being near unto him, Eynbeck and diverse
places more, and then having recreued his Army again out of Westfalia, he
then marched on Stoade, and relieved it before General Tott his nose, that lay
before it, and about it; and all things succeeding still well with him, he not
alone relieved the Town in making the Swedens to quit it, but also cut off
unto them fifteen hundred men, which were but Novices, being new levied; and
he did get diverse colors of theirs, as Trophies of his victory; amongst
others he did get three colors of Colonel Monro of Obstell his Regiment,
which were then led by Captain Francis Sinclaire, who after a little skirmish
had with the enemy, their powder being spent, and they environed by the
horsemen, knowing of no rel^^fe, took quarters for the Soldiers, and the
Officers were prisoners, being long kept unrelieved at Minden, above a year
and a half; but the Captain having ransomed himself came loose soon after
he was taken; but two Lievetenants Monro, and Ensign Monro remained eighteen
months longer in prison.

Papenhaim after relieving of Stoade, having gotten intelligence, that Duke
Francis Carolus of Saxon Lovanburg had come to the Swedens, with two strong
Regiments, of intention to block up Stoade again, the Swedens growing still
stronger and stronger, so that it was thought Papenhaim was enclosed as in a
snare or grinne, and which was worse, that he was scarce of victuals in the
Town, and the Town not strong enough to hold out, he then resolved to quit
it, taking out with him the Imperial Garrison that was therein, and taking his
march again toward the Weser stream; so that he leaving it, the Swedens
patronizing the Town they did beset it again with a Garrison.

Shortly after this brave fellow rencountring again with some Hessen troops,
he did sore beat them also back and side. Bawtishen had got the Command of
the Swedens Army, after General Tott had quit it; who incontinent after
followed Papenhaim toward the Weser; But this brave fellow Papenhaim not for
fear of Bawtish coming, but being called by the Infanta for aid, crossed the
Weser; and coming on the River of Rhine, continued his march toward Mastricht
to assist the Spaniard in their need. This brave Commander, as he was full of
action, so he was still employed, and I was sorry he was not of my mind in
serving the good cause.

Papenhaim gone to Mastricht, Lunenburg, and General Bawtish (under whom was
my brother Colonel Monro of Obstell) they returned toward Duderstat, which
Papenhaim had strongly beset before his going away, and they nevertheless got
it in with little pains, by reason the Soldiers, that were therein, being
fifteen hundred begun to mutine, and to give themselves over unto the
Swedens service; after this they commanded some forces to blockquer
Wolfembittle, wherein the Duke of Lunenburg in person was employed; And
General Major King, being with some forces employed on a Post apart, the Duke
hearing the enemy was marching strong, for the relief of the Town, he did
break up, and marched away for his own safety, without advertizing General
Major King of the danger he was left unto, by the enemies approaching so
strong, till in the end they came so near to the General Majors Post, having
no conshaft of them, till they had strongly environed him with their horsemen,
so that the General Major finding no passage open, he being pursued did
valourously with a few men defend themselves, till in end being weakest, they
were made to yield, where after diverse wounds honorably received, the General
Major was taken prisoner, and kept long under cure, till that after he ransomed
himself, and being come loose again, he levied more Forces of horse and foot
for the Swedens service, to be the better revenged of his enemies, and after
that fortunately and valourously behaved himself, with the general applause
as well of strangers as of his Countrymen; being also well reported of by his
very enemies, so that since his virtues and noble carriage have still advanced
his credit, which for my part, I wish to continue, he being now Lieutenant
General.

Having thus far spoken of the passages, which occurred by this ^^me in the
nether Saxon Creitzis, I return again to show the rest of our intelligence
at Nurenberg, come from the Bishopric of Tryer on the Rhine; where also on
diverse occasions did pass some rare accidents.

This Bishop having concluded a Neutralitie with his Majesty of France, as
also with his Majesty of Sweden, but seeing the Spanish not to remove, neither
yet that the principalls of the Gentry of the Land were willing to embrace the
Neutralitie: Nevertheless, the Bishop remained in his former resolution, and
the Strength called vulgarly Hermensteyne, he gives it to the French, so that
they being so near, in neighborhood to the Spaniard in Coblentz, they did
agree together as Catts and Ratts: in the end the French seeing the Spanish
Garrison growing weak day by day, the Swedens by virtue of their confederacy
with the French, Coblentz, after a short beleaguering, they make the Spaniard
quit it, and getting of the City a sum of money, they remove, giving the
City over unto the French: the Spaniard after losing of Coblentz, Mountebowre,
Engers, and other places thereabouts belonging to the Bishopric of Tryer,
they go their ways.

The Feltmarshall Gustavus Horn, being by this time sent by his Majesty from
Nurenberg toward the Rhine stream, to make resistance to the Emperialists
beginnings there; coming toward Trarbach on the Mosell with his Forces, being
the pass the Spaniard was wont to cross at, to come unto the Paltz; after a
short beleaguering, he got in the Town and Castle by Accord, and then retired
unto the Maine to draw more Forces together, and from thence continued his
march toward Manheime, of intention to join with the Duke of Wirtenberg, for
to make resistance to Ossa and the Emperialists, which were recollecting
themselves strongly in Elsas again, having understood Ossa was joined with
three Regiments of the Catholic League, the Grave Fon Brunckharst his
Regiment of horse; as also the free Here Fon Rollingen his Regiment, and
Colonel Metternight his Regiment of foot, which were levied for the defense
of Coblentz; but shortly after, through the alteration that happened in those
quarters, were brought unto Elsas; and being joined to twenty-five Companies of
Horse, and some Regiments more of foot, they crossed the Rhine unto Turlooh,
and further unto Brittenie, where they compelled the Swedens Garrison there,
being two hundred, to take service of them, and then plundered out the Town,
burnt the Ports, and demolished a part of the walls, being in Wirtenberg-land.

The Grave Fon Mountecueule was General over these folks, who perceiving that
the Duke of Wirtenberg with some new levied Forces had passed over Kinbis, he
retired upon Kintlingen, and scaling the Town, puts three hundred to the
sword, plundered all out, and burnt all the Town to three houses.

By this time the Garrison of Heidelberg coming toward Wisloch, wherein did
lie a Company of Dragoniers, and a Troop of Horse of the Mark-grave Fon
Tourlochs folk beleaguers it, and by casting fire in the Town sets three
houses on fire, whereof the Felt-marshall Gustavus Horn being made foreseen,
he with all his Forces did break up, and marched; the Heidelbergish Garrison
being acquainted with this advancement of the Feltmarshalls, they incontinent
retired in great haste on Heidelberg, and having before their up-breaking from
Heidelberg desired succors from Ossa and Mountecucule, their Corporal and six
Horsemen at their back coming being taken prisoners by the Swedens, the
Feltmarshall did find by their Letters, that on the sixth of August, their
whole Horsemen had appointed Randezvouz at Metternigh, to go for Wisloch,
whereupon his Excellence did draw near to their Randezvouz place, and attended
their coming, being unlooked for by them, in the mean time the Empertalists
were advertised, that th^se of Heidelberg had got in Wisloch, and were again
blocked up by some Swedens Forces, whereupon Ossa, Mountecucule, the Colonel
Mountelabam, and Witzone, with the fore-Troopes of Horse, being a thousand
Horse, march on for the Relief, and unlooked for were pursued by the Swedens,
whereof two hundred, among whom was the Colonel Mountelaban and other
Officers, were killed, many taken, and the rest all scattered. Whereupon Ossa
and Mountecucule, with the rest of the folk, Oberhawsen and Rhinehawsen, in
all haste did set over the Rhine at Philipsburg. The Feltmarshall followed
hard, and finding he could get no more of them, he returned over the Rhine
again, and getting the Strasburg pass Rhinebroucke, he held on his march
further unto Elsas with the Horsemen, during which time his foot Forces with
the Wirtenbergers beleaguered the pass Stolhossen, and getting it in by
Accord, they marched five thousand strong over at Strasburg unto upper Elsas,
whereat the Emperialists were mightily afraid, and without night or days rest
they marched toward Colmarschletstad, Brisach, in the upper Elsas in all
haste, by taking them to those parts for their Retreat, but the Swedens
following them hot-foote, they took in diverse places, and made good booty on
their march, and at last, after in-taking of Offenburg by Accord, they marched
then toward Bentfield, the B^^^op his chief Strength, and beleaguered it.

By this time also, Feltmarshall Arnheim leading the Saxons Army, did fall in
strong into Silesia, taking in Groseglogaw, and other parts thereabouts, and
all the Emperialists marched toward him with a strong and mighty Army. There
were incontinent certain Swedish and Brandeburgh forces joined with Arnheim,
who did set on the Emperialists by Steinove, beat them in the fields, and
followed them unto Brisloe; and then after the Emperialists entrenched
themselves betwixt Bresloe and the Oder. Nevertheless, they were hunted up
again by the Swedens and Saxons, who followed them from place to place, and
did get the Thumb at Bresloe, where they did get great booty from the
Emperialists, and not contented with this, the Swedens and Saxons followed them
over the River at Ollawe, and did set on the Emperialists again, not far
from Wintsloe, obtaining a great victory over them again, where many brave
fellows were taken prisoners, many also were killed, and the rest scattered;
so that the Swedens and Saxons were Masters of the greatest part of Silesia,
and they made the Town of Bresloe to accommodate themselves in confederacy, on
certain Conditions, with the Swedens and Saxons, while as we at Nurenberg for
six weeks together uved no great hostility, but lay secure within our
Leaguers, as within walled Towns, but at such times as we were commanded
forth, as Convoyes for our Horsemen, that went for forage, and then sometimes
we lighted on one another, striving always for elbowroome, whereof at length
the Emperialists made us very crimpe or scarce, having but one quarter of our
Leaguer free, to bring in our forage, being only from the Southwest.

The thirty-fourth Observation.
WE read in Dion, that after Caesar had won the Battle of Pharsalia,
amongst the honors the Senate had ordained to be given unto him, they
commanded to dress for him a Triumphing Chariot, which was set opposite to
Jupiter within the Capitol, and that he should stand on a Globe, representing
the world, with the inscription, Semi-Deus est: Even so the Lords of Nurenberg
in consideration of the great respect they carried unto his Majesty of Sweden,
at the first entering their City, after the Battle of Leipsigh, they
presented two Globes unto his Majesty, a Terrestiall and a Celestial, in
sign of their love and obedience unto his Majesty, and his Majesty again by
his Royal word, promised, under God to defend and protect them against all
mortals; and being thus engaged unto them, their enemies menacing their ruin,
with a mighty and a strong Army, being minded to overcome them with the sword,
or to make them starve by hunger, having closed up as they thought all passes,
where through succors could come unto them, by planting of a wonderful strong
Leaguer about them, of intention to block them, and his Majesty's Army both
within them, being then but weak within their Trenches and walls.

His Majesty again like a wise General, pondering and considering how weighty
his enemies enterprises were, in seeking to overcome Nurenberg, and knowing, if
that on^^ they did get Nurenberg on their side, the rest of the great Cities
would follow, in regard where of his Majesty resolved, the safest course for
him and the Town both was, to set down his Leaguer strongly betwixt the Town
and the enemy, as well to hinder their correspondence, in case of their
unconstancy, as for their defense, in case of their loyalty. For his Majesty
knew well there was as great virtue in keeping of a conquest, as in getting of
it: And therefore at this time, as formerly at Statin, Werben and at Wertzburg
against Tilly, he resolved to take him to a defensive war, with the spade and
the shovell, putting his Army within works, having the supply of such a
back-friend as Nurenberg was, to assist him with men, meat and Ammunition,
until such time as he might weary his enemy, as formerly he had done, or that
succors might come to him, that he were bastant for them in the fields: and
having thus happily resolved, both the Armies strongly entrenched before
others, they did bring the eyes of all the Potentates in Europe upon their
actions, and designs, Sweden, the daunter of Pole and Denmark, and the hope of
Britain, Holland and Germany, was able even unto his death to suppress the
pride and Tyranny of the house of Austria, and of his Ministers and Servants,
being all but Novices in wars, in comparison to the Lion of the North, the
invincible Gnstavus, who in glory and dignity did far surpass all his
enemies, as is cleared by his former wisdom, in Governing his victories, and
hereby his great care and diligence in preserving his friends from the fury of
their enemies, exercising his Army within a close Leaguer, to handle their
Arms well, after his own new discipline, being taught to keep their faces to
their enemies in retiring as in advancing, never turning backs on their enemies
as of old.

It is also to be admired the great provision this City was provided with,
being no Sea-towne, as of victuals and Ammunition, where it was reported that
they had oats, which was distributed to the Army, that had bin kept above a
hundred years, and this City was ever from the beginning renowned for their
wisdom and policy in counsel, more then for their force in Arms, from whence
did come the Dutch Proverb, that he who had the wit of Nurenberg, the money of
Vlme, the pride of Ausburg, with the power of Venice, might do much in this
world.

Here then at Nurenberg, as at a safe bay,

Having spoken in the discharge of this duty of the actions of some worthy
personages, I mind here to observe somewhat in commemoration of the persons
worths that did lead them.

First then we see, that the Spaniard diverse times was forced with little
credit to retire out of the Paltz, and that in respect he never turned faces
about in making use of ground, Cannon, Pike or Musket: which proves his
retreates to have bin dishonorable, and the Leaders to have bin no Soldiers.
For we presuppose, in four days retreat the defender could once have made
choice of ground, where making use of his Cannon, his enemies would be glad
they had not advanced so far; but rather that they had suffered them to
pass: but an enemy once feared never fights well, except extremity make him
desperate, and then it is not safe to deal with him.

Likewise we see here, as they were not all Spaniards, that fled, Swedens, that
followed; so that we find there are some good of all Nations: but it is
certain that at such times the worth and valor of a Leader is best known,
not only in fighting examplary to others, but specially in directing others.

We see here, that the turbulent insurrection of the Boores in Schwabland is
soon stilled, when they want a head to lead them, where we see, the
giddy-headed multitude does ever wagge like the bush: for though sometimes they
grow pale for fear, they are so impudent, that they never blush at their
faults, though oftimes they are well corrected for their errors.

Here also we see, the valor and policy of Duke Barnard much to be commended,
as a prudent Commander in all his enterprises, overcoming more by wit and
policy, then by dint of Arms. For though resolution never fails, yet by
stratagems he overcomes more, then by killing; and being victorious he did show
his clemency, that another time his enemies might yield the sooner unto him,
seeing he had used these well, whom formerly he had subdued: and this Cavalier
being noble, according to his birth, he knew that the strength of victory
consists in the using of it well, which made hime over give the better
quarters; for as he was noble, to make him the more noble, he was endued with
reason; so that he conjoined Nobility with Virtue, which made his worth much
esteemed of, and though he was descended of noble Progenitors, yet his mind
raised him above his condition, he being fit to command Armies, and his birth
did beget the greatest obedience next unto his Majesty over the whole Army,
being resolute, noble, and prudent withal.

In the former discourse had of the acts of that noble and worthy Cavalier,
though our enemy Papenhaim, Sweden esteem more of him alone, then of all the
Generals that served the Emperor, wishing one day he might rancounter with
him, to try his valor, whom he honored so much, though his enemy.

This valorous Captain after the Battle of Leipsigh, was the first that
adventured, with a single Convoy, to pass through his Majeslies Armies, unto
the nether Saxon Creitz to put life in the cause, being come again betwixt
his Majesty of Sweden and home, desirous to gain credit, he delaied no time,
but on the contrary used all diligence, till he got an Army of old Soldiers
together out of the Garrisons, and then began to take advantage of his enemies,
catching them unawares, like a valiant Captain and Chieftaine, he suffered no
grass to grow where his Army did tread, but traversed from one place to
another, adding and augmenting still to his own credit, but diminishing and
substracting from the reputation of other Generals, till he obtained the name
and fame of the most valiant, and most vigilant General that served the
Emperor, being in effect more furious sometimes in his conduct then requisite
for a General, fearing nothing but the indignation of his Superior, whom he
served valianty and truly. This kind of boldness, though happily it does
prosper for a time, yet sometimes in others, it may overwhelme all the good
fortune that formerly they attained unto. For nothing is less to be allowed of
in a Commander, then boldness without reason, though sometimes things happen
to succeed well, being pregnable for such daring men, as the King of Sweden and
Papenhaim was, being both truly courageous. Nevertheless, this daring is not
to be made a custom of; so being oftimes the example is as faulty, as the
deed in an Army.

This Papenhaim in his attempts, so far as I could learn, was unblameable in
his carriage, as a Leader, except at Mastreicht, where he was blamed for too
much forwardness with disadvantage, having lost more men then the attempt
proved credible.

As this valiant Cavalier strived to do notable service unto the Emperor,
Gustavus Horn, being a valiant Cavalier, without either gallor bitterness (as
they say) but on the contrary he was wise, valiant, sober, modest, vigiant and
diligent, striving in all his actions to please God, and his Master the King of
Sweden.

And as Papenh^^m was thought bold, and heady in his resolutions; The other
Gustavus Horn was remiss in advising, but very resolute and courageous in the
execution; parts most worthy praise in a Commander, being Subalterne to
another command, as he was unto his Majesty of Sweden, who could never enter
prize of himself, more then was allowed unto him by his instructions had in
writing, so as he attempted nothing rashly, he feared no danger, once being
entered, and he was so meek in his command, that with love he obliged the
Cavaliers that followed him, to obedience, more then another could do by
austerity: being the best means to conquer with, and the safest way to
maintain reputation and credit; Thus beloved of all men, he was very wise, and
silent, keeping a Decorum in his actions and gestures, being to my judgment
powerful to command himself, as he did command others.

Here also we have occasion to praise the wise and valorous conduct of the
Felt-marshall Arnheim in Silesia,

This virtue Iustitia Distributiva includes many other virtues under it, proper
to a great Commander, as his actions in Silesia do witness, having obtained
several victories there over the Emperialists.

As for the vices of men of this quality, making profession of Arms, being my
Superiors, duty will not permit me to speak, but reverently of them; And
therefore what faults they have (as none lives without some) they shall be
better divulged by some other tongue then mine: Nam quod tibi fieri non vis,
alteri ne feceris

The thirty-fifth Duty discharged of the Accidents that occurred at Nurenberg
before the succourse was come.
HAving lain long still as in a sleep, without fear of our enemies, being
within a fast Leaguer, in the end his Majesty begun to stir first, causing
parties to present themselves before Walestines Leaguer, as if they went to
borrow a Bear, or rather to provoke their enemy to try their valor, but the
Emperialists having no great desire to fight, but attempted only in the night
to fall over the Pegnets, giving us Alarums to little purpose, being soon
repulsed, finding us always ready on our Guards attending their nightly
coming, our outward watches being a mile from us, so far as Furt on the side
of the River, having also Perdues a foot without the Leaguer, our Centries on
the walls at Batteries, Colors and Corp-du-guards; so that it was hard to
surprise us. But the greatest hurt they did us, Crabbats, while as our servants
and horses went forth to forage, for in one day for my part I lost three of my
servants, and five of my best horses; But in the end our forage grew so scarce,
that many did quit their horses for want of entertainment; Nevertheless, twice
every week strong parties of hor se, with strong Convoyes of Musketeers were
sent forth to bring in forage, where it was my fortune to have bin often
commanded with the foot; little skirmishes we had without great hurt, being
always in hope of relief in need; Nevertheless, whatsoever street we went
out on, their Garrisons were still ready to snap some or other amongst us on
our wings, and then away they went unto their Strengths; sometimes they came
from Forchem, sometimes from Buche, and sometimes from Rottenburg, so that
always some Devilish Garrison or other snatched at us aside, though they durst
not draw near our bodies; neither could the enemy know on what quarter we went
forth on, and if they knew, sure that quarter we went out on was beset by
Ambuscades of our people, to attend them, in case they should fall in betwixt
us.

On the twenty-eight of July, Dowbattle, with some Troops of Horse, and some
Dragoniers, toward Furstat in the upper Paltz, which lay but two miles from
Newmarck, where the Imperial Army had their Magazin-house for their Victuals,
and Ammunition; which was beset with five hundred Soldiers; Dowbattle the
thirtieth of July coming before it ere it was day, he divided incontinent his
folks in two Deals, putting the one half to the over door or Port, and the
other half to the other Port; the over Port made up with a Pittard, the
Swedens entering, they gave fire; and at their entry they killed the Lieutenant
Colonel Revenheller, being one of their own, thinking he was an enemy, being
shot in the shoulder he died shortly after at Nurenberg. All the Imperial
Garrison was almost cut off; the Proviant wagons were plundered, and the Town
was burnt, having brought four hundred Oxen, that were both great and fat,
unto Nurenberg.

His Majesty immediately after Colonel Dowbattle was marched, followed with a
party of a thousand Musketeers, and some eight hundred Horse toward Bergthane
on the Dorpes; thinking, if the enemy got intelligence of Dowbattles march,
they would set after him; And therefore to make his Retreat good, his Majesty
went toward Bosbowre. Sparre, with eight hundred horse, twenty Cornets of
Crabats, and five hundred Musketeers commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Gordon,
and Major Lesly, which party of the enemy had an enterprise on Lawffe, to take
it in, for hindering us from Forage, having no door open to go out on, but
that only; and having met with his Majesty in the fields, his Majesty most
Heroickly charged them, and killed many with the first charge: General Major
Sparre kept himself by Colleredo his Horsemen, and the foot were commanded by
Gordon and Lesly, two Scots Cavaliers, who then serving the Emperor did behave
themselves valiantly for a time, as I did hear his Majesty of Sweden give
testimony of their valor, alleging if the Emperors Horsemen had behaved
themselves like the foot, his Majesty had not returned victorious; for Sparre
intending to have broken through his Majesty's Horses, the Crabats having run
away, the rest of the Imperial horsemen were overcome, and then most part of
their foot were cut down; General Major Sparre was taken prisoner, with
Gordon and Lesly, and were brought all three unto Nurenberg, with three Cornets.

In obtaining this victory Colonel Ree was killed, his Majesty after his
death being forced to light from his Horse, and command the Musketeers, having
skirmished well for an hour on both sides, the praise whereof his Majesty did
give to the Scots Cavaliers, that commanded the Emperialists, to whom he
promised before they were taken, within three days to let them loose again
Ransome-free. Nevertheless, they were kept for five weeks with us their
Countrymen, where we made merry as friends. Here also in this Conflict was
killed his Majesty's Camerjounker, called Boyen; and an other Chamberman,
called Cratzistene, that attended his Majesty.

About the ninth of August, the Emperialists catched a great number of our
Horses at forage, and waited on us so well, that there was no more hopes to
bring forage unto the Leaguer; so that many of our Horsemen, for want of
Horses, were put to their feet, till our succors were come unto us.

The tirty-fift Observation.
HEre we have two mighty Armies waiting to take advantages one of another,
their greatest riches; for he thinks he has not to do with gold, being able
to command his own desires: as the bravest Leaders, and most valiant Captains
of Armies have ever made greater esteem of honor and renown, than deceivable
riches, or of the spoil of their enemies; reserving glory and honor unto
themselves, they allowed the spoil for the common Soldier, hunting after an
immortal name to leave behind them after death, rather than with the spoil
of others to be thought rich, robbing themselves of a good name, and their
soul and conscience of eternal rest.

We see then, that it is much better to contest with honest men for virtue and
a good name, than with the avaritious or niggard, that has come to an estate
with the spoil of his enemies, or perhaps with the spoil of his friends, or
worst of all, by detaining their means from them, who did serve valiantly for
it, with the loss of their blood. Such Conquests unlawfully made by some
Officers, are rather to be pitied than envied; and I am of the mind, he has
provided well for his wife, children, and friends, that leaves an immortal
name behind him for himself and his after death, rather than to leave them
rich in the Devils name by unlawful Conquest.

His Majesty of Sweden having had here but a weak Army (though expert in
military virtue) he resolved to weary the enemy having a strong and mighty
Army, to be entertained with all sort of provision, which must needs be
brought from a far, out of Bavaria, upon the Axell or Wagons, being a labor
of infinite pain and toil, to transport entertainment for fifty thousand men
daily, and Corn for Horses such a far way; and having appointed their
Magazin-house in the upper Paltz, to weary them the sooner, his Majesty very
wisely, as we see, plotted the ruin of it, to be effectuated by Colonel
Dowbattle, being known for a Cavalier of much worth, that formerly had done
his Majesty diverse notable good services, as at this time, which made his
Majesty to be the more careful of his safe retreat, in coming himself with
a party betwixt the enemy and him, to be his second; being no small honor,
where in the first Rancounter Colonel Ree was killed, and then a little
Captain of the Leeffe Regiment, throwing off his Doublet did valourously
command, supplying the place of the Colonel, till such time as his Majesty
took notice of his noble carriage, and then lighted from his Horse, taking the
Command to him self: Nevertheless, at his Majesty's return to Quarters, he
did give his own Pourtraict, with a gold chain to the Captain, and advanced
him to a Lieutenant Colonells place, for reward of his virtuous carriage in
sight of his Master.

Colonel Ree being killed, Rees Regiment, which his Majesty confessed openly
to have been my due; Nevertheless, on other considerations showed by his
Majest ie unto me, I was contented to give way to his Majesty's will; whereupon
his Majesty urged me to be Colonel to the Regiment I had commanded so long,
in absence of my Lord of Rhees, seeing his Lordship had advertised his
Majesty, he was not to return to his Charge: As also, he had sent his Warrant
under his hand unto me, to deal with his Majesty to get the Regiment being
weak to be made up for my self; but I being desirous to have commanded
strangers, the other Regiment being strong, and ours very weak, my intention
was to have joined them both in one, seeing at that time his Majesty would not
admit me to recrue the Regiment from Scotland; but having given me Patent as
Colonel, his Majesty assigned a Muster-place for me in Schwabland, from
whence I was to receive moneys to strengthen my Regiment (being then but seven
Companies) to twelve; and before the next Summer, I made them up to ten
Companies, His Majesty having the eighteenth of August 1632, placed me
Colonel over the Regiment, at which time Major John Sinclaire was placed my
Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain William Stewart was made Major.

The thirty-sixt Duty discharged of the joining of our Army with the
Succors, and of our service at Nurenberg.
THE sixteenth of August the succors being come from Saxon, Hessen, and
During, brought up by the Rex-chancellor Oxensterne, and Duke William of Wymar,
being come together at Ventzhame, the eighteenth at Aiorach and Prugg, and the
twenty-one at Furt, by four of the Clock in the morning they presented
themselves in Battle before Furt, where did lie above a thousand
Emperialists, which were presently chased away, Walestines Leaguer; which done,
Duke Barnard of Wymar, and General Banier continued the Armies march, being
thirty thousand strong, through the fields toward a Dorpe called Grosseroote,
and draws up in Battle in plain Champaigne, half a mile from the enemies
Leaguer; his Majesty then marching out of his Leaguer with the Army from
Swyno toward Clyneroote; incontinent presented himself in Battle before the
enemies Leaguer; but the Emperialists unwilling to be seen in the fields, they
kept themselves close within their Leaguer, playing on us with their Cannon,
having done no more hurt, than the killing of one Constable and a few
Soldiers, and we attending their resolution and out-coming, enterprized
nothing all day, but stood ready in Battle till night, that the foot
Briggads had orders to advance within Cannon reach of their Leaguer, where our
Batteries were ordained to be made all in Front, as our Army stood, along
the face of the enemies Leaguer, where we had cast up a running trench before
the front of our Army, from the right hand to the lef t, going from one
Battery to another; on which Batteries were planted seventy-two pieces of
Cannon, great and small, well guarded with strong guards of Musketeers and
Pikemen; the Briggads lying ready at hand to relieve them in time of need, and
our horse-Briggads being appointed without them, to stand in readiness for to
second the foot.

The day peeping, the Imperial Generals were saluted with a salve of Cannon,
which untimely stirred some from their rest, making them retire unto their
Strengths, not having the courage to show their faces in the fields.

This service of Cannon having continued the whole day, Emperialists retired
their Forces toward their works on the old hill, being mighty strong on that
quarter, so that there was no possibility to harm them any more with Cannon.

His Majesty thinking, if it were possible to get in the hill, he was then
able to beat the enemy out of his Leaguer, and therefore in the night gave
Orders to draw off the Cannon from the Batteries, and having the Army in
readiness, we marched in the night through Furt, toward the other side of the
enemies Leaguer, of intention to take in the hill, and then to beat them out
of their Leaguer, and his Majesty having got intelligence, the enemy had
marched away and left but a Reare-guard on the Hill, to make his Retreat good,
we marched near the Hill, and drew up in Battle along the side of it,
horse, foot and Cannon, by seven of the Clock in the morning, where
incontinent, on slight information, his Majesty resolved, in earnest to pursue
the Hill.

Duke William of Wymar then Lieutenant General next unto his Majesty had the
command of the Army, General Banier had the Command of the foot, and Duke
Barnard of Wymar Commanded the Horse, Colonel Leonard Richardson had the
Command of the Artillery; diverse other Cavaliers of note were ordained to
attend his Majesty, for giving assistance in Command, to be directed by his
Majesty, as occasion offered; such as Grave Neeles a Sweden, then General
Major of foot, General Major Boethius a Dutch, Sir John Hepburne then having
left command of the Briggad, being out of employment he attended his Majesty,
General Major Rusteine being then Stallemaster to his Majesty attended also,
General Major Striffe commanded the Horse next to Duke Barnard.

The Armiethus in Battle, Banier was shot in the Arm, and so retired;
General Major Rusteine, being also shot did retire incontinent, his Majesty
commanded strong parties of commanded Musketeers out of all Briggads, led by a
Colonel, a Lieutenant Colonel, and a competent number of other inferior
Officers, to lead on the party toward the Hill, to force a passage or entry
unto the enemies works; which being hardly resisted, the service went on
cruel hot on both sides, so that the parties were no sooner entered on
service, but it behooved the reliefes to be incontinent ready to second them,
death being so frequent amongst Officers and Soldiers, that those who were
hurt rejoiced, having escaped with their lives, seeing in effect the service
desperate on our side, losing still our men without gaining any advantage over
our enemies, being always within their close works, while as we, both
Officers and Soldiers, stood bare and naked before them, as marks to shoot
at, without any shelter whatsoever, but the shadow of some great trees, being
in a wood, so that we lost still our best Officers and Soldiers, while as the
basest sort durst not lift head in the storm.

The service continued in this manner the whole day, so that the Hill was
nothing else but fire and smoke, like to the thundering Echo of a Thunderclap,
with the noise of Cannon and Musket, so that the noise was enough to terrify
Novices; we losing still our best Soldiers, grew so weak in the end, that the
Briggads of foot had scarce bodies of Pikemen to Guard their Colors, the
Musketeers being almost vanished and spent by the continuance of hot service,
where the service was not alone amongst the foot in pursuing of the hill, but
also about the hill without the wood, on the wings, the horse men furiously
charged one another, being also well seconded by Dragomers and Musketeers, that
did come on fresh with the reliefes.

By one a clock in the afternoon, Duke William of Wymar commanded me (being
the first service I was on as Colonel) for my credit, to go toward the Post
on the hill, where the Grave son Torn was shot, and to command those five
hundred Musketeers, I taking leave of my Camerades went to the Post, and
finding the place warm at my coming, diverse Officers and Soldiers lying
bloody on the ground, I went first and ordered the Soldiers on the Post, to
my judgment, as most to our advantage for our safeties and the harming of our
enemies, and perceiving the enemy sometimes to fall out with small Plottons of
Musketeers to give fire on us, and to spy our actions, returning again, as
their powder was spent, to trap them the next time, I advanced a Sergeant with
twenty four Musketeers, to lie in Ambush to attend on their next out-coming,
which they perceiving came out no more, but one single man to spy; I retiring
again to my maine reserve to direct others, sometimes standing, sometimes
walking, and being taken notice of, as a chief Officer, the enemy commanded
out a single man, with a long piece, who from a tree aiming at me, shot me
right above the Hanch-bone, on the left side, which lighted fortunatly for me
on the Iron clicket of my hanger, which cut close the Iron away, taking the
force from the Bullet, which being battered flat with the Iron entered not above
two inches in my side, where I found, a little Arms of proof being well put
on most commodious, in preserving my life, by Gods providence for that time.

Notwithstanding of this my hurt, finding my self in strength, though I lost
much blood, I remained on my Post till near night; my Lieutenant Colonel
John Sinclair was sent with five hundred Musketeers to telieve me, where I did
bring off but the least number of my men, having lost near two hundred,
besides those Officers and Soldiers that were hurt, and my Lieutenant
Colonel brought off the next morning fewer than I did: for those who were not
killed or hurt, being in the night, through plain fear they left him, so that
at last he brought not off of his whole number above thirty, Officers and all.

On this occasion a valorous young Gentleman, being one of my Captains, called
Patrike Ennis, Vive Gustavus, he was shot through the head, being much regrated
by all his Camerades. Likewise with him a young man Hector Monro Catvalls
Son, uncommanded voluntarily having taken a Musket, and gone on service, he
was shot along the brains, and lived a fortnight after, which shot was
wonderful; for the side of his head that the Bullet lighted on, the skull was
whole, nevertheless, through his great torment, the Chirurgian having made
incision on the other side of his head, to see if the skull was whole, but
being found splent on that side, so that his brains could be seen, his wound
was uncurable.

Likewise on this days service were killed on our side, General Major
Boctius, Lieutenant Colonel Septer, Lieutenant Colonel Macken, Rutmaster
Morrits, Lieutenant Co^onell Welsten, and diverse inferior Officers, and above
twelve hundred Soldiers, the Grave Fon Erbach was also killed, and diverse
Officers were hurt, as the Grave Fon Ebersteene, the Grave Fon Torn, Colonel
Port, and of our countrymen under Spence his Regiment, Captain Traile was
shot through the throat; As also Captain Vausse, under Colonel Monro of
Fowls his Regiment, was shot in the shoulder, and the Colonel of the
Artillery, Leonard Richardson, with Colonel Erich Handson, being both Swedens
with two Lieutenant Colonells were taken Prisoners.

Likewise on this service there were hurt of our Soldiers above two thousand,
which were put under cure in Nurenberg.

The Officers killed of the Emperialists were, Jacob Fugger, Colonel Obdo
Brandine, Colonel Fon Maria de Caras, and above forty inferior Officers, with
twelve hundred Soldiers, which they lost.

Likewise Walestine his horse, and Duke Barnard of Wymars were both shot under
them. The day thus past, in the night for the most part, they lay quiet, and
the day being come, I was commanded notwitstanding of my hurt, by Duke William
of Wymar having attended on him the whole last night, to go and receive five
hundred Musketeers, for to bring off those had bin all night on the Post,
being ordained to come off with them, and to make the retreat good; I being
gone to receive the party come together, his Majesty coming by, and knowing I
was hurt, commanded me to retire back with the party, and went himself to
make the retreat wonderfully, bringing them off from all Poasts without one
shot of Musket or Pistol, till we drew up the Army again, within reach of
Cannon, so that there were killed to me of my own Company three Soldiers, and
having removed a little further off, his Majesty drawing up the whole Army in
Battle, Horse, Foot and Artillery, there was presently order given for
drawing out of a new Leaguer, the draught whereof being finished, every
Briggads quarter being known, we begun to work again, in sight of the enemy,
till that in spite of him we were closed in ten days time within a fast
Leaguer again, which was strongly pallisaded without the Graffe, where we did
lie without invasion in quietness to the sixth of September, that his Majesty
perceiving the scarcity of victuals growing great from day to day, and the
scarcity of forage; Therefore his Majesty resolved to take the start of his
enemy, in being the first up-breaker, knowing assuredly he was not able to lie
long after him.

The thirty-sixt Observation.
HERE we see, that nothing is more forcible to suppress the vanting of an
enemy, than a timely succors, as came here unto our Army in despite of the
enemy, who, before their coming, did mightily vaunt they would cut off our
succors, before they could join with us really; and then they would with
hunger, starve both the City and our Leaguer, which hardly they could do, we
being provided of good men to fight, as also of good entertainment to sustain
our number. But the enemy feebly remaining within his works, though beyond us
in number, we thundered on them with Cannon, repaying their cannonading spent
before Verbine, the year before, on the Elve. And it is thought, Nurenberg,
for the ruin of man, being at first a long time used for battering down of
walls and Cities, and for counter-batteries; till at last they were used in
the fields, to break the Squadrons and battles of foot and horse, some
carrying pieces called Spingards, of f^ure foot and a half long, that shot
many bullets at once, no greater then Walnuts, which were carried in the fields
on little Chariots behind the troops, and how soon the Trumpet did sound the
enemy was thundered on, first with those, as with shoures of haile-stone, so
that the enemies were cruelly affrighted with them, men of valor being
suddenly taken away, who before were wont to fight valiantly and long with the
Sword and Lance, more for the honor of victory, then for any desire of
shedding of blood: but now men are martery zed and cut down, at more than
half a mile of distance, by those furious and thundering Engines of great Cann
on, that sometimes shoot fiery bullets able to burn whole Cities, Castles,
houses or bridges, where they chance to light; and if they happen to light
within walls, or amongst a Briggad of foot or horse, as they did at Leipsigh
on the Grave fon Torn his Briggad, spoiling a number at once, as doubtless
this Devilish invention did within Walestine his Leaguer at this time.

Likewise here we have set before us the revolution of humane affairs, Argos
eyes, yet it is impossible he should look unto all things himself. The fault
of one here we see with the loss of many was irrecoverable, and he that before
this day was the terror of the Empire, by his former success, being deceived
with false intelligence, is thought to have overseene himself, the error of
another being imputed unto his Majesty in losing so many brave fellows; which
should teach others to be the more circumspect in recognoscing, before they
should engage men in bringing them upon the shamble-bankes.

Here also we see, that his Majesty was was ever enemy to idleness: for he had
no sooner brought off his Army from pursuing his enemies, but incontinent he
sets them again to work, for their own safeties, and that within reach of
his enemies Cannon, to the end it might not be said, but he attended their
out-comming, lest his Army might be discouraged at a present Retreat, after
such a great loss, for if the service had continued, the whole Army had been
endangered; yet a valourous Captain, as our Leader was, as he fears nothing
entering on service, so he ought to set light by nothing, he sees tending to
his prejudice, but ought timely to retire, with as little loss as he may: for
it were a gross error to despise our enemies through too much confidence in
our selves; for some times by despising our enemies (as here) we make them the
more valiant, and if they be ambitious, the more respect we give them,

The boldness of one bold fellow at first, being a Leader may engage a whole
Army for want of judgment, as was done here going before this hill of
Nurenberg, where as many were brought in danger, as did tread in the first
Leaders paths, through lack of judgment, having been all of them more heady
than wise; yet to dare being annexed unto virtue is the beginning of victory:
nevertheless, a hasty man in an Army, without judgment and discretion, is to
be disallowed of, as well as a coward.

On my Post under the Hill, after I was shot, a sudden fear came amongst the
Soldiers, some thirty horse having suddenly come through the wood, as if they
had been chased, the most part both Officers and Soldiers ran away, leaving
me with a few number on the Post, so that if the enemy had fallen out, I
could not have escaped from being killed or taken; but as soon as they
perceived, that I with the Soldiers remained by me, had unhorsed and taken
some of the horsemen, who were found to be friends, they being ashamed of
their miscarriage retired, having accidentally rencountred with Hepburs
Captain Lieutenant, who brought them up again, whom I threatened to show his
Majesty of their behaviors: nevertheless being loath to incur the hatred
of a brave Nation, for the misbehaviour of some unworthy fellows, their
blemishes I pressed to cover: notwithstanding afterward some of the Officers
amongst themselves came to a public hearing, having blamed one another, till
the question and disgrace was taken away; by showing their particular courage
in fighting one against another, whereof I kept my self free, suffering them to
deal amongst them, being Countrymen.

This kind of Panicke fear without cause does betray many brave men,
Franckfurt on the Oder, the white Regiment marching in the Van, having a
natural fool, that marched always before them, going within a bush, throwing
off his clothes returning naked, and crying, he had seen the enemy, the whole
Soldiers of that Briggad throwing down their Arms, they ran back on the
next Briggad being Swedens, and they running also away, till they were holden
up with pikes by our Briggad, being the third, who having stood, and asked the
reason of their running away; in end, being found a false, and a foolish
Alarm, the poor fool was pitifully cut and carved by the Officers, for the
Soldiers phantasticke fear, being a poor revenge for their cowardice, so
that we see by the example of the third Briggad, that the best remedy against
such Panicke fears is not to fear at all; and none should lead Armies, but
those that are both wise and stout.

The thirty-seventh Duty discharged of our up-breaking, from Nurenberg toward
Newstat.
AFTER this last days service, his Majesty having entrenched his Army before
the Imperial Leaguer, and finding them unwilling to hazard the Combat, as
also the scarcity of victuals growing so great on both sides; his Majesty
resolved to beset Nurenberg with four Regiments, Fowls his Regiment being
one, General Major Kniphowsen had the Command over the Swedens,
Salammers-dorffe had Command over the Burgers; and the Rex-chancellor Oxesterne
was appointed by his Majesty to have the direction of all.

His Majesty leaving Nurenberg in this manner, in the night he sent away his
great Cannon with a Convoy toward Newstat, and before day the whole Drums
had orders to beat, first before troop gathering, and then a march, so that we
were in readiness standing in Battle before the enemies Leaguer by day;
where we stood till midday, and then the whole Army was commanded to make a
quarter Toure to the right hand, making our front before, to be our left
Flancke, whereon our Colors and small Ordinance did march, and our right wing
being our Van, we marched off, in view of the enemy, Duke Bernard of Wymare
with a thousand horse, and five hundred musketeers, commanded by my Lievenant
Colonel John Sinclaire, who was appointed to march in the Rear, for making
our Retreat good, which in a manner was needless, seeing our enemy lacked
courage to follow us, but suffered us to depart in peace.

At night we drew up in Battle a mile from the enemies Leaguer, where we
encamped setting forth strong watches of horse, and musketeers on the passes
betwixt us and the enemy, and our Reare-Guarde betwixt us and them, and our
own Guardes, without our Briggads, so having quietly past over the night, the
next morning we marched to Newstad, being the fifteenth of September, where we
resolved to stay a few days, attending what the Imperial Army would
undertake, having still an eye in our necke-pole.

We got intelligence, that the Duke of Fridland Walestine, Bavere did break up
with their Armies, taking their march through Furt, toward Boocke, and then to
Forcham, burning off all the dorpes, that lay nearest Nurenberg; being all the
valiant deeds, they had done the whole Summer: and the fourteenth of
September, being quite gone, diverse Burgers and Soldiers of the Nurenbergers
with the Country Boores in all haste ran unto their Leaguer, where they
found a thousand wagons, besides those were burnt, which they transported to
Nurenberg, together with a great quantity of Iron, above ten thousand
Centeurs of weight, and a great quantity of meal, corn and flesh, which all
in fourteen days was not brought unto the Town after their going, whereat
many did wonder.

The enemy also left behind them many sick and wonded Soldiers uncured;
amongst whom all that time death was very frequent, as well of men, as of
beasts, for thousands of horse and cattle were lost. Likewise, in the Swedens
Leaguer, about the City were fallen above four thousand horse and cattle,
and within the City were also many dead.

As Walestine was come to Forcham, Galasse with some horse and foot, unto the
Woigkeland, who in his march by Nurenberg, did deal very slightly with Lawffe,
Griffenberg, Welden, and Harchbrook, which he took in; and Griffenberg he
burnt, and in the rest he caused to cut off diverse Burgers and Soldiers,
making many poor men with plundering, and cruel exactions of money, and from
thence, in Woiteland, toward Egger, and further, till he joined with Holke,
being both as Simeon and Levi, continuing their march toward the Elve, taking
in Kemnets, Friberg, Meissen, and diverse other parts, exacting great
contribution, and borneshets, or compositions, pressing an infinite deal of
money out of the Duke of Saxons hereditary lands; using great and extraordinary
enormities over the whole lands belonging to the Saxon, by reason the Dukes
Army lay then far off in Silesia, not being possible for him to releeve his
own Country; Walestine also, from Forcham marched toward Saxony; and the
Duke of Bavaria, to quench the fire, that was already kindled there by the
Swedens, marched to Bavere.

The Imperial Army thus separated, his Majesty lay still at Newstad, till
such time, as he saw their several intentions, and then disposing of his Army
accordingly.

First, Hamilton was graciously dismissed by his Majesty, taking his journey
from thence toward France unto Britain and having taken leave of his
Majesty at Newstad, his Excellence was most honorably conveyed by the whole
Officers his Countrymen, that served the Swedens, who having taken leave of
his Excellence, a mile from the Leaguer, they returned, and his Excellence,
accompanied with Sir James Hamilton of Priestfeild, Colonel Sir James Ramsey,
called the Fair Colonel, and Sir John Hepburne Colonel, having taken good
night of all their Noble Camerades, they continued their journey unto
Britain; and we returned to prepare our selves for a march, and a separation;
which immediately the next day did follow; his Majesty having given orders to
call in all Safe-guardes, and the next morning to be in readiness to march.

The thirty-seventh Observation.
THE separation of these two mighty Armies was wonderful,

We see then here, that when the foundation of man's actions is laid sure by
virtue, the building hardly can fail, especially when we lay our chief
dependence on God, and our cause being good, the lawful means used (as was
done here by the Lion of the North, the Invincible King of Sweden) in defense
of Nurenberg, the liberty of Dutch-land, and freedom of Christ's Gospel, then
I say, the event must needs be answerable to the ground laid, to wit, the
freedom of this City, and the preservation of his Majesty's Army, both which
we see by this separation, where the enemy had not the heart to pursue us,
having Gustavus and his Fortunes with us; Notwithstanding of their powerful
and mighty Army; which the Papists themselves did set and esteem to be
threescore thousand men, being then of opinion, that that Summer they were able
to over-swimme the whole Empire, and all their enemies; yet, with all their
bragging, they durst never present themselves in the Fields, with one Cornet,
Color, or Regiment before Gustavus, being terrified at his presence, which did
prove their valor was not correspondent to their power in Arms, otherwise
they had given us greater reason to have esteemed better of their Conduct, so
that we see, there is neither wisdom, force, or power of counsel, that can
prevail against that cause the Lord defends; and who can think those could
prosper better, who formerly pressed by their cruelty to have subverted the
truth of Religion; by banishing the Gospel, and Ministers of it, forcing
Commons against Conscience, either to forsake their Country and possessions, or
to renounce the truth they professed, persecuting those that would not conform
themselves to their Devilish Traditions; what wonder then, those Generals
could not prosper against the truth, or against him that took the defense,
both of truth and people, against the Tyranny of the house of Austria, and
their cruel Generals, that were not only cruel to their enemies, but also
to their servants and Soldiers, whom they left bleeding behind them in their
Leaguer, destitute of all comfort; not so much as once to cause to dress their
wounds, that they received honorably for their safeties? Truly I dare be bold
to say, the Lord will not suffer the negligence and inhumane cruelty of such
Commanders to be unpunished, that left unchristianly those poor Soldiers,
which were bold to open their breasts to receive wounds, for the safety of
those that had no compassion on them in their extremities. O cruelty of all
cruelties! when we see a valiant Soldier naked, hungry, or pined, with his
wounds bleeding for our sakes, and then to leave them destitute of help, to
the mercy of their enemies, especially, when we are not compelled to leave
them! This fault of all faults in a Commander or Soldier, in my mind, is most
unpardonable, which is too common. Therefore, I conclude,

Since then we see, that the greatest part of humane happiness does consist in
virtue, let him that would prove wise, fix his eyes and mind to judge other
men's actions, to the end he may grow the more circumspect and prudent, pressing
to do good by continuance of time, if he but observe the varieties of chances
incident unto all estates, from the Crown to the lowest Cottage, in the end,
through their examples, he may learn to better himself, and become wise in
his profession: for a diligent servant to such a Master as Gustavus was, might
in a few years time observe many things belonging to the knowledge of a
Commander, though I grant, never attain unto the perfection of his Calling;
for the accidents of wars being infinite, the knowledge of them can never be
limited. But we must always be learning of new things, till we become more
prudent, though not perfectly wise in our calling, being infinite; and though
many think a man may be wise, and not courageous, seeing the wise fore-sees
all dangers; truly I will think, he that is circumspect and wise in this
kind, may be called a stout Commander: for to a wise man, we say, nothing
comes wrong; and he that cannot be surprised in this kind, must needs be both
wise and stout.

To conclude then this Observation, Lodowicke Lesly, and his Regiment from
Spence his Regiment, going with Duke Barnard unto Saxony from us; which
separation was like to the separation death makes betwixt friends and the soul
of man, being sorry that those who had lived so long together in amity and
friendship, as also in mutual dangers, in weal and in woe, and fearing we
should not meet again; the splendor of our former mirth was obnubilated with
a cloud of grief and sorrow; which vanished and dissolved in mutual tears of
love, severing from others, as our Savior did from his Disciples, in love and
amity; wishing one another the mutual enterchange of our affections, as
Soldiers and not as Complementing Courtiers, in the way of love and courtesy,
we wished again and again, being loath to depart from others, the
accomplishment of all happiness here, and of eternal glory elsewhere.

The thirty-eight Duty discharged of our March from Newstade toward Winchene.
HAving come unto the fields, the Army being drawn up and divided, Duke
Barnard of Wymar was directed to march on Kitchen on the Maine, and the rest of
the Army on Vinzeine, and his Majesty with a strong party marched back unto
Nurenberg, to see the enemies Leaguer, and the unhappie Castle on the old hill,
where so many brave fellows were lost. From thence his Majesty returned on
Outzback, at which time on the march some new levied men, that were come from
Switzerland, joined with the Army at Winchene, where we rested two days, I
being cruelly tormented with a burning Ague, contracted with neglecting of my
wound received at Nurenberg.

Walestine his Feltmarshall Holke at this time with his little Army did
dominier in Saxony, Papists did: for their villainy, whom he led, was so great,
that after abusing the women, in satisfying their filthy lusts, they did burn
them and their families, their hearts thus hardened, that it was evident, that
the judgments of the Lord were not far from them, and those he commanded,
having suffered such tyranny to have been used to Christians, before a month
was past, he died raging of the plague, and those who followed him were also
rewarded of God for their cruelty.

The eighteenth of August, Holke took in Zincko by accord, promising unto the
Burgers the freedom of their Religion and liberties, providing they would take
in a Garrison of two hundred Emperialists; then Gallas and Holke being joined,
soon after Walestine himself, after the in-taking of Coburg, continued his
march toward Leipsigh; after spoiling the land of Coburg and Culnebush, he
marched through the Voigland toward Owltenburg; and from thence to Leipsigh,
which he got in on Accord the twenty-second of October, and on the twenty-third
he got in the Castle of Pleisenburg, putting out the Dukes Garrison, and
putting in his own. And after he took in Weysenfelse, Morsburg, Nawmburg, and
diverse Towns more in Sakonie, spoiling and ruining all that side of the Elve:
Hall also he took in, but the Castle of Morsburg, being well beset by the
Swedens, by that time could not be brought to hear of any Accord.

Papenhaim now retired from Mastricht, Patterburne from the beleaguering, and
skirmished with the Lieutenant General Bawtish, he also dissolved the
blockquering of Volfenbittle, an did get some Cornets and Colors from the
Brunswicker forces, and from thence he did come before Heldishem; alleging, he
had beaten the Duke of Lunenbeug and Bawtishen, by which stratagem he did get
Heldishem in his power, and beset it with a Garrison, as the principal
Strength on the Wezer stream, appointing the Grave Fon Gronsfield to command
there, and then he marched toward Eichfield, and took in Milhousen, getting a
great composition of money from them, he marched on Saltz and plundered it out,
wherein he did get much hidden riches, and his Soldiers making rich booty,
they did cast in the water, that which they could not carry; he proceeded also
in the same manner with Theanestade, from whence he carried with him the
Burger-masters in pledge of their Cities Ransom, and finding by the way they
were not able to pay, what they had promised, he caused to take all three and
hang them up, till they were half dead, and then caused suddenly to cut them
down: Cretzburg also he used little better, from Erfort he desired twenty
thousand Dollers, and threatened if the moneys were not told down, he would
not fail to do them all the mischief he could, whereupon with much ado they
did get him two thousand Dollers, and hearing his Majesty of Sweden was drawing
near, he stayed not on the rest; but marched to Morsburg at Hall.

The thirty-eighth Observation.
MEmory and forgetfulness are both necessary in friendship. Shall I then
forget here to speak of our separation, being so long companions of one danger
together? No, this love of Camerades to each others is most worthy remembrance,
seeing we were diverse times willing to give our lives for one another
safeties: shall we then be oblivious of this mutual love and dangers? No
though distance of place separate our ^^dies, we shall stillbe conjoined in
mind, and power against our common enemy, that desires the hurt of us all
alike. Let us then though severed, Nectar in this life, it is in sorrows we
endure for the goodness and love of our absent friends, especially of those
that were our dearest Camerades; for if we sorrow for them, amending our lives,
knowing we must pass shortly through the same passage, they did pass before
us, truly one day our sorrow shall turn to joy, and our tears shall turn to
smiles, our weeping unto a stream of pleasures, and our labor unto eternal
rest, that as we followed the Lion of the North, the invincible King of Sweden,
in fighting the Lords Battles here, even so we shall follow the Lamb unto
the Heavenly Jerusalem hereafter.

The cruelty and Tyranny used by the Imperial Officers in Saxony, who neither
spared man nor woman, is rather to be pitied by Christians, then any ways to
be imitated, which cruelty did presage their ruin to come; for nothing
vehement in that kind did ever remain long unpunished, and though for a time
the Devils rage, at last they are cast into perpetual darkness.

Papenhaim returning from Mastricht, (viz.) error in counsel, and unhappy
success in his best actions; for how soon a man begins to grow proud and
to be secure, then comes punishment; and as pride grows, so virtue decaieth,
and though the punishment of pride and cruelty sometimes comes late, yet sure
it never comes light, and it is most certain, there is ever some fatality
incident unto those, who are desirous of vain glory through pride. Our desire
then should be, to be humble, that we be not rejected with disdain, as those
proud Cavaliers rejected the poor Supplicants; who though begging mercy, were
not heard: whose exorbitant wickedness should teach us, not to imitate their
examples, but rather through grace, press to eschew their punishment both
temporal and eternal.

The thirty-ninth Duty discharged of our March to Dunkelspill, and from thence
unto Bavier.
HIS Majesty returning from Rottenburg with the Queens Majesty, they marched
with the Army toward Dunkelspill, where they did lie three days; during which
time I was glad, looking for no life, to have bin eased by the help of good
and learned Physicians. There I was left, the Army continuing their march upon
Nerling, making all the expedition and haste was possible, to relieve Rhine on
the Leacke being beleagured by the Duke of Bavier his forces, and his Majesty
coming to the Leacke, he received news, the Town was given over, and the
Bridge being cast off, his Majesty was hindered the passage, whereupon his
Majesty directed back the Queen to Donavert, and incontinent begun to
prepare for the beleaguering of Rhine again, the Bridge being repared, he set
over his Army, the thirtith of September, and incontinent begun his aproaches,
the Emperialists at first played hard with Cannon and Musket till night, that
his Majesty's Batteries were ready.

The first of October early in the morning the mist was so thick, that his
Majesty approached very near the walls, and that orderly the Batteries being
ready, the Cannon planted in the mist, by nine of the clock his Majesty
saluted the Town with a Salve of Musket and Cannon, where incontinent the
feeble, Bearish Commanders entered in accord, which was granted unto them, so
that his Majesty, by the assistance of God, got this Town again in two hours
time, after the Batteries were ready, and that contrary to his Majesty's
expectation, who did not expect the getting of it in less then six days.

The Dukes foot Soldiers were suffered to march out without Arms, Dutch
Colonel called Metzfell, notwitstanding of the recovery of the Town, he was
brought before a Counsel of wars at Newburg on the Danow, being accused, he
had given over the Town without any necessity, making his Accord contrary to
his Officers wills, which they having testified against him, by a sentence of
the Counsel of war he was beheaded the eighth of October; and those Officers
of his Regiment, which subscribed the Accord, were ordained to carry no charge
under his Majesty's Army; and the Officers, which withstoode the Accord, were
assoiled from the sentence, as faithful servants to their Master.

The said day, after the execution, his Majesty returned with the Army, toward
Rhine from Newburg, where again his Majesty divided the Army, and having beset
Ausburg, Rhine and Donavert well, he took the yellow and blew Briggad with
himself, leaving our Briggad after long advisement, and the rest of the Army
under the Command of Palsgrave Christian, and General Major Ruthven to attend
on the Dukes forces, and to maintain Schwabland with the passes, which we had
already in Bavaria. His Majesty then taking leave of our Briggad, in view of
the whole Army thanked us for our former service, and in particular he
expressed his affection unto me, and to Lieutenant Colonel Mustein: showing
he was greeved to leave us behind, yet, in respect of the long march he had
unto Saxony, and considering the weakness of both our Regiments, that were
weakened by the toil of war, and the dint of the enemies Armies, and
therefore in consideration of their former good service, he had ordained
Musterplaces for us, the best in Schwabland, for to strengthen our Regiments,
against his return, and withal, commanded us to see it done, as we would
expect his favor: and then calling on Palsgrave Christian, to whom he had
given command over us and the Army, recommending us particularly unto him,
desired him to give us contentment of the moneys were then resting unto us, and
that out of the first money was to be received at Ausburg.

Having after that taken leave of the whole Army, his Majesty returned to
Donavert, where the Queen did attend his coming, being making ready for the
march unto Saxon. As soon as his Majesty had dined at Donavert with the
Queen, going to his Coach, I took leave of his Majesty and the Queen, in
presence of General Banier, Palsgrave Christian, Sir Patrike Ruthven and
diverse other worthy Cavaliers, being the most doleful parting I ever suffered,
having bin still both I and our Regiment with his Majesty, on all service of
importance, since his Majesty's upbreaking from Stetin in Pemeren, till this
parting at Donavert on the Danube, the eleventh of October. 1632.

His Majesty having that night lien at Nerlin, from thence the next day he
directed the Queens Majesty with the soote Briggads to march on Dunkelspill,
and from thence to Rottenberg, his Majesty then with a party went for
Nurenberg, and before his coming, Kniphowsen with some forces was marched to
take in Lawffe from the enemy, who at first defended themselves well; But in
the end they were compelled to come forth and be at his pleasure, and were all
made prisoners. By midday his Majesty hearing there were not far from
Nurenberg some Emperialists seen, so soon as his Majesty had gotten sure
intelligence of them, he brake up with seventeene Troops of horse and some
foot, and marched on Enschbrooke, whence the Emperialists had gone but a
little before, Crabbats that did ly on the Castle Richell, showing there were
some six hundred Emperialists coming to releeve Lawffe, hearing of his
Majesty's being there, they retired to wards Bavaria, yet his Majesty following
them in the night falls on them, and cuts off three hundred, where fifty were
prisoners and two Cornets taken from them, with a great deal of booty; his
Majesty then turning back continued his march toward Saxony, having left all
behind him in Franconia and Schwabland in good order, his Majesty in all haste
to releeve the Duke of Saxon and his country, went from Nurenberg to Swinefort,
and from thence over During Vault, where he joined his forces with Duke Barnard
of Wymar, and then continued the march toward Arnestat, where they lay still
two days, to refresh the Army wearied with hard marching; and from Arnestat he
marched to the general Randez-vouz, being then appointed at Erfort, the Army
being then eighteen thousand strong, under whom there was no other Scots
Regiment, but Colonel Lodowicke Lesly his Regiment.

His Majesty having made a speech to the Counsel of Erfort, he left the
Queens Majesty there and blessed her, Boodestawde, from whence Papenhaim with
the Leguisticall Army had but passed a few days before, and his Majesty having
quartered the Army in the Ampt Freeburg, he commanded Duke Barnard of Wymar,
with fifteen hundred horse to fall on the enemies rear or hinder Troops: But
Papenhaim having in haste past over the Sale toward Morsburg, the Duke could
have no advantage of him, but retired again to his Majesty's Army.

His Majesty understanding the Emperialists had sent thirty musketeers toward
Nawmburg, to get in the rest of the money, they had promised unto Tilly the
year before; his Majesty incontinent commanded some forces with Colonel
Brandesten to see if they could get in Nawmburg, who having come before it, the
twenty ninth of October before day, desired to make up the Ports in his
Majesty's name of Sweden, those who had the watch at the Port answered it
behooved them first to show their Commanders of it, otherwise they could not
answer for it, which they understanding, unwilling to stay so long, taking a
short resolution, with axes and hammers they cut down the Port and entered
perforce, finding at another Port a wicket open, they enter also, and
incontinent they bring the Town in subjection, the Emperialists then in the
Town were in danger, if the inhabitants had not interceeded for them to spare
them, who did get quarters; soon after six hundred Emperialists horsemen came
before the Town, led by Colonel Breda, who desired to make quarters in the
Town, but beyond their expectation having perceived the Swedens horse-watch
before the Ports, altering their resolution, incontinent they retired back
toward Visenfelts.

The thirtieth of October, Sale, with the Horsemen at the Dorpe Altenburg,
directing the Infantrie to pass at the Bridge, where before midday the whole
Army were come to Nawmburg, and marching by on this side of it, they lay that
day, and two days after that in the fields before Jacobs Port, on the street
that goes to Leipsigh.

After this his Majesty being advertised, that Walestine with his Army was
marching on Visenfelts, showing himself as if he meant to stand and fight;
incontinent his Majesty entrenched his Army about Nawmburg with Skonces and
Redoubts, and set two Bridges over the Sale, where on all occasions he could
transport the Infantrie over such a water, and being ready, then he threw off
all Bridges from thence over the Vustront till Freeberg, whereby they should
not be helpful unto the enemy. Whereupon the Duke of Freedland Walestine
changing resolution, the Town and Castle of Visenfelts being in his power to
use them for his advantage, he plundering both Town and Castle the fourth of
November, marched with his Army toward Leitzen, two miles from Leipsigh, and
encamped there.

The thirty-ninth Observation.
IN the discharge of the former duty we see his Majesty was troubled with a
double care; Queen, the other for his Army; being diligent in bringing both
forwards, as also careful to put them both in assurance; for having left the
Queen at Donavert, he marched on Rhine to subdue his enemies. Where we see,
that it behooved him first to put his Impedimenta in assurance, teaching
thereby Cavaliers, that followed him in time of service, to quit their wives,
whereby their care might be the better employed in discharging the points of
their Calling; which shows us, that such impediments at such times were better
away than present: for our nature is ever to grieve much for the loss of
things we love. Therefore our care that are Soldiers having wives should be to
settle them, where they should not be Impedimenta unto us, in discharging of
our duties before our Enemy, to the end we might the better be freed of this
double care, his Majesty was subject unto at this time, which no question
troubled his Majesty's resolutions more than any thing else.

The tragical end of this Dutch Colonel Metzlaffe, should teach all
Cavaliers, to whom Strengths are concredited, not to give over without great
necessity; especially being made foreseen of a Relief to come. And the
greatest blame, that was imputed unto him, was his too much neglect of the
duties of his Calling, being too careful to entertain Cameradeship night and
day, the fruit whereof in the end was ignominy, with the loss of life and
credit. Which should teach all men to avoid such a beastly life, dishonouring
the noble profession of Arms.

We see then no law or justice is more strict or more summary, which being
transgressed, we are subject to the punishment: and if our laws were not
strict, and our punishment sharp, it were impossible to keep us in obedience.
But I am sorry, that for the most part we abstain more for fear of
punishment, than for obedience to God and the law. This censure though hard
from me, the truth is still the same, though man were filent.

On this march toward Saxony, all things succeeded to his Majesty's desire,
as presages of his ensuing victory; seeing Fortune smiled on him, during his
lise time, being Fortunes fellow, he was still encouraged to the Combat, though
weakest: for magnanimity and the virtue of true humility were both cohabitant
in him. For as he had courage with a weak Army to rancounter a stronger; Even
so he humbled himself before God, acknowledging before the people, he was but
dust and ashes, like unto other men. And therefore he wished the people they
should not trust or repose any thing in him, but to put their trust and
confidence in God, saying, he was but a servant: and though the Lord would be
pleased to take him away from amongst them, yet, he doubted not, but the Lord
would raise up others more powerful than he, to defend the good Cause he had
begun, till at last it were brought to a good end.

These speeches, Queen, as the glory of her sex, his Royal Majesty being
truly endued with such true splendor of noble worth, that he ever seemed like
unto the Sun, that shines alike on the Paisant in the field, as it does on
the Emperor in his Throne. And when his Majesty departed from us at Rhine on
the Leacke, then our Sun on earth went away unto another Horizon, leaving us
eclipsed, through the want of our Leader; so that in the rest of our warfare we
had none to depend on, but on God alone, the only sure Anchor for a troubled
soul to rest on.

To conclude then this Observation, having followed the Lion of the North thus
far unto the Battle of Leitzen, though I was not at the Battle, yet for
my love to my Master, and to discharge the duty I owe unto my Country, I will
relate the true manner of this Battle in short, being the end of the second
part of my expedition, under his Majesty of Sweden, of never dying memory,
leaving the third part of the expedition to a fitter opportunity; except so
far as we marched before we were sworn to the Evangelist Stends, under the
Conduct of Palsgrave Christian Brickerfeild in Baviere, and afterward under the
Feltmarshall Gustavue Horn in Schwabland.

The fortieth Duty discharged of the Battle of Leitzen.
THE Kings Majesty of Sweden knowing that the Duke of Freedland had quit the
Town and Castle of Visenfelts, and had the fourth of November marched with his
Army toward Leitzen, two miles from Leipsigh, his Majesty on the fist of
November, with the whole Army, two hours before day brake up from Nawmburg,
setting after the enemy, coming the same day after noone-tide in sight of them;
He presented himself with his Army in order of Battle, so that
incontinently the skirmish went on apace by the Troops, which were commanded
out from both Armies, whereupon the Swedens made still good use with their
small Cannon, till the night did put them asunder. In which skirmish the
Swedens had gotten one of the Crabats Standards, whereon was drawn the
Fortune, and the Eagle, which on our side was holden for a good beginning.

The Swedens Army this whole night standing in Battle, his Majesty was of
intention to have fallen on the Imperial Army two hours before day: but by
reason of a thick mist which had fallen, it behooved his Majesty to attend
the rising and clearing up of the day. But the enemy perceiving the Swedens
coming so near unto him, it could not go off without fighting: he did in the
mean time see well to his own advantage, giving out orders they should
incontinent make the Graffe or Ditch, they had before their Front, deeper than
it was first made, and to lodge Musketeers within it, which they might have
before them, equal to any breast-worke or Parapet for their better safeties.

His Majesty then having ended the morning prayers, and that the mist was
vanishing away, by the rising of the Sun, giving out, by all appearance, the
tokens of a clear day. His Majesty then with comfortable exhortation exhorted
every man, foot, and horse, to fight bravely, especially directing his speech
unto the Swedens and Finnes: Gods Word, and your King; which if you do, so
will you have mercy of God, and honor before the world; and I will truly
reward you; but if you do not, I swear unto you, that your bones shall never
come in Sweden again.

The Dutch also his Majesty exhorted after this manner: You true and worthy
Dutch brethren, Officers and common Soldiers, I exhort you all, carry your
selves manly, and fight truly with me; run not away, and I shall hazard my
body and blood with you for your best, if you stand with me, so I hope in God
to obtain victory, the profit whereof will redownd to you and your
successors: and if otherwise you do, so are you and your liberties lost. His
Majesty having ended this speech says, now let us to it, and let us cry unto
God with one voice, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus help me this day to fight, for the glory
of thy Name: He advanced then in full Battle fasting, having neither tasted
meat nor drink, right forwards toward the Town of Leitzen, where on both
sides the Duke of Freedland his Horsemen did present themselves, until such
time as their General had brought their Infantrie in Battle, beside the
Winde-mill, and then to a side, by the Ditch that was before their Front, they
retired back a little, and set themselves in Battle, on the right hand of
the Town of Leitzen, and then putting the Town on fire, to the end the
Swedens on that quarter could do them no harm.

Notwithstanding whereof, with full resolution the Swedens Army, in full
Battle marched by the side of the Town on the ditch, where their Musketeers
were lodged, and presented themselves in good order, against the mighty and
strong Imperial Army, whereupon, the Emperialists great Cannon, that were
planted by the winde-mill, began to give fire in the midst of the Swedens
Army, and were incontinent repayed and answered with the like noise; so that
the Cannon played two long hours on both sides, the fight going bravely on,
betwixt nine and ten of the clock, that his Majesty himself advanced
toward the enemy, with the Van-guarde of his Army, even to their Graffe,
where their Musketeers were set much to his Majesty disadvantage, so that
sundries of his Majesty forces fell therein; Nevertheless, they chased the
enemy a little out of the ditch, and took seven of the Emperialists Cannon,
Swedens Briggad, or yellow Regiment of the Guard is come after, and not
esteeming of the Graffe in their way, or of the three squadrons, or Battles
of the enemies foot, being four times stronger than they, which they manfully
did beat, making them to give ground, till they were ruined, and then on the
second time, scattering them also even until the third advancing, and being
grown weak, and weary with so many brave Charges, being resisted by the
enemies third Battle, which were seconded well with two squadrons of
horsemen, at last, with the blew Regiments coming up to relieve them, driven
back, and almost so scattered, that they were ruined, and the seven Cannon
which formerly they had won, were taken from them again. In the mean time,
the Swedens small Cannon, that were planted before the Briggads, being righted
on the enemies Cannon at the winde-mill, whereon also Duke Barnards Cannon,
which were before his Briggad, played on the enemies Cannon toward the
windmill, doing great hurt to the enemy, so that they were forced to retire
their Cannon a little behind the Millars house; in this mean time, his
Majesty with some squadrons of horse charged the enemy, that was thrice
stronger than they, charging with their right wing, his left wing falling on
them with such surie, that their Reareguard, or reserve were astonished, being
so furious, that they went through their enemies, putting them to the flight.
But especially his Majesty himself having charged too far with four
Cornets in the amidst of the enemies troops being deadly wonded gave up the
Ghost, fighting for God and for the defense of the true Religion, Christ our
Savior.

Nevertheless two great bodies of Crabbats of the enemies left wing stood
firm, and falling on the right wing of the Swedens horsemen, with such a cry
and fury, advanced so far, that they were Masters of the Swedens Ammunition
wagons, bringing also some of the Swedens horsemen in disorder: whereupon
incontinent did fall on three squadrons of the Swedens horsemen, under whom
Lieutenant Colonel Relingen was one, that did second the rest bravely, who
was shot in the Arm. Nevertheless the Crabbats were beaten back again with
loss, during which time, Duke Barnard of Wymar was not idle, with the left
wing of the Swedens horsemen, but with the commanded musketeers being of
Leslies Regiment, and with the small Cannon, charged the enemies right wing,
making them retire on their Cannon by the windmill and Gallows, and after
long fighting, they were made at last to give ground, quitting to the Swedens
fourteen pieces of great Ordinance.

As the Duke of Wymar did charge the enemy, their Ammunition wagons took
fire, Papenhaim coming from Hall with a fresh supply unlooked for, the
service was begun again more sharp and violent, than before, which
continued for a while very vehement, he having recollected the scattered
Troops, the Order whereof can scarce be well set down, by reason it was so
near night, before Papenhaims coming; yet the service continued hot and
cruel so long as he lived, till it was past eight a Clock at night, that in
end Papenhaim being killed, the Emperialists losing courage, through the
assistance of God, and the manly, and valiant courage of Duke Barnard of Wymar,
the victory was come on the Swedens side, the enemy having quit the field,
and burnt off his Leaguer with his whole Baggage, and three pieces of Cannon,
which he could not get carried away with him; he took his retreat again on
Leipsigh.

There were killed of the Emperialists the Abbot of Fulda, the Grave Fon
Papenhaim, Colonel Lane, Colonel Vestrum, Lieutenant Colonel Lord,
Livetenant Colonel Taphim, Lieutenant Colonel Camerhooffe, Colonel So^es
with many other inferior Officers and Soldiers.

On the Swedens side were lost with his Majesty General Major Isler, Colonel
Gerstorfe, General Major Grave Neeles a Sweden, Colonel Vildesten, and diverse
more were hurt, and of our Nation was hurt with the Cannon, and musket twice
Captain Henry Lindesey brother to Bainshow who for a time did lie almost dead
in the field, diverse Officers of Colonel Lodowicke Leslie his Regiment were
also hurt, having behaved themselves well, being, for the most part, old,
expert Officers, and old beaten blades of Soldiers.

In this Battle as was thought, were killed nine thousand men, besides, those
were hurt, whereof many thereafter dyed of their wounds, such as on the
Emperors side Grave Berherthold, Fon Walestine, Colonel Comargo, Colonel
Browner, the old Colonel Viltzleben, and others. On the Swedens side also dyed
of his wounds after the Battle, General Major Grave Neeles.

After his Majesty's death, Wymar, and the rest of the Cavalieres of the Army
understanding the great misfortune of his Majesty death, resolved all alike,
it was better to dye on the place with his Majesty, than to retire one foot
of ground: which resolution was the cause, that in the end they did crown the
lamentable death of the Kings Majesty with a stately and heroical Victory,
so that his Majesty in the highest degree of glory, may be imagined before
any King, or Emperor to have dyed, and his life does eternize alike both his
praise and glory, being victorious before death, in his death, and after death.

The Duke of Fridland Walestine, after the losing of this Dattaile, Leipsigh,
and having had no time to continue there, he was forced to take his retreat
further unto the Hill's of Bohemia, and thereafter Leipsigh was freed from the
enemies forces, by the Duke of Lunenburg, and the Saxons, that were coming
with succors unto his Majesty before the Battle, whose march was too slow,
their succors being come but after the strokes were given.

The Castle of Leipsigh called Plassenburg having holden out long, was taken
again, together with which all other parts in Saxon, that the Empertalists
had taken, were freed again, by the Swedens the second time, as Camnits,
Fryburg, etc. For which service the Swedens were evil recompensed by the
ungrateful Saxon, whose unthankfulness to the Crown of Sweden will never be
forgotten.

In all this time the Swedens Felt: Marshall Gustavus Horn did prosper very
fortunately in Alsas, not only in taking in the strong and fast Episcopal
Strength Bennenfeld, in spite of the Emperialists, who had pressed to relieve
it, after a long Siege of two months time; The Feltmarshall did take it in by
Accord. As also the Towns Schletstad, Colmare, Haggeno, Molshen, and almost
whole upper Alsas in a short time he brought under his Contribution and power.

The fortieth Observation.
HIS Majesty at this time, though a great deal weaker in strength than the
enemy, notwithstanding he was loath to delay time, finding Walestine once
removing from him, Papenhaim being also absent with the Army of the League,
his Majesty resolved as best to embrace the occasion, not giving time to his
enemy, either to take more advantage, or yet to recollect the Forces which were
scattered from him, thinking it was best to deal with one before another, and
he knew it was a kind of madness to stay till his enemies Forces were
augmented, seeing occasion taken in wars does often profit more than courage
it self. Therefore we see, there was a necessity laid on his Majesty to
fight this Battle in time, seeing the enemy coming together was twice
stronger than he, and then his Majesty had no place of Retreat within ten
miles, which would not only ruin his Army, but also discourage his friends
and Confederates, for whose relief he did come.

Walestine retired from his Majesty of purpose to put off time, till Papenhaim
had come to him, or till they might draw his Majesty's Army between them, which
his Majesty foreseeing adventured the Combat, in seeking first unto Walestine
before Papenhaims coming. It is needless to reason more of his Majesty's
resolution, since all counsels and advisements are allowed of, as they happen
to succeed, which is most unjust.

Here also we see, Fortune, or to enterprise difficult matters, setting all his
estate in hazard, seeing the safety of the whole depends on him alone: for
there is nothing more fearful to a Commander, and with all diligence to be
eschewed, than that he do not at one time, and one moment, commit his whole
estate and Kingdom unto the decision of Chance, without great advantage
offered. Neither ought a King to fight with all his Forces at once, except he
could perceive a sure overthrow to be seen clearly unto himself, or to his
enemies, and if then he resolve to fight, for eschewing of factions, let one
supreme Commander command, which is ever best, since many wits in Command do
but breed confusion. Therefore it is most requisite, that one command and the
rest obey, as was done here at Leitzen, and the best way of Command is, to
keep men in awe of duty, not so much with cruelty (as many base Generals
do) as with a moderate severenesse: for always Commanders ought to do, as
wise Mariners, not to steer their course still one way, but sometimes to give
way to the tempest, which being past, let him follow his course gain: even so
wise Commanders should moderate their Commands according to the time. For as in
a calm sea any fellow may steer, but in a great tempest, a skillful and a
wise Mariner is requisite: even so in Command, when a Battle is to be fought,
a wise and a stout Commander is requisite; for no man can command well, who did
not learn to obey. Therefore it is the most difficult thing in the world to
command well, either our selves or others: and he that would command well, must
not show himself cruel in words or strokes, but if possible, he ought to
bring men to his mind with entreaty and friendly exhortations, showing
himself grave, majestique and benevolent, gaining of others his inferiors
reverence, fear and munificence, with due obedience; and this is the only best
way to command, and to keep men in obedience: which qualities were all
plentiful in the Lion of the North, the invincible Gustavus, who after this
manner encouraged his own countrymen and subjects, to fight, as also in a
brotherly manner of love encouraged the Dutch, being his sworn servants. Who
would not obey such a Commander to fight well, being assured under his
fortunate conduct after travel and pain, to obtain Glory and honor here,
and an immortal Crown after death, for fighting well the Battles of the Lord?

As his Majesty went about his enemies with wisdom and courage: Walesline went
about his with craft and policy, casting a ditch before our forces to fall in,
which was made the burial place of his own Soldiers, being fallen in the
ditch they had prepared for others.

I confess there is nothing more commodious in war then to deceive an enemy,
and oftimes through deceit men obtain victory: yet the wisdom of Gustavus
seasoned with infinite courage could not be trapped with a Fowlers grinne, but
brake through it with the assistance of God, till he was victorious over his
crafty enemies.

This Magnanimous King for his valor might have bin well called the Magnifique
King, and holden for such, who while as he once saw appearance of the loss of
the day, seeing some forces beaten back, and some flying, he valorously did
charge in the midst of his enemies with hand and voice, though thrice shot,
sustained the fight, doing alike, the duty of a Soldier and of a King, till
with the loss of his own life he did restore the victory to his eternal
credit, he died standing serving the public, Pro Deo et Religionetuenda; and
receiving three Bullets, one in the body, one in the Arm, and the third in the
head, he most willingly gave up the Ghost, being all his life time a King that
feared God and walked uprightly in his calling; and as he lived Christianly, so
he died most happily, in the defense of the truth: and to witness all this was
true, I could take Heaven and Earth, Sun and Moon, mineralls etc. to witness
that his Colors ever flourished and spread in the name of the Lord, and that his
confidence was not set on the Arm of man, though he was a warrior from his
youth up, he was the Captain over Iraell, whose fingers the Lord taught to
fight, and to lead his people.

He had the heart of a Lion, that by Gods help had done such things, that
those that had seen and heard it as I did, must needs have faid, that it was
the Lord that did it and not he, being it was the Lords work. But our
adversaries and their damned crew of Jesuits and Monks, will say, that it was
their power and might, and the goodness of their cause, that made his Royal
Majesty to fall. But we may say with Solomon in the twenty-eighth of the
Proverbs and twenty-one verse. It was for the sins of the Land, and our
sins, that he was taken from amongst us, and from those poor Cavaliers, that
did follow him, for his Maiestics love, and the love of the cause. He was shot
with three Bullets, dead with the last, for our sins and the sins of the
Land. And what he did before his death, for the liberty of Dutch-land, and
freedom of the Gospel none but knows it: he left his own Kingdom, to bring
strangers to freedom in theirs, he set light by his own life for Dutch-land,
that they might keep theirs, he waked and cared day and night for them, as a
father for his children, that at last he might bring peace for them to sleep
sound; he brought the keys and opened their Church doors that were closed up
by the Antichristian Idolaters, that the Devils doctrine was banished again
out of the Paltz, and Christ's Gospel preached, and the Sacraments duly
administered, which I saw, and was partaker of, singing thanks unto God for
their deliverance.

He it was and none other under God, Israel. Notwithstanding whereof, the
unthankfulness of the people was so great, that with my ears, diverse times I
did hear some of them say he might as well have stayed in his own country, till
they had sent for him, so great was their unthankfulness! Likewise they said,
if he had had much at home, he had not come unto them over seas such a far
Journey. Was not this to recompense good with evil? Was not this right the
chief Butlers part, that did not remember Joseph, but forgot him? Was not this
Ioas his part to Ichoida his Father? O then this was the poisonable bullet of
ingratitude of the people, for which our King and Master was taken away! Oh
would to God the people had never bin so unthankful, that our King, Captain
and Master had yet lived!

Moreover as these people were unthankful, so they were Godless many of them
in the time of their troubles, as I did behold oftimes with mine eyes a
careless security amongst them, thinking their victories were so frequent, and
their own power so great, they needed not the assistance of the Swedens nor of
strangers, and their pride was so great, that disesteeming of strangers in
their pride, they led a life very insolent and deboist, being given to the
works of the flesh, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
idolatry etc. In a word, it was even amongst them, as it was in the days
before the flood, as if the Lord had forgotten them, or could not see their
villainy, so it behooved God to have punished them by his Majesty's death. For
in their hearts they said there was no God; so that their mischief came on
them unawares; and this the peoples carriage caused his Majesty's untimely
death, being shot the second time. O would to God they had done otherwise, and
served God more truly, that we might have had the presence and conduct of our
Magnanimous King longer, till the pride of Austria had bin more humbled, and
the whore of Babylon brought unto repentance of her Idolatries! O would to God
I could enough lament his death! As also lament my own sins, and the
wickedness of the people, that was the cause of this untimely death, through
their sins! And his Majesty's self also being a sinner, as he himself
oftimes confessed, wishing that God would not lay to his charge the great
respect and reverence the best sort of the people did give unto him, did glory
in nothing but in the Lord, ascribing ever all his victories unto God, and
nothing presuming of himself. For I dare be bold to say he was a man
according to Gods mind, if there was one on earth. Such was our Master,
Captain and King. As was Abraham the Father of many, so was our Master,
Captain and King. Was Noah in his time unreproveable? So was our Master,
Captain and King. Was Job in his sufferings patient? So was our Master,
Captain and King. Was Jonathan true and upright in keeping his word? So was
our Master, Captain and King. Was Iehosaphat in his wars penitent, and busy
craving the help of the Lord? So was our Master, Captain and King. Was Simeon
good and full of the spirit? So was our Master, Captain and King. Was young
Tobias mindful all his days of the Lord, in his heart, and his will not set
to sin? So was our Master, Captain and King, like unto a stone most
precious, even like a Jasper, clear as Crystal ever and ever. Apelles with
his skill in painting, and Cicero with his tongue in speaking, were both alive,
and pressed to add any thing to the perfection of our Master, Captain and
King; truly the ones best Colors, and the others best Words were not able to
add one shadow to the brightness of his Royal Mind and Spirit; So that
while the world stands, our King, Captain and Master cannot be enough praised.
Alas then! it was our sins, and the sins of the Army, and the Land, was the
cause of our punishment in losing of him, with that unhappy last bullet of the
three shot through his head, who was the head of us all under God our Father in
Christ, that did undo us, it was we, I say, that sinned against the Lord and
his Anointed. It was our misdeedes did thus grow over our heads that made us
lose our Head and Leader. Woe, woe then to us that left the Lord, till we made
the Lord take him from us, that was our guard and comforter under God in all
our troubles! What then ought we to do that one day we may reign with him in
glory? While it is to day we must cast off the works of darkness, and embrace
the light in newness of life, repenting of the evil, and turning away from
our wickedness by repentance, not like unto Cain, not like unto Saul, not like
unto Achitophell, not like to Judas Iscariot, who all doubted; but like those
of Nineve in dust and ashes, to fast and pray believing in the Lord; and with
David to say, We have sinned against thee, and against the Heavens, be
merciful unto us o Lord: like unto Peter, let us, o Lord, Weep bitterly; let
us then repent, and believe the Gospel, believe, yea and turn to the Lord
with all our hearts, with fasting and praying, and mourning with Saul, that
said, Thou art more righteous then I, in showing me good for evil: much more
ought we to life up our voices, and with tears of repentance mourn for the
loss of our Master, Captain and King, through our sins and unthankfulness.
Therefore to day while we have time, let us acknowledge our sins before the
Lord, and repent, lest a worse come unto us, and that then we be cast into
prison, till that we pay the last farthing; Meriba and at Massa in the
wilderness; but with the forlorn Child cry, Father we have sinned against
thee, and against heaven, and are not more worthy to be called thy Sons. Lord
therefore be merciful unto us, and enter not into judgment with us. Then let
us all wear mourning, and lament the death of the valiant King Gustavus
Adolphus, while we breath. Yet what help? Res est irrevocabilis, et quod
factum est insectum fieri nequit, what is done cannot be recalled, and should
we mourn like unto those who have no hope? Far be it from us, seeing it
cannot help us in this life, Micha, let it be with us as it pleases God, and
let us say with David, It is good for us o Lord, that thou have chastened us
with thy Rod; thou can also help us, and bring us to an happy end of all our
miseries, the Lord will not suffer us nor our seed to lack bread, and the
Lord our God did ever give unto the people of Israel at all times Rulers,
Judges and Kings, and Iael, though a woman despised, was strong enough to drive
a nail in the right cause. Shall not then the Lord on our repentance, stir
up one, yet to take his cause in hand, who are also Isreal's, and the Lords
people and inheritance, being also christened in the Lords name? And as a
Mother does not forget her Child, so will not the Lord forget us, but in place
of our Master, Captain and King, will yet give unto us a valiant Leader, come,
I hope, of the valiant Bruce, Stewarts, of the Issue of Elizabeth the Queen of
Bohemia, and Jewel of her sex, the most splendid in brightness of mind, for
a woman, that the Earth does afford. From her I wish the Leader to come into
the field, to fight with goodlucke and victory, with strength and power, with
wisdom and understanding etc. against her enemies and our enemies, always
well furnished and prepared, the Lord will give him an Horn of Iron and feet
of Brass to beat his enemies in pieces, the Lord will list up his hand upon
his adversaries, and cut off all his enemies; and to conclude, he will make him
tread the Devil under his feet. The Lord of his infinite mercy grant unto us
such a Leader in place of our valiant Master, Captain and King of never dying
memory, the Lion of the North, the invincible King of Sweden! so shall we not
need in any manner of way to doubt of a wished happy end, both to the war
and to our selves, being victorious over all our enemies temporal and
spiritual. Amen.

The fourty-one Duty discharged at the intaking of Landsberg on the Leake, and
the relief of Rhine.
PALSGRAVE Christian being left by his Majesty to command the Army in Bavier,
having left Rhine with four Companies of Swedens commanded by Colonel Worbran
his Major, he brake up with the Army toward Aichstade in Bavier, and having
taken it by Accord he continued his march toward Landsberg on the Leake. Where
having arrived within half a mile of the Town, we quartered for a night, till
preparation were made of victuals and furniture convenient for the
beleaguering, which being made, the next day we marched toward the Town in
Battle, drawing up within reach of Cannon to the walls in the safest part:
they thundering with cannon amongst us, our foot Army was divided in Briggads,
and directed to several Posts, our horsemen were also divided. Some were
commanded out to scour the fields on that side the enemy was to come, others
were appointed to remain beside the Infantry, to second us against the
outfalling; or otherwise to second us against the relief; that might come to
the Town. The rest of our Horsemen were directed to Quarters, having left
Ordonance Rutters to bring them intelligence.

The Town being beleaguered on all Quarters, a Bridge was made over the River,
where a strong Guard of horse and foot were sent to hinder both their supply
and escape on that side. Likewise the approaches were begun, and orders were
given in haste for making the Batteries. And the Guards being set both to the
Cannon, and to those that wrought in the Trenches, the Colonells were
Recognosceing about the walls before their several Posts. Where at the first,
Colonel Foul was shot through the thigh with a Musket, Ausburg to be cured.

Before night a second party of Horse were sent forth for Intelligence, lest
any misfortune might befall the first party; whereby we might not be
surprised by the Enemy being strong together at Minchen. Spence his Regiment
and mine were appointed to attend on the General at his Quarter, my
Lieutenant Colonel commanded the Guards on the Battery and the Trenches on
our Quarter. And the General Major Ruthven his Briggad being on the other
Quarter next the water, there grew a contrestation of virtue betwixt the
Officers of both Briggads, who should first with their approaches come to the
wall; but those of Ruthvens Briggad were forced, notwithstanding of their
diligence, to yield the precedence unto us being older blades than themselves:
for in effect we were their Schoolemasters in Discipline, as they could not but
acknowledge. So being they were trained up by us from Soldiers to be inferior
Officers, and then for their preferments and advancement they went from us with
our favors toward the General Major, such as Captain Gunne, Lieutenant
Brumfield, Lieutenant Dumbarre, Lieutenant Macboy, Lieutenant Southerland,
Ensign Denune, and diverse more, which were preferred under Ruthvens Regiment,
till in the end they did strive in virtue to go beyond their former Leaders.
Nevertheless we kept ever that due correspondence together, that where ever we
did meet we were but one, not without the envy of others.

This strife amongst us furthered so the victory, that before the next morning,
from our Battery, where Sinclaire did command, there was a breach shot in the
Skonce without the Town, as also from the General Major his Quarter, there
were two Officers of the enemies killed on the wall, their Cannon dismounted,
and a great breach made in the wall. So that the enemy perceiving he had two
breaches to defend, he tuck't a Drum, desiring to parle. Which being granted;
the Accord went on, and they were suffered to march out with their Arms,
seeing the General had intelligence their Army was coming to releeve them,
he was glad to grant them any Conditions, before he were forced to rise from
the Town by the Enemy, being so near for relief of it.

The enemy being marched out and convoyed away, the General directed General
Major Ruthven into the Town with a strong party of foot to beset all the
Posts, and then to take notice of all provision and goods that were in the
Town; such as Corn, Wine, Artillery, Ammunition, Horses, and all other goods
or cadducks in general, to be used at their pleasure. Which being done, the
foot Army were directed to their former Quarters, to rest till further
Orders. The Horsemen were directed also to Quarters, and then there were
Quarters made in the Town for the General and the Hoofstaffe, as also for the
Colonells of horse and foot, during the General his further pleasure.

Diverse of our foot Soldiers were hurt on the Batteries and Trenches, which
got Quarters in the Town, being allowed to have Chirurgians to cure them. And
the Town was incontinent beset again with four Companies of Colonel Hugh
Hamilton his Regiment, being new levied men out of Switzerland, and his Major
being an Irishman, commanded the men. But another Dutch Major called Mountague
was left to Command the Garrison. Where those that entered first the Town, did
make good booty of horses and other goods. But the most part was seized upon
by the General Persons, taking the benefit unto themselves, though not the
pain. Where we did first find missing of our former Leader the invincible
Gustavus, who not only respected Cavaliers of merit, at such times, but also
was ready to reward them by his bounty, allowing Cadducks unto them, as he did
unto Lieutenant Colonel Gunne.

The next day a party of a thousand Horse, with eight hundred Musketeers, were
commanded out toward Minchen, to get intelligence of the Enemies designs,
getting Orders to fall into their Quarters, if conveniently they could. But
beside their expectation the Enemy being together and in readiness in a Wood,
unawares our party was engaged amongst them, so that with difficulty having
lost prisoners, they were forced to retire, and the Enemy getting intelligence
that the Town was given over, to prevent us they continued their march toward
Rhine on the Leacke, to take it in, in compensation of the loss of Lansberg.

The party being retired, and the General understanding the Dukes Army had
marched on Rhine, he brake up with our Army, and marched on the other side of
the Leacke toward Ausburg. And fearing the Skonce at Rhine and the bridge
might be taken by the Enemy, he did direct Captain James Lyell with two
hundred Musketeers as a supply to the Skonce, being ordained at his coming
thither to take the Command of the Skonce on him. Who being come, finding
Colonel Wornbran there, showing his Orders, he was made welcome by the
Colonel, being hard pressed by the Enemy, and mightily afraid: so that the
Captain had no difficulty in getting the command, which he gladly accepted,
being more ambitious of credit than of gains, directly opposite to the Colonels
humor.

The Army having come in time for the relief, our Horsemen were left on the
side of the River next to Donavert, except my Cosen Fowls his Regiment, which
marched over the Bridge with the Infantry, being ordained the first nights
watch to second the foot. And immediately after our over-going there were five
hundred Musketeers of supply sent unto the Town, in despite of the Dukes
Army. And then we begun to make up our Batteries, and to run our lines of
approach toward the Town, advancing our Redoubts and Batteries, as our
approaches were advanced.

The second night our Batteries being ready, Murray was shot dead with the
Cannon, his thigh bone being broken, who was much lamented, being a dainty
Soldier and expert, full of courage to his very end.

On Sunday in the afternoon the Enemy having heard certainty of his Majesty's
death, they drew up their whole Army, Horse, Foot and Cannon before the
Town; and rejoicing at the News, they gave three salves of Cannou, Musket,
and Pistol. Which we not understanding, made us admire the more.
Nevertheless, the General resolved to get some prisoners of them, to cause to
make an out-fall the next morning: and to that effect, five hundred Commanded
Musketeers were sent under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Lesly, who had
Orders to fall out before day upon the Enemy. Which he did; and beating them
from their Posts, there were above threescore killed, and thirty taken
prisoners; which revealed the reason of their salve. As also by them it was
found, the Army had been broken up at midnight, and crossed the Danube, having
made over a Ship-bridge, thinking with expedition to haste unto Saxony, to
supply the Imperialists, that were retiring after their defeat at Leitzen unto
Boheme.

Notwithstanding of the advantage we had to prosecute the Enemy, Ruthven with
the whole Officers offered to do good service. The General fearing they might
be brought to fight through despair, he would not permit to follow them, but
choosed rather to lose a golden opportunity.

Within three days afterward we marched toward Ausburg, where we lay two
months in open Feilds, in the extremity of cold, without houses or buildings,
which undid the Army being idle without hostile employment, our Generals
giving time to our Enemies to gather strenth to beat us again out of the
Country, which formerly we had subdued by his Majesty's valor and good Conduct.

During this time I remained on my Muster place at Webling Cloister, giving out
patents to my Officers, and money to recrue and strengthen their Companies. But
the enemy having taken-in the Pass and Town of Landsberg, which was given
over upon accord by Colonel Hugh Hamilton, who was prisoner, and kept almost
three years; so the enemy getting the Pass unto Schwabland, they marched
toward Menning, and from thence to Brandenburg on the Eler, and chased me
over the Danube. Being forced to quit a good Muster place, we retired unto
Ausburg, having set the Danube betwixt us and the enemy; where, on our march
unfortunately my horse fell on my leg, and being six weeks under cure I
continued still with the Army, on all occasions commanding on horseback,
being unable to travel a foot.

The next day after our coming to Ausburg, General Bannier did break up with
the Army to march toward Vlme on the Danube, there to join with the
Felt-marshall Gustavus Horn, who was to come with a strong party of horse,
foot, and Artillery from Elsas, with whom was come Major Sidserfe, and the
whole Musketeers of Sir James Ramsey his Regiment; who being valourous and
expert old Soldiers, they were commanded on all exploits of importance, being
conducted and led by a discret Cavalier their Major.

The enemy, before our joining with the Felt-marshall, had taken in Landsberg,
Kaufbeyre, Kempten and Menning where their Army did lie, while as we joined
with the Felt-marshall at Vlme. Palsgrave Christian being directed to command
the Army on the Rhine, General Bawtishen having left them voluntarily to go
for his wedding unto Denmark.

General Bannier being also sickly, not yet fully cured of his hurt, that he
did get at Nurenberg, he was directed to the Steifft Madeburg to collect new
Forces there to join with the Duke of Lunenburg and the Saxon, who all this
time, after his Majesty's death, were pursuing hard the Imperialists conjunctis
viribus, assisting the Duke of Wymar and the Swedens Army. At which time the
Rex-chancellour Oxestern made offer, after his Majesty's death, to the Duke of
Saxon, to be made and chosen Directour of the Armies; who was neither willing
to accept it himself, nor yet willingly would condescend to be directed by any
other; so that their division did by timefully ruin the Army, and almost lost
the good cause, few or none looking to the weal of the public, but all
pleasing their own fancies, suffering the enemy to take advantage, every one
looking to their particular commodities, which did occasion the meeting at
Hailbrun.

The fourty-one Observation.
AFter his Majesty's departure unto Saxony, our Briggad, which formerly on all
occasions followed his Majesty, being often the Guard of his person, as at his
crossing the Rhine and at Miniken, were left behind; which then we thought very
hard, as if thereby we had been lost, which may be was the means of our
safety; for as some flying from danger meet with death, Jerome, saying,
Providentia Dei omnia gubernantur, and quae putatur poena, medicina est.

In vain then we murmur at the things that must be, and in vain we mourn for
what we cannot remedy. Therefore let this be our chief comfort, that we are
always in the hands of a Royal Protector: what ever then befalls us, we must
be contented, not struggling against power.

We see also there is nothing more dangerous for Commanders in wars,

We see also the emulation of virtue betwixt friends commendable, Sinclaire is
praiseworthy, who feared nothing but discredit; where we see, that the
enticement to great travel and pains is glory and honor. And we see, all
Arts and sciences are attained unto with diligent exercise; So that it is not
time, or number of years that makes a brave Soldier, but the continual
meditation of exercise and practice; For Soldiers should be frequented in
running, not to run away, as some do, but on the contrary, that with the
greatest celerity they may prosecute their enemies, taking time in overtaking
their flying enemies, and that they may the better releeve their friends, for
more come to be good Soldiers by use then by nature. Here also I did see our
General following Guischardin his counsel, that wished to make a silver
bridge to let pass our enemies, but if the enemy on his retreat would grow
careless and amuse himself once on booty, then it were a fit time to meddle
with him being laden with booty.

After his Majesty's death we see the alteration of time did give greater
advantage unto our enemies; for while as our Army lay idle the whole winter at
Ausburg, the enemy was gathering his forces, and we losing time neglected our
duty, having lost our Head and Leader, when we ought rather to have followed
our enemies with fire, sword, spoil and slaughter, till we had subdued them,
than to have suffered the enemy before our noses to have taken from us that,
which we by his Majesty's good conduct had conquered before, So that we see it
is vicissitude that maintains the world: and as one scale is not always in
depression, nor the other lifted ever higher; even so, like unto the alternate
wave of the Beam, we were at this time with both our Armies kept ever in the
play of motion.

The fourty-two Duty of our March through Schwabland under the Alps to our
Leaguer at Donavert, being the end of my Expedition with the Regiment.
HAving joined with the Felt-marshall at Vlme, we crossed the Danube, and
quartered overnight in the Earldome of Kirkberg, being General Major Ruthven
his lands, disposed unto him by his Majesty for good service; and hearing the
enemies Army were at Memming within six miles of us, we advanced the next
morning toward them, with a resolution to beat them back unto Bavier, being
almost equal with them in Strength, we continued our march with extreme cold,
till the second night that we quartered in a great Dorpe, a mile from the
enemy, so that in the night fire entering in our quarter, Memming, and before
our coming the enemy having strongly beset the Town, he marched away two miles
from the Town, thinking to engage us with the Town, that he might return
again with advantage to releeve it, seeing we had not time to entrench our
selves, he being then so near.

But we find at our coming the enemy was gone, we drew up in battle within
reach of Cannon to the Town, where they saluted us with Cannon till it drew
near night, and then leaving strong watches before the Town, for fear of
out-falling, laying our watches to keep them in, we quartred overnight in
Dorps, attending the up coming of our Baggage, being scarce of victuals and
without forage, but such as we brought with us. The next morning our baggage
being come, and hearing the enemy was within two miles of us, leaving a strong
hinder-halt to keep in the Garrison, we marched with the rest of the Army
after the enemy, where before night our fore-troopes did skirmish together, and
we having the best of it, the enemy was forced to leave a strong Reare-guard of
Horse and Dragoniers, making the rest of his Army to march away unto a pass
beside Kempten, being a strong straight Pass, the country being straight and
hilly, full of woods, very commodious for Ambuscadoes, so that we could not
march to them, but in order of Battle; our fore-troopes of horse and
Dragoniers advancing softly on the enemy, being forced to recognize still
before them, till at last they charged their horse-watches, which being beaten
by ours, we did get three Cornets from them, where incontinent Major Sidsersse
with Ramseys Musketeers fell on their Dragoniers and skirmished with them,

We continued our march in the morning, minding to attrap them, so that by
midday they having turned their Cannon on the Pass toward us, they forced our
Army to stand without reach of their Cannon, trying on both hands of the Pass
to win through, but in vain, seeing there was no passage near hand, but at
that one place, where we did cannonade one against another for two days, till
the enemy retired their Cannon within Kempten, and the rest of their Army unto
Bavier, having crossed both the Leake and the Eler again.

The enemy being gone, we retired for want of victuals and forage, the
country being spoiled, we were forced to over-see the beleaguering of Memming,
for that time passing by it toward Mendelheim, where we rested two days, and
then marched on Kauffbier, where in two days we forced the Garrison to a
composition, being content to march away without Arms, getting a Convoy to
Landsberg on the Leake.

The weather being extremely cold under the snowy Alps, we refreshed our Army
three days at Kauffbier, and the fourth day marched toward the Eler, Kempten;
Having battered hard for three days to gether with Cannon, at last the breach
being made and the Town almost brought to an Accord, having lost diverse
Soldiers and Officers before it, hearing the Duke of Bavier his Army was crossed
the Leake again at Landsberg, having gotten a strong supply, and being made
certain, they were to march unto the Duke of Vertenbergs Land, the
Felt-marshall, after great pains taken, was forced to quit Kempten, and to
march with the Army to be before them in Vertenberg.

The Dukes Army on their march by the way, took in a Castle besides Koffbier,
where Captain Bruntfield and Quartermaster Sandelens were taken Prisoners,
and were sent to be kept at Lindaw. As also in their by-going, they took in
Koffbier, and continued their march along the Eler, till they crossed with
their Army at Brandenburg, we lying that night with our Army within a mile of
them; The next day we strived who might pass the Danube first for going to
Vertenberg, where it was our Fottune to get betwixt them and the pass, having
line at Monderkine, while as they had crossed a mile below us on the River.
Which when we understood by our intelligence of their being so near,
incontinent the Felt-marshall caused our Ar^illery and foot to march over in
the night, so that before day our Army advanced toward the Pass, leaving
Dragoniers behind us, to burn and to cast off the Bridge; But the Bridge was
no sooner set on fire, but the enemies fore-troopes did drive our Dragoniers
after us, they coming up full Squadrons of horse and foot driving up our
Rear, consisting of three Regiments of horse, Colonel Daggenfield, Cratzstein
and Colonel Monro of Fowls, being three valorous Barons, who resolved amongst
themselves, Daggenfield should charge the enemy first, which he manfully did,
and then retired, who immediately was rescued by Colonel Monro, having charged
the enemy, retired, being shot through the right foot with a Musket Bullet,
and Colonel Cratzstein rescuing him again, charged the enemy the last time,
keeping them up till the rest were safely retired, and then retiring himself
at the Spurs, being last, was pitifully cut over the head with a
Poles-shable, the enemy following them still, till they were repulsed by our
Dragoniers. Nevertheless they did get the most part of our baggage, and a
great number of the horsmens led horses, servants and Coaches.

The Pass being narrow, and we having the advantage of them, being able to
receive them with our whole army, horse and foot, while as they could not
advance unto us but by divisions, at most thirty in Front against a steep
hill, where our Army was standing ready in battle, to receive them horse,
foot and Artillery. Which they considering the great disadvantage they had to
pursue us, drawing their Army also in battle, Vertenberg land, having five
miles to march, before day, our retreat being in the night, though safe, was
confusedly made.

The Enemy finding at midnight that we were gone, followed up our Rere-guard,
skirmishing a little, in the end retired. And the whole Army crossed the
Dannbe again, of intention to ruin all our Muster-places in Schwabland: and
in their way they took a French Marquess prisoner on his Muster-place, and
Colonel John Forbesse, being both careless they were surprised in their
Quarters, and were kept prisoners for three years.

The Army quartered themselves in Schwabland and Tyroll along the Boden Sea,
setting Garrisons in Towns, as in Costance, Pybrach, Vberling, and diverse
more. During this time our Army was well entertained and refreshed in good
quarters in Vertenbergland, having secured them for that time from their
Enemies, we attended the Rhinegrave his coming with a supply from Elsas: as
also we did get a strong supply of Country Soldiers from the Duke of
Vertenberg, with a great deal of Ammunition, and a supply of Horse and Cannon.
The Rhinegrave being come, finding our selves strong again, we resolved to
search the Enemy, for to make him retire unto Baviere again, which we
effectuated within ten days. After our up-breaking having crossed the Danube
again, Donavert for three months together, attending the conclusion of the
meeting at Hailbron, resolving to enterprise no exployt or hostility against
the Enemy, till such time as they should know, who should content them for
their bypast service, as also whom they should serve in times coming.

During which time I went to Hailbron to solicit my Regiments affairs with
the Rex-chancellor, and being there my Cosen Colonel Monro of Fowls dyed of
his wounds at Vlme, where he was buried, and there after my brother was killed
by the insolency of some Dutch Soldiers, which were of another Regiment, not
his own, who was also buried at Bachrach on the Rhine, and his Lieutenant
Colonel John Monro discharging himself of the Regiment, they were reduced at
Heidelberg on the Neckar to two Companies under Captain Adam Gordon, and
Captain Nicholas Rosse: which two Companies by the Chancellor his Orders I
took from Palsgrave Christian his Army, and marched with them to Donavert,
where in July 1633. I joined them to my Regiment, of whom I took leave,
leaving them under Command of my Lieutenant Colonel John Sinclaire, who
immediately afterward was killed at Newmark in the upper Palatinate, and was
transported to be buried at Donavert. My Major William Stewart succeeded to the
Lieutenant Colonell's place, I being gone for a Recreut to my Regiment unto
Britain. From that time to the Battle of Nerling, being a year, they were
led by Lieutenant Colonel Stewart, brother to Claire. And since I did not see
the service, I continue to speak of the last years Expedition, till I be
informed of those who did see the service, as I did the rest.

The forty-two Observation; being the last.
IN wars wisdom is of such worth, can he command others, that never pressed
to command his own inordinate desires? and brave Leaders of Armies and
valourous Captains should ever look to their honor and renown, more than
unto riches or pleasure, spoil or gain, quitting the spoil of their Enemies
to their Soldiers, they ought to reserve the honor and fame for themselves:
for, he wants not means but inriches his family, that has won credit, and
leaves it to his posterity. Our contestation then should be for honor and
credit, and not for unlawful spoil or gain, esteeming more of magnanimity,
where ever it is found, than of riches attained unto; it may be, through
feebleness and cowardice, lying in a Garrison, having never seen an enemy, or
a man killed in the Fields; when other Cavaliers did show their valor before
their enemies, gaining more credit, though less wealth, which is of shortest
continuance. For we are not worthy the name of Soldiers, if we glory (as many
do) more in gathering riches (that perish faster than they come) than we do
to get an immortal good name: for we must think still, that true honor does
consist only in virtuous actions, which should make us more ambitious of
credit, than of unlawful gain attained unto by avarice.

Here also we see great difference betwixt Leaders; Horn to lead us, we began
by his valourous good Conduct to recover again, what others had suffered the
Enemy to possess: and before he advanced, he made his friends sure behind him,
as Vlme, and the Duke of Vertenberg, that always in necessity he might make a
safe retreat, as a wise General ought to do, looking what might happen. So
then we see, that as Resolution is needful, Counsel is not to be despised
coming from a steadfast mind; for it is better to save our selves and others,
than to be the Instruments to lose both. But when we have no time to resolve
long in matters deplorable, then resolution should have place before long
advisement.

Here also I did observe, that Generals are forced to be ruled according to
the occurrences in war. For the Feltmarshall thinking to get advantage of the
enemies Army, he left the Garrison of Memming behind him; For he knew well,
if once he did beat or remove the enemies Army, he could deal the easier
with the Garrison in subduing of it. Moreover, we see here, how necessary
Cannon are to a General to make a safe Retreat, getting any advantage of
ground.

Likewise we see here the goodness of Intelligence, Kempten, to save the
Country of Vertenberg by his diligence and celeritie, in marching to gain the
pass before the Imperialists.

On the other part, sloth and neglective watch is to be condemned, while as
through security Cavaliers suffer themselves to be surprised, as became of the
French Marquess and Colonel John Forbesse, being both taken in their beds,
who ought rather, through good Intelligence, to have been on Horseback in the
Fields before the Enemies coming.

Also the valor of those Cavaliers that made the Retreat good, is worthy
praise, they having carried the tokens of their valor in their bodies, for the
safety of their Camerades.

My Cosen Fowls being shot in the foot, retired to Vlme to be cured, who
through the smart of his wound fell into a languishing Fever: and as the wound
was painful to the body, so the sinful body was painful to the soul, the
body being endangered except the wound were cured, and the soul was not sound
till the bodies sin were healed, and both for six weeks did much smart the
patient, while as his wounds were dressed. But though his bodily wound was
incurable, yet his soul was cured by the punishment of his body. For, all the
time, he like to a good Christian, made himself night and day familiar by
prayers unto God, till he found reconciliation through Christ. So that his end
was glorious, having long smarted under correction, though his life was
painful.

O happy wounds that killed the body, Monro of Obstell being untimely and
innocently taken out of this life, being a true Christian and a right
Traveller. His life was his walk, Christ his way, and Heaven his home. And
though during his life time his pilgrimage was painful, yet the world knows,
his way did lead to perfection: for he leaned still on Christ, in whom he was
made perfect. And therefore let no man doubt, that though his end was sudden,
but his home was pleasing, being by his brethren after death made welcome to
Heaven: and though he traveled hard, yet I persuade my self he walked right,
and therefore was rewarded and made welcome through Christ his Redeemer.

Shortly after him, John Sinclaire being killed at Newmark, he did leave me and
all his acquaintance sorrowful, especially those brave Heroicks (Duke B^rnard
of Wymar and Feltmarshall Horn) whom he truly followed and valourously obeyed
till his last hour, having much worth he was much lamented, as being without
gall or bitterness.

Likewise at this time Lieutenant Hector Monro, being also a stout and a
valourous Gentleman, died of a languishing Ague in Vertenberg, being much
lamented by his Camerades and friends.

We read in the Roman Story; That the memory of the dead was ever honorable
and precious, so that the Romans wore mourning for their dead friends above a
year. And the Athenians had an Order amongst them, that all those who dyed
bravely in wars, their names should be inregistred and set in Chronicle: as
also frequent mention was ordained to be made of their names, and of the
exploits done by them, in the public meetings. Moreover, it was ordained by
them to celebrate days in their remembrance, wherein the youth should be
exercised in diverse exercises of body, called Sepulchers, whereby the people
might be encouraged to follow Arms, for to gain honor to themselves, to the
end that disdaining death they might be encouraged to fight for the weal of
the public. And Polemarche the Leader for those youths, in time of their
Exercise, was wont to sing Verses and Songs made in praise of those that dyed
valourously serving the public, and to incite others to the like
magnanimity. The youths did sing them also before the people.

To conclude then this Observation; since GOD has made me poor by the want of
my Friends, I find no other remedy, but to enrich my self in being content
with his will; being persuaded, as they have gone the way before me, I must
needs follow, and then others by my example must learn to be contented to want
me: And though I leave them poor, they can be rich in God being content; For,
we are neither rich nor poor by what we possess, but by what we desire.

AN ABRIDGEMENT OF EXERCISE FOR THE Younger Soldier his better Instruction.
Wherein first we show a complete Company, and then we make twelve Companies to
complete a Briggad.
TO make a complete Company of marching men under Arms, there must be one
hundred twenty six men in Arms, being reckoned to twenty-one Rots, each Rot
being six men, of which two are esteemed as Leaders, being a Corporal a
Rotmaster or Leader, and an under Rot-master, being the last man of the six in
field, which also is sometimes a Leader when on occasion his Leader is made to
be under Rot-master; then in a Company you have twenty-one Leaders being six of
them Corporalls, and fifteen Rot-masters, which to close the fields have
allowed twenty-one men, called under Rot-masters: a Company thus consisting of
twenty-one Rots, is divided in six Corporall-ships, whereof three being
Pikemen, and three Rot, being eighteen men, makes a Corporall-ship of Pikes.
Also there must be to complete this Company, three Corporall-ships of
Musketeers, each Corporall-ship being counted twenty-foure men, being four
Rots, so that to make up the Company complete, there must be nine Rots of
Pikemen, which have the Right hand, and twelve Rots of Musketeers on the left
hand, being drawn in one Front, they make a complete body of a Company without
Officers.

This Company has allowed them for Officers, a Captain, a Lieutenant, an
Ensign, two Sergeants, four under-Beefeeles, being a Captain of Arms, a
furer of Colors, a furrier, and a Muster-schriver; as also to serve the
Company, three Drummers are allowed, and fourteen passe-volants, with four
muster-youngs, are allowed to the Captain, as free men unmustered, to make up
the complete number of one hundred and fifty, besides the Officers.

The Company being drawn up complete, the Pikes on the Right hand, and the
Musketeers on the left hand, then the Ensign or his furer with a Drummer and
three Rots of Pikes goes to bring out the Colors to be placed in Front of the
Company, before they march; As also the Colors are to be conveyed again, in
this manner, at all lodging and dislodging.

The Company marching to Parad or watch, with complete Officers, the Captain
leads off six Rots of Musketeers, his Drum beating betwixt the second and the
third Rank, then follows up after that division the oldest Sergeant, leading
up the first five Rots of Pikemen, the Ensign leading up the other Division of
Pikes, his Furer furing his Colors after him, and the second Drummer beating
betwixt the two Divisions, then the Lieutenant leads up the last Division of
Musketeers, being six Rots also, and coming in equal Front with the rest, the
Captain making a sign for the Drum beating, they order their Arms, the
Captain standing in Front on the Right hand, the Ensign on his left, and the
Lieutenant on the left hand of both, with a Sergeant on each Flancke, and the
under-Beifells with half Pikes stand in the Rear of the Company.

Twelve Companies thus complete would make up three Squadrons, every Squadron
of Pikes and Muskets being drawn up several apart, after the former example
of the less body, Pikes and Colors on the right hand, and the Musketeers on
the left, which three Squadrons thus drawn up and complete would make a
complete Briggad of Foot, to be divided as follows ( viz.) eight
Corporall-ships of Musketeers, being thirty-two Rots divided in four Plottons,
every Plotton being eight in front, led off by a Captain, and every Division
after him led up by a sufficient Officer, till at a haulte all were drawn in
even front, after this Division should follow the thirty-six Rots of Pikes,
being twelve Corporall-ships with their Colors, a Captain leading off the
first five Rots before the four Colors should stir, where betwixt the
second and third Rank of the first Division of Pikes, the Drummer should
beat, then the Ensigns should lead off the other Division, their Furers with
their Colors following them, till they drew up in even Front with the first
Division of Pikes, which ought to be in one Front with the thirty-two Rots of
Musketeers, that make the right wing of the Briggad, keeping their Arms
orderly shouldered, till they were commanded otherwise, and their Sergeants
ought to look unto the Flanks, till such time that the whole Squadron of Pikes
being thirty-six Rots were drawn up in even Front with the Musketeers, after
this manner, the other Squadron of Pikes being thirty-six Rots also, which
should make the Battle of the Briggad, ought to march by Divisions, being led
up in all respects and order, after the manner of the former Squadron of Pikes,
till they were in even Front with the rest, then the other thirty-two Rots of
Musketeers belonging to that Squadron, which are appointed to be the Battle
of the Briggad, ought to be led up as the first Division of Musketeers were in
all points, which ought to draw up at a reasonable distance behind their own
Squadron of Pikes, appointed for the Battle of the Briggad: where their
Sergeants on the Flancks ought to look to their order, and not to suffer them
to stir their Arms, till they were commanded. And after them should march up
the last Squadron of Pikes in all respects observing the order of the former
Squadrons in their marching, till they were led up in equal Front with the
other Pikes, and then march up the last thirty-two Rots of Musketeers in four
Divisions, observing the order of the former Divisions, till they were in
equal Front with the whole Pikes, and then they making up the left wing of the
Briggad, the Colonel of the Briggad ordaines the battle of Pikes being the
middle Squadron of Pikes to advance in one body before the rest, till they are
free of the Musketeers and Pikes, which makes the wings of the Briggad, and
then the battle of Pikes standing firm, the thirty-two Rot of Musketeers
which were drawn up behind them; march up, till they fill up the void
betwixt the Squadrons of pikes standing right behind their own pikes, that is
the battle of the Briggad, and then the Colonel making a sign to the
Drummers, they beat all alike, till the Briggad in one instant does order
their Arms, all Officers of the Briggad standing on their stations, according
as they were directed, then the superplus of the three Squadrons of musketeers
being fourty-eight Rot, are drawn up, behind the Briggad, having also
Officers to command them, they attend orders, which they are to obey, being
commanded out as pleases their Officers, either to guard Cannon or Baggage, or
to be Convoyes to bring Ammunition or victuals to the rest.

A direction to Train single Soldiers apart.
HAving thus formed a Company, and shown the manner to draw up a complete
Briggad, for the younger Officer his better understanding, being a Novice to
this Discipline, I will set down briefly the best way, suddenly to bring a
young Company to be exercised, which in my opinion would be thus. First, since
every Rot of the twenty-one, whereof the Company does consist, has allowed a
Corporal or a Rot-master as the Leader of the other five, which Leader is
supposed to be more expert in handling of Pike or Musket, then the other five,
who make up the Rot, and the under Rot-master is supposed to be more expert in
handling his Arms than the other four, so that he is appointed as a second to
the Leader, being sometimes a Leader himself, then after the company is made
up, for the first week I would have every Corporal of the six, and the
fifteen Rotmasters, being Leaders, with the help of their under Rot-masters,
in a weeks time, to make the other four as expert in handling of Pike and
Musket, as themselves, or to be punished with Irons in case of their neglect,
which the Sergeants should see done, as they should answer to the Lieutenant,
the Lieutenant to the Captain, and the Captain to the Major, the Major to
the Lieutenant Colonel, and they all to the Colonel, which they ought to
practice in the fields apart, till the Rot were acquainted, every one with his
Leader, from the first to the last: and while as the under Rot-master should
turn Leader, then all the followers before, were then Leaders also, and then
the Rot being apart, the middle man of the Rot should be taught to double to
the Front, till their deep were three, that was six before, and in falling off
again, the middle man should turn to the contrary side or hand he came up
upon, carrying their Arms handsomely free from others, without making noise in
their retiring to their former station, and orders.

Likewise I would have the Corporal, Rot-master or Leader, being a Musketier,
having his Rot once expert, in handling severally the Musket well, then to
discharge their Muskets in winning ground, advancing to an enemy, the Leader
having discharged his musket, standing still to blow his pan and prime
again, having cast off his loose powder, then to cast about his Musket to his
left side, drawing back with his Musket his left foot and hand, till the
mouth of the musket come right to his hand, to charge again in the same place,
standing firm till his follower marched by him on his right hand, standing at
the same distance before him, that he stood behind, and then to give fire,
blowing his pan, priming, casting off and retiring his musket with his left
hand and foot, and to charge again, as is said, and so forth, one after
another, discharging at a like distance, till at last the Rot-master should be
under-rot, and the under-rot Leader, and then his follower marching up by him,
while as he is charging, giving fire on the enemy, and having discharged,
standing still also charging, till in the end, the Rot-master come to be Leader
again, and so forth, still advancing per vices, till the enemy turn back, or
that they come to push of Pike, and Buts of Muskets. Thus having exercised the
Rots apart for a week or two, doubtless they will become expert Soldiers in
using their Arms, when they are joined in a strong body, less or more. The
Pike-men would be exercised also by Rots apart, in the several Postures
thereof, till they were acquainted also with their Leaders, and were made
expert in using their Pikes aright, till thereafter the whole body of Pikes
might be exercised apart, with great ease to their Officers; The Musketeers
being drawn in a body, being sixteen or thirty-two men in Front, being but
six Rancks deep, the first Rank discharging at once, casting about their
muskets and charging all alike, the second Rank marches through every
follower, going by on the right hand of his Leader, standing before him at the
distance they were behind, and then being firm, they give fire all alike on
their enemies, blowing, priming, casting about and charging all alike where
they stand, till per vices the whole Ranckes have discharged, and so forth ut
antea, successively advancing and giving fire, till the enemy turn back, or
that they come to push of Pike, and being thus well exercised in advancing to
the enemy, and winning ground, if through necessity they be forced to retire
from an enemy, losing ground, they must also keep their faces to their
enemies, the Rear being still in fire, and the last Rank having given fire,
they march through the Rancks till they that were last are first coming off,
and so per vices, till they have made a safe retreat, the Rear which is ever
the Front, coming from an enemy is in fire.

The manner to exercise a body of Musketeers.
TO exercise a Squadron of Musketeers, how strong soever they be, the number of
Rancks being no deeper than six, the files being even may be so many as your
voice can extend to, ever observing that your Command be given in the Front,
otherwise may breed disorder, and before you begin to command, you would enter
first with a Prologue, as good Orators commonly do, to reconciliat their
hearers attendance: even so you ought with an exhortation of attendance
entreat, but by way of command, your Soldiers not to be gazing in time of
their exercise, but with steadfastness to settle their minds on their
exercise, that they may the better observe and obey the words of command; and
above all things, you are to command them to keep silence, not babbling one to
another, neither in their motions, to suffer their Arms to rattle one against
another, always to take heed to their Leaders, that go before them, and to
follow them orderly without disturbance, keeping and observing their due
distance either of Ranckes or Files: which may be easily done, if they but
duly follow their Leaders, and have an eye on their right and left fellow
Camerades, for keeping their Ranckes even in a like Front. Likewise they are to
observe when they are commanded to turn any where, whether it be by Rancks or
Files, that their faces may by turned to the hand they are commanded to, before
they stir to march, and then to march alike, and when ever they double Rancks
or Files, or countermarch, they must ever observe to retire to the contrary
hand, they were commanded to double on, if they doubled to the right, when they
fall off they retire turning to the left hand, et contra, for avoiding of
disorder or hinderance, that their Arms would make, if they retired to the
same hand they were commanded to double or march to; In their counter-marches
it is also requisite in time of exercise, that neither Officer nor Soldier do
presume to command, direct, or find fault with the error, but he that
commands in chief, whether he be superior or inferior Officer for the time,
since it is said, when many speak few hear; Therefore he must command alone,
suffering no rival, for avoiding of disorder. Order therefore of distance
being a chief point observed in exercising is three fold, to wit, Open order
of Rancks or Files is six foot of distance, being betwixt Rancks and Files
both alike, only requisite to be observed in mustering, or while as they stand
in danger of Cannon, not being in battle, where in battle order the
distance to be observed betwixt Rancks or Files should be three foot, where
Elbow to Elbow of the side Camerades may join, where in the open order
aforesaid, hand to hand can but join. But in close order used most in
conversion, or wheeling is shoulder to shoulder, and foot to foot, firm
keeping themselves together, for fear to be put asunder by the force of their
enemies, and then to disorder, which is ever to be looked unto, chiefly before
an enemy. Your speech thus ended, for your general directions, you begin
again to command silence, and to take heed what is commanded to be done,
saying. Height your Musketeers, dress your Rancks and Files, to your open
order of six foot, and take heed. To the right hand turn,
as you were.
To the left hand turn,
as you were.
To the right hand about turn,
as you were.
To the left hand about turn,
as you were.
To the right hand double your Rancks,
as you were.
To the left hand double your Rancks,
as you were.


The even Rancks or Files double ever unto the odd, and the fourth Rank is
the middle Rank of six. To the right hand double your Files,
as you were.
To the left han^ double your Files,
as you were.
Middle-men or fourth Rank to the right hand double your Front,
To the left hand retire as you were.
Middle-men to the left hand double your Front,
To the right hand as you were.


Nota. The sixth Rank is called bringers up or rear, or under Rotmasters.
Bringers up to the right hand double your Front,
To the left hand as you were.
Bringers up to the left hand double your Front,
To the right hand as you were.


All that doubled, turn first about, and then they retire falling behind
those were their Leaders, before in the same place or distance. This doubling
of the bringers up or of middle-men, is very requisite in giving a general
salve of Musket, and as it is to be observed in rancks, that the best men are
placed in front, rear and middle, even so in files, every Corporalship being
four files of Musketeers, the likeliest are put ever in the right and left
files of the four, being also of best experience.

The doubling of rancks being done, and all remitted in good order, and to
their first distance of open order, you are to command, and exercise Soldiers
in three several ways of counter-marching, requisite in some respects, but in
my opinion to be used but seldom, except it be in necessity in such parts, as
the ground will not permit otherwise, therefore to avoid disorder, Soldiers
ought not to be ignorant of any of the three sorts of counter-marching.

First having commanded the Soldiers to dress their rancks and files, and to
carry their Muskets handsomely keeping silence, say. To the right hand the
countermarch without noise or losing of ground.
To the left hand retire again to the former ground.


Then command again to dress rancks and files, and to right their Arms
keeping silence, taking heed to what is to be commanded, and say. To the right
hand turn.

Then the Flancke before being now the Front command, To the right hand
countermarch and lose no ground.
To the left hand as you were.


This is used ordinarily to change one wing of Battle in place of the other,
then that the Front may be as it was first before they Countermarcht. To the
left hand turn, dress your Ranks and Files, and be silent.

Another sort of Countermarch is the Slavonian countermarch, where you lose
ground, the Front being changed also: then you command the first Rank to turn
about to the right hand, then you say to the rest, Countermarch, and through to
your former distance after your Leaders,

Then say, Leaders as you were; and to the rest: To the left hand countermarch
as you were to your first ground.

The third sort of countermarch I esteem most of to be practiced, being rather
a conversion very requisite to be well known to all Soldiers in all Armies,
chiefly to be used before an enemy: for as it is most sudden; so in my opinion,
it breeds least disorder and disturbance, the Soldiers once used to it, of
themselves they will willingly do it on any occasion, the body being before in
open order or Battle order, say. Close the Ranks and Files to your closse
order, without encumbering one of another, every man following right his own
Leader, keeping closse to his side man, then say. To the right hand the quarter
turn half or whole, as the occasion and the ground does permit, and then say.
Dress your Arms, and follow your Leaders, and open again to your Battle
order.

Lastly, the body of your Musketeers exercised perfectly after this manner, for
the better bringing of them in exercise and breath, that in case any disorder
may happen amongst them, they may the better afterward be acquainted one with
another, say to your open order of six foot distances. Open both Ranks and
Files, and set down your Arms handsomely where you stand, then command your
Sergeant to go an hundred paces from the body of your Musketeers, and stick
in his Holbert in the ground, then admonish your Soldiers, that at the tucke
of your Drum they run from their Arms about the Holbert, and to stay there
till the Drum recall them again to their Arms, which being done, it makes
the Soldiers able in breath to know one another place, in case they should be
brought at any time in disorder, to recover themselves the better. Thus much
for the training of Soldiers in changing of place, as you will have them,
without giving of fire.

When you have gotten your Soldiers thus experimented in their motions, then
are you to acquaint them with shot in giving of fire, to make them fix against
their enemies, which is easily done, having once apart and singularly used
their Muskets, after the order of the several postures, belonging thereto, as
was commanded their inferior Officers and Leaders to teach them before they
were exercised. Therefore before you come to the particular forms of giving
fire, you shall first give some general directions to be observed by all, for
avoiding the hurting of themselves, or of their Camerades, as also how they can
best offend their enemies; and to this effect, you shall admonish in love all
brave Musketeers, first to have their Muskets clear and hansome, and above all
fix in the work, especially every Soldier would be well known with his own
Musket and cock, to cock aright, then to hold the mouth or Cannon of his
Musket ever high up, either being on his shoulder, or in priming or guarding of
his pan, but in giving fire, never higher or lower than level with the
enemies middle, then your Musketeers being in readiness, your Muskets charged,
they may be commanded to give fire in skirmish, disbandoned as their Officers
do direct them, to advance or retire, as the occasion offers; also to give
fire by Ranckes, Files, Divisions, or in Salves, as the Officer pleases to
command, to the effect they may be fixed Omni modo, though in my opinion, one
way is the best, yet there are several ways of giving fire in advancing to an
enemy, as retiring from an enemy, or in standing firm before an enemy, either
by Rancks, or by Files made to Rancks.

Advancing to an enemy not being disbandoned, but in one body they give fire
by Rancks to Rancks, having made ready alike, they advance ten paces before
the body, being led up by an Officer that stands in even Front with them, the
Cannon or mouth of their Muskets of both Rancks being past his body. The
second Rank being close to the back of the foremost, both gives fire alike,
priming and casting about their Muskets they charge again where they stand,
till the other two Rancks advance before them, and give fire after the same
manner, till the whole Troop has discharged, and so to begin again as
before, after the order of the through-countermarch; ever advancing to an
enemy, never turning back without death, or victory. And this is the form
that I esteem to be the best: as for the rest, they are not to be much used;
but this order can be used winning ground, advancing or losing ground in a
Retreat. When you would command the body of your Musketeers to give fire in a
Salve, as is ordinary in Battle, before an enemy join, or against Horsemen;
then you command the bringers up or Rear to double the Front to the right
hand, and to make ready, having the match cocked and their pannes well
guarded, having closed the three Rancks, though not the Files, the Officers
standing in equal Front with the foremost Rank, betwixt two Divisions, he
commands to give fire, one Salve, two or three, and having charged again, and
shouldered their Arms, they retire to the left hand again, every man falling
behind his own Leader.

Being on retiring from the enemy, the whole body having made ready, as they
march off in order, a qualified Officer being in the Rear, and qualified
Officers in the Van to order them that fall up, the last two Rancks in the
Rear turn faces about, and the whole body with them, and the two Rancks
having given fire, they march through the body to the Van, and order themselves
as they were before, and so successively the whole body gives fire ever by two
Rancks, and falls off till such time as they have made their Retreat sure.
Thus much of fire-giving by Rancks on two or three, as you please, at once and
no more.

Now a little for the exercising of the Squadron of Pikes in general; for the
general motion certain directions are to be observed concerning Pikes, that
the Soldiers keep their Pikes clean and clear, and never to be suffered to
cut off the lengths of their Pikes, as often is seen upon marches, being very
uncomely to see a Squadron of Pikes not of one length; likewise in all motions
with the Pike, the hand and foot ought to go alike, and the Soldier would be
expert in giving the right pousse with the Pike backwards and forwards. Your
Squadron of Pikes as they ought to march with the Drum; so they ought to obey
the Drum beating a Troop, a Charge, a Call, a Retreat. As also to traile
their Pikes, to make reverence with the Pike being shouldred: and your Squadron
of Pikes being but six deep in Rank, your Files may be so many, as can well
hear your voice in Command, providing there be no odd File; and thus well
ordered at their open order of six foot distance, command to mount their
Pikes, then calling for a Drum beside you, let him beat a march, then they
are to shoulder their Pikes, flat or slaunt carried, and then to march a
little, let your Drum again beat a Troop, then they mount their Pikes and
troop away fast or slow, as your pass leads them stopping, or advancing as
you do, then let your Drum beat a Charge, then they charge their Pikes and
advance fast or slow, as you lead them, and retire also backwards, their Pikes
charged as you will have them, then troop again, and they mount their Pikes,
march and shoulder; and haulting, let the Drum beat again, and they order
their Pikes on the ground as first, being at their distance, and trooping
again they mount their Pikes, so that you can command them to Battle order or
closse order, for Wheeling or Counter-marching at your own pleasure.

In repayring to their Colors, or coming from watch, they should ever walk
with their Pikes mounted, as also they may use this posture on Contrie; and
your Pikes mounted and at your open order, you can use all doublings that your
Musketeers used, as also to present, to Front, Rear, right or left hand, the
curiosity of the turns to the right or left hand in Van or Rear, the Pike
being shouldred, you can also teach them, as you will, though not much to be
used in exercise: and the Pikes thus well exercised, having seen frequent
danger, can do good service against Horsemen and against foot to foot,
either in battle entering a Town or breach, or retiring, or advancing to
choke an enemy, on walls within Towns or Forts they are very commodious for
service, providing they resolve to fight well and to abide by their Officers,
and, in my opinion, being well led they may beat Musketeers accidently off the
Field, and being well lined with shot they are a safeguard against Horsemen,
having the least advantage of ground. Thus much in brief for the use of the
Pike, the most honorable of all weapons, and my choice in day of battle, and
leaping a storm or entering a breach with a light breast plate and a good
headpiece, being seconded with good fellows, I would choose a good halfe-Pike
to enter with.

CERTAIN OBSERVATIONS WORTHY THE YOVNGER Officer his consideration, being
short and practical for his Highness special use.
I.
THIS life is a Comedy or a Play, wherein every one does his part, we should
press to pass it over with moderate affections, that the end be not cruel or
doleful, as in Tragedies, but full of mirth like a Comedy.

II.
Unto the Victor the life is sweet and happy, but to those that are overcome,
nothing is more bitter, then to put their hopes in their Enemies mercy.

III.
As unto Champions of old lots gave fellows, and not election, with whom they
should fight: so every one of us has destines in our times, where with to
strive.

IIII.
As he who goes a journey does reckon the miles: so he that has entered the way
of this life, shall not determine of his years. For as from the spring flow
the Rivers, from the root the branch: so from the first education comes the
rest of man's life. And if thou would live truly, thou must press to profit
thy country, to defend the Commonwealth, and to live well without liberty:
thou must prefer death before ignominious shame, or slavery. For as this life
is Rosy, so it has flowers mixed with thorns, the one to be plucked up, the
other to be eschewed so far as we may.

V.
It is a part of victory to trouble the enemy before we fight, and as it is
laudable to overcome an enemy, it is no less praise worthy to have pity on
the miserable. For as courage does merit infinite glory, so the love of all,
and the good will of all merits mercy and meekness.

VI.
The feeble and weak minded man is ever pridfull in prosperity: for he thinks
his virtues are such, as can maintain the Fortunes which he has gotten, and
thinks still he is able to attain and acquire more and more: but when the
tempest of adversity does arise, then is he so far afraid, that he becomes
void of all hopes; and this oftentimes is the cause of the sudden change of
his fortunes.

VII.
Nothing does diminish more the publishing of praise, then when one continually
casts up his own success in actions of war, and oftimes striving to get
abundance of honor; men show their riches, of swelling pride; for disdaining
his former friends, he misk nowes his acquaintance, pressing to go before, he
is greevous or displeasing to all his familiars. Our care then should be, to
want this arrogance, ostentation or pride, and pray for humility, being more
acceptable unto God then detestable pride, which is an unprofitable evil, a
secret poison, a hidden pest, the ingenier of deceit, the mother of
hypocrisy, the parent of envy, the beginner of vice, the moth of holiness,
the blinder of hearts, breeding sickness out of remedies, and begetting
langour out of medicine.

VIII.
There is ever some fatality incident unto those that desire vainglory or
ostentation: and those that are proud rejecting the prayers of the humble with
disdain, they often incur the indignation of God, and fall often into
calamity, except they take heed unto themselves.

IX.
These spirits are bentest on ambition that are of great and sharp wits, and
of high minds, being ready to think on great matters, and to undertake them:
but Heroicke spirits on the contrary, considering the worthy acts of others,
are stirred up unto virtue, while as others with glory of succession becoming
more insolent and negligent, make Tragical ends, being oppressed with small
things, they die unworthily.

X.
The duty of a good man, is to reserve himself for the well and use of his
country and friends, being wary lest he should be lost rashly (as my dear and
only Brother was) who did not neglect his duty, neither in word nor deed, but
to his death served God in his calling, though his death was sudden, being the
condition of mortal men, that are still subject unto such changes, that
oftimes in their greatest prosperity comes adversity, and from their adversity
their prosperity again, God hiding the cause of both from us. It were better
then to prevent a wound, then out of time to seek remedy: for in the midst
of evil is not the time to be merry, and those hurts are most, which we
receive unlooked for. Therefore it were much better to prevent, then to suffer,
and it were much better to enter in danger being guarded, then out of time to
grow pale. Vain then are the counsels of mortal men, when we see no humane
happiness to be permanent, since the Roots are taken up before they come to
maturity, except they be confirmed by the divine providence; And chiefly in
wars, as being most uncertain, as we see by the untimely death spoken of;
but no man can forbid Gods decree. Nevertheless men that through age, and long
experience have obtained wisdom, before they enter in a business, they should
look unto the event, and unto that, which by all expectation may happen: for
it is ever the greatest wisdom to use the present time best; we ought then on
all occasions we are employed on, to strengthen our minds with virtue, that we
may be fase overcoming all encumbrances, that once we have condemned in the
judgment seat of wisdom, which always is accompanied with praise and glory,
when we not only equal our selves with those that excelled in virtue, but also
press to go before them.

XI.
Wisdom goes before all other things in esteem, as the most precious Jewel
we can possess, being spread she is gathered, given away she returns, being
published grows greater; by her the Noble treasure of conscience is spread
unto the secrets of the mind, the fruit of inward joy by her is attained unto:
this is the Sun wherewith the light of the mind does show it self and
appear in darkness, being the eye of the heart, the delightful Paradise of
the soul, the Heaven upon Earth immortal, changing man into God, through
knowledge, deifying him, this fellow is invincible against all strokes, he
stirs not a foot for poverty, grief, ignominy, pain, he is afraid of
nothing, and is ever full of joy, merry, pleasant and untouched, living like a
God. Who desires then to be wise and partake of this goodness that is so
excellent, they must not use themselves to vanity, but they must think on that
which is most profitable for them, being not forbidden to use bodily exercise
moderatly: they may become wise, first by thinking what is past, and in whose
time of their Predecessors things were best governed. Secondly, he must
diligently observe the good to come, what can be profitable for him and what
not, that he may eschew the evil to come, and embrace the good. Thirdly, he
should observe the good customs and laws past, being provident, mindful,
understanding, reasonable, diligent, tractable, expert and cunning; and he must
consider four good things; What is his aim; The way and manner he aims at;
The person aiming; And those he governes.

XII.
A Soldier without letters is like a ship without a Rudder, or like a bird
without feathers; but having letters, he finds wherewith he can be made wiser,
finding out by letters, courage, and many other great helps to govern and
direct those aright, whom he commands: neither is that fortune in the world to
be had, where out of letters his knowledge may not be bettered, if he be but
painful, for being lettered he can strictly keep under the cruel, and defend
laws without terror, temperating them to his mind, the meek also he can
civilly admonish, and the deceitful he can wisely go about, and the simple he
can handle with lenity, showing his prudency in all his actions, foreseeing all
dangers which may happen. Therefore we see, that science to a man of war is a
brave Mistress, teaching him to do all things as they did in old times.

XIII.
It is a hard matter when the diligent, and industrious Soldier is
disappointed of his hire, and that he is rewarded with injury who did merit
better. This of all evils is most insufferable, that he, who deserves a
reward, should be frustrate of his hopes: for reward is due unto valiant
Captains and Soldiers that were instruments in chief of victory, glory and
honor: as Sir James Ramsey and Sir John Hamilton were, in forcing the passage
to the Castle of Vertzberg, who nevertheless were frustrate of reward, and
therefore I cannot but allow of the resolution of Sir John Hamilton being no
Soldier of Fortune, that took his Pass of the Sweden for being frustrate of
the reward of his virtue, seeing those disdained that did merit best. Where we
see that a gentle heart, being crossed contrary to reason, does presently
resent his wrongs, pointing out to the world, that he is not the man that can
suffer or swallow a seen injury done to him and his Nation.

XIIII.
It is better to fear evil, preparing our selves for danger, then through too
much security, and contempt of the enemy to suffer our selves to be overcome;
for it is dangerous to have to do with a desperate body, seeing necessity
makes those that are fearful to become stout, and those who fear no dangers
are easily lost, as witnesses the death of the Invincible King of Sweden: and
those dangers ought to be eschewed, from whence arises greatest evil; and
experience has taught us, that nothing is more dangerous in wars, then to
fight great battles on unequal terms, as witnesses the doleful battle
fought at Nerling in August 1634. After which loss those, that should have
fought for their country, their wives and children, did prove seeble cowards
(viz.) the German Princes, Saxon, Brandeburg, Lunenburg, with the rest of the
Gentry, giving occasion to others, that came to help them, for to leave them.
It is no wonder then, they be plagued themselves wishing help another time,
when justly they cannot have it, having rewarded their helpers so ill as they
have done, and through their covetousness and niggardly sparing bin the cause
and instruments of their own overthrowes, and of the loss of the cause, being
I fear the forerunners of their Successors punishment, which I wish may not
happen.

XV.
Before the fall of Kingdoms arise dissensions, that overthrow the
confederates more than their enemies, as it happened here in our late wars of
Germany, after the death of his Majesty of Sweden, the Dutch Princes,
especially Saxon, slighting his Excellency the Rex-chancellour of Sweden and
his Directorium as Supreme, calling him disdainfully a Pedant, or a Penman. So
that we see that dissension, or discord amongst the Superiors was the first
cause of the sudden loss of Nerling. Next we see that the Country was
destroyed, not only for their sins, but also for not punishing of sin. For
after his Majesty's death, what punishment was to be seen in our Army? none
at all: when our own horsemen plundered their friends not being punished, they
began to intercept Letters, and to rob the common Post, and to hinder the
Countries correspondencie, and common traffic: which being overseene, and
winked at by our Generals, they begun then to plunder the Chancelours own
wagons, abusing his servants, and taking his baggage: thereafter the strongest
amongst themselves set the weakest party to foot, taking away their horses,
till at last the whole Army refused to obey the Director and his Concilium
formatum, lying idle for three months in Donavert Leaguer, suffering the
enemy to over-runne the Country, and all because that the Officers alleged
after his Majesty's death, that the Scriveners who followed the Chancelour,
were in better esteem, than the Cavaliers, that had done notable good service
unto his Majesty: so that, through this jealousy, the Army came in disorder,
being the first change, and the rest, piece and piece did follow, till at last
the whole Army was lost, through the number of wrongs that went before, in the
end custom and use of wrongs infected the nature it self, and the lack, or
want of punishment, and the liberty and freedom, which was given to offend,
at last the ruin of families, that were famous did follow, for not punishing
of sin. We see then, when a potent King, and Heroique, as Gustavus was in the
time he did live, all things flourished in a good order, but he once gone, the
Commonwealth was punished for their former sins committed in time of their
plenty, and peace; when they had their heaven upon earth, as other Nations
have now, who ought to look unto themselves in time, lest that the Lord raise
not up an other Heroique to make them to be punished, as other Nations have
bin, to the eversion of great Cities, as Magdeburg, and diverse others: for when
the public burdens do grow, then Governements do change, as was seen
here; for laws being cast away, and discipline put in fetters; then suddenly
did follow change, and great ruin, after the Kings death of worthy memory.

XVI.
Nothing loses more, as we see, the common cause, than the want of authority
in one person, as was formerly said of the Saxons jealousy over the
Rex-chancelors Government. Also the same fault was seen in the Army under
Commanders: as at Nerling, betwixt Supreme Officers, as also betwixt their
inferiors: who for want of one Supreme Commander, as Gustavus was, they could
not agree among themselves. Likewise the dissension and jealousy betwixt Duke
Barnard, and the Rhinegrave helps nothing to the furtherance of the good
cause, being both brave Commanders: though seldom seen command in one place,
and it is to be pitied, how the Rhinegrave after the loss of Nerling, not
being bastant against the enemy, was forced to swim the Rhine on
horseback, and dyed soon thereafter; who was a renowned, valourous Cavalier,
as ever I was acquainted with of the Dutch Nation, serving in those wars; all
these mischiefs were caused through the want of one Supreme Leader to conduct
them, as the enemy had. Which should teach all men to submit themselves to
authority, lest by doing otherwise they procure their own ruin.

XVII.
To repent a thing, when it is done, is most foolish, which might have been
prevented with counsel: for none that do repent counsel can be esteemed
wise. Therefore a Counselor should be very faithful, never counfelling his
friend for his owneayme, lest he that is counseled perceive not his drift, and
then be deceived. But counsel is taken from necessity, and followed. And a
good Commander deserves praise as well for his wisdom, as for his valor: But
evil counsel is a plague or judgment from the Lord; yet those counsels are
ever safest, that come from him that will be partaker both of the danger, and
of the counsel. Therefore it is not good rashly to use the counsel of a
Traitor, nor of an enemy: but we should rather examine, and shift counsels,
and not trust easily, and be deceived. Counsel then we see is the
chiefeground to govern matters well, being secret, true and free, without
flattery, or respect of persons, just and holy, casting aside all private
gains, and utilitie, foreseing the public weal; and if thou would be
truly counseled, thou must take heed to those Caveats: first that the speech
be wholesome, and unreproveable; his counsel profitable, his life honest, his
sentence pleasant, not wavering like a child, or unconstant, neither ought you
ask many what you would do, but show it to a few and trusty friends, which
are rare to be found: and when thy near friends cannot resolve thee, flee to
those for their counsels, whose daily experience is approved for their
wisdom in their own affairs, and then you shall do well.

XVIII.
Military discipline is lost, when the cruelty and avarice of Officers is
extended in detaining of Soldiers means; and Supreme Officers neglecting to
content Cavaliers, make the whole Army turn rebellious, as at Donavert, The
Concilium formatum and their Treasurer, having not given the Army one months
means complet of the whole contribution they had collected the year after his
Majesty's death, but paid themselves, and their Secretaries duly, which
raised great envy against them, the Army having mutined for want of pay:
which made them afterward want both the contribution and the Country, through
misgovernement of their Consilium.

XIX.
It is in vain for a Cavalier to fear any thing but God, and the offense of
his Supreme Officer; for being honest, modesty hindering his flight makes him
victorious in midst of danger, and of his enemies: as chanced me and my
Colleagues at Rugenwoulde in Pomeren, having escaped danger by Sea, were come to
Land in danger of our enemies, but the Lord and the duty we ought our Master,
made us abide the danger of our enemies, which the Lord turned to our best,
giving us victory and freedom. Shall I then distrust this God, having had
this time, and diverse times before, great experience of his mercies? God
forbid. No, I will still trust in him, do to me what he will; for I know his
mercies go beyond all his works, and they endure for ever.

XX.
A man unjustly hurt, as many were, that served the Sweden, once escaped, their
Commanders are now their greatest enemies; for the memory of injuries
received, is ever more recent in the Actor, than in the patient: and is also
more difficult to be reconciled: as often times experience does prove. Therefore
I would advise my friend not to suffer injury if he can, and if injury be
done him, not to pass it over for flattery, lest in accepting of a slight
satisfaction, he should injure himself more, than the other did. But by the
contrary, I would advise himtimely to repair himself, that he may preserve
the former dignity. Likewise the greater our injuries received are, and the
greater they commove us, the more ought our wit to moderate our revenge; seeing
to moderate our selves, and to overcome our desires, is the greatest praise we
can have, being revenged. Yet injuries do ever stick nearer unto us, then the
remembrance of benefits received: for in remembering of benefits, we ascribe
the good to our own merits, flattering our selves; but on the contrary,
remembering our injuries received, we call them to mind a great deal more
cruelly, than they were done without moderation. I must then advise my friend,
that he not only prevent the deed of his enemy, but also his counsels, lest
they bring detriment upon him: for he ought to be a like with the offer of an
injury being a Cavalier, and with the intention, as if the deed had followed.
The offering then of a stroke may be repaired with a sword, the giving of a lie
is repaired with a blow, words not tending to disgrace are repaired with words
again, the loss of goods is restored by restitution, with circumstances
convenient, and to quarrel for a light occasion is want of understanding,
especially with thy betters in esteem. For there should be had respect of
persons, of times, and of circumstances observed, before a man should quarrel;
and having once quarrelled, I would advise my friend not to be put back
without honorable satisfaction, or at least great hazard, not coming unto the
fields for the first bout, or blood, and then to return with disgrace
unthought of by thy self, though much by others, as I have known Cavaliers
do.

XXI.
In Battle fighting with the enemy, at the first be very slow against a
fierce enemy, that the enemy being weary your strength fresh and a little
succors joined unto you, the enemy is soon beaten, and having once begun
war, follow it with sword, fire, spoil, slaughter, till the streets be full;
a Rover should never be a Rewer, so long as his hands are unto it, and you
should never give time to the enemy to join forces, but pursue them ever as
they come, never neglecting an enemy, though he be weak, but still keep a
good reserve by your self, and pursue by parties supplying your own, as they
need, and timely, and without doubt you shall gain honor and credit.

XXII.
Trust never thy self rashly to a reconciled enemy, without pledges first had,
for keeping good peace; and being desirous to possess any thing belonging to
thy enemy, thou have need to use rather diligence, then delay, that thou
may catch them unawares, as Gustavus did Frankfurt on the Oder. And nothing
is more to be suspected, then a near enemy, which Lansberg did find after the
taking of Franckfurt, and nothing is more cruel then a Barbarous enemy, as was
found by our Regiment at Newbrandenburg, and thereafter by our Camerades at
Magdeburg.

XXIII
Wars may be taken on by the counsel of sluggards, but they must be
sustained with the labor, and danger of the most valiant, as was well seen
after Gustavus the invincibles death: It was not the Princes confederats, or
their Consilium, was able to do the turn, whose reward to Cavaliers was but
paper. As their reward was naught, so their Consilium turned to nothing, and
which was worse, to contempt, except the Director alone, who as yet has kept
life in the cause, though without their means or assistance: and which is more
honorable for him, he maintains the war against them, who unworthily have
broken their oaths and fidelity, having turned their Arms against those who
formerly had releeved them, to their perpetual disgrace, shame and ignominy,
having scorned men, that had merited well in offering to reward them with
paper, their punishment is that for their infamy, their names shall rot in
oblivion. Nam ubi orta est culpa, ibi poena consistit.

XXIIII.
All things here being but humane, are unstable and unconstant, so that there
is nothing sure, except true piety; and we see our lives bring many things
forth contrary to our expectation, so that the condition of our humane life
contains the first, and the last day. For it is much to be looked unto, with
what luck we did begin, and with what we ended. We judge him then happy, who
did receive the light happily, and happened to restore it again pleasantly,
which that we may do, I humbly crave of God Almighty.

A short observation of Jntelligence, necessary for a Commander.
COnshaft or Intelligence in an Army is so necessary, that without it no
direction can be given with assurance, without it we cannot discern betwixt
our friends and our enemies, who are with us, or against us, which is the first
point a Commander has to know; coming in an enemies country: Next he ought to
know the strength of his enemies Army, foot and horse, that he may the better
dispose of his own: he ought also to know how his enemy is quartred in
Garrison, Leaguer, Field or Dorpe, and what watch they keep in all those
parts: And how far their horsemen do lie from their foot, and how guarded.
To have certainty of all this he must have some secret friend with the enemy,
for giving him secret intelligence, and that he should not trust too much in
one, he must have a subtle Boore, now and then frequenting without suspicion
amongst them, as ordinarily his Majesty of worthy memory had: likewise it were
needful that they deboished some Secretary on their side, for getting the
Lists of their Strengths, Officers and Soldiers, as also for their qualities,
that he might the better dispose himself against them, in directing private
parties on the ways they travel to get prisoners, and failing thereof to fall
on their watch or within their quarters.

He ought also on all marches to have a known Boore with him, to acquaint him
with all passes or straights, on which the enemy can repare to him, or from
him, conferring his land map with the Boores intelligence, which betime would
enable him in knowing all the Passes.

Likewise he ought to have intelligence out of the enemies Leaguer, how they
were provided of victuals, Ammunition or forage, and of their healths, if
there were any infections amongst them, or what sport or recreation they used
without their quarters, and what streets they go on, and how they are
conveyed, striving still to get prisoners, for the better intelligence how
their Ammunition is kept, and with what Guards, that if it were possible,
accident all fire might be set to it, and for getting this good of
intelligence, the chief Officers would be liberal to those whom they put in
trust, seeing without it little good service can be effected, and the getting
of it is the safety of many Cavaliers and their credits.

Therefore whether he be defender or pursuer, intelligence gives him a kind of
assurance in all his actions, and the loss, or neglect of it has robbed many
a brave Commander of their fame and credit, being surprised through over sight,
as Gustavus Horn was at Bambricke: It was also the loss of Hano, and
Philipsburg; Intelligence then being of such moment, it should make Generals,
and all Commanders under them, according to their qualities and charge, to be
open handed; otherwise it is impossible to subsist long not being surprised.

Of Recognoscing.
HAving intelligence of our enemies strength, how he lies, whether in Quarter,
Garrison, Field, or Leaguer, then having an exployt to go on, we must
recognosce on horse or foot, according to the exployt we have before us. As if
we were to block up a Town with a part of an Army, we must first being
accompanied with a few Horsemen recognosce the bounds, riding the Circuit short
or long from it, foreseeing how to divide our number on the Passes and Avenues
from or toward the Town, to stop out-fallings, or in commings, in ordering
such Works and Skonces to be made on the passages, as may put us in safety,
as well against out-fallings, as against their pretended Reliefes to come: and
our watches one from another, must keep due correspondence by their Centries,
that none can pass betwixt them without advertising one another guard.

Next being to beleaguer a Town near hand, we ought to recognosce also
nearer, having first placed our Army foot and horse Battle without reach of
their Cannon, though in their view: having first directed our parties of horse
to batter the streets without us, then the Commander is to ride the circuit of
the Town within shot, as near as he can, having another riding at a distance
behind him, and having a Boore beside him, resolving him of all Questions
concerning their Ports, their Graffes, their Bulworkes, where weakest, and
where the Graffe is shallowest; which being known, he disposes the Army on
several Posts, where again the Commanders are to recognosce nearer the walls,
where they can best lodge their greatest body in most safety, where to place
their Guard before them, and where their Centries; as also where to place their
Batteries, and where to begin their Approaches: which being done, they are
thought the best fellows, that show most diligence, and least loss to come to
the walls; the same circumstances are to be observed by any Commander, who
leads a party before a Strength or Castle to block it, or beleaguer it,
having Cannon, Pittards, and fireworkes, with sufficient men and furniture
belonging to the Artillery, that can discharge their duties, as they are
directed by the Commander of the party, who must see to all things himself,
that it be well done, as in special to the placing of his Batteries, and in
ordering all things to be brought to the Batteries that are needful, by the
Soldiers commanded out to attend the works, beside the guard of the Cannon,
and of the workmen, he must also be very vigilant in visiting the Approaches,
Batteries, and Guards, admonishing them to be careful against out-falls on the
Trenches, Batteries, or Guards, giving orders to the Captain of the Watches to
receive the enemy falling out with a strong body of Pikes and Muskets closse
together to beat them back, being received with Pikes charged, bravely
flancked and lined with shot, which being done, to advance their works again
night and day, till the enemy be forced to Accord.

In the night also a sufficient Sergeant being seconded by another stout
fellow, should creep to the Graffe, with two halfe-Pikes, for to wade through,
to know the shallowest parts, being helped thereto by some known Boore, who
might give certainty of the enemies strength within, and of their defects they
have of victuals, Ammunition, fire or water. As also to know their private
sorting-Ports, to watch their out-commings; he ought also to learn what
draw-bridges are within, and what Portcullis, and what store of victuals, or
Ammunition is to be had within, in case the Strength be pregnable, that he may
the better make his Accord. Also he ought to learn what Artillery or Arms are
within, and what Caducks, or what number of Horses pertaining to the enemy,
and what other riches they have, and where kept; or if otherwise the Town be
not taken by Accord, or strength of hand, we must strive to force it to yield
by hunger, or by lack of fire or water, or otherwise by throwing Artificial
fire amongst them with Cannon, or with other fiery Engines, fiering their
houses, or spoiling their Watches on their Posts or Guards; as also we must
deal by fraud to convey private Letters unto them, for deboysing the
Inhabitants, to resist the Garrison in making either Port or Post good, while
as the pursuer intends to fall on, on storm or breach.

Likewise the pursuer had need to dispose well of his own watches without,
that he be not surprised, his hooffe-watch, particular watches, reserves, or
by-watches, are to be still in readiness to attend the enemies out-falling,
lest he may cut off his Guards, or spoil his Cannon by nayling of them, or by
burning their Carriages, or Ammunition, being disgraceful in the highest
manner, as oft-times has happened to unprovident and sluggish Commanders, who
have unwisely despised their enemies.

An enemy being in the Field, either with a strong party or Army, a
sufficient Commander must be careful in recognoscing the Field about him, for
taking his advantage of the ground, in advancing to an enemy, as also in
spying his advantage in case he be put to a Retreat, that he may the better
retire in order, not being put to rout, as our Army was at Nerling, which
never happened unto them before during the time I served the Sweden. As also
being in the Field he ought to observe where most conveniently he can plant his
Ordnance, as General Tillie did at Leipsigh, and as the Emperialists did on
the Hill at Nurenberg; as also at Nerling. For Ordnance being planted with
advantage is oft-times the winning of the Field, and the loss of Artillery is
ever reputed and holden for a defeat, although both foot and horse be
preserved. There is also advantage of ground very requisite to be taken by foot
against foot, as the advantage of hights, passages, woods, hedges, ditches, as
also the advantage of Sun and Wind with you, and against your enemy; which
his Majesty of worthy memory did strive to get at Leipsigh against the
Emperialists.

Likewise it is a great advantage of ground, when one of both the Armies is
brought to that inconvenience, that they cannot come to fight, but the one
Army may be forced to come up but by Divisions, while as the other by
advantage of the ground may receive them with full Battles of horse and
foot, the one to second the other; and this advantage Gustavus Horn did get
of the Emperialists, while as he retired before them unto Vertenberg-land in
March 1633. the enemy not being able to pursue our Army but with great
disadvantage, which freed us of them for that time, he being stronger than we,
and afterward the Rhinegraves Forces come from Alsas being joined with us, we
made the Emperialists again retire over the Danube unto Schwaland at the pass
of Munderken, where we came within Cannon-shot; yet they getting the pass,
retired in safety; as they did another time from us, out of Schwabland unto
Bierland, having got the pass before us at Kempten, and afterward over the
Eler in Schwabland, having (I say) got the pass before us, they were safe, and
we frustrate. So that the advantage of ground is of great importance in wars,
as I have often known by experience, especially before the Hill at Nurenberg.

Likewise a wise Commander being defender must observe all Circumstances, as he
did in pursuing for his own safety; he must also being defender beset well
all passes, and frontier Garrisons, whereupon the enemy must pass to come
unto him, having timely recognosced the same, that it may either be beset by
him, or otherwise being found more advantageous for the enemy, it would then
be timely demolished.

As also your enemies Army, or strong party being drawn up in the field, you
are to recognosce both his strength and order, by the sight of your eye, before
you intend to pursue him, where you are to consider, how he can advance to you,
or you to him without disorder, but do you never pursue, except with
advantage; though you shall be deemed by others to be remiss, but rather
suffer him to be gone, than to take the disadvantage of pursuit, since time
will alter any thing, and he that preserves an Army will doubtless find a
convenient time to fight. And it had been good for the Evangelists in
Dutchland, that this point had been more wisely looked unto at Nerling than it
was, for they might have saved their Army and Country both, had they not
presumed with disadvantage in their own strength and courage, where GOD the
disposer of hearts made their pride suffer a great fall.

A short Observation to be observed in Garrison.
ENtering the place before all things you are to visit the Posts, and being
duly recognosced, the round or circuit should be measured, and then the Posts
to be dealt proportionably, according to the several strengths, that no man
have just cause to complain.

The posts then order^y and well beset, there should be orders given for
by-watch, or reserve, where to stand in readiness, whether on the Marketplace,
or some other convenient part, having sufficient Officers ever to command them,
who must be kept to strictness of duty, lest they should be to seek when
honor were to be maintained, while as on Alarm they were to repair to post,
street, or wall, to resist the enemy, and to succourse the weakness of any
accident might befall by pursuit or fire, or to resist enemies within or
without, being as well on continual Guard against the Inhabitants, in case of
uproares, or treachery, as against their outward enemies: since no enemy is so
dangerous, as the inward enemy being least suspected.

Likewise the Governor or Commandant ought to observe and keep a due
proportion in all commandments given either for works, service, watches, or
parties, that no man might justly complain, that there is more duty laid on
him than on his neighbor, but according to proportion of strength.

The keys of the Ports, and of all sorting doors and prisons, are to be
brought in and out by the Captain of the maine Watch to the Governor, and the
Captain of the Watch is to appoint Guards, to stand at the drawbridges,
Portcullis, and sorting Ports, and he is obliged to bring all intelligence
himself unto the Governor, and never to open a door night or day without a
sufficient Guard by him with the Limits past, for fear he might be surprised,
and the whole Gartison in danger.

Also the Governor is to give Orders at night, whether every man must resort
with their Arms in case of Alarm, and the Town being divided, both Burgers
and Soldiers should know their Posts they are to repair to, from the Alarm
place.

And to supply the defects of the fortifications, the Town should be divided
into equal deals, to work their day about, with all materials needful for
repayring the defects, that there be nothing to mend when they ought to fight;
and to that effect, Officers should be appointed by the Governor to over-see
the works, that things may be the better done, and the Governor must often
visit all himself, taking reckoning what is done every day, till all be put in
good order. The Governor ought to have a Register of all inquartering, that he
may the better be made acquainted by the Burgers of every man's behavior for
keeping good order. He ought also to have account of all victuals in their
storehouses, both of Corn and all other furniture, and of all Caducks within
the Garrison; and the out-setting of all safeguards belongs unto him as his
due. He ought to suffer no man to make commodity without his knowledge, but
all to put in to him, that he may the better maintain his state, and
entertain strangers seeing he ought to be a good fellow, and a common receipt
for comers and goers, otherwise he will fail to be thought of; and he must
give orders to the Captain of the watch, that no man come or go without his
knowledge, under pain of punishment, and the Captain of the watch should
direct those that enter the City, having seen their passes, with a Convoy and
an Officer by night or by day, unto the Governor to be inquired of at his
pleasure.

The Governor as he ought to give out the word, so he ought to see all Parads
at the ordinary time they go to watch, where coming off again, they ought to
repair to the Parad-place, and draw up orderly, before they lodge their
Colors, and the Governor is obliged to visit the Posts, and to go the round
himself, and to make the rest go the rounds orderly after him.

Likewise it is his due to command out all parties, being first drawn up on
the Parad-place, seeing them to be provided of Ammunition, and of all
necessaries, before their parting, giving strict orders that at their returns
all booty be brought orderly before him, and nothing to be put out of the way
or aside, on the pain of punishing the Officer that commanded the party, and
the goods being known, they are to be confiscated to the Governor, seeing all
booty ought to be distributed at his discretion: and in dividing the Quarters,
the Governor ought to have allowed him some free houses, to contribute to his
Kitchen, as also some houses kept free to Iodge strangers, which ought to
acknowledge the Governor so long as they have no other burden, and if the
Garrison be such a place as yields other commodities by traffic, by water or
land, the Governor, besides the ordinary custom or toale, ought to be
acknowledged by those who transport goods or Cattle, by or through his
Garrison, if they come under the compass of his watch. As also he may take of
adjacent lands belonging to the enemy, as high a contribution as he can rack
them to, providing he prove not dishonest to his Master in taking moneys, for
being friend to his Masters enemies.

For making of Accord, an Observation.
HIS Majesty of worthy memory, I being with him at Damaine, Brandenburg,
Lantsberg, Verben, Erfort; Mentz, Ausburg, Rhine and Munchen in Baviere, did
never trust the making of the Treaty to any other than himself: for how soon
either Trumpeter or Drummer were conveyed (blind-folded by the Officer of the
Watch) unto him, then being discovered, having delivered their message and
receiving an answer, the same or another being directed back, then pledges
were delivered to be kept on both sides, till such time as the accord were
condescended to or left off, in case of variance; being continued to a second
resolution, and then the pledges were to be retired Hinc inde. Those pledges at
such times ought to be modest, sober and discreet in their discourses, lest
some things might slip them, tending to prejudice of either parties: and if the
pledges be wise, they may save some Commodities for a friend. When the defender
makes a slight Accord, the heads whereof are set down in writing, and
afterward advised, but once granted cannot be recalled; the guard once changed,
a Commander does go to possess withal, according to the Accord, where
incontinent the pursuer makes preparation for the enemies out-comming, that
there be no disorder committed in breaking the Accord by either of the parties;
for it is a gross error for a Christian to violate their word once given: but
they do strive before ending, for honorable Conditions on both sides, the
particulars accorded on are not necessary to be inserted here, since they do
vary according to the occasions; where sometimes the defender makes Conditions
for the City, their Liberties, Traffic and Religion, as the place is of
importance; and if the defender look for succors seeing his advantage, he
shifts in making the Accord, prolonging time till in the end, as sometimes, the
Treaty dissolves; as was done at Traylesound 1628. against the Emperialists.
And the party beleaguerer finding himself weak without, he continues their
outmarching till his weakness be supplied; as his Majesty of worthy memory
did before Lansberg, where the enemy was to march out three thousand stronger
then we were without, which delayed his out-coming, till supply was come to us
from Francfurt.

When treaties are ended, the Conqueror of the place, after making his accord,
having made his best advantage of all provisions sound in such parts, as of
Cannon, Arms, Clothes, Ammunition, Libraries, Monuments, being all transported,
and put in assurance, then the Town being in the Conquerours power, he may
beset it with a Garrison, or demolish it by rasing of the walls, and it had
bin good the Swedens had done so in Bavier with Donavert, Rhine, Ausburg,
Aychstat, Landsout and Munchen; if they had been rased at first, we had not
bin troubled by taking them in twice thereafter, and it had bin better to have
plundered them first, then to have compounded with them for moneys, having after
the losing of Nerling battle lost our moneys, the pledges, the country and
City, which had bin better to have raced them to the ground (as Trophies of our
victories) at our being there, then to have taken pledges for money, and lose
all again.

It is also to be observed in making of all accords, that such prisoners as are
within the place, may be let free, that do belong to the beleaguerer, and such
Soldiers as were run away from the pursuer, may be restored again to be
punished or pardoned, as pleases their Officers. But no man belonging to the
enemy may be detained contrary to their wills.

As also no Cannon taken of the pursuer before, can be taken out of the
Strength, notwithstanding that Cannon be allowed unto him, by his accord, he
must transport none that belonged formerly to another.

Likewise no more horses can be allowed to be transported by Officers, then are
mentioned in their accord, and that proportionally according to their degrees
they serve in, and no more: and if it be found, that the defender fraudulently
beyond his accord, has either stolen away, destroyed, or hid any goods, Arms,
Cannon or Ammunition, being known or revealed, ipso facto the pursuer or
Conqueror is not obliged to keep their paction, but they may use them as the
Swedens did Colonel Gramme, after his marching out of Wesmer, having broken
treacherously his accord.

Of the taking of Prisoners an observation.
HIS Majesty having taken in Frankfurt on the Oder, I did grant quarters to two
young Cavaliers, who had begged my protection, to save them from the fury, and
having once protected them, though with difficulty, I had a care no man should
wrong them: as all Cavaliers ought to do in extremity to those that stand in
need of mercy, not plundring men to their skins, as some unworthy do; But
on the contrary having once granted quarter, men ought to be careful, not only
in guarding their lives from others, but also they ought to foresee for
entertainment civilly, at least for their money, being Cavaliers of charge,
which may be presupposed able to entertain themselves, or if otherwise they
cannot do it, our charity and compassion should move us to provide bread for
them, who cannot provide for themselves, otherwise our oversight in suffering
them to starve for want of bread, deserves a greater punishment, then if we
suffered others to have killed them at first being enemies, so that I wish no
man so uncivil as to dominier over a reconciled enemy being in bonds.

Likewise Prisoners being civilly entertained according to their degrees,
nevertheless they ought to be looked unto as Prisoners; if they be common
Soldiers, they should be committed to the General Gavilliger, to be attended
there, with a guard to watch them, being in Irons, and according to their
behaviors, to be kept closer, or at more liberty, and being on marches, they
ought not to be suffered to come so here the Army as to be spies over others,
and especially being Officers concredited to a Gavilliger, they ought to be so
kept as they could not remarke, either the strength or the discipline of the
Army; and being come to quarters, they ought to be visited as Cavaliers, but in
discourse men ought to be sparing with them, as with prisoners; neither must
you injure them or suffer others to do it, seeing Prisoners can do no reason
to Cavaliers, and giving once their Parole, they may have some freedom to
walk without suspicion within shot of Cannon.

But when either Trumpeter or Drummer is sent with letters, or message to
prisoners, he ought before he come near the Guards, sound his Trumpet or beat
his Drum, giving advertisment to the Guards before he enter within their
outward Centries, otherwise he is liable to the highest punishment, but having
law fully advertised the Guard, an Officer by command of the Captain of the
watch with a Convoy of Musketeers ought to meet him, and having enquired for
his commission and pass, and seen his open letters, having searched him for
private letters, and finding none, then he ought to sile or blind him up, and
convay him blinded unto the chief Commander, who receives his letters, reads,
and delivers them, and then after he being siled up again, he is convaied unto
the Gavilliger, where he is kept till he be ready, and suffered to depart
again with open Letters, being convayed out as he came in: and no Prisoner
ought to deliver any letters, though open, to any man, till first he acquaint
his Guard, who ought to impart it to the Commander of the p^ce, and it is
ordinary to Governors or Commanders, to whom Trumpeters or Drummers do come,
having received their answer, being brought siled from the Gavilligers unto
their lodging, first to talk merrily with them, and then to cause attenders
drink to them till they be merrry, and then being siled again, they are
convayed without the whole Contries, having their pass, they are free to
return.

Prisoners having agreed for their Ransomes, or being exchanged out for others,
they ought not be suffered to depart, without getting first the Generals
pass, and then he may go with a Trumpeter or without one to the next friendly
Garrison.

For quartering an Army in field upon March, Dorpe, Town, or Leaguer, An
Observation.
A Commander ought not be ignorant of the circumstances belonging to the
quartering of an Army, therefore for the better Information of the younger
sort, who have not seen such Marches as I have bin at, with his Majesty of
worthy memory, who quartered his Army Summer or Winter, according as the
occasion or neerenesse of his enemy did offer, where many times the whole
winters night, the Army, horse, foot and Artillery, being without fire, did
stand in battle order by their Arms in the fields, having placed their
Artillery apart, with a guard to attend them, their baggage also being behind
them apart, and well guarded, and a maine guard being commanded out apart
before the Army, of horse and foot; And the Armies being near one another,
all Officers were commanded to abide on their several charges, as they were
commanded on the March, to lead Briggads, Troops or Divisions; The commanded
men being also apart next unto the enemy, with their Officers by them, which
all being orderly quartered in this first manner, they entertained one another
with such dainties as the time afforded, passing the night with variety of
merry jests and discourses till day, that either Drum or Trumpet did invite
them unto earnest.

The second form of our quartering was in the fields not being near an enemy,
where we quartered a little more commodiously for our ease, being commonly
drawn up by four or five of the clock in the afternoon, near some Town or
Village, in some fair meadow by water, if it could be had in the Summer, and
in the Winter being quartered, we drew near the side of some wood, both for
fire, and for build or shelter; The Army drew up in battle by Briggads, as
they marched, where behind the place the Briggads drew up unto, at a
reasonable distance, their quarters were marked out severally according as they
stood in battle, and before the Briggads removed from their Arms, their
guards were first commanded out, every Briggads guard being placed at a
distance of four score paces from their Colors, where they were appointed to
watch, and the watch being set, Centries were put to the Colors, and then the
Pike-men were ordained to six their Pikes fast in the ground as they stood in
battle, the Musketeers also were ordained in dry wether to set up their
Muskets in order in even front, with their Colors, but when it rained, they
were commanded to keep them carefully dry by themselves, which all orderly
done they were suffered part and part to go, and provide themselves of straw
and fire, providing also many times well for their Officers Kitchins beside.

The Artillery and Ammunition wagons being also drawn up a part, and well
guarded, their horses were sent to grass for good quarters, then the Baggage
and wagons as they came up did draw up orderly behind their own Regiments,
and their horses being sent to grass, the Officers Tents were set up orderly
at a distance before their Colors, and then cooks went to dress meat and
all being returned to quarters before supper, the whole Drums of the Army did
beat before their several Briggads, inviting all to public prayers, which
were never forgotten; And after prayers the Majors of the Regiments did give
out orders for that night to the Sergeants, and for up-breaking the next
morning, and then all went to meat first, and next to rest, and the whole
horsemen were drawn up in this fashion, and parties were sent out of their
quarters to batter the streets, two or three mile off, the whole night, lest we
should be surprised by an enemy without intelligence.

The next morning Drums having called all to Arms, the Briggad, that had the
Van, marched out first in a new ground, and drew up, the Briggad, that had the
Van the day before, marched out, drawing up on their left hand having fallen
back one degree from the Van, and then the rest of the Briggads drew out
orderly, one after another, till the left hand of the foot Army were closed
up, and then they went to prayers, and the prayers ended, they marched, the
Baggage marching after, being drawn up in order, as the Briggads or Regiments
did march, so did they. The Artillery marched with the Briggads, in part, and
the rest marched before the Army with their Convoyes, and guard of Musketeers,
which were changed every two days, being commanded men out of all Regiments
proportionally, having Officers, commanded them accordingly. Thus much of
quartering in the fields.

The third manner of quartering, an enemy being a far off, and we near
Towns, only in cold weather, quarterings were given for the Hoffestaffe
(being the King or General and their followers) and the principal Officers of
the Army, including his Majesty's household, whose quarters were first appointed
by the general quartermaster in the Towns, and next to the Hoffe-staffe the
Colonells, that commanded Briggads, were quartered, and next to them, the
Colonells of Regiments, their Officers and Soldiers: agreat part, and the best
of the quarters ordained for the Officers belonging to the Artillery, their
horses and servants. The Artillery and baggage standing without the Town,
those who quartered within the Town, had allowance of free meat and drink,
and no more; sometimes without Towns we had quarters given to Briggads apart
in Dorps, Randez-vouz being appointed for us, the next morning to draw upon for
to join with the Army, and while as we quartered in Dorps being drawn up
without the Dorpe, first we sighted the passes, and the guards placed in the
fields on the Avenues, lest the enemy unawares might enter the quarters, the
Centries duly set, our Colors were conveyed with a Troop to their lodging or
quarter, their furriers shuts leading them aright till the Colors were
quartered and guarded, then the rest shown unto their quarter, men were
appointed to go meet the Baggage to lead them to their quarters. Orders
given, every man entertained another, as they had best reason, and all being
settled, parties of horse were sent forth to scour the fields for intelligence,
and lest they might be trapped by the enemy, a second party was sent out after
them, both getting orders, how far to ride, and upon what streets, being
commanded where to hault, and forage, as also being admonished to have still a
party on horsbacke to advertise the rest from being surprised, which done,
Ordnance-Rutters of every Briggad were left to wait on the General, at his
Quarter, for Orders; the general Randez-vouz for the Horse being appointed,
where to meet when ever they got Orders.

The fourth manner of quartering an Army is in a fast Leaguer, as at Statin,
Swede, Brandenburg, Verben, Donavert, Ausburg, Engolstat, Nurenberg, which
manner of quartering is most troublesome both for Officers and Soldiers, who
having builded Receptacles for themselves, their charges and travels bestowed
in vain, many times they leave their houses to their enemies, yet the form is
commendable, being under an Army that is well paid, where all things may be
had for money, and then the Leaguer being kept clean, and in good order, it
represents a Commonweal or a City defensible against all encumbrances which
may occur; except it please the Lord to wagge his hand, and then no counsel
or strength can avail against Him who is the God of Hosts. The use Cavaliers,
or Commanders have to make of this sort of quartering is, that in case they
happen to have Command themselves, they may learn through this practice to
command others, as also through foresight they may timely take themselves to
this kind of defensive war, till they be able to come into the Fields, as
his Majesty of worthy memory did, being forced to retire by the power of his
enemies to the former Leaguers, wherein there was discipline and good practice
to be observed by Cavaliers, where the Kings Majesty was made to dwell as the
meanest Soldier, being alike subject to the inconvenience as others, which
might happen, of air, sickness, infection, or of watching. Thus far then
for the quartering of an Army.

Of Artillery an Observation.
ARtillery being the third part of an Army, without which no Army can be
gloriously led; it is requisite then somewhat briefly to speak of the
advantages we have by Artillery, being well foreseen and commanded, as it was
by the Captain of Kings and King of Captains, Gustavus the Invincible, who
with as little Charge did as much as any King or Captain could (in doing of so
great exploits as he did) with his Artillery. But lest I should be thought to
neglect a part of my duty in this point concerning Cannon, I will set down
here when his Majesty made most use of Cannon, to my knowledge; which being
rightly considered, will be thought strange, seeing in the whole course of his
Majesty's wars during his time, I never saw or did learn he shot a breach in
any place, except at Garts, though otherwise I knew well his Majesty made good
use of his Artillery, as at Leipsigh, the Leacke, and at Leitzen, where in all
three he showed himself Master of that Art. But against either Town, or Fort,
I did never see in his Majesty's time one breach shot or entered, his fortune
being such, and his diligence so great, that his enemies did ever Parle before
they would abide the fury of his Cannon; as at Brandenburg, Damaine,
Fransfurt, Mentz, Donavert, Ausburg, and diverse more; and in my opinion, the
terror the Cannon breeds is as much to be feared as the execution that
follows, though it be great; and Artillery in all Armies and things belonging
thereto, are of infinite moment on all occasions. So that they may be called
Sine quo nihil; but supreme Officers of the Field, are no more troubled with
them, but so far as they direct others to do the service, their own
Officers being appointed to attend them, as the General to the Artillery, his
Colonells, Lievetenant-Colonells, Majors, Captains, Lievetenants, Constables,
and all other inferior Officers needful to attend, who know and keep their
own Turns and Reliefes, as other Officers do theirs; their furniture is
great and their charges also in buying Horses to draw their Cannon and
Ammunition, Wagons, with Powder, Ball, Match, Materials, Fire-Engins, Petards,
storming Ladders, Artificial Bridges carried on Wagons to pass over Rivers
or Graffes.

In all quartering they are quartered next after the Hoffestaffe before any
Briggad, and the furniture and charges needful to maintain this third part of
the Army is extraordinary great, there being always something to be repaired,
while as the Army does rest; and oft-times they must be provided of a great
deal of new furniture, and they lose yearly an extraordinary number of Horses
of great price. But his Majesty during his time was very fortunate in this, as
in other things; for I never knew his Majesty lose any Ordnance, but I have
seen him get supply of Ammunition and Cannon from his enemies; as first, at
Garts and Grefenhaugne, Damaine, Francford, Lansburg, Glogo, Leipsigh,
Vertsburg, Mentz, and Munchen, besides the supply his Majesty did get for his
Artillery from Nurenberg, Francfurt, Ausburg, Strasburg and Vlme: and to
discourse largely of this subject alone, would take a volume of paper. But when
every Cavalier is commanded apart with a party where he must make use of
Cannon, he would be (before his departure with his party) very careful to
receive his Cannon with the furniture belonging unto it timely together, with
sufficient Officers for discharging that part of the duty, on his march he
must command his party as if it were a little Army, being ever well provided
of Guides, and of careful, witty, and painful Intelligencers, that he may
lead and quarter his party with assurance, directing always his
Intelligencer before him, being ever careful to beset the passes and avenues
well. As also sufficiently to guard his Cannon, Baggage, and Ammunition, since
many times great hurt does come through the neglect of guarding the Cannon and
Ammunition: which over-sights once committed are irrecoverable; in regard
whereof I must entreat the gentle Reader to pardon me a little here out of
History (for the younger Soldier his better instruction) to discourse a
little of the hurt and inconvenience has happened many times by Cannon and
powder; as also of the manner they were first invented, being found out by Gods
permission for the ruin of man punished for finne; experience does teach daily
that the strength of it is not to be resisted.

Estiene Forcatell in his fourth book of the Empire and of the Philosophy of
the Gaulles, does attribute the invention of powder and Cannon to the Germans,
saying that a piece by the help of some kindled powder did spue a ball, the
noise whereof was like to thunder, and killed. The maker of it an Abbot, the
child of the Devil, assisted by his Father found out this cruel invention,
which serves alike for the pursuer of Towns as for the defender, till it ruin
both. It is said of Archidamus, Son to the King Agesilaus, wondering at a new
invention of Cannon brought from Sicilie, complained the valor of men was
beaten down and trod under foot, seeing there was no more fighting without
monstrous hardness and Armor. And it is thought that a black fellow called
Berthold Schuvart an Abbot invented it. Read Polydore Virgil, in his second
book and sixth Chapter de invent. and Sabellicus in his Ennead. lib. 9. a
fellow having some beaten Brimstone for Physic closed in a pot covered with a
stone, he striking with a file on a stone to give fire, a spark lighted in the
pot, and incontinent the flame came forth, heaving the stone in the air; and
chewing his Cud thereon, he made a Cannon of Iron, closing powder within it,
till that piece and piece he found out the invention. And we read that in the
Kingdom of China, in the East Indies, both Printing and Artillery were known
and practiced there, long before they were found out in Europe, and that there,
there be many Cannons, which I will rather believe than go to see.

Virgil also in the sixth book of his Aeneids does speak of the like in his
description of Salmoneus; and Josephus, in his third book and ninth Chapter of
the Jews wars, makes mention of an Instrument they used against the Town of
Iotapat in Galilee, and says, the stones shot by Engines did break the walls
and Towers, and there was no Troop of men so well ordered, but was scattered
by it, and beaten to the ground. The same Author speaking of the Batteries made
against the walls of Jerusalem, affirms that the stones shot by the Engines
were as heavy as a man: And nevertheless they were carried above six hundred
paces by the Engine, killing many men.

Plinius writes in his thirty-one book and tenth Chapter, in his voyage unto
Babylon, that powder was in use of old, and reports he did see powdermilles
on the River Euphrates, though of another fort than our powder.

Of this invention also you may read Cornel de Camp, in his story of Frise,
in his second book and twentieth Chapter. Also Simoscus King of Frise, Beresne
Lord of Holland, and Olympia Daughter to the Earl of Holland, where it is
said, that Simoscus killed with one shot of Pistol the Farle and his two
sons; and that afterward he would have killed Rowland Earl of Flanders, but
the Pistol mis-giving, Rowland did kill him with his sword, and did throw the
Pistol in the Sea. But we read that Barbadigue Admiral of Venice was the
first that carried them on his Galleys and Ships, wherewith he did terrify
the Genoweys, being at hunting by their noise: and Paul Jove, in his third
book of illustrious persons, writes that Barthelem Cokone General to the
Venetians for the space of twenty years and more, was the first that used
Cannon in the Fields, while as the banished people of Florence made wars
against the family De Medices, being first used to make breaches in walls,
and to defend walls: but afterward they came in use to break the Battles of
horse and foot; for if the wars of old, and their inventions were compared
to now adays, it were a sport to laugh at, rather than wars.

Now of late the invention is found out of burning Bullets, full of fire, shot
out of Cannon, to fire houses within Strengths, and to fire Pallesads and
Gabeons set before Batreries on walls or in Fields, whereof his Majesty of
Polle Estien Bathon made good use in his wars of Musco, within a few years.

This invention is thought to have been invented by the King of Pole himself
in his civil wars, of Hungary, finding other Cannon made greater noise than
hurt.

The manner a piece is charged with a hot Bullet, is, the piece is charged with
powder convenient, then it is covered with sand in a little quantity above the
powder, then with a little green grass presently pluct, being a little
dampish or moist, then the hot Bullet being put in must be presently
discharged, otherwise the Invention is very dangerous for the Constables; for
oft-times minding to ruin others, they are ruined themselves.

Albert Gantz writes, that Christophel King of Denmark was killed by a shot of
Cannon in the year 1280. Also we have a deplorable story written by Gyrrard
de Rooe and Conrade Decius, of the Battle betwixt the Emperor Albert and the
Poles in Bohemia. Amongst their Cannons there was one Cannon greater than the
rest, which for her execution was most used, she killed so many of the Poles,
that they were so afraid, that they ran all away, leaving their tents: and
it is reported, that at one shot she killed fourscore men, the Devil (as I
said before) was (by the permission of God) the inventor of such a Monster,
being offended with mankind in this last old age of the world, those
thunderclaps putting us in mind that this whole round Globe shall be shaken
and perish.

We read also in the thirty-fourth book of Paul Jove his story, the answer of
a Turk reprehended of his cowardice, having run away at the noise of a
Cannon, being besieged by the Emperor within Goullet.

Adrian Barbarossa reproaching Sinas for losing courage, he answered so long as
we have to do to fight against Armed men, you and my enemies do know I served
ever with reputation and credit, but to fight against the Devil and the fury
of Hellfire, having against us such terrible Monsters, be not you astonished
that I sought to eschew death, to the end I might remain whole to do you
service.

We read also in the bloody battle of Ravenne fought on Easter day, 1512:
betwixt the French and Dutch, and the Spaniard, that one shot of a double
Cannon did kill (as Michaell de Chochen) forty Horsemen. We read also that in
the Sea Fight betwixt the French and the Emperialists, on the River of Melphe,
near the straight of Salerne, in the year 1628, shot out of the Gally of
Captain Philip Door, a Cannon Bullet that killed above thirty Spaniards, and
hurt many others, as reports Paulus Euterus, in his story of the wars of
Italy: and Paul love writing of the same Battle more largely and curiously,
being eyewitness himself, or at least, within hearing of the Cannon on the
Isle of Aenary, where he did see the smoke of the Cannon, says, Philip Door
diligent to make good execution with Cannon, and not in vain spending powder
and shot on the Spaniard, his great piece called the Basiliske, the ball being
monstrous great, broke through the whole ship, even to her keele, and killing
thirty, wounded several Captains and Gentlemen, that were mutilated or
dismembered; So that the Marquess of Guat was all spoiled with the blood and
entralls of the dead.

Guicciardin roported that at the siege of Calis, in the year 1558. by the
Duke of Guise, in name of the King of France, on the three Kings day, in the
morning, with thirty three double Cannon from one battery, made such a noise,
that the sound was heard five hours going beyond Calis, being twenty English
miles. And lest the judicious Reader will think this an untruth, I would
warrant it from my own deed, for he that pleases, may read the story
written by the Author Guicciardin. But those pieces of Cannon that are farthest
hard, are called pot-peeces or Mortiers, such as Mounts on the Castle of
Edenburrough, being so wide, that it is reported, that a man did get a
Childwithin, which I also warrant from my own deed, but the truth is, it is a
huge great piece, from whence did come our old Scots Proverb, the Devil
shoot Mounts in your arse. Gentle Reader excuse my homeliness, since I was
not the Inventer of this Proverb.

These kind of Pieces are very large, and carry stones for bullets. The
Mortiers of Soliman at the Siege of Rhodes, in the year 1522. their bullets
wayed some of them two hundred weight, the least one hundred and fifty pounds
of great weight, when they light on a house, they go through from top to
ground; and Paulus Iovius reports of a Mine made by Peter Valler, which made
entrance for the Spaniard within the new Castle of Naples, kept by the French,
the French were so astonished with the surprise of the Mine, that they retired
unto the last and furthest Court, so that the guards had not time to draw up
their Draw-bridges, and the French letting down the Portcullies to hinder the
Spaniards entry, coming with a furious press, the French bring a piece of
Cannon to terrify the Spaniards, that had entered one Gate, or the first Court,
and shoot amongst them, where by chance the Iron bullet took hold of the
thick of the Port, where it remains to this day shown for a Monument unto
strangers, that have got the credit to go within this Castle to see it. Many
such Stories we could infer, but let these suffice in this place for this
time.

THE CHRISTIAN SOVLDIER GOING ON SERVICE HIS Meditations.
I.
WHEN thou see thy Camerade going to Muster with a fair show outwardly,
decked with brave clothes, and delighting in his Plumes, think with thy self,
such an outward show is nothing without the inward gifts of the mind: for if
thou desire to be a Soldier of Christ, thou must be adorned with all
virtues; that inwardly thou may be such, as outwardly thou do appear
unto the world. Thou must then learn to mortify those vices to which thou art
most subject, taking account of thy self, how thou have resisted vice, and
what good thou have done, and say then, when thou find thou have done
nothing that is good, Lord make us every day to renounce sin, and resist
vice, that our love and zeal to thee may be inflamed to well-doing, even in
the greatest extremity of adversity.

II.
When thou see the Kings Majesty thy Master, or his General coming to look
on the battle, when all Front toward the King, with due respect and
reverence, think then again with thy self, and say, as for me it is good to
draw near unto thee, O Lord, for thou art my King and my God, thee alone will
I worship and love; make me happy in thy love, and for thy sake, I will despise
all things; for thou art the strength of my head, and my portion for ever; for
through hope, we attain unto thee by Faith.

III.
When thou see thy Camerads knitting all things about them handsome and fast,
before they march, say thou then, knit mine heart unto thee, O Lord, that I may
fear thy name, for he that loves not thee, must quake and fear, and it is a
fearful thing to fall into thy hands; for thy coming unto Judgment is
terrible, thy roaring is like a Lion, and thy Sword a consuming fire, no place
can hide man from thy presence, thou see the heart and the Reins, no secret
is hid from thee, and who can escape thy vengeance? None, except they repent.
Lord therefore save me from that bitter death, and give me grace to repent,
that I may bewail my misery, before I depart.

IIII.
When thou art entered in the troublesome way of thy march, and suffer toil,
travel, heat, cold, hunger, thirst, nakedness, peril, being called to
labor, and to suffer, and not to live in pleasure and idleness, say then; my
sorrow O Lord is ever before me, for in me dwells no good, I offend day by
day; and which is worse, I cannot repent; sin increases, and the Fountain
of grace is stopped, and I find no comfort. Say then again, O Lord spur me
and whip me with thy Rod, before I perish, and reserve not thy punishment, lest
at last I shall be made to pay the uttermost farthing. Lord therefore create a
new heart within me, that I may prepare a habitation for thee to rest in, a
clear conscience. O Lord for thy Son Christ's sake, suffer me not to go away
empty, for with thee is mercy, and great redemption, therefore I will be
comforted whilst thou give me time to amend my life.

V.
When thou see thy Camerads for love of credit, and the favor of their
Officers, making no difference betwixt fair and foul way, but with patience
enduring all toil, to come to the end of their march, think then with thy
self, that after this manner of old, the servants of Christ, for the favor
and love of God, and of his glory, did serve the Lord in hunger and thirst, in
cold, in nakedness, in watching and fasting, in prayers, in meditations, in
manifould persecutions and troubles, contemning all pleasurs for Christ; they
sought the glory of God, more then their own fame. Lord therefore make us
contemn and slight all things, for the love of Christ; altering from vice to
virtue, mortifying our lusts, that we may become Soldiers of Christ, loving
nothing so much as God and the salvation of our soul.

VI.
When thou see thy Camerade fix in his Arms, and well exercised with Pike,
Musket and Sword; then think with thy self, that thy duty is, to trust in the
Lord, and to do good, that thou may dwell in the land, and be ^ed
assuredly, thy delight must be in the law of the Lord, and thou must be
exercised therein day and night, that thou may be full of hope and strength,
remembering thy end, ever redeeming the time, taking heed of small sins,
that by time thou may avoid the greatest, and if thou shall behave thy self
godly in the day, thou may be assured to be merry at night.

VII.
When thou hear the Alarm given, going to thine Arms, think then with thy
self, that it is more then time to abandon the universal world, and to
embrace God: and say, as for me, it is good to draw near to God, and to put my
trust in him, that I may declare all his Works, For whom have I in heaven but
him, and on earth I desire none but him, he will guide me by his counsel, and
afterward receive me unto glory.

VIII.
When thou seeft thy Camerade making ready, and fix against his enemies,
girding his loins, that he may fight the more valiantly, then think with thy
self, that it is thy duty, to put on the spiritual Armor, and to gird thy
loins against Satan, the world and the flesh, that thou may fight the
spiritual combat, bridling thy riotous appetite, bringing under the flesh,
despising the worlds glory, be at no time altogether idle, but ever doing
somewhat for the public welfare, discharging the duties of thy calling,
beseeching God for Christ thy Captains sake, to pronounce thee happy, in the
day of thy appearance.

IX.
When thou see thy Camerade appointed to watch over himself and others, lest
he be circumvented by his enemies, lost and utterly ruined, then think with
thy self, that thy duty is, to watch over thy self diligently: lest the wrath
of thine enemies seize upon thee, by Gods permission, for thy punishment,
crushing thee to pieces: and consider with thy self, that as it is fearful
to fall into the hands of thine enemies; so it is more fearful to fall into
the hands of the living Lord. Stand then in awe to offend him, that infinitely
loves thee, let thy chiefest care be then to please God, and to forsake
unrighteousness, that leads unto death, and then surely thou may rejoice,
though in trembling, being merry in the Lord.

X.
When thou see thy Camerades environed with enemies, and preparing themselves
for Battle, then think with thy self, that it is thy duty also to arm thy
self against thy spiritual enemies, craving God his assistance, that he leave
thee not, nor suffer thee to be tempted above thy strength; and if thou
fightest valiantly unto the end, thou art happy, being promised for thy
reward, the Joys of Heaven: For the Spirit says to him that overcommeth, I
will give to eat of the tree of life.

XI.
When thou see thy Camerades give ear to the words of Command, harkening
unto their Captains instructions, obeying the tucke of Drum, or sound of
Trumpet, then think with thy self, that it is thy duty to hearken unto Gods
Word, receiving comfort from the mouth of his servants; for blessed are the
ears that hear when the Lord whispereth, and blessed are those who prepare
themselves for the knowledge of God his heavenly mysteries: Speak therefore, O
Lord, for thy servant hears; since without man's help thou can instruct,
and though man teach the letter, thy Spirit opens the meaning, they show the
way, and thou give strength to walk: man deals outwardly, but it is thou
that enlightnest the mind; Paul plants, Thou give the increase: speak
therefore O Lord again, which art the ever-living truth, to the comfort of our
souls, to the amendment of our lives, and to the advancement of thine
everlasting Glory.

XII.
When thou see thy Camerade trusting and leaning unto his own strength, and
not depending upon God that gives victory; then think with thy self, that it
is thy duty, not to think with thine own wings to fly unto heaven, but with
Gods feathers; for it is not in the power of man, to dispose his affairs at
his own pleasure; But it is God that gives victory, and comfort whom he
will, and when he will, and what he wills must be: for of our selves we are
full of infirmities, except the favor of God shine upon us, and then are we
strong enough to overcome all our enemies, by his power that leads us,
preserving us from dangers, and delivering us from infinite evils, for he is our
Salvation, our Strength and our Shield in the day of Battle.

XIII.
When thou see again thy Camerade like a valiant Soldier going forwards in
well-doing, not fearing any thing to win credit; then think with thy self,
that it is thy duty to strive to go forwards, notwithstanding the wickedness
of thy mind, though Satan should press to hinder thee in the course of
idleness; and to withdraw thee from all religious duty and exercise, and from
thy godly remembrance of Christ's pains and wounds, and from thy care of
salvation, and from thy Christian resolution to go forwards in well-doing,
making thee abhor prayer, and the reading and hearing of the Word
incorruptible, believe him not, and care not for him, but turning his snares on
his own pate, say unto him, avoid Satan, thou unclean spirit, blush thou
cursed wretch, avoid I say, thou would carry me from my God, but thou shall
not. Jesus will assist me, and thou shall get but a shameful soil: I had
rather die, than consent unto thee; Therefore be quiet, and hold thy peace, for
I will not hear, though thou should trouble me never so much: The Lord is
my light, and my salvation, whom should I fear? the Lord is the strength of my
life, of whom should I be afraid; the Lord protecting me, and delivering me?
Therefore as a good Soldier strive courageously, but beware of pride and
arrogancy, which has led many unto error, and almost unto uncurable
blindness. Therefore pray unto God, that their fall may make thee wise.

XIV.
When thou see thy Camerades impatient, and given to pleasure and
delectation, unwilling to bear their crosses; then think with thy self, that
it is thy duty, as the Soldier of Jesus Christ, to walk in his ways without
wearying, and to bear thy cross and misery patiently. For Christ suffered,
and so entered into his glory: Therefore if thou will be a Soldier of his,
thou must needs walk in this Kingly high way, not quitting thy Rank for
fear, or for persecution, but must resolve to suffer adversity; for the more
the flesh is troubled and weakened by calamity, the more the Spirit is
confirmed by the comfort of the mind; and he that is steadfast in the faith,
needs not fear the malice of the Devil.

XV.
When thou see thy Camerade loose in behavior, not fearing God, neglecting
his duty to his Commanders, careless of life, and unprepared for death; then
think with thy self, that thy duty is, to prepare thy self by unfeigned
repentance, thinking more often of death than of long life, call to mind Gods
judgments, and the pains of Hell, let thy behavior be so, as if thou were
presently to die, so clearing thy conscience, thou can not greatly fear
death, being found such as thou would appear; having lamented and truly
repented thee of thy sins, thou shall win the Field, and mortality being
swallowed up of life, thou shall live for ever.

XVI.
When thou see thy Camerade rash, headie, or obstinate in his own opinion,
or yet ready to believe every man his words, and suddenly rehearsing what has
been told him, then think with thy self, that, as a Soldier of Christ, it is
thy duty, to be wise and settled in thy opinion, not wavering with every wind
of doctrine, but constant in the true faith thou professest, that though thou
frequentest, and see men of diverse Religions, thou may ever prove constant
in the truth thou professest: for the Soldiers of Christ, as they are
constant, so they must be fervent, and godly zealous.

XVII.
When thou see thy Camerade arrogant, thinking himself better than his
fellows, then think with thy self, that it is thy duty, to be humble,
familiar, and sociable, rather silent than babbling, not hasty and arrogant, as
he, lest God should condemn thee utterly; thou must not suffer thy self to be
drawn away with vanity, stirring with indignation against any, but be meek
and wise, watch and pray, and spend not thy time in idleness, but depend on
God; let thy conversation be honest, living soberly and righteously in his
sight, not judging others, blinded with private affection, giving partial
sentence.

XVIII.
When thou see thy Camerade loving the world better than God (oppressing the
poor) as a Citizen of Babylon, and not as a Soldier of Christ, think then
with thy self, that he having made the wrong choice, thy best is to have the
true love and fear of God, in doing no body wrong, but contented with thy
wages, strive to be made a Citizen of Jerusalem, and a Soldier of Christ;
endeavor to be holy, and unblameable before him, in love and charity, the
virtues belonging to the Christian Soldier, that as thou bear the name,
thou be not found void of the virtues belonging to those that fight Christ's
Battles, viz. love, courage, respect and obedience: for he that loves any
thing better than those virtues, is not worthy the name of a Soldier. And he
that loves Christ does not walk in darkness, but has the light of life,
caring more for a good life, then for a long, hunting after righteousness,
that all other things may be cast unto him.

XIX.
When thou see thy Camerade not faithful unto his Master, and with love
unfeigned, not advertising him of all he knows prejudicial unto him, then
think with thy self, that thou, as a Soldier of Christ, oughtst to be
faithful with love unfeigned toward thy Master, fighting to death for him,
till thou overcomest vice, and conquerest thy self (of all Combats the best)
that thou may be esteemed of, as the valiant Soldier of Christ, that as
thou art virtuous, so thou may grow famous in glory, having abandoned thy
self and thy own will, to do the will of God. Lord make us do this, then
are we sure to be honorable in thy sight.

XX.
When thou see thy Camerade contraried in many things by his betters, and
also perhaps scandalized, then think with thy self, and resolve if thou
would be counted as a Soldier of Christ, that would reign with him, thou
must also resolve to suffer with him, and not to care a rush for the reproaches
of men, but thou must take all scandalls in good part, for Christ thy Captain
was despised in this world, and at extremity, his very friends forsook him.
Think then, O Soldier, that thou art in respect of him but dust; and forsake
this world, if thou would have rest unto thy soul, for the Kingdom of God
is righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost; put then confidence in
God, and he will handle thy cause right well, care thou to have a good
Conscience in all thy doings, then thou art sure none can hurt thee, for the
Lord will defend and deliver thee.

XXI.
When thou see thy Camerade vaunting or bragging of his own deeds, without
modesty or discretion, seeking his own praise (as many vain men do) then
think with thy self, that thy duty is to contemn worldly praise as vain,
coming from man: for true and eternal glory contemns worldly praise, and as
man judges of the deed, God regards the intent and mind; press therefore to
do well, but think little of thy self, being the surest token of a modest
mind; for he that praises himself is not allowed, but he whom the Lord
praises. We ought not therefore to wax proud, but we ought to watch
continually, for Satan sleeps not, and the flesh is not yet dead.

XXII.
When thou see thy Camerade dissolute, vain, proud, phantasticke, arrogant,
windy, railing, backbiting, vaunting of all sin and mischief, then think
with thy self, that these are the notes proper unto the wicked, and if thou
would prove a Soldier of Christ, thou must oppose thy self contrary to
them all, being thy duty, to be lovely, strong, patient, faithful, wise,
meek, prudent, circumspect, modest, just, not dainty, not light, not given to
vanities; but sober, chaste, constant, quiet and temperate in all senses: even
with pain living in virtue, for without pain none can love God: for if thou
would love God, thou must be painful in seeking of him, never leaving him,
till he be found of thee, and love thee, bringing thee through his love unto
perfection in Christ. For he that loves him, will endure all things for his
sake, as valiant Soldiers fainting at nothing may happen; yea thou must
despise the inticements of Satan, and of thy fleshly enemies, and that is the
valiant exploit, wherewith best thou can please God.

XXIII.
When thou see thy Camerade stand in awe to commit wickedness, both for
fear of punishment, and his love to his Commanders, then think with thy
self, that thy duty to thy heavenly Father obliges thee to love and to fear
him with a filial fear, standing in awe to sin against him; for cursed is
he that hears the word of the Lord, and despises it. Blush thou therefore,
that take more pleasure in vanity, than in the truth, in time call thy
sins to remembrance, and that with sorrow, let thy Religion be in thy heart,
not in thy mouth, wish for heavenly things, and contemn the world, seek to be
made strong in the love of the Lord, and constant to continue: for nothing in
heaven above, or in the earth beneath, is comparable to this love of God in
Christ; he that has this love, has all in all. Say then O my God, and my
love, as thou art mine make me wholly thine.

XXIIII, And last Meditation going before thine Enemy.
When thou see thy Camerade for the love of honor and worldly credit not
fearing to die, but ready to open his breast like a valiant Soldier to
receive wounds for his Masters sake, then think with thy self, that it is thy
duty, as the spiritual Soldier of Christ, not to fear to die, but rather
looking unto the glass of life, the rule of righteousness, the light of the
Soul, the joy of the Conscience, like a valourous Soldier for his love,
rather let all things seem sweet unto thee for his sake, who is and should be
the end of all our thoughts, of all our actions, of all our speeches, of our
reading, praying and meditating; for through him we attain unto salvation, and
everlasting life; for his love, we will not fear to die, nor refuse to live.
Say then, O Jesus, how can I praise thee as I ought, or think of thee as I am
bound, for thy infinite mercies? Thee will I praise, I will be ready to suffer
for thee, being assisted by thy grace, I will magnify and glorify thee, I
humbly desire thy favor, vouchsafe therefore to do good unto me, write my
name in thy book, and let me never be blotted out; but let me be accounted
amongst the least of thine Elect; I presume nothing of my self, let all my
comfort be in thy precious blood shed for me a sinner, wherein I only repose;
my desire is to be with thee in the land of the living, in the Kingdom of
heaven. In the mean time, I will behold thee in this life with the eyes of
faith, placing my joy in thee, in this my pilgrimage; and though I should be
tossed too and fro, yet will I retain thee fast in my mind; for thou art my
brother, that have taken my flesh and bones on thee, thanks be unto thee, sweet
Jesus, that have united thy humane nature unto the Divine, unite me unto thee,
sweet Jesus, and leave not my soul in the grave, for thou art my Savior and
Redeemer for ever. AMEN.

THE TABLE OF THE SECOND PART.
A. Page. Letter. ANDREW and John Monroes both died at Shevelben in the Mark.
10 P. Authority laid aside, he that obeys is as good as he that commands.
14 V. Ambition grounded upon virtue, makes the meanest Soldiers mount from
the lowest centry to the top of Honor. 14 V. An Army sometimes is ruined by an
idle and a vain brute, being brickle like glass. 16 Y. Avarice has hin the
loss of Armies and Kingdoms. 82 Z. Ashamed we need not be, though poor,
being honest. 96 A. Altringer shot in the head. 117 Q. Ausburg given over by
accord. 117 R. Four Armies against his Majesty of Sweden at once 126 I.
Accidents of war being infinite, the knowledge of them can never be limited.
155 E. Articles of war, the strictest laws that are. 161 R. A Christian
Advertisment from over-mourning. 170 F. An Advise to brave Leaders. 93 W. B.
The Benefit is great we have, when Frontier Garrisons are well beset, for the
Enemy can be affronted in coming and going, and we have time to draw breath. 11
Q. A rare example of the valor of Blanch Rubea. 27 M. A rare example of Bonne
and her husband Peter Brunore of Parme. 27 N. Bonne being a woman yet she was
valiant in Arms. 28 O. At the Battle of Leipsigh Sir James Ramsey, Sir John
Hamilton and Colonel Monro of Fowls commanded the Vangard of the foot Army.
63 R. The Battle was begun the seventh of September 1631. in the afternoon
between twelve and one. 65 T. Few Britains are induced to serve the
Catholic League. 75 N. Hohnwart, Pfafenhowen, Landshut with the Abbey St
Morris and the Abbey of Saint George in Bavier all brought under contribution.
122 A. The Boores in Bireland did cut off the Soldiers noses, ears and
legs. 122 A. The Boores alleged the dead were risen the Cannon being dug
up out of the ground in Bavaria. 125 G. The Boores in Schwabland being revolted
are well paid. 135 Z. The Boores though they grow pale for fear, they are so
impudent they never blush at their faults, though they oftimes are well
corrected for their errors. 142 G. His Majesty's Camer-yonker Boyen and
Cratesten both slain on a party at Nurenberg. 145 N. The Boldness of one
fellow being a Leader, may engage a whole Army. 152 Y. The Blew and Yellow as
valorous old Soldiers charged well at Leitzen. 163 T. A Bridge made over the
Eler besides Kempten with small Cannon on their Carriage. 176 R. C. Captain
Bullion his infalling in Rugenwald. 4 L. Children do suck, with the milk of
their Nurses, certain beginnings of the evils to come, our miseries growing
as does our age. 7 N. A Commander keeping a Fort, is like a body infected with
a Canker, who to preserve the body must resolve to lose a member. 11 P.
Colonel Mackey being gone for Britain I was recalled to command the Regiment
and to join my squadron to the rest at Statin. 11 R. Colonel Monro and Sir
Thomas Conway were both taken on to serve his Majesty of Sweden by my Lord
Rhees Commission, as Sir Frederick Hamilton was by my Lord Forbesse. 13 S.
Colonel Lumsdell and Lieutenant Colonel Stewart brought over a Regiment for
the Swedens service. 13 S. A Colonel ought to have freedom to advance the
Officers of his own Regiment. 13 T. Adiscreete Commander is better to be
followed on little means, then to follow proud Generals for greediness of
means. 13 T. A Cavalier that has merited well, ought to be careful to
maintain himself in credit, according to his charge. 21 C. Colonel Holke his
Regiment lost seven Colors at Damaine. 18 Z. Captain Beaton behaved himself
well against his Enemies at an outfall by Damaine. 18 Z. A Caveat to an
Officer, that has prospered well, timely to dispose of his plenty. 20 C.
Captain Gunne, Beaton and Lermond, with their Officers were made Prisoners. 23
F. Captain Ennis and Lieutenant Lumsdell escaped from the Enemy. 23 F.
Captain James Lyel was murdered. 28 H. How Captain Gunne was advanced. 28 H.
Captain Henry Lindesey advanced being rewarded for virtue. 28 I. Courageous
hearts are oftimes hidden under uncleanly rags. 62 P. Change of Leaders
changes oftimes fortune. 50 Z. Colonel Tivell shot in the left Arm
recognoscing before Francfurt on the Oder. 31 V. Colonel Lumsdell his
behavior commendable at Francfurt. 33 W. Commanders are to be pitied, who
undertake to lead others, being blind themselves. 35 Z. Captain Dumaine died
at Francfurt, to whom succeeded David Monro. 40 F. Its Commonly scene that
those who fear least, are soonest overcome, as does witness the taking of
Francfurt on the Oder and Lansberg on the Were. 40 G. The Castle of Spandaw
given unto his Majesty by the Duke of Brandenburg. 43 L. The Citizens of
Madeburg discommended for their pride. 45 P. Captain Andrew Monro Fern his
Son was executed at Statin in Pomeren, who at the siege of Trailesound
behaved himself well being made lame of an Arm. 47 S. The Commonwealth must
needs decay where the fear of God is taken away, and then the ruin of the
people does follow. 48 V. Colonel Dowbatle with his Dragoniers did take in
Tangermund on the Elve. 49 W. Colonel Monro of Fowls with his own Regiment
alone took in the Castle of Bloe in Macleburg. 49 X. Cannon a hundred and
fifty were planted about the Royal Leaguer before Werben. 51 Z. The
Conjunction of Brethren against Gods Enemies is most pleasant. 62 Q. Common
danger does conjoyne oftentimes the coldest friends against the Enemy. 45 N.
Colonel Tivell slain at Leipsigh battle. 66 V. Colonel Lumsdell and
Lieutenant Colonel Musten both hurt at Leipsigh. 66 W. Colonel Colenbagh
Colonel Hall and diverse more kill'dat Leipsigh. 67 X. Count of Savoy presented
himself before the Emperor, the one side of his body clad with cloth of gold,
the other in glittering Armor. 77 S. The Commons do follow where Fortune does
favor. 82 and. Colonel Hepburn and I, were commanded with the whole
Musketeers of the Briggad to follow his Majesty unto Oxenford. 20 B. Colonel
Hobalt his sudden advancement. 85 E. Colonel Hobalt proves ungrateful. 87 K.
Colonel Lodowike Lesly his folk commanded by Captain Macdowgall on the
Castle of Russalhem on the Maine. 89 M. Clemency was showed by his Majesty to
three thousand Emperialists. 74 M. Concord the mother of all happiness, and of
the Commonwealth. 90 P. No Continent in Europe comparable to Germany. 80 O.
The Castle of Openham in the Paltz surprised by Ramseys Musketeers 92 T.
Colonel Axellilly lost his leg by the Cannon at Mentz. 95 Z. Cowards oftimes
speed better in worldly things, then those that merit the best. 96 B. A
Captain well rewarded for being unthankefull. 97 C. Colonel Alexander Ramsey
placed Governor of Creutzenach. 101 M. Colonel Grame abused for breaking of
Accord. 102 N. Conditions proposed by his Majesty of Sweden to the Duke of
Bavier and the Catholic Stends. 104 R. The Catholic League ever best
friends to the house of Austria. 106 W. The Clergy at Cullen reprehends their
Superiors. 87 I. The Constancy of the Protestants in the Paltz much to be
commended. 95 and. Conditions of Accord were broken at Stobing to Colonel
Monro his Regiment. 109 C. With Cannon it is easy marching from the fiercest
Enemy, having advantage of ground. 109 C. Colonel Lodowicke Lesly his Regiment
praised. 112 I. Colonel Worbrane an Austreker Freher Governor of Donavert.
116 O. Company that are good, ought to be conversed with, that we may savor of
their goodness. 123 E. No Crime before God more abominable then to glory in
sin. 170 F. Colonel Hepburn and his Briggad sent before his Majesty to guard
the Passage at Munchen. 125 G. The whole Compend of wit, requisite for a
Commander, in his Majesty of Sweden. 127 K. The Cantons of Switzerland gave
obedience to his Majesty's letters. 112 L. The Castle of Papenhaim, Aichstat,
and Tilligen brought all under contribution to the Swedes. 129 M. Conjunction
made by his Majesty with Nurenberg and the reasons of it. 132 S. Colonel
Montelaban and other Officers killed by the Swedes at Wisesloch. 139 D.
Colonel Doubattle destroys the Imperial Magazen at Freestat in the upper
Paltz. 144 M. Colonel Rhee killed on the party at Bosbowre in the upper Paltz
145 N. A Captain throwing off his doublet, on hot service, rewarded by his
Majesty of Sweden. 146 O. Cptaine Patrike Ennis slain at Nurenberg. 149 T.
Captain Traile and Captain Vausse both Scots shot through the neck at
Nurenberg and lived. 149 T. Cannon first invented (as it is thought) at
Nurenberg. 151 W. Courtesy and humility in a King is the Gem of his Crown.
162 S. Colonel Lodowike Lesly his Regiment praised for their Carriage at
Leitzen. 164 X. Colonel Folwe shot before Landsberg. 171 H. The Chancellor
Oxensterne after the Kings death made offer to the Duke of Saxon, to be
Director-Generall over the Army. 172 I. Cavaliers that leads others, ought to
entertain the affection of those, who served bravely, lest being disdained,
they might turn their Arms the contrary way. 174 N. Captain Bruntfield and
Quartermaster Sandelens sent Prisoners to Lindaw. 177 R. Colonells three made a
brave retreit at Minderkin on the Danube. 117 S. The Conclusion of the meeting
at Hailbron. 178 V. Colonel Monro of Obstell his Regiment reduced at
Heidelberg on the Necker, after his death. 178 V. Colonel Monro of Fowls
dead, and buried at Vlme on the Danube. 178 V. Colonel Monro of Fowls happy
in his death. 180 Z. Colonel Monro of Obstell, though untimely slain, was
made welcome to heaven through Christ his Redeemer. 180 and. D. Death ought
ever to be before our eyes, that we might the better contemn external things,
putting us in mind of what is able to profit the soul. 7 N. The Duke of
Savelly defended Damaine but slightly. 19 A. Disdain or contempt should be the
only thing to divert our hearts from foreign service. 22 E. Doubatle his
Dragoniers and my Musketeers were kept warm on service before Landsberg. 39 E.
Many will Desire to be partakers of our good fortunes, who never minded to
taste the bitter cup of our adversity. 44 N. The Difference betwixt Generals
is much to be observed at Werben. 56 H. The Duty of a General described, and
his properties. 57 I. The Duty of true piety ought to be observed by the
Leaders of Armies. 58 K. The Discoverers of the Enemies plots and counsels
ought to be well rewarded. 41 H. Though a man be Doubtful in advising, yet in
action he ought to be confident. 60 M. The Duke of Saxon terrified by the
example of Madeburg offered his service to his Majesty of Sweden. 61 O. The
Duke of Saxons Army most complete in show. 61 P. He Dies well in my opinion
that dies standing serving his King and country, for he merits Fame after
death, leaving good example to posterity. 70 C. Duke Anhault made Statholder at
Hall. 76 P. Duke William of Wymar appointed Statholder at Ereford. 76 Q. During
land most fertile for corn. 101 S. Duke Ernest of Wymar made Statholder of
Francony. 78 T. A most Difficult passage along a planke over the Maine. 80 X.
The Difference betwixt Cavaliers marching under an Army and gentle men
Travelers. 88 K. The Duty of an Officer is to Recognosce well. 92 V. Nothing
Discontents a worthy man more then to be rewarded like Cowards. 96 B. When the
Diligent is disappointed of his hire, it is hard, being rewarded with injury that
aid merit well. 96 B. The Duty of an Officer leading a party. 98 E. Thirty
thousand Ducats found in a Cannon at Munchen. 125 G. E. Ensign Greame gave
slight quarters at Brandenburg. 23 G. English Merchants commended for their
charity to Soldiers. 46 Q. Great Execution made by his Majesty's Cannon at
Leipsigh the second cause of the victory. 68 Y. External show profits little
without the inward gifts of the mind. 71 D. The long Expectation of our
happiness makes our joys the more welcome. 72 F. An Exhortation to all worthy
Cavaliers of the British Nation. 93 X. The Evangelists sparing their means
suffered the public to be near lost, being since beaten with their own
weapons. 106 X. Engolstat on the Danube a sure retreite for the Emperialists.
112 I. Engolstat really fortified and well provided thought impregnable by the
Swedes. 121 Z. Experience gives confidence in the greatest extremity and graces
our behavior. 130 N. The Enemy has great advantage at Nurenberg, which was
the loss of many brave Officers. 148 S. Error in counsel and unhappy
success commonly are the punishments of the proud Warrier. 158 K. An
Exhortation for Soldiers to mourn for sin. 168 A. Ensign Murrey slain
with the Cannon before Lanceberg. 172 I. The Emulation of virtue betwixt
friends commendable. 174 O. The Events of Kings projects and intentions avail
nothing till they acknowledge them to come from the fountain God. 60 N. An
Example notable of the rare virtue of Soldiers wives. 26 L. F. The Foresight
of a Commander availes much in preventing his Enemies designs. 10 O. Factious
and seditious Officers ought carefully to be avoided by the wise Commander. 13
T. Felt-marshall Tiffenbacke with his Colleagues escaped at Francfurt. 34 Y.
Felt-marshall Tiffenbacke discommended for timidity. 36 Q. Felt-marshall Horn
with the Finnes Horsemen made the charge, which put the Enemy to flight at
Leipsigh. 66 W. If the Fruit be honest and good we need not care how laborious
or painful our actions are. 72 F. Friendship next unto faith should be kept
unviolable. 75 O. No Friend more worthy to be chosen, then he who has showed
himself valiant against his Enemies. 75 O. Francfurt on the Maine taken in by
his Majesty of Sweden without blood. 89 M. Francfurt did well in preferring
good conditions of peace before uncertain war. 90 P. Fortune with her
boasting should never be suffered to pierce us, having tried sharper that could
not pierce. 95 A. Francfurt shot off their Cannon at the Queen of Sweedens
entry. 99 G. Felt-marshall Horn deligent in subduing the Towns on the Neckar.
100 L. Friendship is never durable where love does not grow. 105 V. Fear and
astonishment is great amongst the Papists in Bavaria. 116 P. Frontier Garrisons
are easily gotten by a victorious Army. 11 Q. The Fuckers of Ausburg from
Merchants turn Soldiers, were made Earls by the Emperor. 120 X. The Fuckers
lands disposed to old Ruthven for reward of virtue. 120 X. Friedberg near
Ausburg punished for betraying of the Swedens safegards. 136 Z. Felt-marshall
Horn takes in Trerebagh on the Mosell by Accord. 138 C. Felt-marshall Arnhem
takes in Grosglogo in Silesia. 139 D. Felt-marshall Horn paralleled in command
to Papenhaim. 143 I. Felt-marshall Arnham commended for his victories and for
his justice. 143 K. The Foundation of man's actions laid sure by virtue, the
building hardly can fail. 154 D. Felt-marshall Horn his good success in
Alsas. 165 Z. Felt-marshall Horn his retreit into Wertenberg. 177 T. G.
General Bannier commended for his carriage at Damaine. 18 Z. Goods evil
conquest, go away with wings swifter then the wind. 20 B* General Major
Kinphousen his oversight at Brandenburg discommended. 23 F. The Germans did
marry their wives on the condition they should be their companions in danger
and trouble. 27 N. God never was served for naught by no man. 37 B. Greedy
persons should never be advanced to public employment. 37 D. Greediness
alike common to Officers as to Soldiers. 37 D. Gustavus Mars his Minion and
Fortunes Favorite, or rather, her Master. 41 G. Good Commanders next unto God
are able to bring victory. 42 K. General Tilly presents himself with
thirty-two piece of Ordnance before Verben Leaguer. 52 E. General Tilly the
scourge of Madeburg. 61 O. General Tilly robbed of his honor at Leipsigh. 68
Y. A Good quarrel is the life of fighting. 70 C. General Tilly after
Leipsigh, leads a strong Army toward the Maine. 82 A. General Tilly his
retreat from the Maine. 85 D. A Generals place very weighty. 86 G. Gustavus
Fortunes Minion, and Mars his equal. H. General Tilly sorceth Gustavus Horn
to retire from Bambricke. T. General Tilly his General Quartermaster slain
at Looffe. 111 E. Globes Terrestiall and Celestial presented to his Majesty of
Sweden. 111 F. Grave Henry W. Fonselius shot at Bambricke and died at
Swineford. 112 G. Gustavus-Burg on the Maine a Trophie of victory. 112 H. Great
Generals they have an unsatiable desire of victory and good fortune till near
their end. 64 N. General Tilly with his Army plagued at once with seventy-two
pieces of Cannon. 116 Q. General Tilly lost a leg by the Cannon before the
Leake. 117 Q. General Tilly being seventy two years of age died honorably in
defense of his Country and Religion. 118 T. General Tilly before Leipsigh
would give his Majesty of Sweden but the title of a Cavalier, 118 T. General
Major Ruthven brought Schwabland under contribution. 119 X. General Bannier
commended for making the retreit from Engolstat. 122 Z. General Bawtish
succeeded to Tot in command. 137 B. General Major King sore wounded being
taken prisoner. 137 B. General Major Sparre, Gordon and Lesly taken prisoners
at Nurenberg. 145 N. General Banier and General Major Roisten both shot
before Nurenberg. 148 S. General Major Boethius slain at Nurenberg. 150 T.
Good Fortune is never on one side. 151 X. H. Hopburne his Major slain at
Francfurt. 33 W. Horsemens carriage at Leipsigh commendable. 69 Z. Honor and
glory are the enticements to pain and travel, and by exercise in war men
attain to courage, and constant valor frequenting danger. 69 and Hopburne and
Lumsdell commended by his Majesty to the Duke of Saxon. 75 N. Hanow taken in by
slight. 85 E. Those whom God Honors are worthy of honor from their equals 87
K. Hechst taken in by accord. 89 M. Men are Hurt sometimes as a presage of
worldly luck. 95 A. Hostages fifty taken out of Bavier. 126 H. Hunting most
pleasant about Minken and Bavier. 125 H. Heroicks who would prove, should
follow and imitate Gustavus. 127 K. A Hasty man without discretion is never
good in an Army. 152 Y. Holke and Gallas brethren, as Simeon and Levi. 153 B.
Holke in Saxony, being a Lutheran, showed less compassion then a Papist. 156
G. I. The Imperialists were well paid for hanging out the goose at Francfurt.
31 V. The Irish at Francfurt did valorously resist the yellow and blew
Briggads. 34 Y. The Imperialists surprised inter pocula, at Francfurt. 36 A.
The Imperialists had forty-one Cornets defeated before their coming to Verben.
52 A. The Imperialists were twice stronger then our Army at Verben. 55 G. The
Imperialists lost at Leipsigh eigh-thousand men. 67 X. As Ignorance
precipitates men into danger, so to a generous heart nothing seems difficile.
69 Z. No greater Joy can come to man, then to evercome his Enemy by fighting.
70 C. The Imperialists committed great abuses at the intaking of Vysingberg.
122 B. The Imperial Leaguer before Nurenberg did extend from Stein to the
Flect called Zarendorffe. 134 W. The Imperialists chased out of Furt at the
coming of the Swedens succors. 147 Q. The Imperial Leaguer saluted with
Cannon for a whole day. 148 R. The Imperial Colonells diverse killed at
Nurenberg. 151 V. Ignominy and loss of life the fruit of entertaining to much
Camradship. 161 I. When Industry cannot purchase one smile from fortune, some
others are wrapped up in fortunes lap. 174 M. Intelligence the good of it, most
necessary to an Army. 179 Y. K. Kinphowsen affirmed that one ounce of good
fortune was better then a pound weight of wit. 10 O. The King of Sweden doubted
never to let put in execution what he once commanded. 16 Y. The King of Sweden
in extremity of cold being all wet, did eat before he changed clothes. 21 D.
The King of Sweden, though stout, was seen to stoop for a Cannon Bullet. 22
D. The King of Sweden did outshoote old Tilly in experience. 25 I. The King of
Sweden did discharge the duty of a General Major before Francfurt. 31 T. The
King of Sweden when his Army was weakest he dug most in the ground. 41 H.
The King of Sweden at Berlin forced the Duke of Brandenburg to quit the Saxon.
43 M. The King of Sweden was alike ready to govern the State as to fight his
Enemies. 46 Q. The King of Sweden caused draw his great Cannon through the
River of the Elve on their Carriage. 49 W. The King of Sweden his order in
defending his Leaguer worthy observance. 51 and. The King of Sweden seeks
advice of his chief Officers at Verben. 52 B. The King of Sweden with a strong
party chased the Emperialists within their Army. 54 F. The Kings prudency and
wisdom in command answerable to the dignity of his Majesticke person. 57 I.
When a King fights a battle he puts much on hazard. 62 Q. The King of Sweden
makes merry with the Duke of Saxon at Hall. 74 L. The King of Sweden for the
advancement of the war made a like use of Protestants and Lutherans. 77 R.
Kings or Princes have no other charters then their sword and the oath of
fidelity. 77 S. The King of Sweden to march over Duringvault did divide his
Army. 78 T. The King of Sweden caused publish and Edict in Franconia. 85 D. The
King of Sweden considering the weakness of his Army at Wertzburg gave out
some moneys. 86 H. The King of Sweden steered his course aright at Wertzburg.
87 H. The King of Sweden alike able tam art quam Mart. 87 I. The King of
Sweden marched through Francfurt as in a solemn precession for order. 89 L.
The King of Sweden Patriot and Protector of Religion in Germany. 90 P. The King
of Bohemia wonderfully well liked of by the Cities and Commonalty in Germany.
91 R. The King of Sweden made no difference of seasons to pusue his Enemies. 92
V. The King of Sweden in six months freed the Paltz of all the Enemies. 94 Y.
The King of Sweden for his Sisters sake the Queen of Bohemia in one night did
anger the King of Spain, the Emperor, and the King of France. 93 Y. The King
of Sweden and his Chancellor sat whole days at Counsel. 100 H. The King of
Sweden his peremptory answer to the French Ambassador at Mentz. 100 K. The
King of Sweden did grant a still stand on a condition. 105 P. The King of Sweden
entertained four whole Armies at once. 107 A. The King of Bohemia his
discourse with the Scots Briggad at Vinchen. 110 D. The King of Sweden and the
King of Bohemia nobly received by the Lords of Nurenberg. 111 F. The King of
Sweden gives God thanks in Saint Annes Church at Ausburg. 117 R. The K. of
Swede his speech co^siderable, his horse being shot under him. 123 D. The King
of Sweden a good shepherd. 130 O. The King of Sweden finding the Enemy strong
gave some contentment unto his weak Army. 131 Q. The King of Sweden and the
Imperial Army had the eyes of all Europe fixed on their Actions. 140 E. The
King of Sweden rides at Anchor as at a Bay under Nurenberg. 140 F. The King of
Sweden defeats a party of the Emperialists at Bosbore in the upper Paltz. 145
M. The King of Sweden ever enemy to idleness. 151 X. The King of Sweden
divides his Army in Bavier to march into Saxony. 159 I. The King of Sweden
having thanked the Scots Briggad left them in Bavaria to be strengthened. 159
M. The King of Sweden on his march to Saxony did cut off with a party three
hundred Emperialists. 160 N. The King joined his Army with Duke Bernard of
Wymar in Duringlang. 160 N. The King of Sweden leaving the Queen at Erford,
made a speech to the Counsill. 160 O. The King of Sweden crossed the Leake with
the Army and marched to Nawmberg. 161 P. The King of Sweden caused to throw off
the Bridges on the Sale. 161 P. The King of Sweden as a Soldier troubled with
a double care. 161 Q. The King of Sweden his exhortation to the people. 161 R.
The King of Sweden compared to the Sun 162 S. The King of Sweden his
exhortation at Leitzen to fight well. 163 T. The King of Sweden having charged
bravely his enemies being thrice wounded fell at Leitzen. 164 W. A King ought
never to endanger himself, his Crown and Country on a day of battle. 166 and.
The King of Sweden at Leitzen discharged alike the duty of a King and of a
Soldier. 167 A. The King of Sweden his confession as a sinner before death.
168 C. The King of Sweden praised a Simili. 168 C. L. When Love and fear is in
the hearts of inferiors, then the command is not burdensome, nor the obedience
slavish. 14 V. We ought to Live so as we are commanded, to live well. 14 V.
Lieutenant George Heatly a valorous young man was shot here at Damaine, and
slain afterward at Vberline in Schwabland being a Captain of my Regiment. 17
Z. Lieutenant Colonel Li^desey and Captain Moncreeffe, both slain in
defense of Newbrandenburg. 23 F. Three things pleasant in Gods sight, the Love
betwixt brethren, the friendship betwixt neighbors, and the Loyalty between
man and wife. 28 P. The Love of Felt-marshall Gustavus Horn to his Lady at her
death. 29 R. The Love of man and wife should be free of gall, despite, anger,
and of bitterness. 29 S. Lieutenant Colonel Butler commended for his valor.
34 Y. Lieutenant Colonel Dowbattle surprised the watch before Lantsberg. 39
E. Who can Labor an Army, as Gustavus did before Leipsigh, he may drink the
best wine grows under the Empire. 69 A. Lieutenant Colonel Buckoy wounded.
111 E. The Leaguer at Nurenberg went in a circular Orb round the City. 132 V.
A new Leaguer made at Nurenberg in despite of the Enemy. 151 W. Lieutenant
Colonel John Sinclaire killed at Newmarke. 178 V. Lieutenant Colonel
Sinclaire his death lamented. 180 and. M. He ought to be Modest and secret that
maintains a Strength or Fort. 10 P. Major Synot died at Statin. 12 R. Major
John Sinclaire at Trepto made a brave show of a slight game. 24 I. Major
Bruntfield died at Buckestehood of his wounds. 24 I. Meleager refusing to
stir for father or mother, at the desire of his wife Cleopatra he took Arms
and preserved the City from ruin. 29 S. Major Sinclaire and Lieutenant Georg
Heatly were the first that scaled the walls of Francfurt. 34 Y. Mack^y his
Regiment had ever good fortune in service, as they had in their quarters, never
knowing want for nine years. 47 T. The Marquess of Hamilton was made welcome
at Verben. 52 C. The Marquess his Army arrived in good time for the furthering
of the service, though not for the weal of the Soldiers. 53 D. Men of our
profession ought to hear their troubles patienly, that in the end they may
gain credit and honor. 72 F. Major Rothwell and his brother bot^ slain at
Wertzberg. 106 W. His Majesty of Sweden put to the trial of his judgment by
Tilly. 85 F. Mentz upon the Rhine taken in by accord. 95 Z. A Royal March made
by two Kings through Franconia unto Bavaria. 112 H. The young Markgrave of
Turlough killed with the Cannon before Engolstat. 120 Y. The Marquess of
Hamilton took leave of his Majesty at Newstat. 154 C. When a Man of war
grows proud over victories, then commonly approaches his punishment, except
he suddenly repent. 158 K. Magnanimity and humility were cohabitant in his
Majesty of Sweden. 162 R. Man being but the Ball of time tossed from hand, to
hand governed by a power, that must be obeyed. 174 M. Major Sidsefe with
Ramseys Musketeers makes the Emperialists give ground. 176 Q. N. The Neglect of
the Commander of Lettes discommendable. 15 X. Nature does beget us miserable,
and we live over-burthened with cares, vanishing like a flower or bubble. ult.
Novices in war sometimes are made sick with the thundering of Cannon before
they come near danger. 70 B. Neutrality sought out of policy. 103 Q. Nurenberg
most commodious for the Protestant faction. 129 N. Necessity seldom suffers to
make choice of time. 130 P. The Nurenbergers made up twenty-foure Companies,
which carried the Letters of the Alphabet in their Colors. 132 T. Nurenberg
for three months together sustained eight hundred thousand souls within the
walls, besides the entertaining of the Army. 132 T. At Nurenberg the Horsemen
were set to foot. 144 L. At Nurenberg left under cure above two thousand. 150
W. The Nurenbergers bring huge baggage from the Imperial Leaguer. 153 A. At
Nurenberg were lost above thousands of horse and catttle. 153 A. If there be
any Nectar in this life, it is for sorrow we endure for the goodness and love
of our absent friends. 157 I. Naumburg taken in by Colonel Bransten. 140 O.
Novices in wars being afraid of death do seek their safeties in flying, as
the Saxons did. 69 A. O. Officers of Mackeys Regiment were like the Eagles
birds taking command on them how soon they could but fly. 14 V. The Order used
by the King at Brandenburg worth the observance. 15 W. Officers that grow
fantastic for wealth, checked for pride. 20 C. Officers that hunt for credit,
may gain renown though poor. 20 C. When Officers grow too rich, they grow
feeble. 50 Z. Occasions taken in wars of times do help more then virtue it
self. 24 H. No Officer of discretion ought to advance further then with
convenience he may retire. 42 K. The Oppression done to the poor causes the
unfortunate events of warlike enterprises. 48 V. The Order his Majesty
appointed to be kept at Verben Leaguer, is worth the observance. 51 and. The
Order his Majesty placed the Army unto at Leipsigh is worth the observance. 64
S. To Obtain Victory, art and skill in handling the weapons of our warfare,
are requisite. 69 and. An Outfall well repulsed by push of pike. 162 S.
Opportunity of time a swift Eagle. 129 N. Oxensterne the Chancellor appointed
by the King of Sweden to have the direction at Nurenberg. 153 A. The Office of
a Generalla great charge. 137 A. An Outfall made at Rhine by Lieutenant
Colonel John Lesly. 100 I. P. The Plague or Pestilence, though raging among
Soldiers, ought not to hinder them from going freely on their duties. 10 O.
The Pest raging at Statin fewer Scots died then of other Nations causa
incognita. 12 R. Princes that are absolute should have way given unto them in
things indifferent. 13 T. A Prentiship well past by an Officer under his
Majesty of Sweden, such an one may be made choice of to serve his King and
Country before another. 21 D. Publia Cornelia Annia lived twenty years without
once offending her husband. 29 Q. Public employment ought never be given to
greedy persons. 85 D. Pikemen being resolved men are best for execution. 37 C.
In a Prince truth of all virtues is chiefest. 45 O. The Plague removed in the
dog-dayes from Verben Leaguer wonderfully. 49 Y. Plumes or Feathers are
sometimes tokens rather to cut men down then of safety. 70 A. Protestation
made by his Majesty to the Lords of Francfurt. 87 I. The Power of example seen
in the following of Francfurt. 90 Q. Papenhaim relieved Madeburg. 104 S. The
People of Nurenberg overjoyed at the sight of two Kings at once, shed tears.
111 E. Palsgrave Augustus took in Heckstat on the Danube. 115 M. The Papists
in Bavaria were hanged by their purses. 116 P. The Protestant Council^ at
Ausburg did present unto his Majesty of Sweden Corn, Fishes and Wine. 118 S.
Piety where ever most, there is most happiness. 119 W. Papenhaim praised for
his warlike exploits. 136 A. Papenhaim merits to be recorded for his resolute
carriage and extraordinary diligence. 142 H. Papenhaim the first adventured
after the battle of Leipsigh with an Amy in Lower Saxon. 142 H. Papenhaim
compared to a crafty Pyrat at Sea. 142 H. Panicke fear does betray many brave
men. 152 Z. Papenhaim retired from Mastreicht and relieved Paterborne. 157 H.
Papenhaim took in Milhousen and plundered Saltz. 157 H. Papenhaim took in
Theanestade and caused hang three Burger-masters half dead. 157 H. Papenhaim
immoderate in his victories. 158 K. It is Pity pride should be oftimes
cohabitant with valor. 158 K. Punnishment of cruelty though it come late yet
sure it never comes light. 158 K. Papenhaim retired from Hall was killed at
Leitzen. 165 X. Pencell or tangue can add nothing to his Majesty of Swedens
perfection. 169 D. Palsgrave Christian did neglect a golden opportunity at
Rhine. 173 K. Some do find Pefection in the very jaws of mischief, while as
others flying from danger meet with death. 174 M. Q. The Queens Majesty of
Sweden proposed to other women for good example of patience. 26 L. R. Robert
Rosse killed by the Cannon before Damaine. 17 Z. Robert Monro Furer and Robert
Monro Sergeant both died at Brandeburg. 47 R. River of the Elve so shallow that
the Kings Cannon were drawn through. 49 W. A Retreit most formal made by his
Majesty of Sweden at Verben Leaguer. 55 G. Robert Monro Kilternes Son died at
Vittenberg. 59 L. As the Rudder in a ship does govern, so God moves and
governes the world, and does not stir himself. 60 M. Resolution ought ever
to be resisted with Resolution. 92 W. Rut-master Home of Carrelside praised for
his valor. 98 D. The Rhinegrave retired from the Enemy with loss. 98 D. The
Rhinegrave being modestly valiant had both remissness and courage. 99 F.
Ramseys Regiment good seconds to their Countrymen, 116 O. Religion and justice
are the fundaments of good society. 119 V. Religion is our guide to Heaven, and
on earth the Fountain of our justice. 119 W. Being Rich in credit the want of
external things should never greeve us 123 C. The Rhinegraves Regiment having
taken seven Standards from the Spaniard, chased them out of the Paltz. 155 X.
Rich he is in God and not poor who ever is content with his Fortune. 181 and.
S. Soldiers wonderfully delivered from danger at Sea. 4 L. The Story of
Hugolene Depise, remarkable. 20 B. Soldiers wives preferred to other women,
for many reasons. 27 M. Sempronius Gracchus choosed to die before his wife. 29
R. Scots resent soonest of all Nations the austere carriage of their
Commanders. 42 I. Strengths or Forts are discouraged while as their secrets are
discovered. 42 I. The Spade and the Shovell ever good Companions in danger. 52
K. Soldiers insurrection amongst themselves, is to be avoided. 47 R. Serbester
beer the best in Dutchland for the body as their Religion is for the soul. 47
T. Soldiers well rewarded will refuse no danger. 50 Z. The Scots Briggad with
push of Pike disordered the enemies battles at Leipsigh. 66 V. The Spoil was
parted at Leipsigh Leaguer the enemy being gone. 71 E. Saxony was, is and shall
be seeds belli till the wars end in Germany. 72 I. The Scots Briggad was
thanked by his Majesty of Sweden. 73 I. Sir James Ramsey and Sir John Hamilton
force the passage on the Maine at Wurtzberg. 79 W. The Swedens entered first the
storm at Wurtzburg castle. 80 Y. The Scottish Clergy esteemed of abroad. 81 Z.
Sir John Hamilton like to a Cavalier of worth did resent the wrong done to him
and his Country at Wurtzburg. 82 and. A Skirmish at Oxenford in view of his
Majesty, by the Scots. 83 C. Sir Henry Vane Ambassador for Britain arrived at
Wurtzburg. 85 E. Stanhem taken in by Accord. 87 K. Soldiers sometimes have
pleasant marches. 89 N. A Scots Sergeant slain with a Cannon bullet at
Oppenhem drinking Tobacco by the fire. 91 S. The Scottish fashion of old was to
fight pell mell with two handed Swords. 93 W. The Scots at his Majesty's
crossing the Rhine in the night did valorously resist the Spanish fury. 93 X.
The Spaniard Enemy mortal to the Prince Elector Palatine of Rhine. 93 X. The
Spaniards retire into Frankendall. 95 and. The Scots of Ramseys Regiment by
scaleing the walls took in diverse little Towns in the Paltz. 101 M. Scots
Regiments diverse were under General Tods Army. 102 O. Sharnesse sent to his
Majesty of Sweden to treat for a Neutrality. 103 P. Suspicions past betwixt
his Majesty of France and the King of Sweden. 105 V. Sweden Soldiers did run
away from their Post at Donavert. 115 N. A Stone house a scurvy defense against
Cannon. 115 O. Sweden Soldiers three hundred in one night slain before
Engolstar. 120 Z. A Soldier in one night could pass prentice for resolution
before Engolstat. 120 Z. Scots Officers advanced by General Major Ruthven. 122
C. Scots Regiments two were appointed at Minken in Bavier to guard two Kings.
125 G. Spoil in great brought out of Bavaria. 126 I. Scots Colonells two were
unfortunate by their imprisonment. 174 O. Spire given over by Colonel Hornegt.
135 X. The Swedens convoyed the Spaniard toward Mastreight. 135 Y. Stoad beset
again with a Sweden Garrison. 137 A. The Swedens take in Coblentz and quit it
to the French. 138 C. The Swedens beleaguor Benfeld in Alsas. 139 D. The
Spaniard discommended for his conduct in the Paltz. 141 F. Spaniards they were
not all that fled neither were they all Swedens that followed the victory. 141
G. The Soldier glorying in his poverty is contented with any thing. 141 O.
Separation wonderful of two Armies without a shot. 154 D. Stout he must be and
wise also that cannot be surprised. 155 E. The Separation of loving friends
compared to that death makes betwixt the body and Soul. 155 F. A Slight accord
made at Rhine on the Leake. 159 L. Soldiers ought to setle their wives before
they should be impediments unto them at service. 161 Q. Soldiers abstain more
from vice for fear of punishment then for obedience to Gods Law. 162 R. The
Swedens after Leitzen resolved to revenge the Kings death. 165 Y. Soldiers
having once conceived an evil opinion of their Leaders, no eloquence is able
to remove it. 174 N. The Swedens Army was left at Donavert 1633 for three
months. 178 V. T. Terror in great amongst the Catholics at Erford. 77 P. The
Tyranny of our Enemies ought rather to be prevented then suffered. 132 T. The
Towns about Nurenberg unhumanely used by Gallas. 154 B. Time nor number of
years does not make a good Soldier, but the continual meditation of exercise
and practice. 69 A. V. The Valor of Lieutenant Colonel Walter Butler
commended at Francfurt on the Oder. 34 Y. Victory is never peculiar unto any.
50 Z. The Valiant man would choose to die honorably when Cowards desire to
live with ignominy. 72 H. In Vain we murmur at things must be, in vain we
mourn for what we cannot remedy. 174 M. Unworthy they are of command who
prefer any thing to the health of their followers. 155 E. VV. A Woman
wonderfully delivered of a child a shipboard. 6 M. Our Wings the farther they
are spread from us, our bodies are the better guarded. 10 O. In Wars nothing
can be well effectuated without the guide of intelligence. 41 H. Wirtzburg
taken by accord. 79 V. The Want of feathers is a great impediment unto flying
87 K. The Wings of the Empire were near clipped by his Majesty of Sweden. 108 A.
To Win credit we must rather seek to our Enemies then to stay their commings.
113 I. Both Wise and stout they ought to be that lead Armies. 152 Z. Wisdom
force or power cannot prevail against that cause the Lord takes in hand. 154
D. Wallestine takes in the Castle of Plesingburg. 166 and. Wallestine his
retreit after losing the battle of Leitzen. 165 Z. Wallestine did go about
to fight more with craft and policy then with the dint of Arms. 153 A. Y. The
Young Rhinegrave slain 1631. 52 A. Young Papenhaim valorously did keep out
the castle of Mansfelt. 113 K.

License is granted for the printing of this Book.

Hampton Court, December. 8. 1636.

John Coke.

FJNJS.

