NAKED TRUTH Or a Plain DISCOVERY Of the Intrigues of Amorous Fops, And Humors
of several other WHIMSICAL PERSONS, In a Pleasant and profitable Dialogue
between a precious Saint-like Sister called Terpole and Mimologos a Scoffing
Buffoon

Written by DON FRANCISCO B'ALTHEC de Montalvan, and faithfully translated out
of the Original By W. H. M. D.

Dulce est decipere in loco. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Palmer, at the Crow^ in
Westminster Hall. 1673.

THE TRANSLATORS PREFACE.
READER,
DO'nt you wonder to see a Spaniard travel up and down our Nation in an English
habit, and so light an one too? Cease to wonder, and know he laid aside his
wonted gravity purposely, out of complaisance, that he might more freely
converse with us; and he seeing that the humor of our people was such, that
sober Truths would not down with them, without an inter-mixture of Jollity, he
condescends to gratify our Palats, which will nauseate the bitter Pills of
reprehension, unless gilded overwith Jovisance and Drollery.

In his travails here, when he of late took his Voyage into England; he goes
about like a Knight Errant, and puts himself upon an hazardous adventure; to
censure persons for the exorbitances of their anomalous life, an hard Province
it is he undertakes, and not likely to please, except here and there one, who
are unprejudiced and unconcerned: In his passage to and fro, he observes the
humors of several sorts of persons, and animadverts upon them pretty smartly
sometimes; especially, upon the debauchery of the effeminate Gallant and the
Ridiculous Fopperies of the ignorantly zealous Phanatick; here perhaps as in a
clear Mirror thou may see thy own Face, read thy own fault and destiny: Now
let me desire thee not to translate that again; which I have once translated
already; I mean that thou do not lay thy own fault upon another, but suspect
thy self, under the person of another; lay thy hand upon thy heart, and say is
it I he means? And what faults thou meetest with in my Translation heartily
rather correct, than satyrically carp at. But first let me entreat thee to
amend what is amiss in thy self, (because charity begins at home) and then in
him who fervently is

Devoted to do you all the good he can. W. H.

To his Honored FRIEND THE Ingenious Publisher of this Facetious Discourse.
PYthagoras was in the right, Lucian's again.
Revived, we find, in your more happy strain;
For herein only we acknowledge odds
Your witty Dialogue reviles no Gods;
But with free mirth comes bravely to engage
And lash the Follies of a Brainsick age;
Now Learning and Religion wasted lie
'Twixt pious Nonsense and wild Drollery
Your harmless Joques correct our Ignorance
And wise Physitian-like in complaisance
To coy depraved Pallats, guild 'ore still
With pleasant, Gayeties your salubrious Pill
A Dish so Cooked all Appetites will fit
Deep Notions intermixed with sprightly wit
Envy must grant this composition rare
A Rabbis learning, and a Poets Air;
Those that from grave Discourses fly away
You to good Lessons unawares betray
The Splay-mouth'd Brother, and his melting Mate
In this Glass view themselves, and blushing hate
Henceforwards all these darling Fopperies
They therefore so zealously did prize
Blew-Apron'd Levites, Fortunetelling Quacks
Empty scull'd Gallants, cheating what-de? lacks
All here Arraigned, hold up their guilty hand
And for their several crimes receive the brand.
Let supercilious Cato's then stand by
With their morose affrightning Gravity
Whilst we with thanks applaud your Art that know
At once to profit, and delight us too.
H. C.

NAKED TRUTH OR A Plain Discovery Of the Intrigues of Amorous Fops, and Humors
of several other whimsical persons, in a pleasant and profitable Dialogue,
between a precious Saint-like Sister called Terpole and Mimologos a Scoffing
Buffoon.
Mim. WEll met Dear Sister, whether away so fast.


Terp. Fast me no fast. I have fasted long enough already, now I have somewhat
else to do than to stand prattling with you I am so hungerbitten: Therefore to
be short, I am newly come from a Lecture, and am afraid my Dinner will be
spoiled the Sermon was so long.


Mim. Well the short and the long of it is, I cannot find in my Heart to say
that I am glad you have been so well employed, for you might have been better
occupied, (I believe) in some other place, but tell me prithee Terpole, what
long winded Brother in a short Jump Coat did preach to day?


Terp. Fie upon you Mimologue, you will never leave your old wont to flout at
goodness, but I thought, you could have expressed your self more properly, than
to call such an exercise, Preaching; we who are acquainted best with the Holy
Dialect style it standing.


Mim. I thank you good Terpole for admonishing me of my Error, for true it is I
did not speak so Congruously when I said so, for now I remember me in
Northamptonshire I have heard, it is a common phrase among the Sisters there:
Such an one Stood to day; therefore to speak at length more properly what was
his Name that Stood to day.


Terp. He is called Mr. Stan-hup.


Mim. A very proper Name, Faith Sister to speak according to the Flesh.


Terp. You still improve all I say to this scurrilous scoffing way, you are the
errantest Droller in Nature, and it seems have accustomed your self to it, and
consuetudo est altera Natura, you know custom is a second nature, for I have so
much Latin, being taught in my Fathers House, when I was a Girl by my Fathers
Chaplain, as also a little of the Greek Language.


Mim. It may be you have learned French too.


Terp. Yes to deal plainly with you, I have.


Mim. I will not ask you, whether you have learned Italian and Spanish, for I
presume, you have not proceeded so far.


Terp. It had been no great presumption in you, if you had put the question, if
you will not think it any oftentation in me, to answer that I have; but (absit
verbo arrogantia) it is true enough. For my Father resolving, that there should
be nothing wanting as to the accomplishing me in my Education, allowed me
Masters to instruct me in all these Languages.


Mim. Now I have much ado to keep my hands off, from taking thee up, and that
to purpose, you do so provoke me? What have thou Terpole to do with so many
Languages? Thou have enough to confound twenty Men; especially when prattling is
so incident to your sex, that a man cannot well suppose one to be a Woman
without it, therefore (...) in Greek signifies both foeminam and
confabulationem; it is vulgarly said, that one Tongue is enough for a Woman,
and the Spaniards do so stomach it, that Women should be learned in several
Languages, that they will not so much as admit they should have any Latin;
therefore they say in their Proverb. De Mula que haze hin, y muger que habla
Latin guarte. Take heed of a winching Mule, and a Latin Woman, and hear what a
modern writer of our own Country says, one of the Minor Poets at least; whose
Verses in English run thus.

You wish me to a Wife rich, fair and young,
That had the Spanish, French and Latin tongue.
I thank you Sir, for I will have none such
I think one Language will be tongue too much.
Then love you not the Learned? As my life
The learned Scholar, not the learned Wife.

Terp. It is an hard and unjust sentence in you men toward us to doom our sex
to the wheel altogether, as if we were fit for nothing but to spin, and prick
in a Clout; whereas we are capable of more sublime things: I know it is
commonly tossed up and down in the Mouths of the Vulgar, as you say, that one
Tongue is enough for a Woman: In some sense I grant it is true, that is, where
there is not prudence to regulate and moderate our words and actions; and in
that case for all as I know, one Tongue may be too much. But discretion does
not consist so much in speaking few words, as no superfluous or impertinent
ones. Therefore many tongues are no harm, if we know (...) as the moralist
Plutarch has it. Parts both natural and acquired in Women, and good qualities
make their Company acceptable, whereas it would be an insupportable burden for
men to stay long with us, if we did twattle about nothing, but what Bands or
Gowns were in fashion, or such like Gew-Gaw things, and affected nothing but to
besmear our Faces with paint, which is the (...) of an unsanctifyed Mind, and
is altogether inconsistent with that profession we make of Sanctity; yea truly
it is a great scandal to the precious people of God in all places, and argues a
Woman to be very immodest, I remember what the Italians say of such an one.
Donna che si liscia Vuol far altro che la piscia: and likewise it is as great
an offense to the Saints, to see some of our sex (which is a thing that I could
wish was not so commonly practiced among us) to besprinkle our faces with
Patches, which show as a good Author says wittily; that there is a Room to be
Let, by the Bill on the door: I say, should we affect nothing else but these
things, and to appear in a new Habit or Dress every day, or as if we were
nothing else but a kind of walking Mercers shops, and were born and shaped for
our Clothes, and consequently if Eve had not fallen had lived to no purpose:
What delight would sober persons (think you) take in our Company? We labor
under a great infamy in this kind, it is said we have got such a trick, to be
so long a tricking our selves up, that half a day is scarce sufficient to make
our selves ready; and therefore old Terence, that knew well enough how to speak
true Latin, and so was well enough acquainted with the Foeminine Gender says;
Dum moliuntur, dum comuntur, Annus est.


Mim. Herein I do agree with you Terpole, that the knowledge of any thing that
is good is so far from being a burden, that it sets a luster on, and is an
Ornament to the persons that are endued with it, And I know no reason why Women
should be barred from Cultivating their minds with Virtue and knowledge, which
if they do seriously endeavor, (be it spoken without flattery) I verily
believe they are capable of as many virtues as men, and what if I should say
may exceed them; for they are of a finer mould and temper than Men; for whereas
Man was made of the dust or slime, of the Earth or Red Earth; Woman was made of
the dust or slime refined, she is so curiously and exquisitely wrought, that it
is said in Holy Writ, Genesis 2.22. That God Built her, for so you have it in the
Original, though we translate it made her. Which implies what an admirable
structure was reared up when she was made; as if she was Gods Masterpiece, and
that he showed his chiefest skill in her contrivance, you see then what a
curious piece of work Woman is, (and notwithstanding the vilifying and
satirical expressions of some malevolent persons, who though they love them
well enough while they are pleasured by them, yet when that is over, they take
a pleasure to speak evil, and write defaming Libels against them, such is that
of the Italians, Se la Donna fosse piccola come e buona, la minima soglia le
farebbe una vest and una Corona. i. e.

Were a Woman as little as she is good
A Pescod would make her a Cap and Hood,
Notwithstanding (I say) this and such like Sarcasmes (which are more worthy of
contempt than any confutation) it is evident enough they are susceptible of all
excellent qualifications, and if it were fit to support so known a Truth, with
so weak a Prop as fiction is, I would refer those that doubt of it, to the
Poets Nine Muses, to which we ascribe the invention of Arts. But there is a
real exemplification of this in Anna Maria a Schurman; though she was of no
great stature of Body, to what an Altitude and Procerity of Knowledge did she
grow to; she was a Paragon for many incomparable Qualities and Virtues, that
she was adorned with. She writ Latin so elegantly and politely, as none
exceeded her; as appears by her Works in Print: In which are many Epistles to
several Learned Men, most in Latin, some in Hebrew, Greek, and French: She was
even ad stuporem Docta. See what an Honorable Elogy Salmasius gives of her,
which is Printed with her Works. She had a transcendent faculty in Limning,
engraving, and a curious Hand at Needle Work; so that the Cloth she wrought
upon even seemed to pride it self, in being pricked and wounded by such an Hand.
There are many other Women of other Nations, that are qualified with rare and
singular endowments of Mind; as that great Heroina the Duchess of Newcastle;
whose Name will be eternized after her Death, by those living Monuments of her
Books.

But what shall I say, or rather what shall I not say (if I had a Copia
Verborum sufficient for such an undertaking) of Elizabeth Queen of England; who
(although she was not in Communion with the Roman Church) was a Peerless Pearl
of Virtue, and all excellent and admirable Sciences, the great VVonder of her
Sex.

What Language was there so difficult, that she did not attain to, and that in
perfection. Mr. Ascham who was one among the rest that instructed her, has for
the perpetuating her Memory left it upon Record, that she read more Greek in
one Day, than many great Doctors did read Latin in an whole Week. But I shall
say no more in a Panegyrical way of her, lest I should Eclipse the splendor of
her unexampled glorious actions with my unpolished lines, and indeed what
Tongue can sufficiently express the Grandeur of her unparelled perfections.

Una loqui te Lingua nequit, quae laudis opimae
Materiam linguis omnibus una dabas.
One Tongue in Praise of thy great worth's to weak
Which yields full matter for all Tongues to speak.
There are some other Women that I could mention, though not that excel in the
knowledge of Tongues, (for indeed since Men are so ill affected to their
Tonguing of it so much, they have laid aside the study of Languages.) Yet are
adorned with many eminent qualities. But they being now living, their Modesty
will not suffer them to hear their own commendations, and so I shall forbear to
name them: by what I have said then, I think it is apparent enough that Nature,
or rather the God of Nature has not denied Women parts and abilities,
sufficient for the acquiring the highest seize and perfections that Men
are capable of; and that all kind of Knowledge and Virtue is as commendable in
them as in Men. Therefore I cannot but Judge that Satirical scomm that Francis
Duke of Brittany, used concerning Isabella the Daughter of Scotland, savoured
more of an humor than reason; who when he understood that she had been
studious, and was learned, said, that a Woman was knowing enough, when she knew
the difference between her own Smock, and her husbands Doublet.


Terp. I am glad since you have dissented from me all along in our former
dissertations, that now at length we meet in Vno tertio, And I give you many
thanks for the right you have done our Sex.


Mim. I hope the rest of the Sisters will have the same Sentiment, that you
have, of my good inclinations toward them, and that they will show their
forwardness upon occasion to pleasure me, when I stand in need of them; but it
comes into my Mind Terpole to ask you another Question; which I had almost
forgot: Since you have vvaded through the knowledge of so many Tongues; Did you
not learn Hebrew too among the rest.


Terp. Yes I did learn that too, so far as to read it, and to give the
Grammatical Construction of two or three of David's Psalms: for it being the
holy Tongue, the primitive Tongue, and the Language that God revealed his Will
to us in the old Testament, I thought it was worth my enquiry into it.


Mim. But there is another reason which you have omitted, that seems to carry a
great deal of force with it, and might induce you to love this Tongue more than
any other, and that is, because it has more Cognation and Affinity with your
sex than any other, for it is to be read from the Right Hand to the Left, and
thereupon a good Author says, that Women and Hebrew are much alike, they are
best when read backward.


Terp. You are still for your Puns and Joques, but to be serious: I wonder that
since the Hebrew tongue is of such antiquity, and conduces so much to the
right understanding of Scripture, that it should be so much vilipended, yea and
exploded too, and that by Men, who would fain have the World believe that they
are not inferior to any for learning.


Mim. There is no other account to be given of this, but that it proceeds from
ignorance and Envy, for those persons that do contemn it, are (as the Elegant
Moralist Plutarch expresses it) like those that are troubled with blear Eyes
(...) who cannot look upon any bright thing without great offense: Such think
to raise themselves to the Zenith of an huge Reputation by censuring and
eclipsing of others that know more than they: These persons deserve to be
severely lashed, but that I conceive 'twill be time misspent they are so
incorrigible: I shall say no more now concerning such but this: They being
Blind stand more in need of pity than reproof, and being they refuse to have
their Eyes opened, and be led by Counsel; a Dog with Bell about his Neck is
fitter for them than good advice; only in compassion to them, I could find in
my Heart to sound forth that doleful Ditty commonly used by Persons deprived of
their sight. Good people pity the Blind. But notwithstanding the knowledge of
this Tongue is so decryed and depretiated by such men, it is of great account
among others that know how to value things rightly, and thought to be very
useful; for the Ignorance of this Tongue has been the occasion of many Errors
not only in Learning but in Religion too; for want of understanding the
Equivocal word (...) which signifies both an Horn and Light, or Brightness as
you find it 34 Exodus v 29. Moses most ridiculously is painted with Horns,
which is the cause of great laughter to the Jews and Arabians, to see the
Venerable old Prophet Metamorphosed into a Cornish Knight. If all Men were as
fottish and ignorant as some are, what would have become of us (think you) as
to the Holy Bible, should we have received it without a great deal of mixture
and corruption? No surely, it is the Jews care and zeal that we are beholding
to, for preserving it in its native purity; they were so strict and rigid in
this kind that it is written in Baba Bathra (...) i. e. Joab killed his Master
because he did the work of the Lord negligently, he reading Deuteronomy c. 25.
v. 19. Tinichi Zachar Amalec, h. e. delebis masculum Amalec, when he ought to
have read Zecher Amalec, h. e. memoriam Amalec. This story too St. Hierom
records as a very memorable thing, (if I be not mistaken) in his exposition of
the Sixth Chapter of Isaiah: Now you see by this, how necessary the knowledge
of this Hebrew tongue is, especially for men, and it would do no harm, if
Women had a little smack of it, as you say Terpole you have) but your Smock
Madam is more taking with Gallants: But stay! Where do we ramble; this
discourse of Languages was a thing Obiter mentioned, and not mainly intended
therefore I must remind you, of what past before, in reference to the Lecture:
You told me I remember who it was you heard at the Lecture, but you did not
acquaint me with the Subject matter of his Discourse. Therefore I pray tell me
now what Doctrine did this Stan-hup you spoke of before Teach, or rather
prattle.


Terp. I must once again correct you, for now you don't only make a mock of
Religion, but also speak very improperly, when you call it Teaching. For we of
the Conjugational Way, term it Holding Forth.


Mim. This is an heavy charge, though I doubt not but to clear my self from the
first imputation, viz. of flouting at Religion, although perhaps not from the
second part of my charge as to impropiety of speech.


Terp. But I hardly believe you can do either, you are so obnoxious..


Mim. I say as to the first part of my charge, of scoffing at Religon in Truth,
I plead not guilty, but as for this Mock Religion of Conventicling if I do make
a Mock of it, it is no great crime for it is but an holy Cheat at best; who
indeed can refrain from laughter, to hear such poor, Jejune, flat and
impertinent expressions, Tautologies, a Myriad, with a Company of wire drawn
Metaphors, and holy Knick-knacks and conceits, extemporary effusions,
sanctified nonsense, and ridiculous Fopperies, which flow from such Pulpiteers
Mouths; as insensibly and easily as excrements from some sick persons. I
profess for my part, I think it is time misspent to hear such, and that one had
better be employed in picking of straws or as the Emperor Domitian, in
catching of Flies by an Hour Glass, (who was truly therefore styled, an Enemy
to Flies and a Fly to his Enemies) then to sit two or three Hours, to hear such
pitiful Nonsensical, and sometimes blasphemous stuff. But as to the second
part of my charge, I do agree that word you use, might be more proper, of
Holding forth; for the Sisterhood don't love obscure mysterious things, that
need unfolding, but are for downright Truths plainly laid open, for Truth and
Women are much alike, Truth is best Naked, and so are Women; they are most
ready, when they are unready, therefore some Lywers will not admit of the word
Notwithstanding in a Jointure, but instead thereof put in alvvayes provided.

Nakedness is that which restores Women to themselves, for the various
dressings of all Nations do strangely disguise them, so that they must put off
their Masquin Habits, or be taken to pieces like Watches, e're they can be
enjoyed: Now we cannot do Women greater right, than to be Judged by one Rule;
then do but once uncloth Women, and they are all the same. Comines tells us,
that a Princess being upon the point of Marriage, appeared in a Lawn Smock, to
be viewed by Ambassadors, and said, she would put off that too if requisite.
Thus you see Nakedness is a sure Rule for the preventing of mistakes, for every
Woman out of her Clothes is of the same fashion, but this will not be believed
by Gallants but they will Coast about the Microcosme of Women, and so insatiate
they are in their desires, that they would willingly try all, omnem movebunt
lapidem, they will leave no stone unturned at Whetstones-Park, until they touch
upon the new found Island, (as they fancy) when as indeed it is as commonly
known as the Isle of Man; and has no relation at all to Terra incognita: but
the frequent speculation of an Idea stimulates Men to the enjoyment of a thing,
which when enjoyed they find to consist more in imagination than reality; like
the Incubus or Nightmare in a Dream, you imagine it a Weight, you Grasp at
it, and awake, and it is nothing. Pleasure in this kind is a Juno in the
pursuit, and but a Cloud in the Enjoyment: It is but a mere Dream, or shadow of
a Dream rather. In Egypt there was a young man that had a mavelous fancy
unto a famous Courtisan called Thonis, who did ask him such a great sum of
Money to lie with her, that it was impossible for him to give it; at length
this Youth being so deep in love with her, dreamt one Night, he lay with her,
and enjoyed her: This Courtisan whom he had taken such a fancy to, hearing of
this his Dream did put him in suit before the Judges, to be paid her Hire, for
the pleasure the young man had taken of her by imagination: Bocchoris hearing
the sum of her complaint, commanded the young man to bring before him in some
Vessel, at a certain day appointed, as much money as she did ask him for to lie
with her; then he bad him toss it to and fro in his Hand before the Courtisan,
that she might have the shadow and sight of it; for (quoth he) imagination and
opinion is but a shadow of Truth. But still supposing this young man had really
his desires fulfilled, yet he would have found, they had been more in
imagination than in Truth, for Opinion is the Shop of pleasures, where they are
at first forged, and receive their birth, and as they are generated of an Airy
Phantosme, so they dye in a fume, and disperse into nothing. (But hold) I fear
I shall run out too far upon this point, and be guilty of a digression;
therefore I must look a little back, and recollect my self: You may remember I
told you the Sisters are for Downright Truths, plainly laid open, and you know
Women are counted best on the sudden, and therefore do'nt love a person, that
is long before he comes to duty; like those dissenting Brethren of the
Conventicling persuasion, who are wont to usher in a trite common notion with
an huge August Preface: Just so a Brother of the same opinion did lately, who
teaching the Brotherhood and Sisterhood, spoke thus. It was well said of as
great a Divine as ever Europe brought forth: Nay if you will believe Gregory
Nazianzen, and he was a man of a celebrated fame for all abstruse Learning, it
was not only well said, but it was very well said; that, Faith is good if it be
a good Faith: But I remember how much this tedious Fumbler, was disrelished by
the Holy Sisters, for they like those best, that come to the point quickly;
(the Vertical point I mean) which by a Trope, or Stylo Novo, may be called
Turn-Style; because there are more ways to the wood than one; but whether you
go this way, or that way, still it is the same thing, to wit a thing of nothing;
for take the whole and yet you have not enough, nor they I warrant you, for
Women, Priests and Poultry never have enough; (as is commonly said) and
although it is a vulgar saying, that Virtus consistit in medio, it is not so in
this middle though it be the best part of the Female Sex, according to the
French Adage. Des femmes and des poissons, le milieu vaut le mieux, i. e. Of
Women and Fish the middle is best.


Terp. I cannot pass by some things you say in defense of your self, without a
severe Castigation, you call those precious, Soul-piercing, yea Soul-saving,
heartbreaking, sin-destroying, faith-confirming Truths; poor, flat, jejune,
impertinent, seditious and blasphemous things; this verily, is a gross Error in
you: For they that Hold-forth to us are men of such courage and zeal, that when
we are e'ne sunk in our spirits for want of meet helps, they keep us from
despair, nay they are Boanerges's sons of Thunder.


Mim. I grant they are Sons of Thunder in some sense, but instead of
Soul-saving Truths (as you call them) that you pretend they should deliver,
they thunder out Soul-destroying; State-disturbing, King-reviling Doctrine, and
are so powerful in their Holding Forth this. And something else that I could
tell you of, (if I were minded) that the Sisters, cannot but fall before them
as Lightning, they being Women of extraordinary humility and lowliness, having
heretofore in the days of Usurpation, and in times of darkness, petitioned the
ablest Members, that they would be pleased to Stand unto them showing a great
readiness at all times, especially in these days of more light, or rather more
light days, to lay down themselves with their hole stubstance; and now there
is no great fear that they will Apostatize from their first principles,
although nature may be so prevailing in them, that they may Fall back a little.


Terp. You will never leave your Drolling (Mimologue) it is strange you should
affect, this scurrilous, sarcastical way.


Mim. Come, Come Terpole for all you look so demurely, and speak so precisely,
as if you were such a Saint: Yea, though you turn up the white of your Eyes,
and make such a show; yet if my skill do'nt fail me in Physiognomy, you look as
if you would turn up something else too, provided it be done in due time and
place, and so no scandal to the strait-laced Sisters; Come, you see I know you
a little, you are Pisello di buona cucina as the Italian Idiom is; you are
loose in the Hilts I Will warrant you, and now I hope I touch you to the quick: I
do the rather use this Gibing way: (which you charge upon me as a fault it
seems) because I would fain laugh you out of that silly rambling humor of
yours, that when you have a good Orthodox Preacher in your own Parish, you
should leave him, and go a Pilgrimage two or three Miles, (it may be) to bear
such pitiful, nonsensical men keep a babbling, who beat upon the Cushion, more
than their Text, and make the Pulpit groan more than their Hearers, whom you of
the Sisterhood admire, because he delivers all he says by heart: Oh say they,
a rare man, he never looks upon a Book, and indeed it is no marvel, for 'twas a
thing he never was used to. I Will hold you a good wager Terpole, that I Will make
a better Sermon that never preached in my life, than any of those sonorous
Pulpit-Thumpers, you use to hear, and so work upon the Sisters by my Doctrine,
and overcome them so, that they will be more ready than in times of yore, when
the old lusty puss was started, (the good old Cause I mean) to bring in their
Bodkins, Thimbles, and Marriage-Rings, and all that they have, and lay them
down and themselves holy at my Devotion.


Terp. Here is multum clamoris sed parum lanae (as they say) great boast but
little roast I Will warrant you.


Mim. Well, come and try and bring some of the Sisters with you and I Will
exercise them to purpose.


Terp. By my truly I could find in my Heart to come if you be in earnest.


Mim. Do'nt doubt that, for I am serious, but remember then to come, Die
veneris which is to morrow at Nine of the Clock in the Morning, (for I am best
at morning exercise) to Grubstreet at the Sign of the Naked Woman, because
that is a very convenient Conventicling place, and I Will be sure to keep touch
with you, in the mean time I Will bid you farewell.


Terp. I can hold up no longer now it is so late, it is twelve a Clock for this
Night I verily believe, therefore I must go sleep.


Mim. Good Night to you Terpole; I Will leave you to your rest.


Terp. I wish you a good Nights rest Mimologue, but remember your promise of
exercising to morrow.


Mim. I Will warrant you, do'nt fear it, but I will be punctual.


Corina. Good morrow Sir, are you Mr. Morologue.


Mim. I am no more a Logg than your self, my Name is Mimologue.


Cor. Pardon the mistake of your Name Sir, you are the person intended.


Mim. Well! Go on, what is your business with me.


Cor. My Mistress Madam Terpole sent me to know whether you were come, and were
ready to exercise here, as you promised: she being at the next door, at the
Sign of the Green-Gown.


Mim. Let her know, I have been here this half Hour, and come as well provided
as I could in so short a time.


Cor. I shall readily perform your commands; your servant Sir.


Mim. Farewell sweet Heart.


Mim. Hoh! Good morrow Terpole, you are come I see with the Brethren and
Sisters, you have brought to hear me: Well I am none of the best gifted, but
I Will perform as well as I can. I pray walk into the next Room, because that is
most convenient for the purpose: So it is well! now the company is come together
I Will begin; My Beloved, prick up your ears, and hearken with all diligence as
you shall find it Written for your instruction in the Second Book of Pseudology
Cap. 3. v. 30. in these words Oh that men were wise, and would consider what
pleasure and profit, there is in Lying and they would never speak Truth again:
Now beloved if you would find me hereafter, never look for me in the Text, for
it may be I may never come at it again, No more than those Rambling Pulpiteers
you hear, who are as far off from the Text, as that unskilful Archer was from
the mark; whom when Diogenes saw ready to shoot, he presently ran to the place
where the Arrow was to be directed alleging this reason for it, (...) that I
might not be hit. Well my Beloved the Text you have heard, from which words I
shall gather this plain lamping observation which flows naturally from the
Words, viz that Lying is a very pleasant, edifying, and universally profitable
thing all over the Christian World. Now I shall speak to these words first by
way of Explication, Secondly by way of Application shutting up all with a word
of Exhortation. Lying (Beloved is a word of great Latitude and extent: As to
its Pedigree I must tell you it is of great Antiquity, it comes of a very
ancient Family, the first Temptation that ever was, it was a Lie.

But that you may know what Lying is, you are to take notice that the credit of
the Relator is that which makes the difference between Lying and speaking of
Truth, for a Lie believed is Truth, and Truth not believed is a Lie, and here
I Will illustrate this with a short story that concerns a Conventicling Brother
who exercised upon the Butchers Wife very ardently, (she admiring him as many
of the other Sisters did for his profound knowledge in revealing of mysteries
and secrets, or rather Mistress secrets) you may perhaps guess whom I mean, but
I Will do him that right not to name him, because he is dead and gone, and (...)
is a precept. But the story is thus; there was a plain farming Fellow in the
Country that lived near the said Brother of the Congregational way, that had a
youth to his Son, who though a Minor in Years, yet was arived to a great
maturity in all debauchery, and notwithstanding the repeated admonitions of his
Father, he continued in his wicked Courses, insomuch that his Father despairing
that he could ever work upon him, so as to reclaim him; desired the said
Teacher that he would exercise his Jurisdiction over him, he being a person of
such Authority among the Brotherhood and Sisterhood, thought (it seems) that
his Reproof might take such impression upon his Son, so as to reform him; and
to be short; the said Teacher meeting with him one day did severely castigate
him in this manner. Oh! Sirrah (says he) I hear fine things of you; you are a
notorious Rogue, you have got a trick, (I hear) that when your Father sends you
to keep his Sheep to play at Cards, and loose I know not how many of them at
One and Thirty; that is a Lie says the Boy presently: How now says this
Teacher you are a rude Rogue indeed; do you give me the Lie, why quoth the Boy
it is true enough that you did tell a Lie? why how is that Boy? (says he) Marry
thus; when I was One and Thirty I always wonn, yea that is true indeed Boy
says the Teacher. But Sirrah I hear of another Roguish trick you have, and
that is you are wont, (when your Father is angry with you for your evil
practices) to drive his Sheep over a narrow Bridge, and so they fall beside and
are lost; that is another Lie says the Boy; why Boy, (quoth the Teacher) how
is that? thus it is replies the Boy; those Sheep that go over the Bridge are
safe enough, but they are only lost that fall beside the Bridge; so this
Brother was convinced that the Boy spoke Truth in both these things he charged
him with as great misdemeanors; but notwithstanding it fell out to be true, as
the Boy said, he was given enough to Lying, and so are many beside him, that
are men, who have so used themselves to Lying, that they will Lie as fast as a
Dog will lick a Dish, now the reward of such persons is, never to be credited,
although they chance to speak Truth (...) (as a good Author says) but of all
persons that are addicted to Lying, none have so good a warrant for their Lying
as Travelers, for they may Lie by Authority. when I Was at Amsterdam in
Holland the Description of an Ambassador, that obtained very much there, was;
Legatus est vir bonus, peregre missus ad mentiendum Reipub. causa; but if
others do'nt ( Lie, and the News be true that we hear) Ambassadors there are
never likely to Lie more for such a purpose, for their Commonwealth or
Stateship is e'ne defunct, it being a thing so odious to the people, that
though their be great Discords among them, yet in this they agree all and cry
out with one accord. The Devil take the States. But if Ambassadors are so much
given to Lying, (as you heard before) what then are other ordinary Travelers:
It is so Authentic with some of them, that they will take it for an high
affront, if you do but so much as question the Truth of any story they relate,
though it be never so improbable, and indeed they have told Lies so often, that
they at length themselves believe them to be true; and are ready to Duel any
that seem in the least to contradict them: Yea, though there be an evident
impossibility in the stories they relate, as there is in that of the Bishop of
Mentze's who bragged that he had a flame of the Bush which Moses beheld
burning. And that likewise of the Holy Relic of the Ass; of which the story
runs thus. A Dutch man making his confession to a Mass Priest at Rome,
promised by an Oath to keep secret whatsoever the Priest should impart unto
him, until he came into Germany, whereupon the Priest gave him a Leg of the
Ass on which Christ rode into Jerusalem very neatly bound up in a silken
cloth, and said this is the Holy Relic of that Ass on which the Lord Christ
corporally did sit, and with his sacred Legs touched this Asses Legs: Then
was the Dutchman very joyful, and carried the said holy Relic with him into
Germany: Now when he in the presence of Four other his Comrades, showed it,
each of them having likewise received from the same Priest a Leg, and had
promised the same secresy; they breaking out into great admiration said; Lord!
Had that Ass five Legs: From whence it comes that the Italians do jeer the
Dutchmen and hold them for very gross ignorant people.

Lying in general being nakedly and abstractly considered, first implies rest,
for by this means we enjoy rest, that which all things, even to the lowest
inanimates tend unto with a strong propension, stones themselves violently rush
down to their Center, and increase their motion as they come near it: those
that are used to hunt in Whetstones Park have sufficiently experimented the
Truth of this (or else they have, not been given so much to Lying as the World
thinks them.) Flames and Fire mount upwards being impatient of those Unctious
and sulphurious Prisons to which we confine them, all things tend to quiet and
rest. If a man would obtain sciences in any kind, there is no way so conducible
as serenity of mind and quietness? hence it was that the Poets secluded the
Muses to mount Parnassus, to Fountains and Groves, as knowing that Cities were
no fit places for any profound Meditations, and consequently much company an
Enemy to it: For this reason I believe it was that the Learned Sir Henry Wotton
after his many Embassayes and negotiations concluded thus; tandem hoc didici
animas sapientiores fieri quiescendo.

Secondly Lying as it implies rest (as I told you before) so it implies health
also; that is to say in Women for it very much conduces thereunto, provided
they lie according, as the French Proverb has it; la femme est bien malade,
quand elle ne se peut tenir sur le dos. That Woman must needs be sick, who
cannot lie on her back.

Thirdly, lying implies pleasure, and so it is true as I told you in my
Doctrinal observation that it is a pleasant thing, for Women especially, but
this is no otherwise true, but as there is lying in the case; that is when men
lie with them, for they take no pleasure at all in lying alone.

Now though I say lying is a very pleasant thing, you are to take notice that I
do'nt mean this of a promiscuous Lying, for there are some Women that is not
lawful for men to lie with them: And therefore Mr. Take-o'-Trust a great
Casuist of the sisters makes a nice distinction herein, and cuts it for an
hair, A man (says he very argutely) may lie with his own Man's Wife, but not
with another Man's Wife: And Dr. Amphibolus another great Casuist says, that it
is not lawful, or at least wise not expedient, for a man to lie at all times
with a Woman, no not with his own Wife, for one may as he phrases it use licita
illicite. But (beloved) for my more methodical proceeding, you may be pleased
to take notice of a Tripartite Division of lying that is commonly known, viz.
an officious, a Jocose, and a pernicious lying. Of these in their order
briefly; But rouse up your selves (Brethren) for I see some of you a sleep with
your Heads in the sisters laps; a foul shame and a great scandal, that when I
am standing here, you should lie there; I tell you truly or rather a true lie
this ought not to be: I pray mind what I told you, I said there was a threefold
Lying, this lying of yours make a Fourth but I know not under what Topic to
bring it, except it be a lascivious lying; but to return to the Text, and first
there is an officious Lying as I mentioned before. And that is when a man lies
with his own Wife, (but this is a thing not much in use now a days and
therefore I Will but lightly touch upon it) As for this Vxorious lying it is a
thing every husband is bound to do ex officio if he would be counted an honest
man. Although some are so wise not to tie themselves to duty in this kind.
Therefore the Italians say Gli huomini da been si maritano gli savij no. Honest
men use to marry, but wise men tarry: I have heard some Gallants say, that a
Wife were a fine thing, if she were an Almanac, that a man might change her
once a Year: If the age we lived in were so loose, how many close students
should we have, that would turn over such Authors apace, if they could have a
liberty to turn them off so soon; for they are apt to think that variety in
such Books, as well as in other things does delight.

But there is another sort of Officious lying, and that is such a Lying that is
hurtful to none, but is of advantage to some persons or other, this many times
is profitable, and may lawfully be used. As for example, if a certain General
of an Army should see a kind of despondency in his Soldiers, and he to hearten
them up and encourage them, feigns that there are auxsliary forces coming to
their succor; and by this means puts courage into these Soldiers when they
were almost exanimated thorough fear, shall not this figment (think you) be
dispensed with, that is so useful? Plato allowed a lie lawful either to save a
Citizen or deceive an Enemy, this kind of lying Abraham used with Pharaoh, and
Abimeleck and his Servants, and likewise the Hebrew Midwives in Egypt, which
proceeded from a fervent desire in them to promote greatly the good of those
persons, and therefore allowed by Origin, St. Hierom, Chrysostom, Innocentius
the third, Cassianus and others: Nay, this is of such Universal use, that there
is no living for Tradesmen of all sorts without it; I believe if man had not
fallen, they should never have needed to use it, but as he is now it is hard
for him to live without it; No lying no living. There are no wares scarce
vended without the help of this, either at home or abroad; they think they can
gain no custom without this custom of lying: Oh says one, it cost me more,
when you have bid money for a commodity, this is commonly practiced in the
Exchange, scarce any thing is sold there without the exchange of a lie. And
some of the Women there will be ready to fly in your face and scratch you, if
you should seem in the least to suspect the truth of what they say, but if you
should escape their Nails, you will be pelted with the Hailstones of
opprobrious words, which will fly thick about your Ears, although such persons
would show more wit, and get more money too, if they were more complaisant, and
used more gentle and sweet Language for chi non ha denari in borsa habbia miel
in Bocca as the Italian Proverb is h. e. He that has not money in his purse,
must have honey in his Mouth. Xiphilinus tells us that Livia the Wife of the
Emperor Augustus; promised Numerius Attieus five and twenty thousand Crowns,
if he would swear that he saw Augustus Caesar after his Death ascend into
Heaven: Now quis potest tot armatis resistere, is there any so foolhardy, Nay
so sottish, as would refuse such an offer, merely upon the scrupulosity of a
fiction. Many of the Brotherhood make no bones of being head of a faction, and
will they (think you) scruple the having their hand in a fiction: No I Will
warrant you, when it turns to their advantage and profit they can easily
swallow it.

But there is an officious sitting too as well as lying, but that is not my
business to treat on here, you will easily discern that belongs more to an
House of Office, than my Text, and so that would be no cleanly come off for me,
to make such a digression: There is a lying for credit too as well as profit,
but such an one that tells a lie to save his credit wipes his Nose on his sleeve
to save his Napkin; but I shall say no more concerning this first head of
Officious lying: Now to come to the second part which is jocose lying; and this
is for the making others merry, and may be permitted, provided we exceed not in
the measure or manner of it; this may argue one to be a wise man for as the
Italian Proverb has it, Del tutto non e savio chi non sa esser pazzo: but you
must take heed that you be not so merry in jest, as to be sad in earnest (I
mean) to loose your Friend for a jest, as that Gentleman did, who meeting with
a Person of Quality his old acquaintance in London, that was newly come from
beyond Sea (where he had been a long time,) after a congratulation of his safe
return, spoke to him in this familiar Dialect: Dear Rogue! where have thou been
all this while? who answered, Faith I have been traveling up and down, and how
have thou lived? by my Wits, says the Traveller, whereupon this Jester
replied, Faith I never knew one live upon so little in all my life; but this
was so biting a joculary conceit and did so distaste this Traveller, that he
never cared for his Friend afterward; it may be said of such a jocofe man, that
he has a good Wit, if a wise man had the keeping of it. No ay peor burla que
la verdadera (as the Spaniard says) the worst jest is the true jest, as that
was of Faustus the Son of Sylla, who (when his Sister had two Gallants at the
same time, that had familiarity with her, namely Fulvius a Fullers Son, and
Pompey surnamed Macula) scoffingly said; Miror sororem meam habere Maculam cum
habeat fullonem.

But the third sort of lying according to the threefold Division that I made,
remains yet to be spoken to, I having dispatched the other two, viZ. an
officious and a Jocofe Lie. Now the last is a pernicious lying, and this is
twofold; one is when a man lies and has neither pleasure or profit by his
lying, the second is when one indeed has pleasure at first, but dolor
afterward: As for the first sort of lying, it is an unaccountable thing in
such a person that so lies, and deserves to be severely censured: In the time
of the Emperor Claudius there dyed a Man in Rome named Pamphylus, who never
told any matter of Truth in all his life time, but evermore had his chiefest
delight in lying: And I heard a story not long ago at a Coffee-House, (which
you know is the Mart of News) of a Countryman of our own that was so given to
lying, but that was a bed, (although he could lie in other places too) that to
break himself of that slothful humor, was resolved to do penance in one
sheet, and therefore very handsomely as he thought pulled off one of the sheets
of the Bed where he lay as a Guest, and wrapped himself up in it as if it had
been a winding sheet: But being found out and laughed at for his labor, he
turned Cat in pan (as they say,) and transferred the contrivance upon the
Mistress of the House, saying it was done by her on purpose to affront him, and
that he would never lie there again: Now this (you will say) was double lying,
although he lay but in one sheet: But however no one single person believed his
tale, no more than he himself did; but no more of this now, because the person
that acted this foolish trick may be dead (for all as I know.) For I hear that
presently after this mad Prank was played, he finding his Spirits exhaled with
the heat of his passion took a Voyage to Anticyra, to purge his Brainsick
phrensy with Helle-bore; now whether he died there, may be a question much
controverted, for I never heard he returned from thence; but I Will not undertake
to resolve this point, but leave it as a Quaere for those fly-witted persons to
decide, that have nothing else to do but to study the Anatomy of Flies or such
like minute things of no moment: But secondly as I told you before, the other
sort of pernicious lying, is when one indeed has pleasure at first in Lying,
but dolor afterward. Now this is such a Lying that is hurtful and destructive
to both parties, and is a mortal offense, for many times it causes mortality.
For example sake, when a man lies in the torrid zone of a Lays, or some
prostituted She-bed-fellow, and gets such an beat or clap, that he can never
claw it off again: Such an one may take up the same complaint that Hermione in
Plutarck does, (...). This kind of Lying is very destructive to ones health.
You have it well expressed in the Italian Proverb quelle che ha un pie in
Bordello ha l'altro nello spedale. He who has the one foot in a Bawdy House
has the other in an Hospital. Those persons that do so freely indulge
themselves in such wild ranges and chases as aforesaid, little consider how
much their desultory promiscuous conjunctions do disturb the Mind, and render
it unfit to undertake serious affairs, they are so much for generation work,
that at the last they wholly incapacitate themselves for the serving of their
generations, besides the many mischiefs the body receives by those fatal
venereal encounters, which are oft-times the productives of misery and infamy
which they intail to their posterity, for though these stolen waters seem at
first to be sweet, (and you shall have Gallants in the apprehension of the
sweetness thereof risque fortune, honor; yea life it self, and all to enjoy a
Miss;) yet they will prove waters of Marah, bitter in the end. Now the best way
to cure this extravagant distemper of a miscellaneous Coition is as a good
Author says, to suppose a Woman to be masculine, and so weigh her conditions
as breeding parts, etc. for we all befool our Judgments with thinking too much
of her invisibilities.

But (Beloved) that you may be edifyed by what I have said, I come in the last
place to show you, that lying is a very edifying thing, it tends very much to
edification, for by that means the Sisters being wrought upon will greatly
increase and multiply, and they being extraordinarily plumpt up before, it is a
pregnant argument of their thriving condition, and that in due time they will
bring forth a blessed seed, but the issue is uncertain, because no body knows,
whether the cun-junction between them and their husbands, or some benevolent
Quakers or fifth Monarchy men: Now you must know the Sisters do'nt edify a like
under all Teachers, those that they edify most by are certain whifling
Declamers, who being void of knowledge and virtue mount the Pulpit with a
Gigantean confidence as a Player does the Stage, and there fulminate and
tonitruate words to puzzle intellects, and vent the foolish and ridiculous
whimsies of their distempered brains, for profound and solid Divinity, they
admire these most, and count them especially the ablest men that are of long
standing, (for they care not how short they are of understanding) But as for
the Do-littles, the Sisters that are not acquainted with their parts, are so
prejudiced against them upon the account of their name, that they are apt to
think them weak Brothers and not edifying at all. But others of the Sisters who
know them very intimately, Cry them up for men of as good abilities as many
others of a greater name, and profess they partake of their gifts with a great
deal of pleasure and are very much edifyed under them.

Well (Beloved) you have the doctrinal part of the Text sufficiently explained
to you, now I shall wind up the bottom of my Discourse with one word of
exhortation to young men, and so dismiss you: Sirs in this your day, whilst
your Veins are full of Blood, and you have Marrow in your Bones, exercise your
selves, yea lay out your selves, parts, abilities, and all that you have in
Lying, and the Sisters hole service: If you mean not in part, but wholly to
destroy your selves.

Well Terpole? What say you now? You thought (I believe) that I could not make
a Preachment, but you see I do'nt do as your rambling Pulpiteers, that give one
knock on the Hoop, and another on the Barrel, (as the common saying is) but I
keep close to the matter in hand: Do'nt I tickle the point think you? Am not I
a Divine now?


Terp. I am not sufficiently convinced, that you are any great Divine; for your
Discourse consists not so much of Divinity, as of Levity.


Mim. That is an Error which I must desire you to correct, blott out levity,
and write mirth instead thereof; you of the Sisterhood, are hugely given to
censuring; but I pass not for that; I care as little for it as a Goose T -- for
the Thames, (as the vulgar Proverb is) so long as I deserve not your censure.
Some persons are so caprichious, that if I were sure always to do well, it is
a question, whether that would always please. I am far from being in love with
faults, but sure this is but a light one, if any, and it is for delight. There
are none will blame this innocent jovial humor, but some peevish morose old
men: who like old Monkies, having either gnawed away or lost their Tails, read
Lectures to young ones to cut theirs too. I know not why I should affect a
sullen melancholy humor, make wry faces and look sorrowfully, to please some
dogged tempers; sorrows will come fast enough, I shall not need to court them.
I am sure a pound of care will not pay an ounce of debt. Therefore why should
not I make my life as pleasant as I can, the most compendious way leading to
this, is to banish all anxious solicitude. Grave cura non ti punga e sara tua
vita Lunga as the Italian Proverb is: There be some Stipocondriaques that can
endure mirth no more than Owls can day light, but it shall never make me have
a quarrel with the Light, because weak eyes are dazzled with its beams. There
must be in every thing intermissions to unbend our spirits; our spirits are
cloyed as well as our senses, if they have not some relaxation by delights. The
Philosopher that always wept, it may be would have a mind to laugh upon some
occasions: Mirth is that which fits one for business according to the Spanish
Proverb. Huelgo me un poco mas hilo mi copo I am a little merry, but I do my
business, and it greatly conduces to health too, it is a Sovereign Amulet
against some distempers, which afflict sedentary men, it revives the drooping
spirits of hypocondriack Persons: And shall it then be counted a crime to bring
in one merry scene to set off a serious and tedious Act: But now business comes
upon me so fast (Terpole) that I can stay no longer to talk with you; I am to
go where neither Pope nor Emperor can send an Ambassador, and if I neglect
this opportunity of putting forth my self, it is a question whether ever I shall
come to be a Privy Counselor, but rather there is more likelihood that I
should be sent to the Isle of Silly, to negotiate there, and then you may
easily smell out in what a case I should be.


Terp. I have business as well as you, that calls me away.


Mim. It is no state business, (I presume) for then I Will warrant you t 'was
likely to be well done: for Women in State affairs are like Monkies in
Glass-shops: But your business, I suppose lies in the Isle of Man not far from
me, where the rest of the Sisters chiefest business use to Lie, and I know you
long to be there, therefore I Will keep you no longer from it: Adieu Terpole.


Terp. God be with you, (Mimologue) for you have been far enough off from him a
good while, though you have been preaching (as you call it) but the nearer to
the Church, the further from God (as they say) and you seem to have verifyed
that Proverb, and so I bid you Farewell.


FINIS.
Gentle Reader, these faults have escaped thorough hasty Printing, which thou
art desired to correct as thou meetest with them.
IN the Title page instead of decipere read desipere, page 19. read v. 29. p.
20. r. Cap. 25. v. 19. p. 23. no comma at Tautologies p. 24. next laid open l.
3. these words being omitted, are to be read: And so are the Brothers, they say
Truth is best represented by Eve p. 30. l. 17. no full point to be next (This)
but a comma p. 37. is transposed the following page is to be read first, p. 47.
l. 5. next that r. it is.


