More WARNING yet.

BEING A True Relation OF A Strange and most Dreadful APPARITION Which was seen
in the Air By several persons at HVLL, the third day of this present September.
1654.

NAMELY, Two Great Battles Fought in the Air: One Army coming from the East,
AND Another out of the North-West.

With the manner of their Engagement and VICTORY.

Enclosed in a Lettet from a Godly-Learned Minister of the Gospel in the said
Town of Hull, who having diligently examined the truth thereof, sent it up to
be published.

Printed at London by J. Cottrel; and are to be sold by Richard Moon, at the
seven stars in Paul's Churchyard.

More Warning yet.
UPon the third day of this present month September, a day not only remarkable
for two notable and famous Victories which the English had over the Scots, the
one at Dunbar, the other at Worcester; but observable also, as to be the day
appointed for the sitting of this Parliament: between nine and ten of the clock
at night, there was seen by James Cook Corporal, Thomas Blossom, and Edward
See, all soldiers belonging to the Garrison of Hull, this strange and unwonted
apparition.

These being (at the time before mentioned) on the top of the North-Blockhouse,
having the Watch according to order, on a sudden the sky seemed to be of a
fiery color, and to cast forth many streams. Whereupon, Thomas Blossom
observing the strangeness of the thing, began to tell the other two, how he had
seen the very like appearance a little after the sitting of the first
Parliament; and after such fiery streams, a great Battle of horse and foot
appeared in the air. He had not ended his Relation, but in the East appeared a
huge Body of pike-men, several Parties marching before, as a Forlorn-hope.
Never saw they in their lives an Army (to their thinking) in better equipage.
Suddenly they beheld in the north-west another Army, the which seemed unto them
to march toward the Eastern Army with extraordinary speed.

And first, there was the representation of some Skirmishes between Parties of
each Army, as the Forlorn-hope. Afterward both Bodies did engage, and
furiously charged each other with their Pikes, breaking through one the other
backwards and forward, in such dreadful sort, as the beholders were astonished
thereat.

Besides, such was the order of the Battle, as the Wings of each Army came in,
to relieve their Bodies: And each had their Reserves, who accordingly came in:
so that for an half quarter of an hour, there was a most terrible Fight. But to
their thinking, the Army which came from the East had the worst.

It is here to be noted, that both these Armies seemed to be of a Red color.

Within a little while, there appeared another Army from the north-west,
greater then the former, which marched directly to the place where the former
Battle was fought.

This Army was black: and here they perceived horse as well as foot.

And now begins another Battle far exceeding the former for fierceness and
cruelty. From the black Army there went off Muskets and Cannons, insomuch that
they clearly discerned the fire and smoke thereof. This Battle was between the
black and the Eastern red Army, being, as they apprehended, the Reserve of the
former Army which came forth from the north-west.

These two Armies thus engaged, brake through one another, forward and back
ward; but the black seemed still to have the best.

But before both Bodies met, there were several Skirmishes of Parties between
the black and red, as in the former Battle. And when both Armies did encounter,
they saw such fire and smoke, as if a dozen Cannons had been discharged
together.

A little beneath these Armies, not far from the earth, upon a black cloud,
appeared Horsemen, and amongst them they could perceive nothing, but rising of
fire and smoke, and a multitude of spears as it were standing upright.

This latter Battle continued a little longer then the former, the black
driving the red before them, till all the red vanished out of their sight. And
the black remained; who in a little time after, departed, and were not any more
seen of them.

READER,
WHat Interpretation thou will make of this Apparition, I know not; neither
shall I add any thing of mine own to the Relation: Only take notice, (and
believe it) it is no Fiction nor Scar-crow, but a thing real, and far beyond
what is here reported: for the Spectators (such was their astonishment) could
not recollect so much as they saw, afterward to make a true report of.

D' Alva being asked whether he had seen the Blazing Star which appeared at
that time; made answer, That he had so many earthly employments lying on his
hands, as he had neither time nor leisure to look up, to see what God was doing
in the heavens. I wish it be not so with too many at this time.

God speaks once, yea twice; yet man perceives it not. Job 33. 14.
FINIS.

