A LETTER From the RIGHT HONORABLE Ed. Lord Montagu, one of the Commissioners
attending His MAJESTY.

With a perfect Narration of all the passages betwixt his MAJESTY and those
Forces that brought him from Holdenby, being Resident now at New Market.

Both read in the House of Peers on the tenth of June. 1647.

Die Jovis 10 Junii 1647.
ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That this Letter, with the
Narration be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley.. 1647.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peers
pro tempore, these.
My Lord:
Upon Saturday as we were upon the way between Huntingdon and Cambridge, in
our journey, as we supposed toward Newmarket, we were met by Colonel Whaley,
who acquainted us with the first Orders he had received from the General to
attend the King with his Regiment at Holdenby, in the room of Col. Graves, and
also with such other Orders as he received from his Excellency after it was
known unto him that his Majesty was upon his march toward Newmarket, whereby
he was directed at his meeting of the King upon the way, to entreat his Majesty
to take up his Quarters at the next convenient house, which he had assigned to
be at Childersly, the late dwelling house of Sir John Cates, wherewith his
Majesty was contented. At the same time we also received two Letters from the
General, wherein he acquainted us that the changing of the Guards at Holdenby,
and the removal of the King had been without his privity; and that he had sent
Colonel (...) with his Regiment to attend his Majesty back to Holdenby: But
those Orders which Colonel (...) last received for waiting upon the King to
such convenient Quarters as should be ne^t to the place where he met him in the
way (were given as it seems after the date of those Letters he directed to us)
and upon his knowledge of the Kings being advanced as far as Huntingdon: Upon
Satterday in the afternoon the King came accordingly to this place, and we
returned answer to his Excellencies two Letters, wherein we acquainted him with
our condition, and that we had sent to the Parliament for directions, which we
speedily expected. Upon Satterday late in the night, Sir Hardres Waller, and
Colonel L^m^^t came unto us from the General, and desired our advice what was
fittest to be done upon this accident, which had befallen by the disorder of
the Soldiers without his Excellencies knowledge, and withal propounded unto
us the Kings return to Holdenby: wherein his Majesty had declared his utter
averseness to Colonel Whaley, insisting that he would not be posted from place
to place, but since they had removed him against his will from Holdenby, he
would now go to Newmarket. To this we durst not, in the condition we were,
presume to give any advice at all before we received new directions from you,
and that was all the answer we returned. Upon Monday the General himself, the
Lieutenant General, and other chief Officers of the Army came hither, and
were much pressed by the King, that for his convenience he might remove to his
own House at Newmarket, professing that he would not return to Holdenby.
Herein though much desired, we could not take upon us to advise, or act any
thing conceiving that no new Guards could be but into the capacity of the
former, who by Ordinance of Parliament were immediately to receive and observe
our Orders, and could not be countermanded by any other authority then of both
Houses. His Excellency after much discourse returned back to his Quarters at
Cambridge, having promised the King that he should have their resolution before
morning, and accordingly Collonell Whaley has now received Orders to attend
the King to Newmarket, whether we also wait upon him, expecting hourly to
receive your directions, which are hereby earnestly entreated, and will be
extremely welcome unto

Childersly the 8. of June. 1647. Your Lordships humble Servant: Edw. Mountague.
IN regard I was straightned in time when my last Letter was written, I have
here enclosed sent you a perfect relation of what passed upon the fourth of
this instant June, when the King spoke publicly with the Soldiers at
Holdenby.



The Narration betwixt his Majesty and Cornet George Joyce, etc.
THe Party being drawn up in the first Court before the House, His Majesty
came down, and standing upon the top of the steps, directed his Speech to
Cornet Joyce, who representing the Commander of the Party, stood before the
Horse at the foot of the Stairs.

The King said that Cornet Joyce having, though at an unseasonable hour in the
night, acquainted him that he was come to convey his Majesty to the Army; His
Majesty, according to his promise, was there to give his answer in presence of
them all: But first he desired to know by whom he was authorized to propound
this to His Majesty. Master Joyce answered that he was sent by authority from
the Army. The King replied, That he knew no lawful authority of England but
his own, and next under him the Parliment. But withal asked, whether he had
any authority from Sir Thomas Fairfax, and whether in writing: It being
replied, That Sir Thomas Fairfax was a Member of the Army. The King insisted
that he was not answered; Sir Thomas Fairfax being their General, was not
properly a Member, but head of the Army. Joyce said, That at least he was
included in the Army; and that the Soldiers present were his Commission, being
a commanded Party out of every Regiment. The King replied, That they might be
good witnesses; but he had not seen such a Commission before: And if they were
his Commission, It was an Authority very well written, all handsome young men.
The King proceeded to say, That he came to H^^d^nby not by constraint (though
not so willingly as he might have done) to the intent he might send Messages to
his two Houses of Parliament, and receive answers from them: That accordingly
he had sent several Messages to them, and thought himself in a sort obliged
to stay for their answers which were not come; yet if they gave him such
reasons as might convince his judgment he would go with them: nay, the
Commissioners should not stop him. He desired therefore to know the reasons
they could give him for this journey. Joy^^ replied, That a plot for this fou^e
years last contrived by some Members of both Houses, to overthrow the Laws of
the Kingdom: That a design to convey his Person to an Army newly to be raised
for that purpose, were the causes of their undertaking this employment, and
hoped would prevail with his Majesty to go willingly with them, thereby to
defeat the purposes of those that would otherwise by the countenance of his
Person, perturbe the peace of the Kingdom: And that his being with the Army
was the readiest expedient he could think upon to procure him a speedy and
sati^f^ctory Answer to his former Messages. The King returned that he knew no
fillable of any such design or intended Army: And that to seek an Answer with
so many gallant men at his back, were to e^tort it which were very unhandsome
and besides that, their proposal looked like an ^pposition to the Parliament,
which he desired not, or would ever infringe their just Privileges of the
Laws of the Land: That these Re^sons induced him not to go willingly; and
therefore desired to know what they intended, it he would not go with them. It
was answered, That they hoped his Majesty would not put them to use those
means which otherwise they should be necessitated to, if he refused. For the
Commissioners, or any else that refused, they knew well what course to take
with them. The King protested; That unless they gave him satisfaction to the
reasonable and just demands he should make, he would not go with them, unless
they carried him by absolute force; and he thought they would well think upon
it before they would lay violent hands upon their King: That the Commissioners
had never put any constraint upon him; they were more civil. Then he
propounded, that he might be used with honor and respect; That they would not
force him in any thing contrary to his conscience, or his Honor; though he
hoped he had long ago so fixed his resolutions, that no force could cause him
to do a base thing: Though they were Masters of his body, yet his mind was
above their reach. But to those Propofitions they consented with a general
Acclamation; Master Joyce adding, That their Principles were not to force any
man's conscience, much less the King. Then His Majesty desired that those which
attended him, and some other of his servants, against whom they had no just
Exceptions, might be permitted to wait upon him. This being agreed, the King
asked whether they would have him go: Oxford was first nominated, then
Cambridge: The King named Newmarket, which accepted, he desired care might be
taken to carry his stuff, wherein Master Joyce said something was done already.

The other expressions of their respect to the King, of the Armies desire to
see him with them, and of their fidelity toward him, were intermixed in the
discourse, together with complaints of the proceeding of the Parliament toward
them; which the King said, He would not ad udge, unless he heard both sides.

The King having ended, at the desire of the Commissioners, he gave them leave
to speak to the Troops; who having repeated the sum of their Instructions
from both Houses, whereby they were appointed to attend his Majesty at Holdenby
till further Orders; did publicly protest against his removal, and against
this act of the Soldiers, as unlawful in it self, and dangerous to them;
requiriug so many of them as would stand by the Commissioners in opposition
thereof, to declare themselves accordingly. But it being with a general voice
answered, That not a man of them would do so. The Commissioners added, That as
honest men they theld themselves obliged to discharge the trust reposed in
them, to the utmost of their power: And agreeable thereunto, if they had force
for the Service, they would withstand them to the loss of their lives. But
since they were not in a capacity at present, they must acquiesse.

As the King turned back to go into the House Major Tomlins declared to his
Majesty, in the presence of the Commissioners, That according to the Orders
they gave him, he had endeavored what he could to induce the Troops assigned
for the ordinary Guards, which he commanded in the absence of Colonel Greaves,
to dr w up and make resistance, but without effect, they all refusing to obey
him therein.

FINIS.

