A Gallant VICTORY Obtained by the LORD INCHIQVEEN Against the REBELS; at
CAPOGH-QUEEN in IRELAND.

Which Garrison is taken from the Rebels, that was kept by 120 Officers and
Soldiers; 4 Piece of Ordnance taken, 150 Arms, 3 Barrels of Powder, 50 Horse,
and good store of Ammunition and Provisions.

ALSO, SAD NEWS from DUBLIN: Where the Rebels with Preston, have taken the
strong Castle of Caterlagh, 3 Piece of Ordnance, 100 Arms, and 160 Officers and
^ouldiers; men, women, and children, forced to Dublin for relief.

With the Votes of the REBELS at their Council of WAR, concerning their
further designs against DVBLIN.

may.17. LONDON, Printed for W. S. 1647.

A Gallant Victory obtained by the Lord Inchiqueen against the Rebels, at
Capogh-queen in Ireland.
Honored Sir,
SInce my last, We have had much action; that in these parts very sad. General
Preston being sat down before Caterlagh (a very considerable pass upon the
River of Barrow, to the County of Dublin, and within about 40 miles of the City
of Dublin) with a party of some 2 or 3000 which quartered about Clogre,
Killegore, Quilirian, and so toward Laghlyn, and Idogh; in which parts are
many of the very rigid party of the Irish Rebels. Preston received Orders from
the assembly of the Confederate Catholics at Kilkenny (which is within some 10
miles of Caterlagh) to take in that Garrison to their obedience; first, offering
quarter, but that if they should refuse to surrender, to put all, (both men,
women and children) to to the sword, after he had taken it.

Accordingly Gen: Preston sent in a Summons to the Governor, commanding the
said Garrison for the use of the King, and the Assembly of the Lords and
Commons of the Supreme Council at Kilkenny, and that if they would surrender
the same, they should have soldiers civilities, if not, then to expect no
mercy. Subscribed PRESTON.

This summons being brought in, and delivered to Major Harman, who kept it
under the Marquess of Ormond, he returned answer, that he kept it for the
King, and had his Commission from his Majesty's Deputy Lieutenant; and desired
to send to Dublin to know his Lordships pleasure, and then he would return
answer. Subscribed HARMON.

Preston not being satisfied with this answer, sends again to him, requiring a
sudden answer, whether he would surrender or not, and threatening him, that if
he did force him to storm it, that he would spare neither sex nor age,
upbraiding him with the fury of the enraged soldiers, in case they should be
so provoked.

Major Harman considering, that besides the Officers and soldiers that were
there appointed to keep it (who were too few to manage it) that there were
many women and children besides Inhabirants (Protestants of those parts, that
came in for protection) whose condition was very unfit to bear a storm,
besides the great importunity of the women, and the little expectation he could
have of relief there, and those parts being wholly possessed by the Rebels, he
condiscended to capitulate.

The next days treaty between them concluded the business, Major Harmon being
to surrender the garrison, upon condition that himself, with his Officers, and
soldiers, and the rest of those persons that were in the garrison, to have all
quarter for their lives, and to have passes, and a safe Convoy to the City of
Dublin.

To this thus agreed, both parties signed, and accordingly they marched out on
St. Peter side, The Officers, soldiers, men, women and children, and wita sad
hearts were forced to surrender all to the Rebels, who marched in, and then
Preston placed 100 foot to keep it for the Assembly at Kilkenny, against the
Parliament and Ormond both, and Major Harmon with those who were marched out
went to Dublin.

I have sent you here enclosed, a list of the particulars of what we lost, in
this garrison of Caterlaugh, that Major Harmon was forced to leave to the
Rebels, and he is now with the Marquess of Ormond here in this City, but some
of the Inhabitants are with their friends in the adjacent villages, yet most of
them are come in hither in a most sad and lamentable condition. O that God
would so put our bleeding estate to your hearts, that we might find some speedy
relief from England, without which we are like to loose all.

This pass was so considerable a one, that we have not such an other betwixt
us and Kilkenny.

In Munster (God be thanked) is betrer news, The Lord Inchiqueen marched from
Cork with a party of horse and foot, resolving (by Gods blessing upon his
endeavors) to take in some Garrisons, and do what he can to divert the Rebels
from passing out of those parts, to join with Oneale, or Preston, against this
distressed City of Dublin, where we cannot represent our condition more sadly
then indeed it is.

His Lordship first sent out a party of horse, and fetched in some provisions
for his Army, and then marched toward the Rebels Garrisons. And this good
news we hear from thence that he has taken from the Rebels, a strong hold
which they kept in those parts, called Capogh-queen, in which his Lordship has
found good store of Ammunition and Provisions.

I have sent you here enclosed a list of the particulars of what was in that
Garrison, as I am informed by those who have been lately in the quarters of
General Preston, who has received Letters that the Lord Inchiqueene has
taken it, and that his Lordship is setting down before another very
considerable Garrison.

Hereupon General Preston, and Owen Roo Neale called a Counsel of War, and
had a meeting near Kilkenny, of the Officers of their Army, as also
acquainting the general Assembly therewith, and receiving their
representations:

It was concluded and agreed according to the enclosed paper, which is the
heads of the resolutions of the Council of War upon an order from the said
Assembly for them to consider of a way to divert the Lord Inchiqueen, and go
on with their designs in these parts, where under a sad and bleeding condition
we cry for help from you. The Lord direct you to lay your own divisions aside
and join to help us, least you give advantage to a third, (a bloody party) to
destroy both us and you. God direct you to help us. So prays

Dublin the 7, of May, 1647. Your humble servant Francis Moore.

The Votes of the Council of War, held near Kilkenny, by Owen Oneale,
General Preston, and the rest of the Officers of the Army of the general
Assembly of the Confederate Catholics.
1. THat General Preston with an Army of foot, and some troops of horse march
toward the Province of Munster, to devert the proceedings of the Lord
Inchiqueen; and relieve the Garrisons kept for the general Assembly of the
Confederate Catholics. 2. That Owen Oneale remain with his forces about
Kilkenny, for the security of the Forces in the Province of Leinster, and that
he have a party of horse, to fetch in Provisions out of the County of Dublin.
A List of what was taken in Caterlagh Castle, which place was taken by
General Preston, and the Rebels.
3 Piece of Ordnance, small ones. 100 Arms, broken and whole. Some Barrels of
powder. Match proportionable. 80 Barrel of Beer. Provisions good store. 60
Officers and soldiers, who marched to Dublin. 100 and ^d, men, women and
children, be^^des. Bullet and ammunition plenty. Much of Protestants goods.
A List of what was taken from the Rebels in Capogh-queen, by the Lord
Inchiqueen.
150 Arms of several sorts. 120 men were in it, Officers and soldiers. 4
Small Guns. 3 Barrels of powder. 50 horses. Diverse barrels of provisions.
Match, Bullet, and Ammunition proportionable, only much broken. The Lord
Inchiqueens soldiers are very resolute.
FINIS.

