A SPEECH Made in the House of PEERS.

By the right Honorable the Earl of Monmouth, on Thursday the Thirteenth of
January 1641.

Upon the occasion of the present destractions, and of his Majesty's removal
from White Hall.

With the Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the County of Buckingham, In
the behalf of Mr. Hampden, Knight for the said County, and of the rest of the
said members of Parliament, accused by his Majesty of Treason.

With his Majesty's gracious answer thereunto.

As also the Humble Petition of diverse of the Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy and
and other Inhabitants of the County of SOMMERSET.

With the last true news from Ireland.

Printed in the year, 1641.

A Speech made in the House of Peers, by the Right Honorable Earl of Monmouth
on Thursday the the 13. of January. 1641.
My Lords.
I Shall desire to be heard speak a few words, which I would much rather have
heard spoken by any of your Lordships, that so they might have a happier and a
more handsome expression; though with a better heart, and clearer intentions
they could not have been spoken.

The sad condition we are now in (my Lords) is such as is too apparent to any
man, who has but half an eye: the City of London is full of jealousies and
apprehensions, we fit not here free from fears; the King has with-drawne
himself from hence, together with his Queen and children, out of a belief,
(as I conceive) that his Majesty's Person was not fafe here. While things
continue in this posture (say Lords) we may well fear an impairing, we can
^^rdly hope for the bettering of affairs* God h^^ plac^ ^s (my Lords) in the
Medium betwixt the King and his people, let us play our parts (my Lords) let us
do our duties, and discharge our consciences; let us really prove, what we
are by Name, Noblemen; let us endeavor to work a perfect and a true
understanding, between the King and his people: let us freely unbosome out
selves to his Majesty; and desire that his Majesty will be pleased to do so to
us; and to this end, (my Lords) which is the end of my motion, if it shall be
approved of by your Lordships, I do humbly move, that by way of conference, or
any other way, we may desire the House of Commons to join with us; first in
an humble petition to his Majesty, that he would be graciously pleased to
return to his good City of London, as the safest place we conceive for his
sacred Person in these distemperd times; and then that they will likewise join
with us in a Profession or Protestation, that we will do what in us lies to
free his Majesty from his fears; to take from the Citizens of London, and his
Majesty's other subjects their jealousies and apprehensions; and that we will
live and dye his Majesty's faithful advisors, counselors and Loyal Subjects.

The Humble Petition of the In habitants of the County of Buckingham.
In the behalf of Master Hampden Knight for the said County, and of the rest
of the members of Parliament, accused by his Majesty of High Treason.
Shows,
THat your petioners having by virtue of your highness writ chosen John Hampden
Esquire Knight for our Shire in whose loyalty and wisdom, we his Countrymen,
and Neighbors have ever had good cause to coufide: how ever of late, to our no
less amazement then grief, we find him with other members of Parliament
accused of Treason, and having taken to our serious consideration, the manner
of their impeachments we cannot but (under your Majesty's favor) conceive,
that it does so oppugn the rights of Parliaments, to the miaintenance whereof
our Protestation bind us: That we believe it is the malice (which their zeal
to your Majesty's service, and the State, has contracted) in the enewies to
your Majesty, the Church, and common wealth has occasioned this foul
accusation rather then any defert of theirs; who do likewise through their
sides wound the judgment and care of us your Petitioners, and others by whose
choice they were presented to the House.

Your petitioners most humbly pray that Master Hampden, and the rest that lie
under the burden of that accusation may enjoy the Just privileges of
Parliament.

And your Petitioners will ever pray etc.
His Majesty's answer.
At the Court at Windsor the 13 th of January. 1642.
HIs Majesty being graciously pleased to let all his Subjects understand his
care not (knowingly) to violate in the least degree, any of the Privileges of
Parliament, has therefore lately by a Message sent by the Lord Keeper
signified; That he is pleased (because of the doubt that has been raised of
the manner) to waive his former proceedings against the said Master Hampden and
the rest mentioned in this Petition, concerning whom his Majesty intends to
proceed in an unquestionable way. And then his Majesty says it will appear
that he had so sufficient grounds to question them, as he might not in
Justice to the Kingdom, and honor to himself have forborne; and yet his
Majesty had much rather that the said persons should prove innocent, then be
found guilty, how ever, he cannot conceive that their crimes can in any sort
reflect upon those his good Subjects, who elected them to serve in Parliament.

The Humble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Clargy and other Inhabitants of
the County of Sommerset.
Shows,
THat having with great joy of mind often heard of the pious inclination of
this Honorable Assembly unto the Reformation of Church Government, and having
of late (not without some regret) seen a Petition in the name of the Knights,
Gentlemen and others of this County, tending most to the Confirmation of
Episcopal power: We have thought it our duty likewise to rouse up our
affection unto Gods cause, and in all humility to lay these expressions thereof
at the feet of this great Council, as being (under God) the chief Arbitrator
between our joy and sorrow.

FOr the present Church Government, of what right it is we may not dispute,
presuming it to be subject to the power of this Honorable assembly; Neither
does it much import how ancient it is, or how near the Apostles days, seeing
we know that in the days of the Apostles themselves, the mystery of iniquity
began to work, and that by the efficatious operation of the same, the man of
sin has advanced himself from the Episcopal chair to the top of
Antichristian Tyranny. But that this Government is the wifest and most pious
that any people has been blessed withal since the Apostles days (what ever
others may believe) we presume is no part of the Creed of this great council;
whose godly zeal in purging the corruptions, and punishing the enemy of the
true Church, being already in part made manifest, does give us rather a inst
cause to hope that God has yet some further blessing of Reformation for us, to
be wrought by the same hands, In prosecution whereof, if it shall enter into
your hearts at this time to give a deadly wound unto that power, against which
you have received so many complaints, we are sure you shall not walk in an
unknown path, but such as has been trodden before you by almost all the
Churches of God which have exchanged the superstition and bondage of Rome, for
the glorious light and liberty of the Gospel. Neither may it be conceived as
the least degree of indignity offered to the blessed memory of those ancient or
later Bishops who have so well deserved of the Church of God both in life and
death, if that Government which they have adorned by their singular piety and
virtues being through the corruption and wickedness of those which have
succeeded them made intolerable, shall by your just authority be abolished. Or
if the number and merit of learned and godly Bishops famous in their
generations be presumed to be a reasonable inducement for the continuation of
that Government, we leave it to consideration of this wise Council, whether
the great and far surpassing multitude of ambitious; ungodly, and infamous
Prelates, in most Countries and Ages bypast, be not a more effectual motive
for the extirpation of the same. Hereunto if we add the present experience
even in these our days of their many insolences and ontrages against the
truth and power of Godliness, suppressing and corrupting Gods Ordinances,
Vnhollowing his day, persecuting his Ministers; Their late mischevous attempt
to impose on us and our posterity an in supportable Yoke of servitude and that
which deserves the highest pitch of Zeal and all the bowels of this
Honorable Senate, the notorious multitude of profane and scandalous Ministers
the most active and malicious enemies unto Reformation, and the authority from
which it is desired. We trust that all this to gether, with much more well
known to this Honorable Assembly, will be sufficient to justify the fears we
have conceived of so dangerous a power.

WHERE FORE being persuaded in our minds, that it will be a work acceptable
unto God, of great advantage and comfort to the Churches of Christ, and no
less conducing to the saftie, peace and strength of all His Majestis
eKingdomes? we most humbly implore the Authority and zeal of this honuradle
Assembly to proceed unto the full accomplishment of the same; And having laid
the Axe to the root of this Tree, to do unto it as to a plant which the
Heavenly Father has not planted, that neither the spreading boughs of the
same may over-shadow the Vineyard of the Lord, nor the bitter fruit thereof
make sad the heart of the people of God any more for ever.

THESE are the desires of your most humble Petitioners, and we are persuaded,
would have been the expressions of Multitudes more of true-hearted Christians
and Subjects, had there not been some indirect practices used in soliciting
the former Petion; whereby many won to subscribe thereunto, who have sit
hence declared themselves in the point of Episcopacie, to have been at the
doing thereof otherwise affected. Howbeit unto us it is sufficient, that
relying wholly on the good Providence of God, the piety and wisdom of this
Honorable assembly, and the sincerity of our own intentions, we cannot want
the comforts of a good hope, while we have the liberty to power out our souls
unto Almighty God to continne and increased his favors and gracious aspect
toward this honorable and religious assembly.

SIr Simon Harcot and the Governer of Dublin Castle have disarmed all Papists
in Dublin, and have overthrown the Rebels and killed many, so that no Rebel
is to be seen within 7. miles of Dublin. The 9. of this month the Protestant
Soldiers beat down the Mass house in Dublin, and threatened to hang the Mass
Priest, and broke down all the Images and spoiled their Trinkets. Tredath was
ready to be relieved by sea. That day we came away we saw the Irish make fires
to raise more help, so their hopes will be frustrate. Corn is reasonable at
Dublin, considering our occasions; the Jesuits and roaring Irish captains
would willingly be gone with the Protestants money and goods, but we hope they
shall leave their heads first, if we can but be supplied gain from England.

FINIS.

