GREAT BRITAINS Remembrancer, Looking In and Out. Tending to the Increase of
the MONEYS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.

Presented to his Highness the LORD PROTECTOR, And to the High Court of
PARLIAMENT Now Assembled.

By the Author RALPHE MADDISON, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, and are to be sold by Humphrey Moseley, at
the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

TO His Highness the Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland, And to
the High Court of Parliament now assembled.
MAy it please your Highness and this Honorable Parliament: Two potent passions
do extremely assault me at once, Grief and Desire. Grief to see the walls of
our City so much wasted, and the sinews of our Commonwealth so much enfeebled,
by the exporting our moneys of late years coined, the quantity whereof will
truly appear, if you please to be certified from the Records of the Mint; it is
given out many Millions almost all exported but our worn and clipped silver, and
most of our Gold: The Mint at a late stand; which one thing were sufficient to
overthrow our Commonwealth, and to bring us under the command of strangers. And
the stand of the Mint had continued, if the Prizes taken from the Dutch by our
Sea-sword had not set it a-work; and will stand again, if remedy be not had,
both in providing work for the Mint, and keeping our moneys from unlawful
exportation when we have it. I humbly conceive the Remedy is feasible, for the
like has been done heretofore when it was evil with us: It was cured by the
hand and rule of a Woman, whose fame and name will never dye. To speak briefly,
she banished base moneys out of England, she set the Low Countries at liberty,
by sending an Army of men, and moneys to relieve them, and lent more then a
Million to the United Low Country men. The like she did to the Assistants of
Henry of Bourbon, after surnamed Henry le grand, for whom I my self did lift up
my right hand: who after the stroke of seventeen Battles in his own person,
obtained the Crown of France. Besides, she had long wars in Ireland, and
fourteen years Sea-Wars with Spain, to some whereof I was an eyewitness. She
dyed rich in good debts owing her, rich in love of her Subjects, her purse was
not empty, and her Land at her death full of Coin and Silver-Plate, which was
coined lately, the Mint-Records can tell when. This I recount with grief to
have seen our Mint standing, and likely to stand again. The want of obtaining
and retention of this good Food of arts and labor, the sinews of war, and
fomenter of peace, will make a public heart to sorrow and grieve.

Nevertheless my Desire, mixed with hope, does abate the grief. What is past
cannot be recalled, but errors past may be amended For the which I humbly
present to your Highness and this Honorable Assembly some crude or indigested
Proposals, by your wisdoms to be altered, fortified and amended, as your
Highness and this Honorable Assembly shall think fit and commodious for these
times. And whereas heretofore two things were propounded under the Kingly
government, viz. The Merchants Exchange, and the Balance of Trade; and now
three things more under a Commonwealth, viz. A Bank, a Council of Mint-affairs,
Free Ports: A short reason may be given, which I humbly refer to your Highness
judgment. When Governments do change, Reasons do change likewise. The
differences between a Monarchy and a Commonwealth are many and great, which I
refer to Hugo Grotius to expatiate. So praying to God to prosper your labors
in all happiness, I remain.

Your humble and devoted Suppliant, Ralphe Maddison, Knight.

BEfore I enter into the particular Discourse of Mynt-affairs, I do humbly
conceive in the first place, it behooves to show the composing of Weights of
Silver and Gold; without the knowledge of which, no Discourse of Mynt-causes
can be understood.

CAP. I. Composing of Weights.
SIlver weight is thus composed: A pound Troy contains 12 Ounces, an Ounce
contains twenty Penny weight, a Penny weight contains 24 grains of Wheat,
taken out of the midst of the Wheat-ear; and e converse, 24 Grains taken out of
the midst of the Wheat-ear, do make a Pennyweight; Twenty-penny weight do make
an Ounce, and 12 Ounces do make a Pound Troy. Where note, that a Pound Tale is
but 4 Ounces, which before King Henry the 6. his time was all one with a pound
Troy; He then raised it by Prerogative to 30 Pence the Ounce, which caused the
price of an Ounce of Silver to pass at that price in current payment between
man and man; and a pound weight Troy to pass at 30 Pence, which before was but
20 Pence. Thus by dividing the Ounce Troy into so many more prices, he lost so
much in his Revenues, Customs and other Duties belonging to him, as he had
multiplied his Pence in number; and this is called raising of the Coin in
Denomination.

And in success of time between Henry the 6. and Edward the 6. his time, the
Ounce was raised to 60 pence, and so it remains ever since constant,
notwithstanding the raising of it in Foraign parts. For it was found by
experience of our former raisings, A temporary remedy is but a fallacy.
that raising of the Ounce Troy was but a Temporary remedy to keep the Money at
home, and stood in stead, or continued no longer then they raised again
beyond-Seas. This may suffice for the weight of Silver consisting of 60 pence
the Ounce Troy, 12 Ounces to the pound Troy.

The Gold pound being the same in weight with the Silver is otherwise composed
in other terms, as thus. The Gold casts away the name of Pennyweight thus. A
pound weight of Troy of pure Gold is said to contain or consist of 24 Carrats,
and every Carrat contains 4 Grains, 2 Carrats and an Ounce are one weight; A
Grain, and half a quarter of an Ounce, are one weight.

Next follows in order to know the composition of the mixture or fineness of
Gold and Silver; and first of Silver, because it is the common Market-man both
at home and abroad.

Here is to be noted, That no Moneys be made of pure Silver in no Mynts; the
reason is, because in its purity the Silver is as flexible as Lead almost; and
therefore not so useful in its purity, as when it is something hardened with
Copper; even so it is with Gold: There is no pure Gold minted in any place I
know of, but has some allay or Copper.

And if it has been so heretofore, it is so ancient, that no memory thereof
remains to us. And if it were at any time done so, the alteration began with
some Prince that meant and did deceive others by so doing: For it is a
powerful means to fetch his neighbors Coin from them to be mynted in his
Mynt; which being perceived, his Neighbors did mix their Coins also, thinking
thereby to fetch theirs home again by the same means it went away.

But as it is before said of Denomination, so then and now it falls out to be
the same in debasing the Coin as it was in Denomination, but a temporary
remedy, and to no purpose, but extreme hurt, as I shall tell you hereafter,
when I come to speak of the inconveniences of raising the Coin by Denomination
or debasing of it by Allay or Copper, which will be all one, and works alike
in effect.

So then, you having the weights of Gold and Silver, and composition thereof in
your understanding and memory, it remains to let you know, That almost all
Princes Coins do differ in fineness or mixture. Few do agree just together, in
as much as Spain (when it had the Kingdom of Portugal) had four Mynts and more
under his Dominions or Command. Two in the West Indies, Mexico and Peru, and
two in the Continent of Spain, Lisbon and Sivile; Difference of finenesse.
yet all four differ in fineness one from the other something, for which there
is some reason to be given in its proper time. So likewise there is some
difference in fineness in other Princes Coins; as between us and France, and
the Low Countries, Archdukes and United Provinces, Lubeck, Hamborough, Stoad,
and the Imperial Cities of Germany.

And for this cause of differences, ours consisting of eleven Ounces, Most
Mynts differ in fineness.
2 penny weight fine. France of eleven Ounces fine, Low Countries of ten Ounces
and some of nine Ounces fine in the pound Troy.

It behooves us who have the finest standard or mixture of Silver in our
Moneys, to beware that our fine Moneys be not drawn out from us to maintain the
baser Mynts. For if Denomination have a power to work that effect, much more
has Embasing of Coin, being not so easily perceived as the other, and to watch
over them in all places, least we be deceived by any of them: Or else how
should we know when they alter, or what Mynt it is that draws our Moneys from
us: Therefore it is needful to watch.

But some will say, what need we be put to trouble to watch others, cannot we
more easily do what others do.

To this I answer, If there were no harm in so doing at home, yet to alter with
them that alter, or may alter, requires a continual watch over all others
with whom we have Commerce: And if we should alter our Mynt, as often as others
may alter, we should ever be altering, and have no rest at home. This by
consequence must needs bring a confusion in short time, when once moving our
Mynt has made great alterations amongst us at home, and will ever do so when
we shall alter. It is the greatest harm to Superior and Subjects as shall be
showed God willing hereafter.

In the mean time give me leave to let you know that in or about the year of
our Lord, 1555. We being in amity with all Princes and Neighbor-Mynts, there
was a general consent amongst Princes and States to make a Treaty for the
concord in Mynt-affairs, to keep a parity in Coins; which Treaties were
frequent in Elder times, but now by reason of Wars near hand in France,
Low Countries and Germany, is omitted.

And in K. Henry the eighth's time, there is mention made of A Treatise between
the King and the Archdutchess of Austria; wherein it was found that the
difference of an Halfpenny in an Angel of Gold, would be sufficient to exhaust
his Treasure out of his Kingdom, and by no means would suffer it.

Then per consequence what do they which at this time do raise their Money
twenty in the hundred above others.

The answer to this is, They do break the Law of Nations, which is a just cause
of war among Princes to go about to draw away their Neighbors Coin by
enhancing by Denomination, or debasing the fineness by Allay; for all make one
effect as aforesaid.

But what care they to break the Law of Nations, that purpose to have War; and
this is advantageous for that purpose of War, to draw Money to themselves, and
from whom they do War with. Then is answered for that point, and must we then
of consequence have our Moneys exhausted (as they are) or make War, and by the
next consequence be und one: Is there no other remedy? There is, but that is
referred to another time and place.

Now I have laid open the composing of the weight and fineness of Gold and
silver, I am to show the cause of Exporting of our Gold and Silver, before a
Remedy can be applied.

And this is a secret to most men to know the cause, and will be controverted
by them that have profit by it; and if we believe them that controvert it, the
cause is lost: Therefore I pray remember what Ecclesiastes says, as concerning
Merchant-Exchange, or touching Exchange: Trust not a Merchant in the business
of Exchange, or touching Exchange; A Laborer in the point of Hire; nor a
Soldier in the ending of Wars.

Bear in mind, I pray you, and have it habituated in you, the weight of Gold
and Silver, and the fineness of our own Coin especially, without the which
knowing and remembering, no man can understand the Merchandising Exchange, the
true cause of exhausting of our Moneys, nor yet the remedy thereof: Therefore I
pray you pause upon that awhile, which has bin delivered, unless you have bin
versed in, or do understand the Mynt-business; and composing both weight and
fineness of Gold and Silver, which has bin in some measure declared.

CHAP. II.
NOw by your favor, because these words ( viz. Balance of Trade or Commerce
and Merchandising Exchange) must of force be mentioned, being the words of Art
or Science well known to many in this Honorable Assembly, who have bin versed
by Trade or Travel in Foraign parts: Yet because I suppose there be more here
assembled that have not been versed in, or given their minds to Merchandising
business, I humbly crave pardon if I be bold (for the help of all men's
understanding herein) to explain these words in as few words as I can.

And first of Balance. Balance of Trade.
All men do know what it means at home in buying and selling, but the word
Trade put thereto, is obscure till it be opened. Balance of Trade then is the
computation or taking the account or valuation of all the Merchandise exported
or imported into this Comon-wealth every year; which being cast up, may tell us
whether we get or lose, or what loss or gain comes to the Commonwealth that
year the Balance is cast up. And if it be found, that we import more then we
export, then that which does want of making the Balance equal, must be
fulfilled with our Commonwealths stock or store of Money, which in process of
time will eat up or consume to a very small portion our Moneys, that should
beat or maintain our home-Commerce or Markets, and per consequence lessen the
prizes of our Wools, Corn, Lands, and what not: For this is infallibly true in
common sense, That where much money is, there the prizes are greater; and where
little money is, there the prizes of all things are less, and grow low. Hence
it was and will be said this Proverb, Regina pecunia donat, for money will bear
rule in price in despite of all men that say no. But I do conjecture (as some
have said to my self) some in this Assembly will say, How is it possible that
all Goods or Merchandises going out of this Commonwealth, and coming in, should
be accounted? This is a thing that to some Wise men does seem impossible.

To this I answer, it is no new thing the Valuation or rate or price of all
Goods going out and into this Realm, has been put in Books duly kept in every
port of this Realm, and once a year brought into the Kings Remembrancers office
in the Exchequer, and there to be collected and made up into one gross Sum of
all out-bound, and another Sum of all in-bound Goods: Whereby the King might
(as in a Mirror) see the face of his Commonwealth, whether it grew fat or lean;
and this (under favorable correction be it spoken) was one amongst other
causes, wherefore Custom of old was due to the King by common Reason or law
for the maintenance of the Officers that attend this care in every Port, and is
so ancient, That in Henry the third his time it was called the Old Custom,
before all memory of Record. This may suffice in brevity for the words Balance
of Trade.

Secondly, Merchant-Exchange.
the word Exchange, all know what it is to make a change. Merchandising
Exchange is known only to Merchants, and to those who in Foreign Travail have
used it: And few of either sort do know the par or equal Exchange of Coins
between Forainers and us.

Exchange of Merchants was first invented for the saving of Portage, and
keeping of Moneys at home in every Government or Commonwealth; besides the
hazard that might befall in carrying of Treasure as luggage from place to
place, which otherwise upon every several Contract made to be paid forraignly,
would be exported, and every Travailer beyond the Sea should carry his
expending Money with him. But now if by equal or disadvantageous Exchange, a
man deliver an hundred pounds here, to be paid so much like quantity of Gold or
Silver there again beyond Seas, this both keeps the Money at home as
aforesaid, and saves the hazard in carriage. But if by unequal exchange a gain
may be had by over-valuing of our Moneys beyond Sea, as now they be overvalued,
especially in France, not only a Merchant making contract as aforesaid, or a
Travailer not knowing the mystery shall lose Ten or more in the hundred; and
the Merchant-observer of the mystery (for the gain had thereby) export the
Money in specie, but more specially Gold, when visibly without change of the
species, he may retain ten of those Pieces, or more in the Hundred; and there
with 90 Pieces pay the Hundred pieces received here; and this is the overt or
open fallacy, now too frequent in France, practiced upon, or by the
Denomination of that Coin.

But there is another more secret which is practiced by Exchangers, to be
considered from the fineness of the Coin: Wherein is to be noted, that all
Princes Coins are not alike, for some have more Allay or Copper mixed with the
Gold or Silver, which were a long Discourse to enter into, and upon agitation
of this business of Exchange will be opened sufficiently. There being only two
chief ways of deceit, Denomination or open deceit, the second intrinsic or
inward value, consisting in the mixture of Copper more or less put into the
Gold or Silver.

Also take this with you for a Principle, That Moneys can neither be advanced
in Denomination, nor a pound Troy, or an Ounce be made into more pieces of
silver, nor debased by putting more Copper or Allay, without general detriment
to the Republique; a perilous thing to deal withal without doubt, and most
specially in Land Commonweals.

And wherefore more in Land Commonweals, then in Maritime and Merchandising
Commonweals; You must be told, or you will not believe. Merchants can
immediately change with the changer without detriment. The Merchant can
immediately set price of his Merchandise according to the worth of the Money,
and the Artificer and Labourer set a price according to his labor or hire,
which cannot be done in a Land-state, more especially in our Commonwealth,
which I forbear for the present, till I show the inconveniences or mischiefs
that would follow the alteration of our Mynt, and will be most pernicious to
undertake any such thing.

Moreover, because our Gold might not be seen too visibly, and make too great a
show in France, or elsewhere, there is order to bring in the Foraign Gold so
fast as may be to be re-Mynted again in their Mynts. In France they do Mynt
double and treble, and quatreble Pieces, calling them Lowyzens, and mynt them
after the proportion of Fifteen to One of silver. We holding in our proportion
Thirteen to One, or a little more; which very Mynt is able by that means to
draw all our Gold away, even that which is left, so fast as can be gleaned, if
Remedy be not provided therein.

Now this Observation following offers it self to give us to understand, That
if this proportion between Gold and Silver be not observed aright, Gold may buy
out Silver, and Silver may buy out Gold out of the Realm, and so the
Commonwealth be deprived of both: The raising of Gold here did cause more Gold
then Silver to come to the Mynt, and by the same means it is called from us
into France, which plainly shows that the raising of Gold or Silver, or
disproportioning one by another, is but temporary, and proves no better in the
end then a fallacy, as enhancing and debasing, and so they all be. And the
truth is, no State stands sure that stands not on the grounds and rules of
right.

Here is to be noted, that Silver prizes Gold, and Gold prizes not Silver; the
reason is, because Silver is of more common use (though Gold be more esteemed
of Rich men) according to the common Adage, Bonum quo communius eo melius. It
is also better for the Commonwealth that more Silver then Gold be mynted; for
Silver is not so hastily nor easily exported as Gold will be. And there will be
always some Canker-worms or Money-Brokers to export Silver or Gold, so long as
Trade is: For remedy of which, there must be some allowance made in the Balance
of Trade, notwithstanding all diligent watch that may be, and great Reward to
be given to the discoverers.

CHAP III.
BUt somtehing else comes to mind which is, the inconveniences that befall our
state, when our Moneys are raised or made little, the moving of our Mintmust
either be in embasing the Gold or Sylver, or advancing it in denomination or
diminishing it by the sheares. But back it cannot be brought when once it is
raised and has obtained currency. It is a dangerous thing to meddle with the
Mint, either in embasing the moneys, or cutting it smaller with the sheares, or
making it lighter: for if it be embased; first it causes counterfeiting
secondly, that part (as so much as is embased) will carry so much fine silver
out of the land; and when it is perceived, the amends is as evil as the
disease.

All those in whose hands the base moneys shall be, will be the losers of so
much as is minted within the land, before it be decryed and what grievance
would this be, able to cause the commonalty to hate the Government, and fall
into uproars and unnatural rebelions, as it has bin in times past, when the
Commons rebelled in Henry the 6 his time, and wrote these words in their banner
or standard, Rex est qui been regit. This and some other mistakes and
misgovernments, was the means that set the Crown on Edward the fourths head.

The like inconvenience to embasing, comes by coining of Farthing-tokens, and
giving them currency and decrying them.

If the money be made less, it gives so much to the lessee, Farmer, or
borrower. All revenues that stand upon constant fees of this Commonwealth; as
Customs, Imposts, Taxes, and such like ancient leases, or rent charges; all
such as be leased shall lose so much; the Nobleman, Gentleman, and Usurer
shall part with so much; in proportion as the money is advanced; in so much
force is raising of money, by often raifing from 20 d to 5 s the ounce as it
has altered the places of Common justice: and this is not all the
inconvenience; price of vi^^ualls will be advanced accordingly, and all wages
raised, and good reason for it. So whether moneys be raised or embased, it
makes great disturbances and discontents of many, in effect miserable.

Therefore there is no stirring of our Mint up nor down, for the reasons
aforesaid, no gain to the Commonwealth, but infallible loss to some parts,
heart burning and discontent, fit to bring in a foraign Enemy will ensue the
tampering with the Mynt.

Therefore I conclude this point, that there is no safe way but to stand
constant at home, change with the changer abroad in matter of Commerce, and
stand constant at home, which can no ways be done, or known and effected, but
by the tables of Exchange mentioned in the Law of Edward the 3, known and put
in Execution ever since in good times of Government; So it was in the time of
Elizabeth.

And first to prove the Merchant-Exchange unequally carried, is the Efficient
cause of Exporting our Money; give me leave to know, whether plenty of Money
make our prises of every thing to rise, and scarcity of Money makes small
prices, which no man I think will deny, and that Commodities are prized
according to the goodness of the coin, or to what end serves fine Gold and
Sylver, If it be not to prize all things.

And if in our commerce with other Nations, we do give more fine Gold or Sylver
then we receive or undervalue our coins in commerce with others, it is a
sufficient outlet, or way to carry out our Money or Bullion, when thereby
those that perceive the advantage to be had, shall leave the true use of
trading in Merchandise, and turn Money Merchants or Exporters of Bullion or
Moneys; for no Laws are prevalent against gain.

And if we do not carry an equal hand with forrainers, in preserving and
increasing our Moneys (as forraigners do) we shall in small time undervalue
our commodities for want of Money, and consequently overballance our trade in
price or quality; and continuing the same course, send out our Moneys in change
for commodities, and have no more commodities then we had before, which course
will infallibly impoverish the Nation exceedingly; and when there is want of
Money, or wasting of Bullion, the Commodities of the Nation, Wool, and all
other home commodities will fall in price; the commodities falling, rents will
fall accordingly; when rents do fall by such a necessity, the necessity spreads
it self over the Land, and Tenants having taken leases at inhanced prizes of
Country-Commodities, not knowing the Efficient cause of this change of prices,
will lay the cause on the Landlords, and grow in hatred toward them, not
knowing how to hold their Farms, nor what to do when they give them over.

This is a fearful effect that follows the want of a convenient stock of
Money to maintain the prices, and to beat or maintain our home-commerce
proceeding from foreign causes, and not from Landowners, or Tenants at home.

So it follows, that those that look to the home cause, as evil-making or
Dying of our manufactutures, or such like, do not amend the matter, or raise
the prizes; so long as there is no more Money, to make the prices any greater.
For it is infallibly true much Money, much price; little Money, little price:
and it is as true, that inhancing of Goldor Silver in France, will draw our
Moneys into France, as is before said.

But there is a more secret way which has bin practiced by Merchants and
Bankers, and long continued; a biting or Canker-eating Usury upon us: namely,
the Merchandizing-Exchange which at the first was devised for good use, and
moderate gain to the lender, and ready disparch to their affairs, and for the
avoiding of hazard importage of Money, as aforesaid which being abused, is
turned into inestimable loss and damage to this Commonwealth, with whom it is
not understood in general, by the Merchants that use it, as here they do not,
but take it upon trust from the Bankers.

Whereas amongst the Dutch, it is so commonly known, that some women do know
it, and I my self do know one (now an English Lady) that is skilful in the
business of Merchant-Exchange; and the Dutch are so wise that they will have
banks amongst themselves, and no foreign banks do fit down their; because they
see, that the gain of foraine banks returns not profit to the Dutch, but to
themselves. I could wish that this were resented by us.

Likewise the gain that was gotten by foreign Bankers, was certified by 25
Selected Commissioners in King James his time to be an immense loss to this
Nation: mistake me not I pray, I do not speak against Exchange, but against the
carrying of our Moneys out of our Land, by the Exchange unequally carried by
strangers, who are the rulers of it.

My desire is, that every Prince or Commonwealth might have the sole use of
their own Moneys, within their Dominions; and for that cause, with other
forerecited causes, was the Merchant Exchange devised in old time, returning
value for value with usance according to reason for forbearance; and so might
our Exchange of England (grounded upon the same reason) be continued and the
Law of the land commands the same. The true valuation of Money, makes the price
of exchange for every place wheresoever we have to do, and the want of knowing
and putting into use this Mystery of comparing of our coins with the coins
of others, value for value, brings in the abuse and an inestimable damage to
this Commonwealth, for we ought to Examine and compare our weight and
finenesse aforesaid, with the weight and finenesse of other Countries, and the
finenesse of our Standard as aforesaid, with the finenesse of the Standard of
the Moneys of other Countries. And if we differ not with them in the proportion
between the Gold and Silver, then may our Exchange go at one price both for
Silver and Gold: the valuation of each Countries Moneys, being taken according
to weight and finenesse, as aforesaid.

And if the proportion of gold and silver of other strange Moneys (as now in
France) do differ from ours, then must we have two distinct valuations, one for
Gold, and another for the Silver; and hereby shall we find how much fine Silver
or Gold our pound Sterling contains, and how much of other moneys France,
Germany, Low Countries, or elsewhere, we are to have to countervaile the same
in the weight and finenesse answerable to ours. Whether it be by Pound, Crown,
Ducket, or Doller, giving always Value for Value, which amongst Merchants is
called Par.

The due and equitable course in Exchange being abused, and through the
ignorance of Merchants, and neglect of the State (not examining the truth) but
taking the price of Exchange upon trust from the Bankers, who rule the price of
Exchange, this trade of Exchange is become very deceiveable, and dammageable to
our Nation; the Merchant making his account from the price of Exchange as it
goes when he uses it, and not from the true par or equality required. And
from hence grows the loss of our moneys, and the Exchange is become
predominant over our moneys, as moneys do rule commodities, and is the
efficient cause of this over-ballancing of commodities in price aforespoken of,
and consequently of the decrease of wealth, and exportation of our moneys, when
we were driven thereby to give as much of our native commodities for foreign
commodities, as we did before the abuse, and moneys to boot, to fulfill the
same quantity.

This Exchange is made properly by Bills, when moneys delivered simply here in
England, and Bills delivered or received again for the payment thereof in some
other Country beyond sea; Or, when the like is done beyond the seas, and money
received here in England, and that upon a certain price agreed upon between
party and party, which is termed the Price of Exchange: whereof the Merchant,
or rather the Bankers have the only and whole disposing, and buy and sell their
commodities beyond seas accordingly; without that, few or none of them do look
into the nature or inward value of the Exchange, but only to the present
object, which is to know how the price goes at the time when they have
occasion to deal therewith, either in taking up, or delivering out moneys by
exchange: Whereas, if they will be true Exchangers indeed, they must know
perfectly the weight and fineness of every Countries coin, thereby to render
every one his just and due proportion as beforesaid; that is, par pari refer,
with consideration to the Lender according to the time agreed upon.

CHAP. IV.
ANd because I have heretofore attributed the ruling of the Exchange to the
Bankers, rather then to the general common Merchants; it behooves me, for the
enlightening of all men's understanding, and further illustration of the business
of Exchange, to show what a Banker is.

A Bank is properly a Collection of a great quantity of ready moneys of a
Province, Banker, what.
Commonwealth, or City, into the hands of some persons licensed and established
thereunto by public Authority, erected with great solemnity in the view of
all the people and inhabitants, showing great store of gold and silver as
belonging to the persons so established; which is to them an attractive, to
persuade and allure the common people to bring their money into these Bankers
hands; so that these persons or Bankers do become (as it were) the general
servants or Cashiers of that City, Province, or Commonwealth.

The Bankers have their Factors or Correspondencie in the chief places of
Christendom, and do keep account with every man of whom they have received any
money into their bank; and generally all men of wealth, that be Merchants, are
desirous to please them, and to bring their moneys into the bank, in regard of
double and treble credit they give to their Compartners, which they do by
assignation, without laying out of the bank any money. Such, and greater
devices have they, and many others too long to recite, the money still remaining
in the Bankers hand, is employed by them to other uses; as, to engrossing of
foreign Commodities to Englands prejudice, and such like feats, making money to
ebb and flow when and where they please; and to that purpose the heads of every
Bank do set price, and agree upon it by common consent at their Ferias or
general Fares for moneys only; and still their eye or devices tend to the
beating down of our English, and raising of their native commodities: which
cunning our Merchants do not countermand, as in old time, when the Staplers
that were entrusted with our staple-commodities, were sworn to advance the
English commodities to their power, and also to bring in to this Nation a fifth
part of their Exitus in money. But as concerning the point of Exchange, it is
most certain, that neither difference of weight, fineness of standard, or
valuations of moneys, can be a true cause of exporting our moneys, so long as a
due course is holden in Exchange, which is par pari refer. But this due
course being abused, causes (as aforesaid) our moneys to be exported, and makes
scarcity thereof, which abateth the price of our common commodities, and on the
contrary side advances the price of the foreign commodities, by reason of
plenty of money there increased by ours sent thither.

But to this may be objected, If this be true (as it is very likely) then it
would follow, that our commodities would be also dear, where the plenty of
money is. True it is, it would be so, but that they have two crafty devices to
prevent the rising of our commodities. One is, our Merchants being takers of
money here to pay there, they know our Merchants must sell, and do proffer their
price according to the price of the goods in-bought, which they know as well as
they that bought them; and also they have toleration of moneys to pass far
above their value with them, and to the greater transportation of ours, and
hindrance of importation of any to us.

Therefore to conclude, there is no remedy but in the watch of the Exchange, to
preserve our own at home, and an ample trade of woollen commodities, together
with the setting of our poor on work, which live idly without employment. These
will advance the balance.

An high Exchange hinders moneys to come from the East, diverts the Royals of
eight and Bullion that comes from the West, and hinders employment at home.

A low Exchange exporteth our moneys in specie, for gain whereof neither high
nor low is advantageous, but prejudicial to us; only a mediocrity is the best,
which cannot be known but by the Par made known in Tables, expressing the Par
according to the law of Edward the 3. and a Watch for the observing of that law
(which has been a long time neglected) giving leave to plenty or scarcity, as
necessity or plenty inviteth* and is most agreeable to right and equity to all
men: Which otherwise carried, the Stranger has three ways of exportation,
namely, by commodities, moneys, or Exchange; and there are but two ways of
importation, namely, Commodities and Exchange, whereby comes a notable
over-ballancing of foreign commodities: And be assured, the gains to be sought
upon moneys, does impeach the gains to be had upon our commodities abroad, and
beats down our prices at home; and our commodities being beat down, is a
great cause of carrying out our moneys, to fulfill or equal the balance.

The moneys exported (as now they be) causes increase of money and prices
beyond sea; so that our Merchants buying dear there, must sell dear here, which
brings a very great overballancing, and causes us to feed upon our native
soil, giving the benefit thereof to strangers: whereas Merchants should live
upon the gains of our homecommodities, being sold to other Nations; and now our
Merchants are driven to seek their gain upon foreign commodities, witness the
Prices of Wines and other foreign commodities, to the great prejudice of our
own Country; wherein, though the Merchants be gainers, yet the Commonwealth
bears the loss, and they feed upon their mothers belly.

More specially in prices of foreign Commodities growing daily upon us, through
neglect of our State not regarding it; what, and how much foreign prices have
exceeded ours in growth, the old Merchants can best tell, and is easy to be
known: I do believe the Foreigners have exceeded us a fourth part, or more,
within my memory, our moneys still remaining the self-same, Five shillings to
the ounce; and here consists the overballancing aforementioned. If the
foreign Commodities which are consumed so soon to dung, shall mount in value,
and the solid Staple-commodities of our Land stand, and not increase in price
according to theirs, This is worthy the State to know.
certes this Land is very negligent and unprofitable to it self. This is one
point (I humbly conceive) does call for a consideration of State, amongst many
others, in the balance of trade, to be considered.

So then, give me leave to intimate this that follows by the abuse of
Exchange, four manner of ways.

1. By the scarcity of moneys, caused by the unequal Exchange, which causes
home-commodities to sell cheap.

2. By the gain sought upon moneys, which otherwise would be sought upon
commodities.

3. By an high Exchange with us, which causes men to deliver that money by
exchange in nature of trade, which otherwise by them might be employed upon our
commodities; or by a low exchange, which causes exportation of our moneys.

4. By rash sale of our commodities by young Merchants and others, that are
driven to pay money taken up upon Exchange here in England to keep them doing,
hereby spoiling the market of others.

Foreign commodities on the contrary are advanced four manner of ways.

1. Through plenty of moneys in other countries, which makes generally things
dear; which plenty is increased by our moneys, to our hurt every way.

2. By a high Exchange beyond seas, whereby men are inclined to buy foreign
commodities; and by a low Exchange with them, when there are not akers up of
money, and therein our excessive use of them does encourage them.

3. By toleration of moneys, beyond seas, to go current far above their value;
for by the alteration of moneys, the price of commodities does alter also; and
this toleration being a hinderance for the importation of moneys, causes the
greater quantity of foreign commodities to be brought over at a dear rate.

4. For that the principal commodities of Silks, Velvets, Fustians, and such
like, are engrossed by the Bankers (as aforesaid) that sell them at their
pleasures. These ways considered, must needs bring an overballance in our trade
(in value) to the loss of Five hundred thousand pounds a year.

CHAP. V.
THus we may consider how the Banker, and every one of our selves do use, or
rather abuse the Exchange, making it a trade for moneys, and making that a
biting Usury, which was invented for speedy Commutation, ease, safety, and
moderate gain to the Lender and Merchant-borrower indifferently.

Likewise, you may see merchandizing-exchange rules moneys, as moneys rules
commodities; and that is fully proved, when we shall find visibly that one
piece of money of one sort and kind of Coin has two prices and two valuations
at one time, exchanging the place only, or Country; as for example, you have a
Piece of 20 s. and beyond the seas you may see the same piece pass between man
and man (in some place) for 22 s. in some other place at 24 s. and in France at
26 s. at one and the selfsame time, and money willingly goes where it is most
made on: And whether they work upon coined money, or valuing the ounce or pound
at a higher price then their neighbour-Princes, if it be not carefully looked
unto, it works the same effect, and one remedy preventeth both.

Wherefore our Merchants having no care nor regard of this, I humbly conceive
it behooves our State (which you represent at this time) to have a special care
unto it, lest the want of money, when you stand in most need of it (now flying
away from you) continue the fall of all home-commodities, and your rents and
livelihood to fall with it, which will be the undoing of your Tenants, the
impoverishing of all men, turning up of your Farms and Grounds throughout the
whole Nation in general, which in truth is the Mother of commotion and
rebellion, procured through a general decay of all estates. Every man being
ready to strike the next above him; and these be the fearful effects that
follow an unequal Exchange: and for truth, the the common course of the
Merchant-Exchange is unknown to most Merchants, and almost all men else,
exceping some few, that use it for their private and unconscionable gain, to
the loss of the Comonwealth, like unto the Cancer or to the disease called the
wolf, eating and consuming the bosom that bred it.

Give me leave (before I explain the remedy conceived) to inform you, that if
any to delude time, will oppose or contradict, that unequal Exchange is
prejudicial to the Commonwealth, it is yielded unto by common consent of all
hands, Merchants and others, that unequal Exchange is prejudicial to the
state, when it was controverted and determined in King James his time, at what
time he appointed 50 Commissioners for trade to sit weekly in
Haberdashers-hall, whereof one besides my self is still living, called Sir
George Stroud, then a Spannish Merchant. Whereupon it followed, that for the
prevention of public loss to the Commonwealth, a parity or equaility of
Exchange should be made known to all men, that had occasion to use it, having
regard to the forbearance, according to the time and place, which is most just
and equal for all men, both Denizens and strangers.

To this Exception will be taken, unless I do explain my self, allowing and
granting for truth, that plenty or scarcity of Moneys to be given or taken up,
does bear a sway, as it is upon the statute of usury,

If there be plenty of Moneys, they will be lent under the statute; and if
there be scarcity, there will be more given for the loan then the statute
allows, by some covert means or other; for in truth, the good use of the
Merchandising Exchange, is none other but a ready way of borrowing for
Merchants, without sureties or delay to be executed; which moderately used,
without excessive biting usury, is both profitable and commendable for all
Merchants to use, as their occasion requires; but if it be unequally or
abusively carried, may be justly called the Canker of Englands Common wealth.
And let no Merchant think, but that I am their friend in wishing them ease and
remedy therein, that it be not carried at the will of the banker, as it is but
that it may be used according to the Ancient Law of the Nation Extant and the
practice of Q. Elizabeth for the same, which Law and Proclamation will appear
upon the debate of the business; If you please to take order.

As also the demonstration of the tables mentioned in the said Law of Edward
the 3 d, one for Gold, and another for Silver, as I have seen the like in my
time, respectively expressing the value of every piece of Gold or Silver Coin
with whom we have commerce, severally compared with our pound Sterling; whereby
the Equality is demonstrated to every Merchant, that will follow the tables of
Exchange, to avoid the danger of the Law.

And, because foreign Coins are daily subject to alteration in finenesse or
valuation, after the computation is once made, it behooves that there be (and
it is no hard matter) an observant watch, or diligent eye over those places of
commerce and Mynts, to send intelligence hither to the Guardian of the tables,
to alter the tables immediately in that point, and to keep constant at home,
which will be a sufficient guide to defend us from foreign wrong by any. This
table of demonstration once made, will be far more easy to understand, then
any Pen or Tongue can express. This being done and observed, that the foreign
Banker or Exchanger do us no harm, in a small process of time, our Balance
of trade will recover it self again, and we shall have God willing a constant
thrift to attend the labors of our Commonwealth, and not to be wrought upon
by any biting usury, by shifts or interval of time, to waste or Exhaust our
treasure or consume the stock of ourcommonwealth that should maintain the
prices of our native commodities; our rents and artizens; as sundry times in my
memory it has done. But what a Nation or Commonwealth have we, that is able to
bear the loss of so much Coin as we have lost, and departed from us within
few years, that might have bin saved and had it bin saved, would have enabled
us to send out a Portion of ready Money yearly for the advancing of trade, or
other worthy undertakings, as Herring-Busses, or such like.

The sums of Gold and Silver Mynted within these 10 years and now stolen out
again, and wanting, may give the State satisfaction thereof by the Records of
the Mynt, to be had at your command, to the unspeakeable loss of the
Commonwealth.

CHAP VI.
THe tables of Exchange being put in use for our safety or safeguard it
follows then (as good husbands use to do) that we take account of the thrift
of our commonwealth to see yearly how we do thrive or go backwards, Also to
know by what ways our wasting comes and thence to distinguish what several
trades is beneficial to our Commonwealth or not, and to set redress
accordingly if occasion require it, which is no new thing but an Ancient
practice as might be manifested; the general balance of trade being cast up
and found defective a light in the balance, It behooves us then to look what
particular trade or commodityes be dammageable or hurtful to our Commonwealth
and to set redress. First, then that trade or Merchant that carries out
superfluities or those commodities we abound in, and bring in the commodities
that we want for them; that is a good trade or Merchant and deserves to be
nourished countenanced and maintained therein, and those that do contrary
better ordered.

Now who knows not that we abound in Wool and Woollen commodities, Tinn,
Lead, and someother things, which I name not, who knows not what we want of
our own but must have it from without us, namely Gold, Silver, Iron and Steel,
per consequence it follows that those Merchants that bring in those said
commodities we want, are most to be nourished and favored before others that
do the contrary.

But how or by what means is this trade of Merchant discovered, but by the
Ancient way of examining the balance of trade of late years, almost grown out
of use, but it was discovered in the latter time of King James, there was one
employed to discover the unlawful export of Wool, out of the port of Boston,
which was discovered by the custom books of Boston, though the wool were
uncustomed: Where finding two ships, one a stranger, and the other a Bostoner,
to come and go often with little fraught, were more narrowly looked into and
found to be faulty, and the offenders censured in the Star Chamber, the other
Shipp of Camphire came no more to Boston; so by deligent search might forbidden
goods and unlawful trading be discovered: If the state would encourage and
recompense the Watchman and discoverers of abuses. This watch of the balance
of trade was always observed by the prudent Lord Burley Lord Treasurer of
England.

And to what other end, was all the port books of this Nation, brought into
the Custom house of London, and from thence once, A year transmitted with the
custom-bookes of London into the Kings remembrancers Office in the Exchequer;
where one gross sum of all the Kingdoms Exitus and Introitus of Trade might be
known, and of all the Goods both inward and outward bound and the value of both
accounted, thereby to know whether we were buyers or sellers, winners or
losers; for it behooves the Father of a Family to be a seller, and not a buyer;
and if it be found that we sell more then we buy, we do well; if otherwise, it
behooves us to look about us.

As in general, a view may be had of our public thrift; so in every
particular Trade their walk being observed, it may be known what Trade brings
in, or forces in Money, or such things as we want, for therein lies the
thrift of our Commonwealth; and so on the contrary, what Trade forces out our
Moneys, and per consequence imbaseth our commodities.

This public Thrift or reformation, as I humbly conceive would not be held in
mystery, but made more common and easy to every intelligent Gentleman,
because he is in some fort interessed in the same for the advancement of the
Public good, and therein his own particular is intermixed. Therefore I am
bold, and humbly commend the general or theorical studies of the Merchandising
exchange, and the balance of Trade unto your Wisdoms to be regarded: and for
these purposes, the keeping and the observance of the balance of Trade will be
found very useful.

There be also other things to be met with in the public thrift, which for
the present I forbear, which before I have done or finished my intended
discourse, I purpose to enter upon, if it please God, notwithstanding the
dispute that may arise by them, that would endeavor to frustrate this
business; for private gain never wanted colors, and pretexts to stupefie or
inveagle the understandings of such as have not bin versed therein.

Give me leave, I pray, you to repeat one thing twice, though the same have bin
in effect said before for the better illustrating what has bin said to those
that were never seen nor studied any thing herein.

It is a sure tenent or maxim that it is necessary for our Commonwealth to
keep constancy in our Mynt at home, so is it as necessary to change with the
changer in all foreign Coins either Gold or Silver, reducing all foraign
Coins to a par or equality with our constant Coins; and to that end in
ancient times, there was a pair of Tables set forth, expressing the same
demonstratively the one for Gold, the other for Silver Coins, with whom we had
to deal beyond seas. The French Crown did answer to six of our shillings: our
unite to contain 3 French Crowns and a Third, so the Dutch Ryder, although it
go here but for 21 shillings, it is of equal value to our Unite, so as all
foreign Coins, severally reduced to our Coins, did show and express what
was to be given and allowed between strangers and us in accounts, which is
called the Merchant Exchange, this equality once known and expressed, as
aforesaid we may be deceived 3 manner of ways,

First if we watch not foreign Mynts, by the sheeres in coining, whereby it
may come to want in weight, although it were of equal finenesse.

Secondly by putting in more Allay or Copper into their Moneys, which is not
perceived or discovered, how much, but by trial in the fire, in melting some
part and refining it and comparing the remainder of pure Silver, to the like
quantity of our Moneys refined as theirs was.

Thirdly without lessening or embasing to call any of their species higher up,
a way commonly used in foreign parts called denomination, which must be
watched and prevented by new expressions as aforesaid, so often as there shall
be cause, by such as the Lord Protector and his Council shall depute, for that
purpose most proper for the Council of the Mynt affairs, I humbly conceive,
this is a sure way of preserving our Coins at home with good reward giving to
the discoverers of exporters of Gold and Silver, for there will always be some
of those offenders, even if it were made Felony, for once it was so, yet
availed not: good recompense is far better then life. This is a sure way, or
the best can be of preserving our Gold and Silver at home, without which the
Bankers both forraigners and domestic have power to deceive our Commonwealth
and lessen our common stock of Gold and Silver, which will turn to a fearful
effect in time, and in few words, not to be expressed and double loss when the
balance of trade is against us to our loss together with an unequal Exchange;
and that Country or particular Trade that gains the Balance gets our money, be
it friend or enemy: And if we lose both ways, how should we long subsist
without home poverty and Canker-eating consumption?

CHAP. VII.
WHereas I proposed five things to be useful to this Commonwealth: the two
first, unequal Exchange and Balance of trade, being in some measure laid open,
the third is (to wit) a Bank and a Banker. What they be, is declared; but the
feats and activities of the Bankers are not touched tending to their private
gain, which is an enemy to the public: For the most part all Corporations be
hurtful to the Public, if not overseen by the States supreme government that
preserves and intends the public good. But for and by this that has been
said of the Bank, this reason may be given, Contrariorum contraria sunt
sequentia.

1. A Bank of Foreigners was and is most hurtful to us in receiving from us the
increase or loanmony given to the Bankers by those that dealt by exchange with
them.

2. Engrossing of commodities, and indearing them to us, may be otherwise
ordered, if we had a Bank of English goods and English subjects, that harm that
was done by strangers to our Nation, vice versa, would be altered, and we
defended; if no further but so, it would redound much to our profit.

If Banks of native Subjects were not both useful and beneficial to the
Commonwealths wherein they live, they would not nourish them as they do both in
Italy and the United Provinces. And for the preventing of the Dutch from
indearing the East-Indie commodities, that would sell them as they list unto
us, our East-Indie Company is approved by us. So the like it is with the Bank
or Bankers, and for the aforesaid reasons allowable and profitable to have an
English bank to prevent the forementioned enormities, if but so. But this being
a policy exceeding my mean skill or knowledge, I humbly submit it to the high
Governors of the State to determine.

And whereas, something has been heretofore objected against the having of a
Bank in England in times past, that might now be answered: but herein Cynthius
aurem vellit, and wills me to be silent at this time.

CHAP. VIII.
THe fourth thing I humbly conceive is A standing Council for Mint-affairs to
be settled constantly, to sit at the days appointed to give audience concerning
all affairs that concern the ordinance of the Mint, or that may obstruct or be
obnoxious to the Mint, either by exportation, diversion, or consumption, the
great defrauders of the Mint, and to bring them all both offenders and
accessaries to condign punishment according to the Law of the Land: And when
this Court has any cause concerning life or forfeiture of moneys, to be
assisted with one or more of the Judges learned in the Law; and in the mean
time to be a Court of inquisition or presentment, fitting the offenders for
speedy trial; for delay abateth the edge of the law, and experience tells us
that where the State does not keep extraordinary watch in money matters, the
State is and will be abused, which is over-well known to the French and Dutch
that we have no such watch.

And to make our Mint to flourish, the chief Officers of the Mint and Council
would have a general knowledge of all the chief Mints and Mintmasters, and chief
Bankers of Christendom, which is a great point of State wisdom, the greatest
point whereof is to foresee that Bullion be had to keep the Mint going; and for
that purpose to see that the Gold that comes from Africa, and the Silver that
comes from the West Indies, be brought to the Mint, and to use their
endeauours to bring more, and to keep it when we have it. For that end, no
penalty that concerns the Mint to be remitted, the forfeitures to be great,
and reward great to those that discover the offenders, and the part given to
the informers in no wise to be pardoned.

Item, To keep the Goldsmiths to their trade to be Silversmiths, and not to be
Bankers or Cashiers of money for other men, which puts them in a way to deceive
by culling of moneys or other secret ways of diminution of Coins, which other
men know not. Likewise those that give more for the Gold or Silver then the
Mint, that is a forestalling of the Mint, in no State suffered, and frequently
used here of late in the eye of all men. A circumspect care would be had to the
Examination of the Balance of Trade in particular, likewise to have an eye
observing of the Tables of Exchange when they be set out; Also to have a
special regard in the time of peace what the French do here, for they do come
and go often, and bring trifles for which they carry away our gold: It is not a
small sum in the Balance, that Pocket-commodities and things of small bulk,
being stolen without paying of Custom, come to: Also to hunt out such, were a
good service to the State. Lastly, all commodities bought in with ready moneys,
as Currens, Tobacco, and Nuns works, or whatsoever carries moneys or Bullion
for it, by all means to be narrowly looked after for what cause soever. There be
also diverse ways out of our proper selves to bring bullion to the Mint: but so
long as we have not the retentive faculty, but do let our moneys and bullion to
pass through as water through a sive, we shall enrich others, and do our selves
no good but harm.

CHAP. IX.
SO leaving this point of a Council of Mintaffairs, I do proceed to the last of
the five, namely Free-Ports.

First, Free-Ports.
of the inconvenience of not having Free-Ports of our own, it is well known,
and I have in mine own time observed, that whenever wet seasons of seed-time
and harvest do come, we have but little increase, and that little evil gotten;
which inforceth us of necessity to fetch and to buy our bread from the
Hollander, or from East-Country, which we pay for in ready money for the most
part, The general law of all Nations permits to give money for bread. This I
have known diverse times in England; not only our ready money, but the poor folks
treasure, Pewter and Brass, their utensils sold and sent into Holland for
bread, who have no bread for themselves of their own growth, but buy it from
cheap places in cheap years, and sell it again to those places that have
scarcity of Corn or extraordinary cause for the use of Corn. So might we do if
we had free Ports of our own subjects; the chief benefit would be to keep our
moneys at home, which we send out for Corn so often as we have wet and
unseasonable years as aforesaid, and feel the loss of it many years after by
reason of the want of our moneys, which does abase the prices of our
home-commodities, to the unestimable loss of our Commonwealth; which if we had
free Ports of our own people, would return unestimable profit in lieu of our
losses sustained as aforesaid, both in being storers of many foreign
Commodities we have not, and to send them forth again as the Hollanders do in
manner aforesaid, giving and allowing small custom for such things as are not
consumed or used within the Land. The increase of Shipping, and the wealth that
is gotten by foreign trade, is more then I can recount; the example of the
Hollander may suffice for satisfaction herein.

But to give equal privilege to the Dutch to harbor in our Ports all winter,
or when they will, and to be gone when they will, (otherwise then in distress
of weather to give them harbor) is not only to give them that which they have
not, nor can give the like to any other, open harbors all winter when theirs
are frozen; and we have the benefit of many winds to go out and in, and they
having fewer winds to go out and in, in Holland-Harbors, then we out of ours,
and more danger in coming in and out then we in ours, witness the frequent
losses in the Texel; but also make our Ports their store houses, and become
thereby Huxters amongst us, which were too much unless they were incorporated
one Nation with us, which thing is too great a business for me to treat or
speak of: Yet at least those that had the benefits of our Ports as free natural
subjects, should become our own subjects and plant their children amongst us,
and not to come hither to glean or gather our thyme, and make their hives in
another place or country then ours. This were friendship above the Roman
friendship, that were wont to grant their freedom not freely, but for a good
sum or price, as is verified of old.

Therefore both the Seas and Ports being ours, these privileges be more then
ever was given by any free State or Commonwealth to any neighbor State that I
ever heard of. Yet so well we love the Dutch, and firm alliance with them, that
I believe there be many amongst us of this mind, notwithstanding some do
allege they will eat us out. If it be so that we be slothful and vicious, let
Gods will be done, let the virtuous and laborious enjoy their labors, and
posterity enjoy and possess that which vicious drones have dispossessed
themselves of: which I humbly conceive is just in the eye of God, and law of
nature, if done without force. But if we shall admit them by way of courtesy
to have free Ports without conditions with us, in short time when they see
opportunity they would be as unthankful for them, as they have been for the
liberty of the Seas, as has appeared by a Treatise divulged by them entitled
Mare liberum, which was fully answered by learned SELDOM; and more particularly
the Sovereignty of the British seas proved by ancient Records to belong to the
Sovereign power of this Land, in a Treatise composed by the worthy Antiquary,
Sir John Buroughs, called, The Sovereign of the Seas.

To conclude this point of Free-Ports, common reason confuteth the Liberty of
the Seas: without government, both Sea and Seaports would become Receptacles
of Thieves, Sea-robbers, and Pirates, which would destroy Sea-traffick, if they
be not mastered and destroyed, which cannot be without government: Which being
granted as a thing necessary to be at Seas as at Land, (not one over all Seas,
for that is too vast a government to be under the rule of one, if it could be
without injury or wrong to others) Who then should? Even those to whom the
government most properly belongs: And who are those? Even those
Principalities or Commonwealths who have the best Sea-harbors by site of
nature, and near those Seas, are fittest for the government of those Seas
adjacent; and withal the eldest prescrition of the possession of the
government of those Seas. Of which both Harbors, and possession of Government
of the Seas, Great Britany has had the tuition and government, unless it were
in the times when the Inlands of Great Britany were in Civil wars, and so the
government of the Seas became neglected.

And to manifest this, begin we with

1. Our several Conflicts with, and Victory over the Dutch.

2. The times of Queen Elizabeth, whose actions are fresh in memory, and her
famous Conflict with the Spanish Navy, (by Gods special favor obtained, and
never to be forgotten.)

3. The famous Navies and Victories of Edward the Third, whereof the best and
brief memory is his golden Coin (yet to be seen) called the Rose-Noble, or Spur
Royal, by his Image pictured thereon as the Stears-man of the ship, and
Governor of the British seas: Whose title of the British seas descended to him
from Richard the First, who in his way to the Holy wars (so called then)
ordained new Laws, and confirmed the old, in the Isle of Oloron, ever since
called the Laws of Oloron, well known to Seamen. He held the prescription of
the sovereignty of the Seas from Henry the first. And had the Seas been guarded
in the times of Harold the Usurper, which was neglected in the times of Edward
the Confessor, William the first had not so easily entered England. So King
Edgar had the sovereignty of the Seas, when he had eight Under-kings or
Viceroys to row the Barge, and he himself the Stears-man, and so entered
Westchester. Whoever had the mastery of the Scas, Saxon or Dane, gained the
Land. Even so it was in Julius Caesar's time at his entry, testifying the
excellency of the British ships, which he after imitated in his future wars,
leaving also a Memorial of the British government of the Seas and Seaports.
The Britains were masters of the Seas, and sole Merchants; the Gauls being
ignorant of the Inland of Britany, and so kept by the Britains from the
knowledge of Britany, the Britains being masters of the seas.

What Nation can say so much as Great Britany? And therefore it behooves us to
regard our Seas and Sea Ports, and whom we plant in them, lest neglecting them
we become a prey and booty unto Strangers.

Your Suppliant, as a weak Remembrancer, having according to my poor skill and
ability passed over the Cinque Ports of the Profits of our Land, I hope my
boldness herein may be excused, proceeding from the ardent desire I bear to the
welfare of our Country and Commonwealth.

Etiam in magnis and voluisse sat est.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. l. 21. for then read this. p. 15. l. 9. for manufactritures r.
manufactures. p. 28. l. 13. for ten r. twenty years. p. 28. l. 28. for a light
r. or light. p. 29. l. 33. for Watchman r. Watchmen.


