THE TRUE LIGHT Has made manifest DARKNESS: OR, Sion builded up, and Babylon
cast down. WITH A true Answer of what the Baptist Teachers objected against
the Servant of the Lord who in scorn is called a Quaker, and known to the world
by the name of John Moon, in several places in Wales, both in Radnorshire, and
Brecknockshire, whose names are these.

Hugh Evans, John Price, Daniel Penry, Reese Davies, John Prosser, Evans
Oliver, and Vavasor Powel, who are called Ministers of the Gospel, but are
found to be enemies to it.
Joel 2, 10. The Lord is uttering his voice out of holy Sion, and says the
earth shall quake before them, and the heavens shall tremble. Psalm. 2. 11.
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Some of Vavasor Powel's
doctrine tried, and made manifest by the Light. And also some Queries given
forth, and are to be answered by them that lives in observations.

This is given forth by me who is a lover of the Truth, and known to the world
by this name, John Moon.

London, Printed for G. Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle near the West end of
Paul's, 1657.

The true Light has made manifest Darkness, etc.
NOW is the day wherein the Lord God is making manifest his love in the hearts
of his people, to the discovering the deceit of the heart, and makes manifest
unto man the false way of Worship, and to the discovering of all rotten
profession which many do boast in; and this love is that which thinks none ill,
which is that light which shines in darkness; and if man will but hearken unto
it, and obey it, it will lead man out of the ways of darkness, into the way of
light and life: And herein man will come to know and possess that which the
world professes; now he that would know the way unto life, must first know that
light which shines in darkness to be the Judge and Condemner of his evil deeds;
for all them that will not come to the light to be tried, their deeds are evil;
and these are them that profess that with their tongues which their souls never
did possess; and these are them by whom the way of God is evil spoken of:
Therefore hold not thy peace O God, but arise and plead the cause of thy
children, and make all the ungodly to know that thou art a righteous Judge, and
that by thy eternal Word, the mouth of the Wicked may be stopped, and all them
who are gainsayers of the Truth may be confounded, and that thou by thy own
Work, O Lord, may be praised and glorified for evermore.

This is in love to all you who would know the Truth as it is in Jesus, and who
has a desire to know true possession from the rotten profession, which stands
in observations, who are by the children of God known to be the uncircumcised
Philistines.

And as the servant of the Lord was declaring the Word of the Lord to the
people, and said Christ lights every man that comes into the World, and it
is by that light which man is to be lead out of darkness.

And one of the Baptists, called Hugh Evans, said, That the true Light shines
but in some, and not in all. He was demanded to prove it, but could not.

This I say, That the true Light is that which lights every one, as says the
Scripture, That was the true Light, John 1. 9.
which lights every man that comes into the world. Now see how contrary to
the Scripture he does speak, that would make John a false Witness, and the
Scripture to be a lie, which says, Light shines in darkness, and darkness
comprehends it not. Now every one consider that reads, and see John 1. 5.
if ye can find in all the Scripture, if it does declare of any other but the
Righteous and the Wicked; Light and Darkness; the strait Way, and the broad
Way; the one is the Way to life, and the other unto death: Now every one that
knovvs that Way which leads unto death, it is the light that shows it him; and
if he will hearken to the Light, it will show him what wilhe should deny, and
what cross to bear; and through the denial of his own will, the cross he
will come to know, which daily should be born, and then he will come to
know it to be the power of God unto salvation: And if man does not deny that
will which leads into iniquity, it is that will which stumbles at the
cross, and counts it foolishness; but these are them which perish, and talks
of the Cross, but knovvs it not, nor the power of God, but are found Enemies to
it; and these are them who says Christ has given light unto some, and not to
all; and herein they would make Christ to be a respector of persons; If ye
have James 2. 9.
respect to persons ye commit sin, and are convinced of the Law as a
Transgressor: Now this I say, That Christ has respect Acts 10. 34.
to no man's person, as says the Apostle, Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respector of persons; now here every one that reads may see their confused
Language, and may see that those are them who speaks contrary to the Scripture;
and all these who would know life, must believe in the Son of God who is the
light which shines in darkness, which is the condemnation of the wicked, as
the Scripture does declare, This is the condemnation, That Light is come into
the world, and John 3. 19.
men loved darkness rather then Light, because their deeds were evil; for every
one that does evil hates the light, but he that does truth comes to the
Light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God; and
here it shows but of two, the one his deeds were evil, and he hates the Light;
and the other he loves the Light, and brought his deeds to the Light: Now
herein he that reads may see that the Professors do say that the Light shines
unto them, but not to others; and herein it does appear by their own words,
that their Profession is darkness: Now this I say, That the light shines to the
profane, and to them that sits in darkness, as the Scripture bears witness;
God gave his only Son a light Luke 8. 79.
to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death.

And also the same man said, That Christ and his spirit were distinct.

I say, That they are one, and not distinct; Christ is the life, and the Spirit
is life because of Righteousness: Now see Romans 8. 20.
where is the distinction, for the Scripture declares that the John 17 21.
Father and the Son are one, as you may read, That they all may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee; that they also Ver. 22.
may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me, and the
glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one, even as we
are one. Them who have an eye to see withal, let them see the confusion which
the Baptist declares, who would make Christ and his Spirit distinct one from
the other, which is contrary to the Scripture; so with the Scripture they are
judged, and with the life which gave forth the Scripture, they are condemned;
as Christ said; the hour comes, and now is when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth; John 4. 23.
for the Father seeks such to worship him; for God is a Spirit and they that
worship him must worship him in Spirit and in truth; and now herein you may see
that Christ and Ver. 24.
that Spirit wherein he is worshipped is one, and it is them that he is well
pleased with; but them that knows not his true worship speaks evil of it; and
these are them that would make a distinction between Christ and his Spirit.

As the servant of the Lord, who is by the world called quaker, went to a
meeting, and there to wait upon the Lord; and as he was moved by the Lord, to
declare his word to the people, how they must come to know the way unto God,
which is light, and said that which made manifest sin is light, and it is that
light which shows man the broad way which is sin, and if man would hearken to
that light and obey it, it would lead him to know the strait way where life is
to be found, and said as long as man is going on in his sin he is in the way of
darkness; and there the true light shines and shows him the evil deeds of
darkness; and now he that loves the Lord, and would know the redemption of his
soul, must learn of the light to deny that will, whereby he is lead to do
evil; for it is that will which is not subject to the Lord, and as long as man
harbors that will, he harbors the cursed thing which is the enemy of man's
soul; and man that harbors that cursed thing, with it is to perish; but man
denying the cursed thing, and owning that light and obeying it, it would lead
him to know a day of redemption; and if man deny that light which shows him
sin, to be his teacher, redemption he will not know.

Then one of the cheifest of the professors called John Price hearing me
declare to the people how they should know truth from error; and light from
darkness; then he said there is an other way besides light and darkness, and
that they are distinct one from the other; I bade him prove three ways: and
this is his proof, there is God, man, and the devil: I bade him prove them
distinct one from the other and clear it to the satisfying of the people that
way which was neither light nor darkness; and I demanded of him to show and
make manifest to the people the word which said they are distinct one from the
other, but he could not.

An. Now this I say; that there is no other way but light and darkness, and man
is in the one way, and obeying the one, as the Scripture makes manifest; know
ye not that to Romans 6. 26.
whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are; now if man
obey the light, he obeys God; and if man obey sin, he obeys the work of the
devil; now every one consider and mind the light, which will show man which way
he is going, and when he does evil it reproves him, and shows him whose work
he is doing; for there is none that can serve two Masters; so people consider,
whom ye serve I Cor. 6. 16, 17.
and what ye are joined unto, for he that is joined to an harlot is one body,
for two (says he) shall be one flesh; but he that is joined to the Lord is one
spirit; and now every one own that light which will show you what you are
joined unto; and every one that is joined to his own will, which is the lust of
the flesh, except he deny that will with it he must perish; So every one that
would know the way to the kingdom of God; must learn of the light to deny his
own will; and take up the Cross and follow Christ Jesus daily, and then he
will come to know the power of God; which overcomes the wicked one; this I say,
that there is God, man, and the devil; and man is joined to the one, either to
God or to an harlot; now let the wise in heart judge where the third way is.

And the same man says, that faith is not the gift of God.

An. Now this I say, that faith whereby man is saved from sin is the gift of
God; as the Scripture bears testimony, for by Ephesians. 2. 8.
grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift
of God; now here, in your way; see how contrary to the Scripture he speaks, and
though many may have the letter and know the Chapter, and verse, and yet be
ignorant of the way unto life; so all people consider, what way you are in, and
what faith you do know, for that faith which is without works is dead; now see
if you know that faith which saves from sin; if not, your faith and you must
perish; and this is that faith which the world lives in, and though the world
may have the letter to talk on; yet this I say, there was not any by it saved;
for the drunkard, the swearer, liar, and the covetous one, these have the
letter to talk on; but are not saved from their sins, and these are them who
follow the blind teachers of the world; and if the blind lead the blind both
shall fall into the ditch; now people consider in what condition you are in,
and see if you can witness to be saved from your sins, for if you live in them,
ye are them who are deceived, and are in the broad way; for sin is the broadest
way that any can walk in; now let him that reads, read with an understaning;
and see if in all the Scripture ye can find of any other saving faith, but what
is given of God.

Daniel Penry, another of the Baptists said as he was declaring to the people,
That the Devil spoke in the people of God.

Answ. Now this I say, That the people of God is the Temple of God, as the
Scripture declares; Know ye not that 1 Cor. 6. 19.
your bodies is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you? Now people
consider how confusedly he has spoken, for that which he said is more likely
to be the Synagogue of Satan then the Temple of God, for where the Devil speaks
is the Idols Temple; and God said, What agreement has the 1 Cor. 6. 19.
Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the living God; as God has
said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will he their God, and they
shall be my people. Now he that has an eye to see withal, may see their
confused Language, who does call the Temple of God the Idols Temple, and herein
they are found to be them that call Truth Error, but Truth has made manifest
their Errors; and all them who knows the Truth, and the true Worship and
Temple of God, they know how and by what the Prince of this World is cast out,
as the Scripture declares, they know it so to be; Now is the judgment of this
World, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out; and all ye that knows
him to be cast out, John. 10. 31.
praise ye, and glorify the Name of the Lord God for evermore.

Rees Davies, and another said, who were two Baptists, these words, That in the
devil there is as much of God as makes him tremble. And the other said, That
there is as much of God in the Devil as in man.

Answ. I said he had spoken contrary to the Scripture; and I said, The hope of
Glory is in man, and it is not in the devil; as the Scripture meakes manifest;
to whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this Gal. 1. 27.
mystery amongst the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of glory; now
all people consider, and see how confusedly they speak, and contrary to the
Scripture; so every one mind that light which convinces of sin; and leads to
the mystery of faith; and leads out of all blind profession to the true
possession, where man will come to know a rest to the weary soul; and now
concering the devil, I say he is out of the truth, and the truth is not in him,
as the Scripture does affirm, Ye are of your Father the devil, and the lust of
your John 8 44.
Father ye will do, he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth because there is no truth in him: so all people consider and mind that
light, which lights every man that comes into the world; that by it you may
come to be lead out of darkness to know the light of life, but if you deny the
light which convinces of sin, out of darkness you cannot come and you will
remain ignorant of the truth, and though man declare the truth unto you ye
cannot believe.

As the servant of the Lord, was moved of the Lord to go unto on of the Baptist
meetings, to declare as he was moved of the Lord unto the people, and said that
all worship that stood in the will of man was abomination unto the Lord, and
said where two or three were gethered togeteer in the name of the Lord, he
would be in the midest of them; and I declared and said that Christ is the
light of the world, and lights every man that comes into the world, and it is
that which shows man sin, and shows the drunkards, he should not be drunk, and
the liar he should not lie; and the proud he reproves; then one of the Baptists
hearing me, cried out and said, prove, prove thy doctrine, for I deny it; then
I said unto him, if thou can disprove me do, and if thou can not believe
me; and I said do thou cry out against me, because I declare against pride,
and thou being an upholder of it? then he said, wherein am I an upholder of it?
then I said thou art on who goes about to sell ribaning and lace, and how
can thou have a face to speak to the people and say thou art one who
declares the Gospel; then he answered and said, that ribaning, and lace, is to
adorn the Gospel; then I said the same the drunkard and the swearer is adorned
withal; now people consider what the Baptist Gospel is adornd withal, for the
same the whore of Babylon is adornd with; but this I say that the Gospel of
Christ is the power of God unto salvation, unto every one that believes; and it
is adornd with righteousness; and now herein you may se the defference between
the Baptists Gospel, and the Gospel of Christ; and the same Baptist said that
there is nothing that is pure of God, in every man's conscience, and he bade me
prove that there is some thing which is pure of God in every man's conscience,
and he bade me prove that there is something which is pure of GOD in every Man's
conscience, and this Scripture I bring to prove it, for the grace of God that
brings salvation, has apeared to all men, and this is that which is pure, for
there is nothing that Tit. ^. 11.
brings salvation but that which is of God; as the Scripture declares, that was
the true light which lights every man 1 John 2. 9.
that comes into the world, and this is that which convinces the world of sin;
the true light which shines in darkness, Verse. 5.
and darkness comprehends it not, and now peopel this I say there is but that
conscience which is purged, and that conscience which is defiled as the
Scripture declares Christ Heb. 9. 14.
through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God; purge your
consciences from dead works to serve the living God; and that conscience which
is defiled, is the conscience of the wicked; and Christ came to call them to
repentance, which defiled the conscience; and that which is defiled is
darkness, and there the true light shines; and now all people that reads this,
read it with an understanding and se if the profession be not one with the
profane, for many more words was betwixt them and me, which is not worth the
mentioning, in so much that they said that the heart of man is always
deceitful; and herein by their own words, it does apeare that neither their
profession, nor their possession does cleanse their hearts from sin, so all them
that would know the remission of sin, own that which convinces of sin which
is the son of God, who sets free that freedom, you may all come to know.

Evan Oliver, a Baptist said these words, that God and his grace is not both on.

An. I say that God and his grace is both one, and it is the grace of God
which brings salvation, and which is the teacher of the children of God, as
says the Scripture; for the grace of God that brings salvation has apeared to
all men; teaching Tit. 2. 11, 12.
us to deny ungodlyness and vvorldly lusts; and now people consider and see
where you can find in all the Scripture, that God is not one with that which
brings salvation; for it is the grace of God that tells, and teaches man the
way to God, and seperates man from his iniquities?

Some of the conference which pased betwixt John Moon and Vavaser Powel, who
goes under a pretense of being a Minister of the Gospel, but is found to be an
enemy to the Gospel of Christ, and to his servants, who is and was sent to
declare the Gospel of Christ as it is made manifest, to all them that knows the
truth.

The first error.
Vavaser Powel said these words, that Christ called his disciples, ye
unbelieving and faithless Generation.

Then John Moon said that the disciples were believers, and had faith, for if
the disciples were not believers and had not faith they were not saved, but
were already condemned, and if they were condemned, who are they that are
saved? And now herein Powel thou art found judging the servants of God to be
without faith; but this I declare that Christ loved them, and choosed them out
of the world, to declare his eternal word of truth; and from that word they
declared, These things have I written unto you that believe on the I John 5. 13.
name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life; now here
the Scripture does make manifest that they did believe and had eternal life;
and James said, Yea a man may say thou have faith and I have works, show me thy
James 2. 18.
faith without thy works; and I will show thee my faith by my works; Now all
people that read may come to see that the disciples believed and had faith as
said John: for whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world, and this is the
I Joh. 5. 4.
victory that overcomes the world even our faith; and all them who knows the
faith which is given of God, they know by that faith to overcome sin; and so
they come to witness the Scriptures; and to know the everlasting Gospel. But
thou Vavaser Powel, who goes about to tell the people of a Gospel and of a
Faith, but they know not the power of God nor that faith which purifies; and
thou art he who art found declaring a Gospel without power which is not the
Gospel of Christ; but to that Gospel which is the power of God thou art found
to be him who is an enemy to the Gospel of Christ; and that faith which was
delivered to the saints. for if thou had known that faith which purifies,
thou would not have said by them who Jesus Christ chused to declare the
Gospel, ye unbeliveing and faithless generation; but Powel herein thou have
made thy self manifest to all them that will not be will fully blind; and in
stead of being a friend to the Gospel, thou art found and enemy unto it, and a
revening wolf, who is seeking to devour the Lamb, and them who are messengers
from the Lamb of God, to declare the eternal word of truth to the people, but I
found thee Powel declaring to the people, that the servants of God who are his
disciples, that they were an unbeliveing and faithless generation; and herein
Powel thou art found declaring thy errors to the people, and contrary to the
Scripture crying up sin, and another Gospel which is without the power of God,
and them that believe in it, shall never know to be redeemed from their sins;
but always live and die in them; and this is the end of thy ministry.

Now I am come to the second error?
Thou Vavaser Powel, who say that them who are sanctified, purified, and
cleansed did commit sin, and fall into sin.

Then John Moon answered and said, he that sanctifies and he that is
sanctified are one, and this Scripture I bring to prove it; for both he that
sanctifies and they who are sanctified are all of one, for which cause he is
not ashamed to call them brethren; and now this I say that it is Christ Heb 2.
1^
that sanctifies; and he does not commit sin, and he that is sanctified is one
with him, and he that is cleansed and purified is one with the Father, and the
Son; but they who does commit sin is not one neither with the Father nor the
Son; for God is of purer eyes then can behold iniquity; and this is he who is
light, and them who are sanctified walks in the light as J h said; but if we
walk in the light as he is in the light we have fellowship one with another,
and the blood I John 2. 7.
of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin; now here all that reads
may see that he who is sanctified is one with God; But Powe who would make the
people believe that he that is sanctified commit's sin, this is but to cover
his Gospel which is without power.

Then I hearing him preaching to uphold sin; and saying that the godlyest man
that ever was upon earth would sin, then I asked him if any ware clear or holy
that passed before us; he answered and said no not one; then I brought this
Scripture, Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you; then
he said he would disprove it, and John 15. 3.
sought in a Bible to make these words to be a lie, and brought two or three
scriptures; then I spoke and said, owel art thou going to prove Christ's words
to be aly, for Christ spoke these words, that I have read, and thou art going
to prove them a lie; and herein thou have made thy self manifest to all them
that will not be wilfully blind; and instead of being a Preacher of the Gospel,
thou art found to be him that would destroy it, and is declaring contrary to
the Scriptures as thou say, There was no man holy upon earth; and Christ and
his disciples said, there was, for the prophecy came not in old time by the
will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost; 2
Pet. 1. 21.
but thou Powel have made thy self manifest, that thou do not know this
prophecy; if thou had known that prophecy which is of God, thou would not
have cried up to the people sin and wickedness, and against the holy men of
God; but herein thou art found in another prophecy, which stands in thy own
will, and that makes the world to receive thy testimony, and thou go under
a pretense to be a Preacher of the Gospel, but I find thee declaring to the
people thy errors, crying up sin and wickedness, and said it was to comfort
the people; Now people to let you know Powel errors which he preaches, is
these, He is crying up sin and corruption and vvickeduess, and these are them
that are guided by the spirit of error, and he says, The righteous man
commiteth sin, and I say, That is an error; and he said, He that is clean
commiteth sin, and that is an other error; for who soever commiteth sin is
guided by the spirit of error; and these are them whom thou Powel art
declaring to the people, and to cover thy errors, thon cryest up an ordinanance
to make thy errors to seem glorious to the world, but thy ordinance is no more
but what the drunkard, svvearer, and liar, does know, and feed upon, and dye;
for they are eating bread, and drinking wine, but they do not discern the
Lords body, and Eccles. 7. 20.
if thou Powel had discerned the Lords body, thou would not have brought
this Scripture; for there is not a just man upon earth that does good, and
sins not; But herein thou have made thy self more manifest that say,
There is not a just man; thou have long been learning of the unjust; if thou
had but known, or confessed that Christ is come into the world thou would
have hid thy error, and thy profession would have seemed more glorious; but
thou saying, There is not one that does good, and sins not, thou have denied
that Christ is come into the world; and herein thou art made manifest, to be a
Minister of Antichrist, which upholds sin, and thou pleading for thy masters
kingdom; for if thou had known the Gospel of Christ thou would not have
said, There is none that does good; for it is the Gospel of Christ which does
good, and as many as believe in it shall be saved; But thou art far from
knowing this Gospel, or learning of it now see where thou and thy professors
have been learning all this while, who says, There is none does good, and
sins not, thou and thy professors are far from witnessing this Scripture,
and Heb. 8. 11.
they shall not need to teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, know the Lord, for all shall know me Ver. 12
from the least, to the greatest; for I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins, and their iniquities will I Heb. 20. 14.
remember no more says the Lord; For by one offering he has pefected for ever
them that are sanctified; Now all people that read may see how contrary to the
Scripture Powel has spoken, that says, He that is sanctified does commit sin,
and the Scripture says, he that is sanctified is perfected for ever and this
is to let you see his blindness, who is the blind guide.

Now I am Come to his Third Error.
Thou Vavaser Powel who say that the children of God, went into sin, and
committed sin, and the Lord passed by them and did not reprove them.

Answ. Then John Moon answered and said, that God did convince and reprove
them that committed sin, and the Lord is no respecter of persons, and he will
not let the transgressors go unpunnished; for you only have I known of all the
families of the earth; therefore I will punnish you Amos 3. 2.
for all your iniquities says the Lord; but thou who would have the Lord to
reprove some, and not others; herein thou would make him to be a respector of
persons; but this I say, that the Lord came to execute judgment upon all, and
to convince all that are ungodly amongst them of all their ungodly deeds which
they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which they have
spoken Jude 1. 15.
against him. Now here I have made it appear by Scripture, that the Lord
convinces all, and that he executes judgment upon all, and they that commit sin
are wicked, but them who are the children of the Lord they know to be born
of the immortal seed which the blessing is to; and herein we know, that
whosoever is born of God sins not, but he that is begotten of God keeps
himself, and that wicked one 2 John 5. 18.
touches him not: but if thou had known that birth which is of God, thou
would not have said that they committed sin; but thou being ignorant of the
new birth, therefore thou art speaking evil of it, and it serves thee to talk
on, and make a trade of it. Now Powel if thou were not blind, thou might
see thy confused language, and see that thy Ministry is contrary to the
Apostles doctrine; for their doctrine was for the perfecting Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God unto a perfect man, whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching
every Gal. 1. 28.
man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. But
Powel thy Ministry is to declare to the people to uphold sin and wickedness,
and tell them they must never be clean, nor never to have power to keep them
out of Sin, but that they must commit sin, and the Lord will pass by it: And
herein thou art striving with all thy might and power to keep the people in
their sins, and that they shall never be free whilst they are upon earth: but
all people consider what life you live the same you must die; and own that
light which shows you what life you do live, and what your works is, and every
one is to receive a reward according to his deeds, and as long as you follow
them, that cries up sin, you follow the ministers of AntiChrist; and these are
them that ran, and the Lord sent them not; and therefore they shall not Prophet
my people at all says the Lord; and these are them who says there is none
that does good and sins not; but them who are sent of the Lord, they know
the just and him that does good; O how I love thy Law, it is my meditation all
the day, and and thy Testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my soul keep
them, the entrance of thy word gives light, it gives Psalm. 1 19. 96. v.
understanding to the simple; I have seen an end of all perfection, blessed are
they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole heart, they
also do no iniquity, they Ver. 2, 3.
walk in his ways, and trust in his name, and these are the remnant of Jsrael
they shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies, Zeph. 3. 13. ver.
neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouths, for they shall feed
and lie down in perfect peace, and none shall make them afrind.

Some Queries given forth by the Servant of the Lord, and are to be answered by
them that lives in observations:
Quaery 1.
WHat the fall of man is? and, Where that is which man fell from? and, How man
must know it again? and, Whether the resurrection be to that which man fell
from, yea or nay?

Quaery 2.
What is that which lets, and will let until it be taken out of the way? And
where it is? And what is that which the Letter kills? And where it is killed?

Quaery 3.
What the soul of man is? and where it is? and how must man know when it is in
death, and when it is raised to life?

Quaery 4.
Whether Jesus Christ be not the Light of the world? And how does he enlighten
every man that comes into the world? and how is that Light the condemnation of
them that do evil?

Quaery 5.
Who are they which Christ spoke to, and said, Now are ye clean through the
word which I spoke unto you? And what that resurrection is which Paul said, If
by any means he might attain unto it, seeing that all menshall arise?

Quaery 6.
Whether they which are eating bread, and drinking wine, be not them which are
showing forth the Lords death, and deny his coming? and what Ordinances are
those which the Apostle said, Touch not, taste not, handle not that which is to
perish; show what Ordinances they are?

Quaery 7.
Whether any man may be perfect whilst he is upon the earth? And whether the
new birth be witnessed by any but them who were perfect, yea or nay?

Quaery 8.
What Sion is? and where it is? and where the flesh of the Son of man is, that
except a man eat thereof, he has no life in him.

Quaery 9.
What that is which is dead in the grave, which shall hear and rise up to
life? and what that is which must rise to condemnation? and where that grave
is? and what that voice is? and where it is to be heard?

Quaery 10.
What is the cross of Christ? and how does the creature know it, and bear it?
and how is it preached? and what is the offenses of it? and how is it the power
of God to salvation? and how does it become a stumbling block? and how does the
offenses of it cease?

Quaery 11.
What the false Prophet is? and where he is? and what his worship is? from the
true Prophets show the difference.

Quaery 12.
What God and King is that which the people shall look upwards and curse? and
where they are? and what their worship is, that the people might no longer
worship them?

Quaery 13.
What the people was turned unto, seeing they had the Letter and were in
darkness? And what eye that was which was blind? And where that eye is? And
how that eye was opened by which they come to see salvation.

Quaery 14.
What the Ministration of condemnation is? and what is the glory of it? and
how do the Ministration of Righteousness exceed in glory?

Quaery 15.
What the Garden of Eden is? and where it is? and what the tree of knowledge
of good and evil is? and where it is? and how it may be known?

Quaery 16.
What the Cherubins and the flaming Sword is? and where they are? and what the
tree of Life is? and where it is?

Quaery 17.
What the two witnesses are which John spoke of, which lies slain in the Cities
called Sodom and Egypt, which the people of the earth make merry over?

Quaery 18.
What that sure Foundation is which is already laid? and where it is laid?

Quaery 19.
What Ordinance is that which Christ said, He that resists it, resists the
power of God?

Quaery 20.
Whether there be any true Church but that which is in God? and whether any be
in that Church and commit sin, yea or nay?

Quaery 21.
What, and where is that Principle which is pure, and leads man into that true
church which is in God?

Quaery 22.
How does Christ become Mediator between God and man?

These are given forth by a Servant of the Lord, who is a lover of the Truth,
and known to the world by this Name, JOHN MOON.

THE END.

