MORE TRUE AND Exceeding Joyful News FROM IRELAND, OR, The Victorious
Proceedings of the Protestants in the Neweries, and in the North parts of
Jreland, From the 11. of April, To this present. 1642.

SHOWING, In a most true, and Real Relation, the manner of three Glorious and
Renowned Battles, fought by these Worthy Pillars of the Protestant Religion;
following.

The first, by the Lord President of Munster, in the North parts of Ireland,
near Done, April the 11. 1642. The second, by these two Worthy Commanders of
our Army, Sir Richard Greenvill and Sir Charles Coote, in the Neweries, April,
the 13. 1642. The third, by the Noble and Heroic Champion, Captain Marro,
April 14. Lately set forth out of Holborne, London, with 100. Men.
Brought ever by the last Post, April 18. 1642.

Likewise, the Copy of a Letter sent from Ireland, to a worthy Gentl^^^^ in
London, and r^^d in the Honorable House of COMMONS.

It is Ordered, That this be forthwith Printed.

H^^, Elsynge, Cleric. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for I. H. 1642.

More True, and Exceeding Joyful News from JRELAND.
SIR,
SInce my last Letter, I have sent you these joyful Occurrences, being all the
proceedings, which passed from April the 12. 1642. To this present.

Upon the 12 day of April, the Lord President of Munster fought: a great
Battle with the Rebels in the North parts of Jreland, hazarding his own
persons very dangerously, by reason of his couragions and Heroic Spirit
bringing up his men so valiantly, he himself being fore-most in the Re^re, but
after 2. or. 3. value of Shot, withdrew himself into the midst of his Army.

It is credibly reported, that he with 700. men, has fought against 3000 of
the Rebels, the fight lasting for the space of five hours, and has slain
1300 of them, and took fourscore prisoners, some being Commanders of great
Note, and has likewise won the strong Castle of Carnow, leaving a strong
Garrison in the same.

After this, he marched to his own Quarters again, and does intend very
suddenly, to set forth, to scour those parts.

But upon the 13. day of April was a joyful day with us, when the Earl of
Ormond with 500 Foot and 100 horse, gave Battle against two thousand Rebels,
near to the City of Youghall, who had entrenched themselves very strongly; and
after a bloody Battle, burnt them out of their Quarters, they retreating back
with the loss of 800 men, leaving great store of good Pillage behind them, of
our side were slain not above 50. at the most, all Common Soldiers.

On the 14. day of April, Sr. Richarh Greenvill, Sr. Charles Coote, and
Captain Marro, set forth with 5000. men from our City, and marched toward the
Neweriis, where they had Battle given them immediately by 12000 Rebels, but
they were resisted most valiantly by them again, so that a long and tedious
Battle did ensue, Captain Marro bringing up the Rear, gave Fire so thick
upon them, that in the first encounter were slain of the Rebels 300. our men
seeing them fall so thick before them were mightyly encouraged, so that they
most puissantly sent the dreadful Bullets amongst them, so that by that means
the Rebels retreated back, for the space of half a Mile, our men pursuing
them very close, slew 200 of them in their retreat whereupon the Rebels
instantly presented themselves in a fair Battalia Order, so that there did
begin another hot Skirmish for the space of four hours, where there were
slain of the Rebels 500. more, of our side threescore, the Battle then ending,
the Rebels retreated back, leaving great store of Pillage behind them

Then Captain Marro, with the consent of Sir Richard Greenvill, and Sr.
Charles Coote, drew out 1000 men from the maine Body, taking with him four
pieces of Ordnance, and upon the 14. of this present Month, marched toward
Wallen Castle, four Miles distant from the Army, where he gave them a sudden
assault, and beat down a great wall of the Castle, which put the Rebels into
a great perplexity, nevertheless they with the best Power and Strength they
had, gave Battle to him, and after the space of four hours fight, they
sounded a Parley, Captain Marro showing himself in the Front, they desiring
of him some time to prepare themselves for Battle, but he immediately caused
the Drums to beat up, and mounted his Ordnance against them, so that after some
time to prepare themselves for Battle, but immediately caused the Drums to
beat up, and mounted his Ordnance against them, that after some time he
attained the Castle, putting all to the Sword that was therein.

Our Army is entered in the Neweries, 15. Miles, and does intend (God willing)
to give them another Battle very suddenly.

From Dublin April the 14.
Very good News from Jreland.
Master John Hawkredge,
I Have written by the the two last Posts, and having good News, it shall trot
to impart it unto you.

The last Saturday the Lord Moore and Sir Henry Tuchburne sallyed out of the
Town, and fell upon the Enemies, and drove them out of their Trenches, and
raised their Siege, slew about 350 of their men, and took many of their chief
Officers, and have relieved themselves bravely, and took 150 of their Muskets,
and a Field full of Pikes, we having lost, as some affirm no men. Here are
three of our Captains come by Land, so that this News is true.

Upon Monday our Forces went out, 4000 Foot and 500 Horse, they are already
within five miles of Tredagh: by the way; Lieutenant Colonel Read came into
our men, and submitted, if he had not done it he could not have fled: he is
sent hither, and lodged in the Castle I do believe we shall now get good store
of Corn out of the Country, which will keep the price from rising. Our men
are not expected home this week, pray GOD keep them safe: Sir Philimy Oneale
was in the Battle, but was feign to fly; and that was not like to serve turn.

With my true love, I rest: Your affectionate Friend, R. H.

It is this day Ordered, That this be forthwith Printed.

He. Elsynge, Cleric. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS

