Miscellanea Spiritualia OR DEVOUT ESSAYS Composed By the Honorable Walter
Mountague Esquire.

Sero te amavi Pulchritudo tam nova et tam antiqua.

St Aug: W. Marshall sculpsit.

London Printed for William Lee, Daniel Pakman, and Gabriel Bedell, and are to
be Sold at their Shopps in Fleet Street 1648.



Miscellanea Spiritualia: OR, DEVOVT ESSAIES: COMPOSED BY THE HONORABLE WALTER
MONTAGV Esquire.

ECCLUS. 51. Videte oculis vestris, quia modicum laboravi, and inveni multam
requiem.



LONDON, Printed for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell, And are to be sold at
their shops in Fleetstreet.

MDCXLVIII.

To the most Sacred MAJESTY OF Henrietta Maria, Daughter of France, and Queen
of Great Britain.
MADAM,
THe propriety of my Life is not simply by a common Right inherent in Your
Crown, but likewise (by a special and notorious Purchase) is annexed unto Your
Person; and that by so obliging a Title, as nothing less then the cessation of
my Life, could seem on my part a legitimate separation of my personal Services
from Your Majesty* But in this engaged estate of my life, God has been
pleased, by a civil death, to contrive a justifiable intermission of my secular
Duties, and by such away, as renders even this cessant state in some sort
active, and discharging my Obligations: Since my present suspended condition is
a consequence of the active prosecution of my Duty to Your Majesty, whereby
even this my inanimate constitution, in regard of any motion in Your service,
seems enlivened by this kind of dying in that relation; by which means my life
may be said to have but changed the manner of application unto You, and in place
of the Spirit of Acting, to have taken that of Suffering for Your Service; So
that in effect, it is but the corpse, as it were, of my time that lies thus
into (...)bed in this Region of civil death, while the Spirit thereof lives in
Your Service, by the occasion of this my passive condition.

In this state of violent quiescence, my thoughts (Madam) have not ceased to
range and cast about in these spacious fields of Solitude, to find a way, how,
my person being now like a Clock with a broken Spring, unable to give You an
account of my time by my own Motion, I might contrive my present state, as it
were, into a Sun-dyal, which while it self is fixed, does by an extrinsique
Motion give an account of Time: In some report to this Conceit, I have
bethought my self of drawing some such lines within my walls, by the rules of
Spiritual Mathematiques, as might (by the Motion of that Sun upon them, which
commonly shines the brightest through the closest walls of Prisons, they like
Crystal curtains, intending rather then intercepting his beams) render You,
Madam, an account hereafter of my present time, by the strange property of this
Spiritual Dyal, which may mark out the passage, even of hours already elapsed:
And, I hope, these lines have yet this better quality, of bearing some marks of
the fervor and operation of this Sun upon my thoughts, as of their course and
motion toward Your Memory; which Impression if they retain, this one act does
happily conjoyn these two great Duties, of Gratitude to God, and to Your
Majesty.

In my present convenience (Madam) of contemplating much these two subjects, I
have often resolved, That God had designed You so specially, for the mediate
conveyance of all his Blessings to me, as that he would not minister this his
Medicinal affliction, but as it were by the hand of Your Service; by which
order he has been pleased to render Your adversity more beneficial to me, then
ever Your felicity was like to prove, since it is not probable that Your Power
would have given me what I find now to have been most wanting to my Life,
Sufferance and Mortification; insomuch, as what my vain Nature needed the most,
and Your generous one, could afford me the least, has by the accidents of Your
fortune, binfurnished me, with the preservation of Your favorable constancy;
and thus, without the blemish of any of Your Virtues, Your Service has taught
me Patience and Resignation; Virtues, which though You had them habitually in
Your mind, yet neither were Your Nature or Your Fortune, the one apt, or the
other proper, to give Your Servants occasion to practice them.

Nor does this my particular blessing of Sufferance, endure any abatement by
the sense of Your personal afflictions; for GOD has provided against this
allay of it, by the improvement, at the same time, of all Your Virtues and
Pieties; So, as in respect of Your Person, I may rejoice likewise in all Your
tribulations, since every Thorn in Your present Crown has been a kind of
pensil, the sharpest touches whereof have drawn You the nearer that original
Head, crowned with Thorns, whose resemblance ought to be Your principal
intendment: And if what You have lost of the likeness of a Terrestrial Prince,
has conferred to Your similitude with that King of kings, there is made a
blessed Transfiguration, rather then any Disfigurement of Your Image: Wherefore
I may presume (Madam) That all the present Breaches which Your Crosses have
made in Your Temporal state, will prove in Your Eternal like the wounds of our
great King of the Cross, which are turned into the most glorious and
resplendent parts of his Body.

It were easy (Madam) to present You many Motives of Consolation, derived from
the subject of Your Troubles; but I had rather You should extract them from
that part therein, which solaceth all Your Attendants in this hard Fortune, the
resigned manner (I mean) and temper of Your Suffering, and that which eases
Your Servants is the likeliest thing to confort You in this condition. You may
therefore safely rejoice, that Your comportment supplieth much the disablement
of Your Fortune, and in some degree relieveth all Your distressed Party, while
Your Gracious precedence in this asperous and narrow way of the Cross (wherein
Your Virtue does prescribe the order of their march) may well draw every
generous Mind off from the thoughts of their own private Distresses, and so
succor the noblest Hearts in some measure, by this virtuous diversion, while
You are unable to do it by direct supplies: Thus, by the influence of Your
Piety, even Your Necessities may become Provisions for Your Suffering Party.

Thus did King David refresh more his Paral. 11. 18.
whole Army, by bearing them company in their thirst, then he could have done
by the provision of many vessels of water and as this holy King did as good as
cast that water into every thirsting mouth, which he poured out unto the Lord;
so may You, Madam, by accepting still cheerfully Your own wants, and offering
up to God Your Will of suffering in this general Calamity, relieve more
universally Your Party, then by the distribution conferred to Your similitude
with that King of kings, there is made a blessed Transfiguration, rather then
any Disfigurement of Your Image: Wherefore I may presume (Madam) That all the
present Breaches which Your Crosses have made in Your Temporal state, will
prove in Your Eternal like the wounds of our great King of the Cross, which are
turned into the most glorious and resplendent parts of his Body.

It were easy (Madam) to present You many Motives of Consolation, derived from
the subject of Your Troubles; but I had rather You should extract them from
that part therein, which solaceth all Your Attendants in this hard Fortune, the
resigned manner (I mean) and temper of Your Suffering, and that which eases
Your Servants is the likeliest thing to confort You in this condition. You may
therefore safely rejoice, that Your comportment supplieth much the disablement
of Your Fortune, and in some degree relieveth all Your distressed Party, while
Your Gracious precedence in this asperous and narrow way of the Cross (wherein
Your Virtue does prescribe the order of their march) may well draw every
generous Mind off from the thoughts of their own private Distresses, and so
succor the noblest Hearts in some measure, by this virtuous diversion, while
You are unable to do it by direct supplies: Thus, by the influence of Your
Piety, even Your Necessities may become Provisions for Your Suffering Party.

Thus did King David refresh more his Paral. 11. 18.
whole Army, by bearing them company in their thirst, then he could have done
by the provision of many vessels of water: and as this holy King did as good as
cast that water into every thirsting mouth, which he poured out unto the Lord;
so may You; Madam, by accepting still cheerfully Your own wants, and offering
up to God Your Will of suffering in this general Calamity, relieve more
universally Your Party, then by the distribution of a great treasure; and this
may pass for an agreeable motive to You, to attend the improvement of Your
Piety, the expecting by the degrees of Your advance in sanctity, not only the
ministering a good proportion of spiritual confort to Your distressed Servants,
but likewise the propitiating of Almighty GOD, toward Your reinablement to
afford them, all other succors, whereof Your ROYAL HEART can make a^
Designation; and likewise by these Arguments of Your holy carriage in this
affliction, Your Loyal Subjects may be persuaded to expect all Your heart can
promise them, justly concluding of Your Case, what was presaged of holy DAVID
in his Exite, Now we know certainly, that You shall reign, and the Kingdom
shall be established in Your hand.

Had I not, Madam, a better reason, then the circumstance of my present
condition, I should, per adventure, give more liberty to my Opinion, and
impress more livelily by my Pen the signature of my Thoughts upon these Papers,
as the true figure of Your Virtue and Merit in these unhappy occasions: But
Your Virtue it self forbids me more then any other reflection, knowing that the
charges of Your Duties are welcomer to You, then even the due proclamation of
Your Praises; in which regard, although it might seem a Service to the Nation,
to endeavor by some respects and civilities to Your Majesty, the purging a
little our Language, of some disloyal rudeness and barbarisms that have of late
vitiated much this Tongue; yet will I prefer the satisfaction of Your Modesty
and Humility, before the reparation of our own concernments: And surely, Madam,
they who have the honor to know You particularly, may conclude the pleasingest
way of righting You, to be the leaving You the most to forgive those who have
misunderstood You.

I shall therefore rather humbly commend unto You, the progress and advance of
Your Pieties, then offer You any reparatory commendations; since by the cand^r
of Your Charity, You may turn every bl(...)opt upon Your Name, into a beam of
Splendour shining on it in the Book of Life; and whatsoever seems now a fear
upon Your Person, may by the virtue of Your Patience, prove as it were so many
several Stars composing one glorious Constallation of such Merits, whereof the
Prophet Daniel says, They shall prove Dan. 12. 3^.
like the splendour of the Firmament, and like STARS shining in perpetual
Eternities.

Now (Madam) studying what I should say, to recommend this Offering to Your
Sacred Majesty, I find the nature of it to be such, as rather prescribes me
Prayers for the Acceptance, then allows me to make Promises for the worthiness
of the Present; For such is the order observable in our Oblations to GOD, and
to his most special Images on Earth; unto whom, as to himself, Servants do
likewise not pretend to give toward the enriching them, but in order to their
own Discharges: So (Madam) do I not presume by this Offering of my Thoughts, to
supply You with any New Lights requis(...) for Your advance in Devotion, but
rather to rejoice Your Charity, by showing it how my little Stock profits in
this Royal Exchange of the Cross, better then in the Treasury of the Court: Nor
can I conclude this account of my Time, wholly useless to Your perfection; For,
as Princes do often build their Palaces by the same Models which inferior
persons use for their houses, enlarging only the Dimensions, with observance
of the same Figure; So (Madam) peradventure this Draught of Devotion, formed in
these Lines, may not seem unfit for Your great Soul, in point of Figure and
Order, while You may raise Your Zeal upon it with great excesses, in respect of
the measures and proportions: But this I may modestly presume, That though
these lines do not pretend to be exactly fit for Your Soul, as a model of
Devotion; yet they need no enlargement, as they are a Draught and Design of my
Gratitude: In which relation, nothing can be more accomplished, then the
Thoughts and Vows, of

Your Majesty's most dutiful Subject, and most obliged Servant.

A PREFATORY ADDRES TO THE COURT.
WE are made a spectacle to the World, to 1 Cor. 4. 9
Angels, and to Men, says Saint Paul, the Mirror and Pattern of all Penitents
and Converts, as if he had been obliged to summon all Creatures as Spectators
to the prize of the high calling of God, which Philip. 3.
he was running for; and this his Proclamation is a sanction of a perpetual
Law, in point of the Duties of all notorious Converts: By this they are
advertised, That they are more specially then others, designed as Examples of
singular gratitude and fidelity: wherefore S. Augustine, after he had This was
said to S. Augustine by a voice from heaven, Conf. Aug. l. 8. cap. 8.
been called up to this Theater of S. Paul, by the same voice (though in much a
softer tone) which seemed breathed out of the aura lenis, the gentle air of the
Prophets conference; for talle and lege, (...) Commission in these words of his
happy precedent S. Paul, Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and Romans 13.
make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: After this
Lecture* the remainder of his life ^as such a piece, as seems to call unto
all his fellow-Converts, toll and lege, take up him, and read him; for his
whole succeeding time was a fair impression of his admirable fidelity, and may
serve for an excellent Lesson for all Times to study.

And surely all such Images of Gods so remarkable Me^cy and Indulgence, ought
to endeavor the resembling, in some proportion, these two great Paterns, in
this special similitude, of immediately not condescending to flesh and blood,
and of laboring Galat. 1.
more then others; this was S. Paul's method, and S. Augustines manner of copying
him: and surely God may justly require a singular rectitude, in the courses of
such, as he has raised from then falls by his special hand of Compassion; and
this not only upon the account of their own debt, but also in order to the
benefiting their Brothers, since we know the people came more to see Luzar^s
risen, then Ies^s who had revived him.

Certainly, all great Spiritual resuscitations, are more attended and reflected
on, then such as seem Natural lives of Piety; and some special demonstration of
gratitude is so much conditioned in Gods notorious Pardons, as even the looser
part of the world expects some extraordinary recognition from them; and their
uncorrespondency to that measure of Edification, which is looked for by
unreformed observers, does discredit to the world those invitations to
amendment, which are commonly made by the first persuasive fervors of zealous
Converts: For one pattern of relapse and retrogradation, substracteth so much
from the efficacy of such Examples, as that defection is apt to render many
sincere progressions in the first fervor, suspected of unsoundness and
recidency: And by this suspicion of unperseverance, there may well be blasted
much of the fruit of extraordinary Conversions; for Libertines, with a little
tincture of Truth in such recesses from zeal, will color a great deal of witty
impiety: So that this scandalous remisness, seems to give a fair pass for
Profaneness to make reprisal upon Devotion, which does take from Libertines so
many affected freedoms; so great a detriment does a little Scandal procure to
Religion, in such as have the seal of Extraordinary Pardons upon them,
evidenced to the Eye of the world: And on the other side, when such remarkable
vocations continue so exemplary, as they answer all equal and just
expectations, and obstruct all licentious tongues, the benefit they impart unto
the world, is likely more then the native piety of many unseduced persons.

Me thinks the prevision of this utility, may be given for a handsome reason, of
the rejoicing of Angels, in one Conversion, more then in the persistency of
many virtuous tempers; for Humane Nature (which the Angels are better
acquainted with then we, as being incharged with the conducting it to Spiritual
improvements) is well charactered in the stiffness and indocility of the
Pharisees, since it is apt to be demanding a Sign from Heaven, for Reformation
of corrupted Customs; and desperate Spiritual recoveries seem so many openings
of the Heavens, in the descent of the Holy Dove visibly to the standers by:
wherefore the Angels, upon their precognition of the extraordinary efficacy of
such Conversions, may well be speculated to ground this exceeding joy and
exultation.

Not that we intend hereupon to conclude, That such Prodigals have greater
portions of Grace then those elder Brothers, who may justly say, We have served
so many years, and have not transgressed Luke 15.
the commandments: We do confess, where the special preventing Grace of God
bestows an exemption from the stains and inquinations of youth, when one may
truly say, I have observed all these precepts from my youth, that such a
condition is preferable to this recanting state, of, I have sinned against
heaven* the having been always so clothed, as our turpitude has not been
discovered, is a better posture then the casting off our rags, to put on the
first robe; so that I purpose chiefly to incite these younger brothers to an
eminent humiliation, not to elate them in the preference of their conditions,
before other states of innocence, that have never been tainted by the
contagious air of the world, and have remained (as the virgin Apostle says)
The Rev. 14.
first fruits among men to God and the Lamb, without spot before the throne of
God.

Surely all notorious cures of such as have fallen into the thiefs hands between
Jericho and Jerusalem, are never so perfect, as when the Scars or Cicatrices
remain in the eyes of the Patients, rather as marks of their misery, then
pledges of their continuing health; and so their lives which are set out to
others by God, as Ensigns of victory, must be looked upon by themselves, as
wrecks saved and set up in their own thoughts for memorials of the danger
whereunto they are still exposed; for God does often set up in public such
figures of humane misery, and divine mercy, not only in commiseration of the
particular subjects, but in condescendence to the bent of our common nature,
which runs after example, and seems but dragged after single precepts.

Wherefore all remarkable Converts should account themselves as sent from the
dead upon the suit of their necessitous brothers, in Gods compassion to them,
as well as to themselves, the world being much better disposed to hear such
messengers, then Moses and the Prophets; and in this respect, they should study
to live exactly by this rule of St. Paul, Yield your selves unto God, as those
that Romans 6. 13.
are alive from the dead: And surely this expropriation of themselves, and
transaction over to the uses of others, (which the Apostle denounces to all
Christians) is more especially relating to them, then to any others; for they
may be most pertinently served with this holy writ, You are not your own, being
bought 1 Cor. 6.
with a great price, therefore glorify God, and carry him in your body; so
that those who (as our Savior says) have heard his voice, and are come out of
their graves John 5.
and live, must remember as they have a kind of fraternity with Lazarus in
this spiritual resuscitation, that they strive to live as brothers of the
Blessed Magdalen; and that after their first alliance in this point, of having
had much forgiven, they be very studious to fraternise with her in this other
part, of loving much.

By this exhibiting the obligations of a true Convert, I have recorded my own
bonds; and I may hope, that God by his infinite liberality will be pleased to
enable the rest of my life for some competent discharge of this great
engagement: For me thinks I hear the voice of our Savior, to him he had
dispossessed of a legion of evil spirits, Go home to thy Mark 5.
friends, and tell them how great things God has done for thee. I am therefore
come back thus ad domum Caesaris, to the house of Caesar, which in reference to
many of my Duties, I may presume to call my home; but most particularly, in
order to my discharge of this Commission, of announcing quanta mihi fecerit
dominus, how great things God has done for me: wherefore I do not owe this
Manifest only, as an office of Recognition unto God, but do stand, me thinks,
charged with it, as a condition of my Absolution, by which I conceive my self
enjoined, to make as much Restitution as I am able, of that time which my Pen
has stolen from the Court; For the most of that which is thought well passed
away by the company that loses it, stands upon account to them that are the
most accessory to the taking it away, even from those that then reckon their
loss of it as a benefit; so that truly considered, those whom the world
abusively (...) the best company, are commonly the most chargeable with the
undervaluation of time, which the cheaper and more inconsiderable they render
it to others, the dearer are they to account for it themselves: And this truth
we easily perceive, when looking through all time upon eternity, we come to
discern the true value of that which is the only price this transitory world
has to purchase everlasting glory.

Upon examination then of my time past, I find my self bound to give up all
the stock of my following days, as an extent assigned for restitutio(...)
although I cannot hope to make a rigorous satisfaction by it; For the
unhappiness of these kind of debts is such, as the more we have taken away
from others, the less we are able to restore; because such prize impoverishes
the taker of it, since he loses his own time, while he robs others of
theirs* wherefore this confession, as it may prove precautionary to others, may
pass for the most likel^ part of my satisfaction; and I shall always assign my
prayers toward the impetrating this of God* that this penitential satisfaction
may be so much blessed, as to restore some value of time thither, where I am to
account for so much idle dissipation of it.

Let me therefore humbly propose to all my Readers, to remember their creator
in the days of their youth; for when in their recollected days they come to
this suit of the Psalmist, Remember not, Lord, the sins of my youth, one of the
hardest points is, even their own forgetting them; since the Ghosts of our dead
sins walk often in our Fancy, and divert much of that time we assign for the
discharge of our arrears; although they be but such broken images, as dreams,
that possess not the will, yet they pinch away always somewhat off from the
stock of time, set out for past redemptions. This case is attested by St.
Augustine, when he complained, That his old familiar acquaintances, did hold
and shake the garment of his flesh, repining and murmuring at his estrangement:
and this shaking and questioning us, is always some diversion; for he
confesses farther, That after he had cast off the images of youthful vanities,
from all adherence to his will, they stole after his fancy, not so bold as to
face his consent, but as it were, muttering behind him, and by stealth
snatching at him, and pinching him to turn and look back.

It is surely then a singular blessing, never to have been so familiarly
conversant with the vices and vanities of youth, as our memories may be
challenged acquaintance with, and so drawn to some discourse with such images,
when they present themselves; they are therefore the best disposed for
spiritual advances, whose imaginations (freed from the clogs of idle and vain
notions) are always in their motion and progress through the speculation of
some fair object, and are not distracted by looking back upon the calls and
noises of their discarded familiars: The structure of the temple advances
faster, when we build with both hands, then when we are forced to hold arm^ in
one hand to repulse our enemies; such a (...)levolent 1 Esdra. 4.
opposition do our fancies make, wh(...) they have been long possessed of
images, which we must not admit into association, toward the edifice of the
temple; they are as much unconsortable, as those strangers to whom Zorababel
answered, We cannot join with you in building the house of God; therefore the
wise man's counsel is excellent, in order to the prepossessing our minds, Endue
thy self with vert(...) Ecclus.
from thy youth, and thou shall retain wisdom to thy old age: And this other
position of Solomon, is verified by common experience, He that flatters his
servant in his youth, shall find him disobedient.

When I have considered how much is written of this spiritual regiment of Life,
and how much better then any thing I have prescribed; I have sometimes
questioned the exhibiting these my receipts; but again I have concluded my self
justified in this consideration, that the domestique Physician is always called
into consults, though his abilities be so much meaner then others that are
joined with him; as his learning can promise little contribution, yet his
experience in the constitution of the Patient, is accounted useful for the
appliance of their prescriptions: So under this notion, of one that has had
long experience in the indispositions and infirmities of the Court, I have
conceived, that my opining in the consult might prove in some degree profitable
to the Pa(...); and I may believe, that of the constitution of the body, and
the peculiar peccancies of the humors, I have given no ill information, toward
which part I have had a great advantage, by having been so long a domestique:
For as there are many little passages and pertusions in living bodies, which
are closed up and inacceptible in Anatomies; so I, having studied this body
alive, may be better informed of the composure thereof, then many learned and
pious persons, that look, as I may say, upon the Anatomy only of Courts,
surveying them laid out as it were dead in speculative figures.

And concerning what I have voted in order to remedies, I will say nothing
savoring of a formal disesteem thereof; for such vails of sale are commonly so
thin, as there is more affectation then modesty seen through them: I will
profess ingeniously, I have done my best, in a sincere regard to the benefit of
that place to which I owe so much civil obligation, and spiritual satisfaction;
and I may hope God will accept the design, and bless the operation, con^iding
on this of our Patron Apostle, Heb. 6. 7.
The earth that drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings
forth herbs meet for them for whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God.

One humane advantage this work may own, namely, That though there are many
better invitations to Devotion, yet there is little expressly provided for this
family; so that mine may be a less feast, and yet a bettter entertainment for
such guests, with whose appetites I am so well acquainted: wherefore I have
served in more of St. Paul's milk, then of his solid meat, rather familiar
Piety, then severe Perfection: I have intended most the presenting such wholesome
confections, as are good against those particular humors, which breed a kind
of spiritual green sickness, so familiarly in these bodies I entertain, I mean
those levities and trifles, which the fancies of these bodies are so apt to
feed upon, which I may call the unwholsom green fruit, that even old age is
commonly greedy of in this place; the taste whereof does disrelish the savor of
Devotion, and breed many obstructions in the body of the inward man: This
Court-disease is excellently described by the Wiseman, The dalliance with
trifles, darkeneth to us better Wisd. 4.
sights; and the waveringness of our cupidities, turns the mind into a
diziness unawares to it self: I may hope to be hearkened to, in the crying down
of these toys, having been so long a Peddler of them: And as devotion may truly
say of me, He that persecuted us sometimes, does now evangelize the says which
he did once impugn; so I beseech God I may deserve the other following words,
of, And they glorified God in me* I have Gal. 1. 23.
thus much toward this hope, that I may be well persuaded of the good s^ting
and adaptation of my advices, even by the prejudices of my unhappy experiments.

For certainly, as an ordinary Courtier, who is acquainted with the humor, and
interests of the favorite, may be more dexterous in forming welcome
Propositions, then a greater Foreign Statesman, who designeth all by the
general maxims of policy; so one who is well versed in the intimate, and
favorite affections, and passions of the times, may apply motives likelier to
work upon them, then some who are much better grounded in the solid rules of
grace and sanctity; for such is the weakness of our vitiated nature, as it is
more wrought upon in piety by proportions, then by perfections.

Considering then the duties I have specified, I humbly present the Court with
this discharge of my Commission, a^ the dispossessed native did preach to
Decapolis; but, I hope, the consequence will resemble more the enuntiation of
the (...) (...) her town; for of the effect of his preaching* we read only,
that all his to (...) wondered at him, which is a more familiar answer at Court,
to such vocations, then the believing and going out to meet Christ, as the men
of Sichem did: wherefore my humble prayers shall be joined, to enforce my
persuasions, that it may be truly said in this occasion, Many believed in John
4.
Christ by the word of him that did testify of him.

To conclude, although I may better entitle this, an expiatory offering, then a
propitiatory, the first being in order to the discharge of a debt, the last to
the impetration of some favor; yet I may presume to pray in it, against the
common iniquity, which is noted in time, that the current thereof may not bear
up, and carry down my lighter papers upon it, and let sink these my more solid
and weighty cogitations: And to obtain all the blessing I petition for, upon
this design, I shall humbly present it to you with this reference of St. Paul,
To Ephesians. 3. 20.
him, who is able to do more abundantly, then we can either desire or conceive,
according to the power that works in us, to him be glory in the Church by
Christ Jesus unto all generations.

Wa: Montagu.

Non solum mihi laboravi, sed and omnibus inquirentibus veritatem,
Ecclesiasticus 24.
Miscellania, or Spiritual Essays: A TABLE Containing the several Treatises, as
they stand divided into Sections.
TREATISE 1.
A Map of humane nature, divided into two Sections. page 1 Sect. 1. Treating
the Original rectitude of man's nature, and the present obliquity thereof. ibid
2. Of man's abusing, what he might learn by the mortality of the creature, and
the frailty of his nature evidenced in all sorts of persons and trials. 6.
TREAT. 2.
Handling the reparation of humane nature in two Sections. 11 Sect. 1. Of the
admirable means God chose for this work, and the rehabilitation resulting to
man from this Order of God. ib. 2. How even man's infirmities may afford him
glories; with motives to joy, and correspondence to the grace of Christ
incarnate. 16
TREAT. 3.
Of Religion in two Sections. 21 Sect. 1. Considering it under the general
notion of some reference to a Divine power. ib. 2. Treating the best habit of
mind in order to the finding a recti^ied Religion. 24
TREAT. 4.
Of Devotion in two Sections. 27 (...). 1. (...) regularly defin^d* (...) some
(...) (...) (...). (...) (...). Devotion described a more famil(...) way, and
the best natural (...) in order thereunto. 31
TREAT. 5.
Discoursing whether sensible pleasures may consort with devotion, in two
Sections. 36 Sect. 1. Rectifying our affections, chiefly our love in the sense
of beauty. ib. 2. Ambition rightly examined, and discreet condesc^ndencies
proposed respectively to diverse vocations. 42.
TREAT. 6.
Of disabuse to the Rationalists and Sensualists, concerning temporal
happiness, and devotion proposed for security of a happy life, in three
Sections. ^0 Sect. 1. The virtue of Devotion exalted, and the vanity of some
Philosophers detected. ib. 2. A conviction of Sensualists, declaring how grace
emancipateth us from the bands of the creatures. 55 3. Resultancies from the
meditation of humane frailty, and a resolving the right of happiness, as
belonging to devotion. 60
TREAT. 7.
How true Devotion induces those notions, wherein consists the happiness of
this life, in three Sections. 64 Sect. 1. The fallacy of opinion, and the
virtue of truth discoursed. ib. 2. Sacred examples, showing what may be said to
be a rejoicing in the truth of temporal goods, and how eve^ secular evils
afford joy by the same method of a right understanding them. 69 3. The
fallacies of some Objections solved, and the rejoicing in truth concluded for
our real happiness. 73
TREAT. 8.
Touching the means of possessing that truth wherein the happiness of this life
is stated, in two Sections. 78 Sect. 1. Diffidence in point of obtaining
spiritual lights reprehended, and prayer (...) in order to this design. 78 2.
What sincerety in prayer is requisite for this effect, and what kind of peace
is to be expected. 74
TREAT. 9.
Of the condition of Courts, Princes, and Courtiers, in three Sections. 86
Sect. 1. The best notion of Cour^ts proposed. ib. 2. The vitiousness of the
heathen Courts censured, and the consequence of the Examples of Princes urged,
as a charge upon the virtue of their lives. 90 3. The importance of their
company for the education of Princes, and a rule proposed for Counselors, and
Companions, to both ruling, and young Princes. 94
TREAT. 10.
How a good conscience, and a good Courtier are consortable with one another,
in seven Sections. 98 Sect. 1. The temptations of Courts acknowledged great,
but not insuperable. ib. 2. Real humility recommended, discerned from
Courtship, and proved consonant to the state of Courtiers. 102 3. The
vitiousness of flattery displayed, with an allowance of decent civilities in
exchanges of Courtship. 107 4. The use of sober praises treated, and reciprocal
civilities regulated. 110 5. The advantages of the vocation of a Courtier
balanced, with some prejudices in point of piety. 113 6. Some notorious errors
remarked, and what facility the breeding of Courtiers may bring toward an
excellence in Religious duties, proved by examples. 117 7. Comparisons between
vocations disavowed, and advices offered, in order to a due correspondence,
with the grace of a Courtiers profession. 121
TREAT. 11.
Of Medisance, or detraction, in 2. Sections. 125 Sect. 1. The true nature of
the crime of detraction, and the subtilty of it in disguising it self. ib. 2.
Some rules whereby to square our discourse, and an expedient offered, toward
the correction of Medisance. 131
TREAT. 12.
Concerning scurrility, or foulness of speech, (...) three Sections. (...)
Sect. 1. Of the dangerousness of these liberties, and the familiar ex(...) made
for them. (...) 2. Some special causes of the growth of this licentiousness,
and some (...)pedient proposed toward the suppression thereof. 1^0 3. What
circumstances augment these faults, and women incharged (...) severity in
opposition to them. ^4^.
TREAT. 13.
Whether to be in love, and to be devout, are consistent, in eight Sections.
Sect. 1. The nature of love and devotion compared. (...). 2. Some subtle
temptations detected, and liberties reproved. 1(...) 3. The errors of profane
jealousy argued, and a pious jealou(...) proposed. 1^^ 4. The deceit of
passion in promise of mercy, and power of resisti^g temptations. 1^^ 5. The
faultiness of flattery to women discovered, and dissuaded. 1(...) 6.
Presumption upon our virtue discussed, and the danger thereof remo^strated. 1^6
7. Some scruples resolved about the esteem of beauty, and the friendshi^ of
women. 17^ 8 The conclusion framed upon the premised discourse, and our love
safe(...) addressed. 179
TREAT. 14.
Concerning the test, and balance of filial and mercinary love, in five
Sections. 181 Sect. 1. Of the value of love, and Gods tolerating some mixture
of self respects in it. ib. 2. Mercinary love defined, and the relying much on
it dissuaded. 184 3. Filial love described, and some strong incentives
presented to kindle it in us. 187 4 Motives to filial love drawn from our
several relations to God, as also from the dignity, and advantage of this sort
of love. 191 5. Advices in order to the preserving this sort of love, and
fraternal dilection represented, as a gracious rule, whereby to judge of our
rectitude in filial love. 194
TREAT. 15.
Of the duties of a Christian toward enemies, in five Sections. 265 Sect. 1.
The precept of loving enemies sweetened by many reasons draw^ from Christ's
injoyning, and his acting it. ib. 2. The av^rsness to this duty rises from our
corrupted nature, promoted by diverse subtle temptations of our great enemy. 270
3. The relation wherein all enemies are to be loved, and what Offices are
indispensably due to them, the omission whereof can be redeemed by no other
sort of piety. 274 4. The inordinateness of our love difficilitateth this duty,
dissimulation in this conformity reproached, and many benefits derivable from a
sincere compliance represented, as also presumption upon the Theory of this
duty dissuaded. 282 5 The best preparatory disposition for the acting this
duty, the which makes no obstruction in the course of justice, as also
powerful persons admonished of their temptation in this point of revenge, and
animated by their exceeding merit in this ^idelity. 287
TREAT. 16.
Of considerations upon the unsuccesfulness of a good cause, in six Sections.
291 Sect. 1. That much Religion is requisite to assist us in this probation.
ib. 2. Motives to constancy after a prudent election of our cause. 294 3. The
variableness of the vulgar upon event^, and a prudent conduct proposed. 297 4.
An information of what kind of conformity we owe Gods declared will in adverse
events. 299 5. The infirmity of our nature comforted by examples, holy and
profane, and the acquies^ence to Gods order with constancy persuaded. 302 6.
The conclusion regulating all humors in this probation. 310
TREAT. 17.
Of Solitude in two Sections. 315 Sect. 1. The most useful order in describing
the nature of solitude. ib. 2. Solitude divided into three sorts, and the first
discoursed of. 318
TREAT. 18.
Of a mixed sort, or of Neutral solitude in three Sections. 324 Sect. 1.
Explaining this term by exhibiting the state of man's will in his elections. 324
2. Treating diverse motives that solicit this vocation. 327 3. How God works,
and how the devil countermineth in this vocation, wherein a safe course is
directed. 330
TREAT. 19.
Of violent solitude, or close imprisonment in eight Sections. 338 Sect. 1. How
unwillingly our nature submits to the loss of liberty and society. ib. 2.
The deficiency of single natural reason argued, for consolation in this case,
and the validity of grace asserted. 340 3. Great benefit acknowledged to moral
Philosophy, and the right use thereof directed in order to our solacing. 345 4.
The disposure of our time treated, and advised, for improvement as well as
easing of our mind. 350 5. A method proposed in point of study, and the use
may be derived from story, toward a right understanding of Divine providence.
355 6. Some special meditations proposed for the divertisement of our mind.
361 7. Some speculations suggested to recreate our spirits in sufferance, and
to invigorate our Faith. 365 8. The final and most solid assignment of comfort
for this condition. 370
TREAT. 20.
Of the contempt of the world in 2. Sections. 375 Sect. 1. Arguments to
discredit all the attractives of this earth, and Gods contribution thereunto
produced. ib. 2. Motives by the property of a Christian to contemn the world.
384.
TREAT. 21.
Of the pre-eminence of a true contemplative life, in five Sections. 385 Sect.
1. Contemplation defined, and some excellencies thereof discoursed. ib. 2. The
gradations whereby we do ordinarily ascend up to this station. 385 3. The
requisitenes of lecture, in order to this spiritual elevation. 39^ 4.
Speculation placed a^ the last-step in this ascent of the soul. 39^ 5. Of the
sensible delight springing from this head of contemplation. 401.
The first Treatise. A Map of HUMANE NATURE, divided into two Sections.
. I.
Treating the Original rectitude of Man's nature, and the present obliquity
thereof.

AS in Navigation, Cosmographie is no less useful then Astrology, by reason
it is by some relation to the earth, that all measures are taken, and all
reckonings are made in the several courses of our saylings; even so in our
spiritual voyage through this life, it seems no less requisite, to study the
Map of our own Earth we carry about us, then to speculate the Globe of heaven,
whereunto we are steering, in regard the constitution of our infirm Nature
ought to be understood, in order to the conducting of the Vessel to her
supreme and heavenly designation; And the knowledge of our self, is as it were
the Compass, whereby we must set our course, since it is out of diverse known
properties of humane nature, that we form points of direction, by which we
judge, how near our actions and designs stand to the right course of a
rational nature: And as the soul and body in man, hold an analogy with the
firmament and the earth, in point of constituting but one world of these so
differing substances; So shall we do well to consider the spiritual and
corporeal substances in man, as making one coexistence, whereby we may the
better understand the nature of the subject we discourse upon, and reflecting
on man's consisting of two so diverse portions, as spirit and materiality, we
shall wonder the less, at those so discordant qualities, which are found in
this compound nature of Man.

If Faith did not oblige us to believe our own original integrity, we have
scarce virtue enough left to own it, our reason is so degenerated, as she has
no mind to claim by that prescription the dominion of our sensitive appetites
(which are her natural subjects) she seems so much better pleased to yield
unto their government: but let us move Reason (by the dignity of her
prerogative, and the debasement of her condition in submitting to the rule of
our passions) to endeavor the recovering as much of her Rights, as can stand
with the forfeiture of her first state.

God made man so noble a creature, as even in his obnoxiousnesse to misery,
there was an excellence of nature; For the freedom of his will was one of the
chief prerogatives of his state, and the abuse of this power, declares the
dignity of it, by the severity of God's vindication, since upon the first
defection of man's will from him, God did tear and divide the Kingdom he had
given him, rending the sensitive powers from the dominion of the rational; And
in this breach, he left man's reason though not wholly deposed, yet so much
distressed by the powers of the other revolted Tribes, as she needs now a
foreign succor, not only prevenient, but actually concomitant for her
support, in this continual warfare against her natural subjects, our
affections and sensitive appetites, which have set up idols of their own
making, like Jeroboams calves, (the delights of the senses) to maintain this
division and independencie, upon the sovereignty of reason, to which they were
at first subjected, looking always up with the eyes of the Handmaid, upon the
eyes of the Mistress sincere and rectified reason. This first happy state of
man we are bound to believe, even in this deplorable condition we now find him,
for the spirit of his Creator assures us, that God made man upright, and he
entangled himself in all his perplexities.

We may therefore well ask the Prophets question, O how did thou fall in this
Morning light, when there was but one block in all the earth to stumble at?
Thou were made to tread upon the earth, only as on a stage, beautified and
adorned for thy passage over it, in triumph up to heaven, not to sink into it,
and be wrapped up in it, in this foul and dark conveyance of thee, whereunto
thou art now sentenced. Thou wast created to have been served only by the
mutations of all creatures, not to have suffered with them by any change, which
should have been in thee only a translation of thy earth to heaven, not a
resolution of it into dust; for man's soul as having never been offended by his
body, should never have put it away, and left it to his own vility, but should
have gratified the services thereof, with an immediate preferment to glory and
impassibility: O! what can be answered by man for this selfe-destruction?

Me thinks Man replies, that the weight of the then greatest of all created
substances, falling from heaven, fell upon him, and thus shivered him into
dust; indeed this is all can be said to move compassion for him, and this
prevailed so much with his Maker, as Man's fall was commiserated and redressed,
and he that fell upon him, was left fastened to the abisse of his own
precipitation. What a sad contemplation is this, that the morning star who was
created to feed only on the increated light, was so soon condemned to feed on
dust, as being fallen from an Angel to a Serpent; and Man who was to rise up to
the Purity of Angels, and to know no foulness by the way, was quickly
sentenced to the becoming dust: so that by this commerce with the Serpent, Man
is become his food. O then as the Wiseman says, sure it is the tongue of the
Serpent, while he fed first upon thee, that infused the poison of pride into
all thy corruption; For man's nature savours so of this venom, by which it was
first tainted, (which came from the Serpent, who retains his pride in all his
debasement) as even through all the veins of man's infirmities there runs still
this mortal spirit of self-love and presumption, though he be reduced daily, to
plead the misery and infirmity of his nature, in defense of his reproachable
imperfections.

There seems to be no better Character of the infelicity of humane nature,
then is made by those, who inveigh against the weakness of it, yet claim that
as an authority for all their faults, making the propensity to ill, the
patronage of it, as if the forbidden fruit were now become medicinal for a
weak conscience: That is, as if our inward frailty might serve for a purgation
of most of our faults. This is a confection the Serpent offers us often, which
his tongue may be said to make against the venom of his teeth; For how
familiar is it, to accept this prescription, and to apply thisreceipt of (it is
not I, Romans 7.
but sin that dwells in me) for the cure of all the stings of conscience, as if
the accusation of the wretched man, were sufficient for the acquittance of him
before God. For how many when they are ingenuous in this confession, think they
are dispensed with for many gross infidelities? so as even the discovery of
the nakedness of our nature, passes often to our sense for the cover of all
her deformities: how familiar this self deception is, I need not argue, but
rather complain directly in these terms of the Gospel, since the light that
is in thee is darkness, how great is that darkness? This being our case; Mat.
6. 23.
when the knowledge of our infirmity becomes the despair of our recovery.

This considered, may not we say that the Serpent while he feeds upon our dust,
(that is, prevails upon our frailties) blows part of it into our eyes, to
blind us, raising this cloud out of our infirmities, that we may see no way out
of them: which subtilty prevails so much, as despairing often of our
constitution, we consult our poysoner, for receipts, only to give us a fair
and easy passage through this life, and for allaying the disquiets of our
nature, he gives us such remedies, as are pleasant for our senses to take,
which are variety of sensible fruitions, that rock our childish nature into
some rest, by the motions of her own infirmities; Thus commonly our life is
but a continued slumber, in which our reason lies bound up, and our fancy is
the only loose and living faculty of our soul, which raises to us, but
dreams and similitudes of good and evil, sometimes vain images of joys, and
other amazing phantasmes of fears; and in this dream of opinion and imagination
we usually pass our lives, seldom waking and comprehending the true nature,
even of the things wherewith we are the most affected: In so much, as while the
truth is that our life in this world is but a kind of dream or shadow, we
dream so strongly, as we do not discern it to be but a dream; for the
momentanynesse and inanity of our life seldom comes into our fancy, which
though it be so susceptible of all levities, yet seldom admits the thought of
man's own lightness into it; the vanities of our life, shadow and cover to us
our lives being but a shadow; and thus while we breath continually in this
element of vanity, it becomes as the air to us, which we feel not sensibly in
our familiar respiration, and yet our breath is nothing else but air: after
this manner, while our life is nothing but vanity, we are the less sensible of
this constitution.

So vain a thing is mere humane nature, as when your wit has fancyed the
most ayerie and light conceptions, it can, for images of this inanity, man
seems yet so much vainer then all those expressions, as even all of them
leave no impression on man, of his own vanity, for he makes no use of those
his apprehensions, but lives as if hedid traduce and abuse himself in his
conceptions and expressions of his own vacuity and emptiness, and falls not
at all into consideration of those disabusing notions: and thus he verisies
what the holy Spirit says of him, that man compared to vanity is Romans 8.
found lighter then it.

For, as if the variations and instability of his own state, were not
sufficient for his vexation, does not man add to them, the changeableness of
many other creatures, more vanishing and fleeting then himself, by fastening
his love to them, namely, to riches, honor, beauty, and the rest of this
worlds flashes, and blazes of delectation, which go out very often, even
before they have so much as warmed our senses.

. II.
Treating Man's abuse of what he might learn by the mortality of the creature,
and the frailty of his nature evidenced in all sorts of persons and trials.

ALL the creatures seem to tell man in their perishing variations, that they
were made so transitory, to pass away as attendants on the flux and motion of
his life, whereby to instruct, as well as serve him by their subjection, yet is
he so little advertised by them of his own frailty, as he rather applies their
variations to amuse him in the imperception of his own instability; For while
all his pleasures are derived from the continual changes and mutations of
things, even out of this variety of delights, he draws the inconsideration of
his own continual flux and consumption: For he neither seems to believe the
nature of the things themselves, in all these evidences of their mutability
(while he fixes his heart upon them, as if they were immovable) nor does he so
much as learn the variableness of his own mind, by the experiments of so
frequent alterations of it which happens after, even without so much cause as
satiety, merely by the lightness of his own constitution.

Does not this seem a strange incongruity in the nature of man, who, while he
states all his delectation in the intermixture of changes, (even of his own
mind, as well as of foreign fruitions) that in this occupation, he should
divert himself from the animadversion of his own vanity and impermanency: How
justly may it be said then, O wretched man, who shall deliver thee from this
body of delusion? When all the creatures that passing away and dying, open
themselves in an Anatomy of thy frail nature, thou will not so much as look
upon thy own frame and composition, which thou can not see in those living
figures thou art playing and sporting with; for the life of man cannot see it
self truly, but by reflex from death, and every perishing, dying or dead
creature, reflects to man his own image, and yet as the Apostle says, Man so
frequently beholding his natural face in James 1. 23.
this glass of death, forgets what manner of man he is. Therefore the Author of
life, in his Word, has often set his hand to his manifest of the creatures,
which they all make, for Man, in their successive corruptions, and in very
pregnant terms he has declared to man, That his life is but a vapor, that
appears but James 4. 14.
a little time, and then vanishes. If then our life, which is the foundation
of all our vanity, be but so slight and subtle a thing, what can we say of
riches, beauty, and honor, and the like temporalities? which are but the
accidents of that substance, which is it self but a vapor: Wherefore all they
seem but colors, diversified by the several variations of that light, which
is but a flash of lightning, for life it self is but such an esclat of light.

This considered, when the nature of all the worlds toys and nugacities is
rightly discussed, all the specious good of them is found to be but opinion and
imagination, which may be termed the fume of this vapor of our lives, as it
is exhaled, and vanishes away, and yet this fume of opinion, darkens to us the
nature of our lives, as smoke often does the matter out of which it is raised:
For how familiarly the eye of our reason is deprived of all exercise by this
smoke of opinion, I need not urge, since every one that goes abroad into the
air of the world, palpably sees what sore eyes Reason has almost every
where, by living in this smoke of opinion.

O then, how much worse then nothing is the life of man, thus lightened and
evaporated by his own fancy, when at the best of his carnal nature, in the
holy Spirit's account, it is but a shadow, a dream, or a vapor?

And certainly it was an express act of Providence, (relating to our
undeceiving) this of Gods choosing Solomon, among all his Secretaries, to make
the most ample and precise manifest of the nature and conditions of all
temporalities; for as Alexander is said to have furnished Aristotle largely
with expenses requisite for all sorts of Anatomyes, when he designed him to
write the history of Nature, that his experiments might afford him both light
for himself and credit with others; so God seems to have provided Solomon an
abundance and affluence of all those creatures, in their best degree of
sincerity and perfection, whereof he was to deliver to the world, the nature
and properties, that the sensiblenesse of his experience might move and affect
the world jointly with the charity of his speculation.

S. John Baptist, (who had the same spirit of truth, I by an immediate
infusion, but did never exercise it in any practical experiments) had not been
an organ of this truth, so proportinate to our infirm apprehension which
embraces truth, sooner, clothed with sensible particular experiments, (and so
becomes as it were palpable) then in the universality of notions, while it
remains more abstracted in speculation; King Solomon therefore was an
instrument sized and fitted to work upon our natures, and he, who was the best
Moral Chymick that ever wrought upon the matter of temporallities, by the
experiments of all fruitions, extracted this as the quintessence of them all.
Vanity of vanities, all is vanity under the sun and vexation of spirit; Here
then is the product and sum of all our loves and fruitions in this world, and
after this convincing manifest, of the worthlesnesse of all other creatures,
alas, how much a more deplorable conviction has he left us of the vanity of
man, by his own fall and prevarication, when in the splendour of all this light
of verity; a few fading colors in a woman's face, dazel'd even his Eagles eyes,
and so his blindness and infatuation is become a clearer evidence of the
infirmity of man's nature, then even all the beams of his illuminating pen.

They who will look attentively upon this naked image of Solomon, need no other
character of our humanity; there they shall discover all that the world
accounts the security of happiness to be the likeliest betrayers of it; For
he, whose knowledge exceeded the stock of nature, and whose possessions were
equal with all natures provisions, may be said to have fallen by the weight of
his felicities; how infirm a thing then is man, that cannot carry even his
own wishes without falling under them when he is charged with their successes,
for alas, how much does familiar evidence attest this truth, that man in honor
becomes like the beast that perishes?

May not our carnal nature then be justly discredited to us, by considering
that our life is either a perplexity of wishes, or a perversion of successes?
and this convincing evidence which common experience offers, proves what
Solomon says, Eccle. 3. 10.
that this is the affliction which God has given to the sons of men, to
exercise them in it; since indeed this world is but a stage for their wrestling
and contention.

And if we look upon our nature in the exercise and trial of it, in the other
extreme of affliction, we shall find their feebleness, even in those pillars
that were the strongliest supported by grace, namely Elias, who seemed to have
had so little mixture of the elements in his nature, as he is called by Ecclus.
48. Kings 3. 19.
the holy spirit, a fire and a burning light, yet even he in his fiery trial
had so much earth about him, as to faint under his carriage, and to cry out to
be delivered even of his life, as of a burden: thus strong was that little
weakness of our nature he had about him: and holy Jer. who seems to have
brought none but holy earth out of his mothers womb, by the testimony of his
sanctification in it, yet even this sanctified oar, had so much dross found
in it, when the burning fire was shut up in his bones, as to run over even into
the cursing the day of his birth, and to prepose his mothers being a tomb for
him before a deliverer of him into that light wherein he saw so much misery and
affliction; May we not well say then in reference to that of Solomon, if the
best men on earth make this confession of the misery of their nature, what do
the worst and the most Jer. 20. 10. 14 Prove. 11. 31.
depraved?

Thus have we seen frailty and infirmity of our corrupted nature taken from
the best figures of it in diverse postures of temporal felicity and
affliction, and we perceive that in one state it is so unhappily disposed as
the pronenesse of it to ingratitude, is raised by the very degrees of
obligations and benefits it receives; Insomuch as the plenty of temporal
blessings, proves often an over-ballancing even of the power of abundant grace,
as we see manifested in the infidelityes of Solomon: and again we find in the
other trial, how the weight of sufferance boweth and deflects a little, even
the strongest pillars of humanity, among which we do bring in Saint Paul's
deposition of this truth, where we make upon all these surveys, this his
reflection, O wretched man! who shall deliver thee from this body Romans 7.
of death and corruption? But we are not so miserable as not to have a present
answer to this sad question, the grace of God by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Wherefore let us go on, and look upon our nature as it is Deified in him, and
as the other representations might make us lament our birth with Job upon our
dunghill, so this aspect of it in the person of Christ, may recall us to
rejoice with Zachary Luke 1.
in the Temple, and allow our nature this selfe-ascription, justly assumed by
the second organ of the reparation thereof, henceforth all generations shall
call me blessed; this assumption may be well allowed our nature when we look
upon it with S. Paul, Gal. 2. 20.
not living in it self, but Christ living in it.

The second Treatise. The reparation of Humane Nature, divided into two
Sections.
. I.
Treating the admirable means God chose for this work, and the rehabilitation
resulting to man from this proceeding of God.

HAving seen the figure of man made much liker the image of him, who said, he
would raise himself and become like God, then like God himself who made man
after his own image, what means is there left to restore that, which all the
subtilty of the supreamest Angel had much ado to disfigure, when ruin is so
much easier then reparation?

If Lucifer himself had applied all his abilities to have given man
satisfaction, he could hardly have excogitated such a means of man's
redintegration; for it may be disputed whether it had not been a higher pitch
of disrespect to have designed God, to have put on this wretched nature of man,
then it was to project for his own Angelical nature, an independency on the
divine.

So here the spirits of men and Angels are confounded, when they consider both
these natures of God and man, first apart in their peculiar properties, and
then behold them united in this incomprehensible manner in the person of God:
here Saint Austins exclamation is more proper then any inquisition, one Abisse
calls on another, the Abisse of misery attracts that of mercy; here is the
transcendency of all wonder, that the unworthiness and demerit of humane
nature should prove the exaltation of it; For now the Church does not stick to
say foelix culpa, proclaiming even the fault to have been happy, that procured
such a redemption and a melioration.

Lord what was man, that thou should be thus mindful of him, who had
nothing left to move thee, but his being become worse then nothing! did this
invite thee to show thy self more God in his refection, then in his creation,
wherein his nullity had thus much toward his being, viz. no actual opposition
to thee, which his iniquity had, and so his reparation seemed more incapable of
thy love, then his nothing was of thy omnipotency in his first production.

In this deplorable state of humane nature, become even Gods enemy, he did not
only reconcile, but even subject himself to it, to mediate this reconciliation,
he that could not rob God Phil. 2. 6.
of any thing by his equalizing himself to him, seemed to rob God of all his
Majesty by this his equality with man, by this stripping and exinanition of
himself, taking upon him the form of this disfigured servant; here we may ask
with the amazement of the Apostle, who has been thy Councellor in this
incomprehensible design, which man could not have so much as wished for
himself? And Saint Paul resolves us, God for that Ephe. 2. 6.
great, love, wherewith he loved us, has raised up our dead nature, and made
it sit in as heavenly a place, as even the person of God.

And indeed, love could only render this act worthy of almighty God, all the
other of Gods benefits might be referred to his glory, without any relation to
his love, the creation of all out of nothing, might relate to the manifestation
of his omnipotency, and the order of his providence and administration of the
world, might be referred to the magnifying of his wisdom, and the exalting his
glory by his diverse communications to his creatures; But this exinanition of
himself could not consist with Gods dignity, if it had not flowed from the
immensity of his love: So as this act confirms Saint John's definition of God,
that he is love, for in this testimony 1 Ep^. John 4.
God appears nothing else, all his immensity and infinity is extant only in
love, since in this act of Gods incarnation, even his Omnipotency may be said
to be exhausted in obliging man, when there remains neither power in God to do,
nor wisdom to excogitate a greater benefit then this selfdonation.

O immense beneficence and excess of love, which terminates even the divine
omnipotency! shall not this then subdue man's infirmity, and appropriate all his
desires, to the study of loving this God; who having given man, even all his
divinity by his love; shall not man give this divinity all his love? methinks
it is now unnatural, since God is become man by love to him, that man united
to this God, should not become all love of this divine Essence.

How can man then find now so little of God in his nature, as to plead his own
infirmity, for not loving God, when by this gift, he is made a consort of the
divine nature? as Saint S. Peter 2. Ep. 4
Peter tells him, and thereby enabled to love God by a participation of the same
love, with which God loves himself, so that the donation exceeds so much the
delinquency, as Saint Austin Romans 5.
votes a congratulation to our humane nature, which being assumed by the Son of
God, is constituted immortal in heaven, and exalted, so as to sit at the right
hand of the Father: who then ought not now to congratulate his nature thus
immortalized in Christ, when he may hope to rise to the same immortality by
this assumption?

So much strange incomprehensiblenesse follows upon Gods incarnation, as our
nature is dignified above what it has a faculty to conceive, for the soul of
man shall not rightly apprehend the honor of this union with our flesh, till
she be severed her self from this connection: so great is the mystery of Gods
taking flesh and blood upon him, as man must divest his, before he can
comprehend it, for we see the more we are immersed in flesh and blood, the
less we discern of it, the carnal man is the worse inquisitor into this
incarnation, but the benefit and mercy is no less then the mystery, for Gods
incarnation inableth man for his own decarnation, as I may say and devesture
of his carnality, and by imitation of this divine man Christ Jesus, shows him
how to wear his flesh in s(...) proportion, as Christ wore his, namely, as a
garment that did not defile what it covered;

Who then will choose to cleave to our nature in the impurenesse of her own
carnality, and bewail that infelicity, for an extenuation of her foulness,
rather then recur to this capacity which is imparted by the two natures of
Christ unto ours, viz* to refine her self to so much cleanness and
spirituality, as Saint Paul does not fear to exalt our spirits to an identity
1 Cor. 6. 17.
with Gods; he does not wonder at any thing in consequence of this first gift
of God himself given to our nature, for he concludes, that he, who did not
think his own Son too much, how shall he not with him also freely give us all
things? Romans 8. 32.


Insomuch as we may justly now say with S. Paul, Therefore O man thou art
inexcusable when thou judge thy nature, as incapable Romans 2. 1.
of victory over her infirmity, for there is no such predominant malignity in
her, as thy enemy would insinuate the belief of; the worst part of thy
weakness is this querilous diffidence, for in that ill feature thou shall
find no similitude in the person of Christ in all thy trials and temptations;
thou may find some resemblance in his figure, even in the anguish and
attristation of thy spirit, but none in the yielding and surrender of thy
confidence, for he felt our infirmities that we might not faint under them, so
that the similitude of his temptation Heb. 4. 15. Heb. 2. 18.
is the succor and security of our defense in all our trials.

They then who in the pressures of their frailties, shall faintingly say, who
shall show us any good? have their answer following in Psalm, 4.
the next words, the light of thy countenance is sealed and impressed upon us;
for now the light of Christ's divinity is not only shining on our nature, but
even in it, as being now the orb of the sun of righteousness, insomuch as the
eyes of God may be said, not only to be upon us now in all our conflicts, but
likewise to be concerned in our contentions as members of that head, whose eyes
are his; and consequently they do not only animate us, but act and second us,
insomuch as the Apostle S. Paul chooses his infirmities only to glory in, to
magnify the triumph of Christ.

Wherefore they, who behold the splendour of Christ's divinity now shining in our
nature, need not lament the destruction of the first Temple, when they
contemplate this re-^dification of this second Sanctuary, but may confess with
one of Gods Esaiah 9. 10. Haggai. 2. 2.
witnesses, that the glory of this latter House is greater then that of the
former, for our nature is more dignified in the person of Christ, then it could
be depressed by the fault of Adam, since, not only the holy Angels adore now
humane nature in the person of Christ, but the very revolted spirits are
punished even by the consequences of their malice to it, for the bruised heel
stands now trampling upon their subjected heads; and it is not only in the
glorious person of Christ, that our nature triumphs over Ephe. 1. 22.
her enemy, but even in many other persons, mortal and charged with her
infirmities, (which make the weight of the shame the heavyer) she treades
victoriously upon the Basalisk, vilifying all the malicious powers and
principalities, who are the governors of the darkness of the world. Such
honor have many of Christ's members, even in this life, being enabled to walk
in it, and yet not war after the flesh, having such spiritual weapons, as cast
down all imaginations, that rise up in defense of their own impotency, and
suggest their incapacity of subduing their enemy.

. II.
How even Man's infirmities may afford him gloryes, and consequently, Motives to
joy and correspondence with the grace of Christ incarnate.

REflecting duly on what has been premised, we may justly sing an Hosanna to
our humane nature, as she is now participant of the virtue of God himself, in
the person of Christ, since she is so fortified for triumph and victory over
all the devils forces, and her own frailties, as I may say, it is a greater
shame for man, not to overcome now, thus joined with Christ, then it was at
first, to yield to the devil and the woman joined.

He, who is clothed with light as with a garment, when he bowed the heavens and
descended, taking our nature as a cloud for his vestment, might have purged it
of all frailty and infirmity by his merits in it, and have re-estated it in the
original integrity; but he seems to have chose the leaving of this infirmity,
to exalt the fidelity, this thought may be supported by his denial of Saint
Paul, the removing from him his 2 Cor. 12.
reluctancies, because virtue is perfected in weakness, so having left our
nature with this lifeguard about her of my grace is sufficient for thee, he
has enabled her to rise to a higher degree of honor, by victory, then she
could have done by security, for then our nature would have wanted the
similitude and configuration with the image of Christ, tempted, suffering, and
triumphing, which is a diviner figure then the safe unexercised condition of
Adam.

And why may not we conceive that the miseries left in our nature by so
merciful a God, were intended as seeds of a more fruitful glory, since not
only our own sufferings are now allowed as good evidences for the claim of our
felici^y* but even the distresses of others, are assigned for our
qualifications, for Christ in his last account with man, produces nothing but
miseries of nature, for man's merit to him, sickness, ^unger, poverty, and
captivity are brought in, as the only contributions to man's glorification, and
by Christ's words, we find that even he inhabiteth still in the infirmities of
our nature, insomuch, as to reconcile us to the most aversing part of our
nature, we may look upon Christ's personation in it, for he seems (at that day,
when he shall in our nature, judge both natures of men and angels) to own his
residence most especially, in all the distresses and indignities of humane
nature, and to admit the communication and familiarity we have had with such
miseries, as the only claim to our eternal association with him, and thus
having a capacity imparted by all our infirmities to merit at Christ's hands by
his own sentence, our lyablenesse to them may be thought a nobler state then
would have been our exemption from danger.

And to support this supposition, we may conclude, that our arrogant enemy (who
affected to be like Christ in his glory, but never emulated his humility) is
more tormented now by man's triumphs over his angelical powers, and his own
humane weakness, then he would be by man's state of impe^cancy; for even that
spoil this enemy now makes upon us, does not at all ease or relieve him,
whereas the defeats and shames he received by our victories over him, strain
the rack of his pride upon him, torturing him by this vilifying his power, by
which means, even our infirmities may be said to serve Christ against the great
maligner of both his Natures, which admitted, they who complain of the
infelicity and perversion of our nature, may be advertized, that they have a
means to rectify this crookedness, even by the impulse of one of the most
vebement corruptions thereof; namely, the passion of revenge, since this
redress may be wrought by their attempting continual vindications against the
procurer of all our misery, by a victorious fidelity to our maker; whereby even
our infirmities being overcome, are converted into the torments of our
pretending tormentor; and may the thussting of the serpent be retorted into his
own bosom, when his assaults return him more the sight of his own impotency*
then of our frailty.

And how feisable this way of revenge is made, S. Paul assures us, both by his
life and Doctrine, when he defieth Angels, Principalities, and Powers to join
with his infirmities; and yet glories that in all these oppositions, man may
be more then conqueror by him, who has loved him. Romans 8. 37.


How many virtuous Trophies are there now erected in Christianity, of the
victories of humane nature, over our most powerful infirmity? What numbers
wear the vestures of their humanity, shining in the candor of innocence and
chastity, in so pure a manner, as they seem rather, living, transfigured with
Elias and Moses upon Tabor, then coming disfigured with Adam out of Eden? So
much does even the frailest portion of our humanity triumph now over the
greatest frailty Nunns.
of our nature, and from the infirmity of the flesh, derive rather consequent
merit then actual infection; so that the proud spirit finds oftentimes by
this repulse, rather the misery of his destitution of grace, then the infirmity
of our nature, being succored and supported by an accession of the fortifying
grace of our Head Christ Jesus.

In which respect Saint Augustine says elegantly, the nativity of Christ was
the renascency of man; as flesh had wounded thee, so it now heals thee; the
Physician ministered a receipt, composed of our own infirm nature, and by the
infirmity of his flesh, cured the infection of ours.

And for an entire re-inforcement of our humane nature, which consists of
spirit and flesh, our spirit seems to have yet a more intimate union with God,
for our flesh was but a supervesture or upper Garment to the Son of God. The
two natures of God and Man remaining distinct, and not intermixed, but our
spirit is sealed and impressed by the holy Ghost, and so seems identified with
the Spirit of God, in some such sort, as the impression left is the same image
with the stamp which impresseth it, and in this respect, the Apostle tells us,
that he that is joined unto God, is one spirit with him; we need not 1 Cor. 6.
17.
speculate so curiously, the radiant beams of the Word of God, as to dazzle or
dissipate the sight of our mind, in this mysterious expression of the holy
Spirit; as much as is competent with our eyes, is the perception (by this
dazzling light) of what great dignity and excellence our humane nature may now
own; in which the entire Trinity does reside, the Son of God in Person, the
holy Ghost or Spirit of God, by Character and impression, and consequently God
the Father by the indivisibleness of his essence from their presences;
therefore we see Christ promises us in express terms, the company of the
John 14. 23.
Father, and his residence in us.

Wherefore, Now O happy man that thou art, look not down upon the stage of the
Serpent, where he lies still hissing at thee, to call thy thoughts to the
earth, since thou did first hearken to him; But raise thy looks upward, to
the throne of Heaven, where the splendour of thy humanity, at the right Hand of
God, reflecteth to thee thy own dignity, for even in the mirror of the word,
wherein God the Father sees himself, man may now see his own image; there man
may see not only his nature made after Gods image, but God himself in the
image of his nature.

Correspond with thy own worthynesse then, O exalted creature! and live as if
thou had never seen thy self in any other glass, for here is that
eminence truly conferred on thee, which thou did at first so vainly affect,
of being like God, and the holy Spirit is thy counselor in this claim of thy
divinity, and thy comforter against the disswasions of thy first projector, who
would now divert thee from the aspiring to the consort and participation of the
divine nature which is 2 Peter 1. 4.
offered to thy aspiring.

This premised and pondered, man may say, I rejoice even in my infirmities,
that the power of Christ may rest upon me, and 2 Cor. 12. 9.
triumph in me; for my strength is made perfect in weakness, and may consort
the harp of David to the same tune of praising man's condition, professing, thy
friends, O Lord are Psalm. 138.
become exceeding honorable, their principality is exceeding strengthened, for
when man's infirmities appear in temptations and suggestions, to deface the
image and Character of the holy Ghost in him, then has he the holy Spirit to
second him in the defense of his own image. So that by the adjunction of these
helps, even all man's infirmities may be converted into his glories, and man
has nothing left to undeifie him now, but his own preferrence of degeneration
and flavery to the enemy of his nature, before his adherence to her Author.

Finally, upon all these representations, I may justly re-extoll and magnify
the dignity of humane nature, which we may consider sent down at first from
Heaven as Gods image: and next, as a state to which God himself did vouchsafe
to come down in person, and taking it upon him, will inhabit therein eternally,
and then, that the holy Spirit of the Father and the Son abides in it, as in
his Temple, which he sanctifies incessantly, nay more that it is designed to
partake the same glory, which the whole Trinity injoyeth, by being promised to
be made like him who has it all, the God and man Christ Jesus. 1 E. John 3. 2.


O then, he that may hope this, let him never plead his frailty or infirmity,
in discredit of his nature, let him not in a dejection of spirit seek to cover
his pusilanimity, with, O wretched man, I find a Law reluctant in me, against
all these motives and incentives of my aspiring to divinity, but rather let him
boldly pronounce in such a holy confidence as is prescribed him, I can do all
things in him that strengthens me, for since God is in so many sorts with us,
who shall prevail against us? Therefore in all these reluctances, let us
aspire to be more then conquerors, by him who so much loves us. Romans 8. 37.


The Third Treatise. Of Religion.
. I.
Considering it under the general Notion of some reference to a Divine Power.

REligion rises in the first dawning of the light of nature, for the soul, as
soon as she does but see her self by the reflex of any discourse, discernes
her own relation to some superior cause; to which she assigns some present
reverence and reason, as it rises and ascends, breaks the day a little
further, but leaves the mind still in such a twy-light, as the understanding
does hardly distinguish singularity, in the supremacy discryed above it self;
for reason does but, as it were, feel out her way to Divinity by a kind of
palpation, and sensible touches upon material creatures, and cannot by an
immediate elevation of her faculties to immateriall notions, raise her self up
to the speculation of any spiritual substance, much less to the supreme
spiritual Essence.

So that by the mere light of nature, the mind oftener scatters and breaks the
object of Divinity, then singleth it into unity. This deficiency appears in
the speculations of most of the Philosophers, who all looked naturally upward,
for some supreme reference and asscription of their being, but unto most of
them, Heaven like a cracked mirror broken by their various imaginations,
reflected multiplied images of the Divinity; whereby we may discern that the
perception of unity in the divine Essence, is not derived so much from the
emission of the rays of natural Reason, as from a reception of a
supernatural light, whereby reason is rather illuminated from above it self,
then singly producing this selfe-illustration: and this foreign clarity
diffused upon our reason, is the Grace of the Divine essence, which elucidates
to our mind the simplicity and indivisiblenesse of the object, from whence
this gracious splendor issues upon our understanding.

Grace thus inspired, works by the soul, as light does by the sense; not
inducing the faculty, but only the exercise of sight, for grace does not
confer any new faculty to the soul, but only perfecteth the capacity of
natural reason in this act, of singling the notion of the Diety, and settling
the unity of a Creator in our belief. And this first position always
suggesteth some Religion taken largely, as a recognition by some exterior
homage of one Supreamacy above our Nature; but this estate admits of much
diversity in Religious beliefs; in which, even the wise men of the World, as
Saint Paul terms them, did stray and lose themselves, growing vain in their
own Romans 1. 21.
imaginations, for by a seeming pretext of piety, namely, of making religious
addresses enough to God, they made many Gods under the color of one Supreme
address. By this Error we may perceive that natural reason needs still a
further conduct from grace, to lead it to a rectified Religion.

Certain it is, that the material and visible species of this world, afford
some notion of the invisible producer; as in mines, whereof the specificall
matter is of a much meaner substance, there are found some veins of Gold and
Silver; so out of the gross mass of nature, those that work upon it by single
reason, may easily extract some Spiritual ore of Religion, for through the
elemented body of the universe there run some veins of intimation of a
spiritual nature, independent on all matter, which reason may discern, and so
resolve some Religious acknowledgment of a Divine principle, as the producer of
subordinate causes and effects, but how apt humane reason is to sever and
disunite this principle, we may easily judge, when we remember how soon reason
forgot her own origin, and as if having lost the unity of the godhead, she
could in number have made up that loss of quality, she brought in all the
celest all bodies into the account of Divinity, serving the Militia of Heaven,
instead of the maker, and we may call to mind that as humane bodies grew
Giants, minds seemed to shrink into dwarfs; when they fell in love, as I may
say, with the daughters of men, that is, the conceptions of their own natural
Reason in this point of Divinity.

And we may well suppose that the Giants souls, in the law of nature became
so, by espousing this daughter of God, which we may properly call Grace,
whereby their heads passed the sky, and touched Heaven it self in this
belief of the unity of the godhead, and by this conjunction with grace, reason
produced their issue of a rectified Religion; hence is it that we find the
Patriarks frequently visited by celestial spirits, as the allies, as I may
say, of this daughter of Heaven they had espoused; and most do conclude, that
all those, who in the law of nature continued in a rectified belief and worship
of God, were maintained in that state by grace, supplementall to the virtue of
single Reason.

How far humane Reason may alone find the way to rectified Religion, is a
question to exercise curiosity, rather then excite piety; and very commonly,
reason in the disquisition of faith, does rather sink the deeper into the
earth, by falling from her over aspiring, then she does six her self upward in
her proper station; and besides this danger, me thinks there is this
difference between them that are working upon reason to extract Religion, and
those that are feeding upon sincere faith, that the first are laboring the
ground for that fruit, which the last are feasting on; or that the first are
plowing, while the last are gathering of Manna. I shall endeavor therefore to
serve in this spiritual refection ready to be tasted, treating of faith,
already digested, rather then to be provided by ratiocination, for devotion is
faith converted into nourishment; by which the soul contracting a sound and
active strength, needs not study the composition of that aliment, it finds so
healthful.

. II.
Treating the best habit of mind in order to the finding a rectified Religion.

ME thinks Religion and Devotion may be fitly resembled to the Body and the
Soul in Humanity: The first of which, issues from an orderly procession of
nature, by a continuing virtue imparted all at once to mediate causes, the last
is a new immediate infusion from heaven, by way of a creation, continually
iterated and repeated. So Religion at large (as some homage rendered to a
supreme relation) flows into every mind, along with the current of natural
causes: But Devotion is like the Soul, produced by a new act of grace,
directed to every particular, by special and express infusion, and in these
respects also the analogy will hold, that as Religion has the office of the
body to contain Devotion, so Devotion has the function of the soul, to
inform and animate Religion: And as the soul has clearer or darker
operations, according as the body is well organized or disposed, so Devotion is
the more zealous or remiss proportionately to the temper and constitution of
the Religion that contains it: Suitable to the Apostle Saint James his
intimation to us, that Pure Religion keeps us unspotted from the world. James.
1. 27.


I shall not take upon me the spiritual Physician to consult the
indispositions and remedies of differing Religions, but relying more upon the
Testimony of confessed experiments then the subtilty of that litigious art, I
shall prescribe one receipt to all Christian tempers, which is to acquire the
habit of Piety and Devotion, for this in our spiritual life, is like a
healthful air and a temperate diet in our natural, the best preservative of
a rectified faith, and the best disposition to recover from an unsound
Religion; for the Alms and Prayers of the Centurion were heard and answered,
when they spoke not Act. (...).
the language of the Church, and the Angel was sent to translate them into that
tongue, in which God has chose only to be rightly praised, that which his
Eternal Word Christ Jesus has peculiarly affected, and annexed to his Church;
this shows the efficacy of piety, and the exactness of Gods order, who has
enclosed his eternal graces within those bounds, into which he brings all that
shall partake of them, and so does naturalize all such strangers as he
intitleth to them, does not allot any portions to aliens, but reduces all them
he will endow, into that qualification he requires, which is into the rank of
fellow-citizens of the Saints, and of the household of God; Ephesians. 2. 19.
he leaves none with a dispensation of remaining forreiners. The Angel that
called the Centurion, directed him to the gate of the Church: Saint Peter did
not bring him a protection to rest in his own house, with the exercise of his
natural pieties: and so for those that are straying without the enclosure of
the Catholic Church, if they walk by the light of natural charity, moral
piety and devotion in their religious duties, this is the best disposition
toward the finding of the way, the John 13. 6. Psalm. 144.
truth, and the life, of whom the Psalmist says, He is near to all those that
seek him; and those who are thus far advanced in morality, may be said to be
in atriis Templi, in the Churchyard, which is, in a congruous disposition for
farther advance into the body of the church. I shall endeavor then to affect
every one with the love of purity and holiness of life, for to those that are
already rooted and growing in the Church, this disposition will be are that
fruit; the Apostle soliciteth for them, that their love may abound more and
more in knowledge, Ephe. 1. 9.
and in all judgment: And in those who are yet strangers and forreiners, as he
calls them, this reverentiall fear of God seems to chase the wax for the
seal of the holy Spirit; for Prayers and Alms do as it were retain God for
their Counsel, and as his Clients open their cause to him, in these terms of
the Psalmist, Lord cause me to know the way wherein I should Psalm. 142.
walk, for I lift up my soul unto thee: And such may be said to be half way
toward their end, that do worship in a zealous spirit, and are likely never
left there, but helped on to the other part of worshipping in truth, by him
that has ordained John 4. 23.
our worship to consist of Spirit and Truth, so that devotion and sincerity in
any Religion, are the best Symptoms of our designation to the true and sincere
Religion.

Wherefore having made this general presentation of piety and virtue to all
parties, I shall not stay to wrestle in the Schools, but rather strive to set
such Church-musick, as all parties may agree to meet at the service; and this I
presume may sound in tune unto most ears; that where consort and harmony in
faith appears, it is a good note of that Churches service, being set by the
hand of that great Master, who in this last lesson of his own voice, did
concert this symphony in the music of the Church, and even engaged his father,
to preserve this unity and consort by these words, Holy John 17. 11.
Father, keep through thy own name, those whom thou have given me, that they
may be one as we are one. This cleereth to us the mark of concordancy in
faith, to be one of the most respondent unto Christ's signature on his Church.

And as one may, without arrogating to himself much of the science of a
Physician, venture to pronounce what is the best temper to be composed of, so
may I safely affirm that Religion to be of the best constitution, which
consists the most perfectly of these two divine elements, well intermixed,
Zeal and Charity; the which may be said to make a good complexion in the face
of Religion, the first relating to the color of the blood, and the last to the
fairness of the skin, through which the good tincture of zeal is transparent
in the works of charity: wherefore the well tempering of these two qualities
make that beauty in the Spouse, of which the Bridegroom says, Behold, how
fair is my Love! there is no spot in her. And as the face, although it be not
an infallible, yet is one of the best indications of the bodies health; for
although there be not any so secure symptoms in it, as conclude against all
infirmities, yet there are some so resolving marks of unhealthfulnesse in the
face, as cannot mislead a prognostike of some infirmity: So may we make a
probable judgment of the foundnesse of a Religion by the fair and healthful
aspect thereof, and by the ill looks and disfigurements of some Religions, we
may warrantably sentence the unsoundnesse of them; for there are some that have
such marks of uncleanness on their skin, as not only the Priest, but even the
People may discern the Leprosy.

This considered, the most advised judgment touching Religion, for the
generality of men, is, the preferrence of that which has the most promising
countenance, of this perfect constitution, of unity in faith, of orderly zeal,
and of active charity, for out of these materials only, that flame is raised,
which our glorious high Priest came to kindle upon the earth. Luke 12. 49.


The Fourth Treatise. Of Devotion. In two Sect.
. I.
Devotion regularly defined, and some accidents that raise it, explicated.

THere is nothing seems more requisite, toward the sincere practice of it,
then the sound definition of Devotion, for it is much easier to copy well,
then to design perfectly this work: Nevertheless it is the familiar
presumption of the world, to pass themselves Masters, by drawing the
expressions of their piety, by their own imagination, rather them to work then
by the Churches draughts and patterns: and thus many are mistaken in the
manner, more then in the meaning of their religious duties, for devotion
consists more of conformity to order, in pious applications, then in
contrivement of them: wherefore this prescription of some spiritual director
is given by God, Obey them that rule Heb. 13. 17.
over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls. And herein
is provided a rest, as I may say, for our zeal to discharge it self upon; for
when it is shot without that stay, it often falls very wide of the right mark,
which the holy Spirit has set up to us, by the Psalmist, in, Not unto us, O
Lord, but unto thy Name give glory. So that this is the safest principle Psalm.
114. Non nobis Domine sed nomini tuo da gloriam.
for all good inclinations to build upon, viz. the right notion, and
understanding of devotion, taken from some prudent director; for even the
steadiest hands draw straighter lines, stayed and guided by a rule, then left
to their own loose motion. And I may without presumption, undertake to shape a
general good rule, (by the Model of the Churches doctrine) whereby to take the
right dimensions of rectified Devotion; for this may be done by an unskilful
hand in the practical part, as good instruments may be made by Mechanics, who
want the science of using them.

Devotion is a fervor infused into our soul by Grace, which Devotion defined.
breaths out continually an alacrity and promptitude in regular and ordinate
performances, of all such religious duties, as are ordained by God, for the
exterior testimony of the interior love and reverence we owe him.

This good habit of the mind, is the fiery spiration of the holy Ghost, taking
in such sort upon our wills, as it raises a flaming Mat. 3(...). 11
evidence of our love to God, in all our actions, and this is properly to be
baptized with the Spirit, and with fire, to have Luke 12. 49.
all our affections turned Christian, by the accension of that holy fire in our
hearts, which Christ said he came to cast into the earth, and required the
kindling and ardencie of it in us, so that the activity of this spiritual fire
in our souls is that we term our devotion, which implies a conformity of our
affections in morality, and our opinions in religion, to the revealed will of
God; our appetites we conform in acquiring such habits of virtue as are
expressly enjoined us by God, in his commandments; and our own conceptions we
submit in our conformity to such acts of religious worship, as are directed to
us by the Church, which God has invested with power of direction, by these
words of his commission, They that S. Luke 10. 16
hear you, hear me, and they that despise you, despise me: promising also the
spirit of truth, to rectify all the executions of John 17. Mat. 28.
this power, and the residence of that spirit to the end of the World. In order
to the preservation of that capacity imparted; hence is it that there is no
zeal or fervor of spirit, which may properly pass for Devotion, that is not
touched at the test of the sanctuary, which is obedience to the Churches
regulations, for many may think themselves in Saint Paul's discipline, in the
ferrour of the spirit, when they are nearer Saint Judes commination of
perishing in the contradiction of Jude 11. 1 John. 4. 6
Core, for as Saint John says, The Spirit of Truth and of Error is discerned
by hearing the voice of the Church, not by singing loud in it, therefore it is
not the straining our notes, but the singing in tune, that makes the music of
Devotion wherewith God is delighted.

But supposing the flame of our Devotion to be lighted by a coal from the
Altar; the higher it rises, the nearer it comes to Heaven; for there must not
be only interior heat, but exterior light in it, Saint John Baptist is a
perfect image of John 5. 35.
Devotion, in that Character Christ gives of him; he was a burning and a
shining light, which signifies internal sincerity, and active exemplarity;
and our Savior intimates these two requisitions in our Devotion, when he gives
us this order, Let Matthew.
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven; wherefore this precept requires not
only a fervor, which we feel our selves, but a splendor that may illuminate
others by the edification of our lives.

When our Savior stateth us as pilgrims in this transitory world, he advises
us to have our Loins girl, and our Lights Luke 12. 35.
burning, which intimates promptitude to the exercise of Charity, and fervency
in the act of our love. And Devotion comprizes fully this equipage for our
journey, since it collects us, and strengthens us for motion, and is likewise
that fire which is the best security we can carry with us in our passage
through the wilderness we travail, to arm us against all the wild
sensualities that lie in our way, since it has this special virtue to fright
and disperse all that is irrational.

And this spiritual fire has many analogies with material, insomuch as the
holy spirit says of it, The coals thereof are coals of fire, and have a
vehement flame; and me thinks this Cant. 8. 6.
one remarkable similitude between them may be fitly applied, viz. as fire
does convert many substances which were unfruitful and unclean, into a matter
both generative and clensing by the consumption and reduction of them into
ashes, which have both these qualities: so Devotion by consuming our passions
which were both barren and impure, converts our affections into the love of
penance and mortification, which are the ashes of our consumed offenses, and so
are made both fruitful and purging by this conversion into matter of
humiliation, by which kind of soyling many converts improve much the good seed
fallen into their hearts: for that penitent reflection Devotion makes upon our
vain and foul passions and affections, (which is the consumption and
incineration of them) becomes purgative by sincere contrition, and generative
of all fruits of Charity, since the zeal of mortification is not only a mark
of our repentance, but a means of our perfection: when holy David says, he
eat ashes like bread, they were made of his loose passion consumed by the
flame of his Devotion, and so converted into seeds of penance, and we know how
fruitful these ashes proved to his former sterility.

The water of expiation in the Law, was made with the infusion of ashes, and
certainly there is nothing more clensing then the matter of our offenses
consumed by Devotion, and aspersed upon our memories, for nothing makes us more
zealous to take out all their stains upon our lives, according to the Apostles
observation of the effects of godly sorrow; What carfulness, what clearing of
our selves, what indignation, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
what vehement desire, what zeal, yea, what revenge it works? so as you see
what fertility Devotion raises out of the consumption and ashes of our sins,
which is the Apostles godly sorrow.

. II.
Devotion described a more familiar way, and the best natural temper in order
thereunto.

BEcause Devotion has hitherto spoke the Language of the Church, it may seem
uneasy unto many to be understood; therefore I shall put it into the vulgar
tongue of the Court, and so make it more familiar for apprehension, and by the
warrant of S. Paul's condescendence to the capacities he wrote unto, I may speak
after the manner of men, because Romans 6. 19.
of the infirmity of your flesh; and therefore venture without any levity to
say, Devotion is a Divine passion.

Love raised to the height of passion, upon humane objects, is a power in our
mind, whereon most of the world does rather pretend an excellency over others,
then plead any excuse, for such an incapacity in their nature; wherefore this
will be an expression of devotion, that will serve and fit most apprehensions.
And certainly as strangers do discreetly, to change their habit, when they
come to dwell in foreign parts, especially if they be rude and uncivilized;
so pure devotion (being Romans 8. 7.
a stranger to our carnal nature, which is of it self wild and undisciplined,
coming to plant it self, and live with it) may be better suited for the
purpose of introduction with the apparel of passion, which is native, then
with her own habit of purity, though more decent and becoming; for this
exterior simil(...)de may give the love of God, at first, more convenient
conference with our sense, which usually does but look strangly at her, when
she appears first in her own spiritual habit, which is so different from the
spotted garment of S. Jude 23.
flesh and blood.

So that Devotion being thus put into the fashion, and speaking the language of
the place it comes to, may hope for admittance without much wonder unto our
understandings, and by acquaintance with them, informing them of the benefits
of her association, may obtain a plantation in our wills and affections; and
thus by degrees come to be naturalized in our dispositions; and by this easy
way of introduction, Devotion may come to get possession in some minds, by
commerce of a good companion, sooner then by open claim of her own rights;
for we may conclude what right Devotion has to our minds, by this, that when
profane passion seeks to value it self, and to possess the minds of others,
it puts on a heavenly habit, and speaks the language of Devotion, in reverence
and adoration; thus, as it were, confessing the due interest piety has in our
hearts. May not piety then to recover the easilier her due, without
irreverence, be put into the lighter figure of passion? I may therefore in
order to a pious success, propose the being devout, under the terms of being
in love with Heaven, because it is the likeliest way of persuasion to the
world, to propose not the putting away, but the preferring of their loves, and
so transfer them to a fairer object, not extinguish the fervency of their
act; and I believe without any levity of conceit, that hearts wrought into a
tenderness by the lighter flame of nature, are like metals already running,
easilier cast into Devotion then others of a hard and less impressive temper,
for Saint Austin said, the holy Magdelen changed her object only, not her
passion; and one may join him with her to authorize this opinion, for love
like gold, though it be cast into an idol, the perversion of the form, does
not disvalue the metal; and we know the same gold that Gods People took from
his Enemies, in the form of their idols, after it was purged by fire, was
consecrated to the tabernable, and then it seemed to have a double capacity of
honoring God, as an offering of his servants, and as a trophe from enemies; so
when the flame of the holy Spirit (which is Devotion) has purged and purified
our loves, that were cast into the images of humane passions, the same love is
sanctified and assigned to Divine Service, and brings a more special glory to
God, as it is not only an oblation of his children, but also a spoil of his
enemy.

This is not meant to countenance the alienation of our loves at any time from
God, but to commend that disposition of nature, where love seems the
predominant instinct, for certainly such a temper is apter for a right
conversion, then a harsh and sour constitution of the mind, the first is a
good mould of earth, with ill seed cast into it, and so the fruit may be ill,
while the pregnancy of the earth is good; the other is Psalm. 62. In terra
deserta invia and inaquosa.
a heath naturally unfruitful, and requires much more manuring to make it
bear: Wherefore that nature, which has not a kindly pregnancy in it to bear
love, is not the best mould for the seed in the Gospel, for though it may
render thirty, it can hardly yield the increase of a hundred fold in Devotion.

Certainly we may then very religiously prefer the constitution of such
minds, whose powers are best disposed for the act of loving: for love, as it
is the greatest treasure of our souls, so is it the only security stands bound
to God for all our debts; all the other faculties of man seem to be receivers
only, and this the discharger of all their accounts; but love has this
extraordinary blessing, the greater expense it makes, upon this occasion, the
richer it grows; for the more our love pays God, the more it improves the
same estate; but we can assign nothing but this pure species of love to the
receipt of heaven. Wherefore all empty formalities, and unsincere affectations
in exterior exercises, that would pass for Devotion, are, me thinks, like
servants, that have got on fine clothes of their Masters, by which, strangers
may mistake their quality, but their Masters are not deceived by them; so these
garments and coverings of Devotion, may abuse the eye of the world, but we know
the master of all sanctity, distinguishes dissimulation in all the specious
similitudes it wears. And I should believe a varnished hypocrite may be more
offensive to the sight of God, then a zealous unvailed idolater, for this, is
but mistaken in God, and the other seems to suppose God may be mistaken in
him: and certainly there is nothing more capital against the laws of Heaven,
then counterfeiting the coin, (which piety may not improperly be termed) as
being the price and measure of all exchanges between heaven and earth: of these
false coyners King David says, They slatter God with their mouth, and lie unto
him with their Psalm. 78. Psalm. 59.
tongues, and he gives them Gods answer, thus, The Lord shall laugh them to
scorn.

We may conclude then, that the sincere love of God, is the spirit and soul of
Devotion, and therefore is to be entire in every several part of our religious
exercises: when God dignifies man with similitude to his own image, it is the
soul, not the body that has this Divine relation; so in the service of God,
(which is a consistence of two such parts united of spirit and of matter) the
spirit and breath of life does not reside in the material part, which is
sensible religious offices, but in the informing and animating part which is
Devotion, the which answers to the soul in humanity, as I have endeavored
to demonstrate. And thus I hope that I have not indecently apparelled Devotion
in the habit of the place it is recommended to, clothing it in this soft
raiment of passion, being to come unto the houses of Kings. Mat. 11. 8.


But now me thinks, I hear some sensual and voluptuous persons cry out to
warn their passions to stand upon their guard, objecting that I, like a pyrat,
have thus put up friends colors, while I am in chase, calling devotion, love
and passion, that it might the easilyer enter our hearts, which when it has
done, it takes and imprisons all our humane delights.

To these I may answer, that I have put up these colors indeed, that those
vessels I would speak with, might not fly from piety at first sight, as from an
enemy to pleasure, that speaking with them, I might show them how Devotion
coming and possessing our minds, does rather compose the munity, then
infringe the true liberty of our affections.

For grace finds Humane Nature (like a vessel richly fraught for commerce
with Heaven) most commonly in a mutiny, where the affections that should sail
her, rise up against their Commander, resolving to make spoil of their
commodities, and to turn to the piracy of sense, taking all whereof sensuality
can possess it self, and if. Devotion Reason.
enter and compose this sedition, and convey the affections cheerfully to
their direct commerce with Heaven; this may be rather thought a delivery then a
violation.

And surely our senses cannot more justly complain of Devotion, as a
dispossessor of their properties, then wild people can call a Lawgiver a
tyrant. For piety does but regulate the functions, not ruin the faculties of
our senses; and licentiousness cannot more rightly be called the minds
liberty, then nakedness the bodies freedom: For laws and apparel, do both
in their kinds, cover natures nakedness; and laws, like clothes, impart
conveniences, (the one to the mind, as the other to the body) without
impeaching the decent and proper exercises of either: and so Devotion does but
reduce the wild multitude of humane affections and passions, under the
Monarchall Government of the love of God, under which they may enjoy a more
convenient freedom, then let loose in their own confused Anarchy, which they
confess when they are converted by God to this belief of their condition, that
to serve God is to reign.

The Fifth Treatise. Discoursing whether sensible pleasure may consort with
Devotion. In two Sections.
. I.
The rectifying our Affections, chiefly our love in the sense of beauty.

UPon the title of this Chapter, me thinks I see our humane affections stand
with the same perplexed attention, as a condemned multitude, at the reading of
a Proclamation of Grace, to some particular specified names, each one watching
and praying for his own. Thus do our humane passions seem now concerned,
believing themselves all condemned by piety, each one me thinks in a frighted
and tacit deprecation of their censure, is expecting with anexity to know
whether Devotion will allow them life and consistence with her edicts.

The answer to this, must be, that I shall only put to death, the blind and the
lame, whch are commonly set to keep the strong hold of our corrupted nature
against virtue. (As they were upon the walls of Sion to keep out David.) Such,
Devotion must destroy, for they are hated by her Soul, and are not to be
admitted into the Temple. Secular justice is allowed a latitude 2 Kings c. 5.
in mercy, to which this spiritual judge cannot extend his favor, viz. rather
to save diverse guilty, then to cut off one innocent; for Devotion must rather
put to death many innocent affections, then save one criminal, by reason, that
in this case mercy renders the judge a complice of the crime, so that our
Devotion must not look upon the face of any of our affections, but judge by
the testimony, our conscience brings in against them.

Yet piety is not so inhumane, as many may apprehend that know not the nature
thereof, for it delights not in the death of our affections, but desires
rather they may turn from their perversions and live, and to persuade their
conversion, offers that to them in this life, which is promised to us, but in
heaven, namely, to have our bodies changed from corruptible and passive, into
immortal and inpassible, for Devotion offers to transfigure our affections
from their impure and passive shapes, into immuculate and imperishable forms,
and raise them up from infirmity to virtue, and make those desires which have
been the image of terestriall figures, to bear only that of 1 Cor. 15. 43. 49.
the celestial.

Nevertheless our minds seem to be like fond mothers, which are lamenting
their children given over by the Physician, and will scarce hearken to the
consolation of Gods Minister, who promises so much a better state, as a change
from weak infants into Angels. In this manner our fond and effeminate minds
seem to bewail this tranfiguration of their affections, which Devotion
proposes according to the Apostle, Phil. 3. 20.
viz. the raising their conversation up to Heaven, and changing their vile
body, so that it may be fashioned like unto the glorious quality of the love of
God.

And certainly, unless our affections be cut off from the carnal stock of our
nature, and set by way of ingrafting and incision upon the stem of the holy
Vine, they do bear but sour Grapes, such as will set reason's teeth on edge,
which is their mother, since our corrupted nature puts forth many sharp and
unripe cupidities, and fancies which are truly rather corrasive then cordial
to the mind.

God has planted affections in our sensitive nature, not with a purpose that
they should be fixed in the earth, and bear only terrene cupidities, but has
rather set them there for a while, only as in a seminary or nursery; where he
does not mean they should take any deep root, for our reason, as soon as it
is able, is ordained to remove and transplant our affections into spiritual
scituations into, that garden for which they were first planted, so that,
although our loves grow at first, while they are little tender slips, only in
the terrestrial part of our nature, they are designed to be removed in their
due season into the celestial portion, and to bear fruits spiritual and
intellectual, which order is intimated by the Apostle, when he says, as the
first man is of earth, earthly; so the latter must be of heaven, heavenly.

But because in this warfare of our lives upon earth between these two parties,
the sensitive and the rational, our sensitive nature is not easily persuaded
to render up her affections (wherein she accounts her self so strong) unto
right reason upon discretion, let us examine what fair conditions grace which
always takes Reason's part offers her; and indeed, if the offers be well
judged of, there will appear a truer freedom gained by this surrender, then
that, which the looseness of our nature would maintain, when our affections
Romans 6. 18.
being made free from sin, are become the servants of righteousness, for if
we examine the impositions and constraints our passions lay upon us, it is
easy to convince that to he a real servitude, which we do familiarly, but in
wantonness term so: and thus our loose passions (like the Jews, to whom our
Savior proposed freedom by the knowledge of truth* will hardly confess their
inthralment; but I may fitly say to them, as he did, while you commit sin,
you are the servants of John 8. 34. 36
sin. If grace by Devotion set you free, you shall be free indeed.

Therefore I will procure to manifest how grace may give nature great
conditions of freedom, and how the best proprieties of our affections, are
rather improved and secured, then alienated and spoiled by this surrender to
Reason and Devotion.

And to treat first of the interests of love, (which seems to be the
commander of all the strength of our passions) when love renders it self to
Devotion, then is it so far from being restrained, as it is continued in the
command of all the power of our pieties, and is trusted so much, as it is
allowed to hold fair correspondence with beauty, though that were the party,
love had served under against grace, for then our love commerceth with the
creatures, only to improve his own estate and faculty of loving, which is all
assigned to the honor of the creator. And surely when love by a rectified
persuasion of the blessings of the creature, brings beauty into the service of
Devotion, by a right admiration of the works of the creator, such objects may
forcibly concur to excite us to the love of the maker, in honoring of whom
consists all Devotion.

Beauty may be truly honored by the rights of her nature without being
flattered, by that means to be solicited against her maker, for she may be
confessed one of the best of all mixed creations, since pure spiritual
substances, when they will put on a material veil, take beauty for their
vestment. The Angels expose themselves to us, always in the form of beauty,
because that is the readiest note our sense acknowledges of Divinity; and when
the Son of God vouchsafed to be clothed with materiality, the holy Spirit that
made him this Garment, exposes it and recommends it to us, in this form of
being beautiful above the sons of men, and he draws the image of Psalm. 44.
3.
the spouse he came to take, in the figure of perfect beauty, as the best
sensible Character can be made of her; and makes this quality the object of
Christ's love, As she is all fair, and no Canticle. 4.
spot to be found in her: and thus, as beauty is chosen for a simbol of
spiritual purity, the allegory of it, as I may say, not the letter is to be
studied by us, since that attention will reflect to us the fairness and
integrity we ought to preserve in our souls, and so possess us against that
perverted sense which is often drawn out of the outside or letter of
material beauty.

In the Book of Gods Works, Saint Paul tells us, the Divinity Romans 1. 20.
of the Author is legible by some little study of the Character; and certainly,
there is no so fair part of this edition, as that of beauty; but we do most
commonly, like children, to whom books are given in fine prints, and graced
with gay flourished letters, and figures, they turn them over, and play with
them, and never learn the words; thus likely, do our childish minds, that
are kept at play by our senses, look wantonly over the specious figures of
beauty, and seldom study them to learn Gods meaning in them, which if they
did seriously inquire, they might learn that the excellence and perfection of
their true meaning, renders the perversion the more reproachable, for as crimes
are the greater, the nearer they come to the violation of the person of the
Prince; so if beauty be the nearest sensible image of the sovereign of nature,
the betraying it to his professed enemy, must needs be the most capital
offense: how this infidelity is committed, is but too much notified.

May I not fitly then reproach those with S. Paul, who with vain flatteries,
change the truth of God into a lie, for is not this Romans 1. 25.
done by such who corrupt the real good of beauty, by fond and false
ascriptions? And surely while they serve thus the creature more then the
Creator, they provoke God to give them up to their vile affections, in which
with Daniels Elders, Dan. 13.
Having overthrown their sense, they turn down their eyes, that they may not
see heaven. But the perversion of this blessing, does not not interdict unto
the eyes of the world a due commerce with beauty, nor to our sight the being
delighted with it; for as the Apostle wishes us, we may be children in malice,
1 Cor. 14. 20.
and yet men in understanding.

If Devotion coming to Court, should declare such a war to the world, as to
prohibit oursenses commerce with pleasures; which are the natives of this
world, she would find but a small party, upon such a breach to follow her. And
indeed, God does as the Prophet says, lead us into solitude, when he speaks
Hosea 2.
that language to our hearts, there he sets on the wings of Seraphims, to those
that upon such plumes fly over their passage through the world; but those whose
vocations lead them through the tracts of the earth, do always feel the
earth they tread upon, and it is not to be required of them, to leave all the
pleasures of the world in their following of Christ; but S. John Baptist
instructs them sufficiently in the lesson he Luke 3. 13.
gave the soldiers, that they should exact no more then is appointed them, and
be content with those wages of innocent pleasures, God allows their senses in
the duties of nature.

We may then justify Devotion to be so far from interdicting to nature the
regular love of the creatures, as we may assert it the only means, whereby we
can assure the continuance of our loves to them; for our sensitive affections
are like the hay and stubble the Apostle speaks of, they are easily lighted 1
Cor. 3.
by every spark of pleasure, but they make only a short blaze, and go out
again; whereas Devotion is the Psalmists oil of gladness, and though it
raise not so glaring and so sharp a flame of joy, yet it entertains it in a
more equal and durable temper, for notwithstanding it does not blaze so much
in the sensitive, yet it warms and recreates more the rational part of our
minds, and so does rather foment then waste the matter of our joy, which the
sharper flashes of our passions do quickly consume: for truly our affections
and passions in their own nature are so light and volatile, as beauty it
self, that works best upon them, cannot fix them, nay nor stay them, so long
as even beauty, which is so variable, continues the same; since the same vain
love, which to day robs even Divinity for offerings to make to beauty, tomorrow
commits as great a fault in humanity, stripping again his own Idol, merely
upon the motion of inconstancy, not at all upon the complaint of conscience; so
that I may fitly apply this of the Prophet to such loves, They weave spiders
webs, their webs shall Isai(...). 5. 6
not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works.

Thus are our humane passions so deceived in their commerce, with the vanities
of this world, as they break often upon the return of their adventure; it seems
our fancies insure more upon fruition, then the commodities are worth we
traffic for, and so we become losers even by the return of our adventure,
whereas Devotion teaches us the true value of our desires and successes, and
how to adventure our hopes, and how to manage the happiness of our wishes in
temporalities, in such sort as to make a stock out of them for eternity,
according to the prudent advice given us, to make friends of the felicities of
this S. Luke 16. 9
world, that may provide for us in the eternal habitation.

By these lights we see how the love of God is not only compatible, but
requisite with our love of creatures, to assure and improve our true delights
in them; for nothing but piety can make good to humane appetite, in all
temporalities; that abatement of their esteem which is made by propriety, and
Devotion teaches us to love them, as gifts of God. By which means, fruition
makes rather an endearment of them, then a deduction.

But because I conceive this passion of love, has more friends then any other
that will be interested in the cause, I shall give it a fairer trial another
time, single by it self, wherein the right our love has in the creature,
shall be determined.

. II.
Ambition rightly examined, and discreet condescendencies proposed,
respectively to diverse vocations.

IN the next place, Ambition seems to claim a hearing, and pleads a long
prescription, for possession of a great tenure in our nature; I shall examine
therefore that affection of the mind, which is current under the sinister
notion of Ambition, and endeavor to show, how the matter of this appetency
(which is temporal dignity and glory) is not inconsistent with the purity of
Devotion.

Pride is like Jeroboam, who first drew Israel to sin, and indeed may be
fitly said, to set up golden Calves for the worship of our fancy, against the
true service of our reason, wherefore Devotion is charged to extirpate all that
house; and Ambition, as it is familiarly accepted, is the eldest son of the
house, for it is an inordinate appetite of temporal honor and preferrence,
which we understand, commonly under the term of Ambition; which indeed, is the
act of the habit of pride. And so Ambition, is, as it were the title of the
prime seignory belonging to the House of Pride, which varies only the
appellation of the son, and in this sense (as Ambition is the heir of Pride)
though bearing another name, Devotion can have no confederacy with it; for
humility, which has the same relation to piety, that Ambition has to pride,
has the commission of Jehu, and is not to be tempted by Jezabel, though she be
never so well colored and painted, even the little ones of this house must be
dashed against the stones; but humility has no command to raze and demolish
the Cities and Palaces this ill generation lived in, which are, honor, fame
and power, for piety may lawfully dwell in these commodious habitations of the
world, and make excellent use of all these temporal advantages. So that
Devotion does not prohibit Vtilior sapientia cum divitiis. Eccles. 7. 12.
the pursuit of honor and preference, it rather gives our nature a safe
conduct against the dangers of the way; upon which, so many parties of our
passions make their courses; for we know honor and differencing of degrees,
are stairs of Gods fabric, and there can be no order without degrees, for
order is the right disposition of parity and disparity. Whereupon the several
stations in this world, are designed by divine wisdom, both for the ornament
of the universal frame, which is the natural end of them, as also for this
moral effect, namely to excite and attract our minds, by these near sensible
fruitions, to strain for an investing the habit of virtue, which likely
presses and pincheth our loose natures at the first essays, but they endure
more quietly the constraint, as being conceived the means of some affected
acquisition; for all honor is primarily intended by God, as a remuneration of
virtue, and it goes still in the world under that name, though this order be
never so much vitiated by the iniquity of the world, all dignification retains
still the same title of the merit of some virtue, and those that attend the
least to virtue, will not refer their temporal successes to less then the
adeption of them by some virtue; insomuch as even man's corruption attests that
all honor and dignity is originally the legitimate issue of virtue, which our
minds are naturally betrothed unto, and confesses the generations of fortune
to be spurious and illegitimate, since we will not leave any of her issue under
the title of her maternity, but pass them all over to some virtue, for the
owning them. For does not every one find out some color of virtue to lay upon
the looks of his good fortune? No body will leave it naked in that frivolous
figure of bare fortune, every one is ashamed to expose such a bareness of
mind, and such a destitution of virtue.

Does not honor and dignity appear plainly by this genuine instinct of our
ascribing them to virtue, to be one of Gods designments for man's appetency?
Wherefore they cannot be discredited by Devotion, which is Gods Minister, and
does decently marshall all the faculties of our mind, in the order of humane
actions, directing every one by their several vocations to their respective
properties, assigning to Courts and Cloisters their several portions, and so
evidenceth that of the Apostle, that God has given every one the manifestation
of the 1 Cor. 12. 7.
spirit, according to the several utilities he designs by them; and thus, as
there are many mansions in our fathers house, Devotion sets every one upon the
right stairs, that lead up to their peculiar assignment. Therefore piety must
not be so much traduced to the Court, as to be reported quarrelsome with all
the family, the proper attendants of the place, namely, glory, power and
riches; for it is rather the steward God appoints to keep all in decent order.
By whose conduct the proper luster and magnificence of the place may be set
off, so much to the best, as it may hold a pious Analogy with the Court of
Heaven, as well in the whole family, as in the Masters persons, who are so
specially the images of God upon earth; as not only the person of Solomon, but
the order of his Servants, the attendance of his Ministers, and their apparel
may be a good image of the original glory they represent. And such a
constitution or frame of temporal glory, may be formed by the economy of
Devotion, when she manageth the dignities and treasures of 3 Reg. 10.
the world, which commonly are made the subject of confusion and disorder.

Devotion may then say to the Court of temporal desires, which pass under the
notion of Ambition, as Christ did to his Apostles, in the temptations they were
exposed to, I pray not John. 17. 15
that they may be taken out of the world, but that they may be kept from evil.

As for the prescribing a course of temperance to these appetites, this present
question does not properly exact it: I hope the rest of my labors will afford
some competent directions for our regiment of health, according to the air and
diet of the place, for which they shall opine. Pride is, indeed, that dangerous
disease, whereunto the constitution of the Court is most disposed, and the
least overheating of Ambition turns it into pride, but truly the matter of
this disease, is rather in the humors, then in the blood, for as no meannesse
of birth, or misery of condition are sure exemptions from pride, so not any
nobleness, or felicity are consequent conferrers of it; for Solomon allows
us to conclude, that the want of bread does not starve pride. Prove. 12. 9.


Christian humility does not prohibit all pursuit of honor, as malignant; or
prescribe poverty, as not at all obnoxious; for we have Christ's Authority to
conclude it a more blessed thing to give, then to receive; and the blessing he
gave to poverty, was to the poor in spirit, and this qualification of the
spirit, may agree with the eminence of all qualities; for Devotion Matthew 5.
does not only carry humility with her up to all the heights and stories she
ascends, but retains it also; for she looks upward still at that infinite
distance she there remains from heaven, and does not take measure by her
elevation above other estates, she sees below her on the ground; this was King
David's Psalm. 122.
prospect from the Towers of Sion, where he was raised so much above the
platform of the earth, Unto thee I lift up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in
the heavens: and that true mirror, did reflect to him humility, while the
polished glories of the earth, might have returned him a flattering image of
his condition.

We may then resolve, that those who shall make their judgment by the Apostles
perfect law of liberty, will find James.
that the carriage of Devotion, is no clog to the activenesse of their
thoughts, or motion of their desires, but rather such a weight as is put to
clocks, to regulate, not retard their motion; and certainly, our temporal
desires are to be esteemed as our watches, not those which go fastest, but
those that go best.

So that one of the chief offices of Devotion in the world, is to regulate, not
repress all temporal desires. Wherefore piety may fitly say to our humane
affections, in the Apostles terms to the Galatians, Brethren, you are called
into liberty, Gal. 5. 13.
only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve one
another.

Devotion may have ill offices done her by her own friends, by bringing her to
Court in so severe and unsuitable a habit, and uncompleasant looks, as she may
fright the infirmity of some well disposed, and fire the malignity of others,
and thus fail of a good reception by many that would entertain her, if she
were better suited for the place. They never saw piety but in one dress, that
think she cannot suit her self according to occasions, and put her self so
far into the fashion, as may make her the easilier occostable, and yet
retain her dignity and decency, her natural visage in a Cloister, may be a
vizard to her in a Court. And surely there is nothing recommends Devotion more
to the world then to see it well suited, in the exterior habit, to the society
wherewith it is conversant, and the habit changes no more the natural
composure of it, then clothes do the true proportions of the body, wherefore
Devotion may lawfully suite her self in such sort, at her first coming to
Court, as to cover that which is such an eyesore unto our infirm nature, too
pressing a constraint upon our natural affections.

Did not Saint James advise Saint Paul, to comply with the weakness of the
times, and surely it may be truly said of Courts, that there are many which
believe, and yet are Zealous of Acts 21. 20.
the law of nature, of the pleasures and conveniences of the earth, and not to
offend such as may have innocent inclinations to such attractives, those that
recommend Devotion, may protest (against their common discredit) that they do
not teach the relinquishment of all the customs of the place, but do admit
many of them competent with the spiritual laws of piety. This president of
Saint Paul may be prudently accommodated, by those that are addressed to work
respectively upon the several infirmities of persons and places; they that can
copy well, Saint Paul's figure, of becoming all things to all, that they may
gain all, shall neither avert some by the hard favor of scruple, nor endanger
any by the smiles of liberty.

The precepts of speculative purity, are natural in the element of
contemplation, which is reclusenesse and solitude, but are not always
competent with society, there may be a misapplication of spiritual advices,
where the matter proposed, is excellent in quality, but not adequate in
proportion to the place. Of such directions, it may be said as Cicero said of
Cato the Censour, that his sense was always excellent, but he did sometimes
indamage the state, because he councelled, as in the republicke of Plato, not
a^ in the rubbish of Romulus. So there may be many that may mean excellently,
and advise very virtuously, and yet prejudice the state of humanity when they
prescribe, as if it were still fresh in the purity of Eden, not polluted, in
the dregs of Adam: The fit application of actives to passives produces the
best effects in grace, as well as nature, so that it is sufficient for the
proposers of Devotion, to answer as Solon did, when he was asked whether he had
given his Country the best Laws he could devise? he replied, that he had given
the best they were likely to take; by reason the usefulness of pious precepts,
consists not in the giving always simply the best, but relatively the
properest; as when we set fruit, we consider the earth before we choose the
plant.

Upon these grounds, my study has been to fit propositions of piety to the
measures I have by experience taken of the world, in which work I may be more
confident of the justness of the measures taken by my infirmities, then of the
value of the matter furnished by my abilities. I have by Saint Paul's advise,
remembered those that are in bonds, as having Heb. 13. 3.
been bound also, (and being still, God knows, but working upon other
fetters) and if there be any thing that seems lighter colored, then the
solemnness of the argument requires; let it not be taken as a voluntary
indulgence to any levity, but in order to the support of the feeble-minded, and
comfort of the weak, by S. Paul's direction. 2 These. 5. 14.


When Ambition then is purged from the popular malignancy, imputed to that
term, and referred only to an aspiring at dignity and preferment by virtuous
addresses, I may conclude Devotion and Ambition may live happily together, and
yield mutual aides to one another, while Grace furnishes order, and Nature
activity to our spirits.

When piety disciplineth Ambition, the end of our pursuites is rather in
prospect upon others, then reflection upon our selves; and truly, charity and
beneficence must be the last term of a Christians exaltation, according to the
pattern of our head CHRIST JESUS, our ascending up on high, must be coupled
with giving gifts unto men.

We may then resolve, that when Ambition moves without Devotion, this is an
earthly motion, moving upon his own Center; for then Ambition turns commonly,
at best, upon self-love, and private cupidities; but when it moves with
Devotion, then it is a celestial motion, upon another Center that is, upon
the design of a charitable influence on the inferior positions of the earth,
which is that activenesse all Christian Ambition should have, in order to
communication of the good whereunto it aspires.

And this, as it is a heavenly, so is it a circular motion which unites all at
last unto it self, that it touches in the whole circulation. For as a circle
has every point made in the whole circumference, contained in the perfection
of the figure; so this circle of charity has every portion of good it has
done, returned into it self at the compleatment thereof, which is in the
closure of the circle of our lives: For then the Charities which power has
circumferr'd to others, do all return, and become her own again, in the
perfection of Charity; wherein consists the consummation of all power, when by
the pious exercise of our temporal power, we are preferred to an eternal
domination.

By these discussions, I hope to have shown without any levity or indecency,
how love and Ambition are compatible with Devotion and piety; and me thinks,
these two are the two great lights of our passions; the one ruling over the
day, the other over the night in our sensitive appetite: so that I shall not
need to bring any of our lower affections in question, which like lesser stars
derive their lights from hence; for when once love and ambition, which are, as
it were, the heads of the faction against the spirit, are reduced to the
service of Devotion; the other meaner popular affections are easily regulated.

This premised, we may conclude, Nature has so little reason to complain of
any restraint made upon her faculties by grace, as her affections may justly
make this acknowledgment of the Apostle, unto Devotion, (which is Graces
minister) that it delivers them from the powers of darkness, and makes them
worthy to be partakers of the inheritance of light. Col(...) 1. 13.


The sixth Treatise. Of disabuse to the Rationalists, and the Sensualists,
concerning temporal happiness, and Devotion proposed, for security of a happy
life. In three Sect.
. I.
The virtue of Devotion exalted, and the vanity of some Philosophers detected.

THis inscription may seem to many to speak like a Mountebanks Bill, that
discrediteth the common School of Nature, and promises by one receipt the
cure of all diseases; and I pray God this offer may obtain, what the large
undertakings of their Bills familiarly do, which by speaking so fair, invite
many that believe not fully the promises, to try the experiment of their
medicines; for if this my plausible prescript gain but so much either upon the
curiosity, or the belief of any, as to draw them to an essay of this my
receipt, in that order I have indicted it, I need not fear the discredit
thereof by the operation, since they who are drawn by any motive to follow
this voice of the Psalmist, to come and Psalm. 23.
see how sweet the Lord is, do quickly make this confession with him, Even the
fables, sinners have told me, are not like thy (...); Psalm. 118.
for even the speculations of our own inventions do not so much as create that
real peace of mind, which is concluded by devotion.

This metaphor of Physic suggesteth to me the carrying it a little further on
to my purpose; for, me thinks I may truly say of the spirit of devotion, what
some curious Naturalists have vented of a medicinal extraction, they call the
spirit of the world, which gives vegetation to all bodies, they affirm it to
have the virtue of restoring nature from decay to integrity, and to preserve
man's body long in an indeficient vigor, and propose contrary effects
produceable by this spirit, respectively to diverse constitutions, but still to
the benefit and redintegration of nature, in each individual whereunto it is
ministered: I may without questioning or signing this position, make this
application of it, and affirm that these properties are really verified in the
virtue of this supernatural spirit, which I call Devotion: so that I need not
fear what I promise, to persuade the taking it, in that manner I have formerly
receipted it: whereupon I propose to every regular user thereof, no less
benefit, then the conferring on them their final desire in this life, which is
comprised under this notion of happiness; by which term we understand, the
resting and quieting our minds in the fruition of goods convenient, and
Happiness defined.
agreeable to our nature, in which state I propose to show, that Devotion does
establish the mind of man; in order whereunto I may well prefix this Axiom of
Saint Augustine, Lord thou have made the heart of man for thy self, and
therefore it is always restless until it requiesce in thee.

Nothing has so perplexed the wit of man, as to determine the supreme
felicity of this life. The Philosophers have been so divided about it, as they
seem to have passed their lives in a continual war upon one another, in the
very treaty of this general peace they sought to establish: it seems
Almighty God, in revenge of the partitions and fractions they made of his
unity, broke their opinions into so many pieces, as they could never joy^ne in
one uniforme conclusion, but as Saint Paul says of them, They grew vain in
their imaginations, and in the darkness of their hearts, every Sect had a Romans
1. 21.
several Phantasme of happiness appearing to it.

Surely God, who saw with what presumption they were building up the design of
their security in this life, by the model of their own natural Reason, sent
this confusion of opinions, like that of the tongues amongst them, to ruin
that structure of humane felicity, the wisdom of the world was raising for her
refuge and shelter, against the storms of Heaven. And so these bricklayers of
humane happiness, (which they may be properlytermed, in respect they wrought
only upon the matter of the earth, tempered by humane wisdom, and with that
stuff, thought to build up their forts of felicity) were struck from Heaven
into this confusion of language, and dispersed into several Sects, in which,
every one spoke a different tongue, and never concurred in an intelligence to
constitute one unanimous position touching the supreme felicity.

This point of man's constant happiness, seems to be in Moral Philosophy,
the great secret, in search whereof most of the speculative Sages have employed
their studyes, and have advanced no further then the natural Philosophers have
done toward finding the famous Elixir; for the Moralists have made many
useful discoveries by the way; whereby they have composed diverse excellent
medicines for the infirmities of the mind, but never any of them, though they
have much boasted it, did attain unto that consummate virtue, which could
settle the mind in a perfect tranquillity and invariable temper. This virtuous
power in morality, as it answers adequately to those properties the Chymicks
attribute to their great work; so is there this Analogy between them, that
they both seem much more feisable by their speculative rules, then they are
found by practical experiment.

The swelling science of the Ancients, which had never heard of the fall of
Humane Nature, grew too well conceited of her sufficiency, thinking the
perversity and wrynesse of the superior part of the mind, to grow only by an
ill habit of stooping and bending toward the lower portion, which is the
sensitive appetite; thus the Stoiks concluded, that single reason might by the
reflex of discourse, see this indecent posture, whereunto custom inclined her;
and so, by degree rectify and erect her powers to such a point of
straightness, as neither the delights nor the distresses of the lower and
sensitive part of nature, should ever bow or decline the evennesse and
rectitude of the mind; and by this means they arrogated no less to man's
sufficiency, then even the power of remaining in a calm apathy and
impassivenesse, in all offensive emergencies. But alas, the wisdom of the
world knew nothing of that inward bruise our nature had in her fall, which
keeps her too infirm, to be reduced to that perfect activity, whereunto pure
speculation might design her; we understand that repugnant law in our members,
by which, all their imagined tenures of security were voyded, when they came to
their trial; but they understood so little this law, as what we know to be the
defect of frail title, namely, our nature, they took for the security of their
estate of peace.

Me thinks the Ancient Philosophers with all their wisdom and precaution were
served by their own nature, as children use to do one another, at a certain
schoole-play, when he that hides, strikes him he holds blinded, who being
thought out of play is never guessed at; and thus did our corrupted Nature
while she her self held them blinded, strike them, and she was never suspected
of the blow; but the accidents of fortune were only taken for the strikers,
with which singly, those Sages thought their minds were exercising themselves;
for they never misdoubted this infidelity in Humane Nature, they thought her
entirely sound and selfesufficient, to afford this consummate tranquillity of
spirit in all seasons; and thus they were like children kept blinded, and
stricken by the same hand which they never suspected, charging fortune as a
foreign actor, with all those blows that provoked their passions. Upon which
ground they presumed on the sufficiency of natural Reason, even to extinguish
all passion or distemperance in their minds: but to these presumptions the
Apostle answers, While they accounted themselves wise, they became fools.

And surely, these Moral Ideas conceived by the Stolkes, may well be coupled
with the natural Ideas, supposed by the Platonikes; out of which principle,
there may be some light drawn toward the inquiry into the nature of forms
abstracted from matter, although the position be erroneous. After this sort, we
may derive much clarity, toward our discerning the latitude and power of
moral virtue, by these maxims of the Stoiks, which are not sincerely true in
their conclusions. I may therefore justly bring in this evidence of the wisest
of men, against this Sect of pure Moralists, presuming upon the Stock of
natural wisdom, You have said, you Eccle. 7. 24.
would become wise, and it departed farther from you.

The felicity of a Christian is stated upon a far different principle,
namely, in the perception of the defectivenesse of our Nature, as being maimed
by her first fall, and in the acknowledging the insufficiency of our single
Reason, to moderate and compose the disquiets of the mind, without a
supernatural adjunction of Grace; by which we are, as Saint Peter 1 Pet. 2. 9.
tells us, called out of the darkness of the Philosophers, into this
admirable light, to see the curse that is upon our earth, and to discern that
we are not, in this life, Lords of our ease, but tillers of this foul earth of
our corrupted Nature, which we can never weed so perfectly, as to gather out of
it a pure and immixed felicity; it is by a supernatural light shining in our
dark places, that we are enlightened in a right apprehension, of what degree of
happiness we may project in this life; and Grace does us this good office, by
a detecting to us the nakedness of our nature, not by a covering and
palliation of her disfigurements; and in the point of establishing our
happiness, Grace may well be said to instruct Reason as her Disciple, in the
terms of Truth himself to his Disciples, Abide in me, and I in you: For, as
the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it John 15.
abide in the vine, no more can Reason, unless it abide in Grace; and when our
Reason (which originally considered, is properly a branch of the root of Grace)
does abide therein, it brings forth much fruit of such felicity as the season
of this life can afford for our resection.

. II.
A conviction of Sensualists, declaring how Grace emancipateth us from the
bands of the Creatures.

NExt we will take into consideration the case of those who state the happiness
of this life in a plentiful fruition of all temporal accomodations; and such
are in my mind much easier confuted then the former Rationalists, we have
examined; for these, whom I term Sensualists, may be in great pain and
incertainty, to get but so much as the ground or subject of their happiness,
which are wealth and sensual pleasures; whereas the other have the foundation,
at least of their work, namely Rectifiable Reason, much more attainable by a
sincere pursuit so that notwithstanding they are abused in the degree of
sufficiency, they assign to this rational composure of mind, yet have they
always some fair proportion of contentment in this attempt; whereas the
Sectaryes of voluptie, part with their Peace beforehand, upon no security of
their projected satisfactions for commonly they are first much troubled with an
unassurance of compassing any of their desires, and then in case of success,
much perplexed in point of preserving them; and at the best, are always
disappointed of somewhat they expected, even in the possession of their
desires: Since propriety in our fickle nature, does deduct much from the
prefanfied value of such pretensions.

Such therefore as state the felicity of this life in the full and constant
satisfaction of their senses, are much easilyer confuted then the other we have
treated of; for they seem to design the imposing upon Reason, a degree of
Passivenesse, as much lower then it can fall, as the other do aspire to raise
it to a point of activity above the sphere of our vitiated nature; Since the
Sensualists me thinks pretend to reduce the Rational part of the mind, to as
much submission to the sensitive appetite; As the Moralists did design the
quite contrary subjection. For they would have Reason murmr as little against
all the appetites and fruitions of the senses, as these would have the mind
remain unaffected and inviolable by all sensible vexations; neither of which
projects are effectible in our humane constitution; for experience disabuseth
us in both these proposals, but most especially in this point of sensualities,
being able to suspend and silence reason so fully, as it shall interpose no
disquiet or dis-savour in the eases and suavityes of corporeal fruitions; for
even the highest degree of irrational pleasures, which does the most alienate
and suppress the acts of Reason, are of little continuance, and our reason
soon returns, and brings with her such reproaches as break the entirenesse
of the delight, and so leave all voluptuary happynes, at the best, but an
intermitting and discontinued piece of satisfaction. For this interposition of
the reasonable power of the soul, induces always some accusation of the
unreasonablenesse of those delights upon which we assign our selves felicity,
and our understanding sets our memory very often, even against our will, to
remember the dignity of our Intellectual nature, which we endeavor to debase
by a preference of her own natural servants, and there is no state of sensual
voluptie, so well guarded by the attendance of all earthly commodityes,
whereinto the depressed power of Reason does not often get access, and then it
wounds that tender portion of the mind, we call conscience, so far at
least, as to manifest to us the unsoundnesse of that sort of our imagined
happiness.

Nay abstracting from all religious reflections, does not natural experiment
familiarly teach us, that our sensitive nature is not to be trusted, when she
proposes the satisfaction of her appetites, for security to our happiness?
Since our carnal affections, even in their dearest engagements, break their
word so commonly, and run away, as I may say, from those appetites they were
contracted to, before they have so much excuse as having attained to their
proposed term, to justify their change of desires, and how seldom do our
passions maintain themselves in any vigor in the state of a lawful conjunction
and fruition of their most servent pursuits; Nay, does not a Legitimate
propriety, (which in reason should indear them) commonly make the right we have
to be pleased with such possessions, the only reason of our disvaluing them?
These notorious Infidelities may justly evacuate all the title Voluptie can
claim unto this life's felicity.

Must we not then resort to a Superior power, for the stability of our
happynes? such a one as may be able to fix our affections, and not leave them
in their own natural trepidations and Retrograde motions, by which we can
never keep a true account, even of our desires? So far are we from assuring
our delights, and for the fixing of our volatile Nature, there is no humane art
to be consulted, the Author of Nature reserveth to himself this great secret.

Since Nature then is so discredited, in order to this great work, we must have
recourse to the peculiar secret of Christianity, which is the grace of God
infused into our hearts by the holy Rom: 5.
Ghost; By the advice whereof, our hearts are taught, not to work upon temporal
felicity, (which may aptly be resembled to quicksilver) as Alchymists do upon
this mineral, with a design to fix it, and so convert it into earthly
treasure; but as good Physicians do, only in order to the extracting medicines
and remedies out of it; And by this Method, as they render Mercury beneficial,
by drawing from it some good quality, and fixing that upon some other body,
while that substance remains unfixed and volatile; We may likewise, without
setting our thoughts to work upon temporal goods, in hope to make our happynes
by the fixure of them, well derive great utility from them, by the infusion of
some of their virtue, making thereof remedies for the necessityes of our
neighbors: Such an extraction Daniel counseled the King to Dan. 1. 4.
draw out of his perishable felicity, and by this Method, while the matter of
worldly goods remains fluent and transitory, there may be great utility
derived even from the consideration of these qualities; For by using this
matter, according to the nature of it, by keeping it passing and transient
through our hearts, and hands, we may provide a fixed and eternal happiness:
This advice is given us by the Author both of Nature and Grace, to make out of
the unfaithful company of this worlds friendship, such loyal friends, as
shall receive us into those tabernacles, where no good is less then eternal.

This is a practical use, which Devotion will always introduce in our
temporal possessions; There is also another speculative influence, which it
has in order to the settlement of our mind, namely, the frequent meditation on
the instability of all things sublunary, which cogitations are pregnant seeds
of the contempt of this world, whereby we learn to draw the cure of the venom
out of the bowels of the beast it self, distilling out of the serious
contemplation of the mutability of all worldly happiness, a remedy against the
evil of that ficklenes and impermanency; and by this course, we raise some
succor out of the adverse party of our own frailty; For they who ponder
frequently, how all things sublunary move continually, in an interchangeable
flowing and refluencie, may easily learn, not to imbarque their minds in any
earthly delights, never so fairly secured, without expecting adverse
revolutions and repeales of those joys; and by this preparation, Devotion does
by degrees teach us to make our peace Postable upon all the tides of fortune,
understanding them to be truly the current of Divine providence.

This light we can receive only from the beams of Grace, and they shine the
clearer in our hearts, the more Devotion is kindled in them; For this
Spiritual flame, as it rises, always attracteth more of that first fire that
lighted it; and thus from our affections being inflamed by devotion, our
understandings take this light, whereby they discern the greatest security we
can contrive for our contentments in this world, to be the being so prepared
for mutations, that our wills may be so loose from anchorage upon any earthly
pleasure, as they remove easily from their hold on that delight, and put out to
the sea of Gods providence in all the storms of adversity; And considering how
Gods way is in the sea, and his paths in many waters, and that his footsteps
are not to be discerned; Our affections may easily repair their earthly
losses, by that treasure they may find in this Ocean of Gods will; the riches
whereof, we make ours by entering into his will, as often as we are driven out
of our own, by the variations of this world; and by this Pious acquiescence to
all vicissitudes of this life, we shall come to a constant good habit of mind,
as men at sea obtain an unmoved state of body; for as they do not confirm their
health, by the steddynesse of the vessel in a calm, but by the custom and
habitude of the rowlings and tossings of it in several weathers; So shall we
settle the peace of our mind, not by the calm equality of a prosperous
condition, but by the acquaintance and inurement to several adverse
revolutions; And this is undoubtedly the best Method, in point of attaining a
good constituton of happynes in this life, for King David himself found little
security in this, I have said in my Psalm. 29.
prosperity I shall never be moved; For he seems to retract this opinion all
in a breath, the next words, confessing, Thou have hid thy face from me, and I
was troubled; Wherefore his reflection upon the instability of our humane
condition, proved a more assured stay for him in his agitations, when he
concluded, Doubtless all things are vanity, every man living, surely Psalm. 38.
7.
man passes as an Image, yea and he is troubled in vain.

. III.
Resultancies from the meditation of humane frailty, and a resolving the right
of Happynes as belonging to Devotion.

THe state of humane Nature being thus determined, me thinks there may be an
excellent medicinal extraction drawn (by prudence directed by Grace) out of
the nature of temporal felicity, in order to the fortifying our minds, which
may not improperly be termed the Spirit or salt of humane frailty, since it
may work upon the mind, as Physicians say, those kind of Diaphoretical
medicines do upon the body, the which although they do not produce any violent
sweat, yet they cleanse by opening the pores, and keeping the body in a
continued transpiration and breathing out of the Malignity; After this manner
may our minds be purged and rectified by this meditation of our frailty, which
notwithstanding it forces not out any notorious expressions of the contempt of
this world, in a sensible alteration of our course of life, yet it may maintain
the mind in a constant temper of purifying, by a soft evacuating much of the
uncleanness of her sensitive appetite, through an insensible perspiration of
mortifying thoughts; and the proper time to minister this receipt, is in the
health of our fortune, while we are in an easy fruition of the joys and
solaces of this life; for then the persuasion of their insecurity holds us
loose from that dangerous adherence which carries away our peace along with
their removals; but this prescript loses much of the efficacy, when it is
taken; but after our minds are decayed and infeebled by the sadness and
weight of affliction, because in that ease they commonly want that vigor of
reason, which should cooperate with this remedy, and in that respect, what
might have been a sufficient stay to our minds, while they stood straight and
upright, may not be able to redress and erect them, when they are fallen and
dejected; I will therefore leave this prescription thus signed by the Holy
Spirit; Say not, I possess many things, Ecclus. 11. 24
and what evil can come to me hereafter? but in the good days remember the
evil, for the malice of one hour makes oblivion of great voluptuousness: and
therefore in another place the same hand gives this advice, From the morning
to the evening Ecclus. 18. 26
the time changes, All things are soon done before the Lord, A wise man will
fear in every thing.

But lest me should conceive happynes to be inconsistent with this injunction
of continual fear, we must understand, that there are two fears respecting
this world, which may stand in morality, answering most of the properties of
the same in Divinity, viz: a filial and a servile fear, the first whereof
fears but as a child of humanity, by the knowledge of the frail Nature of all
temporalities; the other, as a slave to mundanities, being mastered and
subjected by Sensuality; So that the filial fear rises from an ordinate love,
and right apprehension of the condition of the Creatures, and the servile
springs from a misprision of their Nature, and an undue subjection unto them;
wherefore this first filial fear, is but virtuous and precautionall, and so
compatible with a happy constitution, for it perplexeth our present fruitions,
no more then the general notion of our mortality offends our present health:
the knowledge that we must die, does not make us sick; no more does the
understanding, that our temporary delights are to pass away, disrelish their
present savor.

Let this prenotion then of intervenient changes in all our most secured
conditions, of stated as requisite, for the settlement of tranquillity in our
minds, since at all times, temporal felicity is either going away from us, or
we from it; for whatsoever the best of our times bring us in their revolutions,
they carry us away from them at the same time, by the motion of our Mortality;
in proof whereof the Spirit of Truth tells us, we are but a breath of air
passing on and not returning. Psalm. 78. 39.


Thus have I, after the method of Saint Paul with the Athenians, indeavored to
confute the two Sects of the Stoics and Epicureans, and I conceive to have
voyded both their titles to happiness; the first, claiming it in the right of
our single Natural Reason, the other, challenging it in the name of our
satisfied senses; to neither of which, I hope in God to have showed, that
felicity can rightly be adjudged, by reason the speculations of the Stoics are
but like well painted scenes, which at a convenient distance seem to expose
real fruits, waters, and shades; but when you come into them, you find
nothing but paintings and barren colors. Much after this manner, while you
look upon the pure Theory of their maxims, they seem to contain peace,
serenity, and satisfaction of spirit, i^ all the earthquakes of this world; yet
this fair show lasts but while our conditions are at a convenient distance
from a necessity of acting those principles, for when we are pressed under the
ineumbe^t miseries of this life, to practice this I deal self-sufficiency, we
are then brought as it were into the scenes of those maxims, for then we find
all those figurings of apathy and impassivenesse, to prove but colored and
fruitless conceptions, in respect of those Sovereign effects were promised
the mind, at the distance of speculation.

And I presume to have cast the other Sect by these two evidences brought
against it, viz. the unfaithfulness of all material goods, in point of
duration and fixure, and the fickleness, even of our own affections, in the
esteem of such fruitions; wherefore the former of these two Sects stands
convinced of stating happiness, in what can never be obtained, and the other,
in what can never long be preserved; whereupon they may both justly receive
their sentences, the first from the Apostle, pricking thus their swelling
knowledge, If any man 1 Cor. 8. 2.
think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet, as he ought to know:
and the case of the other stands thus judged by the Prophet, you shall conceive
heat, and bring forth stubble, your Esaias. 33. 11.
spirit as fire shall devour you.

May I not then say, that felicity is in the worlds opinion, as the unknown
God was in the Religion of the Athenians? for though it have an Altar assigned
unto it, yet neither the true nature of happiness is rightly apprehended, nor
the addresses to it duly determined, and the terms of Saint Paul on that
occasion, will very ^igh fit my purpose, What therefore you Acts 17.
ignorantly pursue, that I declare unto you, and manifest how the true felicity
of this life, dwells not in temples made with hands; that is to say, it is
not seated in the speculative edifices of Philosophy, nor in the material
structures of sensible fruitions, but resideth in this spiritual mansion of
fervent and rectified Devotion, which produces a right understanding of the
value of all things transitory, and induces a confidence of enjoying eternal
peace of mind, and inva^ible felicity of body.

I have already set up before you an entire figure of Devotion, by which you
may draw the just proportions of that virtuous bit, which calmeth all humane
passions, in that degree our nature can be serened and quieted in this life;
instructing us, how Gods universal order admits not our being happy in all
our temporal desires; and therefore Devotion fixes all our desires upon Gods
order, and so makes the accomplishment of his designs, the chief term of
our wishes: and by this course, as God changes his exterion sentence
sometimes, but never his i(...) council; so godly and devout souls may ^ary
in the apparencies of their present happiness, but never alter in the
in^rinsique state of a blessed condition. For as much as in all extrinsique
changes, Devotion has this rest of the Ps^lmist, when upon the vexations of
the senses, the soul (...)s to be reduced to My soul refused to be comforted,
there follows presently, I was mindful of God, and was delighted Psalm. 76.
4.
in this mindfulnesse of God. Devotion sixeth all our security, and by fastening
our minds to what is immovable, they themselves are rendered as it were
unalterable.

Upon what we have discoursed, I may conclude my proposition firmly
established, and resolve by the Authority of the wisest of men, The heart that
knows the bitterness of his Prove. 14.
soul, in his joy shall not the stranger be mingled. That is, an advised man
man admits an exterior foundation of his happiness* And for an unquestionable
security of my promise, I will leave you this engagement of the Psalmist,
Delight in the Lord, and Psalm. 36.
he will give thee the petitions of thy heart.

The seventh Treatise. How true Devotion induces those notions wherein
consists the happiness of this life.In three Sections.
. I.
The fallicies of Opinion, and the Virtue of Truth treated.

ME thinks I hear many, very impatient to see some more sensible object of
temporal happiness, exposed by Devotion, for our nature is not easily drawn
to look off from the delights it sees, as I may say, face to face, and turn
to those that are seen but darkly as through a glass, which are the joys of
the other life, speculated only 1 Cor. 13.
through the perspective of faith; I will not therefore propose to those
vocations which are the address of my persuasions, the putting their nature
into any severe straights or pressures, in hope only of remote reversions. I
will assign present conveniences for the entertainment of our nature, and
over-pay by good security of sincere secular joy, what may seem taken away in
that adulterate species, wherein our fancies use to accept the receites of our
contentment: For surely Devotion does assign the mind a rectified joy, in the
use of temporal goods, instead of that vicious and counterfeit, which our
three enemies (pretending to be our stewards) bring into our fancy that is
prone, to take all, whatsoever has but the image of sensible pleasure, without
examining the substance; which facility to be deceived, the Prophet reproacheth
in us, saying, We sell our selves for nothing. Esaias 52.


Should a traveller passing through a foreign country, finding the coin of
the place raised to an excessive value, exchange into it all the good species
of his own, thinking to make gain by this traffic, because the coin is
current in his passage; as soon as he were passed that dominion, he would
quickly repent his inconsiderate mistake; This seems to be the familiar case
of man, who while he is in his transition and passage through this world,
finds the temporalities thereof, (which are the current species of the place)
cried up to such an overvalue, as he is persuaded to turn all his affections
into that species of joy, and at its issue out of this foreign region, he
finds the irreparable loss he has made by the debatement of his talents in
this exchange: And it is against this delusion, not against all commerce with
secular joy in our journey, that Devotion issues to us her inhibitions, lest
by this ill husbandry in their way, when they come to account with their great
Creditor, they be reduced to give a worse answer then he, who brought back his
talent unimproved: I shall therefore exhibit to our minds (which must needs
negotiate in their passage through this world) the true Intrinsique value of
those joys, uttered in the commerce with the creatures, that taking none but
such as are allowed in their last audict, their traffic may bring home into
their native country not their Bonds forfeited, but rather Bills of exchange
payable upon their Masters joy.

In answer then of the desire of having the truest happiness of this life,
specially determined; I declare that the felicity of Felicity described.
this life consists in a constant rejoicing in truth: This is the assertion
of Saint Augustine, and is easily verified to all rational dispositions; The
first reply the world is like to make to this proposition, is Pilates question,
What is truth? to which John 18. 38.
I answer,

Truth is a perfect and edequate similitude or likeness, imprinted Truth
defined.
in our understanding of the nature of the thing we conceive; So that when our
conception is just equal to the being and property of the thing we conceive,
we are said to understand truth. Wherefore the truth of knowing, is as it were
the mould cast off from the truth of being, or the print of that seal, and so
the image of the true being of a thing, is the figure of truth seated in our
minds.

But this, which may seem a fair impression of the nature of truth, may
perchance appear but a dark Character of the form of happiness to my auditory,
unto whom indeed I do not intend to assign only the speculative notions of
verities for the subject of their satisfactions; but I will open farther this
store of joy, (the rejoicing in truth) and show how it contains the Prophets
wine and milk, which he offers to all for Esaias 55.
fetching it; From hence the contemplative life draws that wine, whereof King
David says, My chalice inebriating how Psalm. 22. 1 Pet. 2.
goodly is it; and the active sucketh that milk, which the Apostle says is
proper for their vocation, which nourishes their minds with more sensible
delectation issuing from the true use and ordinate love of the creature; And
this is that, I may not unpleasantly call the milk which these Gentiles love
best, to whom I present my breast.

The preference of the contemplative life, before the active, is inferred from
this respect, of affording a more clear and serene light, for the perception of
Supernatural verityes; For contemplation is a fixure of the mind on the aspect
and Contemplation defined.
presents of truth: and although this act of contemplating be purely
Intellectual, yet the term and end thereof rests in the affections, as the
possession of our pursuits induces joy; whereby this is demonstrated, that the
happiness of the contemplative life consists in the rejoicing in truth; This
sensible delight in contemplation flowing from the Superior portion of the mind
down upon the Inferior, is a good Image of man's consummate Beatitude in Heaven;
where the glory of the body is derived from the excess and redundancy of the
joy and blessedness flowing from the soul; and in this order, the delight
imparted to our affections by contemplation, falls from a superfluence of truth
in our understanding. And thus, what may be said to be light in the Superior
region of the Soul, seems fire in the lower; The first reporting to truth,
and the latter to joy; which as it is a passion in our nature, may be said to
be more material then the other in the same degree, as flame is less pure
then the radiancy of the Sun; but the comparative degrees of purity, between
the acts of our Intellect and our affections are not our Theme. Certain it is,
that all the sensible delectation of the contemplative life, streameth from the
springs of Supernatural verities; we will therefore stay no longer on the top
of Mount Sinai, which may seem all cloud to those that are below, while the
Moseses that are upon it, find all splendour and clarity, and may not unfitly be
said to see the hinder parts of that verity, in seeing the face whereof,
consists the consummate rejoicing.

Coming then down into the Camp of the active life, it will be no hard task to
prove the happiness of that state likewise, seated in the rejoicing in truth,
which has so grateful a savor even to our sensitive appetite, as I may say,
none wish for quails, but they desire to taste this Manna in them; I mean no
body affects any sensible fruition, but as it is under the form of a true
good: For as Saint Augustine reasons, let any be asked, whether he had rather
joy in truth or in falsity, and the answer will bear no doubt; For although
there be many would deceive others in their happiness, there are none would be
deceived themselves in it, there is such a signature of the light of the
countenance of verity, stamped upon the reason of man, as his understanding can
propose nothing to his affections as matter of joy, but under the color at
least of truth; So that the object of all our affections is true delight,
though the error be never so great in the subject of our joy: For no body can
rejoice under this notion of being deceived, the instinct of man is such, in
order to truth, as he must present that object to his Imagination, even out of
the error it self he rejoices in, so Essential is truth, for the term of
his acquiescence.

Supposing we do thus generally aim at truth for our felicity, I may well be
asked, how it comes to pass, that the subject of our joys is oftener
appearance and falsity, then the real good of this life's benedictions? the
cause surely is, the partiality of our imagination toward our sensitive
appetite, rather then in favor to our reason; and thus Opinion, which is but a
changeling introduced by Sense, passes commonly for the right child; and
certainly, Opinion may well be said to be the mean issue of sense, and Verity,
the noble child of Reason; but by this unjustice of our imagination, it
follows, that all the delights which are touched but at our senses, are
commonly accepted by our will for the true species of joy, from the credit of
that test, without examining their nature in the fire of Ratiocination; whereby
it happens, that when we are the trulyest deceived, we are most believing in
the truth of our happiness; for when we misapprehend the most the nature of
secular pleasures, having the least suspicion or scruple of the mutability of
such fruitions, our joy seems the most sincere, which proves clearly, that
truth is but mistaken in the coloring, not unintended in the design of our
felicity.

In redress of this error, Devotion takes off the deceitful colors of good
and evil, which Opinion lays upon the creature, and presents to our
understanding a natural image both of the worth as well as the vanity which
may be found in the rectified or vicious apprehension of all temporalities, and
possessing us with the true nature of all our possessions, directs us how to
rejoice in the truth of such blessings, and thereby satisfyeth that instinct of
the mind with the reality, and does not amuse it with the mere color of verity.

Certain it is, that temporal blessings, as health, beauty, wealth, and
honor, are endued with a true and sincere goodness, wherein their owners may
virtuously rejoice: the point is, the discernment of this Truth, and the
selecting that, only for subject of our delectation: because just as much as we
stray from this principle, so much we remove from our happiness; which
depending on the satisfaction of our opinion, if that be unsound, in
apprehending the nature of such goods as are the objects of our affections; we
are in danger of being unhappy, by their being but true to their own nature,
while we are untrue to ours: For their true instinct is mutation and
instability; and ours, the perception and use of that verity: whereby our
understanding may sort an affection proportioned to the nature of secular
benedictions.

. II.
Sacred examples, showing what may be said to be a rejoicing in the truth of
temporal goods, and how even secular evils afford joy, by the same method of a
right understanding them.

THe states of many the dearest friends of God, testify that temporal
felicity affords a sincere matter of joy, which is commensurate to the true
sense conceived of the nature of such happiness. Abraham's wealth was thought
worthy the holy Ghosts mentioning as a blessing, and as his peregrination was
fitted with great accommodations; so that state of unsettlednesse was a fixing
in his mind, the true nature of all he possessed. In proof whereof, it may
well be observed, that the only purchase Abraham made upon Genesis 23.
earth with his riches, was a grave; from whence we may infer, how rightly he
understood the truth of their transitory nature, and his own mutable
condition; whereupon he chose to take possession of the Land, promised him by a
mark of his parting with it, rather then of his possessing it: thus did he,
understanding the true goodness of his worldly commodities, derive from them,
both exercises of charity, and notions of mortification, while he employed his
wealth, in the accommodations of strangers and passengers, and in provision of
his own lodging, as a traveller at the end of his journey: and remaining in
this rectified sense of his tempoporall fruitions, all their effects proved a
constant rejoicing in Truth.

By this method Abraham extracted the same Spirit of Truth, out of his
plentiful substance that Lazarus did out of his penury and indigence; and
surely, if Dives had rejoiced but in the truth of his abundance, and not set
his heart upon the false part thereof, he would have taken Lazarus into his
breast in this life, and then they might have been bed-fellowes in Abraham's
Bosom. For I may truly affirm, that there is no Lazarus in this world, who
has not an Abraham in his Bosom, that shall get to the being in Abraham's
Bosom in the next: And likewise conclude, that there is no Dives in this life,
who has a Lazarus in his bosom, that shall not attain to Abraham's Bosom in
the other world: For there is no necessitous body, wanting fidelity of heart,
and poverty of spirit, that can be qualified for that state merely by his
misery; and there is no so splendid or opulent person, endued with true
Christian poverty of spirit, that is not thereby entitled to eternal felicity:
and surely, as there are many Lazarusses, who want this kind of Abraham I have
explained in their heart; so there are diverse Abraham's in this life, as I may
term them, who carry this sort of Lazarus in their bosom, being both rich,
humble, and faithful, contriving all their temporary joy, out of the
perception and dilection of the true blessing; intended in the Creature, and
deduce their satisfaction from Gods order, not their own exaltation, in which
respect they may be proved to rejoice in verity.

Did not holy Job rejoice in the truth of his worldly goods, when he assigned
the most of them to sacrifices, either expiatory for his children, or
propitiatory for himself, to purge the excesses of feasting in his own
family, or to provide against the exigences of fasting in the houses of his
neighbors? acting this part which the holy Spirit gives the potent; saying,
the portion of the poor is in the rich man's hands; and surely we may conceive
that in the latter part of his life, (which I may call his temporal
resurrection, his estate rising again to more glory then it had expired with)
his piety was also exalted in proportion to a higher state of perfection; so
that truth being found and acknowledged in any splendid condition, will keep
Peace and righteousness in the family kissing Psalm. 84.
each other.

Was not King David's vast treasure well managed by the superintendency of
truth, when he assigned all the most precious materials the earth affords to
their true use? some as it were converted into vocal instruments of Gods
praises; others into visible memorialls of his presence, and designed in a
Temple as good a sensible figure as he could of the truth he conceived of all
material substances, which was, of the earths belonging to God, and all the
plenitude thereof, which confession he made in these words, thine are the
heavens, and the earth is thine: In this verity he rejoiced, extracted out of
all his transitory felicity.

And King Ezekias, having his treasury and cabinets filled with all precious
stores, might have rejoiced in the truth of those blessings, without deriving
from them vanity and presumption, as much as he boasted of them to the
Babylonians; so much untruth he found in that felicity, whereof he seemed to
have forgot the changeable property, and was quickly instructed by the Prophet,
in the insecurity of such goods, whereby Esaias 39.
he discerned how he had rejoiced in the untruth of his temporal happiness; out
of which, he might have extracted matter of a true and sincere rejoicing; for
Gods Spirit attesteth to us, that he does not cast away the mighty, whereas he
himself is mighty. Job 36. 5.


All the attainders, lying upon great and rich men in the Scripture, are
brought against such as rejoice in the errors and deceits of temporal goods,
such as either sacrifice all their wealth to the Idols of their fancy, or such
as make an Idol of their wealth, and offer up all their thoughts unto it: The
voluptuous, or the avaritious are those that fall under the sentence of the
Gospel, and their crime is not what they possess, but what possesses them,
when they do not rejoice in the truth of their goods, but delight themselves
in contriving errors and fallacies out of them; and as the Apostle says,
Change the Truth of God into a lie: So that the defectivenesse Romans 1. 25.
of their happiness, arises out of their degression from Truth; and whence
does all the blessedness which Christian faith annexeth to sufferance, issue,
but from this spring of verity, which streameth out that joy and exultation is
proposed to us, in the afflictions of this life?

How come the thorns of sufferance to bear grapes, the wine whereof rejoices
the heart, while our senses are prickedct wounded with this spinous or thorny
matter? Surely this cordial is made of the Spirit of Truth, which may be
extracted out of all the asperities of this life; first, by considering the
true state of Humane Nature, designed to sufferings, not only by sentence, but
by Grace, in order to the aversing us from the love of this world: next by
contemplating the truth of those glorious promises, which are made to a
virtuous correspondency with Gods Order, in his disposure of his creature; so
that both the material goods and evils of this life, afford no legitimate
joy, but what the mind bears when she is teeming with Truth; we may therefore
resolve with King David, that when Truth does spring out of the earth,
righteousness Psalm. 85. 11.
shall look down from Heaven.

. III.
The fallacies of some Objections solved, and rejoicing in Truth concluded for
our real Happiness.

BUt now me thinks, having determined the happiness of this life, in the
loving and rejoicing in Truth; many that think themselves unhappy, wonder at
this conclusion, and conceive me disproved by their defeatures, persuading
themselves to have been always suitors and lovers of Truth; when the Truth
is, that they do not first seek verity for the object of their love, but
conclude they have found it, in what they have placed their love: Supposing
their opinions of such joys as they pursue, to be sincere and solid truths;
insomuch as I may well resolve such sons of men, that They love vanity, and
seek after lies. Psalm. 4.


In that region of the world which I have traveled the most, I may reflect to
the inhabitaints of it, one reigning error, which may convince many of
insincerity in their addresses to Truth, for the ground of their happiness:
this it is, the trusting the infidelity of fortune to others for our own
felicity, designing our stock, out of the spoils of our fellows; and in this
course, do we not fix the hopes of our happiness, upon what can never pass
to us, but by such an infidelity as must assure us we are in continual danger
of a like dispossession? this must needs be our case, when the expectance of
the unfaithfulness of fortune, is made the assignment of our prosperity: And
yet we see how Courts are commonly divided into these two parties, of some,
that are Sacrificing to their own nets, and Habac. 1. 16.
others that are fishing for such nets; the first, is the state of such as are
valuing themselves, for what they have taken; the second, of those, who are
working and casting out, how to catch what the others have drawn: and in this
manner, there are many who pretend to be lovers of Truth, that make these
fallacies, the very ground of that web of happiness they have in hand.

This is so preposterous a course, for ingenious spirits in order to true
felicity, as surely there is much of a curse in this method, and God warranteth
my belief, both by the Prophets and Apostles; when speaking by the voice of
Esaias to this case, he says, They have chosen their own ways, wherefore I
Esaias 66. 4.
also will choose their delusions, and by Saint Paul, the holy Spirit says,
Because they received not the love of Truth, for this cause God sends them
strong delusions, that they should believe a 2 These. 2. 11.
lie.

Let the worlds darlings examine what they confide in for the security of their
joys, and they will find, it is the Father of lies, they trust for the truth
of their felicity, who being not able to diminsh the increated verity, sets all
his art to deface all created Truths, which work (in this region of the world
I now treat of) he designeth by such a course as he used with the Person of
Truth it self, when he was upon earth; for he carries up our imagination to
the highest point of esteem he can raise it, of earthly possessions, from
whence he exposes to our fancies, the glories and beauties of this world, in
deceitful apparencies, as if they were permanent and secured fruitions, and
our wills are commonly persuaded to bow down and reverence such false
suggestions; whereof the infidelity augmenteth by the degrees of our Devotion
in that belief; since the more we confide in their stability, the more
falsehood do we admit for our happiness; and thus are we abused in the
possession of Truth, while we affect all our delights under that notion, by the
subtilty of the great enemy of Truth; we are as Saint Augustine says
elegantly, brought to hate Truth, by loving those things which we love, only as
we imagine them to be true, for the impermanency of this worlds goods is odious
to us; which is the truth of their nature, and we affect in them their
assurance, as a truth without which we would not love them, and yet that
opinion is a mere delusion.

This may satisfy many, who account themselves unhappy by the mutations of
fortune, and the dispossessions of their secular commodities, for they shall
find themselves unfortunate, but in the same measure they misapprehended the
true nature of such fruitions, by as much as they over-loved them, so much are
they distressed by their losses, so the defect will still result out of the
distance of our joy from this principle, of rightly possessing and rejoicing in
Truth, for all our real unhappiness rises by the same degrees, that Verities
are diminished from among the Children of men. Psalm. 11. 1.


There is one familiar scruple raised against our persuading the active life to
this constant intendment of Truth; which is, that this fixure of the mind upon
verity, rather then leaving it a little loose to opinion, takes off the point
and edge of our spirit, in the activenesse and commerces of this life.
Whereunto I answer, that spirits where and sharpened upon the errors of
imagination, are subject to turn their edge upon the least encounter of
disappointment; when minds tempered by the consideration of truth, and thereby
set and whetted for action, keep their edge cutting against the hair, as I may
say, not blunted or rebated in any adverse occurrencies; nor does this breast
of Verity, as some suppose, nourish only the mind, and pine the senses, but
feeds them also with healthful and convenie(...) pleasure, and teaches the
soul how to keep the senses in their true degree of servants, managing their
trusts only upon account, which the mind takes so exactly of them, in all the
commerce of their delights, as they can never run out much in prejudice of
her estate; and in this order the rational part does the office of the good
steward in the Gospel, Feeding the family with their portions Luke 12. 42.
in due season. And surely, this orderly economy in the managing of all
worldly goods, (Reason presiding, and the senses entertained with competent
satisfaction) is the best state of happiness this active life can admit. So is
it the knowledge and love of Truth, seated in our understanding, and our
affections which can only consort this harmony of a constant rejoicing.

And doubtless, while our fancies do but counterfeit that truth they expose
to our affections, we can no more justly complain of the insufficiency of that
object, in point of affordingus felicity, then of a painted fires not warming
us, be it neverso well drawn. For commonly, they are but designs of our
imaginations colored over with vain apparencies of Truth, which they exhibit
to our affections, for the true substances of our happiness: wherefore I may,
me thinks, fittly illustrate this familiar error of the world, by this story
of Zeuxis the famous Painter; who having made the figure of a boy, with a
cluster of grapes in his hand, being told, the birds sat upon the boys hand,
to peck at the grapes; answered, this was no true praise of his art, because it
was a sign he had painted the grapes better then the man; otherwise the birds
would have been afraid of that figure: In like manner, may I say, that these
imaginations which figure such a truth of happiness in sensible delectations,
as their affections take them for the real and sincere felicity of this life,
are not to be commended for this vivacity, for it is a sign they represent
more lively to our reason, the fruits of this world, which the man has in his
hand, then they do the nature of our humanity, the constitution whereof, if it
were truly imaged and figured to our understanding, would fright our
affections from setting themselves upon the fruit of temporalities, by
considering the state of man; which inadvertency is now familiar, by this
partiality of our fancy, in figuring the grapes more to the life then the hand
that holds them; if the images which Truth it self has drawn of the condition
of man in this life, were well impressed in our imagination, of being but a
blast, a vapor, or a shadow; this would undoubtedly divert our minds, from
taking never so well colored images of riches, honor, beauty, or dominion,
for the true substances of humant felicity.

If there be any then, that wonder they are not happy, pretending they have
always held Zerubbabels party, preferring truth before all competitors, of
empire, beauty, and pleasure, if they are in any great de^ection of spirit, let
them take this course to undeceive themselves in this their supposed rectitude
of intention, (which if it had been sincere, could not have let their minds
sink into any deep depression) let them I say, examine first, whether they
have rightly apprehended the state of our humane Nature, and the condition of
all temporal fruitions; and then, whether they have squared their loves to
such delights, by the measure of a rectified apprehension of both their nature,
and their own, for the same disproportions there are between our affections
and the true property of those things we love, the same deficiencies must be
consequent in our happiness: and upon this reflection, Truth may tell most of
the world, This people honors me with their lips, but their hearts are far
from me, and as the increated Truth John 8.
told the Pharisees, who pretended to have great interest in God the Father,
that if what they alleged had been true, They would have acknowledged him
also, because he proceeded from the Father. So in the name of the created
Truth, which is to be found in all Gods Works, I may say to many such
pretenders, if they had truly loved the Original Verity, they would have been
possessed of the true nature and use of the creature, which notion issues and
proceeds out of an application to the first Verity.

Having showed how the beams of Truth enlighten both hemispheres of the
contemplative and active life, and infuse into each of them, their respective
happiness, I may conclude with the Wisemans confession, upon his loving of
Truth, above Sap. 7. 10. 11.
health or beauty, that hers is the only light, because it is inextinguishable,
and that all other goods come together with her, and Devotion may lawfully use
the words of her great master, and assure her followers, If you continue in my
word, then are you truly my disciples, and you shall know the Truth, and the
Ioh. 8. 31. 32.
Truth shall make you free.

The eighth Treatise. Touching the means of possessing that Truth wherein the
happiness of this life is stated. In two sections.
. I.
Diffidence in point of obtaining Spiritual lights reprehended, and prayer
proposed in order to this design.

NOW me thinks I am called upon, as one that has advised a traveller not to
lose his way, to give some nearer directions for the finding it, as a further
contribution toward the securing his journeyes end, then a simple caution
against the danger of deviation; For as Solomon tells us, The lame man in the
way makes more have then a Courser out of it.

And by reason there may be many different humors, that may ask this question
of Saint Thomas, How can we know the way to this so excellent possession of
truth? I may well premise this consideration before my answer, that there was a
wide difference between Pilat's Interrogatory concerning truth, when he asked
our Savior, What is truth? and Saint Thomas John 18. 38.
his question about finding the way to it, saying, How can we know the way? The
first seemed to question only the truth of John 14. 6.
Christ's affirmation, not to intend the being satisfied in his question,
whereas the other sought to be informed of the readyest access to that truth
which he believed; so they who shall be moved only by the captiousnesse of the
Infidel examinant in this point, are like after his manner not to stay long
enough upon the inquest, to be enlightened in this verity; but to such as with
the credulity of faithful Disciples, shall make this quaere, How shall we know
the way to this truth you propose? namely, a rectifyed understanding and true
use of all Mat. 28. 6.
prosperous and adverse events in this life, I may say as the Angel did to the
faithful watchers at the Sepulcher, after he had stricken as it were dead the
miscreant wayters, Fear not you, If you seek Jesus: for he answers all
sincere inquirers of truth, John: 14. 6.
as he did Saint Thomas, I am the way and the truth, and none comes to verity
but by me: yet this me thinks gives a fair hint for such a further demand as
Saint Philips was, saying, Show us the plain direct way of coming to you, Lord
Jesus, and it will suffice us; This question Christ has also answered by this
most evident direction of Ask, seek, and knock, for every one that asks
receives, and that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be
opened. Math. 7. 7.


Prayer is therefore expressly given us for our address to Jesus who is truth,
and in these three proper divisions, of petition, meditation, and perseverance,
which ought to be concomitant with each of them; our asking respects the
particular suits we make, seeking imports the application of our minds unto
Spiritual verityes, and knocking refers to our zeal, earnestness, and
perseverance in the acts of prayer, and to this sort of prosecution, is annexed
the promise of asseqution of truth: wherefore I may answer my inquirers, as
Christ did some who distrusted his proposals, If any man will do this will of
Jesus, he shall understand of the Doctrine whether it be of John 7. 17.
God, or I speak of my self; So that considering aright these gracious
assignations unto prayer, I may say, we may obtain the possession of verity,
even with less solicitude then we can neglect it; for the seeking, asking; and
knocking, in this world upon such applications as divert us from this inquest,
are the more laborious assignments of our mind.

May I not therefore boldly reply to all the incredulous and disbelievers of
the facility of this medium exhibited; Say not in thine heart, who shall thus
ascend into heaven? for the word is nigh thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart;
we only need Romans 10. 6. 8.
but (as the Prophet advises us) return to our own hearts to find that
happiness, which while we seek elsewhere, we lose our hearts in that inquest.
True it is, that the great enemy of our nature, uses all his arts toward the
prejudicating this belief, of the alsufficiency of prayer, in which design he
does now impugn our nature, by a Machination far differing from his first,
slandering it to us now, almost as much as he did heretofore flatter it; for
now to discredit to us our capacity of repairing his first breach, he
suggesteth the ineptitude of our present state for this perception of truth,
and seems to ask us now by way of derision, Shall you be like Gods thus
knowing good and evil? so that he tempts us now, and often prevails upon
us, even by the disparagement of our nature; thus much has he gained upon us
since his first acquaintance, when he durst not attempt us by less then the
promise of a capacity above our nature, to wit, of knowing like Gods; whereas
now, he presumes to implead our right to that knowledge which is due to us as
men, that is, the discernment of our being qualified for the penetration into
truth by the beams of prayer and meditation; But the holy Spirit has left us
a good caution against this delusion, Resist the Devil and he will fly from
you, approach to God and he will approach to you: This refuteth James 4. 8.
all suggestions of diffidence in this point of attaining by prayer the effect
of my proposition, since God promises to set forward to meet us, as soon as
our prayers do but set out toward him, which is likewise aver'd by the
Psalmist, assuring us, God is near all such as call upon him in truth. Psalm.
145.


Gods mercy has so much outdone man's mischief, as he has not left him,
either the subtilty of the Devil, or the infirmity of his nature to charge with
the continuance of his misery; there must go an accession of wilfulness to our
weakness for the duration of our unhappynesse: For since the Divine power has
given unto us all things that pertain unto life and 2 Peter 3.
godliness, we have no more color left to diffide in the means of rectifying
the enormities of our infirm nature, then a Malefactor that were offered grace
for asking it, had reason to fall sick and die for fear of his former sentence;
he who has blotted out the handwriting of the Decree against our nature, has
given us his hand for such security of obtaining what we solicit by this
appointed means and method, as we can only endanger the wanting a sufficient
provision, by our pretending too little by this address, for surely this rule
will hold in our asking little Spiritual light, that what we have, shall be
rather taken away then more conferred, and the contrary disposition, will
likewise be answered with the more abundance.

What Saint Gregory conceives to be the case of the Saints in heaven, in this
point of supplicating God, may be firly said to be that of us sinners upon
earth, in our act of petitioning for Spiritual light and verity: as the Saints
the more ardently they are united to God, receive the more fervent impulses
from him, of asking what they know he is resolved to do, and thus drink out of
him, what they thirst for in him; after such a manner, the more zealously our
prayers are applied to the pursuit of Spiritual illumination, the more
fervent desires we attract from the increated verity, of begging what we are
sure he will give, viz: the discernment of truth, whereby in an admirable sort,
we draw from Jesus, even in this life, the hunger in the very food we take of
them, while our prayer attracting the infusion of truth, does extract
conjoyntly out of those verityes fresh desires of the same illuminations.

May not these considerations justly silence any objection against the facility
of this proposed medium of prayer, for obtaining from God a sufficient
communication of that truth, wherein I have stated the happiness of this life?
since there is no condition charged upon this grant, but the sincere desiring
it, which is comprised in the direction of Christ prementioned; and the Apostle
witnesses to the same tenor, re-minding us in this particular, the frequent
promises of the giver of all good things, whereupon he urges us thus expressly
to this application, If any of you want wisdom, let him ask it of God, who
gives all men liberally, and it shall be given you. James 1. 5.


. II.
What sincerity in prayer is requisite for this effect, and what kind of peace
is to be expected.

THese promises of the increated verity delivered by his own mouth being
premised, together with this conveyed to us by the holy Organ of his Secretary,
Saint James, I may confidently give every one this address to the effect of my
proposal, the asking wisdom of God, by sincere and humble apprecations, for
indeed the soul has no hand wherewith to reach her sustenance from heaven but
prayer, and by this hand she offers her sacrifice of praise, and reaches to
her self the exchange of succor for all her necessities: wherefore in order to
this commerce with God, the Apostle Saint Paul advises us to pray every where,
lifting up pure Tim. 2.
hands; Here prayer is assigned the function of the hand to offer up, and to
bring down to us all returns from heaven. But we must remember this binding
clause in the promise of Saint James, that our prayer must be without any
stammering, or hesitation in our faith.

First we ought to believe steadily Gods providence in all the various
contingencies that seem to shake humane reason: Next, our prayer must not waver
between the desire of this wisdom, which brings all other good with it, and
the affectation principally of some peculiar good we design for our felicity,
for this is an hesitation in faith, when we do positively elect any temporal
fruition for our happiness, because therein we toss and flote between the
fear of that privation, and the reference of all our proprieties, to the course
of that providence which wheels about all temporalities; Insomuch as this
hesitation Mat. 11. Justificata est sapientia a filijs suis.
makes a kind of mental stammering in our prayer, when there is as it were
some knot upon our heart, that doubles it and keeps it from opening it self
freely to this desire of spiritual wisdom. And as in this vocal impediment,
the eagerness does rather fasten then untye the tongue, so in this implication
of our heart in any worldly affection, our zeal and fervor in the pursuit of
that petition, is rather an impediment to the freedom of our mind, then any
solution to the difficulties of our peace.

But I desire it may be remembered that the means I propose of obtaining
happiness by prayer, is not the fervency of the spirit in such petitions, as
the flesh does commonly indite, namely, an attaining either riches, honor, or
the like temporal commodities; but in that sincere ardor of the soul, toward
the impetration of such a fervent love of God, as induces a composure and
steadiness of mind, equalling and sizing our wills with our conditions, and by
that means keeping the peace of our mind volubile and concentrick with the
motions of Divine providence; and this is an effect of that wisdom only which
the Apostle Saint James says, descends from above, and is assigned for all
those that ask it, without hesitation in faith, or duplicity of mind.

Not that I dissuade the negotiants of the world, their pursuit of earthly
commodities, nor the praying for adeption, and conservation of temporal
blessings, but it must not be as they have placed their happiness on the
material part of those desires, but as the greatest good of them is, their
being grants, and concessions to prayer, which when it is sincere, refers the
will of the suppliant to that of the Sovereign Creator of all wills, who does
often as Saint Augustine says, mercifully deny us, when we know not what we
ask; for there may be many events solicicited or deprecated, in relation to
Gods service by the dim light of our reason, which do not stand with the order
of Gods providence, and so our praying may be acceptable, when our prayer is
not accordable; but this suit of spiritual wisdom, (whereby to adjust our
wills to all the events and orders of Divine providence,) is not only assured
of acceptance, but of concession; on the other side there is no temporal
project of ours never so Pious, wherein we may not be mistaken in the specialty
of the way, and means whereby God has designed to be glorified, whether by
his justice upon us, or his mercy to us; wherefore this grace of conformity to
all his designations, is the only petition we can be sure has this reference
made to it by Saint John, viz: That it is made according to the will of God,
and consequently is accorded 1 E. Ioh. 5. 14.
to us by his promise, of Whatsoever we ask according to his will, he hears us.

Nevertheless, even they who are discharged of any weighty solicitude in this
world, must not expect such a fixure and steadiness of their minds, as not to
feel the motions of our fluent unsteady nature, which heaveth and sets a
little, even in our greatest calmes: This is that emotion and unevenness
whereunto Saint Paul says, even those who have the first fruits Romans 8. 23.
of the Spirit are subjected, viz: some swelling and groaning within
themselves; and Saint Augustine tells us, that exemption from combat is
properly the Angelical privilege, and not to be subdued or mastered in the
contention, is the supremest point of fixure, attainable in our mortal nature.

Wherefore they must not conclude this advice defective, who do not attain to
such an evennesse of peace by prayer, as they figure to themselves, resting
without any breath of disquiet to shake those leaves of passions, which hang
upon the stock of our nature, but must conclude, such agitations of the
sensitive part of their souls no less natural then wind in the middle region
of the air, for Saint Paul tells us what we find by familiar experience, that
we have our treasure not in earthen vessels; so that to be troubled, but not
distressed; to be vexed, 2 Cor. 4.
and not vitiated, is the best establishment of happiness, competent with this
state of our Peregrination; and this degree of tranquillity of spirit is to be
attained by petition to him, whom the sea, and the winds of humane frailtyes
obey upon his rebuking them.

Saint Paul (who had learned to be equally content in all Phil. 4.
estates of abundance, and abasement) did not find this science at the feet of
Gamaliel, but rather upon his own knees at Damascus, when, Behold he prays,
was alleged for the reason of his relief; and by using his own prescription of
Pray continually, he attained to such a strong habit of mind, as preserved his
equanimity in all the inequalities of his conditions. For when in one day, the
same hands that would have sacrificed to him as a God, did sacrifice him to
their own evil spirits; he tore his clothes with more emotion of spirit when
he was vainly to be Deifi'd, then he suffered the tearing of his flesh when he
was thus unjustly damnifi'd.

This pattern in one part affords us a fair copy of the mutability of humane
nature in her own current, and in the other a draught of that constancy may be
superinduced upon it, by this intervention of grace, which is attracted
naturally by the aspirations of prayer, according to what the Psalmist tells
us, I opened my mouth, and I drew in thy Spirit; I may therefore hope to have
acquitted my self of such direction as was requisite Psalm.
for attaining the possession of that truth wherein I had constituted
happiness, and my way is so accessible, it lies as near every one as their own
will, which is affirmed by the holy Spirit, saying, Open thy mouth and I will
fill it.

This considered, I may expect the persuading some at Court to be suitors to
God for Devotion, concurrently with all their other suites; since in all the
fortunes they can make they cannot unmake fortune: For the variable temper of
humane felicities, is not to corrected and fixed. Since they cannot then stay
what is transitory, let them attend to arrest that which is fixable, which is a
good degree of peaceable acquiescence of spirit, in all transitory events; and
as no temporalities can confer this spirit, so no contingencies can sequester
it, for it is the spirit of Truth, that stays our mind; which partly is
composed of the knowledge, and expectance of alternative variations in
temporalities; and hence it is, that in all adverse changes, this spirit is
rather in action and practice of his own constant nature, then in suffering or
passion, with the frail nature of temporal mutations.

Let me then entreat all those (who need not be pressed to muster themselves
at Saint Paul's summons of Rejoice always) to remember that this treasure is
the pay, and stipend of his discipline, of pray without ceasing, and give
thanks in every thing, for this is the will of God: Whereby we may 1 These. 5.
make all the several conveyances of Gods providence new deeds of joy to us,
when our rejoicing is seated upon his will, and thus our happiness that cannot
stand still upon the fixure of our fortunes, may be firm upon the confixure of
our wills, to that immovable one that changes all things, Without any James 1.
17
vicissitude or shadow of change in it self.

The ninth Treatise. Of the Condition of Courts, Princes, and Courtiers.
Divided into three Sect.
. I.
The best Notion of Courts proposed.

IN the Law of Moses, all the Rites and Ceremonies were not only declaratory
forms of the present Religion, but significative figures of a future state;
and howsoever, most of the vulgar looked no farther then the gloss and luster
of the exterior veil, which was the beauty and decency of the form, and order
that affected them; yet the nobler sort passed their sight through that veil,
and fixed it upon the signification, and mystery it self, and thereby, had
not only their eye of sense delighted, but that of their understanding
enlightened by these objects.

In reference whereunto I may hope not improperly to apply these considerations
to the Courts of Princes, since all the exterior state of Ceremony and
Reverence (being truly conceived) is significative as referred to the images of
God, and thus all the distinguished ranks of honor, which compose the formal
order of Courts, are figures of those different degrees of Ministers, which
attend their Original, the King of Kings: and in this order, the Glory and
Majesty which exteriorly in all sorts, resideth about the persons of Princes,
may be fitly understood to represent (in such shadows as these materialities
can make) the celestial magnificence of the King of Heaven: so that one who
will interpret religiously the Ceremonies of Princes Courts, may say, all
things befall them in Heb. 1.
figures.

But certain it is, there are many in Courts, who determine and center their
thoughts upon the fronts and outsides of these mansions, which are honor,
riches, and pleasure, and raise all their Devotions to the place upon those
objects, (and such are truly the meaner sort of Courtiers, though they be
greatest in the measure of the world) and there are some of the other party,
who penetrate into the religious sense of these exterior figures, and derive
from them, spiritual conceptions and appetities; concluding by these glories,
(which are but the shadows of those they signify that the substance it self
must needs be above what eye has seen, or ear heard, or has entered into the
heart of Man; and so by this view are quickened in their ambition, toward those
original honors; and these are the nobility of Courts, though they be never
so inferior in office.

Of these two kinds of Courtiers is verified, The first shall be Matthew. 19.
last, and the last first. And likewise of the first sort we may say, as the
Apostle says of the Law, the Letter kills. If the litterall sense of the fair
text of this worlds glories take up and fix their minds; and of the latter
sort the spirit quickens, when out of these specious objects they extract a
spiritual sense, which excites in them a celestial aspiring and emulation.

Such a figurative conception Saint Fulgentius framed out of these images, when
he was asked, whether the beauty and Majesty of Rome did not work upon his
affections? he answered, If terrestrial Rome be so beautiful, how glorious
must be celestial Jerusalem? His mind was so little taken or retarded on her
way, as she stayed not at all in the outward Court of the Gentiles, but passed
on, as in her way through it, to the Holy of Holies; and by this method, who
attend the offices of their minds upon earth, and wait not upon the places of
their bodies, concluding that they are but strangers, and passengers through
these courts, and Fellow-citizens of the Saints, and Ephe. 2. 9.
Domestikes of God; make excellent use of all the lustrous, and polished
glories of the place: for instead of looking on them as flattering glasses, and
mirrours which reflect only the material beauty of the earth, they make
opticke glasses of them, through which, they do the easilier take the height of
the celestial glories: and surely, the sight of our mind is much helped by
such material instruments, in the speculation of spiritualities, by reason
that in this her prison, all the intelligence of our mind with
immaterialities, passes as I may say, through her keepers hands, which are her
senses, that can carry nothing but corporeal images to her; and therefore we
see the Apostle Saint John draws the image of the court of heaven, in such
Revel. 21.
colors as are most visible and most affecting in the Courts of the earth;
whereby to raise our imaginations upon these steps, which they can tread upon
to some proportionate conception of such fruitions, as are truly all
spiritual, and Intellectual.

And under this notion, all the lusters and splendors of Courts, (being
understood as figures of the sublimer, and purer state of the Kingdom of
heaven) are convenient ascents for our weak apprehensions to rise up to the
love and estimation of these spiritual objects; for the same affections which
move us so strongly in the valuation of the state of Princes, may work upon us
toward the pursuit of that condition, which is proposed to us, of sitting on
the throne with the King of kings, and enjoying more Majesty and pleasure then
we can wish in this life, by such little paterns presented to our appetites.
Nay by this order, even the vanities and excesses of this world (which were
stumbling blocks to our minds as long as they looked but upon them, and not
through them) are by this perspection and through light laid under our feet,
and made steps or gradations for our minds to ascend the easilyer even to the
contempt of them, and the contemplating the sincere and secure glories of our
Spiritual Coronation.

And since, as the Apostle says, We see now but through a 1 Cor. 13.
glass, and darkly through the brightest creatures, some faint beams or
glances of the Creator; Surely the Majesty and splendour of Princes is the most
clear and best polished glass we can look through, in order to the
speculation; and so Courtiours who study the Spiritual optics in these
glasses, may make instruments of protracting their sight, of the same glaring
temporalities, which others make the dazzling and dissipation of it; whereby of
such students at Court, I may say with the wisest of Kings, In vain the net is
spread in the sight of such birds, for they can easily fly over all the snares
of vanity, Prove. 1. 17.
which catch those who want these wings of contemplation.

. II.
The vitiousnesse of Heathen souls censured, and the consequence of the example
of Princes, urged as a charge upon the virtue of their lives.

CHristianity has repealed this Canon against Courtiers made by the Poets (the
Divines of the Heathen) Exeat aula qui vult esse pius, that one must either
quit the Court or his conscience; this caution might be pertinent in the courts
of such Princes, as were rather the images of those they made their gods, then
of the God that made them; f(...) as the Psalmist says, The gods of the
Gentiles are Devils, and their Princes were the gods of those Courtiers; every
flatterer was a statuary, who cast his Prince into a god, of that gold he had
either received, or expected from him; and thus most of them set up their own
fortunes in their thoughts, which they adored under the image of their Prince;
and by this course the Kings of the Gentiles, seemed animated idols of gold and
silver, whose breath passed for divine air, as it melted those metals, and
made them run, and flow about their flatterers* in such Courts likely all the
offices, and complacencies of the Courtiers, were immolations and sacrifices to
idols; true it is, that there must have been too much danger to live in such
Courts, where the very air was pestilentiall.

This was in the Monarchy of Lucifer over the world, when most Princes lived
like his vice-Kings; but since this Tyrant has been deposed by our King of
kings, who took Luke 3.
not all the Kingdoms of the earth of him upon the terms that usurper offered
him, but dispossessed him of them by his own right, and invested his Deputies
in the Crowns of the earth; by which act Christian Princes are now lnaugurated
Vice g(...)nts to the King of righteousness; and as they reign by his
Commission, so the offices and duties of their servants are copies of their
Alleg^ance to the Supreme Sovereign of them both, who faith truly, By me Kings
reign; and when they are images of both his properties, viz: of his
righteousness, as well as of his reg^^^ty, the offices o^ Courtiers may be
esteemed nearer Sacred functions, then seducing temptations.

Princes then are so much engaged to Personal Piety, as they seem depositaries,
not only of the Politic, but even of the Moral virtue of their state; as
they have the first trust given them by the Ordinance of God, so have they the
last reference made to them, by the inordinatenesse of man: For our nature
traffiqueth with virtue commonly, as she ^ees it makes returns in the world;
and so Courtiers, when they find this Royal exchange (of the Princes
disposition) open and promising honorable returns of their commerce with
virtue, are easily persuaded to employ their stock upon this adventure, and are
as easily discouraged by Balaa(...)s return from the King, I thought ^o have
raised thee to preferment, but Numb. 24.
the Lord has kept thee back from honor: Such wrecks of expectations will
easily fright many adventurers.

In this respect Princes had need to be very considerate, what Moral Laws they
pass for their Court by their lives, since Courtiers are likely very religious
in such observances. All factions at Court likely agree in this voice of We
have no King but Caesar; Christ is not immediately looked upon as our
p(...)tern; we are much readier to copy those his images, because we are soon
paid for our work: Wherefore Princes are bound to be very accurate in
preserving the similitude of the Original, in the figure of their lives; they
had need as the Apostle advises, bear the image of the Celestial man, since 1
Corin. 15.
the terrestrial man is so apt to bear their image; ^est they incur then our
Saviors Woe to those who did not only not come themselves into the Kingdom
of heaven, but kept also others out of it. Let them for Gods sake be followers
of Christ, since whether they be or no, men will be followers of them.

There is me thinks such a difference between any noted vitiousnesse in
Princes, and a much greater depravation in private persons, as is between the
Malign influence of the Planets, or the Celestial bodies, and the poison of
plants and minerals; for although the ill of the first be not simply so great,
viz: intensively so mortal in the operation, yet considering this circumstance
of the extensive quality of it, that the malignity has a general influence,
and offends imperceptibly, and so is less evitable, in these regards it may be
counted the greater nocency in nature: So the lives of Princes have such an
universal influence upon their Court, (at least) as a small infection thus
spread by them, may be esteemed a greater ill, then the rank poisonous lives of
such whose examples are not operative; and this rule holds in all Courtiers
descending in proportion to their several degrees, since all of them according
to their respective magnitudes, have like the lesser stars, some power of
insinuating their tempers to their dependencies; since our interested nature
does commonly, as the Prophet says, do some worship to all the militia of this
firmament, respectively to that fertility of the earth, they are likely to
impart to us; for as among the Gentiles there were lesser gods for several
special necessities, household as well as temple gods: so in Courts, there are
superior powers of many sises, that have votaries proportionate to such powers.

Considering then the communicative felicity which Princes have of their
dispositions, ought they not to be most chary and tender of this highest
Prerogative? which is, to impose virtue by their practice of it, and this
Spiritual levy made upon the minds of the people, facilitates the raising
upon them all other tributes.

Therefore Princes should be as religious in their lives, as they are
politickly just in their coins; they must take heed of crying up any base
species to an overvalue, since their stamp and impression makes all their
moral coin so current in their Court, by reason the images of their humor,
are as it were privy seals for the receipt of those images wherewith their
followers are most affected: and because it is no crime to counterfeit this
kind of the Princes signature, but rather a warrant for their pretensions,
likely the whole Court is a stamp of the Kings humor and affection.

This influence of Princes, upon the dispositions of their Courts, needs not
the deposition of examples, since it has the Authority of a known principle;
therefore I shall only offer one precedent in the case, in which the example
and extravagancy is so singular, as the very foulness of the Testimony must
make the proof the fairer, and the more irrefragable. There was a Grecian
Emperor, called Constantinus, surnamed Copronimus, which Surname he gave
himself before he could He fouled the font in which he was baptized.
speak, when he was first brought into the Church, by fouling it as much as
his nature could then extend unto; and afterward, his life was a truer
performance of that unclean promise he made himself, then of those bonds of
Christianity, and purity he entered into by his sureties: for this first was
the least uncleanness wherewith he polluted the Church in the rest of his
life. This Emperor (who seemed to have a soul merely vegetative, by the
inclinations of it, (for it grew, and thrived only upon dung) had such a fancy
to the smell of horse-dung, as he besmeared himself with it; and all his Court
in complacency to that fancy, qualified themselves for his company with the
same per^umes, and so offered him continually this odor, which was fi^incense
for such a deity: and this natural immundicity was but a figure of that
spiritual impurity of him and his Court, for in this Princes humor, this was
the least brutish of all his other bestialities, so that his Court was rather a
park of the locusts, and scorpions of the Revelation, then a Congregation of
reasonable creatures. This is an Of all sorts of Her^sies.
unhappy trophee of the power of example in Princes, erected, to evidence that
conclusion.

The sacred History is so pregnant in these examples, how the prevarication of
the Prince, has always been the perversion of the people, as I shall not
need to instance any: therefore I may properly apply to Princes, this advise,
which was given by a holy Father of the Church to Priests, Since they speak as
Oracles, let them live as Deities, for the lying spirit is often more credited
in their mouths, then in those of the Prophets. And this same prescript is
likewise very requisue for all persons near in office, trust, or familiarity
with Princes, since there is a natural influence from such conversations, even
upward upon their superiors, according to what some Physicians hold, in point
of a circulation of the blood, to wit, that which is in the feet, to have a
reflux back into the heart. This motion may be truly affirmed in the course of
the spiritual blood, in the civil body of society, for the affections and
habits of the inferior parts of the company, flow often upward upon the
superior, as well as they run downward by their influence on the lower
stations; wherefore this moral circulation of virtue and vice in humanity,
makes the infection of any parts of the company familiar with Princes, very
dangerous for their contagion, we see this in Roboams young Counselors, who
were not only the mediate instruments of rendering the Kingdom, but also in
some relation, were the erectors of Jeroboams calves.

. III.
The importance of their Company, for the education of Princes, and a rule
proposed for Counselors, and companious to both ruling, and young Princes.

UPon this information, let the Familiars and Counselors of Princes
understand, they have a very precise charge of integrity upon them in their
moral conversation, as well as in their politic comportments; for indeed,
their vocations in many respects are rather sacred functions, then simply civil
conditions, in regard they are employed in the ministeries of the most special
images of God on earth; in which respect, the scandal of their lives is not
only profaneness, but a kind of s^c^iledge, as it endangers the violating of
the most sacred part of a Princes Character, which is the divinenesse of his
life and Government.

The life of King Joas is an unhappy precedent in this case, who while he had
Joh(...)a in his eye, was himself a singular pattern of piety to the people,
and eminent for the reparation of the Temple; but after the change of such a
companion, when the Princes of Juda came, and adored the King; he being 2
Paralip. 24* 17.
moved by their insinuations, concurred with them quickly in leaving the Temple
he had so much merit in, and followed them into the groves, to secke out, and
set up new Idols. This was the sad effect of infectious familiars, therefore
such as are near in office, or privacy to the persons of young Princes, have a
most strict: obligation to be virtuous, and exemplary in their lives and
conversations, for humane Nature, like Jacobs sheep, in the a^dor and ^eat of
youth; is very apt to conceive, with some tincture of the colors it sees in
those waters whereof it drinks in that season; and the conversations of our
familiars, are the waters where with our imaginative faculty is nourished, and
so Princes had need to have them kept very clear and serene; for according to
the colors they look upon in them, their conceptions likely prove, whereby
the issues of their minds become sported, and staind according to such images
as are represented to their imaginations in the pregnancy of their youth.

In this regard, they (who have choice of those, to whom they will commit such
trusts, as the company and familiarity of young Princes) should no^ be
lesse^^act, then when their Pictures are to be taken; for which always, such
who are the best reputed, are preferred: for indeed, their familiars do this
intellectual office to their minds, though this spiritual work is done by
acuite contrary manner, to that of the images of their persons; for the
familiar companions of Princes may be said to work upon the image of their
minds, by sitting to them, that is, by exposing their own figure to the young
fancy, they draw the other to that resemblance; such is the active virtue of
example upon the tender age of education.

Surely those then who are trusted with this office, of being a familiar object
to young Princes, (which is a nobler place then they can conceive by any name
it has at Court) should set their dispositions in a virtuous posture, knowing
they are working upon Gods most special image, and that they are to be
accountable for what dis-figurements in that form their works shall occasion:
So that taking Courtiers under this notion, one may advice them a good use of
flattery; which is, to flatter the figure of their own humors, and
inclinations, to make them as good, and gracious an object as they can, though
they be not so like their nature; to the end the exterior representation, which
works upon Princes, may be proper for imitation; this favoring their minds,
in the coloring of virtue, is more conscientious then the exposing the
natural ill complexion of them, before young Princes; for when the exemplary
part, (which only works upon their minds) is fair, and virtuous; the
un-sincerenesse of it for the present, can have no ill operation on them,
because those eyes do not penetrate farther then the superficies of goodness;
and so peradventure the very flatterd pictures of virtue may work such an
impression upon Princes in their youth, as they may derive the love of truth,
even from the face of dissimulation. For as a beautiful Curtizan may be a fit
object for a Painter, whereby to make a good image of a Saint by, seeing he
takes only the lovely species for his pattern; so, even the fair gloss of a
counterfeit virtue, may be a convenient object for youth, which commonly only
copies the aspect, and countenance of such exposures.

Upon all these considerations methinks this may be a religious rule for both
sorts of great Courtiers: viz. That Counselors should advise Kings, as if they
thought them invested with the Prerogative of their original, to wit, of the
knowledge of hearts, and companions should live with young Princes, as if they
thought they could not discover their hearts, but by their lives before them.
This rule will produce sincerity in the former, and exemplarity in the latter,
which are the two things whereby Kings who are in age of Government, and
Princes who are in years of Discipline, are the most advantaged; and so may be
said to be these, the mediate conveyances, by which God gives judgment to the
King, and righteousness to the Kings Psalm. 1. 71.
son.

To conclude, let Princes and Courtiers of all degrees consider themselves as
ministers of the King in the Gospel, who is gone into a far country, and as
being all to account by the several proportions of their talents, wherewith
they are trusted. For they who are set over many cities, here, are by the good
account of their Governments, to be preferred to the command of many greater in
their Masters Kingdom: so Luke 19.
that this is the most proper Motto they can set upon all their coats, which
are blazoned with so many shining, and glorious colors of the fruitions of the
world, To whom most is given, of them most shall be required.

The tenth Treatise.How a good Conscience, and a good Courtier are consortable.
In seven sections.
. I.
The temptations of Courts acknowledged great, but not insuperable.

TO this Map which I have presented the Court of her own state, it will be
expedient to add some lines, by which, as by a kind of scale of miles,
Courtiers may take their measures, and learn the distances between their
dominion, and the state of perfect Christianity, and by that means have some
direction in their way, to the next adjacent Kingdom, of which I have showed
their region, to be a very pregnant type, for I have said you are Gods, makes
their habitations a most special figure of Heaven.

Whereupon I conceive this advise in the first place, to be very pertinent,
toward the seasoning our mind with a grave and reverend tincture of the
nature of Courts, to consider them as a figure of the celestial mansions, in
those respects I have exhibited, because this first stamp being impressed on our
minds, may give us a sober and modest image of our conditions in Courts, which
may persuade us, that we are not placed there by God, as officers to our
fortunes, which terminate in this world, but rather as Ministers, in that order
upon earth; by which God does figure out to us the constitution of the state of
his own Majesty: whereby we may resolve that our places are but passages up to
that preferment of Saint Paul, whereunto we may aspire, The sitting in heavenly
places together Ephesians. 2. 6.
in Christ Jesus.

This animadversion then is very important for all Courtiers to esteem
themselves, called to a laborious vocation, and not resting in a licenced
vacancy from labor: for though they do not eat their bread in the sweat of
their brows, they do it in the sweat of their brain, and so the digestion is
more difficult, then in the other case: and upon this ground, we see likely
that the body of this society, is more unhealthy then any other, because the
fullness of bread choakes that heat, which should concoct it; and their
spiritual bread which should alter and convert the other into good
nourishment, is made of that grain in the parable, which grows among so many
of those thorns, as do at the best, make the gathering of it, sharp and
uneasy; for The solicitude of this Matthew. 13.
world, and the falacy of riches, do prick and draw some blood, of all such as
reap thisbread amongst them: By reason there are always some diversions and
distractions in a Courtiers life, which catch and hold their affections in some
manner to temporalities; insomuch, as there is ever some pain and smart in our
passing through those briars.

But many of those Weeds which Courts are over-runne with, are slight
levities, and vanities, that have but such stings as nettles in them, which
when they are held and handled roughly, sting less, then when they are
fingered tenderly: for there are diverse fond affectations, which I need not
instance, whereof, taking resolutely in hand the reformation, we find less
pain in discharging them, then we did apprehend, while we were but as it were
chiding them, to fright them, rather then to put them away. I may hope to be
believed in this, having good warrant to say with the Wiseman, I have seen many
things wandering Ecclus. 34. 13
to and fro, and very many fashions of words, and sometimes I have been in
danger of death for these things, and I was delivered by the Grace of God.

I may therefore set this bill upon the Court gates, Son, coming to the
service of these gods upon earth, stand in fear, Ecclus. 2. 1.
and prepare thy heart for tempation; for we may well use the phrase of the
Psalmist, It raines snares in this region; by reason of the fatness of this
soil, which affords more earthly vapors then other places, which the Prince of
the air draws up out of it, and from thence forms shoures of temptations; to
power down upon it, to set forward his fruits; namely, the lust of the eye,
and the pride of life, which thrive most kindly in this rich earth; this
renders the situation dangerous, but not certainly infectious, for as the
Wiseman tells us, The Creatures of God are become snares, but to the feet of
the unwise; Sap. 14.
wherefore he directs us how to escape this capture, by entering into other
bonds of pre-ingagement to wisdom, Putting our Ecclus. 6. 25.
feet into her fetters, and our neck into her chain; These fetters are of too
solid a substance to be catched, and entangled in the slight brittle snares of
Courts, the chains of wisdom are made linkes of Gold, which cannot hang in
cobwebs.

The levities and nugacities of the world, to those who look on them, only with
the pur-blind eye of sense, may prove clouds, and even so thick ones, as their
sight cannot transpierce them, that is, look beyond such vanities, when those
that see clearly with the eye of reason, discern such slight traverses to be
but like cobwebs, that do not eclipse to them the light of Heaven: it is not
the matter of temptations in Courts, which works like celestial bodies upon
terrestrial, by a predominant impression, but it is the disposition of the
patients, which rendereth the matter so malignant; for all the vanities of
Courts in a confession of their own impotency, to force our affections, do
soothe and flatter our senses first, and corrupt them, toward the possession
of our minds.

Whereupon, as Moses said to the children of Israel, I may say to those who are
called into this land of milk and honey, If thou shall say in thine heart,
these inhabitants of the place are Drut. 7. 17.
more then I, and how can I prevail against them? thou shall not be afraid of
them, but remember what the Lord can do, how many has he carried with a mighty
hand through all these confederations of snares in Courts; sundry examples of
such holy victories attest to us, this word of the Apostle, The Lord 2 Pet. 2.
9.
knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations.

It is related in the life of Saint Anthony the holy Hermit, how in a vision
he saw the world all hung over with nets, and the very air over-spead with
them, so that in great commiseration of their estates, who lived in it, he
asked God how it was possible to escape in our passage, and make way up to
Heaven? and he was answered, there was no way left, which was, to creep under
them, for they were not so fastened below to the earth, but they yielded and
gave way to that posture of humility. And since our Head Christ Jesus did
vouchsafe to be figured to us, under the notion of a worm, and no man, this
lowly posture of creeping through this world, could not mis-become his members.

Therefore to such as have their minds laid even and levelled by this line of
humility, I may say (while they are creeping under these snares) with the
Prophet, Fear not thou worm Jacob, Esaias 41. 14.
I will help thee says the Lord, thou shall thresh the mountains, and make
the hills as cha^fe, thou shall fan them, and the wind shall carry them away;
all the mountains of greatness; and power, and the hiles of plenty and
pleasure shall appear to the eyes of an humble soul, broken and crumbled into
that dust which they consist of, and their resolutions shall be able to blow
them off from their affections, like chafe, assisted by the wind of the holy
Spirit, which blows always so strongly in such souls; as the levities of
this world that fly about them, cannot cleave and hang upon them. And we must
settle this principle, that humility is not seated in local depression and
obscurity, but in mental purity and illumination; and so conclude the
scitation of Courts is not in that torrid zone of pride, which some imagine to
be uninhabitable for humility.

. II.
Real humility recommended, discerned from Court-ship, and proved consonant to
the state of Courtiers.

THis admitted, the best prescription can be given a Courtier against all his
infirmities, is pious and discreet humility; and this is so far from being
alleged by themselves, incompetent with their vocation, as almost every one
pretends the being furnished with it, as a requisite qualification, though
indeed most commonly, it is so hollow, as even the best noise it makes, speaks
the emptiness of it, as being but a tinkling cymball of ceremony and
complement. There is a slight glittering stuff, which commonly Courts are hung
with, which passes there for humility, and is truly but the tinsell of
civility and courtship, through which, one may often see the walls to consist
of pride and self-love: Wherefore they, who desire the real benefit of this
virtue, must discern between this superficial coloring, and the true being
of humility, and endeavor an acquiring the habit thereof in their mind, not
study the fashion of it only in their exterior commerce.

Me thinks one may properly argue with Courtiers, as S. Paul did with the
Hebrews, by representing to them, how all Ep. Heb.
the external Ceremonies wherein they were so Religious, were types and
figures of that reality which he proposed to them, and so their customs and
observances might well dispose them, sooner then the undisciplined heathen, to
acknowledge that body, whose shadow was so famillar to them: In like manner,
may not I say to Courtiers, that all the civilities, Ceremonies, and mutual
submissions, whereof they are so studious, are figures of that substantial
humility which I recommend to them; from whence I may argue that their
habitual practices in these exterior representations of that virtue, should
advance their minds, more then other less civilized conversations, toward
the acquiring of that real humbleness of spirit, I recommend to their
intentions.

Those of whom it is commonly said as Saint Paul said of the Pharisees, that
they are of the best sect of their Religion, viz. they who are accounted the
most accomplished in all urbanity and Courtship, and are the most exquisite in
all civil polishments, in the purifications of their apparel and tables, and
all other sorts of humane neatness and curiosity, they I say, must remember
not to rest so much on these traditions of men, as to forget the graver and
weightier parts of the Law of Christianity, which is purity of heart, and
poverty of spirit, two of our King Christ Jesus his qualifications, for the
Matthew. 5.
Courtiers of heaven required in the order of his beatitudes instituted in the
Gospel.

As for the other exterior polishments and decencies, which are pertinent to
their condition, I may say with our Savior in the like case, these things may
be done, but the other not omitted, for civility and sincerity, proprety and
purity, honor and humility, may be fellow Courtiers, and all of one party. So
that I may say to these of the best sort, Therefore o men Romans 2.
you are inexcusable, for you condemn your selves, by these exterior
professions of those virtues, if you have not the interior signature and
impression of them, in so much, as the immundicities of Tire and Sidon shall be
more tolerable, viz. the ruder forms of life where humility and purity is not
so much represented to them, shall not be so much charged with their defects in
them, as this Capernaum where these virtues seem preached every day, and
wonders done in this Doctrine of ceremonial purity, which is a figure of a
real immaculatenesse of mind.

But I must speak yet plainer, and declare that this humility I propose to
Courtiers for their commerce with one another, is far different from that
current species of a verbal imagery of this virtue which I have decryed, for
it is an internal habit, Humility described.
or disposition of humblenes impressed upon our spirits by the signature and
character of truth, made by a lively exhibiting to our minds the intrinsique
value of all specious temporalities, by which perception we are disposed to
dis-value really this world, and our selves in the first place; as knowing best
our interior unworthiness: and this sincere root of Humility, bears our
several engagements, proportionated respectively: First to the greatness of
God, then to the meannesse of our selves, and next, to our nearness, and
relation to our Brother. And as these three divisions contain the total sum
of Christianity, so is there no better Accountant to make up a just estimate of
these divisions, then Humility; whereof they who are solidly possessed, shall
not be confounded in the diverse fractions, and partitions of estimates either
of things, or persons, which their condition requires them to make, in the true
account of this world; for they can easily by this Rule of Three, wherein
Humility is perfect, divide all their respects to each of those duties, and so
give God, Themselves, and their Brother respectively, their just estimations.

Nor can it be answered that this degree of exactnes seems opposed, by the
offices of this Vocation; for this cleare-sighted Humility is so far from
being incompetent with the condition of Courtiers, as if many circumstances be
fairly weighed, their profession may appear more advantaged then any, toward
this endowment; since likely they are the sharpest, and most discerning
Spirits, which apply themselves to this active course of life; and surely this
dis-abusing the object, is the most fairly, and most familiarly exposed in
Courts; viz. The fickleness and infidelity of all temporal advantages; since
what the world calls Fortune, goes in other places more modestly attired, and
so may easily be mistaken; whereas in Courts, presuming on her beauty, like a
professed Curtizan she unveiles her self, confident of corrupting even those
to whom she proclaims her disloyalty, by continual shows and triumphs of
inconstancy. Many private and settled states of Life, do take this knowledge of
the instability of humane goods, but by hearsay, living themselves in a calm
dead water, where they feel little motion of variety; but Courtiers who are in
this Ocean of Fortune, feel continually her tides, and very frequently her
storms; insomuch as they living in a perpetual fluctuation of temporalities,
may be said to walk Per speciem, in the sight of the true nature of all
mundanities, and to see the variety of Fortune face to face, while low obscurer
lives, look upon her perfidiousnesse but through a glass, and darkely in
reports of the various turbulencies and confusions of Courts.

The heights of Courts may in this regard be said to be the best scituations
for prospect, and far sight upon the truth of the worlds constitution, and so
courtiers to be better placed then lower estates, in order to their being
undeceived, in the specious fallacies of the world, by as much as experience is
more operative upon our nature then speculation.

And methinks we may account it a special provision of God, that where our
affections are in most danger to be seduced, by the alluring invitation of
temporalities, that there our reason should be most powerfully dissuaded from
such adherencies, by the clearest evidences of the infidelity of such
confidences; for here Fortune bears her own name in her forehead, which is
visible together with her smiles, and the continual objects of rise and ruin,
the frequent vicissitudes of braving and bleeding conditions; show Fortune in
Courts (even but to indifferent good eyes) not as the Sirens of the Poets, the
beauty and graciousnesse of her only above water, but expose her, just like to
the Locusts of the Revelation; for although on Apoca. 9. 7.
her head there seems to be crowns of gold, and her hair like the hair of
Women, yet her teeth appear as the teeth of Lions, and her sting like that of
Scorpions; so that the deterrings and disabuses appear together with the
delectations.

I may therefore conclude, that Courtiers by their living in this demonstration
of the truth and nature of all mundanities, are advantaged above others,
toward the acquisition of Humility, which is, a natural resultancy, from a
true apprehending the meannesse, and vility of all things so unfaithful and
transitory: For as all Pride rises from the belief of some propriety which we
rely on, so the persuasion of the insecurity of our possessions, must needs
abate our esteem of them, and consequently dispose us to a modest and humble
account of our selves, and our conditions.

I will therefore confidently commend Humility to Courtiers for their guide,
through all the snares of their way, in the terms of Solomon; She shall lead
you by the paths of equity, which when you are in your steps shall not be
straightened, and when you Pro. 4. 11.
run you shall not stumble; for you shall neither faint in the restines of your
Fortune, nor fall in the full speed of it; Humility does not decline the course
of Honor, and Dignity, but only casts reins upon our sensitive appetite, and
holds that from running away with our Reason, in the course. Nay, Magnificence
and Humility are consortable in the same heart, wherein the habit of this
virtue may consist with acts of the other, since this disposition dislodgeth no
virtue, and secureth all: For the posture of prostration in which Humility
conducts our minds, may be said to carry as it were a Trench before them,
casting up the earth it self for their defense, against all the fiery engines
of the Prince of this World, in regard the Penetration and inspection which
sincere Humility makes into the bowels of our own earthinesse and mortality,
casts up our misery, and despicablenes before us, as a brest-worke of our own
earth, to defend our hearts against vainglory or presumption, by which any
Fortune never so eminent can endanger us.

For indeed, they who have this Parapet, as I may say, before their minds, of
Dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall return, may be said to be fortified in
the nakedness and discovery of themselves: Such is the ingeniousnes of Humility,
as it can raise defenses for us, out of our wants and destitutions; nay it may
be said to draw in them a Line of communication, between heaven and earth,
joining the knowledge of our own nullity, and the apprehension of the immensity
of God, which view may keep us always little in our own eyes, though we have
never so many false reflexes from the eyes of others.

. III.
The vitiousnesse of Flattery displayed, with an allowance of decent civilities
in exchanges of Courtship.

HAving proposed to Courtiers, for their chief security, solid Humility,
discerned from superficial civility, I must desire them to be very sincere in
the examination of this virtue; for humanity and courtesy external, do often
so well counterfeit the stamp of it, as it had need be touched at some occasion
of suffering, to find the falsity of the metal: and for the greater safety of
this virtue, it were to be desired, we could banish and eliminate out of the
verge, one of the best Waiters at Court, though of the worst servants in it,
namely, Flattery, which is always an enemy to Humility, though it seem often
near allied unto it, by submissive appearances: For we know, the first
progenitor of Pride, was also the primary father of Lies, from which all
Flattery descends in a collateral Line. Hence it is, that there is always
some of the blood of Pride, in all adulation, though it go clothed in never so
servile an habit of submission.

And that we may see how naturally Flattery issues out of Pride, we may
consider into what a base and inferior posture Lucifer contrived himself,
when he cast the first seeds of Flattery into our earth; did he not lie
prostrate at those feet he was undermining; while he was flattering them with
their capacity of treading on him, and becoming like Gods? And this seeming
subjection, was it not designed by the sublimest part of his Pride, which meant
to captivate and subject the minds he wrought upon in this posture?

In like manner, all the servile forms of complacency, and deference to
others, which Flattery casts it self into, in the magnifying their worth and
excellency, has this serpentine insinuation in it; to wit, the hoping to
infuse the easilyer the Flatterers sense into them; which project in the
complyers must needs rise from a belief of their own minds, being so superior
to those they are applied to work upon, as they can impose upon them the
belief of all their suggestions, and so subdue their spirits; which thought is
the very soul of Pride, to conclude our minds to have such a transcendency
over others; for no body flatters another, but in belief of being credited: So
that all Flattery being anatomized will be found to live by the heart of Pride,
which is indeed the first living part of Sicophantry, in what body soever of
humble verisimilitudes it seems to move. And upon this ground we may say, that
a mean Parasite is a prouder thing, then the most magnifyed Prince he
humoureth; in as much as the presumption on the excellence of mind, as it is
more spiritual, is nearer the original of Pride.

And as it was excellently said of a wise King, That witchcraft King James.
is the height of Idolatry, because though it exhibits no exterior offices of
Worship, but rather disclaimes them; yet is it the highest mental veneration
of the seducing spirit, and so the truest idolatry: In like manner it may be
said, that Flattery is the supremacy of Pride, because though there be no
external profession of self-love in it, but rather of an alienation from it,
yet it is a continual exercise of the supreamest arrogance, which is the
Flatterers valuation of his own abilities.

Whereupon it seems that a Philosopher being asked what was the most noxious
beast to humane nature? answered, of wild beasts a Tyrant, and of tame ones a
Parasite; and we may add, that the tame ones seem the worst of the two, for
the wild ones take the greatest part of their ferocity, by coupling with them;
since this commixion is the generation of all tyranny, wild power enjoying
servile praise: Humane nature could not fall in love with the exorbitancy of
wickedness, if she saw it naked, and beheld the bare deformity of that object;
therefore to make this conjunction, there must intercede the art of flattery,
to color the baseness and inhumanity of outrageous mischief, with some fair
varnish of decency; as either with the right of greatness, or the liberties of
nature, or many other such shadows, by which Sycophants keep Tyrants minds
the fiercer, by holding them in this darkness, chained up by the magnifying and
applause of their appetencies: so that this may be truly said, in the terms
of the Psalmist, to be the pestilence that walks Psalm. 90. 6.
in the dark, which the light of truth would easily assuage, somewhat, even in
the greatest rage of corrupted nature.

We may therefore fitly say, that Flattery is the oil of the Flattery
described.
sinner, wherewith Tyrants are anointed by these Ministers of their passions;
and we know King David says this should not be the unction falling on the head
of Princes: For this reason we cannot too strongly brand the forehead of these
Court Charlatans, since there is so much known art, to take out the marks of
the character of a Parasite, and to continue still in the practice of this
mystery of iniquity.

I confess therefore it is hardly to be hoped, that this sentence of expulsion
of Flattery out of Courts, can be strictly executed; for when it is pressed and
straightened by these reproaches, then like the Poets Proteus, it varyes shapes,
and appears presently covered with another form, either in that of duty to
superiors, or civility to equals, or due commendation of merit, and will never
answer to this indictment of Flattery: And indeed these forms, which she
shifts herself easily into, are the legitimate issues of morality, by which
all the fit alliances are made in civil society; the two first bearing order
and distinction beween Persons, and the last producing fertility in virtue.

Wherefore we cannot impeach this commerce of customary civility and
complements, for there is a discipline belonging to the practical part of
morality, which is referred to the discretion of the Ministers of it, (which
Courtiers may be most properly termed) and the rites and ceremonies of mutual
civilities, are ornaments requisite to raise respect, and sorme order in all
the exercises of morality; therefore as it is not possible to set and regulate
in such sort those voluntary descants of complement, as to put them into such
measured notes, as they must precisely run in, to keep them from straying
into Flattery, I will only set Courtiers this lesson of the Apostle, which may
keep some time and measure in the consort of their vocal civilities, You are
called unto liberty, only use not this liberty Gal. 5. 13.
for an occasion to the flesh, but by love to serve one another; and by this
order, those finer threads of Court civilities, may make as strong a band of
charity, as rough and grosser materials.

. IIII.
The use of sober praises, treated, and reciprocal civilities regulated.

I Do not in this sharp insectation of sordid Flattery, mean to asperse the
good name of praises and commendations, for I must allow them to be convenient
breasts, to nurse young and tender dispositions to virtue; and the good
inclinations of Princes and great persons, may like their other issues be
allowed more tender and dainty breeding then ordinary, and yet be nourished
with sincere and healthful aliments; for applause and estimation of all their
young virtuous actions, and proffers, may be so tempered, as they may conduce
to the thriving and growth of their minds, without any swelling or elation.

Methinks praise may in some cases be fitly applied to our minds, as Coral is
to the mouths of children, when they are breeding teeth, which is given them
to nibble and champ upon, to ease and satisfy that little itch they have in
their gums, in that season, and to supple them so much as to bring their teeth
out with the more ease: In this order praise may be aptly given to young tender
inclinations to virtue, for there is in our minds, in that state, a spiritual
itch which is eased and refreshed, while they are champing, and sucking upon
applause, which does also soften and open our imagination, and so lessen the
pain of our perverse and froward nature, when the hardness and sharpenes of
virtuous practices, which are spiritual teeth, do first break the flesh,
which is always done with some smart, when the tenderness of our senses is
pierced and broken through, first, by the sharpnes of the spirit of virtue; and
by degrees, when our minds have thus put out these kinds of teeth more
commodiously by these cherishing contributions, which help at first our weak
nature, they advance to such a state of strength, as to be able to feed on the
solid meat of virtue, which is the discharge of our duty to God and man,
irrespectively to humane praise, and by these steps we come to be weaned from
the emulsions of sensible applause, which is the first milk our imaginations
are fostered with, and gives them a sweet relish of virtue.

Since then we find by experience how praise and estimation conduce much to the
sweetning of the asperity of virtue in young tastes, I do not discredit the
ministering of sober and modest praises, to the good dispositions of great and
eminent persons, whose minds are too commonly at Court in this tender state of
growth and prosiciency; and I confess it is not practicable, to frame rules
for the discernment, between due praises, and flatteries, in all occurrences in
the worlds commerces.

Wherefore the ingenuity of every particular, must be every ones director in
this point; but the best general advice I can conceive, is, for those who are
passive in commendations, to weigh the worthiness of the hand that lays them
on, in one of the Scales, against the belief, they put into the other, of
their own deserts; and still to put in somewhat less credit of their own
praises, then the opinion of the praiser lays in the scale; and those who are
active in this subject, when they praise any they love^ and would perfume them
with the good odor of virtue, must remember to give them less of this sweet
oil, then their own opinion; and beliefs would cast upon them; which is to
say, that when we are praising our friends to their face, we should be careful
to praise them always somewhat less then we love them; for likely that
measure of our affections filled with praises, will run over, if it be poured
into that of our friends merit, and when we are upon the receipt of
commendations from kind conferrers of them, we must be advised in taking
somewhat less of them upon the account of our belief, then is offered us; for
we may give always a good allowance of discrediting, for the partiality of
friendship, which cannot be exact in the weighing of her opinions.

The Chimicks say, that he who had found the art to fix Mercury, might easily
transform it into gold; so may I say, If there were means to limit this
volatile matter of complement, and fluency of praises, within the terms of that
precise good, which is believed of one another; this might convert all current
civility, into the gold of charity, and then the breath of reciprocal praises
might mutually kindle virtue, raising but little smoke of vanity.

But this rectitude of our lips is not to be hoped in this our state of
crookedness of hearts; for our words are cast off from their moulds; and since
it was flattery that drew the mouth awry of that figure whereof we are all
copies, our mouths will always stand somewhat drawn aside from the straitnes
of truth, toward the side of flattery, especially when we find the ears of
great persons drawn awry into that posture.

Forasmuch then as we cannot pretend to rectify perfectly this shape of our
distorted nature, we must be cautious to lean as little as we can to that side
of our inclination to flattery: King David found this deflection, and
indirectnes in our minds, when he proclaimed, that verities are diminished from
the sons of men, they speak vanity every one with his neighbor, with
flattering lips, and a double heart; since through our best watches over our
lips, there will escape many excesses in the enterchanges of civilities; it is
very requisite for the safety of their hearts, that Courtiers should not let
their tongues run loose in the ordinary excursions of complements, thinking
such words weigh as little as the breath that carries them, for we know that
even all those nulls and ciphers, in our reckoning, are set upon account to us.

I will therefore close up this caution, with that terrible animadversion of the
Gospel, By thy words thou shall be justified, and Mat. 4
by thy words condemned; which words, if they would frequently put into their
mouths, they would find them a bit, which will not at all press upon their
tongues, so far as to curb them from any becoming freedom, but hold them
as it were from being cast out of their mouths, in many undecent motions of
loose libertyes, wherein the unbridled custom of the world does never curb
them.

. V.
The advantages of the vocation of a Courtier, balanced with some prejudices,
in point of piety.

THus have I with my best skill set the Courtiers Compass, by which he may
steer a good course, through the deepest of his temptations; and the Wise man
seems to qualify me for this office, saying, They who sail the Sea, report the
perils of it; so that in my judgment, there may be a convenient safety in this
course, when it is steered by sincere humility; for truly humility is like the
Mariners needle, but a little motion, yet requisite for the use of all the
Sails of moral virtues, in the course of a Christian; and I have set as good
marks as I can upon those banks, and sands of flattery and adulation, which
lie covered over with the shallownes of civility, and complement, upon which if
our affections do stick, they will batter, and by degrees open our hearts, and
so cast them away quickly upon all vanities and presumptions; and indeed, these
sands are more dangerous, then apparent and emergent rocks of riches, and
ambition, which give more warning of their dangers.

Nor do the many wrecks that are made in Courts, justly discredit the
profession of this traffic, for temporal commodities; I have already in this
express argument, voted the pursuance of all worldly honors, respectively to
several conditions, very competent with piety and devotion; though indeed it
must be remembered, that such estates in the world require much more vigilance,
and attendance, then others of a more simple constitution, as engines of
various motions may be kept in order with proportionate appliance of labors,
as well as a single wheel; for regularity is as sociable with magnitude, as
with mediocrity, if there be proportionate art and labor to concert them; and
greatness is as consortable with goodness, as simplicity of life, where there is
a commensurate applyance of the mind, to the obtaining of an answerable measure
of grace.

He who suspends the world upon the weight thereof; and measures Job 26.
the waters in his span, keeps the Sea in bounds as easily, as the smallest
Brooks in their own beds: Every condition has a size of grace suited to it; as
the Apostle says, Every one has Cor.
his proper gift; and proportionate duties are annexed to every several
condition: God is so just, that he charge the greatest possessions of
temporalities, with the greatest taxes of difficulties in spiritual payments;
but no condition is scanted in a capacity of such performances as Gods precepts
charge upon it: And so we see how all conditions have presented to us Saints,
which humane reason weighing all circumstances, cannot rank in order of
precedence in the Church: How many Kings and Courtiers does the Church
reverence, as now placed in those heavenly mansions, where she cannot discern
in what degree (as several Stars) they differ in brightness? So equal has
the luster of their lives been, with that of any other vocation, as they dazzle
us in any such distinguishment of their merits, we know how the good seed of
the Gospel took root as early in the house of Caesar, as in any part of Rome,
and Saint Paul sets an emphaticall note on those Saints, in preference before
Phil. 4. 22.
the rest. Did not S. Sebastian in the head of the Emperor Dioclisians: Guard
(which was one of the greatest elevations on earth) appear in the same
eminence of zeal among the Primitive Christians? And did not Saint Maurice in
the head of the Emperors Army, erect such a trophie for Christianity, as all
Times triumph in? for in desiance of those Spirits which called themselves a
Legiou, he flourished the Colors of Christ Jesus, dyed in the blood of a whole
Legion of Martyrs; which blessed legion of Spirits did so possess the
Christians of those times, by their, examples, that many gave supernatural
testimonies Mar. 5.
of this holy possession.

And may it not be remarked for the honor of Courts, that while Christianity
was but shed and sprinkled here and there, in the lower parts of the Roman
Empire, it was carried but in the hands of Christ's Commissioners? but when
Christ was pleased to appear at Court, he marked his lodging with his own
signet, the glorious Cross; first in the air, visible to the Emperor
Constantine, and to the whole Court, and after, the same Eusebius. vit. Constant.
night appeared himself to the Emperor, advising him how to manifest his
glory, which until then, he was content should not break out of the clouds of
contempt and persecution, that overcast it. And thus Christ made his remove
presently from the Grots and Cavernes of the fields, up to the imperial palace
of Rome, where he set up his Cross triumphant over that Crown, which til then,
went as near burying of it, as the keeping it long under ground, for the
Caverns of the fields were before that time, both the Tombs and Palaces of
the Christians.

And it may be noted, that when Christianity descended from this height of the
Court, upon the lower parts of the Empire, it spread it self faster in a few
years, then it had done in the three hundred, before it camp up to the Court,
for till then, the waters of Life were cast upward, and forced against the
risings of sense, humane power, and natural reason, by the supreme force of
Miracles, and so were spread no further, then they carried them by continual
renewed supplies of miraculous operations; but now after there broke out this
Spring of Living water, on the tops of the mountains of the Empire, it ran
down more naturally, and plentifully upon the subjacent parts, and fructifyed
the earth faster, and more universally.

In our corrupted nature, what is the common effect of material, holds also in
spiritual weight falling on our minds, for the higher reason falls from the
elevation of authority, and example, the more impression and penetration it
makes upon them: wherefore Christian Religion, when it fell from the supreamest
point of humane power, the Imperial Court made much more sensible marks upon
the world, then it had done before. And as this operative efficacy, may endeare
to Courtiers their vocations, so must it needs press so much the more upon
them the evidence of their virtues.

Thus I have showed how the Court may say, in honor of her conversion, that
Christ in diverse manners spoke to the other parts of the world by his
Messengers, but unto us he spoke himself, Heb. 4.
when he came first to Court in public, for before Constantines time was
there but as we say in incognito, but then he appeared in his own place, over
the head of Kings, and presently dislodged the Prince of darkness out of these
rooms of State, whereas before he had but displayed him in his under Offices,
while he did but deliver and free private possessions, but then in one act he
seemed to dispossess the whole Roman Empire, when he expelled him from the
Court.

. VI.
Some notorious errors remarked, and what facility the breeding of Courtiers
may bring toward an excellence in religious duties, proved by examples.

COurtiers (who may by these reflections be apt to value their vocation) must be
put in mind, that as they are more eminently then any, made spectacles to the
world, to Angels, and to men, they have in that pre-eminence a proportionate 1
Cor. 4.
charge upon them, of being more to the life the image of the celestial man;
in which figure, there is commonly at Court one remarkable incongruity, which
is, that the feet are more labored, and better finished then the head; for
moral virtues hold but an analogy with these parts in the body of
christianity, since they are but as it were carriages for theological or
divine virtue to rest, and move upon.

The error then which I reproach, is, that there are many who are very precise
in acquiring, and preserving their reputation in courage, prudence, and
fidelity, and are as remiss and indifferent in their applications to charity,
piety, and humility; which is methinks such an incongruity in christianity, as
that of the Pharisees was in the Law, when they said, Whosoever shall swear by
the Temple, it is nothing, but he that swears by the Gold of the Temple, is a
debtor, making no account of that which was truly a sacred obligation, and
making a great scruple in what was nothing so obligatory. And do not those who
are so punctual in their reputation, concerning all moral accomplishments,
and so unconcerred in the opinion of their christian performances, seem to
practice the same impertinency? For all morality is in relation to
christianity, but what the gold was to the Temple; since it is only sanctified
by being serviceable, and ministerial to Religion; wherefore they who pretend
exactnes in all civil and sociable honesties, unless it be in order to divine
duties, and obligations, may be doubted to be more Disciples of the Pharisees,
then of JESUS, more affecters of the praises of men, then advocates for the
part of virtue.

But this information against this Solecisme in the style of many Courtiers
virtues, does not discredit the vocation (though I need not fear much the
taking away the good name of it in the world,) for this discipline in morality,
and fashion of punctuality in civil duties, (if the principle thereof be
sincere in the love of Moral virtue) may work, and accomodate the mind to a
general habit of sincerity, which when it is referred to religious uses,
proves a facilitation toward fidelity and perseverance in them; as Saint Paul
his Pharisaicall strictness, and severity was a great promotion of the true
religious fervor of his Apostleship; So this natural preparation in Courtiers
in these points of courage, loyalty, and civility, raises the flame of their
devotion the higher, when those so well disposed materials are kindled by the
Prophets Seraphim, or by the Apostles fiery tongues.

The pregnancy of many Courtiers in sanctity, ingrafted upon the stock of
natural good parts, and acquired virtues, allows us to say as Saint
Augustine said of Saint Cyprian (who grew by nature in the highest part of the
world, and was singularly endued with all humane literature before his
conversion,) how well over-laid with the gold of Egypt, did Cyprian come out of
it, with which he enriched Jerusalem? And so the Church may truly acknowledge
that many Courtiers have brought out with them much of this precious metal of
humane prudence and sagacity, by which virtuous qualities and honestations they
have been more happy then others in their applications to move the minds of
men, in whose tempers they had been so well versed, this ingenious and
versatill habit of mind, (which they had acquired in the commerce of the world)
has made their spiritual practice upon the world, much more successful then
that of others, whose sepulative piety is less accommodable with the humors
of the patient; and certainly they owe much of these furtherances and
inablements to the civil Discipline and Politic literature of Courts.

I still conclude therefore in defense of the vocation of courtiers, while I
reproach to them the perversion of their advantagees in education, for since
nature is the ground on which grace is planted, the temper of the ground
conduces much to the increase, may be expected; for without doubt the civil
breeding of Moses did much contribute to all his natural excellencies, and the
being the most reverend and respected person of the Court, did not at all elate
his heart, the softness of his education was rather a good previous
disposition for the effect of the Supernatural Agent, in point of the
admirable me^knesse of his Spirit; of whose Court life the records of the Jews
deliver unto us much more then the holy Writ. Josephus reports to us how the
comeliness of his person; and gratiousnesse of his meene and behavior was
such, as all the Kingdom of Egypt was taken with admiration of them, and the
opinion of his virtue was such, as they repaired to him in a great extremity of
an invasion of the Aethiopians, for his conduct; in a pressing distress of
their Armies; and how that by his prudence and Magnanimity they overcame their
enemies; Insomuch, as Moses was honored sometime as a successor of Joseph, and
no less cried up for a redeemer of Egypt(...) and there is no doubt but he was
as sincerely virtuous while he was the adopted heir of Pharaoh, as when he
fell to be the son in law to Jethro; so that the softness of his breeding,
did not at all enervate the sanctity of his mind. Therefore we may say, that
the palaces of Egypt will bear a Moses, as well as the plains of Mad^^n.

The Prophet Esaias* was nephew to a King, and bred as is supposed in the Court,
with all the tendernesses which are affected, and allotted to the royal blood
of Princes, and his conversation was altogether in the Courts of diverse Kings,
where he shined in no less flame then Elias in the Desert. Those words were as
powerful which called back the sun upon the dial of the Court, as those
which called down fire from heaven in mount Carmel.

And as diverse Princes have changed their condition of representing Christ in
his Kingly office, for the Character of his Priestly function, relinquishing
their houses of power, to rest in His house of prayer; So many, both Kings and
courtiers of the most eminent, have in their own stations in the world shined
out, as the Apostle says, Like bright lights to the world, in the midst of a
perverse generation, and have deserved Saint Peter's testimony of Lot, of being
Righteous both in hearing and seeing, notwithstanding all the seducements
proposed 2 Pet. 2. 8.
to those senses. And certainly such objects of virtue are more impressive upon
our affections, then those which may be greater in themselves, but more
distantiall from our eye; in such a manner as we see that great branches of
lights hanging very high cast not so much light for the use of the room, as
much lesser proportions placed among the company; so those elevated sanctityes
which are in the upper part of the Church in holy sequestrations, do not
communicate to the lower part of the world, so much exemplary virtue, as those
less purified, but more familiar and more proportioned pieties in the lives of
secular persons, remarkable for sincere holiness and devotion; such lives
conversant in the world, are like a perfumers shop, which gives some good scent
to all the passengers through the street, though it may be there are not so
choice and precious odors in it, as in some places in the same street, which
impart none of their sweets abroad, because they are intercepted by the
enclosures of walls, which keep them from any access to the passengers; so
privacie and reclusenesse may contain a more sublime kind of sanctity, yet not
be in so communicative a position, as those fragrant plants which grow abroad
in the trafficable parts of the world.

. VII.
Comparisons between vocations disavowed, and advices offered, in order to a
due correspondence with the grace of a Courtiers profession.

BY what I have pleaded in this last argument, I do not pretend to prefer the
porch of Solomon before the Sanctuary, I intend to keep the due distances in my
measures between sacred and secular vocations; each of them stand in their
proper order, and constitute the grace and decency of the Temple which King
David did love so much; For as the Father has many mansions in his house, so
the Son has several offices in his, sorted to those distinctions; and the
holy Ghost marshals and ranks all those diversities of callings in such sort,
as to frame an harmonious consonancy between both Houses, of the Church
militant and triumphant, according to what the Apostle informs us, that There
are diversity of gifts, and differencies of administrations made by the same
Spirit, who divides to every one severally as he will. 1 Cor. 12.


Wherefore my purpose is not to measure or weigh the preferablenesse of
several vocations, but only to set that of Courtiers rectified and straight
in the understanding of the world, to the end that not only the consistence of
this calling with piety, may be evidenced against the popular traducement, but
that also the advantages of this vocation being rightly balanced with the
prejudices, may confute courtiers themselves in this error, of supposing they
may discharge part of their infidelity to God, upon the infelicity of their
vocation in order to Piety.

Every state of life has an assignment of grace commensurate to the
necessities of that calling; all things are disposed in number, weight, and
measure, as the Wise man informs us; Sap. 11. 12.
so that although the temptations be more in number and weight, then in more
retired and in glorious courses, yet the abilities and understandings of the
persons are commonly stronger then in vulgar stations, whereby they are better
enabled to apprehend their dangerous exposures, and accept them from the divine
order, as a Rent charge of peril, laid upon the plenty of their temporal
estates; by which discernment, they may convert even the species of their
seducements into the treasure of patience and humility, deriving from the
perilous part of their condition, conclusions against the worth of things never
so glorious, being but transitory; since by these fruitions greater and
eternal glory is so much endangered.

And by this reflection, even all those fiery darts which fly about the Court,
headed with the wild fire of the Prince of darkness, (though they have a
fabulous surname which the Poets have invented to disguise them, to wit, the
golden shafts of Cupid, quite contrary to this their due ascription,) when they
light upon this shield of faith, and expectance of eternal joy and glory, are
easily extinguished: So that a good humble courtier marching as I have directed
him in all his ways, upon the foundation of humility, and poverty of spirit,
may keep a safe course in all the highest stories of fortune, and be no more
scorched with pride or vanity, then with fireworks playing in the air; and
though the Prince of that Region entertaineth all Courts much with such flashie
shows, (that is, with the glittering vanities, and resplendencies of the
world,) yet to an humble and discerning soul, they will seem no more then
squibs breaking into sparkling shivers of fire, which shine but for a moment,
and die with the ill scent of those rags whereof they are composed.

Upon all these considerations, it seems to me to import all the success of
this course of life, the fixing in our mind this principle, that all humane
life, especially the active part is constituted in a state of continual
malitancy, in which notion courtiers should account themselves as the chief
officers of the field, and so remember that the condition of being in the head
of the world, is like that of being in the head of troops, since it coupleth
always danger equal to the degrees of honor. And upon this supposition, they
ought to be industrious in providing extraordinary armor, in which point if
they will be but as provident as they use to be for the defense of that life,
they can but defer, and not truly defend or save, they are in a state no way
disadvantaged for that Coronation, promised only upon the condition of
victory; since to the greatest vanquishers are proposed the largest Crowns.
Therefore they who are frighted like Elisha's servant, with the incompassure of
tempations, let them look upward with the Kin. 4. 6.
Psalmist to the mountains, and they shall see the fiery Legions of the holy
Spirit standing for their defense, insomuch as they may truly say, there are
more with us then against us; for Saint John gives them this assurance, He that
is in you, is greater then he who is in the world.

By these defenses I hope to silence the popular cry against Courts in exeat
aula qui vult esse Pius, as if a good Christian and a good courtier were not
stars of the same hemisphere, and so could not be seen together. For there are
some natures, as Seneca says, so shady, as to think every thing turbulent and
stormy, that is but in broad daylight; and we may sitly say of the eyes of
such minds, that they have not yet had the last touch of christianity; for like
the man in the Gospel, who before Christ his last touch, saw men but obscurely
looking like trees, these minds may be said to have a spiritual dimness upon
them that does not see clear, nor far enough into the grace of different
conditions; this touch of Paul's hand when it seems he was doing the same cure
upon the Corinthians, may elucidate further this case unto them; those who are
not Apostles, Cor. 12.
nor Prophets, have their ranks allotted, and due provisions of graces designed
to their several stations.

And likewise by these advises, I hope to rectify that so different error in
many minds, which claim the slipperinesse of their station, for a tolleration
of many foul falls, aledging the fashion of the times and place carfieth them
down the stream, pretending when the humor of the Prince or the Grandees
leans and rests it self upon them, that their going into the house of
Rimmon is much extenuated, believing that those faults which custom and
company impose upon them, are set but low upon their account: But the grace of
a Christian teaches him, not to be ensnared by this subtle imposition of
complacencies from the worlds Ministry, no more then Christ was by that nice
question concerning paying of tribute to the Court; for christian religion
discerns clearly between what is due to Caesar and to God, and so a Pious
courtier may easily give to Caesar what is Cesars, and to God what is Gods; and
that by an Anological instruction from this rule of Christ, allowing all that
has Cesars Image only on it, offerable to Caesar, that is, all civil
complacencies in things unprohibited by God, as the complying with all the
innocent fashions of the court, and reserving all that has Gods Image on it
for God; that is, making an entire reference of all actions which concern the
soul, to the regulation made by Gods precepts, and the churches explanations.
Thus a courtier may preserve himself from being at all moved or shaken in his
judgment for Christ and Religion, by not apprehending whether he be accounted
or no a friend to Caesar, to wit, whether he retain the courts opinion of being
agreeable, or complaisant, or good company.

Gods lesson given to the Prophet Ezekiel upon this occasion, is very proper in
such cases of temptation, Son of man, Ezekiel. 2.
though thou do dwell among Scorpions; be not afraid of their words, nor
dismayed at their looks, though they be a rebellious house; For those (who do
sincerely stand upon their defense, lifting up their hands in the posture of
the Psalmist, in all the volleys of Darts) shall never want that child to
incompasse them, which he promises, Thousands shall fall on both sides of
Psalm. 90.
him, but the danger shall come no nearer him, the Sun shall not burn him by
day, nor the Moon by night: the Sunshine of Fortune shall not tanne or
dis-colonr the fairenes and candor of his mind; nor the Night, or coldness of
his grace or credit, shall not damp or benumme the vigor of his spirit.

To conclude, let a Courtier at his entrance into this vocation, remember to
read the Bill I have set upon the Court gates, at the beginning of this
Argument, and before he go in let him say with Moses, in a devout apprehension
of his infirmity, If Exodus 33. 15.
thy presence go not with me, let me not go up to this place; and so, in all
his advances into the rooms of State, (in any sort of his preferment) let him
remember that whereof all the Majesty he sees, is but a figure, and by this
means he may easily keep the original presence in his sight; which object
will prove a light to his eye, and a lamp to his feet, showing him, according
to the Apostles rule, How to walk worthy of God, who has called These. 2. 12.
him into his Kingdom and glory.

The eleventh Treatise. Of medisance or detraction.In two Sections.
. I.
The true nature of the crime of Detraction, and the subtilty of it, in
disguising it self.

HAving entered you safely into the Court, and conducted you as I may say,
through the rooms of State, and showed their ordinary furniture of snares, as
Ambition, Flattery, and Dissimulation; it follows in order to pass into the
withdrawing rooms and cabinets, which are commonly furnished with the finest
and daintiest stuffs, to wit, with more subtle and refined temptations; among
which I conceive there is none more sharp and piquant, and consequently less
controverted or reproved, then Detraction, and Medisance: Wherefore it will not
be amiss to work a little, to file down as much as we can, the point of it,
by the instruments of Religion, which the Holy Spirit ministereth to us fitted
for this purpose, by the hand of Solomon, Remove from thee a froward mouth, and
let detracting lips be far from thee. Pro. 4. 24.


But lest this first severe aspect, may seem to affront any innocent Medisance
defined.
good humor, upon the Stage of conversation; it is fit to declare, that I only
understand by Medisance, all such speeches as may probably derogate from the
fame and good repute of our neighbor; which though it be done in never so
graceful or facetious a manner, has still the deformity of sin lying under
the finest coverings, any fancy can cast over it, and consequently ought not to
be admitted into good company, upon the recommendation of never so handsome
clothes.

The Chimiques say, that in all material bodies there is a salt, which is the
most spiritual and active portion of them: which suggesteth to me this
conceit, that in the immaterialities of our passions, there may be said to be
a kind of salt or spirit, which is the most subtle and sharp point of them;
and upon this score, I may say, that Medisance is the salt of envy; as
containing the most quick and piquant part of this passion; it agrees likewise
in this property with Salts and Spirits calcined, which do not sensibly
discover the matter out of which they are extracted, being reduced into
differing forms; neither does Medisance in many cases manifest at all the
quality from whence it is derived, being drawn into another appearance of jest
and ingeniosity; and surely the nature of such poisonous plants, ought to be
the most proclaimed, the taste whereof is pleasant, and the occurrence familiar
among innocent herbs, of which kind is this spirit of detraction; which I may
not unfitly compare to Mercury sublimate, that tastes like sugar; wherefore
the children of this Family ought the more cautiously be advertised of the
malignity thereof, since the matter lies so often in their way.

The Apostle Saint James, as Gods advocate, brings a heinous charge against
this libertinage, which in the world does Jam. 4. 11.
pretend to pass, at the highest, for no more then a trespass, not a sin; but
thus he informs against it; Detract not from one another; he that detracteth
from his brother, or he that judges his brother, detracteth from the Law, and
judges the Law; so that not only the credit of man, but even the honor of
God seems violated by these invasions, since even the law of God is said to
be impleaded by such aspersions; God seems to have tendered so much the good
fame of man, as he has joined his own honor with it, as a convoy against the
insults of our vicious fancyes, that we might at least respect Gods concernment
in the violation of the fame of one another; detraction is thus proved to be
one of the greatest offenders in humane society, yet the familiarity covers
so much the faultiness, as it suffers the seldomest of any criminal, by
reason of the many disguises it can interchange: insomuch as sometimes
religious justice that would not connive, knows not how to take notice of it,
meeting it so ingeniously transformed, but for the most part it is not strictly
looked after.

The case of medisance in courts, is like that of loose women in the world that
are very handsome, who do oftener gain and corrupt the officers of justice,
then they are detected and indicted by them; for abuses and derisions of one
another, pass for such a kind of Pecadill^o among the children of this age, as
they conceive it the office of a Gentleman rather to rescue and shelter it,
when it is pursued by just reprehension, then to deliver it up as a criminal;
but surely if we consider whose law the Apostle tells us is offended and
impugned by these asperities, we shall find the Method of Jael to be followed,
rather then that of Rahab, with these emissaries of the Prince of this world,
which are employed by him to bring him back the fruits of our corrupted earth,
which is very luxuriant in this mystery of iniquity; insomuch as we may say of
this unhappy facundity, that our earth needs no rain to fall upon it, that is,
no external provocation to fertilize it, there rises a mist out of it self
that waters it, to wit, our innate perversity, which causes this pregnancy
of thorns and briars, that prick and scratch one another in a reciprocal and
customary detraction, wherein we differ much from the opinion of the holy
Ghost, for we conceive we gather the best figs from these thorns, and the best
grapes from these brambles, that is, we raise the most pleasant points of our
discourse, and the most cheerful rejoycings of our hearts out of these
pungencies and stingings of one another.

Of all the disguises medisance puts on, that of mirth is the most common, and
the most cunning; for there it appears in so natural a habit, wears the
clothes of innocence and harmlesnesse so handsomely, and speaks the language
so well, as seldom any inquire whether it be a native of that state; but as
strangers are easilier discovered by their accents then by the impropernesse of
their words; So medisance retains most commonly some foreign accent, if it
be well observed, that betrayeth it to be no native of the state of innocence;
yet we are likely over-civill, in taking notice of this forreigner, and very
familiarly use detraction, as we do strangers we would oblige, when we flatter
their failings in our language by the warrant of civility, and take no notice
of what we cannot choose but perceive; This kind of court-ship is much used in
our entertainment of all ingenious and well fashioned mordancy or detraction.

In this particular more then in any other, we commonly at Court observe the
precept of doing to others, as we would be done to our selves; For we examine
one another faults in this kind, rather as accomplices then judges, so general
is the concurrence toward the maintenance of this common interest of our
fancyes entertainment: For alas, how few are there in Courts that are not
either thieves or receivers in this stealth of one another good name? for those
who have not tongues to commit the fact, have ears to entertain it, and it
may be truly said in this case, that if there were no such receivers, there
would be no such thieves, since the good reception and welcome that witty
medisance finds, does surely entertain the profession; and alas how few resolve
with the Psalmist, that Psalm. 140.
this oil of sinners shall not make fat their head, but do rather use it to
keep their faces smooth, and shining in smiles and gayetyes; little remembering
what Saint Paul says of whisperers and detracters, that not only they that do
such things, are worthy of death, but they also that have pleasure in those
that do 1. Romans 30. 32.
them.

Ought we not to be the more vigilant in the discernment and discountenancing
this licentiousness, when we consider how hardly this offense can come to be
sentenced, since the committers of it are very often the only possible Judges
of the crime? so well is it dissembled to the rest of the company; which even
when they do suspect it is rendered very partial, by being interrested in the
pleasure, and not conceiving themselves concerned in the fault; wherefore every
one must be his own sincere overseer and censor of the edition of his language
on this Theme, since he is not likely to meet any other correction; All other
licentiousness of speech does likely meet with some adverse party in the
company, and so comes not off without being shot at with some reprehension,
but pleasant and sharp medisance, as if it were in contribution with all
humors, passes commonly freely in all conversations, without so much as the
warning of an enemy.

Our own consciences must therefore be the conductors of our fancyes, when they
are licensed to go out in parties a la petite guerre, as the French calls it, to
a kind of little war in conversation; and the French have suited methinks this
kind of liberty of speech very aptly with a term, calling it fair la guerre,
as it were shirmishing of wits with one another: and I conceive that medisance
may be very properly matched in this particular, with the custom that parties
have in the courses they make upon highways, in their own quarters; for when
they take from travelers in the terms of civil asking, because the words are
not violent, they maintain the action to be lawful; whereby many times when
in effect they do rob, they perceive not their own theft; after fuch a sort
medisance or detraction while it uses the terms of raillerie, that is,
quaint and handsome jesting, although it take away what reputation it pleases,
yet the actors deceive themselves in the crime by the civil and sociable form
whereinto it is contrived.

The insinuation therefore of this mischievous quality into mirth, ought to be
watched with the more attention, since the preception of it is often very
difficult, and the prejudice always very desperate; for it works it self
into conversation, (which is the best external fruit our reason bears) like
a worm by a little orifice, but it tainteth and corrupts more then the birds,
which prey directly upon the skin of the fruit, that is, then more professed
indecencies and presumptions, which are like birds easier seen and driven away,
by an apparent gravity and sobriety set up in our behavior.

It imports us very much to preserve conversation (which seems the
intellectual air, that our souls breath in and out) as pure and wholesome as
we can, since though the infection of it, do not sensibly offend us at the
instant, yet it works upon our minds by a more subtle infusion of malignity,
whereby it corrupts by degrees the habit and disposition of our souls;
wherefore the Psalmist tells us, that with the perverse, we shall be perverted;
and how often do we find this surreptious contagion crept into our hearts,
without much sense of the introducement? of which case Solomon says, The words
of the whisperer are as it were simple, and the same come to the most inward
Pro. 26. 22.
parts of the belly; let us therefore consult a little how to obstruct the
passages of this so subtle insinuation.

. II.
Some Rules whereby to square our discourse, and an expedient offered toward
the correction of Medisance.

BY this reformation proposed, I do not intend any defacing of the fair and
pleasant frontispiece of sociable conversation, for I do not design the
breaking down of all discourse, that has the image or aspect of civil
hostility, that is, all ingenious wrestling and fencing of wits against one
another; such forms of speech may be handsomely set, as spiritual Figures and
carvings upon the structure of conversation, which may innocently grace and
imbellish the whole frame, there are many passages that have an evident
character of harmless mirth and jollity; which although they are piquant, yet
are not easily pervertible to any disparagement of our neighbor; so that our
speech may be with grace, and seasoned with salt, as Saint Paul advises us,
wherefore in any such recreative freedoms may well be admitted, with this
caution given to the utterers, that they examine not only the candor of their
own thoughts, but likewise the composition of the persons whom such liberties
may concern, as also the humors of the company where they are vented, for I
conceive, these three circumstances ought to concur, for the licensing such
exercises of our What circumstances are to be observed in jesting.
fancy; first, the ingenuous and harmless intention of them that minister the
mirth, next the probability of a right understanding by them who are the
subject of it, and lastly, the likelihood of an innocent apprehension of our
jests in the company they are addressed unto, for their pleasure and
entertainment; and I conceive one may be very good company, restraining their
wits within these three religious limitations, for while our words are tuned to
the Key of charity, Men and Angels may rejoice together in the gayety of their
aires; this was the tune which the Psalmist set for himself, and for us to
study, having left it thus noted, I will take heed to my ways that I sin not
with my tongue, I will keep my mouth with a bridle. Psalm. 39.


Considering the humor of the world, and how fashions are sooner decryed, by
the dislike of such persons, as they are designed to fancy, then by the
prohibitions or order of the state, I conceive the best proportioned expedient,
to the effect of repealing this licentious custom of pillaging one another
reputation, in these excursions of jest and raillery, is to terrify the
receivers of such spoils, which are those, that take them off from the acting
parties with applause and delectation; wherefore such patrons must be
advertised, that they know not how dear they pay for such preyes, when they
imagine they give nothing but a cheerful countenance for them, since indeed
they cost them more innocence, then many of them would part with for them, if
that price was directly set upon them: let them be admonished then, that as the
Psalmist says of the committers of such facts, that the poison of Aspes is
under their lips, so that it may be properly said of the receivers of such
thefts, in the terms of the Holy Spirit, They suck the head of Aspes, and the
Vipers tongue shall kill them: Since we are made by God as it were mutual
Feoffees in trust for one another good name, by this order, which declares
that God has given every one Ecclesiasticus 17.
commandment concerning his neighbor, being therein charged the preservation
of our brothers fame, to answer, Am I my brothers keeper? does indeed savor
somewhat of the guilt of the murder.

Let not then those parties unto whose complacency such licentiousnes is
addressed, suppose that they may innocently enjoy such spoils, which they
pretend not to bespeake, but only to accept as a present from their familiars;
for surely all persons of alluring fortunes, or of other followed qualities,
which are noted for entertainers and cherishers of Medisance and bitterness in
conversation, do no better then set up a Shop declaredly to take off plundered
goods; which commodity offered to the violaters, cannot choose but pass for a
contribution to the Fact; and the mischief of this traffic is always
proportioned, by the eminency of the estate of the person that professes this
commerce; for high encouragements do as it were press these moral plunderers,
which are such licentious companies, that those who raise them so easily, as
they cost them but their connivance, cannot cashiere them again with their
command, for very often as the Wiseman says, The Charmers themselves are stung
with the Serpents they play with, and then who shall pity them, when they swell
upon such stingings? Ecclestasticus


Let every one then make this good use of the respect and difference which is
given to their persons or conditions; the taking upon them to discredit this so
pernicious fashion of receiving (as justifyable Presents from their observers)
the desamation of their brother; for when this humor of Medisance springs in
the head of the company, it runs fluently into the less noble parts; but
when it rises first but in the inferior and dependent persons, it requires a
force of wit and ingeniosity to raise and diffuse it upward, which capacity is
not very familiar: wherefore I conceive the most powerful receipt against this
mischief to be the possessing the most eminent and reverenced persons of
Courts, with the irreligiousnesse of this authorized fashion of Medisance,
cherished under the disguise of mirth: For if Princes do ignoble their minds,
with this favoring of detraction, they do not only license it, but seem even
to impose it, which is such a kind of grievance, as offends much, and yet
lesseneth their own means, not only in point of their re-obliging, but
likewise in their part of commanding, for what is taken from the true value and
estimation of every one, by this liberty, is lost to the Prince in all the uses
he has of their service; so that Princes have not only a religious, but a
politic duty, that requires of them severity rather then indulgence toward
this toleration, since their simple connivance will introduce detraction, in
the fashion called incognito, which allows all the same liberties, to the
party so received, under this color of his not professing himself to be
present in his own quality; such a kind of admission does the connivance of
Princes give to Medisance, treating with her, as if they took no notice of her
quality: and when Princes foul their hands actively in this sullying of
others, they do as it were publicly prescribe the fame and reputation of
every one, and seem to set a price upon them, for every one that can bring
them into their delight and entertainment; nor is this price limited, but may
be said to be as much as every accure malicious wit shall rate his hope at, by
becoming agreeable and familiar with the Prince.

Saint Austustine says, he does not wonder at the dissolutenes of the Heathen,
when their Gods were both Patrons and parterns of their vi^iousnesse, whereby
their crimes seemed to them rather sacrifices then sins; wherefore it is little
wonder to see a Court overrun by any vicious humor, that is let in through
this overture of the Princes inclination; for as patterns of moral liberties,
the world look upon them too much as Gods images, since their considerations
do commonly terminate in the images themselves, and do not pass on to the
original or prototipe; that is, we do not examine whether their wills resemble
that exemplar will they represent, but conform our affections directly to the
similitude of theirs, by reason that our interested thoughts, stay likely at
our nearest hopes and fears; and finding Princes the next and immediate
rewarders or punishers of our actions, we square and model them to such
expectations as their humors minister unto us: Hence it is, that though
Princes have many preheminencies over others, yet in this particular of their
moral freedoms, they seem the most limited and restrained of any, by reason
of the common derivations from their examples: Whereupon as Subjects do
subscribe to Princes in point of their fortunes, so do they seem to prescribe
unto Princes, in this regulating their comportments, in respect of the common
frailties, because they cannot take off the impositions of their own examples;
wherefore they must remember themselves to be the selfsame persons, which are
the most specially menaced by those judgments the Holy Spirit says are
prepared for scorners.

This being so much averred, I humbly present Princes and Pro. 19. 29.
great persons, with this excellent pre-caution given by the Wiseman, Hedge
your ears with thorns, and hear not a wicked Ecclus. 28. 28.
tongue, and make doors and locks to your mouth; that is to say, fence your
ears so with the points of religion and piety, as they may rather prick, by
some sharp reproof the obtruders of all offensive Medisance, then leave them
open for such receptions; and surely the locks set upon the mouths of the
chiese of the company, does shut out all such speech, as they intend to debar,
for their humors are the Wards, by which the rest frame the Key of their
discourse, to open unto themselves acceptance.

All this considered, the best expedient I can administer, toward the
repressing of this licentiousness, is the dis-favour and un-concurrence of the
Grandees in the world; which opinion is thus supported by the Holy Ghost, The
North wind dissipateth raines, and a sad look the tongue that detracteth;
Wherefore I Pro. 25. 23.
beseech every one whom it may concern, to put on a serious displicence, upon
these occasions, that they may not incur this menace of Christ, Woe be unto
you that laugh now, but rather entitle themselves to this promise of the Holy
Ghost, They Luke 6. 25. Pro. 31. 25.
shall laugh in the latter day.

The twelfth Treatise. Concerning scurrility or uncleanness of speech. In
three Sect.
. I.
Of the dangerousnesse of these libertyes, and the familiar excuses made for
them.

BEing in chase of the tongue, which Saint James says, is so wild a beast as
no body can tame, me thinks James 3.
this other unruly evil seems to be her other foreleg, whereby she runs so
lightly in the course of our nature, and sets it (as the Apostle says) on
fire; wherefore these her two vitiousnesses of medisance and lubricity may well
be prosecuted together, and in effect they are seldom parted in our humors.
Moreover, as they are twins of an illegitimate and scandalous conception, their
delivery is commonly after such a manner, as that of Pharez and Zara, where he
that put his Genesis 38.
hand first into the world, came intyrely the last into it: So detraction and
piquantnes of wit, does likely first make proffers to issue out of our
corrupted nature, but is fully delivered the latter of the two, for we know
that our fancies even in their immature season, strain to be forward in this
point of medisance and mordancy of one another, but the other twin, namely
loosnesse and uncleanness of speech, enters first completely into our
discourse, by reason that the full growth of medisance, requires a riper
fancy, and many extimulations to sharpen it; whereof our green youth is not
susceptible: so that most commonly our tongue delivers fully this vice of
foulensse and obscenity of speech the first into the world; and thus, that of
the two which in part sallieth first out of our fancy, is the last in point of
an entire production, I shall not stay to examine their priority, in this
relation of their brotherhood in iniquity, as neither of them are children of
light, so their inheritance is such, as even the least share will seem too
much to each of them; wherefore I may truly say, Blessed are they who dash
these while they are little ones, against the stones of the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, repressing the first strainings and proffers of our fancies, at these
indecent excursions.

But alas how distancial are we from this igennious coercion of our polluted
fancies? When commonly we set al our wits upon this liberty, to cloak and
palliate it, when it is accused; do we not familiarly seek to elude the
reprehensions, and to cover this our Idol of Wantonness with Rachels Mantle,
answering Genesis 31.
our impeachers, it is with us after the manner of the world? the customary
infirmity of our nature is made the palliation of this iniquity; but surely
custom and possession in this case ought strongly to be impleaded; for if
custom pass for a second nature, even when at first it contendeth against
her, when it does concur and second her; how strong and unruly must they
needs both grow against the order and discipline of grace? which is evidenced
in most companies by the notorious excesses of these impunities.

But it is no hard Argument to overthrow this plea of custom, and to prove
this charge of a high offense against this licentiousnes of speech, because if
we stand charged with all our words upon account, all our indecent and unclean
ones must needs be set very high in the reckoning; by reason they may be said
to be responsable, not only for all the time we our selves take up upon them,
but even for all the loss and prejudice the company suffers by them, since
whether they offend or affect the company, we are answerable for both these
effects, for the scandal even when they are distasted, and much more for the
temptation when they are well relished; and if we are enjoined such a
preferring the good of society, before that of singlenes, as we are dissuaded
by the Apostle, even lawful and innocent libertyes, in case of indangering the
scandalizing of our brother; how faulty must be this unruly transgression of
all the precepts that directly prohibit such licentiousness? Is it not a
pleasant answer to Saint Paul's order, of let no ill word come out of your
mouth, to reply, alas we are used to let out so 1 Cor. 11.
many as the custom may stand for our defense: to which, methinks we may
suppose the spirit of Saint Paul answering as he did upon the occasion of
reforming an effeminate fashion among the Corinthians, We have no such custom,
nor the Church of God.

The most familiar extenuation of this culpable practice, is, that there are
many light passages in discourse, that have no aim but the present jollity and
recreation, and that many of such levities spring up in our way without the
ranging of our fancyes for any such game, and that such accidental freedoms
may produce a harmless recreation; I do not bring my charge against any such
chances, there may many words be started in conversation that may move our
first instincts to run after such sportings, wherefore I do not attaint all
such propensions, but desire that this aptness in our nature may be rightly
understood, and that we may discern our being moved with such light
invitations, to be rather excusable by our frailties, then justifiable by the
qualities of such mirth.

There is no fault so little in this kind, that is not accounted one; for the
familiarity of these small imperfections, indangereth their rising into higher
corruptions; how many little uncleanness do we see, that being wiped off as
soon as they light upon our clothes, come out again with any stain? which if
they be neglected, sink in, and leave their spots upon the place: nor is there
any moral immundicity of a more dangerous insinuation then this of wanton
discourse, by reason it introduces it self in a harmeles appearance, and so
subtly, as even many who aim at purity of life, are sometimes if not
affected, at least amused and diverted by it in their design, and unto such well
disposed minds do I addres this animadversion; to such I say, in whose lives
these amusements are the most apparent defects; for in such subjects, (in whom
these excesses are, the least of their corruptions, where out of the abundance
of the heart, the mouth overfloweth in these pollutions) I cannot hope to wash
off so easily this soul grain of their interior disposition; this particular
being so twisted and inwrapped in other grosser vices (like strawes or feathers
cleaving to some tenacious matter) as it cannot be easily severed or expurged,
but in some fair souls; these levities are but like some loose dust or feathers
that of themselves come up, and swim upon the top of their entertainments, and
so may easily be scum'd off by a gentle hand of reprehension, whilst in fordid
and foul minds, this filth sticks to such heavy vices, as keep them in the
bottom of their hearts, insomuch as they seem to require some storm of
affliction that may move and agitate the deepest parts of their ill habits, and
by that means cast out all the foul weight together that lay sunk in the
bottom of their hearts.

I will therefore only address these gentle prescripts unto such as intend
the observance of Solomon's advise, of keeping Ecclesiastes 9.
their garments always white, that they must not only set a guard over their
heart, but also a watch over lips, that no indecent freedoms may creep into a
custom, for in that incroachment they shall never discern the possession they
have taken, till they attempt their remove; and the smalnes of this fault in
the commencements of it, proves the most dangerous part toward the progress
thereof; for it may be compared in a perverted sense, to that grain which is
the least of all seeds, when it is cast into the ground; but at last it grows
to a nest for the fowls of the air, because, commonly what is at first but
levity and venial wantonness, grows up very familiarly to bear and harbor
all kind of foulness and impurity: Wherefore Solomon warns us thus against
such deceptions, There is a way that seems right unto man, but the end
thereof Prove. 16. 25.
is the way of death.

. II.
Some special causes of the growth of this licentiousness, and some expedient
proposed toward the suppression thereof.

THE admission of these liberties by well disposed persons, is derived commonly
from the inconsideration of the dignity and duty of a Christian, upon this
suggestion, from him who transfigureth himself into an Angel of light, that
the maimed and defectuous, were only forbid the Altar, not debarred the
Congregation; to wit, that Candor and immaculatenesse of conversation is only
required of such, as are sequestered for God, by some vow or consecration; and
that other vocations need not attend to so much cleanness of heart, as is
intimated by these scrupulous suggestions, but this flash of lightning of the
evil Angel will quickly vanish, when we turn our eyes upon these beams of
the Sun of Righteousness, which shine out so fully in these words, Be ye
perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect: Whereby Mark 5.
our Savior seems to press so much our purity, as he sets us a higher
pattern then even himself, (as he did then appear to the eye of his disciples)
and this similitude enjoined cannot possibly admit any voluntary adherence to
the least unlikenesse and dissimilitude to this exemplar, and how distanciall
the most trivial imperfection is from his infinite purity, the Angels
themselves cannot determine: How much ought we then to apprehend the slightest
touch or dash of our pensill, in the copying this Immaculate Original?

If we could discern the staynes and taints, even of our best works, wherein
we perceive no faultiness, we would never venture the voluntary exposing any
to the sight of God, wherein we our selves find spots and blemishes, when the
man after Gods own heart was fain to appeal to Gods mercy for his secret and
undiscerned sins; how vain a thing is it to esteem any sin light or
inconsiderable, which we our selves are able to discover? O what an honor is a
Christian trusted with, when not only the rejoicing of Angels is within his
capacity, but even the satisfaction of the Holy Ghost? which is intimated by
Saint Paul, when he charge us not to grieve or make sad the holy Spirit; and
certainly all the loose mirth and jollity wherewith we flatter our nature, is
so much contristation to his holiness and purity; and alas, how often do these
impure sparks of our tongues pass to a higher offense? when flying inward they
kindle such a flame, as does extinguish the order of the holy Spirit, how
little a spark sets a whole wood on fire? is too frequently attested by unhappy
experiments in this 1 These. 5. 20.
kind; wherefore Saint James warning us further of the ill consequences of our
tongues disorder, tells us, that the tongue is the helm of the whole body, so
that if it be ill steered, it must James 3.
needs mislead the course of our whole lives.

Nothing methinks evidenceth more the faultiness of these libertyes, then that
the presence of any notedly good and virtuous person, does commonly restrain
such freedoms of speech; does not this forbearance avow their
unjustifiablenes, and reproach the idleness of our inconsideration, while we
forget the continual presence of Almighty God? in reference whereunto, we are
pressed even by instinct, to pay this reverence unto men, of vailing our loose
inclinations; if the eyes even of the children of light, are able to dispell
these foul mists, the consideration of the presence of the Father of lights
though in an invisible manner, may well dissipate the matter of these meteors,
the substance whereof, is always earthy and viscous, though the flame be never
so bright: for the subject of lascivious words, is always sordid and unclean,
though the flame of fancy they glitter in be of never so clear and sharp
conceptions.

The best expedient then in order to the bridling our unruly fancyes, is, to
awe them often with the presence of God, who is termed a consuming fire, for
such minds as are habituated to that aspect, and whose thoughts walk before the
Lord will be no more entangled with these levities, then they are retarded by
Atoms walking in the air; and to indue this presentiall consideration of God,
let us remember often that we are not our own, but are bought with a great
price, by him who will be glorified as well as carried in our bodies: and as 1
Cor. 6. 20.
we may be said to lodge God in our hearts, so we do carry him abroad no way
more visibly then in our mouths, and surely the custom of any unclean speech,
tainteth and spoileth the breath that is to carry him.

Let us not therefore be deceived with this vulgar diversion, to wit, that
these freedoms of discourse are harmless and allowable, there is no action of
a Christian inconsiderable to God, our recreations must be of the same species
as our prayers, though not of the same degrees of intensive finenesse, they
must be both of the same nature of innocence, though not adequate in the
measures of purity; we may say methinks not improperly of our recreations and
devotions, that the first must be holy, as the last are holy, in the same
sense, that we must be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect, which is, in
point of similitude, not in a degree of equality; such as analogy must the
pleasures of a Christian hold with his prayers of being resembling, though not
commensurate in Sanctity.

We may well infer, what an obligation of purity Saint Paul lays upon
Christians, when he says, Those that are baptized have put on Christ, if we
are to consider our selves as clothed with Christ, how can we be too curious
and circumspect in point of keeping such a vestiment unspotted? methinks this
should be a good glass for those who are so curious and neat in their
material clothes and dressings, wherein the least unbecomingnes or disorder is
so much examined; for by a reflection from these words of the Apostle, they may
see with Ecclesiastes
what degree of purity they are incharged, methinks this respect may well move
them to an exact candor and cleanliness in their conversation, which is
recommended by the holy Spirit, under the notion of keeping in all times their
vestments white and candid.

But I pray God, much of the worlds proprety and decencies, be not affected
expressly in order to the staining this our inward garment of Christian purity;
this is light enough to all intelligent persons, for an exploring the rectitude
or wrynesse of their behaviors in this particular; since even in this vain
superficies of neatness, they may discern a figure of their Spiritual
obligation to purity, whereof Christ does prescribe to us the preservation by
this exact Discipline of Watch and pray lest you enter into temptation: For
alas we have the roots of the forbidden fruit, planted in our nature, which
shoo^ up continually so fast, as we have work enough to nip and crop off their
buds and blossoms, and all unclean liberties, may well be said to be so much
dung and filth we cast about these roots, to cherish and set them forwarder;
but the ranknes and luxuriancy of our tempers in this kind, ought rather to be
the subject of our extirpation, then a ground for ow^ manuring and culture; we
might better methinks derive much bashfulnesse and confusion from this notion
of the pregnancy of our natures toward all these foul productions, then work
thus with our fancies, to stir up the earth about these roots*

They who extract sha^e and humiliation out of the foulness of their natural
propensions, may be said to do some such cure open themselves, as Christ did
upon one of the blind men, to wit, upon their own eyes, by thus laying their
own dirt upon them, and those who catch at all occurrencies in discourse, to
advance their light impulses, may be said to continually raising a dust out of
their loose earth, to put out not only their own eyes, but likewise those of
the company they frequent.

Referring to this depravation, there is one familiar iniquity, which deserves
a particular animadversion, which is, this, custom of letting our tongues
run full counter to this Christian precept, of Watch lest you enter into
temptation. For alas how frequent is this practice of watching to lead all
words into temptation, by binding and straining even the modest words of others
into a crooked and lascivious sense, this vitiousnesse argues a great
sullnesse of the evil spirit, when it runs over with such a waste, even upon
the words of our neighbor; and well considered, me thinks this is one of the
most censurable parts of this licentiousness, in regard it labors to taint
the whole body of conversation, as it corrupts the nature of words, which are
the Public Faith, whereupon all innocent discourse must needs trust it self;
so that this perversion seems a public impediment to the commerce of all
virtuous communication; wherefore this distorting of equivocall words, which
passes commonly for a trivial peccancy, if it be well examined, will be found
a very dangerous admission; for me thinks this may be termed a verbal
adultery, as it vitiateth and corrupts the property of another, which would
have remained innocent without that solicitation, and therefore seems much a
fouler fault, then a single incontinency of our own words.

This discourse puts me in mind of a most ingenuous piece of S. Augustines
Confessions, upon the reflection on the uncleanness of his youth, whereof my
repetition will be sufficient application.

Thou O Lord, Physician of my soul, afford some benefit to others by my
infirmities, grant that the confession of my evils past, (which Confess. Aug. l.
1. 10. Chapter 3. 4.
thou have remitted and covered, blessing me with a change of my soul by thy
grace) when they are read and heard, may awake and stir up the hearts of
Auditors, that they may not sleep in despair, and say, alas we cannot rise,
but rouse themselves up by the love of thy mercy, and sweetness of thy grace,
whereby every weak one is sufficiently enabled, who by that influence comes
to be conscious of his own infirmity: Let those I impart this confession to,
lament my ills, and long for my good: all my good is thy provision and gift, as
my evils and faults are thy judgments: Let them sigh for these, and sing thy
praise for the other: Let both pity and praise ascend up to thy sight from the
hearts of my brothers, the which are thy incensors, and thou O Lord delighted
with the odor of thy holy Temples: have mercy upon me according to thy great
compassion, and for thy holy names sake, give not over what thou have begun,
but consume totally my imperfections.

These words will be too easily applied, since all those who have known me,
cannot be ignorant of my culpablenesse in those particulars against which I
have informed in these two Treatises: and truly if I could represent the just
shame and confusion I feel in the reflection upon my guiltiness in this kind,
I believe it would undeceive many, in their opinion of the lightness of such
faults; for we may learn by what means humane nature is the likeliest to be
moved unto Reformation, by the Proposition of the unhappy rich man in the
Gospel, who concluded that his brothers would certainly be converted, if they
had one sent back to them from the dead, to preach and represent their
sufferings; and surely I may pass for one returned as it were from the death
and grave of these sins, wherein I lay the deepest buried of any; so that I
may truly acknowledge in honor of the exceeding indulgence of God, Great is
thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the Psalm: 85. 13.
lowest hell, wherefore in all humility I offer up this short Petition to my
deliverer.

Lord I beseech thee, let this my resuscitated voice, carry some powerful
effect to such of my brethren as it shall come unto, reporting the painful
remorse these faults require for expiation; and while I stand here, brought by
thy clemency to do this just and public penance in these penetentiall sheets,
grant that the admonition may prove as efficacious to others, as the confusion
is sensible to me, who humbly acknowledge, that as the chief of sinners I have
therefore obtained mercy, that in me first of all Christ Jesus might show all
patience, to the information of those that believe in 1 Timothy 1. 16.
him to life everlasting.

. III.
What circumstances augment these faults, and Women incharged much severity in
opposition to these levities.

DEsiring to complete my charge in all points, and to denude this offending
liberty of her most potent patronages, it is requisite to impeach some
circumstances, as guilty of great aggravations in these offenses, namely, the
quality, the reputation, and the Sex of such as favor these freedoms of
speech; for though great vices may be made current by great examples, yet they
are cried up in their own visibly base species, whereby every one knows the
matter they receive to be sordid, even while they use it: But this wantonness
and petulancy of speech is oftentimes a kind of Alchimy, so well colored over
with wit, as it may easily pass for a good and innocent custom, when it is
vented by great and observable hands, which may abuse even the Judgments of
their dependents, in the understanding of these licenses: wherefore every one
according to their degree of place, or estimation of virtue in the world, is
charged with a proportionate evidencing their discountenance of such liberties,
for the advantage of quality may easily introduce them, and the nepute of
modesty may as easily disguise many of those faulry freedoms: The first of
these capacities may authorize this custom, and so render it a destruction
that wastes at noone day, and the latter of them, may by a connivance bring it
in as a pestilence Psalm. 19. 6.
that walks in darkness.

The most part of women, but especially such as this discourse is addressed
unto, seem but passive, and tolerating of these levities, and many think that
they discharge the duty of their Sex in some slight reprehensions of them,
which are commonly not of so sad a color, but the whole company may through
them see another tincture then the uppermost: less piercing eyes then Gods,
discern what is under that veil: but surely virtuous women ought to be very
solemn and serious in such dislikes, especially such as have authority over the
company, if they well consider that an easy Judge may do more mischief, then
an impudent offender, by reason this publishes the foulenes of the crime, and
in that act discrediteth it, whilst the other palliateth and disguiseth it,
whereby the inducing the habit thereof is much endangered.

And since the weakness of the world looks commonly upon women, as the only
Judges of their behavior before them, when the Judges are conceived to be
receivers, we may imagine to what a height this theft of liberty is likely to
grow, and surely these light indecencies may be fitly compared to the children
that thieves use to carry along with them, to put into windows, which after
they have crept in, open the doors to them that employ them, since very little
freedoms stealing at first in at the ears, do often open the way to greater
liberties, that expect an entry by the overtures shall be made by these first
encroachments upon modesty, so that women (who have their bashfullnes and
pudency given them for a guard of their weakness and frailties) must beware of
any surprisall of this outguard: Let those who are so bashful and cautious in
any undecent discovery of their bodies, know, that the admission and
countenancing of this wantonness, is a detection of the nakedness of their
minds, which may prove the far more dangerous temptation: I do not say but
their honor may be kept alive in this ill air of idle discourse, but
certainly the unwholsomnesse thereof, induces but a crazie constitution.

Let therefore all virtuous and well-affected minds be choice in the air of
their conversation, for though this unsound one do not change the features of
their virtue, it will spoil at least the complexion of it; all these staining
levities are a sort of freckles that appear upon the face of their piety,
which takes off much of the fairness and beauty of it.

Those persons then whose places in the world set their lives as patterns to be
copied by others, are the most strictly bound to take care of the face and
appearance of their virtue, which is never so lovely, as when it frowneth
severely upon all indecent freedoms of speech: wherefore I may fitly present
them with this memorial from the Holy Spirit, to cast their thoughts upon in
these occasions, Anger is better then laughter, because by the sadness of the
countenance the mind of the offender is corrected. Ecoles. 7. 4.
So that all women, to whom civility, or any other respect gives power over
men, should make use of it to preserve the liberty of their virtue, which is
always entrenched upon by any unbeseeming presumptions: and lest it may be
apprehended that the retrenchment of these pleasant liberties, may flat and
dead the taste of conversation, I dare answer by experience, that whosoever
will enter into a course of purging his nature of that humor, (which I may
call a moral jaundies that discoloureth the whole skin of civil conversation,
and puts us out of taste of the sweetness of purity) shall recover the right
favor and gust of purity by the same degrees he is cleansed from the other
immundicity, and he will quickly find so much more pleasantness in the relish
of innocence, as the very smell of these herbs of Egypt will offend him, and
Manna will not seem too light a food for him, but will rather find Piety
affording him as many several tastes of mirth and entertainment, as his
rectifyed appetite shall demand, and the savor of purity shall bring him
quickly to profess, How sweet are thy words unto my taste? yea sweeter then
honey to my mouth. Psalm. 118. 10.


Now then I will bind up all my persuasions with these bands of two Apostles,
Saint Paul and Saint James, which strengthen them so firmly, as no subtilty of
the most artificial evader can loosen them, the first detesteth so much all
licentiousness, as he forbideth even the naming any uncleanness, filthiness,
foolish Ephesians. 5. 4.
talk, or scurrility, as incompatible with the sanctity of a Christian, and
the last leaves us this precise advice, in order to the same regulation, He
that looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, being not
a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his
deed: and if any man think himself religious, not bridling his tongue, but
seducing Jam. 1. 25, 26
his heart, this man's religion is vain.

The thirteenth Treatise. Handling whether to be in love, and to be devout, are
in consistent.In eight Sect.
. I.
The nature of Love, and of Devotion, compared.

LOve in humane nature, is both the sourge and center of all passions, for not
only Hope, Fear and Joy, but even Love desined.
Anger and Hatred, rise first out of the spring of Love; and the courses of
these passions which seem to run away from it, do by a winding revolution
return back to rest again in Love; for there could be no aversion if the last
end of it were not some affection which our Love pursues through opposition,
with which our Anger and Hate combat, but in order to the conquest of our
first Love; so that all the powers of a rational Nature seem to be
ministerial to this sovereign power of Love, since even in Grace also, Love
is both the way and the end of Beatitude, For God himself is Love, and none 1^
Ep. Ioh. 4.
end in God that do not go by Love: Therefore S. Augustine says excellently,
that a short definition of all Virtue is the order Virtue defined.
of Love; for since Love is the first impulse and motion of our intellectual
appetite, (which is the Will) toward an union with what it apprehends under
the notion of good; if God be rightly apprehended as the supreme good, and our
Loves primarily directed to that union, then all our affections descend from
that due elevation, upon the lower stations of the creatures, as upon stepps
set in order by God, for our affections to pass down upon his works, and
repasse again upon the same gradations up to the Creator: Therefore we must
examine whether that state of mind which the world terms (being in Love)
admit of this order, wherein consists the virtue of all Devotion.

I have before treated and defined what it is to be Devout, so I conceive it
expedient now to determine what it is to be in Love; for as there are many
antipathy's, which while they are out of the presence of one another, discover
not their repugnancies, but being set together do quickly declare their
aversions, so if we state profane and sacred love by one another, we shall the
easilier discern whether there be any incompatibility between them, for he who
transfigureth himself into an Angel of light, does more artificially disguise
this passion then any other, and presents it to our minds under the fairest
notion he can utter it, knowing that Love is the best color he can use in his
own transfiguration.

I have already described Devotion to you in these familiar terms of (a being
in love with Heaven,) whereby I conclude, that being in Love is the most
intensive appropriation of all the powers of our mind to one design; now how
such an assignment A description of being in Love.
of our Soul to the love and service of the creature, (which is to be in love
with one) can consist with the precept of loving the Creator with all our heart
and all our mind, is a question too hard for even the Devil to resolve;
therefore to reconcile Passion with Devotion, he does commonly detract somewhat
from them both, in his definitions of them to us, representing it as a less
alienation and transaction of the mind to be in love, and a less exaction on
the soul to be devout.

Thus man's first supplanting Counselor offers himself for a reconciler of
this inconsistency, and pretends to accord these two loves, as we use to
compose civil differences, where likely each party does remit some of his
interest to facilitate the agreement; and thus many taking off somewhat from
the nature of humane passion, and abating some of the rights of divine Love,
think they may both concur in the soul by this arbitration; as who should
say, when God is allowed the supreamest part in formal adoration, the creature
may share in the inferior portion of the mind, which is the seat of Passion,
and be allowed a love to a degree of Passion: Many are deceived by this, as
with an equal composition, which truly examined, is to conclude, that if the
Arc be set in the quire, Dagon may stand in the body of the Church; but he
whose Temple our heart is, allows no independent love to the creature to
stand by his at any distance; all our affections must rest involved in his
Love, and must issue from thence upon the creature, but as by commission and
delegation from that master Love: So I may say of such compounders, that
pretend there may be some of the heart allotted to support humane Passion, as
was said of the inhabitants of Samaria after the captivity, wherein were mixed
the Jews and Babilonians, These fear the Lord, but serve their Idols; for
indeed they who give not God all their Kin. 4. 17. 41.
Love, give what they do, chiefly to his fear, and so may be said to fear
God, not to love him, but to serve and love their passions.

Yet it may be there are some who being frighted with the preciseness and
amplitude of the precept of loving God, disavow me in my definition of being in
Love, saying I have done an ill office to humane Passion in this exaltation of
it, putting it upon a claim of so great rights, as must needs make a quarrel
between it and Devotion, when they pretend they do covenant between their eyes
and their affections, in the admiration of beauty, for the preserving the
prerogative of divine Love; alleging that all the vehemence of their
affections, is in order to the estimation of the excellency and perfection of
Gods works, and disclaim any infringing the rights of Religion.

This is commonly answered by some when they are before grave and pious
examiners, when they find themselves fallen, as I may say among Gods party,
then they have his word ready to pass with, but when they come off to their
own side, when they are giving account of their passions to those persons they
serve under, then commonly they take all occasions to do all ill offices to
divine Love, and study to affront Devotion, as if it were a Rival that
pretended to that affection for which they are in suite, and then the entirenes
of the oblation of their minds is what they most insist upon; and God knows
Religion is not so much as thought upon, unless it be to take from it some
divine terms, to set out the offering of their passion.

. II.
Some subtle temptations detected, and liberties reproved.

Profane Passion is a flame in our sensitive Appetite, which does commonly
refine and subtilize the faculty of our imagination, enabling the fancy very
much to circumvent the reason, suggesting this belief to many, that we may
easily proportion a correspondence between our affections to sensible and
spiritual objects, setting them in the due subordination of the sense to the
understanding; and when this order is settled in our minds, we are persuaded
there may be allowed this intelligence, (which passes often between the
greatest distances of degrees) that what appertains properly to the dignity of
spiritualities, may be borrowed sometimes innocently, and applied to adorn and
grace the worth of material goods: and after this manner I suppose we may
accommodate these attributes of divine and heavenly, and many other such jewels
of the crown of God, to illustrate the accomplishments of corporeal blessings.

In this method many Lovers seem to think they may use Gods spiritual Altar,
as we do his material Altars in Churches from whence the ornaments are borrowed
and transposed from one to another, according to different solemnities, for
many use as familiarly all the proprietyes of divine love for the gracing of
their passion, as if God had lent them his attributes to set off the shrine of
their affections, which do usually stand dressed up with Sacred vessels, with
all the terms of veneration and adoring, and thus does our unfaithful
councellor persuade us in effect to set up altar against altar, upon pretense
of a fair correspondence between Grace and nature.

This is truly to be blinded by the God of this world, (as the Apostle says)
to treat any such compartition of our heart, between our faith and our fancy,
applying alternatively the same expressions of estimation to them both, when we
know all the appurtenances to Gods altar, are so fastened to it by his own hand,
as the very borrowing of them for secular uses is sacrilege.

The same composition of ointment, which God did appropriate to the services of
the Tabernacle, was forbid to be employed upon bodies in the delicacies of the
flesh, under the same pain as sacrilege, and that confection of perfumes,
which was peculiarly Gods odor, was not to be compounded for any common
application; and when we pour out so familiarly Gods attributes upon our
loves, as an unction of suavity and delicacies upon flesh and blood, and
perfume our passions with the same composition of praises and exaltations which
are properly affected to divine uses; we do certainly incur this kind of
irreligious presumption, and how familiar this loose effusion is of all the
most Sacred terms upon this subject of our passion, I need not argue, but
enter this ill custom as a high indignity to God, though it pass commonly for
no more then a light intemperancy of the fancy which is little questioned;
truly it is most an end the foul ardor kindled in the heart, that seeths this
unclean froth out of the mouth which staineth all the Moral virtues it
touches; for profaneness taints wit, and civility, and all other good
qualities it runs through; and so though profane love may sharpen the brain,
it always sowreth the heart, which is the vessel of devotion; if there be
then many hearts far from God, while they honor him with their lips, we may
safely conclude no heart can be near to God, while the lips are so far from
honoring him, as leading out his propertyes.

Wherefore let no body presume that they may innocently convert a hymn into an
Iopean, that is, to transfer the prerogative praises of divinity to the
flattery of his own Diana.

In the religion of the heathen Romans, every one had their household gods,
that did not derogate from the honor of those they worshipped in the Temples,
each one was allowed his Genius, each family their Penates for familiar gods at
home, which they observed and loved more, though they feared not so much as
their state gods: methinks they that would maintain a consistancie between
those two altars of humane passion, and divine love, take the privileges of
that religion allowing themselves their Genius or fancy for a domestic god,
which they affect more, though they acknowledge not so much as their Church of
God.

But the reason why the Gods of the heathens did admit this association, was,
that they were not jealous Gods, and cared as little for the singleness of the
heart, as they knew the secrets thereof; whereas our God is just the contrary,
both a jealous and an Omniscient God; and as all hearts are his, not only by
creation, but by purchase with no less a price then all his love, so it cannot
be expected, he should receive hearts back again with less then all their
love.

. III.
The errors of profane jealousy argued, and a Pious jealousy propounded.

MEthinks passionate lovers, who know nothing so well as the nature of
jealousy, (which studyeth continually the anotamy of hearts, and is so severe
to the least defective part,) should not hope to pass any insincerity upon a
jealous God, if they did not study too much the quality of jealousy, and too
little the nature of God, for if they attended that, it would show them God
cannot be jealous, according to the nature of man, where jealousy implies
doubt and perplexity of inquiry; for to God the secrets of hearts are manifest,
even while they are secrets to themselves, he preconceiveth what all hearts
shall ever freely conceive; and so God calls himself a jealous God, as
knowing the nature of humane jealousy, (which is so sensible of the least
substraction from what we affect) to assure us by that title, he can admit no
participation in what he vouchsafes to love.

It is to inlighten man in the knowledge of his severity, not to obscure the
belief of his omniscience, that he calls himself a jealous God, which quality
is as propitious in Gods love as it is malignant in man's; for humane jealousy
among all the falsities it suggests for our disquiet, tells us but one
important truth, (and that we seem to believe little by the eagernes of our
solicitations) which is the infidelity and variableness of all humane loves,
that are so unfaithful, as our greatest passions are commonly unsecured by our
tenderness and caution of them, and Gods jealousy assures us of the
immutability of his love, which we can loose only by our not being jealous of
it, for the more watches we set over it in our lips, and the more guards in our
hearts, the more it is obliged by this circumspection: nor must we think to
keep it safe in our hearts, while the doors of our lips stand open to all the
passengers of a prophan and libertine tongue; so that if we make a serious
reflection on it, there is none of Gods attributes so sure a guide for our way
to him, as a jealous God.

Whereupon I may well ask the Synagogue of Libertines this puestion of Saint
James, Do you think that the Scripture says in vain, The Spirit that dwells
in you, covets you even to emulation, and Saint Paul explicates this, James 4.
5.
when to indeare his zeal to souls, he calls it the emulation of God, and we
know God is not as man that he may be deceived; the same Spirit is jealous of
us, which peirceth and divides 2 Cor. 11. 2.
asunder the soul and the Spirit, and is the discerner of the Heb. 4. 12.
thoughts and intents of the heart; Therefore they who look upon the beauty of
Gods love, in the beams of his mercy, should always reflect upon the shadow of
his love, which is his jealousy, and is inseparable from the substance of his
charity.

But commonly Libertine lovers, when they raise their thoughts as high as God,
look upon his mercyes being above all his works, and account that as a City of
refuge, whereunto they can easily fly for protection of these kind of
infirmities of nature, pleading all their offenses to be rather occasional
frailties, then purposed infidelities to God; and so while they have this
attribute of Gods mercy in their eye, like the hill seated upon a mountain,
they think they cannot loose their way to it, though they loyter and wander in
their youth out of the strait and narrow way; straying by the light excursions
of their passion.

And certainly no one sin has misled more, then this purposed Piety, in
which the Devil is a diligent advocate for Gods mercy; For all active
vitiousnesse, has a kind of hot feavor, which keeps the conscience awake at
least, but this rolling between mercy and justice, is a certain motion, that
very often rocketh the conscience into a drowsinesse till our last sleep; after
which, the worm it wanted, never lets it rest again; How many say with Christ,
Yet a little and the world shall not see me, who go out of the world, in this
stretching of John 14. 19.
themselves in a little more sleep, a little more slumber?

Therefore I will recommend one jealousy to lovers, which think themselves
secure of Gods mercy, by being but loose suitors for it, let me propose to them
to be very jealous of it, I am sure they can know nothing of Gods heart, which
ought to make them confident of his mercy, longer then they are actually
watching it, for it is seriously true in this case (what is familiarly said to
justify vain jealousy) that we cannot love mercy much, and not be jealous of
it; nay I may add, that the very apprehension of the insecurity of it is the
fruition of this love, for it is a possession of mercy to be solicitous and
attentive in fear of losing it; in this sense Solomon says, Blessed is Prove.
28, 14. Psa. 118.
he who is always fearing, and David prays that his flesh may be pierced
with this fear.

But alas, profane passion is commonly a derider of all holy fear, and accepts
only that which vain jelousie imposes on her, and so the fear passion has,
proves rather a curse then a custody for her love; for the fears of lovers may
be properly said to be such, as the Wiseman elegantly discribes in the
Egyptian darkness, when their fire afforded them no light, and those flashes
of lightning which passed by Sapi. 17.
them, did but fright them so much the more; and being so terrified with what
they saw, they concluded that much more horrid which they saw not, and thus
their fear proved nothing to them, but a betrayer of the succors of reason: I
need not put this on upon a lovers jealousy, to try if it will serve it by an
application of those qualityes, for it will appear to any body that knows it
as apposite and fit as if it had been made by the measure of that passion;
therefore I may well conclude that love to be very unhappy, which rejects all
Pious fear, and accepts willingly this perplexing terror.

. IV.
The deceit of passion in promise of mercy, and power of resisting temptations.

VAin passion is so malignant, as it corrupts the best power of minds, which
is love, and perverteth the best quallity of bodies, which is beauty: nay it is
so apt to make a wrong use of all beauty, as it does commonly misapply the
beauty of grace, which is mercy; for it sets our thoughts too much upon that
fair delightful attribute of God, and seldom allows his justice a due
proportion of them; for many lovers acquaint themselves with Gods mercy, as the
Pharisees did converse with Christ's person, they are heirs of Gods mercy, and
eat and drink with it familiarly, but have no intelligence with his other
attributes; and so when Luke 13. 15.
they come to claim that acquaintance with it, of having been taught and fed
by it, they are in danger to be disclaimed, with I know you not, depart from
me; mercy shall not then know them, for their having been too familiar with
her, no more then God shall own the acquaintance of swearers, who have been so
familiar with him; thereforethe Wiseman gives them an excellent counsel, Say
not the mercy of the Lord is great, and he will have pity on the multitude of
my Ecclesiasticus 5.
sins, for his mercy and his anger are near one another, and his anger
looks upon sinners, and most of all when they look not upon his anger.

For this reason, lovers who usually set before their eyes mercy put before
justice, should use mercy not as a cover, but as a Cristal, only to look
through it upon the figure of justice, in which it may intenerate and soften
somewhat the hard strokes of that figure, for the severity of Gods judgments
may well be sweetened by this transparent supervesture of his kindness: but
when mercy is laid as a covering which too much obscureth justice to us, then
likely the more we look upon it, the more we see our passion in it, and the
love of God the less for hope, which vain passion finds a virtue in our
hearts, it commonly leaves a vice, by flattering hope into excess, and
corrupts it often by the art of overpraising it, and so leads it
imperceptibly up to presumption; therefore I may properly say to many lovers
presuming on mercy, as Saint John Baptist did to such a kind of confidence,
think not to say within your selves we have Abraham for our father, but bring
forth works worthy of repentance; let them not think mercy Mat. 3.
is intailed to the stock of their confidence, but stated upon the conformity
and fidelity of their lives; for those that do the works of Abraham, are only
his sons, the children of fear and trembling are the only heirs of mercy.

But there are many minds that seem made of such a stuff as was forbid the
children of Israel, which was a contexture of linen and woollen, (which command
did figuratively intimate, that simplicity and entireness was to be the
garment of the inward man) against this rule many pretend they can weave purity
and passion together, and keep their minds sound and innocent in this
composition, and for this consorting humane love, is very intuentive and
ingenious in designing fair and specious terms of subordination, in which
this love pretends it may consist, and be limited under divine love.

But many (who pretended at first to keep their affections running through the
beauty of the creature, in a regular re(...)ux back to the Ocean of all beauty)
find them intercepted in this dangerous passage, and when they are once staid,
by degrees they come to intend nothing but the making their passion the deeper,
by an effusion of another upon it; and thus they fall into the state, which God
reprocheth by the Prophet, they commit these two evils, They forsake God the
fountain of living Jer. 2. 13.
waters, and hew themselves out cisterns, broken cisterns, that hold no water:
For alas how unsound are all those conserves of humane beauty which contain
man's passion? we cannot say which is the less solid or durable, either the
matter of them, which is but fading color, or the maker of them which is yet
more fickle fancy; nevertheless, in these broken vessels do men trust their
love, when they are even in the securest or strongest passion, since inordinate
love is so unsafe a conserve for our happiness, as even our own wishes cannot
fix it long upon one object, and our reason can much less weigh it by grains
as our own wills take it from our senses, and so keep our love to the creature
in such a proportion, as it may be tried by the balance of the sanctuary,
whether it have just that quantity which is allowed our affection to the
creature.

Therefore let none persuade themselves they can keep their affections running
on currently through particular inclinations, back to the Universal center of
love, and upon that confidence license many insinuating familiarities with
women, for it is very hard even for the most purified humane affections, to
fall from beauty (where nature makes so many fences to stay them,) to pass on
without making some eddyes in a reluctant motion, looking backward with a
profession of some unwillingnesse to pass so quickly forward in that course of
purity they should continue; and if (as Saint Peter says), the Peter 4.
severest watchers of their nature have task hard enough, what shall be hoped
of the indulgers of it? certainly they who will cherish nature in her first
appetites, shall quickly find her second past their checking, and then as the
Wiseman says in this case, Who will pity a sorcerer that is stung with a
Serpent? for they who are familiar with temptations, will quickly be acquainted
with infection; let them remember then our Masters counsel, that will have
their body kept lighted, to keep their eye pure, since the Prince of darkness
observes a rule quite contrary to the first law of the Father of light; for
when he has put out an eye of his servants, he does not release him, but makes
him the more slave.

. V.
The faultiness and flatteries to women discovered and dissuaded.

NOthing has more perplexed the animosity of man, then the search into the
nature and transmission of Original sin, which the curiosity of woman
produced: it seems God is pleased to punish that first presumption in point
of knowledge, with a perpetual perplexity of doubt in the very thing which was
then introduced into nature, and the only one of man's own making, which he did
by yielding to woman, who furnished him the matter whereunto he gave the form
of Original sin, and ever since they have both conspired to pervert the
greatest blessings of their corporal nature into occasions of propagating sin,
for the same seeds of vain glory spring up upon all invitations.

The first temptation that prevailed upon woman, was her becoming like God,
and the same tempter seems to employ man's passion to perform his promise, so
that it is upon his commission men offer all those profane flatteries by which
they worship their passions, and yet even all these presumptuous expressions of
passion testify that all our love appertains to God for these mis-intended
excesses unawares, set the right superscription upon the addresses of their
affections, when they set divinity and adoreablenesse as the titles whereunto
their loves are directed; and so their tongues as it were by instinct, declare
the property of love to be Gods, while they cannot call them less then Gods to
whom they misgive their love; and love which by nature and instinct is so
conversant with God, may easily slip into this mistake; for as when we are bred
and habituated to one company, we are very apt to call those we speak to by
accident, by those names which are most familiar to us; so love, which by
nature is most intimate with God, when it is by accident diverted to other
company, seems to mistake their names, and gives them that which is so
imprinted in it, and yields them the same reverence proper to that title;
thus even the farthest removes of their affections from God, are remembrances
of their loves, being entirely due to him, when even the possessed tongues like
the evil spirits in the Gospel do testify Gods right.

There is nothing sure the devil hates more then beauty, it is so much his
contrariety, who is all foulness and deformity, yet there is nothing he
flatters so much; he serves it with the supplenes of a Parasite till he gain
his ends by it, and being the best Artist, with a gentle hand he lays fresh
colors of praises on the external figure of beauty every day, whereby Gods
Image is quickly so covered, as they who admire it most, take no notice,
(unless it be profanely) of any such character upon it; and the Glass this
servant holds to Women, makes them no reflex, but of those vain colors of
flatteries which he has laid upon the Figure; and thus as at first he deceived
woman by credulity in expectance, now he seems to delude her by confidence,
that she is possessed of all his ascriptions to her, and beauty set under this
burning glass of praises and admirations, easily lights self Love in the
heart, which is a flame catches at all materials that are offered to entertain
it: nor is there any thing so apt to soment self-love, as that Straw and
Stubble of light praises which the passions of others cast upon it.

Whence it is, that profane lovers do as the Prophet says, Walk in the light
of their own fire, and in the sparkles which they Esaias 50. 11.
have kindled, while abusing the liablenesse of woman to self-love and vanity,
they are continually striking fire out of their fancies upon this tinder, that
is, straining their wits to cast excessive praises upon this so taking Subject
of Woman's beauty, wherein men should be very temperate, knowing how little a
spark fireth the whole Wood, and turns all the goods of Nature into jewels
for Pride, and Vainglory, the flame whereof Jam. 3. 6.
is so deceitful, as when we believe it polnteth upward, to the honor of our
Maker, it tends downward to the center of fire, without light, for the fire
of self-love, as it is kindled by the breath of the Father of Lies, so it
partaketh of the quality of his flames to be without light, since it keeps us
in darkness to our selves, and imper-ception of our own true dimensions.

Wherefore it must needs lie as a heavier charge upon men then they usually
account it, the breaking this bruised Reed by pressing so much flattery upon
it, for the aptnes which beauty has to raise self-love, may be reputed an
allay of the natural blessing thereof; it may be this propensity to
selfe-deceiving, is set as another Fine upon woman's head for her first fault,
and the facility of her minds conceiving, and the pleasure of bearing this
spiritual issue of self-love, is another kind of judgment upon her first
credulity; and to be thus endangered in her soul by the pleasure of her best
material property, which is beauty, seems a greater penalty, then the sorrow
of her other labor: Upon which ground Lovers do likely treat at first by
Parley, to introduce self-love into the heart by the Presents of flatteries;
and certainly more are betrayed by Natures intelligence with the subtilty of
adulation, then taken by the breach of interest: For indeed self-love in woman
has a strange quality, the more it persuades her to overvalue her self, the
more it tempts her to cast her self away, and so men cheapen their bargain
most, by commending what they would have.

Therefore let not even those (who, without any design do suffer their tongues
to ru^ne loose by fashion, in the praises of Women's graces and beauties) think
this aymelesse roving of their fancies altogether innocent, though they pretend
only to spring and put up their good humors, and not to set and take their
affections, for convertly they undermine virtue, though they lay not a Train
to blow it up: The Tempter never wants ministers that watch hearts as they
grow hollow, and void of humility, to fill them up with vanity, and then the
Mine is too easily sprung; so many may be guilty of filling of hearts with
Pride, and self-love, while they meant only to empty their own fancy; and thus
their wits serve the Tempter, as Jonathans Page did his master; for they carry
Arrows which 1 Reg. chapter 20.
the Devil shootes upon Design, though they are not privy to the intention.

It is no wonder that frail woman should be so much deceived in the colors
and features of all their good qualities, since the Devil and Man join and
study nothing so much as to make them flattering reflexes of their persons, and
powers of their mind; and so woman is entertained commonly in her first manner
of delusion, for that is still taken from her, which she believes is given
her; the being like God, for her innocence, is a much better resemblance of
God, then man's vain adoration.

But let not men think they have an easy account to make for all those
levities which they expose so handsomely, as women's eyes are deceived by those
false lights, for that which will prove an aggravation of men's faults, will
serve as an extenuating circumstance for women's defense; their wit and
dexterousnes, may deduct somewhat from the guilt of woman's trespasses, for she
may plead now some commiserablenes, by saying, the man who was given me, as my
sentence to obey, deceived me, and as one of the reasons given, why God did
compassionate the fall of Man, and not of Angels, is, that they sinned without
any exterior solicitation; so certainly abused woman shall find this
circumstance as some intercession for her, the being assaulted by a foreign
power of temptation, which may move God the easilyer to call such to him, as
Christ did the Woman, who had a spirit of infirmity so long upon her, that tied
her from looking upward; and Christ gives this reason for his calling her,
when she did not it seems think on him, that she was bound by Satan, and
she is a good figure of the Luke 31. 11.
infirmity of her Sex, which is easily overcome and bound by the violence of
exterior temptations; wherefore God does more easily commiserate their fallen
frailties, and calls them with more pity then he does the stronger Sex,
which have the crime of abusing their strength toward the others defection:
We can but hope that the Samaritane Lover was comprised in the Ioh. 4.
conuersions of her town, we are sure of her sanctification, and we have
little reason to hope of the adulterers remission, when the Woman found such
commiseration in Christ, so as we may conclude, God is more indulgent to the
infirmity of woman, extenuated and modified by the exterior pressure of
temptation, then he is to the infidelity of man, who is as it were trusted with
a charge of superiority, rather to succor then supplant the weakness of that
Sex.

Admitting this, they who are so licentious in all their entertainments of
Women, should remember sometimes the penalty Christ has set upon the
scandalizing of little ones, for there are few women that are not always
children in this point Matthew.
of being able to bear fond praises and adulations, without enfeebling and
lightening their minds; so as all those levities which the fancies of men
vapor out in their conversation with these little ones, are Millstones, which
they are insensibly hanging upon their own necks, while they are thus
scandalizing them; that is, while they are leaning and pressing upon the
infirmity of nature, that way it stands already bowed: And since humane
nature is of so frail a constitution, as the purest blood of it is the
easilyest tainted, we ought to be the more sober and temperate, in treating and
entertaining the most infirm part of it, which is Beauty, with the delicacies
of praises, since by nature it is so apt to make excesses upon such diet.

If we consider how profuse and inordinate even the most reserved Lovers are in
this entertainment, we may easily sentence even this light riot to be poison to
piety and devotion, which says with the Psalmist, I will take heed to my ways
that I sin not Psalm. 38.
with my tongue; what can then be answered for them, who take care of their
tongues only to make way for their sin? and since we are to account for idle
words, methinks that order should easily determine never so slight a passion to
be inconsistent with Religion; for we know they are the aliment and life of all
such excesses; and certainly no idle words are so hard to answer for, as upon
this subject of vain love: Upon other occasions many vapouring extravagancies
are like squibs thrown up and break in the air, above the heads of the
company, and so offend no body; but upon this purpose, they are likely Trains
laid to take fire and work some ill effect, so that idle words upon the ground
of passion, grow not as Weeds, wild out of the pregnancy of the earth, but are
set as poisonous plants, with design of making venomous compositions.

How heavy these light words will lie upon them, let every one judge by this
rule, that they are to be accounted for at the same price each one sets upon
them; for just as much as they would have them pass, (whether they be taken or
no at that rare, by those they would put them off to, viz. whether they make
that cozening advantage by them or no, with the creature) they must answer for
as much to the Creator as they projected to make of them; and thus, as the
Prophet says, As much Wind as they have sowed, so much Tempest they shall
reap. Hosea 8. 7.


. VI.
Presumption upon our virtue discussed, and the danger thereof remonstrated.

THere are many Lovers, who (when they find no direct design of impurity at
first in their passions) conclude them competent with their salvation, and care
not how near the wind they steer, nor how many boards they make, as long as
they believe they can reach the Port with this wind, which is so fair for
their senses; therefore they pretend they need not stand so strait a course, as
making Jobs covenant with their eyes, nor setting David's watch over their lips,
provided they set a guard over their heart, that no foul possession enter upon
that seat: thus do they expose many fair models of their love, which in
speculation may seem designed according to the square of Religion, but how hard
it is to build adequately to the speculative measures in this structure, none
can tell that presume to know it: our senses are not inanimate materials that
obey the order of the spirits design, but rather laborers, which are easily
debauched, to work contrary to the measures and rule of the Spirit: hence it
is, that they who will undertake in this case, all they can argue possibly for
humane nature, render it impossible by their undertaking it, for they reckon
not their presumption as any impediment, which in the practice (as being an
irritation of God) out-weighs all the other difficulties, and the more, always
the less it is weighed in the design; therefore as Solomon says, The wise
man declineth evil, and the fool heaps on and is confident. Pro. 14.


The belief of impossibility is the most prudent supposition in such
experiments as cannot be essayed without some desperate exposure of our selves:
it may be demonstrate by reason, that we may have half of our body over a
precipice, so the center of the weight be kept in an exact aequilibrium, that
part which is pensile can never weigh down the other which is supported but we
should think one mad that would try this conclusion, when the least motion
changes the Position, and consequently destroys the practicer of this
speculation: so those that pretend to keept their souls equally poised in the
just measures between piety and profane love, their eyes hanging over the
precipice of temptations, which do so easily turn their heads, and then alter
all the positions of their mind, adventure upon just such a spiritual
experiment.

He that seeks danger shall perish in it, is attested by the unhappy
president of the wisest of men, and it is superfluous to 3 Reg. chapter 7. Jachin
and Boos the two pillars set before the temple of Solomon, signifying Direction
and Fortitude.
instance other testimonies of this truth: When David and Solomon, the two
brazen pillars of the Temple, (being the direction and fortitude of the Princes
of Israel) were melted and poured out like water, (as David himself
confesses) by the ardors of his flesh, and so they seem to stand in holy
record as two high eminent marks set upon these sands, to advertise the
strongest vessels not to venture to pass over them: and if Saint Paul that
vessel of election, after his having seen the beauty of Heaven to possess his
heart) thought himself hard matched with the Angel of Satan, and cried out
to heaven for help against him; shall any presume to entertain and cherish
this ill Angel, and hope to overcome him with flattery and civility? for they
make this trial, who lodge in their thoughts, and serve with their fancies,
strong impressions of humane beauty, and propose to keep their body in order,
even by the virtue of such a guest, pretending that the very object infuseth a
remembrance, and reverence of purity.

With this and the like glittering conceits do many vain Lovers fondly satisfy
and abuse themselves, which is to answer the question of the Holy Spirit, that
the fire they carry in their bosoms preserves them from being enflamed by it;
we may fitly say to such, in answer from the Prophet, God laughs at you; when
all Gods advices are, that there is no security against this bosom enemy, but
violence and diffidence; there is no mean between the flesh's being slave or
master; this treaty of Friendship between it and the spirit, proves but
Dalilahs kind holding of Sampsons head in her lap, while she is shaving him:
How often do we see the Spirit thus betrayed, and lie bound by this confidence?
And truly, all those chains which vain Lovers forge for the figuring out the
powerfulness of beauty, may be said to be those irons the flesh has cast off,
and set upon the Spirit, which is truly captivated always by the others
liberty.

This considered, let none presume, that while they deny the(...) eyes nothing
which they covet, they can deny their hearts any undue cupidity; for this
seems such an experiment, as if one of the children of Israel should have
carried a fiery Serpent in his bosom, presuming that while he looked upon the
Brazen Serpent he could not be stung: sure such a perverted confidence would
not have proved safe to the projector: So those who believe (while they have
the love of God before their eyes) they may expose them to all the fiery darts
of lustful eyes; seem to tempt God by such a vain presumption: these are such
of whom we may fitly say with the Apostle, that Erring themselves they lead
others into error, and have a form of Godliness, but 2 Timothy 3. v 4. 5.
deny the Power of it, being lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of God.

Let no body then trust to any confederacy between the flesh and the spirit
which is of humane loves making, for, of all reconciled enemies, the flesh is
least to be trusted after the accord, and love the least for the arbitration;
therefore let none believe their souls out of danger, because in the first
paces of their passion, they meet no insolent temptations that face them, and
declare the danger of their advance, for the Devil keeps likely his first
Method still, with those he finds in the state of innocence, he takes the
shape of the serpent, and creeps up by insinuation, and then changes his shape
into the figure of his power, and this transmigration of the evil spirits, from
one body into another, is truer then the fancy of Pythagoras; for we find often
this Metamorphosis of the devil from the form of a dove unto a serpent, and
from a lamb into a lion, since it is the same spirit that moves in the poetical
doves of Venus, as was acting in Eves serpent, and thus what has at first in
our love an innocent form, passes quickly into a venomous nature.

Wherefore severe caution, and repulse of the first motions of our sensitive
appetite, is the only guard our souls can trust against our bodies in this
case: for certainly many lovers sink into temptations in which they perish, as
some do that wade themselves unawares beyond their depth, who go into the water
at first, with caution and security as they believe, and are careful to find
ground at every advance of one of their legs, but when the water gets to a
certain height, though they feel ground still, they cannot use their legs,
which are carried up by the stream before they are out of their depth, and
thus they perish by this ill measured confidence: Even so the most cautious
lovers do often cast themselves away, for as long as they feel but the fear of
God as a ground, they go still upon, and find no temptations, (which the
Scripture familiarly figureth to us by waters) force away absolutely their
consents, (which are the souls feet) they think themselves safe, while they
feel the ground of a good resolution, but coming on by degrees into such a
depth of temptation, as the sensitive appetite does surreptiously lead them
into, their feet are easily carried away, and so they are lost by this
unexperienced presumption: and thus as Solomon says, we find There is a way
Prove. 14. 12.
which seems right unto man, but the ends of it are the ways of death: Me
thinks Solomon's experience should disabuse all men in the relying upon the
virtue of their Spirit, when we see that his so singular induement with the
holy Spirit was not security against the danger of this presumption: we are
warned by the Apostle, not to extinguish the Spirit, and nothing puts it out so
soon as the bodies being set on fire, the pure immixt fire of the cloven
tongues will not hold in long in cloven hearts, they must be perfect
Holocausts, which are to entertain that flame, and when the eyes are but
warming themselves at strange fire, that is, intending only an innocent
delight in the sight of beauty, they are often in too much danger of being
taken by this incentive.

Holy Saint Bernard brings in Eve, looking upon the fruit, while it was so
yet in her eye, when she saw it pleasant and fair Genesis 3.
to the eye; and asks her, why do you look so longingly upon your own death?
why are you so taken in looking upon that, which if you taste you are lost? you
answer, that you do but cast your eye, and not your hand upon it, and that you
are not forbid to see, but to eat; O though this be not your actual crime, yet
is it an aptitude thereunto, for while you are thus amused, the serpent
covertly windeth into your heart, first by blandishments he intangleth your
reason, and then by fallacies he diverteth your fear, affirming you shall not
surely die, and thus sharpens the curiosity while he suggesteth the cupidity,
and by these degres presents the fruit, and puts you out of the garden;
and this is commonly the event of the children of Eve, who entertain this
party with the serpent, weighing no temptation when it lights first upon their
eyes, till it fall too heavy on their hearts to be removed,

Therefore Saint Austin gives us an excellent advise, since the Devil does
watch thy heel, do thou watch his head, which is the beginning of an ill
suggestion; when he proffereth first an ill motion, reject it; then, before
delectation arise, and consent follow; thus while thou breakest his head, he
shall not be able to bruise thy heel. And sure Saint Austin is one of the best
Counselors we can consult in this case, for he reads it decided in that book
which he was commanded to take up and read, while he was studying the case,
which advise as it came from the same voice, so it wrought the same effect,
take up thy bed and walk; for it raised him from being bedridden in this passion,
and set him a walking with him who is the way, the truth, and the life; We
cannot recuse Saint Austine as a party against this passion, when he professes
he had studied long the agreement of it with Piety, therefore let us hear the
result of his studies.

All the while he was in this disceptation, he confesses he found two wills in
himself, the one carnal, and the other Spiritual; which by a daily contention
did sever and dissipate his mind: and thus by experience he found the combat
between the flesh and the Spirit, which while his mind sought to part and
reconcile, she was hurt by both parties, conscience wounded her on the one
side, and custom struck her on the other, on which she was the most sensible,
so as his senses swayed him commonly to a partiality; thus he shows us the
links of that chain, which lovers by degrees find their wills fastened by; an
easy seduced appetite raises passion, and that cherished, induces custom,
and that uncontrolled imprints necessity, which becomes a punishment of
perverted liberty; for the law of sin is the violence of custom, by which
the mind is drawn and held at last even against her own reluctancie, but
deservedly, for having willingly fallen into this necessity, in this manner he
confesses that often upon the motions of the Spirit, which invited him to
break off all treaty of accord, and to declare for the redemption of his
captived appetite, he found himself kept as it were in a slumber in these
meditations of rising out of that soft bed of sensuality, and while he lay
stretching himself to wake, overcome still by his drowsinesse, he lay still
tossing in this resolution.

And alas, how familiarly do we roll our selves asleep again in this
doubtful drowsinesse, while we are half awake, purposing to rise and break
off our fancyes, dreams, and illusions! O then let Saint Austin's alarm keep
us awake, while we are in this halfe-wishing or vellity toward our casting off
the works of darkness, let us not lie still stretching and consulting our
senses, whether the night be far spent, and the day be at hand, that is,
whether there be not enough of our Romans 13. v. 13. 14.
youth left to promise us time to make our selves ready for the last day, let
us not slumber in this rumination, but rise and put on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and not lie turning our selves to and fro, which is, to make provision for the
lusts of the flesh; Saint Austin after he had rowsed himself upon this alarm
rose up directly, and set himself to such exercises as kept him always in
that vigilance which is required, not to enter into temptation, he presently
broke off all treaty with this passion, and has left this excellent test for
lovers to touch their affections, to try if they be of that purity which is
only current with God.

They love God less then they ought, who love any thing besides God, which
they love not for God. Apoc. 216.


This is to state God in our affections, as he has proclaimed himself to our
faith, to be the beginning and end of all things; Now whether a passion to the
creature can by any compass of humane frailty be drawn into this perfect
circle, moving first from the love of God, and reflecting still back again in
all the circumference to that first point? is a question will be answered
affirmatively by none, but by him who promised man he should become like God;
for this is an understanding above the strain of humane nature: yet I believe
there are many lovers seduced by this counselor, who at first design this
innocent re-conveyance of their affections, passing through the creature back
to their proper place, and of many of such projectors, we may say as Saint
Gregory does of the Camel in the law, that they are clean in the head, but
not in the hoof; they ruminate well, and speculate cleanness and purity in the
rational part, but the feet of their souls, which are the sensitive
appetites, want always their right division, because they remain too entirely
carnal, and so the whole becomes illegal in the law of grace: therefore I may
say it will be hard for such Camels to pass in at the narrow gate; wherefore I
shall advise those well-meaning minds in Christ's name, He that is thus washed,
wants yet the washing his feet, they must endeavor to change and purge their
terrestrial affections John 13. 13.
(which are here typified by the feet) with as much neatness as they can for
the impressions of corporeal beauties, which at first are but as dust upon
their feet, if they be let stick upon them, do easily turn to such dirt as is
not to be got off but by water drawn from the head; tears are required to wash
off that at last, which our breath might have blown off at first.

Therefore let them remember Solomon's admonition, in the Prove. 23. 33.
first straynings and impulses of their frailties, thy eyes shall see strange
women, and thy heart shall speak pervers things: we must answer then our hearts
first question, before it multiply arguments, with King David's resolution, My
heart, and my flesh rejoice in the living God, who indeed is the Essence of all
beauty and goodness, and has such an immensity of them, as even they who love
not him directly, can love nothing under the notion of fair or good, that is
not a part of him, though they be so injurious to God as to cover him with his
own light, taking the less notice of him, the more they find of his similitude
in the creature, they love and honor with his rights: in this case we do but
like fishes who play and leap at the image of the sun, as it is impressed upon
the fluencie of their element, and take it for the real substance: for when we
adore the image and copy of beauty, shadowed out to us upon the fluent and
transitory superficies of well colored flesh and blood, are we not deluded
like fishes, with a shining image of beauty superficially delineated upon our
own fleeting element? and thus as the Apostle says, we are erring, and leading
into error.

. VII.
Some scruples resolved about the esteem of beauty, and the friendship of
Women.

UPon what we have discoursed I believe we may conclude, that none should
flatter themselves with the hope of an agreement or co-habitation of these two,
divine love, and humane passion; whereupon we may say, that they who treat
this accommodation, are of Micahs disciples Jud. 17.
who hope to lodge concordantly together an Idol, and an Ephod, ^aking only as
it were a Cell apart for God, and expect as he did, to prosper in this
concordancy: But we know our Lawgiver Christ Jesus would not suffer so much as
Doves to be traffiqued in the Temple; which figureth to us, that we must
endeavor to dislodge even all our levities and most harmless amusements out
of our thoughts, which are apt to trade and bargain for a part of our hearts,
that must be kept single and entire to his love: Therefore we may much more
forceably conclude with the Apostle against the co-habitation of any vain
passion; What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? you are the Temples
of the Living God. 2 Cor. 6. 16.


But now as I was laying down my Pen, there come some objections from my
memory of the worlds humor which hold my hand till I have answered them,
though it may be I have already strained the patience even of a recovering
Reader, by the quantity of this prescript.

Methinks there are many now, who (like the Pharisees that were in the
possession of the pleasure of changing wives) reply Matthew. 19. 10.
as they did to Christ upon the decision of that question, saying, if this
strictnes be required in our life, with women, we are debarred of all
friendship and civil conversation with them; and it were better there were no
beauty if this be the case, that we are interdicted a particular preference and
estimation of it, unto whom I may properly return Christ's question for an
answer, have you not read, that the souleof man is the spouse of God? And that
which God has joined so, nothing must separate; no creature must share any
parcel of the heart, in such a manner as may question her fidelity, which is
all the restraint I put upon the spouse, but as wives are allowed friendships
and familiarities with others, which do not impeach the sincerity of their
virtue, so the soul of man is permitted acquaintances, amities, and valuations
of the creature, and proportionate to the excellencies wherewith they are
advantaged from the Creator, giving the graces of nature a prizall commensurate
to their distinct dignities, so it be bounded in such terms, as do not come
within that enclosure of the heart, which is Gods property; for the Beloved
challenges the heart as a Garden enclosed, a Spring shut up, a Fountain
sealed: And yet this integrity of the Cant. 4. 12.
Spouses love to her Beloved does not forbid her affections coming abroad, and
conversing with amiable objects, as with her Lord his dependents and retainers,
which she may esteem and delight in more or less, as the stamp of his goodness
is the fairelyer impressed on them.

Wherefore I do not mean to attaint friendship with beautiful persons,
merely upon the suspicion of our frailty, for such intelligences are requisite
to some vocations in the world, which may say, in the Apostles name, we must go
out of the world, if we do not contract friendship with Women, and I hope such
may find in this discourse some direction how they may be able to quench all
the f^ery darts of the enemy, who can easily Ephesians. 6. 16.
make up his Wildfire in friendship.

And in answer of what concerns the honoring of beauty, I profess to esteem
the blessing of beauty so much, as I design only by these advises to secure it
from the treachery of such a confident as beauty likely trusts most, yet is
truly such a one as does oftenest betray the goodness of it; this is passion
that I detect, which is so naturally false to beauty, as it subsisteth but by
betraying beauty, by perverting it into temptation and impurity; whereupon I
would prefer reason to beauty, to have that trusted only, which may furnish
true joys enough, wherewith to entertain and delight the owners of it; showing
what a real blessing beauty has, by being made by God one of the best opticke
glasses for the help of man's spiritual eye, by report from his corporeal in
the speculation of divinity; for by this inference of the Wiseman, he may
argue, If we are delighted with these material beauties, we may judge how much
more beautiful and lovely is the Lord and Creator of them: adding, that by the
greatness of the beauty of the creatures, the heathens were inexcusable, that
they did not find the truth of one Sap. 13. 3.
Creator.

We may remarke a special providence of God in the order of nature, providing
against the pervertiblenesse of this great blessing of beauty, for the most
vehement cupidity of our nature arises not before the use of reason: the abuse
of beauty, and the use of reason, are both of an age, whereby we have a defense
coupled with the time of temptation, and our reason when it is seriously
consulted for our safety, has the voice of the holy crier in the desert, and
directs us to a stronger then her self, which was before her, though it
appeared after her; this is Grace, which we may call in to our succor in all
the violencies of our nature, so as with these pre-cautions, I propose beauty
to be truly honored in that highest degree of nobility, which God has been
pleased to rank it among his material creatures, preserving religiously the
Prerogative Rights of the Sovereign of our hearts, who demands not the
putting out of the right eye as the Ammonites 1 Reg 11.
did for a mark of slavery, but proposed it only as a medicine in case of
scandal, when the liberty of the whole body is endangered by it, whereby we
see devotion does not infringe any of the rights of humanity in the valuation
of material blessings, for in not admitting vain passion, it does rather
defend then diminish the liberties of humane nature, which are truly inslaved
by the tyrannies of passion.

Now in answer to that question concerning friendship with Friendship defined.
women, I profess to intend so little the discrediting of real friendship
with them, as I approve it for an excellent preservative against the
contagiousnesse of passion, for as passion has been well said to be friendship
run mad, so friendship may be properly styled sober passion; since it has
all the spirit and cordiality of the wine of love, without the offensive fumes
and vapors of it, and so does the office of exhilarating the heart, without
intoxicating the brain; Insomuch as we find, that our friendship with the
proprietor of what we are tempted to covet, does often, even by the single
virtue of morality, suppress those unruly appetites: Therefore when the power
of Christianity is joined to reinforce it, we may expect it should much the
easilier correct frailty of nature.

It has been well said of friendship, that it is the soul of humane society,
and if our friendship hold this Analogy with the soul, to be equally entire in
every part of the body, it is very safe with women, if the love be no more in
the face then in the feet, as long as it is like a soul thus spiritually
distributed, equally in the whole compound of body and mind, it is not in
danger of the partiality of passion, which never makes this equal
communication of it self, but lodges solely in the external figure of the
body; and friendship thus regularly spiritual, may find a sensible as well as
a lawful delight in the beauty and lovelynesse of the person; for beauty has
somewhat that affects and takes our nature, which methinks is somewhat like
to that we call the fire, or the water in diamonds, which are certain rays of
luster and brightness, that seem the Spirit of the whole matter, being equally
issued from all parts of it; and so there may be a kind of spirit, and
quickness of joy and delight that may shine upon us, from the object of a
beautiful person, whom we may love so spiritually, as to consider nothing in
the person, severed from the whole consistence and virtuous integrity of soul
and body, no more then we do the fire of a diamond apart from the whole
substance.

Thus beauty may innocently raise the joy of friendship, whiles sincere*
friendship does suppress the danger of beauty, which is only the kindling of
passion* wherefore if it be rightly examined, passion which pretends to
honor beauty, more then friendship, will be found but to vilify and debase
it; for passion uses this diamond but as a flint, to strike, material
sparkles of lust out of it, whereas friendship looks upon the fire of this
diamond as delighted only with the luster of nature in the substance of it,
which reflects always the splendour of the Creator unto a Pious' and religious
love.

But this high Spiritual point of friendship with women, (where we have no
defense by consanguinity against the frailty of flesh and blood) is not so
accessable as we should presume easily to reach it, many loves have strayed
that pretended to set out toward it; therefore we cannot be too cautious in
this promise to our selves of security in such difficulties, for our spirit can
make no such friendship with our flesh, as to rely upon the fidelity thereof,
without his own continual vigilance; wherefore S. Peter's advise is very
pertinent in these 1 Pet. 1. 17.
intelligences, Converse in fear in this time of your sojourning, for
otherwise I may presage to you in the terms of the Prophet, Evil shall come
upon you, and you shall not know from whence Esaias 47. 11.
it rises; for friendship does often when it is too much presumed upon, rob
upon the place it did first pretend to guard, being easily tempted by the
convenience our senses find in that trust: And as those thieves are the
hardliest discovered, that can so handsomely change their apparencies, upon the
place, as they need not fly upon it; so friendship when it is debaushed into
passion, is very hardly detected: For when it is questioned by Gods authorized
examinants, it resumeth the looks and similitude of innocent friendship, and
so remains undiscovered, not only by the exterior inquest, but very often it
eludeth a slight interior search of our own conscience, thereby proving the
most dangerous thief in the familiarities with women: For this reason I must
charge this admission of friendship toward women, with this clause of Saint
Paul, While you stand by says, presume not, but fear, for in this case we may
warrantably invert the rule of Saint John, and say, 1 Ep. Joh. 4. 18.
that perfect love brings in fear: wherefore I will conclude this case with
Solomon's sentence, Blessed is the man who fears always, he that hardneth his
heart shall fall into mischief.

VIII.
The Conclusion framed upon all the premised Discourse, and our Love safely
addressed.

NOw then upon these evidences, we may fairly cast passion in this charge of
Treason against the Sovereign of all our love, and consequently, all libertine
discourse, and familiarities with women, may justly be noted as Malignants,
which legally in Religion ought to be sequestered; nay even friendship it self
(with persons to be feared) lies under some cloud, as requiring a continual
suspicious eye upon it, to keep it safe from all intelligence with sensual
appetites; in so much as when it is sincerest, it must be watched with great
prudence to be kept safe: for which cause in stead of all these perilous
commerces of our love, I will prefer so secure an object to it, as Saint
Augustine says of it, Love but, and do what you will; this is the increated
beauty of God, in which there is not only no fear to be had of our over-loving
it, but even there is no fear of our not being out-loved by it, and so our love
is always secured to us.

Therefore, O Soul! Why do thou halt and hesitate about the loving him, who
must needs love thee faithfully? and art so prone to love that, which if it
love thee at all, must do it perfidiously, either deceiving thee or some other:
thou shall always be unhappy in loving such, which if another love, thou shall
be offended; or if they love another thou shall be tormented: The love of God
is exempted from all grief or care; for in his loving of others, thou shall
joy, and that all may be in love with him, thou shall wish: This is the
transcendent sufficiency of Gods good, that he may love all, and be beloved of
all without any detriment or diminution of either the lover or the beloved, but
with a fuller joy of both: All other things are infirm, scanted and indigent,
which are not sufficient for the loving of two, or the being beloved by two,
without defrauding of one of them.

You then, that by love seek contentment, why do you love that, which even the
loving of, is disquiet? O love him, who even in the necessary disquiets of this
life, can make you happy; how idle is it to love such goods, which by loving
thou deservest to want, and not to love that good, where the act of loving is
the fruition of it? for God being beloved becomes yours: other goods when you
love you become theirs, and so indeed you want even your self by such loves:
God is only to be wanted by not being loved, and all other things which you
leave for God, you find again in his Love; O then love that only, which alone
is all things.

To conclude, all you who have much to be forgiven for other loves, transfer
betimes all your affections upon him, 1 These. 5. 23.
where you may hope with the blessed Penitent, To have much forgiven you, for
loving much: Thus only you can hope to attain to the state Saint Paul
prescribes to abstain from all appearance of evil, that your whole spirit and
soul and body may be preserved blameless to the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and God grant that our souls may meet him with the lamps of the wise
Virgins only lighted in them; and then we shall be no more in danger of ceasing
to love what we should, when we enter into our masters joy, which is eternal
love.

The fourteenth Treatise. The Test and Balance of Filial and Mercenary Love.
In five Sections.
. I.
Of the value of Love, and Gods tolerating some mixture of selfe-respects in it.

WHen Esdras had cleared to the seduced people, that the Law of God could not
dispense with 1 Esd. 10. 12.
their retaining of such strange women of the Land as lay in their bosoms,
they pleaded for some time to make this painful divorce, saying, It was not
the work of a day or two: So methinks, many who are convinced in this point,
of the prohibition of this alien and strange conjunction of our Love, which is
the child of God; with vain passion, the daughter of the earth, pretend that by
degrees they will sever this impurity from their loves, because it requires
some time, and much grace to make this division.

I confess, it is not the work of a few good motions or remorses, it asks
as it were a melting and liquefaction of our hearts, to separate this dross
from the pure substance of love; but we are so much furthered toward this
operation, as the fire we must work it in costeth nothing but the asking: It
is that which the Spouse says, are coals of fire, and have a vehement flame,
and has a special virtue to purge and calcine our Cant. 8. 6.
affections; according to the Prophets advice, of separating the pure from the
impure: and we may confidently call for this fire down from heaven, by the
Spirit of our master to consume these his enemies, the concupiscence of the
eye, and the concupiscence of the flesh, that are the opposers of this
purgation, and refinement of our hearts which he demands of us, as silver
seven times tried.

Reflecting upon the exactnes of this receiver of hearts, if we resolve to
trade with our loves for the Kingdom of heaven, we must examine sincerely what
temper of purity is current with God; for as passion does both lighten and
vitiate them in one kind, so is there another sort of drossines in our nature,
which does often too much imbase our love, by an overallay of self respect,
that rendereth it too mercenary, and of too low a value: it is very requisite
then to be rightly informed of the Standard by whose purity all our love, that
passes for the purchase of the Kingdom of heaven, must be tried and tested.

In our contract for heaven, there is a strange singularity, since both the
payment and the purchase, are one and the same thing; differing only in degrees
of intension and purification; for infirm and imperfect love is our price, and
love perfected and consummate is our possession; namely, God who is love is
all; and 1 Ep. Joh. 4. (...).
as love is the best thing even in heaven as well as in earth, it is
consonantly appointed for the chief commerce between them: wherefore God
asks but the heart of man even for all himself, and knowing that the heart in
the most entire transaction of it self in this life, can remit but imperfect
and defective love: we must examine severely what rates of imperfectnes God
admits in our affections; for in favor of our poverty, he accepts some
part of our payment, in that which is, as I may say, the base money of our
nature, mercenary love, which he allows for the convenience of our indigent
and decayed estate.

Methinks by this allusion we may appositely explain what degree of
allowablenes mercenary love may be accepted at; for as base money is a means
of commerce between the rich and the poor, and is not commonly allowed in
payments, above some low sum: so God in condescendence to the poverty and
incommodity of our nature permits mercenary love in some proportion to be
current, between his plenty and our penury, but will not accept our total
discharge in it, we may have some selfe-respect in our affections to God, that
may represent to us our rewards, as a beneficial traffic and correspondence;
but if we assign all our love too partially to the interest of our private
blessings, we are in danger of losing heaven, by trading only for it; by reason
this kind of love seems to treat with God only, as he is in heaven, not to
affect heaven as it is in God; and so we may fail of both, by this misplacing
of them in our desire; they who seek God first, are sure to find heaven with
him, but they who look at heaven only, are not so sure to find God: for in
this Court the very aspiring to the Kings favor is the acquiring it; and we
know the having grace and credit is a better security for the making of
benefit, then the affecting of gain, is an address to the attaining of favor.

This considered, we must be advised, not to reckon too much upon this baser
species of mercenary love, for though it be admitted for some part of our
account, it will not be accepted for the whole sum of our purchase, it must
be the gold tried in fire which the Angel advises us to provide, that must
Rev. 3. 18.
make the greatest part of the price of that precious Pearl for which we
traffic: and this is filial love, even as pure as we can refine it, in this
our ^ordid constitution: Wherefore I conceive it will be expedient to lay out
some pieces of both these loves, that those who desire to discern their
differences, may have some facility to weigh their own dispositions by these
portions of either of them exhibited as just measures, whereby they may judge
their due proportions.

. II.
Mercenary Love defined, and the relying much on it dissuaded.

MErcenary Love, is that which affects God chiefly, in order to our own
remuneration, and so seems to look up to heaven, rather as on a mirror of
reflection, then as on the essential splendour of Gods presence, whereby this
aspect on God seems more referred to the sight of Mercenary love desined.
our selves in him, then to the seeing of him in himself: this kind of love
then savoureth much more of the minds immersion in our senses, then of the
spiritual nature of the soul, which by her own instinct points back to
heaven, in order to a free return to God from whom she issued, rather then
that she is drawn thither by a reflection on her self: and the more the soul
is abstracted from selfe-respects, the more genuine and kindly return she
makes of love; which free and ingenuous reaspiring to her own repatriation, we
term filial love, which is to love God more fervently, for what he is to us
by his own nature, then for what we are promised to be by his grace, which is a
due to God, who as he is a father to us, in so admirable a kind, as his love to
us, not his delight, as in other fathers, is the occasion of our being; so his
being, rather then his blessings ought to be the object of our love.

But in our degenerated nature, mercenary love seems to be the Elder Brother,
yet as it is the son of the Bondwoman, so is it not the heir of the
blessing; though God does hear the voice of this Ishmael, and assigns some
allowance to it, yet he settleth not the Covenant upon it: Filial Love is our
Isaac, the issue of a free ingenuous Soul, the spouse of God, and of that
stock, Christ, as the Apostle says, is born in our hearts, and the chief
blessings of christianity are entailed upon this seed of the Holy Ghost,
Filial Love.

Notwithstanding we must acknowledge this Ishmael of mercenary love to be a
legitimate issue, though of a servile mother* for King David himself owneth
the Lineage of it, saying, I inclined my heart to perform thy statutes for
reward: So as I do Psalm. 118.
not censure the matter, but advise the regulation of the measure of it: For it
may be said to be of the nature of Dwarfes, which are an imperfection, not a
perversion of nature; and so like them, the less it grows, the better it
remains, the littleness of it making some amends for the infirmity: And we
may say aptly, that this kind of love, is permitted us for the hardness of our
hearts; for from the beginning it was not so, since we know God made the soul
to reflect back upon himself, directly, as a Beam emitted from his own
goodness; and so it was to revert upon him, in as direct a line, as Rays are
reverberated upon the substance from whence they issue: But we know who changed
this course of the soul of man, and taught her this flexuous serpentine motion
of self-love in which she seems now to revert to God: For self-love moves
in a posture of indirectnesse and retor^^on, winding and looking back upon
selfe-respects: yet Gods indulgence is such, as he tolerateth this infirm,
crooked regresse of the soul, when by the succor of grace, the heart is
sollicitous to rectify and straighten the course of our loves reflux, bending
as little as we can in the obliquity of our nature toward private references,
and addressing the major part of our wishes in heaven, to the glory of God.

When our hearts do sincerely aim and point at this straight filial love,
God, like a tender father, does rather compassionate then reproach the wrinesse
and indirectness of our paces, in this feeblenes of our feet, when our hearts
are set straight in this way of our loving him, as we see fathers deal with
little children, which they call to them when they begin to try to go alone,
when they see them cross their feet, and reele forward in their weak
faltering motions, sometimes falling by the way, they. do rather cherish them
then chide them for this imbecility: so God, when he sees the heart straining
forward, with the best of our powers, toward a simple immediate love of him,
does not discourage this infirm staggering of our nature, between mercenary
and filial love; and in conformity to this his Method with his children, God
says by the Prophet, I have taught Ephraim to go, and taken them by their
arms, and then Hosea 11.
in condescendence to our degenerous and ignoble nature, he advances further,
and says, I drew them with the cords of Adam, with bands of love: that is, God
presents us with such attractives, as affect most our interested
constitutions, which are the objects of remuneration, and private salary; and
of these threads, (made of the fleece as it were, of our own nature) he
vouchsafes to frame cords to draw us, and fasten us to the love of him, but we
must not take this merciful indulgence given to our defectuosities, as a
dispensation for the sordidnes of our loves, but rather in a holy effect and
contention of gratitude, strain to love God the more purely, and irrespectively
to our selves, in regard of the transcendent benignity of this dispensation.

This supposed, we ought to consider mercenary love under the same notion, as
Saint Paul exhibits to us the Law of Moses, as a Preceptor or Tutor to us in
the childhood of our love, to lead it by degrees to filial love, which is the
full age of our affections: For indeed while our love is in this first infancy
Gal. 3. 24.
our minds may be well said to be in bondage under the elements of the world,
rather serving upon a servile contract, then acting as heirs of the Promise;
which dignity a Christian evidenceth only by filial Love: indeed the other
sort is rather legal then evangelicall, and alone brings nothing to
perfection.

. III.
Filial love described, and some strong incentives presented to kindle it in
us.

NOw then (as the Apostle says,) Let us leave these beginnings and rudiments
of the doctrine of Christ, and Hebr. 8.
covet earnestly the best gifts, and I will show unto you a Corinth. 12.
more excellent way; by as much as the matter of the altar of perfumes was more
precious then that of Holocausts, let us then leave fouling our hands with this
brass of mercenary love, and fall a telling out this gold of Filial dilection.

Filial love is an adherence of our hearts to God, under this Filial love
defined.
mixed notion, principally of his own being, and secondarily of our relation to
him: So as this may be said to be a repercussion of his own light upon him, as
simply as our compounded nature can reflect it, the light of Gods countenance
impressed upon us, being by this love reverberated upon the divine nature, From
the eyes of the handmaid, fixed upon the eye of her mistress, more in order
to the duty of her nature, then in private affection to her self* So that this
kind of love seems to be in the regeneration of man in the age of reason,
what the soul is in his first generation, to wit, the first principle of life:
For our devotion is but as it were an Embrion before it receive this animation,
which is induced by an infusion, even of that love, wherewith God loves
himself, since it is the holy Spirit diffused in our hearts, that quickneth
and informs them by this kind of love: This is then the only sort of
affection worthy of God, whereby we return him that part of the divine nature,
we partake by his communication, while we seem thus to remit the Holy Ghost
back to him out of our hearts, loving God with the same affection, we derive
from this residence in our souls.

Methinks the dignity and present delight of this noble love (though it were an
unthrift anticipation in this our minority, and were to be discounted to us out
of our future estate of loving) might tempt a soul to take up for her present
joy and satisfaction, the suavity and blessedness of this excellent love: how
much the rather ought we then aspire to this degrees of loving, when the estate
of our reversion is reproved proportionately to the degrees of this our
anticipation? This may well be the Method of such a father, whose portions to
his heirs, are the enjoying himself; no wonder then, that the desire to
preoccupate this state, should augment the childrens inheritance: For the
Father (who is infinite love,) must needs be largest to them who have advanced
to themselves the most of Filial love: and the reason is, that this Celestial
Father can reward nothing but his own gifts, assigning always second benefits,
by the measures of his first liberality: and thus the more he has enriched us
with this love, the more he remunerateth the possession of it; so that
mercenary love when it is understood, will be found to damnifie it self, by
this projected aeconomy of selfe-provision: for in this commerce, all private
reference imbaseth so much the species wherewith we negotiate, as it falls in
value, just as much as it rises in quantity.

When we reflect upon the state of humane nature, we may collect easily, how
much God desires this correspondence of Filial love, since even from the
forfeiture of all our filial dignity, he took the rise of a nearer and firmer
alliance of our nature unto his, and fastened it so to this filial constitution,
as he took it out of man's own power, ever to divide or sever it again from
this relation; for even the sin of man can never divorce our humanity now
from this filial state, since the natural Son of God, will now no more
cease to be man, then to be God, so inseparably is our nature now fixed in this
filial reference; for though individuals may by want of Filial love to the
divine nature) separate themselves from a blessed participation thereof in
eternity, yet our nature can never fall from this divine conjunction, but shall
remain elevated above that of Cherubims and Seraphins to all eternity.

O who can contemplate this, and consent to love God, less nobly then our
present nature will admit, considering we have even the nobleness of our
nature, now set out to us as an object of our love! for as it is in Jesus
Christ, we cannot overlove our own humanity: and since God has done as much as
was possible for him in honor of our nature, shall man be content to love this
God, less then is possible for his constitution? nay there are grave Divines,
who indeare this obligation upon our humanity by this supposition, that God
lost the love of much nobler creatures, by his preference of man's nature before
theirs; and if the supreamest of all creatures, thought this as a partiality to
an unworthy subject, a provocation to leave loving of God; shall not this
preferred creature derive from hence a powerful motive to raise and purify his
love, in respect of this so obliged proposure; whereof the Apostle glories,
and insisteth much upon the prelation of the seed of Abraham, before the nature
of Angels, as one of the strongest inducements, to ^nterest our hearts in this
filial affection.

And since God has preferred the nature of man, before that of Angels, not
only in point of honor, but likewise in the part of succor; why may we not
suppose he valueth more the love of men, then that of Angels? this conception
may safely be made use of, to incite us to the studying the abstraction and
spiritualizing our loves, to the purest degree of our compound nature; in which
(the very disadvantage we have more then pure spirits in the devesture of
self-respects) may be converted into a conducement to the value of our purity,
by reason the opposition of our bodies in this disinterested love, is counted
to us an indearement of our hearts, when in this reluctance of one half, we
reduce our love to that decree of implicity which is compatible with this our
complexure; and as Saint Jerome says of the chastity of virgins composed with
that of Angels, There is more felicity in the one, but more fortitude in the
other: So we may say respectively of their two loves, that there is more
happiness in the one, but more Heroicknesse in the other.

What Angelical love exceeds in the finenesse of abstraction, humane may
answer in the fidelity of extraction, since his is labored and formed out of
repugnant matter; for man must overcome, what Angels have not to resist, many
material adherencies incorporate in his senses, insomuch as the sons of men
for the purifying their affections, must (as it were) cease to be themselves,
and these spiritual substances for the simplifying of their loves, need but
rest and remain themselves.

Wherefore in this ods of natures, in this act of loving, the difficulty on
man's part passes as an allowance of some disparity in point of finenesse and
separatenesse; and taking our loves with this allowance, they may be thought as
current with God, as those abstracted affections facilitated by a more simple
nature* so that when man sigheth, (as the Apostle says) as burdened with
inviscerate interests, longing to put on this pure spiritual vesture of
Filial love, this kind of heaviness of spirit, may be said to make his love
weight in heaven; and indeed the easiest way to lighten this kind of burden of
selfe-respect, is to sigh it away by degrees; for nothing looseneth and blows
off more this dust about our hearts, then these breathings and aspirations of
the soul in a resentment of those impure mixtures, the body infuseth into her
love to God; so that we are, as I may say, allowed what our nature abounds
the most in, which is sorrow, to make up that wherein our love is the most
defective, which is simplicity and immixture; since a pure and sincere sorrow,
for the mixture and impurity of our affections to this indulgent Father, is
accepted as a compensation for the defect of pure and Filial love.

. IV.
Motives to Filial love, drawn from our several relations to God, as also
from the dignity and advantages of this sort of love.

LEt us observe a little under what affecting notions the divine Trinity
vouchsafes to exhibit it self to the love of man, the first person under that
of a father, the second of a brother, the third of a comforter or a friend; so
that the love of man may be said to be an act wherein they have all one
indentity, while they are distinguished into these three obliging relations,
issuing out of the unity of love; thus the deity seems to draw it self out
into these several lines of benevolence, to take in all the ways and avenues
to our love, since there is no inclination that is not suited and matched by
the^e agreeable correspondencies, if our affections do not so easily ascend to
the relation of a father, we have that of a brother, which is level and even
with the current of our natural love, and if it seem to run too stilly and
slow in this channel, we have the respect of a friend and comforter to turn it
into, in which our affections may be said to run downward in respect of their
pleasant current, and so to have the quicker motion: thus has the divine
charity fitted all the sympathies of our rational nature, with competent and
attractive motives to engage our loves unto it self.

Does not then this Method prove what God says by the Prophet, What could I do
that I have not done for this generation? shall man then leave any thing
undone, that his love may retribute?

When the Prophet aslae^h in admiration of Gods condescendence, What is man
that thou art thus mindful of him? may we not answer, that though man was
nothing but by Gods minding him, yet now by that act of bounty, he is become
son, brother, and friend to God: Then may we not ask now with greater wonder,
What is man, that he can be unmindfull of God? and attend to the loving
himself who is nothing, thereby deducting from his love to God, who offered
him yet more for his affection, the becoming even like himself, for but loving
him all he can, and specially when self-love which opposes this integrity,
reduces him to worse then nothing; surely no body can seriously ponder this
state and obligation of man, and not cry out with the Prodigal, if he have
hitherto misspent and dissipated his love, Father I am unworthy to look upon
thee in this relation, and if he have not been such an unthrift, nevertheless
if he find much mercenary dross sticking upon his love, let him humble
himself with the unsettled father, in the Gospel, confessing, Lord I love thee,
but impurely, and do thou purge the impurity of my love, and love that calls
in for this succor, grows strong enough by this displicence of his weakness.

This indulgent dispension with our defective love, flows from that gracious
relation of friends to the Son of God: which dignity seems so firmly instated
in our nature, as the conferrer of it did not degrade, even Judas, after the
forfeiture Matt. 26. 50.
thereof, he was received with the title of friend, when he came to renounce
all his rights to that concession, it seems he was yet in a capacity of being
restored, if he would but have pleaded by love and sorrow for his restoration,
he might have sold God, and yet have enjoyed him, if he would but have loved
him after he had sold him; had he instead of casting the price of his despair,
into the material temple, brought but back his faith and his love to the
living temple, casting himself forward at his feet, as a counterfall to
recover his falling backward when he fell from them, had he then with penitent
kisses repai'd unto Christ's feet, besought the taking off that perfidious
impudence which stuck upon his lips, we may well believe Christ would have
received him in this return, with Friend thou art welcome, coming with these
kisses to sign the Son of man's being the Son of God, and it is very
probable he would then have equalized the good thief.

O what cannot love obtain of him who loved us so much, as he seemed not to
love himself in the expression of it? Let us then copy this love, as well as
our disproportions allow us, and aspire to such a dilection of him, as may
seem a desertion, and even an exinanition of our selves, which were as the
Apostle says, the degrees of his love to us; Phil. 2. 7.
and in this our imitation of his love, we have a strange advantage of him; for
he was feign to take upon him the form of a servant, to express his excessive
charity, and we put on a divine similitude in this our exhibition of pure
disinterested love to him; for we manifest our partaking of the divine nature
in this denudation of our own, when our love is refined and purged from
mercenary respects.

And when we penetrate into the divine nature, we perceive that we are so far
from losing any thing by this self-post-posure, as we lose even no time in
point of our remuneration: For there is no interim between our loves looking on
God for himself, and the seeing our interests in God, since in the same
instant, our loves look directly upward upon this mirour of the Deity, it
reflecteth to us our own blessedness, and the less we looked for our selves,
the more we then see of them, resplendent in that clarity.

This Celestial mirror, makes a reflection much differing from all material
ones, for it does not send back to us the same image we set before it, but a
far better then we had any capacity to expose unto it: for when our love
looks upon God, referred simply to his own essential purity: This sort of
mirror returns to us not so much the image of our loves to God, as the
representation of Gods love to us, by reason we see then God loving us, in this
our intuition of his goodness: which reflection shows us a better character
of this manner of our love, then we could have prefigured to our selves; and
when we behold our selves in that image of Gods loving us, we cannot overvalue
our selves under that notion, so that this is a blessed and a safe course,
jointly to please God, and humor our own nature in a selfe-complacency.

Thus have I endeavored to figure these two loves, and I have set them both in
the tabernacle, but in unequal ranks of dignity, the one without, among the
utentsils of brass, the other within the vail, among the instruments of gold:
so as the most ignoble of these two species, is allowed in the service of
religion in some degree, but is not accepted single, as sufficient for our
religious oblation: For God tollerateth no longer the infirmity of that love,
whereof we our selves dispense with the insufficiency, so that the relying upon
mercenary love, may decry it, while our disclaiming the meannesse of it, may
hold it up current with him, to whom King David paying the purest species,
said, Thou art my God, and stand i^ no need of my goods. Psalm.


. V.
Advises in order to the preserving this sort of Love and fraternall dilection,
represented as a gracious rule whereby to judge of our rectitude in filial
love.

THese two loves being thus set by one another, (whereof I have not only drawn
the several complexions, but delivered the diverse constitutions,) there is
little doubt which of them will be preferred, but much, which will be rightly
pursued, for our degenerated nature is apt to believe that the verbal
preferring of Filial love, is the having it: and certainly, many who have been
near it, have missed of it, by concluding they had attained it; and many have
lost it, by conceiving it might be kept, and left loose without much
attendance, whereas they should remember that it is not the Spring of our
fallen nature, that of it self rises to that point from whence it fell; it is
the force of grace which can only raise and re-mount it to this elevation; and
our spirits must continually attend this operation of Grace, to force up this
pure affection against the risings of our sensitive appetites, which make
steep oppositions to this reflux; insomuch as if this work be not assiduously
intended, our affections quickly sink into the channel of our earthy nature,
which is interested and mercenary love.

They who pretend to keep their hearts exalted, as the Prophet says, above
the altitudes of the earth, in this purer element of filial love, must watch
it continually, when they hope they have it, and still pray for it as if they
feared they had it not: and there is no so ill sign of our having any of it, as
our presuming we have enough of it; as Saint Augustine says of the knowledge
of God, that he who has speculated his nature never so long, when he comes
to think he has found a complete definition of God, may be then said to
understand the least of him: So may I say of Filial love, they who have been
never so long filling their heatrs with it, when they presume they are full
enough, are then the most devoyded of it: It is in our love, (referring to the
immensity of God) as in numbers relating to infinity, wherein any sum never
so great, when it is once cast up and stayed in any total, may be said to be
further from infinity then a much lesser number, which is still running on
without any determined period: So any degree of love to our Creator, being once
voluntarily bounded and circumscribed, is farther off from our interminate duty
of loving, then an affection never so much behind, that is still advancing
without a purpose of term or limitation.

This then may be an infallible note of the deficiency of our love, when in any
strain of interior fervor, we conclude we may stay our loves at such a pitch,
and make plains upon it, never aiming at a higher flight, and this may be a
secure rest for such hearts, as are yet never so infirm in their loves, that
as long as they pursue sincerely the premotion and advance of them, loving all
they can, and resolving never to love less then all, they can improve their
loves by any solicitude, they may believe they love enough, for nothing
reaches nearer Gods actual infinity, then this (as I may say) optative
infinity in the soul of man, which though she can never reach the other
infinite existence, yet has a possibility of never staying or limitting her
motions toward it: This consideration drew from Saint Bernard this elegant
indearement of the capacity of love, in these words to God, O otherwise
incomprehensible Majesty to a soul loving thee! thou seem comprehensible,
for though the conception of no soul or Spirit can comprehend thee, yet the
love of a true lover of thee, comprehends all thou art, when he loves all
thy being, how great soever it be.

What greater incentive can we wish for the purifying our love, then to
conceive that capacity to be granted to our love on earth, which is denied to
our understanding even in heaven, to wit, the full comprehension of God? but
there is no love unless perfect filial, that can bear this so large
ascription: For our mercenary affection may be said to look upon divinity but
as an object angular, only as it points unto our selves, and does not spread
out souls upon the spherical and circular form of the divine goodness, as it
is it self, embracing all forms and beings, which latitude and expansion* is
peculiar unto Filial love, as an operation of that all-comprising charity,
diffused in our hearts by the Holy Ghost: For all Romans 5.
our love to God is inspired by himself, as the light inlightning, makes the
light that is illuminated.

God has provided so kindly against our mistaking of our way to this excellent
love, as he has set us a sensible mark to guide us by, which is fraternall
love, which we have as a kind of visible object, whereby to direct our course;
so that if our love lose sight of this mark, we may be sure it is out of the
way to filial affection, for the beloved Apostle (in pursuit of his 1 Ep.
John, 4. 10.
Masters specifical difference given to know his disciples from others, which
was the loving of one another) gives him the lie, that is so bold as to say he
loves God, when he hates his brother: And sure it is a special mercy, the.
laying for us these sensible steps of sociable dilection, whereon we may feel
our hearts rising up to that imperceptible object of the Deity, that by loving
what we do sie, we may direct the course of our love to what we do not see, if
we wanted this landmark, (whereof the Pharisees took down the upper half,
when they shortened the precept of loving our neighbor, to the length only of
reciprocal friendship) our love would be much more exposed to deviation, in
the course to heaven; For we know it is much easier to keep our way at land,
where we have diverse sensible marks for our guidance, and information of our
advance, then at sea, where we keep our course by accounts of art, and little
visible directions; and our love to our brothers, seems to be a passage of
our minds by land, since in that motion, in our own element, we have many marks
and signs of the rectitude of our love; whereas the elevation of our loves to
the invisible being of God, seems to be a course at sea, wherein we are
conducted only by spiritual and abstracted notions.

We may therefore account our selves much favored by having fraternal love as
a sign and secure token of our loves being in a straight and rectified address
to God, and the bosom- disciple of Christ fixes this, as the pole by which
our love may safely set his course to our Celestial Father, affirming that He
1 Ep. John, 2. 10. Mat. 22. 39.
who loves his brother, abides in light, and in him there is no scandale;
this is grounded on his Masters assertion, that the second precept of loving
our brother, was like the first of loving God; and these two loves may (me
thinks) be said to be different: but as the Divines say, Gods attributes are
distinct from his Essence, not really in their own nature, though they are
severed by distinct conceptions in our understandings, to wit of Gods wisdom,
goodness, justice, etc: we form conceptions distinct from his essence, which are
all really the same thing with it: In like manner we frame diverse notions of
this charity, as it is divided into these distinct exercises, which is really
the same, and is distinguished only by our understanding, according to these
several respects toward God and our brother; for it is the same inspired love
that streameth it self into these diverse acts or operations: Let us then
bless God for this precept of Fraternall love given us as a visible pillar of
fire, which while we have in our eye, we may be confident of being in our way,
to the term of Filial love consummate in the sight of our Father, who is as
yet visible but in his images; wherefore let us attend unto this duty, as to a
light shining in this our dark place, 2 Pet. 1. 12.
until the day star of Filial love rise in our hearts.

Thus have I set before you Christian Charity in the form of Jacobs ladder, on
which our love must ascend to him who rests upon the top of it, and in this
similitude mercenary love seems to answer well to the lower rounds nearest
the earth, on which our infirm nature is allowed to set her first steps, and
so to rise by degrees to the uppermost marches which touch heaven, to the which
none reaches but filial love, and our fraternall charities seem to be the
side-pieces which combine and compaginate the whole frame; so that these three
concurrencies do complete the means of our souls re-ascent to her Creator:
And since Christian grace is derived from the filial relation in the Deity,
Filial love in this state of our adoption must needs be the pillar and
strength of Christianity, which like the pillars of the holiest part of the
Tabernacle has the head cast of gold, and the fact of silver, that is, it
contains not only the purity and preciousnes of speculative love, but the
pliantnes and commerce of practical charity, whereby the feet in action, hold
a proportionate value to the head in speculation; thus by the intelligence of
speculative, and the industry of acting charity, our souls are safely
re-conveyed into our Fathers bosom, where the portion of every child is no
less then the becoming like the Lord of all, our elder brother Christ Jesus,
whose Filial love has purchased this co-inheritance for us, upon this
condition only on our part, of loving our father and his, with an affection
copied after his; and the liker we draw this image, the more we shall resemble
him when we shall become like him by once looking on him; let every one then
that 1 Epi. John. 3. 3.
hops this, sanctify his love, as his is sanctified.

The fifeenth Treatise. The Duties of a Christian toward Enemies, Divided into
five Sections.
. I.
The precept of loving Enemies, sweetened by miny Reasons drawn from Christ's
injoyning it, and his acting it.

NEver ^an spoke like this, said our Saviors enemies of John. 7.
him, when they came armed with Malice, and Authority to offer him violence:
This singular attribution was due to all he said, but cannot, me thinks, be
more apposite to any thing he uttered, then to this injunction of, Love your
enemies, as good to them that hate you; The Matthew. 5. 44.
strangeness of this precept seems to imply, That the Author of Nature only
could be the proposer of it, because the complyment with it seems to require
a reversal of the instincts of Nature, and looks like a greater undertaking,
then the re-edifying the Temple in three days; this seeming as many miracles
proposed, as there are Humane tempers in the world to be wrought upon: For the
answering of Hatred and Injury with Love and Charity, seems more incompetent
with our Nature, then the proposition which posed Nicodemus, since i^ may be
said to be less strange for John 3.
Nature to revert to what she has once been, then to transcend so much her own
dispositions, as to be raised from a Humane to an Angelical temper: For in this
state of Charity, the spirit seems no ways acting by the impulses of the sense^.

Me thinks those Celestial Doctrines should have attested to his enemies, that
it could be no less then the Creator of Men and Angels, that could undertake
these Conversions of old men into children, and all men as it were into Angels;
and he it was indeed who proposed this renovation and exaltation of our Nature:
and well might he do it, who had in his person brought God into Infancy, and
Man into Divinity. We may ^i^y then proclaim of him, with them that heard him,
referring specially to this article, of Loving enemies, that he taught not as
the Scribes, but as having power: For the Doctors of the Law durst so little
press this duty upon the people, though it were contained in their
Commandments, as in compliance with the hardness of their hearts, they ventured
rather to allow a Bill of Divorce to their loves, in this case of consorting
with enemies; and in this perverted liberty, Christ found the people strongly
habituated.

Insomuch as we may say not improperly, That o^^ High Priest found the fire of
this Charity, which came 2 Mac. 1. ^1.
out of the flames of Mount Sinia, as much altered in appearance, as Nehe(...)
did the fire of the Altar, that had been hid during the Captivity, which seemed
turned into a thick water: And Christ Jesus, like Nehe^^as, took the same
matter of the former precept, and spread it again upon the Altar, and extracted
the first fire out of it; for our High Priest explicated and unfolded this
precept of Loving our neigh^^^^, the virtue whereof had long layen concealed,
and seemed rather turned into a thick water of bitterness against enemies, then
to retain any spark of love for them: But Christ by his explication and
dilating of this precept, has revived the fire that lay covered in it, and
replaced it on his Altars, which kindles now one of the best smelling
Sacrifices we offer up in the Temples of the Holy Ghost, which is the loving of
enemies, and doing good to those that hate us.

This may at first sight seem such a burden laid upon Christians, as their
fathers could not ^ear; but when we look upon the donative given at the same
time that the imposition was laid, we may acknowledge these retributions, not
to be tithes or first fruits of that treasure which is dispensed to us for our
inablements to this discharge, since the grace of Christ Jesus passes all
understanding much more, then this precept transcendeth natural reason; For
single morality has by the hands of the Philosophers, affected to draw an
exterior coloring of this image of Charity, in arrogating impassiveness unto
humane wisdom: We then, unto whom the Divine wisdom has imparted it self in so
admirable a manner, teaching and acting this office, may well avow the gift to
be much greater then the charge: And truly, when they are balanced together,
this order seems more an infranchising, then a fettering of our Nature, which
without it seems rather bound, then free to revenge, such is the dominion of
our irritated passions; so that Christ, by this injunction, may be said to have
set us at liberty, not to seek our own vindications, wherein the violence of
our Nature seemed before to ravish us of Free Will: wherefore even in this
point, wherein the Gospel seems the most co^rcive and constraining, it may
rightly be said to be The Law of Liberty; he that in our Nature led captivity
captive by this sort of Charity, has given the same gift unto men, as his
members, 2 Pet. 1.
whereby they are enabled to triumph by the same love over all foraign and
in^rinsique enmities.

We then who may own a participation of the Divine Nature, cannot justly except
against this obligation, of acting more by the inspirations of that Nature,
then by the instincts of our own; and our Savior seems to have affected so
much, the inviscerating this disposition in our hearts, as he claims the
first introduction of this precept, to recommend it to us, as a special
property of his mission, that the kindeness to his person might sweeter the
asperity of the command, he says, he gives us this as a new commandment, To
love one another, Ioh. 13 34.
and thus owneth the having instituted, what he did but redintegrate; it
seems he meant (by setting the most he could of himself to this order) to
work the better upon our Nature, by that sympathy which is more sensible
between him and us, then between us and the other persons of the Trinity; and
surely all the prints of this duty were so efaced, as these conjunctions
co-existing in Christ's person, seemed requisite to induce this renovation, viz.
Man for a capacity of suffering from enemies for our example; and God for a
power of imparting an ability of imitating such returns of love, to injuries
and violations.

But supposing these two capacities, united in the person of the precepter of
this conformity, the newness of such a person takes off all wonder, from any
innovation can be induced by such a Ministry; And, me thinks, we may say of
this Doctrine of Loving enemies, as S. Paul did of that of 1 Cor. 15. 14.
the Resurrection of the dead (though in this point Christ's infirmity and
passiveness promoteth the Commandment, a^ in the other his prerogative and
exemption evinceth the article) That if Christ had not risen from the dead, the
preaching of the Gospel would have been vain: So if Christ had not forgiven his
enemies his death, and returned them love and benefits for all their
provocations, the preaching of this article would have been of little efficacy;
for we know Christ found it wholly antiquated in the Law, and how little is it
actuated in the time of the Gospel, with the help even of Christ's precedent?
though he dyed for his enemies, and requires of us but the living with ours as
if they were our friends; this is but a favorable exaction, were the
retribution claimed but by an equal: when God himself is then the sufferer, as
well as the imposer, how can we be affected more with Humans enmity, then with
this Divine friendship; and leave following of Gods pattern of charity, to copy
out Man's draught of malignity, in his offending both God and his Brother?

Must not this preference of the example even of them we hate, before that of
God, appear a strange ingratitude, when we calmly reflect upon it, since God
has been so solicitous, both for the cure and comfort of our infirm Nature, as
he himself, in the person of Christ Jesus, chose to want all those things, the
cupidities whereof do use to deprave and vitiate our affections, that by his
contemning them, they might be deprised and vilified to our appetites; nor has
he staid at this privation, but passed on, even to an assumption and toleration
of all those things, whereof the terror and apprehension uses to divert us
from the preference of his verities, that by his society we might be reconciled
to these aversions, and animated in the pursuance of his preferences.

Would we but consider then the remission of Offenses to one another, as a debt
we owe our Savior Christ, we might repute it a blessing to have some of that
species of Charity to repay unto him, wherein he has given us no less a
treasure then our own Salvation; and without the help of enemies we could have
none of this precious species of love, which Christ so highly valueth, insomuch
as our friends and favorers may be said not to be so useful to us, as our
afflicters and maligners, when we make the best of them; for they indebt us
more and more to God, and these help toward our discharge and acquittance, by
a means of paying, in some part, of the most difficult conformity we owe in
Christian Religion: And we may observe, That Christ has intailed Mat^h. 5.
most of his Beatitudes upon such estates as come to us by enemies, not by
friends, as all sorts of sufferances; and that friends commonly do less for us
then we require, whereas enemies in this respect do more for us then we can
wish, since out of their iniquity we may raise friends, that shall receive us
into the eternal Tabernacles.

This bitter fruit, planted in the middle of Christianity, and commanded to be
tasted of, is as it were the counterpoyson of that which was at first
forbidden; the breach of which order induced the necessity of this, and this
wholesome plant, as it is designed to cure the venom of the other, so has it
contrary properties, as the first was fair to the eye, and pleasant to the
taste, but mortal in the operation; so this is unpleasant to the fight, and
unfavory to the palate, but medicinal in the effect; this allayeth the heat of
our feverish passions, expectorateth all such obstructions as might impostume
in our breasts, and draws away the virulency of all those poisoned arrows
that wound our flesh; insomuch as that promise seems truly annexed to this,
which was deceitfully given with the forbidden fruit; for this does really open
our eyes, and show us the true distinction between good and evil, whereof we
are commonly ignorant, till the dilection of enemies gives us this light, to
discern injuries and offenses to be no evils to us, without our helping them to
that mischief, since the evil of pain can never change the species into that of
guilt, but by our own voluntary translation.

. II.
The averseness to this Duty arises from our corrupted Nature, promoted by
diverse subtle Temptations of our great Enemy.

SInce our first Parents Reason was vitiated by this Temptation, of discerning
good and evil, there is descended on us a curiosity of having them in this life
still of our own making, and so out of our fellow creatures we make this
composition of good and evil, by the rule of our private appetites: Thus comes
in that supposed variety of these two qualities (the objects of all our
passions) which God has no hand in; for we attribute commonly these properties
to things, as they respect our sensitive appetite, by which means, as many
false goods as our fancies compose, so many true ills we frame by the same
work; for the wa(...) of such apprehended goods, is always accounted a real
evil, and the fruition of them is likely in effect, what the privation is but
supposed. Thus God suffers things which have no true goodness, to work upon
our imagination, under real apparances, and so to anxiate us as effectually, as
if they were sincerely what they are fancied by us; this is verified by the
common experiment of our being so truly afflicted and perplexed, either by the
defeature, or in the pursuit of vain desires; and this vassallation is a
penalty set by the true Judge of all things, upon our attempt to design, of our
own heads, the forms of good and evil, whereof the right apprehension
consists in judging of all things, as they respect the supreme and ultimate
good of our being; by reference whereunto we shall discern nothing to be an
evil, that does not deflect from the rectitude of that line which is drawn to
the Center of goodness, by the hand of him who is himself this Center, Truth it
self, and the way to it, as he John 14. 6.
terms himself; and our path is lined out to us by his hand, which has drawn
for us a trace of self-denial.

So that in our peregrination through this world, we are not to go as if we
were taking the air, where the fairest and pleasantest way leads always to
our end, but as Travelers and Pilgrims we must keep on the straight narrow
way, which Christ has marked us, though it seem never so asperous and
unpleasant, resolving with the Royal. Prophet, for the Psalm. 16. 4.
words of his lips to keep hard ways: Nay, in this our passage, our enemies
seem to be our surest guides, since we may take a certain mark from them of our
being in the way, which is our loving them; and from our friends we can take no
such assurance, for our kindeness and love to them does very often mis-lead us
into the by-ways of our inclinations; so while we love but those that love us,
we know our leader tells us, we may be still in the ways of the Gentiles; but
when we love those that persecute us, and do good to those who hare us, this is
an unquestionable mark of The straight and narrow way, treading in Christ's very
prints and vestages, in conformity to this rule of his dear Disciple, in this
point of Charity, He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk
as 1 John 2. 6.
he has walked.

The great enemy of our Nature, who finds the observance of this new
difficult command, a proper expedient to repair the transgression of the first
so easy precept, interposeth all his subtilty to divert this obedience, and he
finds this atempt nothing so hard a work as his first circumvention: for in
this point he has our Nature already gained to help him, whereas in his first
enterprise it was fortified against him; in this case he makes use of our
eyes, being unhappily open, and presents us injuries, persecutions and
hatred, as so horrid objects, that in their company he covers even his own
deformity, and appears lovelyer then they, to our imagination, in that light
he sets himself by them; so as his own fouler enmity in the suggestion of
malice and revenge is not discerned: and he is much bolder in this counsel,
then he was in his first persuasion, for then he was fain to flatter us with
the hope of having our eyes opened, and becoming like Gods, to be able to
deceive us; but now he presumes to carry our wills by another kind of
insinuation, which is that of fear to become like inanimate creatures, having
the eye of sense shut up and blinded by the conformity to this precept, the
submission whereunto is represented by him as an examination and destruction of
our sense: And our Nature (which stands too well affected to all propositions
that seem to defend the rights of Sense) is ready to take this enemies part in
this determent and initation against all our other enemies, whereby the Serpent
is commonly successful, in the discrediting this counterpoyson of
mortification, prescribed for the killing of his first venom of disobedience.

If we but reflect upon our first constitution and integrity, we shall easily
confess this to be but just, that our Nature, which had but one commandment for
her restraint, and broke that through a curiosity of enlarging her lights and
capacities, should now be enjoined to expiate part of this fault, by this
closing of her eyes, and contradiction of her own sense, in submission to this
commandment, so repugnant to our vitiated Reason; so that were this imposed
simply as a punishment upon our criminal Nature, it could seem but equal, that
she who had introduced enemies and injuries into this world, should be obliged
not only to forgive, but to love and benefit them; yet God is so indulgent, as
in stead of exacting this duty, as a fine set upon our first forfeit, he
seems to treat with us for the sale of our Revenges, as if they were
Proprieties he would purchase from us, and offers us no less then his eternal
Love for our temporary dilection of enemies: Nevertheless, how few are there
that will part with this illegitimate title to Revenge, even upon these terms.
Our passions truly considered, are stated only upon Reversions, by reason they
lay out always our present peace upon some succeeding expectation, yet they had
rather trust their own powers, which can give them no security of their wishes,
then resign their interests to God for such an exchange, as his promise of an
eternal Triumph over all enemies; and so likely, in stead of accepting this
proffer of God (which he is so gracious as to make even his own propriety,
which is all Revenge; our chief study seeks how to evade the obligation of
this precept, and how we may draw our particular aversions and animosities our
of the compass of this order) whereby we often make the party declared against
it (viz. Our private vicious Reason) judge of the sense of this Commandment of,
Love your enemies, and do good to them that hate you.

The most part of the world take the same course to solve the difficulty they
apprehend, as Alexander did with the Gordian knot, they will not take the pains
to bow this precept, but break it outright by a neglect and inconsideration of
it: Others that would seem more reverent, are ingenious to elude it by way of
explication; by this means many bow it, so as to make it seem standing bent to
their peculiar disposition; and such humors use these words, Love your enemies,
as some do, This is my body; they strip them of all their literal sense,
because they seem so cross and opposite to their Reason in a literal admission,
they will not receive them in other then a figurative meaning, rejecting the
reality signified by those words: Thus do those that would elude this precept
of Love your enemies, because they find this Command so averse to Humane sense
in the literal acception, they would have it understood but as a kind of
figurative expression, to evade the reality of this duty, and so pretend to be
obliged only to some exterior show and superficies of civility and fair
behavior to enemies (which is indeed but the figure or representation of Love)
while they decline the real presence of Fraternal Charity; the reality whereof
has no less substantial a pattern, then that of Christ Jesus's love unto us,
given in this form, A new commandment I give John 13. 34.
to you, that you love one another, as I have loved you.

It is not therefore so much the obscure, as the hard saying that averteth the
conformity of our Capharnaites in this Article; and alas, how many are there
who are not scandalized at this hard saying, which seems so to their Reason,
in the point of Faith concerning Christ's Natural body, who do notwithstanding
go back upon this Article of love to (...) Mystical? It is therefore requisite
to plain and smoothe somewhat the rough surface of this Command; for which
effect there needs only an unfolding and deplication of the inside of this
order, to show, it is not so asperous and thorny as our Nature apprehends it
by the first glances that light upon it.

. III.
The relation wherein all Enemies are to be loved, and what offices are
indispensably due to them, the omissions whereof can be redeemed by no other
sort of Pieties.

IF ever there were a just occasion of hatred given, it was that man had when
he first perceived the injury he had received from woman seeing his own and her
nakedness become as it were a minoir that reflected to him the figure of Death
in his own face: How came it then to pass, that this passion of Revenge (which
is likely the strongest at the first straining, all passions being now so newly
broken loose in the mind of Adam) did not declare some violent resentment of
this provocation, and fall into an aversion against his Temptress? Sure it was,
that he (who had still so clear a light of his own Nature left shining in him)
discerned the Image of God remaining still upon her; which object he saw
deserved love and affection.

This character, as it was not efaced by this occasion (which was the seed of
all injuries that have sprung up ever since) so it remains still indelible in
all Humane enemies: And as no iniquity can expunge that Image, so is there
always left that object for our love in Humane Nature, even when it is the
worst disfigured to us by any demerit of individuals to our particular: Unto
this character is that love referred, which is by command assigned to our
private enemies, whom we are not ordained to love under the notion of haters of
us, nor to bless in relation to their cursing us, for this were to propose that
for the object of our love, to which God cannot be reconciled, as Evil and
Viciousness; not could out Master and Lawgiver love any, because they hated
him: we may rather say, That because he did not love to be hated, he came even
from Heaven to make friends of his enemies, that were capable of this
Conversion, and showed no love even unto Angels, in respect of the
inflexibleness of their Nature, after their declared enmity; but we can have no
irreconcilable enemies, since Humane Nature is not invariable after judgment,
like Angelical.

Therefore all our Charity commanded for enemies, is in order to the working on
them, by differing impressions, being designed to rectify their enormity, not
to confirm their crookedness; for we are not obliged to any offices toward
enemies, that are likely to continue and foment their pravity or malevolence.
After our sincere and cordial forgiveness, all the assistance we are bound
constantly to render them, is Spiritual, in fervent and devout intercessions to
God for their recipiscence and restitution to his Grace. Temporal benefits are
precisely due to them only in cases of their extreme necessities, and in such
proportions as rise not to the enabling them for those ill effects we may
justly apprehend from their ability, what falls within our ordained duty, is,
The not excluding them in any public distribution of our benificences, in
relation to our private discords, and the keeping our minds disposed to
succor and accommodate their particular distresses, in case of their occurring
and presenting themselves to our charity.

This is the term our Charity is positively commanded to reach unto, what it
exceeds this point is a free-will-offering, which passes forward from the
precept toward the perfection of Piety; so that the positive exaction in this
duty, can seem severe only to such as are pinched with any of the straight
orders of Christian Religion; for all the exterior offices of obligation,
respect only the necessities of enemies, which our Nature has no aversion to
look upon, and it must be a very perverse temper that must not be moved to
Charity by the state of superiority over an enemy; besides, all our Supplies
and Ministeries, both Spiritual and Temporal, are directed by God toward the
conversion of our enemies into friends; and in that respect we seem allowed a
prospect of some present interest in all our offices, for the coals we are to
intend the heaping on the heads of our adversaries by our benevolences, are
such as are kindled in our own hearts, of Fraternal Charity; they are not to be
proposed as fuel to Gods fiery indignation against them, as is familiarly
misconceived by many semi-Christians.

When we ponder then (even but rationally) this duty, we shall find it lighten
in our hands the more we weigh it; for what is commonly said of Death, sorteth
well with this precept, viz. That is looks horridly at the first aspect, but
the longer it is looked upon, the less formidable it grows, and by degrees it
becomes familiar and unoffensive to our mind. In like manner the terror of
this precept consists in the first aboard of it to our vicious Nature: the
discoursing and acquaintance with it opens to us the understanding of it, by
which we are easily reconciled to our first prejudice of the severe countenance
of this commandment; and when we behold it in the form reflected from the light
of the Gentiles, all Christians see themselves fellow members of one body: In
which respect the resentment of offenses may seem as unnatural, as our hating a
wounded part of our body, because it paineth and distempereth the other: Does
any body project a revenge against his feet, for having stumbled and fallen and
hurt his face? All wrongs and injuries done to one another, are (in the
constitution of Christianity) but the failings and defects of one portion of
the body, whereby another is prejudiced.

Let them therefore who are so mindeful of those words of the Apostle, in not
hating, but cherishing their own flesh, Ephesians. 5. 29. Ephesians. 4. 26.
remember of these of the same hand, That we are all members of one another;
and so malice seems to incur this incongruity of hating part of our selves,
if we allow our neighbor that relation to us which S. Paul assigns him: If we
would rather follow this method, of giving more 1 Cor. 12. 24.
abundant honor to the infirmer members, considering all injuries proceeding
from some weakness and infirmity in the offensive portion of the body, this
would be a prevention of that Schism so much censured by the Apostle; and this
course would keep the part offended from pain and vexation, whereas the other
of resentment does but indeed chase and inflame the sore.

The Stoics with the Ninevites will rise up in judgment against the viperous
generation of our Non-Conformists to this Doctrine, when they upon the
preaching of the voice of Nature, undertook to suppress and mortify these
passions of Anger and Revenge: May not we then (who have another manner of
Dictator of this precept, even the Author of Nature personally acting this
proposition, as well as preaching this observance) fitly say to the
Rationalists of this Age, what our Master did to the refractory of his, upon no
unlike occasion, being upon the casting out of evil Spirits, if even your own
children pretend to dispossess their minds of all malignity, and to have the
dominion of all passions, shall not they be your Judges, and condemn such, as
with the succor of Grace conjoined to reason, do not undertake the subjection
of this passion to the precept and Luke 11. 19. John 7. 5.
example of our Divine Directer?

The Holy Ghost intended this surely as a high reproach to Christ's nearest
kindred, when he tells us that they did not believe in him; and we are as
much nearer a kin to God (as I may say) then the Heathens were, as Brothers are
to one another, then Strangers: So that a Christians unconformity to this
Doctrine, rises to the highest degree of ill Nature and Malignity: They who
remain wavering between the observance and the excuse of a punctual compliance
with this order, are loose and unsettled in the foundation of Christianity, and
all their superstructures of Alms and other materials of Religion, are but
raised upon that sandy foundation Christ slighteth so much, which the least
storm removes and dissipateth: Such then (who retain any uncharitableness in
their hearts, while their hands are full of good Works, and their lives gilded
over with the leaf gold of external Charity shining in the eyes of the world)
seem to me to do but as if a Leper should be very curious to make himself brave
against the time of the Priests visiting his nakedness, since to our Searcher
of Hearts, all cogitations are naked and discovered; and if the interior be
leprous and infected, we know even the finest garments and coverings it has
are accounted but unclean.

Yet alas, how many are there who use this supervesture and palliation of their
Souls, covering private Malices under specious Pieties? all which are but like
perfumes which one that has an ill breath rising from perished lungs,
employeth about him, which may take away the ill smell from such as converse at
usual distances with him, but his bedfellow will not be deceived by those
exterior Odours; it is the breath of the Spouse which exhaleth those Odours
after which the bridegroom runs* and smells them when he kisseth Cant. 1*
her with the kiss of his mouth: If the soul have not the soundness of interior
Charity, all the gums and spices of Prayers and Alms do not sweeten her breath
to her Divine Lover: In this case of her pretending to exterior beauty, tainted
by this intrinsique blemish, she may be said to have the contrary properties to
the beloved Spouse, for then it may be reported of her, That she seems
beautiful, and yet is black; Cant. 1. 4.
though the complexion of her life be fair, yet the constitution of her
substance is foul and unhealthful: Let none then conceive their Devotion
sufficiently qualified, without the integrity of Charity for enemies.

God is so gracious, as I have said before, that he offers to purchase of us
all our claim to Revenge; and men by specious acts of Religion, consorting with
covered Malice, seem in stead of accepting this offer of God, to make him a
proffer of a recompense in other actions, for his pretense of this alienation
of their interests, and conveyance of their wills over to his pleasure: But
alas, in this bargaining as it were with God by this offer of Pious exercises,
we do but forfeit all we advance, and God applies them to the necessities of
others, and accounts nothing to our selves for the disoursement; for God can
accept nothing, in lieu of this conformity to Christ, it might seem a
derogation from his exemplary remission of all injuries, if our obligation in
this point were redeemable by any commutation.

Let none then abuse themselves with this hope, to make such friends of the
Mammon of Iniquity, as may protect their iniquity to enemies, let them leave
their other offerings at the Altar of their distressed Brother, and go make
their own unreconciled hearts an Altar, whereon they offer up to Christ
crucified all their angers and animosities, which have this property of
smelling very ill, while they are growing, and of making an excellent perfume
when they are burning and consuming in the fire of Charity; God smells these
diverse savors in them, in both these conditions: and surely S. Paul leaves us
no hope, that any act can move God which turns not upon the Center of Charity
to on^ Brother, since even that compassion which should break down our own
houses, to build up harbors for others, and that Faith which did remove our
Mountains and our Meadows, into the possession of our necessitous neighbors;
all these actions, I say, would be but painted schrines, wanting the substance
of what they figure and represent, if Charity were not the engine that carried
all these motions; there may be many works that hold this analogy with a
tinckling Cymbal, the making their sound out of their hollowness, the being
conscient of this emptiness of sincere Charity, may counsel the raising noise
and voice of their Piety, by the sound and report of exterior Charities, to
such the Angel declares, I find not your works full before my God. Apoc. 3. 2.


Nor can we now excuseably mistake in the measures of this Charity, since
Christ Jesus has left us impressed and stamped upon his own life a new model of
compliance with this new Commandment; how unanswerable then is the method of
many, who in stead of copying this exemplar, draw their charity to enemies by
their own designs, by fitting this figure rather for their own Cabinet, then
the Church of Christ; this is the course of such as form their observance of
this precept by the square of their disposition and facility to forgive some
particular offenses, that do not much sting their Nature, and allow enemies but
such a sort of love as savoreth of contempt, which takes away the taste and
gust of Revenge: And so this manner does indeed rather but change the diet of
our Nature, then keep her fasting in this precept from all her flattering
appetites, for her vicious palate relisheth no less scorn and undervalue of
enemies, then revenge and vindication.

So that the figure of this Charity is lame and misshapen, and appears not
taken, off from that mould which we have of our original, the form whereof is,
Loving one another, as he has loved us; and in his model we shall not find
the least oblique angle of contempt to enemies: and sure though we cannot keep,
in the forming of our Charity, an Arithmetical proportion to that of Christ,
yet we must observe a Geometrical one in this our conformity; which is to say,
Though we are not able to attain to an equality of his Charity in point of
quantity and greatness, yet our love may be in some sort at least adequated to
his, in point of form and proportion, loving just so as he did, though not just
as much as he; therefore we are commanded to be perfect, as our heavenly Mat.
5. 48.
Father is perfect, upon this occasion of our demeanor to enemies, which
signifies a conformity and similitude, not an equality or commensuration to
the Divine perfection.

As little Lodges may be built by the same model of the greatest Palaces, so
we are to design our Charity to our enemies, by the figure of Christ's unto his,
which excludes all sort of animosity or malevolence against adversaries, and
interdicteth all self-reparation, by contempt or despection of them, which
voideth all the merit of sufferance and forgiveness; and they who neglect the
making their charity like unto that of Christ, in these proportions I have
explained, will find it so ill done, when it comes to be set by that figure
it ought to resemble, as it will not be known for Charity, so far will it be
from becoming eternally like the Original Charity by looking on it, when every
well copyed Charity shall pass into that configuration.

. IV.
The inordinateness of our love difficilitateth this Duty, dissimulation in
this conformity reproached, and many benefits derivable from a sincere
compliance, represented: As also presumption upon the Theory of this Duty,
dissuaded.

THe misapprehension of the Nature of Love seems a great occasion of our
minds being so aliened from the love of enemies; pleasing objects do commonly
strain our affections into such excesses, as we often know no love, but under
the notion of a distemper in the concupiscing faculty; and while our affections
are accustomed to this inordinateness, we can hardly comprehend how love should
be compatible with displeasures and contrarieties: So that the perversion of
our amities, induces this alienation from our enemies: Could we then hold love
from straining into passion, we might easily stay anger from passing into sin,
as is evidenced by the lives of all those who have discarded the pleasures of
this age, whom we see keep in their hands so contentedly the injuries and
offenses thereof: We find it verified in such estates, the growing potent when
they are infirm, and the imitation of receiving Judas with, Friend, why art
thou come? they who are past being betrayed by the worlds kisses, are beyond
the being disordered by the spittings of his ministers: But that even those,
who are not called to this upper story of Christianity, may not mistake the
nature of this love assigned to enemies by the image of that love they figure
due to friends, they may be satisfied, That we are not enjoined the same state
and composure of mind to the adversaries and offenders, as to the friends and
allies of our Nature.

There is a certain inviscerate tenderness of affection, growing in our hearts
for children and kindred, which is a kind of spring of natural love, rising in
our minds, and running from thence in our blood, through our senses, and
carrying with it a sensible joy and delectation in such affections: This sort
of love is not ordained to be communicated to enemies; and there is an intimacy
and union between friends, resulting from an intercourse of mutual sympathy,
which raises a pleasant alteration in the sensitive appetite, referring to
such correspondencies: These sorts of consonancies and kindeness, are not
assigned by God to the persons of our enemies and maligners; this constraint is
not put upon our Nature: To find a refreshing air in the furnace of Babylon,
is a transcendent grace, and rarely conferred Dan. 1.
but upon such as have been polluted with the meats of the Kings Table: Those
who from their youth have disrelished the vain pleasures and honors of the
world, may be gratified with this special benediction, of being tenderly
affected to the persons of enemies, and the being solicitous to serve them, in
conformity to the perfection of our pattern, our Savior Christ.

But our precise obligation reaches no farther, then a sincere and cordial
remission and forgiveness of all our offenders; never seeking the least
indirect retaliation upon the persons, fame or fortunes of our enemies. Upon
the deficiency in these points, is our Saviors judgment denounced in Mat. 18.
32.
the Parable, of our being delivered over to the Tormentors, in case every one
forgive not his brother from his heart; and in point of benefiting of enemies,
the disposition is only exacted, in order to their extreme necessities; so
that a temperate consideration of the terms of this Duty, will easily resolve
with the Apostle of love, That even this command 1 John 5.
meant is not heavy.

We must remember then, that this order does not allow the common shift of the
world, which is, The raking up our passion in the ashes of civil prudence,
where malice is still kept alive, though it neither blaze nor smoke, to the
perception of others: This allowance would make this precept the easiest to be
observed, where it seems now the most incompetent; namely, in courts where
hatred, as well as Luke 22.
many other mean things, is usually dressed up in so fine clothes, with so much
art and dissimulation, as it looks familiarly liker all things, then what it
is.

This disguise is the more criminal, as it seems to make even God of the
party, by putting out his colors of love and sincerity, when all the exterior
civilities and correspondencies are but set out as false flags, by which the
enemy may be boarded with the more safety: for here the acts of enmity are
commonly suspended, not so much out of fear of Gods prohibition, as of his
defeature of the success, which is Judas's art, this watching an opportunity
that the people might not spoil his bargain; and so the attempt of revenge is
but deferred by many, till it seem sure to the wisdom of the flesh, which we
know is an enemy to God: In this sort Romans 8.
Gods enemy shroudeth himself under his wings, while malice remains masked
with sociable civility; but indeed this dissimulation is so mean and
irreligious a thing, as it may be said to brave God, and to fear Man: And
having branded it with this infamous Character, I hope I shall not need press
any farther the detestation of this counterfeit conformity.

There may be so great advantage made of enemies, as certainly no ill-willer
would act his malice upon one from whom he expected but a return of love: For
the scope and aim of all violence and mischief, is the pain and resentment of
the patient; so that did we believe our harms designed would prove satisfaction
instead of sorrow, malice would never allow the maligned party this gain upon
her; Envy would never set up her frames, if she thought that she did but weave
her Rivals Nuptial garment: Christian Charity makes this conversion of the
works of her enemies, she cloatheth and adorneth her self by the same hands
that invade her.

Therefore we see most commonly, that they are such as are little skilled in
the nature of Charity, that offer injuries and studies revenges; and it must
needs be, upon their expecting such a temper of grieving and vexation in their
patient, as they find in themselves, otherwise they could not assail an enemy
whom they conceived they should fortisie by their attempt: But true Christian
Charity has this excellent property, unknown to such strangers, and so
improveth by her invaders by this unexpected capacity; for there may be truly
affirmed much more of the virtue of Charity, then was fained of the estate of
Antheus, who was said to raise new strength from his fall, but this was only
after his being overcome; he had been more invincible then Hercules, if he had
doubled his forces by the gripes and compressions of his Adversary; and this is
the Prerogative of Charity, which therefore is insuperable by all violences,
because she deriveth fresh vigor, even from the pressures of the hands that
impugn her: In order to this, I have seen Charity painted with her hand upon a
Compass, and this Motto, While I am pressed, I am enlarged, which aptly
expresses her true nature, and informs us, That if we do not find this
opening and dilatation of ours, upon the pressures of enemies, we should resort
to Christ with this suit of his Apostles upon this same occasion, Lord,
increase our Faith: This request sincerely pursued in all our provocations, is
always Luke 17. 5.
answered with this grant Saint Paul proclaims, of glorying in our probation,
as it produces hope, which is not to be confounded, because the Charity of God
is poured forth Romans 5.
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost; and this infused love can be tested at
nothing more approving, then Enemies and Persecuters: for true Charity must not
only have the clarity of Crystal, but the solidity of Gold, it must not only
be lucid and shining in good Works, and firm, until some Violence strike upon
it, but it must be like gold, by which it is so often symbolized, malleable and
enduring all percussions, without shivering or dissipation.

This sort of Charity, hammered by the hands of enemies, and refined in the
ardors of persecution, is that firetryed gold, which the faithful and true
Witness counsels us Apoc. 3.
to buy of him to be made rich; but this precaution is very requisite to be
given such as intend this purchase, not to reckon on the possession thereof,
until they have actually laid out some of it, since this error of the Angel of
Laodicea is very familiar, to account our selves rich in it, when we are poor
and void of it; for the speculative promises we make to our selves of this
treasure, are but such an account, as if one should calculate his wealth upon
great Bonds and Obligations which he had made to himself; our persuasions of
this capacity proving often such self-deceivings, when this Charity is to be
issued out in practice: For while the will may take this virtue upon trust, and
pay no ready constraint and pain for it, upon these terms it freely engages it
self for future discharges of this Obligation; but commonly when God sends
enemies, affronts and indignities, to call in for the discharge of this
Charity, our will does oftener break and run away from them, then make good and
acquit our Contracts: It is therefore but very bad Security which we use to
give our selves, the presumption on this virtuous habit, before the practical
demonstration; for sure there is no precept of Christianity, wherein the
speculation and the practice are more distant from one another then in this of,
Loving our enemies, and benefiting our disobligers.

. V.
The best preparatory disposition for the acting this Duty, which makes no
opposition to the course of Justice; as also powerful persons admonished of
their temptation in the point of Revenge, and animated by their exceeding merit
in this fidelity.

SInce it seems so unsafe, to presume upon the interior habit of this
conformity before an actual probation, this question may well be made, What is
the best preparatoty disposition, in order to the compliance with this precept,
in all emergencies and occurrences of Injuries? Whereunto I answer, The habit
of sincere Humility, a virtue every one lays claim to, but most do it upon
evidence which they forge themselves; so as commonly, when the possession
thereof comes to be questioned before God, it indureth not the trial; In this
case, we cannot recuse our Enemies for our Jury, since they are more proper
then indifferent persons for this trial, which is to be judged upon the
testimonies of our humble and patient sufferings; few will protest against
flexibleness, under the depression of Gods hands, but most would fain hold the
screw themselves, whereby they are let down, for fear of falling too violently
or too low; but true Humility abandoneth it self to the supreme hand, under
which all other move but instrumentally, not excepting against any violent
motions of secondary hands, whereinto it is delivered to be exer^ised.

And if upon the pain we feel from our Enemies hand, we would with the eye of
Humility look strictly inward upon our selves, we should for the most part
discern, that it is dressing some defect we apprehended not before, as either
the cancer of Self-love, which we have all in our breasts, or some tumor rising
in Prosperity, or the Ulcer of Sensuality, or the vertigo and giddiness of
youth, or the drowsiness and tepidity of Ease and Accommodation; All which may
be said to be like worms to Ships, that breed in us, eating and consuming us
under water most, when we lie still in the harbors of temporal rest and
security; so that perfect Humility, understanding the unsoundness of Humane
Nature, apprehends Enemies as Gods Surgeons, making all their operations,
rather Cures of some Infirmity, then woundings of any virtuous quality.

I may then safely propose to you the study of Humility, as the best
qualification for the discharge of this precept, Matt. 11.
since he who commands us to take this yoke upon us, bids us, learn of him
to carry it, because he is meek and humble of heart; Matthew. 3.
therefore by the same disposition we must needs be the best enabled in his
method, to fulfill all righteousness.

Nor does this precept, of Loving enemies, and Forgiving offenses, any way
slack or retard the exercise of Justice, whose sword, though it draw blood, yet
it sheddeth none, for it strikes only in application to Gods order, not man's
passion; Princes therefore (who are but Gods sword-bearers by the right of
their offices, when they are provoked by any personal injury, as Ingratitude,
or any other infidelity not legally criminal) should remember, That though they
have many other arms about them, yet they are warranted to strike with none but
the sword of Justice.

Revenge is justice that Nature would do her self, whereby that power which
has the command of regular Justice, may easily be deceived by our Nature,
which (when it is checked by the Law of God in this point of self-righting)
seeks to slip in this appetite, under the cover of the Law of Man: Thus the
animosity which powerful persons have in their hearts, easily runs through
their veins into their hands, which hold and deliver out the public Justice;
into which private interests do so commodiously insinuate themselves, as it
requires a great attention of grace to discern this surreption, and reject
this intrusion of Revenge into the train and comitancy of Justice.

Me thinks Princes, not being exposed so much as others to personal
irritations, have it discounted to them in the equal imposition of this duty on
them, of Forgiving private offenses, and repressing the sense of particular
displeasures; since this Bridle must needs set the most uneasily upon their
heads, the Crown seeming to take up so much room, as there is little left for
the reins of this Command: In others, the violence of their Nature is often
easily staid and repulsed by the steepness of the rise up to Revenge, but they
are put to hold it pressing downhil, so that unless Grace bear the reins very
hard, Nature will easily run away in this precipitate passion; but as this
difficulty makes the restraint of this impetus the more painful, so the
mastery thereof becomes more meritorious to them, then it is to less tempted
Conformists.

Certainly Princes who faithfully observe this command, make more of their
provocations then they do of most of their bounties; for by this subjection,
they lay up their power in Heaven, in stead of laying it out on Earth: and at
that day when all the Treasures of their Civil Liberalities shall be melted and
dissolved, these their Sufferings and Self denials shall remain impassible, in
that fire, which the Apostle says, shall try all our works.

Blessed then are only those, who while they live here in greatness and
authority, build their Monuments of such materials as may endure the fire of
that day, when even the light affections of this life shall prove hay and
stubble about their owners, passing through a flame, and the heavy passions of
Anger and Malice shall sink their bearers into such flames as are never to be
passed.

Wherefore the best Monuments Princes can erect for their eternity, are arches
of these solid Virtues, of Humility, Patience and Charity, which are the more
strengthened, the more they are charged with the remission of injuries, and the
dilection of enemies: These will out last all their Pyramides of secular
Ostentation and Magnificence, the King of Heaven and Earth has left them the
model of this arch in his life, who was then in the strongest point of his
Oharity, when he was bowed into this triumphant arch of Humility, bearing his
Cross, under which as his body sunk, so his love to his enemies grew the more
erected: none then can be so great, as to be exempted from this conformity, nor
any so miserable, as not be solaced by this association.

I may well then cast up all my divisions, respecting several conditions, and
different provocations, into this total, That whosoever confess they have any
sins, whereof they expect a forgiveness from God, must resolve to forgive their
Brother, what offenses soever shall require their remission, since this
condition is expressly set upon their own pardons, If you forgive not men,
neither will your Father Mat. 6. 14.
remit unto you your offenses: And our Savior Christ at his remove from his
Disciples, left them this specifical distinction from the worlds dependants,
The loving one another; so as John 14. 36.
we may say, That our suffering King and Master has set his Arms upon this
Precept, for all his followers to wear, and to be discerned by. O let us then
cast off our old Badges of Envy and animosity, which are indeed but the
Cognizances of Cain, and let us put on his Livery, to whom we rightfully
belong, remembering we are not our own, having been bought by a great 1 Cor. 6.
price to glorify and bear God in our body: And when we carry Christ crucified
in our thoughts along with our own Crucifiers, the pretensions of our Nature to
her resentments, will be out of countenance in that company; and drawing all
the grievances and aversions of our Nature, as coupled in the yoke with Christ,
we shall easily confess, That even the burden of this precept of dilection of
enemies, sits but light upon the carriage of the Cross of Christ. Mat. 11.


The sixteenth Treatise. Considerations upon the Unsuccessfulness of a good
Cause; Divided into six Sections.
. I.
That much Religion is required to assist us in this probation.

THere is no Argument wherein Natural Reason has more need of a Supernatural
prompter, to help us to frame our conclusions, then in this of the miscarriage
and frustration of pious and just designs, especially in public causes: For
God has left us a convenient light, whereby to read the right of Causes, and
our duties to them, which is our sincerest and most disinteressed Reason,
judging by the known Laws of his Will: But to discern whether the Success or
Defeature of any Cause concur most to the universal end of Gods Providence,
this knowledge is seated in unaccessible light. We may read Gods present Will
in Events, but not his consequent Order, which may require the demolishment of
many particular goods, to build up the frame of the universal* therefore the
present ruin of single pieces of Equity, does not derogate any thing from the
goodness of their Nature: Wherefore the right of Causes ought not to be
sentenced by the irregularity of Successes, which are always uniform to Gods
universal design, though, disproportioned according to the model of our Reason.

Surely they who shall seek to penetrate the Divine Providence by the eye of
Reason, so far as to make a draught of the reasons of all particular
occurrences, in the variations of Events, make such an attempt, as one that
should gaze upon the Sun to enjoy more light, then when he looked upon the
Earth: For they who press into this light, shall quickly be oppressed by the
same splendour they design for illumination: And yet the infirmity of man is
subject to such a kind of Temptation (viz.) To study even the decyphering of
all Gods characters, in which his hand to the Creatures is very often sent. For
the successes and prevalence of Injustice against Honesty and Virtue, may be
aptly termed Gods eyphers, in which his hand is soon discerned, but not his
sense: Nevertheless, we do familiarly take Events for the key of all the
characters of Gods Providence, and presume to read many of his Secrets very
confidently by this key of the present form and figure of Events; Nay, our zeal
is often so ingenious in this art of decyphering, as it persuades us that we
may even run and read the right of Causes by this light of Successes.

Insomuch as S. Paul's case in Malta is very familiar in the world; for while
the Viper is hanging upon the Cause, and we are looking when it shall fall down
and perish, then we make our Judgment to be Gods Sentence; and when the Viper
is shaken into the fire, and that destroyed by us, which was expected as our
destruction; when a cause recovers from this danger; then commonly that is
cried up for Gods Cause, which before passed for his Curse. This is a familiar
conclusion with such, who as we may say, know Gods Providence only by fight,
that is, by the external marks of Successes, and have no acquaintance with the
nature and condition^ thereof.

Therefore as it is said of Philosophy, That a slight and superficial knowledge
of it, may incline the mind of man to Atheism; for if our mind stay, and rest
upon second causes which are next to our senses, this fixure of our thoughts
may keep our mind short of the Supreme cause; but if we make a farther advance
and progression into the reason of Philosophy, it will lead the mind up to
Religion, as it shows the congruous dependency and subordination of all causes
to Divine Providence: So in the first rudiments of Religion, which present us
with a superficial aspect of Gods Justice under the notion only of rewarding
and punishing: This first impression may move us to conclude of the quality of
causes by Gods present declaration in their promotion, or their prejudice; but
a judicious advance into the farther grounds of Religion, will carry us to a
reverent suspense of our conclusions upon the present apparences of all Events,
and apply us to the contemplation of Gods universal Providence, which the
Psalmist calls Gods great abyss; which when it is the most stormy to our
Reason, when it drowns and desolates in our apprehension the right and justice
of Humane actions, even then it runs in the proper course of universal Justice
and Equity. There is also a regularity, even in the very wave it seems broken
into, subverting all Humane order, though the concertation of this method falls
not within our capacity; for the Psalmist himself says, when the waves of this
Ocean were gone over his head, Thy way is in the Sea, and thy paths in many
waters, and Psalm. 76. 20.
thy steps are not to be traced.

A profound immersion in Religion, covers our Reason with a reference to Gods
universal Providence, in those cases which seem to be void of his particular
justice, whereas a looking upon Successes by the first glances of Religion, and
discoursing on their Reasons by the flashy light of our private zeal to the
Cause, may easily raise impertinent conclusions upon the present apparences;
and such hasty judgments are so little capable of giving rest to our minds;
as they must needs keep them in a continual vassellation, according to the
vicissitudes of contrary occurrences.

Wherefore, as mere eagerness and zeal to the mastery and prevalence of any
Cause, ought not to be the motive of electing our party (for in that affection
there is always some obliquity from the straight love of Right^, and leaning
toward the convenience, not an uprightness in our address to Justice) so the
success of our election ought as little to raise or abate the zeal to our
Cause; for by this varying of our measures, we seem to square our conformity to
Gods method, as it answers to the model of our Reason, by which we have
framed conclusions upon our own suppositions of Equity: And this expectation of
the Success of our Cause, comes nearer oftentimes to the flattering our own
judgment, then applauding the Divine order and disposition of Events.

. II.
Motives to constancy, after a prudent election of our Cause.

GOd has left us sufficient marks, by which to discern the right of public
Causes, though our mistake of them be very familiar, being swayed by some
private partiality, which looks more upon the beam reflected back on our
selves, then upon the direct beam, as it shines upon the public good: But
supposing us misled by our judgment, I conceive it less blameable to
persevere firmly in our first application, then to be shaken from our party
merely by the motions of adverse Events. In the first case man does but miss
his way in seeking God, and in the last he seems to fear God may miss his way
in coming to man; for we know God is often said to come down to men in several
acts of his Providence, and when the Psalmist says, He bowed the Heavens and
came down; there was a cloud, and mist under his feer^ So that we must not look
to trace his paces, nor judge of his design by some strokes and touches of his
hand, but expect the time when the whole piece of his universal Providence
shall be exposed and finished altogether: Then we shall discern how all
postures, which taken severally did seem deformed, when they are set together
in the whole design, do make an admirable concordance of Justice and Mercy. We
must remember what S. Peter says, A thousand years, 2 Pet. 3. 9.
and one day, are the same instant object to God; so as he sees all the broken
and sh^vered pieces of our several times, entire at once in the mirror of his
intellect, whereby all is evenness and uniformity in his spirit and sight,
which is fraction and irregularity in our successive view of the broken
portions of his Providence.

Do not they then who are confused and distracted in their Opinions, upon the
prevalence of unjust actions against the honest and unquestionable party, do,
as if one should see a crooked and misshapen figure severed from the whole
design, whereof it is a part, and knowing it to be of a great Masters hand,
should yet wonder at it, and suspect the failing of the Artist? when if this
single figure were seen in the complete design, it would appear to be made for
that misshapen posture it was to represent, in order to the perfection of the
whole piece: For the particular present events in Humane actions which seem
crooked, and deflected from the rule of Justice, are such portions of Gods
Providence, severed for a time from the whole configuration; for which reason,
in this single existence of them, they seem disproportioned: Wherefore in this
case we should look upon parts and portions of Gods works with the eyes of the
wise man, concluding, All things live, and remain for all Ecclus. 42.
uses, and they are all obedient: all things are double one against another,
and he has made nothing imperfect: So, that which taken single may seem
imperfect to our sense, being set doubled, and united to that part it belongs
unto, becomes uniform, and complete in the total of Gods Justice.

Since then our Faith tells us, That God has disposed Sapi^nt* 11. 12.
all things in weight and measure, we must suspend our judgment while the
balance is yet suspending, and not resolve by the present raising or
depression of the scale, unless we pretend to hold Gods hand where our eye
leaves it: For we know the scales of Providence are always in motion, as the
Psalmist says, Now he humbles this part, now he exalt^ the Psalm. 91.
other: Whereupon this is that holy Kings supercession and suspense of his
judgment, in these tides of the Abyss of Gods Providence, Thy cogitations are
too profound for me. David rests his own cogitations in that depth which they
cannot fathom, and satisfies his incapacity with rejoicing in Gods
Incomprehensibleness, proclaiming joyfully, Thy Justice is as the Mountains,
and thy Judgments as the vast Ocean, in which they who will study the reasons
of the ebbings and flowings of happy and adverse Events in all kind of Causes,
shall be more confounded then the Philosopher was in the reason of the tides of
the Sea. But one may more properly relieve himself, by doing with our Reason,
as it is said he did with himself, by casting it into the bosom of the
unsearchable Order; concluding, Since I cannot comprehend the design of it, it
shall contain and involve my submission to it. And being thus sunk deep enough
into that Divine Element, we shall not feel the storms and agitations which are
on the upper part of the waters.

. III.
The variableness of the Vulgar upon Events, and a prudent conduct proposed.

THe Athenians were a people so affected with curiosi^y and novelty, as rather
then they would want new Religions, they would have even unknown gods; so as
their Liberties did not only reach to the making of new Religions, but new
gods: therefore it is no wonder if their Poets were their Priests, which moved
S. Paul to argue Acts 17.
with them out of their Authorities. It was no wonder this people, who had a
several god presiding over every Humane action, should judge the equity of all
causes by Events; insomuch as when S. Paul preached to them one God, and his
single Providence as the orderer and contriver of all productions and
mutations, they thought this an abridgement of the privilege of their Reason,
to be enjoined a subscription to one supreme Providence, without any private
satisfaction to their discourse in the occurrences of this life: For when he
told them, That by Gods works man could but feel out as it were by palpation in
the dark the notion of the Deity, and could not expect to read the reason of
his administration by any light, but that of Faith; this seemed to them
babbling, and talking idly in S. Paul.

Neither is it any wonder that people undetermined in Religion, should be so
superstitious in Successes, as to make some Religion out of them; for where
Religion has been loosest, Fortune always passed for a Deity; and it is not
strange that they who worship Fortune, should sacrifice their Reason to
Successes, for then truly men's private Fortunes become their Religions. But
where the knowledge and worship is resolved and uniform, the Divine Providence
is erected in stead of Fortunes Altar, our Reason is offered up as an Holocaust
totally consumed, and resigned to this order, and the fat of the Sacrifice is
the evacuation of all our own judgments, in the event of things which do
wholly transcend our Reason.

Yet do I not pretend we should be wholly unmoved or unaffected with happy
Successes, but in such cases we ought to look upon them, as they are simply in
themselves mercies, not respectively, as we judge them sentences in our Cause:
for in adversity the matter does not declare Gods meaning, when sometimes it is
intended to purge and improve, sometimes determinately to punish us; therefore
the matter of misery may be disliked, but not Gods meaning in it So prosperous
Successes are sometimes meant as approbations, and often as derelictions to the
desires of our hearts; wherefore the matter of them may be affected, but the
meaning of them not peremptorily concluded.

Hence it is, that as in our enemies we may hate the sin, and not love the man
the worse, so in our temporal advantages, we may be joyed with the success, and
yet not like the cause the better, which is to have an equal disposition in
them: For the choice of our Cause must rest upon that immovable Center of the
right and justice thereof: which when by our best and most disinteressed Reason
we conceive fixed and settled, nothing that does not better our Reason, can
evidence more to us the goodness of our Cause: and uncertain Natural Events
have not that virtue of improving our Reason; they may more easily weaken it,
if we study by the lines and editions of Natural Accidents, which are so false
to the nature of Moral causes.

Man is not set so hard a task, as to work to fit all Events with suitable
Reasons to them: It was a strange exaction of Nebuchadnezzar upon his Magi, to
declare to him not only the meaning, but the very dream, as if they had been
the infusers of it. They who search for Humane Reasons proportionate to the
events of all actions, do, me thinks, as wild a thing; for they adventure to
interpret Gods Actions and Mysteries by their own Dreams, since our
ratiocination upon the secrets of Divine Order, is but an excursion of Fancy,
which is of the same nature as a Dream in Religion.

It seems therefore rather an indulgence to our weakness, then an injunction
against our liberties, to be forbid to press into that light where we shall be
oppressed by the majesty of it: For, What is man (says the wisest of men) that
he should follow his Maker? and when he had applied his heart to find out the
reason of all things, he confesses, He had counted one Eccles. 7. 28.
by one to find out the account, and yet his soul sought and found it not: So
that his return upon his adventure, may well be our disswasion from the
attempt, and a strong motive for us to rest upon this anchor of the Prophet, In
the path of thy Isa. 26. 8.
judgment, O Lord, we have patiently expected thee.

. IV.
An information of what kind of conformity we owe Gods declared Will in
adverse Events.

AFter these bounds set to curiosity, me thinks many are desirous to know,
Whether their Wills are bound up to their Adversities. I shall endeavor to
satisfy such enquiries by a clear Solution of this Question; resolving them,
That although we are restrained in the curiosity of Causes, we are not confined
to a conformity of our Wills, to the material object of Gods Will, in public
calamities and afflictions. Our Wills must be fastened to Gods, in the formal
object of our willing; which is, to desire every thing in order to the
accomplishment of his Will, in his universal Ordination of all things: But we
are not obliged to be pleased in every material declaration of Gods pleasure,
as in the defeature of a good Cause, the death of our friends, and the
successfulness of our enemies. In these, and such cases of conforming our wills
to the matter of our sufferings, we may, as it were, dispute the cause with
God, and wish his Providence might work by other means: Because in this
shadowed light of our Reason wherein we live, we do not see how the ways lead
to Gods universal ends, to which our wills are only bound to be conformed
formality, as making that Divine Order the rule of our final desires.

We know Abraham opposed Gods declared Will, in the material part of it, in the
destruction of Sodom; and when God ordained him the Sacrificing of his Son; he
might justly have wished God had been pleased to appoint him some other
testimony of his Obedience: This kind of dissenting is properly rather a
velleity, or wishing an alteration of Gods purpose, then an opposition to it;
and this imperfect adhering to Gods Will, is proper to this half-light we have
of it, in our distance from the object of his universal Order. Those who in the
light of his countenance look upon his Will, have theirs both materially and
formally united to it; because, as the Psalmist says, In thy light we shall see
all light: Thus they discern how all they desire is in order to the universal
end, and understand how all the discords which are now jars in our ears, are
set to compose the harmony of the Divine Providence, wherein they have their
parts, singing continually the praises thereof. But while we are looking
through our glass, and the darkness of our riddle, we are not obliged to a
clearer conformity of our Wills, then the nature of our light can afford us,
which discovers not to us how all present advers accidents are pertinent to the
efficacity of Gods universal Order; therefore we are not imposed that precise
adherence of our Wills to the material part of adversity.

Upon this ground the Prophets presumed as it were to implead Gods sentences,
by an expostulation with him about their execution. Moses makes a Remonstrance
to God of the inconveniences of his declared Will to destroy Israel,
representing the scandal of impotency whereunto his name would be liable among
the Heathens: and the Prophet Samuel, after the pronouncing of Gods sentence
against Saul, seems to plead for him with his tears so long, as God asks him,
How long he would lament Saul? not as displeased with this unconformity, but
rather in commiseration of his piety, and tenderness of charity. The Prophet
Jeremy pleaded so long against the rigor of his own commission, as God employed
his modesty to silence him, knowing he would not expect a grant in what Moses
and Samuel should have bin rejected; yet when he could Jer. 14.
intercede no longer, when his mouth was stopped, his eyes were let loose into
streams, that seemed to run still against the tide of Gods judgments. And God
allowed the Prophet Jonah a Jonah 4.
much stronger liberty, to seem angry at Gods mercy, and to dispute the
justness of his perplexity. In all these instances the wills of the Prophets
were formally concurrent with the Will of God; for they made still the reason
of their willing the accomplishment of the common universal disposition of Gods
order, but we see they dissented in the matter of their willing; they did not
vote these special and precise means concurrently with Gods voice, because they
saw not clearly how they stood in Gods design of the common good, and so might
differ from God in wishing the order, though not the end.

It is otherwise with the Angels who are in a fuller light, they discern how
all Humane events are in their special order to the common benefit of the
Universe, and so execute their Commissions of Benevolence or Indignation upon
us, without any alteration of joy in our temporal blessings, or commiseration
in their offices of destruction. This state of equanimity we shall attain, when
we come to see face to face, that Face which shall make us like it, by looking
on it, when we shall see him as he is, in who^ we shall together see all other
things as they are; until then, while we see him but in the shadow of his
works, he requires of us only our conformity to his will, as far as he has
endued our Nature with a power of apprehending how his declared pleasure has a
consonancy with the universal good of the world: So that we have an injunction
and a capacity of wishing always in preference of the universal good, before
our private interest. And in those cases in which we are not convinced, how the
ills we suffer conduce to that order, we may piously deprecate such Events,
lament the exigencies they occasion, and sue to God for the reversing of such
orders; in which exigencies we may earnestly press the hastening of Gods time,
and concurrently attend his will with patience; for that is Gods time to which
our Prayers have brought God, as that price was Gods price to which Abraham
brought God for Sodom. This, I hope, will sufficiently explicate the sense of
formal and material conformity to Gods Will, and so enlighten us in many
obscurities and scuples, which the tenderness of our Conscience may cast over
us, as apprehensions of con(...) against Gods order in our sorrow, and
resentment of public or private calamities.

. V.
The infirmity of our Nature conforted by Examples, Holy and Profane; and the
acquiescence to Gods Order with constancy, persuaded.

BEcause this trial of us requires all the strength of our Grace, or our
Reason, to secure us farther from being dismayed at the proneness of our Nature
to slack^^ in the confidence of our Cause, upon the prosperity of the advers
party, we may look upon one of the strongest vessels of Gods building, and we
may find him in this storm driving upon all his anchors, when he confesses,
My (...) Psalm. 72.
almost gone, and my steps well ^igh stipping away, when I saw the peace of
sinners; they are not in trouble, as other men, neither are they plagued as
others: He could have no ease in the inquisition of the reason of this inverted
appearance of Justice, till, as he says, he went into the Sanctuary of God: So
when we find our selves upon David's slippery steps, we must follow him who
leads us to take Sanctuary in Gods universal Providence, taking hold of his
Altar there, his Inscrutable Wisdom; and the passions of our Nature will be
afraid to violate that holy Refuge, in disputing to draw us out of that
Sanctuary by their Violences, as long as our thoughts rest themselves there,
and our Reason does not venture abroad to rove in the inquisition of second
causes.

It was upon the holy ground of this Sanctuary that King David trod, when he
climbed up the mount Olivet barefoot; his steps were then firm and sure, even
upon all these sharp stones which were under them; even those stones which
Shimei threw in his way, did not give him the least trip, he walked upon this
ground of, The Lord has ordained him to curse David, who shall then say,
Wherefore has he done 2 Kings 15.
so? it may be the Lord will look on my affliction, and requite me for this
days cursing: Here we see King David walks so firmly on Gods Order and
Providence, as his steps broke in pieces all Shimei's stones they trod upon;
and he was now no more moved in the diffidence of his cause, then he was elated
with the right of it, when Shimei came to meet him, and lay prostrate at his
feet to be trod upon: He then raised up his enemies person, and kept only his
injuries under his feet, which were so many steps to raise his eternal Throne:
and certainly, all that Shimei threw at him proved the most precious stones,
which the Hand of Providence set in the Everlasting Crown of this Blessed King.

Thus we see the common infirmity even of the most sanctified Natures, while
they are working upon the stock of their own Reason in Humane occurrences, and
what a firmness and stability we may find when we lay all our thoughts up to
rest in the bosom of the Divine Providence, taking this advice in all advers
Events, Yea, when thou shall say Job 35. 14
he considers not, be judged before him, and expect him. And as it is
observed in the motions of the Heavens, that as the Orbs are nearer the first
mover, so they go the faster in the common diurnal motion, and the slower in
their own peculiar, which is opposite to the other; so we may truly say, the
nearer our minds are raised to an adherence to the first Divine moving order,
our Reason shall go the quicker in a consenting motion to all the common
occurrences of Providence, and shall move the gentlier in the retrograde motion
of her own Orb of Nature, and consequently the disquiets of our Nature shall
move less in their passionate oppositions to all sinister Events, and we shall
be the less frighted when with the Apostles we are going into the cloud,
remembering the reproach Luke 9.
God makes to tottering confiders, Am I only a God Jer. 23.
at near hand, and not the same at distance?

If ever we could have hoped to have been informed of the reason of the present
advantages allowed to the wicked, it should have been when the Prophet Jeremy
(one sanctified even in his Mothers womb) did so earnestly ask God this
question, with a conjuration upon his Justice, saying, Lord, thou ar^ just when
I argue with thee; yet let me talk with thee of thy Judgments: Jer. 12.
Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy
that deal treacherously? And yet God affords him no answer to this desire, but
leaves him in such a suspense and perplexity, as in an holy confusion he
challenges even God of having misinformed him in his Judgments Jer. 20. 7.
upon sinners, which were so long deferred: So we can look for no satisfaction
in this point, greater then that answer which God makes to Daniel, when he
asked, What sha(...) ^e Dan. 12. 9.
the end of these things? Go thy ways, Daniel, for the words are closed, and
sealed up till the time of the end. Wherefore, in all the distractions and
subversions of Kingdoms, pri(...) Ruins and Confusions, we must recur to
Daniels conclusion, Blessed be the Name of the Lord; wisdom and power are h^^,
he removes and constitutes KINGS and Kingdoms.

By this precedent, as near as our giddy Nature will admit, we must seek to fix
our minds upon that incomprehensible course of Gods Providence, which changes
all things without any mutation in it self; and the nearer we come to this
con^ixure unto that stability, the less obnoxious we shall be to the estuations
of joys and fears, or the anxiety of wonder in all contingencies: For the chief
motive of the disquiet of our mind, is the imperfect broken view we have in
this life of the chain and coherence of second causes we see several links
lying scattered and parted without the rings which make the connection* that is,
we see daily mutations of all conditions, from good to bad, and interchangeably
from advers to prosperous estates, but we discern no reason that linketh and
accords these variations with our judgments, making a coherence satisfactory
to our understandings in this distributive part of Gods Justice.

This half-sight of the form of things, excites wonder in us, which is broken
knowledge, when our understanding meets objects of strange effects, divided
from their apparent causes; for if we could see at once this chain of
Providence set together, all events hanging linked to their final reasons, our
wonder would presently cease: As we may suppose if the Prophet Daniel had lived
to see actually the accomplishment of his Visions, while others had wondered at
Alexanders enterprise upon the Monarchy of the World, and all the strange
occurrences that did effect that work, he would have been little moved at those
Events: And when cursed Antiochus destroyed Jerusalem, and set up Idols upon
the altar of the Temple, and abolished all form of true Religion; when
venerable Mathathias, and the glorious Maccabees had reason Mac. 2.
to rend their garments, and to be astonished at the desolation of Gods people,
Daniel would not have been perplexed and amazed in all this confusion, as
having had a prenotion of this, and the rest of the chain of Providence, which
made the coherence of this action.

In the like manner in all other prodigious Events, which coupled the
successions of the other designs of God upon the world, whereof Daniel had a
prevision; he could not be confused at that, whereat others (who looked but
upon the broken pieces of the chain) were justly astonished: But if Daniel had
survived the issues of all his Revelations, and had come to those Times of
which he was desirous to know the sequences and determinations, and was refused
that illumination, and told, They were sealed Mysteries, and not to be opened
Dan. 12. 9.
to him; if then he had seen the destruction of Gods people, and the violation
of all things sacred, by the inhumanity of Gods enemies, he would then have
been posed to have given a reason of these disorders, and must have resorted to
David's answer to himself, Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, it Psalm. 138.
6.
is too high, I cannot attain to it.

Some satisfactory rest may be derived from the experiments and acquaintance
with such cases, but still the reason of that order (which is so preposterous
to our conceptions) will remain in the smoke of the Temple, wherein we may see
Apoc. 15.
God is present, but not how he works in it: The order of Gods administration
rests in the Temple described in the Revelation, which is filled with smoke
from the Majesty of God, and none can enter into it until all be consumnate.

One that shall study the Story of the World in one Age or Century, shall find
Iniquity and Violence prevailing, it may be, many years over all Piety and
Justice; and insequence of time shall come to read the prosperers and
presumers in their powers destroyed and extirpated by some exemplary vengeance;
then for some time may meet with virtue and godliness flourishing so, as to
protect all their Vot^ries; and then as he goes on, it may be, he will meet
with a storm blasting, and withering all the fruits of innocence he saw before
so flourishing: Thus alternatively through the whole age, he shall commonly
find an interchangeable variation from the happy to the persecuted state of
goodness: And although in the period of that portion of time he chance to find
the most notorious impieties of it punished and revenged, in such sort as that
particular may give him some sensible satisfaction of Gods Justice, yet he
shall find in no age the audict so perfectly made up, between Impiety and
Punishment, as he shall not still remain perplexed in the account of Gods
reckonings with the world.

They who shall live to see, or read the full Account of this present Age,
will certainly find at the end of it, the Fractions and Divisions ^urnm'd up
nearer the true Account of Gods Justice, then it appears now in all these
scattered orderless figures, which seem to have little reference to Equity; but
still the end of this Age will leave some confused parcels of Injustice, which
are referred to the succession of time to make up, and rectify: And in this
kind of sequence and relation, Times will turn and roll over to one another,
the last bringing still somewhat imperfect to the next it flows into, until
Time it self shall be drowned in eternity; so that while we see, as Solomon
tells us, All things Eccles. 9.
happen alike to him that offers Sacrifice, and him that breaks down Altars, he
gives us this excellent caution, not to be tempted to say there is no
Providence, If thou see the violent perverting Justice, and Judgment in a
Province, marvel Eccl. 5. 7.
not at the matter: for he that is higher then the highest regards, and there
be higher then they.

This is a cordial the Holy Spirit has confected for us, to take in the
strongest fits of Humane vicissitudes, to keep us from fair^ing in the
unsuccessful state of a righteous cause: I shall only give one or two
Historical instances of many, which all Times afford in this Argument.

The first is so memorable and adequate in all circumstances for our
instruction, as no times can match a better, and no sort of Christians can
reject it as president. This is the case of St. Lewis King of France, a person
so holy, as if the most sanctified voices of his Time had been to elect a King,
they would probably have chosen him: This great and holy King starning with the
zeal of repossessing Christians of the Holy Land, which is a figure of their
Birthright, the heavenly Jerusalem, kindled most of the Christian Princes with
the same ardor, which carried many of their persons upon the place for the
achievement of this blessed Design: The beginning of this Enterprise was
prosperous, in the recovery of many possessions from the Infidels, and
restitution of the Worship of Christ into them: But soon after Gods secret
Judgments struck this Army with an evident mark of his present displeasure,
and by a pestilent sickness consumed most of his Forces; insomuch as he was
reduced to a dishonorable Treaty with Gods Enemies, and forced to return with a
total defeature of his Design: Under which rough hand of God, his sanctity in
Syria, like one of their Palmtrees, grew the higher by the weight of adversity
it was charged with, and after a perilous return into France in his old age
(his zeal burning still the brighter in all the darkness of his Successes) he
made a second Expedition, with three of his Children, upon the same Enterprise,
and landing in Africa, his Army was again seized by the destroying Angel, and
one of his Sons strool first, and presently he himself was arrested by the same
hand, and executed in his sentence of Mortality, though truly delivered out of
his prison, and translated to that higher Crown which he had conquered in all
his defeats.

This was the unhappy Event, according to the style of the world, which that
pious King, and unquestionable Cause; left the world to opine upon; of which we
cannot give a better vote, then he himself did in his sickness out of the
Wise-mans mouth, Who can conceive the ways of God, (...) Ecclus. 16. 20.
more then a Tempest which no eye can see? for most of his works are hidden;
Who can declare the works of his Justice, or who can stand under them? for his
covenant is afar off, and the trial of all is in the end.

There is another notorious president I have met with in the Ecclesiastical
Story, which I have chosen of many, as it has relation particularly to this
Nation. King Harold of Denmark, who was the first planter of the Faith of
Christ is his Country, and a Prince whose eminent sanctity deserved the
public testimony of the Church, by his admission into the Catalogue of the
Saints: This devout King in his old age was assailed by the Rebellion of his
own Son, called Swayn, a desperate Enemy of Christianity, yet it pleased God to
give him Victory against his Father, and to Crown the old King with Martyrdom
in the Defense of Christ's Cause, and his own Right; for he dyed of his wounds
received in the Battle, where his impious Son remained Conqueror, and King.

But soon after Gods Vengeance rose up against this Patricide, and expulsed him
out of his Kingdom, and in many changes of Fortune reduced him to take Refuge
in England and Scotland for many years. At last in many variations of his
Unhappinesses, it pleased God to change his heart, and convert him to
Christianity, of which afterward he became a great Champion, and a Zealous;
and God employed him here in ENGLAND to punish King Ethelred (who though his
person was not stained with his Mothers bloody hands, yet he did rise to the
Crown, not by a Legitimate Descent in Blood, but by an Execrable effusion of
his elder Brothers, through the wickedness of his Mother) so as Swayn of
Denmark dispossessed this King, and soon after dyed invested of the Crown of
England.

I thought this Example, in the various Occurrences of it, very apposite to
this subject of declaring GODS mysterious Judgments, His Justice, Mercy; and
Longanimity, which is the Attribute whereby we are so much relieved in all our
provocations of his Vengeance.

These Examples may temper an hasty impatience to censure Causes by the Events,
and repress in us that Natural forwardness of judging with the JEWS, those to
be the greatest sinners, on whom the Tower of S(...) does chance to fall, for
we know our Saviors decision of such conclusions.

. VI.
The Conclusion; Regulating all humors in this probation.

THere are many men of such a mould of earth, as the stony ground in the
Gospel, who are quick in their conception of virtue, and active in the first
impressions of the right and justice of their party, and so their actions are
forward, and eminent in fair seasonable weather; but if the heat of disaster
beat upon them, for want of a w^ll-rooted constancy on the ground of true
fortitude, they shrink and wither as fast as they did shoot out at first; when
they first begin to be followers of virtue, they should remember what our
Savior said to his Disciples, Blessed is he Luke 7. 23
who shall not be scandalized at me; for in the attendance on goodness in this
world, we shall often see it suffering and affronted.

They who will serve under the Militia of the King of kings, must take the
Covenant of Longanimity, in which consists the best part of the honor of a
Christian; for, as our great Master says, If you love but where you are
beloved, do not the Gentiles do as much? so if you are zealous while you are
prosperous, every unworthy person has this kind of honor to show for his
nobility; but when you are to endure the test of loving of Enemies, that is,
humbly to embrace all advers accidents, and to close with them, to wrestle
still, rather then fly from the Lists where they are triumphing, when as the
Prophet says, Strange lords have dominion over us, Isa. 26.
this is the sincere trial of honor, even in morality; in which, this perilous
perseverance (it may be) i^ but a counsel of perfection; but in cases of
Divinity, I am sure, it is a precept, as the Apostle says in the name of our
Master, If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in Heb. ^0. 38.
him.

Hence it is, that as any defection from a good Cause is odious in Gods sight,
so too much solicitude and vehemence, in relation to a quick issue out of our
engagements, look unhandsomly in Gods eyes; for there is always a great
shadowing of Self-love woven with this color of our zeal to Justice, in this
impatient appetite of Success.

Our Savior Christ at his remove from his dearest familiars upon earth, in a
gentle reprehension to them in this point of earnestness, has left us an order
for our dependence quietly upon the common course of his Providence, without
any inquisitive scruting into the times of such Events, as the cause may
promise: For when they desired to know the time of his restoring their kingdom
who were of his own house, his answer was a kind of soft increpation to them,
and a strong instruction to all times, It is not your part to know the times,
nor the seasons which the Father has Acts 1.
put in his own power: This is a prerogative our Sovereign communicates unto
none; but as he proceeded to comfort again those friends he had checked, we
have our share in their compensation, for he does impart to us also his Holy
Spirit, which may assist and consolate us in the perplexities of all Times and
Seasons.

Let us therefore, by the residence of this Comforter with us, endeavor to
correct our Nature in her promptitude and hastiness in our distresses, to make
Gideons question to the Holy Spirit, If the Lord be with us, why are all these
ills be Judges 6. 13.
f^ln us? and to conclude, Sure the Lord has left us, and delivered us up to
our enemies, Let us procure rather to make the answer of Eli to Sa(...) in
acceptance of Gods Judgments, It is the Lord, let him do what seems good to
him: If we remain in this temper, we may boldly say with King David, The Lord
will not be angry for ever; he will judge the world Psalm. 102.
in equity, and the people in his truth: therefore I will hope always, and will
yet praise him more and more: Thus with the Psalmist, keeping God at our right
hand, we shall not be moved, or dejected by any sinister Events in a sincere
Cause.

There is a far different superstition in the pertinacy of the Pharisees, and
the facility of some people; for they in a shower of Miracles falling down upon
them, to anounce to them the time of the change of their Law, still called for
a Sign from Heaven to authorize that Doctrine; and some people are so prone to
change their Law, as they call Natural Accidents, that favor their
dispositions, Signs from Heaven to warrant their innovations. As the first were
said to have eyes, and not to see, so these last may be said to see without
eyes; for their imaginations seem to them so illuminate, as the eye of their
Reason is dazzled when it looks against them: Such fancies commonly love to cast
in troubled waters, and upon all successful draughts, they do (as the Prophet
says of them) Habac. 2.
Sacrifice to their own net, and offer incense to their drag, worshipping in a
manner their own Spirit, which they have before invocated for their directer:
Thus while they are so confident Expositors of the letter of Humane
Contingencies, they are better Interpreters of Fortune then of Providence.

They who are emboldened by the advantages, or abashed merely by the
miscarriage of a Cause of which they have reason to believe God to be the
conducter, do as if the children of Israel should have thought God had been
more in the Pillar of Fire, then in the Cloud, because it was a pleasanter
object: The true children of Abraham, the sons of Faith, follow the Cloud of
Gods Judgments, as confidently as the Flames of his manifest Kindeness, and
murmr not at the waters of Contradiction, which they are often put to drink
in this peregrination.

St. Augustine says elegantly; That every one would be content to overtake
Christ at his home, but few are constant in following him in the way; there is
a contrary inordinateness in our Nature in the point of Gods Providence, for
most are curious to follow with their ratiocinations the traces and steps of it
upon Earth, and few are content to be transported immediately to the home
thereof, which is Heaven; that is, we commonly affect an enquiry into the
Reasons of second Causes, and are busy in guessing at Gods meaning by them,
rather then resort directly to the inscrutable order of Gods Providence in all
Events, and so rest upon the faithful resciance of his Reasons: This course is
the overtaking of Gods Providence at home, and not the tracking it curiously
abroad, in the prints and traces thereof as it passes through the world.

This last ought to be the course of a Christian, to whom Christ has left his
Faith in the equity of Gods universal Providence, as the Apostle says of his
other Doctrines, That we may not be like Children, tossed to and fro with every
kind of Fortune, by which our great Enemy, the Prince of the Air, raises
continually change of winds, to toss us, and carry us away into an opinion of
that airy Deity of Fortune, which he has set up for the Devotion of the worlds
Fancy.

I may pertinently then conclude with Saint Peter, in this case of Temptation
to the Primitive Christians, Think 1 Pet. 4^ 12.
it not strange, concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some
strange thing happened to you; it may be the time is come, that Judgment must
begin at the house of God; in which case we have this excellent advice from God
by the Prophet Isaiah, Go my people into thy chambers, shut Isa. 26. 20
thy doors upon thee, be hid for a moment, till the indignation pass.

Whereupon I will sum up all my resolutions with this excellent Exhortation of
that most holy King David, in his most depressed condition, Expect the Lord, do
manfully, and thy Psalm. 26. 19.
heart shall be strength(...)d: I say, wait on the Lord; for they who have
taken Gods Word for their repose, and acquiescence against the corrupted
Testimonies of their own impatient humors, will by a blessed experiment attest
the truth of this Asseveration of the same afflicted King, and beloved Saint,
Blessed is the man whom thou chasti^est, O Psalm. 94. 12,
Lord, and teach him out of thy Law, that thou may give him rest from the
days of adversity, until the pit be dug for the wicked.

The seventeenth Treatise. Of Solitude. Divided into two Sections.
. I.
The most useful order in describing the nature of Solitude.

MAny who have made Images of Solitude, have done like Painters when they draw
Ladies; who (observing the most remarkable Features, as much as may make a
resemblance) cover the defects of the complexion with all the Art they can;
they set no freckles, or mark, nor pits, or unevennesses in the skin,
accounting the best prizure of their Art, to leave the favor of the person on
the figure, with the least touches of disfavor upon it: In report to this
method, many who have figured Solitude, having set out the most noted
properties thereof, have sought to sweeten all they could the disagreeableness,
leaving no roughness or inequality upon the countenance of their Character of
Solitude.

But those who look upon it by the life, will find much more unsmoothness and
hard favor in it, then is expressed in such speculative Images: For the original
Malady of our Nature was such, as has left some dints and prints in the
surface of the evennest state of our minds; there are harsh and unpleasant
intervals of roughness, and inequality found in all the fairest complexions of
our peace and serenity: Wherefore it concerns us to possess our opinion with
the most natural Image of Solitude we can pourtraict, and that rather rudely
touched, then flattered: For when we come to the actual acquaintance of it,
either by election or necessity, it imports us in the first case, not to have
fancyed such a figure, as may have moved us to design it for a Mistress to some
melancholy Fancy; or in the last case, of constraint not to have preconceived
any such hard favor, or disagreeableness, as may confuse us in our first aboard
of it: But some previduation of it is easilyer taken off by acquaintance, then
an over-charge of promises to our selves of peace and ease, can be made good
unto us by our first communications with it; because our minds do easilyer
acquiesce upon their proposals of moderate conveniences, then they can setle
upon their fall from high overvaluations.

I shall not therefore play the Painter in this draught of Solitude, but rather
the Printer, by exhibiting the just impression of it, taken from the original
stamp thereof, which I have in my hands, and shall design my print to bear the
countenance and proportions of Truth, rather then the regular symmetries of a
fair imagination, which is as Painters draw Angels, in whom they intend only
beauty, not similitude: For I may own the having taken this Lesson from
Solitude, which I will practice upon her own figure, to prefer the benefit of
the Reader, before the beauty of the Discourse; and rather desire to impart by
Charity the utility of Truth, then to affect the making my Solitude so lovely,
as it may be rather good Company then good Counsel.

This were to trade for Vanity with that Stock of Solitude God has given me to
acquit the Mortgages of my time; and it is no mean blessing to be able to
redeem time, even by the evils of our days. This is to grow so rich by the very
Sequestration, as to be able to make provision of Liberty, peradventure at some
time or other, even for some who are now Masters of mine: For this my Map of
Solitude may be useful to all that are Travelers through the Changes and
Vicissitudes of Times, though they seemed never so fixed in any station.

I do therefore humbly present my Country with some Fruit of that Graft of
Solitude it has set upon the barren Stock of the other time of my Life,
praising God that I may in some measure say with Saint Paul, The things which
have happened to me, have fallen out to the furtherance of my liberty in Christ;
Philippians, Chapter the first, Verse the twelfth.

I shall not then endeavor to write the Laudative, but rather the Life of
Solitude, in which the intermixtures of Good and Ill are co-incident to one
another: And though I do not pretend the measures of my mind should exactly
fit many others, yet the matter of my propositions, which is Virtue and Piety,
will endure the taking to pieces, and translating into many good Forms,
according to the sizes of several Dispositions.

In God there is this inexplicable Mystery, there is Unity, and Singleness
without Solitude; for out of the Singularity of the Divine Essence, there is a
Natural Fecundity and Emanation of a Plurality of Persons, in which consists
Gods incapacity of solitariness; for without this connatural Society, Divines
affirm God might be said to be solitary, even in the midst of all his
Creations, as Man was said to be alone among all the Creatures of Paradise,
before he had a Consort of his own Nature. We need not stay any longer in this
Mountain of the Divine Essence, clouded and overshadowed with this Mystery of a
TRINITY in UNITY, it is sufficient that it afford us but so much Light, as to
show, That Solitude is not consonant to the Nature of Man, as he is GODS Image,
and so provision was quickly made for that supply, after the singleness of his
Creation.

We must resort then to some Supernatural intervention, that may mediate
between Man's Nature, and the Nature of Solitude, when he is reduced to it; and
thereby acquaint him with another kind of society, when he is sequestered from
that which is so familiar to him: Thus, as it were, rather translating his
communication into another language, then razing out the impression in him of
the love of company. And this is to change the nature of his society, and not
the sociableness of his Nature.

. II.
Solitude divided into three sorts; and the first discoursed of.

ME thinks all the states of Solitude may be pertinently divided into these
three sorts, of Voluntary, Violent, and Neutral. The first is the operation of
a Super natural Voluntary Solitude defined.
agent upon Man's Will, which works upon it, as the Wise man says, Forcibly and
sweetly, drawing our minds out of the world, in such a gentle soft separation,
as vapors are extracted out of the earth, while the virtue of the heavenly
Spirit attracts our Will out of grosser immersions in the earth, unto the pure
speculation of Divine objects; the grace of such evocations falling (as the
Psalmist says) like dew upon a fleece. So as this egress out of the society of
the world, may be nominated supernatural in the means, though voluntary in the
act.

The next is, when any exterior natural agent forcibly deprives Violent
Solitude defined.
us of the liberty of all society; and this may often be just, in order to the
general society of the world, which is maintained sometimes by violences
exercised on particulars; but is always offensive to the nature of Man: And so
I term this sort of Solitude, Violent.

The third (which I state as Neutral) is a mixture, and Neutral Solitude
defined.
compound between the aptness and constitution of particular natures, and some
exterior intervention of violence and offense to that humor, by which we are
most affected to the world; as a defeature of some hope, whereunto our minds
were most applied, or some loss, of what our affections had made an entire
transaction of themselves unto, or some injury above our reach of any
reparation, and many the like violations of our minds in the world, upon which
we break off correspondence with it. And this condition of Solitariness I call
Neutral, as having somewhat of both the other states of Voluntary and Violent;
for both these qualities concur to the composure of this kind of separation
from Society.

For the first sort of these Solitudes, which I call Voluntary, that part of it
which is disagreeable to the instinct of Nature, is reconciled by the mediation
of the Author of Nature, who nourishes the minds, he calls ou^ into this
Desert, with lighter and more Spiritual society, which he showers down from
Heaven upon them, as the Psalmist says, Man feeds upon the bread of Angels,
Prayer and Meditation, which associates his Spirit to such company, as he
thinks he has rather one body too much with him, then want of any.

There are many of the children of Abraham whom God Genesis 12(...)
calls, as he did their Father, summoning them by his voice to come out of
their Country, from their Kindred, and from their Fathers house, unto a Land
that he will show them; and to this citation many do faithfully answer,
quitting the Native Region of all their Inclinations, the habitudes of Flesh
and Blood, which are so near of kin to them, and all the sweetnesses of
communication, and solaces of company, which are the domestics of their
Fathers house, and the familiars of our Humane Nature, and separating
themselves from all these in(...)e app^tencies, take their journey into the
strange Region of Solitude, privacy and recluseness; and when the Soul, like
the Psalmists Spouse, shall thus Psalm. 44. 13.
forget her own people, and her fathers house, then the King shall be in love
with her beauty; and then this delectation of the Luke 12. 40. Psalm. 36.
Soul in our Lord, confers all the petitions of the heart upon it.

When God makes these extraordinary selections and vocations to this passage
through the Desert unto the Land of Promise, he spreads a Cloud over them by
day, which shadows them from all the ardors of their sensitive appetite, and
sets up a pillar of Fire before them in the night, of that fire which Christ
came to bring into the earth, that illuminateth all the obscurities whereunto
our Nature is subject, in the ecclip^e of Society, and warmeth and cherishes
that shivering chilness wherewith our Nature is so apt to be benumbed, in the
privation of the elementary light, and heat of our Nature, which is
Communication and Society. This holy fire that accompanies them, does not only
(as the Psalm. mist says) Make their night as day to them, but even the
devesture of themselves, their solace and delectation; and by the same degrees
that they are severed and discharged of themselves, they are replenished with
that Society, which entertaineth them with that joy, wherein the fingleness is
the universality of it; for it is never all things to any heart, but when it is
there alone; This is the peace of Christ, exulting in our hearts: And in
Colloss. 3. 15. this Society is the whole Trinity, which, as the Prophet says,
Leads first into Hosea 2.
solitude, and then speaks to the heart, as though it would have nothing but
the heart it self present at this entertainment.

Such passengers as are truly led by this conduct, have for their Viatick, that
hidden Manna given them, which is promised in the Revelation, in which they
find the several tastes Rev. 2.
of all their inclinations; the relish of the society of Parents, Brothers and
Friends, are all savor'd in this celestial Ma^na of Contemplation; insomuch as
they seem to taste in the source, and spring it self the diverse relishes of all
those currents of pleasure that flow our of it, before they take various
infusions from those veins of the earth they run through. They taste the joys
of Fathers, Brothers and Friends, in loving him, who is every thing to pure
love: Thus being in the state which the Prophet says, shall be raised above the
altitudes or elevations of the earth, they live in the scent and odor of the
blossoms of the Tree of Life, of which they are promised to eat the fruit in
the Paradise of God; For our Supreme beatitude, is the contemplation of God,
ripe, and gathered in the maturity of the full vision of his Essence, so as one
of the sweetest fruits of Glory, is a perfect and consummate Contemplation.

They then who live in this holy Garden of Speculation, may be said to be
already under the shady leaves of the Tree of Life; this state of separation
from the world, seeming to be in such an order and relation to the supreme
beatitude, as Adams Paradise was to Heaven, as it is in a manner of integrity of
^ase, and passes away out of this life by a kind of translation to glory.
They live in the Suburbs of the celestial Jerusalem, whose streets are paved
with fine gold; and these suburbs in proportion are paved with refined silver,
which is a proportionate purity here, to that perfect Charity wherein it
terminates within the gates of the City. So as we may say of this kind of
separation from the world (which is an ascending upon Jacobs Ladder) Truly,
this is no Genesis 28.
(...)her but the house of God, and the gate of Heaven.

Of such Souls that live but at this little distance from their home, while
they are still advancing from virtue to virtue, we may say with the Psalmist,
Blessed are those Psalm. 88. 10.
souls which know this jubilation, they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy
countenance, and in thy Name they shall rejoice all the day, and in thy
Righteousness shall they be exalted* It is easy to say much in exalting this
happy state of Solitude; all the space between Earth and the empyreal Heaven,
the seat of the blessed, being the scope we have to extend our thoughts upon:
For no exageration that stays short of the sight of God, can go too far in the
endearment of this blessed condition, as they who have read the lives of many
Saints who have lived in this Region, will easily confess.

I must confess my self very unable to say anything in order to direction,
either how to walk in these Suburbs of Heaven, or how to find the best way to
them; yet as one may print a good Map of a Country, or stamp of a City, and
neither know the streets and passages in it, nor the ways in the Country that
lead to it; experience in both being requisite for this capacity: So though I
am not at all acquainted with the purity of this kind of Solitude, knowing it
only by sight, as having seen it in the Images of some Saints, I may have
taken off this impression handsomely, without any practical skill in this Divine
Exercise of Contemplation; therefore I will only say of it as a Holy man did
of the Apocalypse, I admire it in what I do understand, and also what I do not
understand, in honor of what I do: For truly the mystery of this Angelical
life, is like the white Stone promised in the Apocalypse, in which a new Name
is written, which none Apoc. 2. 17.
know, but they that receive it: So that I can say nothing to inform such as
have received this white precious kind of life, only admire their felicity,
who (like Moses conversing with God) see the hinder parts of him in this life,
and have as it were the earnest given them of that which S. Paul says, Neither
eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man,
the joy, I mean, of contemplating the Divine Essence face to face in the light
of glory.

What I may presume to say pertinently in order to my design, is to desire,
That all men be very advised in the discernment of their vocation to this
excellent kind of Solitude, and to proceed as Samuel did, by Eli's advice, in
answer to the voice, not to presume upon their first interior motions, though
never so clear, but to stay for the iteration and pressure of the same voice
often speaking to them, and not to resolve any thing finally, but by conformity
to some Spiritual direction, to the end an acceptance of this excellent course
may rather be the persuasion of Humility and Obedience, then any promptitude or
fervor of our temper and complexion: For the voice of God to this vocation, may
easily be mistaken, as the Jews took that which was a voice from Heaven for
Thunder only, so many take that for the voice of God, which indeed is but the
thunder of their own constitution; some Spiritual fervors (composed of the
vapors of their Nature, that lie under the clouds of the world) breaking out
into some loud discontent; which noise of our humors is often taken for the
voice of Grace.

But this vocation is not so likely to be in the great wind of our first
Spiritual impulses, or in the flashes of our new fervor, as in the gentle air
and breath which the Prophet found the Spirit of God in; that is, in a soft and
equal temper of Humility, and diffidence on the power and virtue of our natural
propensions; not to trust every Spirit, but to try the Spirit, is the best
advice in this great undertaking, and to bring it to the test of a prudent
Spiritual Director, who may upon due examination testify to our Spirit, that
this is the voice of the eternal Word, which pronounces this, Follow me. And
when we have truly heard this voice, and answered to it by a selfabnegation,
then the hundredfold which he assigned even in this life, is paid in the
relinquishment of all, and dissociation from the world, by this union with him,
who is so much above all we leave, as he is all we can wish to have.

This is all I can contribute to the reverential estimation of this best sort
of Solitude; and since the blessedness of it is much above my report, I will
leave it with the Queen of She^a's admiration, and praise of the Master of this
so well ordered Solitude, who is greater then Solomon, Happy are thy men, and
happy are thy servants, which stand thus continually before thee, and hear thy
wisdom.

The eighteenth Treatise. Of a mixed sort, or of Neutral Solitude; Divided into
three Sections.
. I.
Explaining this term, by exhibiting the state of Man's Will in his elections.

NOw I have, as I conceive, rather paid my Devotion in this Saintly life of
Solitude, then contributed any thing by my testimony to the beatification of
it, I shall descend to the other two, which are more terrestial, and of my
familiar, acquaintance. Wherefore I may hope to give some more pertinent
information of the nature of them; for as I may truly say, I have neither
learnt wisdom, Prove. 30. 3. Ecclu^. 34. 12.
nor have I the knowledge of the Saints; so I may also own, That I have seen
many things by erring, and going astray, whereby I have found, that the
sensitive part has often an equal voice with the rational, in the election of
this second state of Solitude, which I have stated as Neutral, and so will
treat of it in the middle, between those two I have termed Voluntary and
Violent, as mixed and partaking of them both.

What has been said of the great Patron of Solitude, John Baptist, may, in my
conceit, sort well with this particular I now describe; to wit, That he was the
Horizon of the Law and the Gospel, his state being a kind of middle Circle
that did divide those two Haemispheres, touching upon each of them: Such a
position does this Neutral Solitude seem to have, of being an Horizon between
the two states, of purely Voluntary, and Violent Solitude, as it is a middle
term between both of them, which parts and disterminateth them from one
another, and partaketh of either of them: For indeed it touches both upon
Freedom and Constraint; on the first, as it is an act of Election; on the
latter, as it is an effect of some exterior compulsion, which notwithstanding
it cannot fully distrain the will, yet it lays such forcible motives upon it,
as carry away the election in a posture mixed between Consent and Coaction; and
this is the manner of our willing in many occasions, when our Imagination
suggesteth to our Will some apparent good, under the form of Real, and moving
this choice in a kind of imperious manner of persuasion, carries the election,
which although it be always voluntary in the act, yet may be said to be violent
in respect of the means that wrought it; forasmuch as that voluntary act holds
more of the imperfection, then of the perfection of Free Will, as being an act
contrary to the order of Reason, thatdoth dictate rather the choice of the real
good, then the apparent, which is preferred in this election.

To elucidate this point, we may consider, That the Angels now cannot make such
a choice, in respect their freeacts are always perfect and regulated by right
Reason, though before they did see God it was not so, as in Lucifer is clear:
when therefore such a vote is passed by our Will, it must needs argue a kind
of violence and tyranny indeed excerseded over our Reason; and consequently
this choice partaketh of violence in point of perfection of the act, however it
is likewise voluntary, in the order of our imperfect Natures, that are less
truly free then Angels; albeit we may be said to have an extension of liberty
above them, viz. that we can choose as well to do evil as good, which amplitude
argues in effect imperfection and deficiency of liberty, no^ any compleatment
or perfection thereof: And for this reason, That by the order of Nature, the
understanding ought to command in all rational elections; wherefore it is
rather a regulation of Nature to restrain the Will unto Reason, then any
violence upon Free Will, to have it so confined or restrained.

In proof whereof we may consider, That even man's Will (which is now in via
rebellious, when it comes to be perfectionated in Heaven, or in patria, as
Divines call it) will be reduced into this order and conformity; so while we
find this order inverted by the irregularity of our corrupted Nature, we may
say many of our voluntary acts partake of a kind of violence, when by the
predominating of our Will over our Reason, they are rendered acts imperfect,
however we may call them free: From whence arises this mixed amphibious kind
of election, which nevertheless does not infringe the liberty of the Will,
since that electeth always freely; for no force of motives can rise to a direct
compulsion of the Will: and the efficacy of extrinsecal impressions, in this
case, may be fairly illustrated by Gods manner of working upon the Will, which
he moves efficaciously to his own end, yet freely in order to her Natures
preserving his power and her liberty. After such a sort do external Motives
very often carry the elective faculty of the Mind to some choyces and
resolutions, moving the Will with efficacy, and withal conveying it with
freedom to the determination: And this is the case (I suppose) of what I term
Neutral, or Mixed Solitude, when any exterior injury from the world presses
the Will vehemently, to elect this state of life, which is often chosen, as in
this mixed Disposition has been represented: Wherefore the chief intendment of
this Discourse, shall be to furnish the Will with such precautions, as may
fortify her against such violent assaults of the Imagination in this act of so
great importance.

. II.
Treating diverse Motives that solicit this vocation.

THe Soul of man being the seat of the Divine Image in Humane Nature, the
instinct of sociableness may be said to be the eye, or the sight of the Divine
Image in it; for as the eye is the organ of light, which conveyeth to us the
chiefest society of all material things (and thence is the noblest manner of
Commerce the Body has with the World, as consequently the worthiest portion of
our sensitive Nature) So the instinct and Natural appetency of Society, is the
noblest faculty of our intellectual: For by Society we receive all our rational
light, as by the Eye we take all visible species; and the love of company is
not imprinted in us so much for our own private solace, as for the support of
the common frame of Humane Society: So that the sociableness of Humane Nature,
is in order to the conservation and comfort of the whole, by a convenient union
of the parts: And the same reasons that require a due disposition of the
several parts of our Natural body, for the decency and health of it, hold in
the constitution of the Spiritual frame of our Nature, so as the love of
Society Definition of order.
is referred to the constituting of order, which consists always of parts,
and is nothing but a due marshalling and ranking of diverse and distinct
portions, either in material things, or rational designs.

Whereupon, since order is in Nature the final end of this impression of the
love of Society, an inordinate love of Company may be out of the order of the
sociableness of Humane Nature, as it may aim only at some propriety that
respects some such single desire, as is much severed from the common good of
Society: and so many self-assignments may be in this respect said rather to
tend properly to Singularity then Society. According to this rule all the busy
negotiation of our passions, in the world, do rather break the chain of
Society, then make part in the connection, though they seem the only rings and
links whereof it is framed. Hence is it we so often see unruly and disorderly
activity, and pursuit of some appropriation, occasion a separation from the
world, as falling out with it upon the rejection of some unduly affected
propriety: And upon these terms many do often break with the world, and retire
in defiance of all other company, after this defeature of their particular
pretense; and so in effect they rather fly from the world upon a repulse in
their assault, then leave it in neglect of what it possesses: Wherefore in
this quarrel with the worlds party, many do often change their side at first in
despite, rather then their mind in a sincere distance of their affections
from it; yet on our first estrangement from the world, upon difference with it,
God is so Divinely compassionate, as he does not upbraid us with our first
infidelity, in adhering so firmly to the advers party in all our
successfulnesses, which we take as the pay of his enemies.

All which truly understood, are but the excesses of Gods plenitude, who can
afford even to his enemies, as his waste and redundancy, these his temporal
Bounties, since The earth is his, and the fullness thereof: Insomuch as the
infiniteness of the Divine goodness, is very often manifested most in the
reception of such as come in to him, upon the worlds cashiering of them: For
God accepts even his enemies Reformado's, and prefers them often to great
Trusts in his house.

We cannot therefore discountenance this breach with the world, though at first
it be not in direct order to the following of Christ; for he to whom St. John
forbade the casting Luke 9. 50.
out of Devils, because he was not of Christ's train, was notwithstanding
authorized by Christ himself: God resolves often (in this case of an indirect
address to him) as Christ answered St. John, in the forecited occasion, He
takes those to be for him, who are not against him: for many of such who are
but so near Christ's side as a declaration against the world, he does often
retain and setle in his service.

S. Paul's Charity was a copy of this his Masters, who rejoiced at an accession
to Christ, whether it were either by pretense, Phil. 1.
or in truth: So God is glorified in some degree in many such relinquishments
of the world, which have at first more animosity then sincerity of Devotion;
because this defiance has always some appearance of victory over the world,
which still gives a kind of alarm to the worlds party, and shows them the
contempt of the world, standing before them in such a posture, as stirs up some
reflection upon the despicableness of it, or at least upon the distresses and
dangers in it, and so moves, in some measure, toward a consultation on their
estates.

Yet do I not upon this foundation advise any hasty inconsiderate Sequestration
of our selves from the world, though there are many (who like some criminal and
Banditi retiring into the the Sanctuary only for safety) have by the
frequenting Gods domestics, been sincerely converted into the family, and have
taken up the arms of the Spirit, with which they have combated only the rest
of their life against themselves by continual mortification. In this manner many
(upon civil enmities with the world) have (in their retreat out of it, and
taking the Sanctuary of Solitude) found by degrees that Sanctification, which
at first they did not chiefly seek, as God said to the Prophet, I am sought of
those that asked Isaiah.
not for me before; and I am found of them that sought me not: This was the
case of many who sought Christ at first, merely for recoveries from incurable
diseases, by the worlds Art, which had given them over, and found Spiritual
reparations of their Souls, above what they projected. Many such bedrid
Pal^ies, benumbed and stupefied in their passions, which are fain to be carried
out of the world, by the violent hands of diverse afflictions, being brought to
Christ into such solitudes wherein he does most manifestly reside, receive not
only the cure of their passions, which they sought chiefly at first, but are
often staid and scaled with a Divine impression of the contempt of the whole
world, and a sincere consecration of themselves to Spiritual affections.

This happens when God in some rare cases uses instrumentally the worlds
sharp tools, as fit and proportionate to work on some stony hearts, wherein his
Image is much defaced, which he has notwithstanding from all eternity designed
for figures to stand in his house: But such are precedents of Gods Mercy, to
reverence only, not to rely upon; for God (as the Prophet says) does often
take out a stony heart, and put one of flesh in the room of it; whence the
Apostle tells us, He has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will Romans 9. 18
he hardens; yet he will harden none, but such, as like firestones, resist
and grow harder by the heat of his love, or the flames of his judgments, which
he has first applied to soften them. They who study Gods hand in all the
various designs and colorings of his Works, shall discern it even in all those
pieces of Providence, which are of such different manners, as have made many
mistakes in the world upon this Conclusion.

. III.
How God works, and how the Devil countermineth in this vocation, wherein a
safe course is directed.

THere is no notion under which we can more apply look upon God, then as a
Physician to our weak Nature: He who knows all the properties of Actives and
Passives, applies to all constitutions their proper remedies; and as some
Medicines are not proper both for Beasts and Man, in regard of their different
tempers; So for brutish sensual persons, there are required stronger Drugs,
then to more reasonable and ingenious dispositions. The Word of God makes this
difference often between voluptuous and sensual habitudes, and between pious
and virtuous constitutions, calling the one Dogs, and the other Children;
wherefore as the Physicians minister to some tempers only such Drugs which
they call Benedicta, blessed simples, which work kindly, and yet effectually
upon them, and to others they are fain to prescribe Minerals, and more violent
Ingredients to move them: So there are some such insensible habits of mind, as
Gods Benedicta, his Blessings, and his gentle voice of vocation does not move;
but their strong Nature rather works upon them, and alters them, turning them
into the nourishment of their passions, while all their temporal Benedictions
are converted into aliment of their sensualities.

Therefore to such indurate tempers, God ministers often rude and violent
Minerals, so unprepared, as they seem to the world to be poisons; these we may
call Affronts, Losses, Dishonors, and all kind of Disappointments: and these
violent compositions work upon their Natures, and alter it, by which their cure
is performed; so that oftentimes the worlds Injuries prove R^ceits ministered,
when it intends ruins: For while the enemies of our Nature, viz. all kind of
crosses and vexations seem to chase us out of the field, they convey us into
that retreat whereunto God has designed us. This is a frequent contrivement by
Gods Providence, to secure his friends by the chase and pursuit of his enemies,
and theirs; as he preserved David from acting against him, by the malevolence
of the Princes of the Philistines, who thought they had shamed him, by
rejecting and casting him out of their Troops, when indeed they preserved him
innocent, from staining himself in the blood of his Brethren. So God excites
very familiarly the adversities of this world, to remove, and seemingly to
expel his servants out of it, to deliver them from the guilt of loving the
world, providing thus against their longer engagement with his Adversary, who
is the Prince of this World.

And as God vouchsafes to serve himself sometimes of the storms which the
Prince of the Air raises in this world, by making them carry such wracks upon
his coast of Solitude, as he designs to save with the loss only of their
temporal fraights: So the Prince of the World does sometime make use of this
Shore, for the casting away of many, to whom he shows it as a secure harbor or
shelter which they have under their Lee, and can reach when they please, upon
any distress of weather: And thus as an Angel of Light, he promises this
Sanctuary, of retiring to God as a security which cannot fail, even after all
the provocations of him, whereby he persuades many to sport themselves with him
in his large alleys, in the days of their youth and fortune; Leave no flower
ungathered (as the Wise man says) of th^s season. And when either the winter of
Nature, or of Fortune, has withered and blasted all those sweets, then it is
time enough to retire to Gods cover for shelter, who refuses no sort of
Refugiats.

These insinuations do work with many, so as to embolden them to live profusely
upon the present stock of their Time and Fortune, with this purpose, of taking
Sanctuary either at some assigned time of their Age, or upon any pressing
Contingency. Hence is it, that taking their Council of Gods Enemy, he presents
such Clients to him, as have robbed him all their life, in a purpose to repair
to him for protection against the Law, and exemption from his hand of Justice;
and thus, in effect, the house of Prayer is turned, and designed by such
Projectors, to be but an harbor of Thieves.

How often does the Prince of Darkness amuse many with this falacy, who walk
with him in his large alleys, even by this light he shows them, by which they
conceive to see a safe issue out of this broad way, into the narrow paths of
the Kingdom of Light? But alas! how many lose themselves in this labyrinth, and
are foundered in this calm Sea of the world, even while they have this coast of
retreat, and Solitude in their eye? And how many others, who are entered into
the Port, sink there, by those leaks they bring in with them, never being able
to stop those overtures in their minds, through which worldly affections and
passions soak continually into their thoughts some ill habit or other, still
keeping intelligence with the world? And for this cause many either revolt back
openly to it, or else hold some private treacherous correspondence with it, in
a nauseousness and distaste of all Spiritual aliment, and a tepid irresolution
between breaking off and holding on that course; and remaining in this
nauseousness, we know how disagreeable this temper is to Gods stomach; so that
many presuming to take this Water of Trial, being polluted by a long
co-habitation with temporal loves, it proves to them rather putrefaction, then
purgation; and their minds, in stead of a Spiritual conception and
improvement, break out into an unsound and fruitless dissipation.

Likewise as this deceitful project of relinquishing the world, is often
preferred by the Father of Lies to many sensual and brutish lives; so, me
thinks, it has this property, common to many Animals, who believe when they
have hid their head, that their whole body is covered, because such whom St.
Jude calls bru^e beasts, seem to conclude, that when their bodies shall be
retired and sequestered from the world, their minds are removed and estranged
from it: But they quickly find the brutality of that opinion, by the blows and
wounds wherewith the Images of the world assault and charge their minds; by
this disabuse they perceive her nakedness and exposure to all those vexations
from which they thought themselves guarded and covered; and God, who regards
only the posture and nearness of the heart Jer. 30.
to him, does adjudge a punishment s^ted to this presumption, in revenge of
their promising themselves the being able to carry their minds out of the
world into his Sanctuary at their own assignments; he often receives the body
only, and leaves the mind still in this habitual looseness, making the bodies
division in this separation from the world, the revenger of this presumption of
adventuring to dispose of one of the most dear properties of Grace, namely, the
retreat of our minds by the right of Nature: For nothing is more peculiar to
Grace, then to impart the joy and peace of the Spirit, in a state of
contradiction to all the cases of the Flesh.

It is in some sort a design of Simony, to expect the gifts of the Holy Spirit,
upon the exchange of a local transaction of our persons. Holy King David had
not only stepped into the way, but was running in the way of God, when he had
his heart dilated and enlarged unto him, so as his Flesh and his Spirit both
joined in an exultation in the living God: Therefore it is very useful
Animadversion, not to rely upon the Covenants of our own private Spirit for
the conveyance of this so happy condition to us, of a godly retreat and
^eposure of our selves, since the more Nature promises, the less interest she
has in it, this self-arrogation being an evidence against our title to this
possession of Grace.

Upon these considerations I may advise such as are come to labor under the
burden of their mundanities (which they have been less cautious in loading
themselves with, in respect of this final discharge they have proposed) to
remember when they come to Christ to be disburthened that precedent in the
Gospel, which relates aptly to their cases, which is, that of the ten Lepers,
who when they came to Christ, stood after off, and lifted up their voices with,
JESUS have mercy upon us; the consciousness of their pollution, kept them at
Luke 17.
that reverend distance: And Christ's answer in this case is a very pertinent
direction to such Spiritual Lep^^s, Go, and show your selves to the Priests,
take advise of Gods Ministers, and their opinions of the cl^anness and purity
of their intentions, before they venture into the communion of this Sanctuary
of holy Solitude, otherwise their present offering may prove of as ill an odor
as their former Sacrilege.

If these Animadversions meet likewise with any such as are not urged by the
pressure of their Consciences, but rather solicited so much by their natural
temper and disposition to privacy and retiredness, as upon the least
provocation of the world they are apt to break with it, these humors are
desired to stay and pause ^^riou^ly and long on this suggestion; for this may
often be the operation of Melancholy which works this hasty promptitude: And as
Melancholy is the highest degree of choler in the Humors; so in these hasty
sallies out of the society of the world, there may well be more Natural Humor,
then Spiritual Disposition, and so this be rather a Disease, then a devout
Constitution: Wherefore like sick men that forbear food long, while the Humor
is consuming, these retreaters may for some time live quietly, as long as this
Humor of the worlds disrelish is wasting and spending it self; but after that
is digested, the appetite of the world returns, and likely gnaws upon their
peace, they having no natural food for it. Hence is it that such complexions
ought to be very advised in this their assigning of themselves, according to
the propensity of their Humors, which persuades them often, that what is indeed
but the Ec^ho of their own voice of Nature which speaks in them, is a Spiritual
vocation: For their Natural Constitution raifeth that desire in their
imaginative part, which causes a little repetition and answer of it in the
Judiciary and Rational power of their mind; but it is rather from the
hollowness of their reason, then the solidity of it, that this Echo is
returned.

The result therefore of all these Examinations of several Cases, must be, Not
to conduct our selves by the precedents of special extraordinary vocations of
some, whom Christ has sent for out of the streets and by-ways of the world,
that is, immediately from the foulness and immundicity of their lives, and by
his Messengers of Crosses and Afflictions, compelled them to come into his
house: For these Cases are prerogatives Luke 17. 23.
of Gods Grace, which do not alter the known Laws that are enacted by him; by
which Laws we ought to try our vocations, to wit, by the mature advice of those
Judges he has seated in his Tribunal upon Earth, his Church; and by their
Sentences to make the trial of all our own private impulses or motions of our
Spirit, to this dispossession and abnegation of the world*

Christ himself has ruled this case in an excellent Parable, Luke 14. 28.
of one that builds a Tower, which is properly adopted to the design of a
contemplative life, as it is the erection of a frame of life, raised high above
the other parts of the Earth, and intended for prospect and discovery; so that
none must undertake this edifice, but after computation of the pertinencies
requisite for the finishment, lest they expose themselves to the reproach, of
having begun what they were not able to finish; and this reckoning and account
of our provision, must be made by the consulting of a prudent Spiritual
Surveyor, not trusting to the Architecture of our own Spirit, in which we must
zealously, often and humbly consult the eternal Architect of all Spiritual
frames, for a sincere discernment of his order, in the regulating our own
designs, with this address of the cautious Spirit of Holy David, Lord, grant me
Psalm. 142.
to know the way wherein I should walk; for I have lifted up my soul to thee.

This parting and separation from our own Will, is the first leave we must take
in our valediction to the world; and this is not to be done by a hasty
dismission of it, for so it is but a weight thrown upward, which is fastened to
us, and falls quickly back again; therefore it must be loosened and severed by
degrees, and steeped, as it were, in the fresh springing water of Prayer and
Mortification, whereby it will peel and fall away the easilier: Some
perseverence in this disposition is requisite, to blanch and whiten the
intention perfectly. St. Paul's advice for our preparation for the Holy
communion, is, me thinks, very properly applicable to this our preparation, for
participating of this Spiritual food; for Religious Solitude is the Table of
the Holy Ghost: Therefore, let a man examine himself, and then eat of this
bread of life, for he that presumes to taste of it unworthily, may be truly
impeached as guilty of much irreverence to the Holy Spirit, in venturing to
come to the Communion of his Gifts and Graces rashly, without a due consulting
of his invitation.

I need not urge our precaution and advisedness in this case farther, since our
temerity in it is brought to be a kind of Sin against the Holy Ghost:
Whereupon I will close up this Advertisement in St. John's words, Beloved,
believe not every Spirit, 1 John 4.
but try the Spirits, whether they be of God; for many false promises of this
Spirit of an happy Solitude, are current in the world, it being truer in no
case then in this, It is not of Romans 9.
him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God who shows mercy.

The nineteenth Treatise. Of Violent Solitude, or Close Imprisonment; Divided
into eight Sections.
. I.
How unwillingly our Nature submits to the loss of Liberty and Society.

IN the case we treated last, the Will needed a premonition against the
deception of sight; for our Will in fits of Melancholy, looks commonly
through the glass of our Imagination, upon such objects as flatter that humor
most: This Perspective of our Fancy is often cut into such angles, as represent
various and false colors of persuasions, wherewith the Will is inveigled, such
species proving not real when our Reason comes strictly to oversee them.
Therefore in the election of Solitude, the elective faculty was to be
instructed against the falacies of discourse, upon which, the Resolution is to
be grounded; but this case requires a different direction: For here, the best
course the Will can take to rectitude, is, to be totally blinded and cieled,
that she may make the straighter mount upward to the eternal Will, and not
amuse or perplex her self by looking about, with a solicitous inspection into
second causes, but may pitch at the first flight upon the primary cause of all
Contingencies.

Our Nature requires much precaution in this aptitude, to entangle us under
the pretext of infranchisement, by the liberty of reasoning out the Causes of
all advers Accidents; for in this case of loss of Liberty and Company, our
Nature likely seizes on curious disquisitions of all Humane Reasons, as the
next thing she takes hold on, to make company out of them, and the contrivement
of issues out of these straights, is a sort of freedom our Nature takes, as
some imaginary reparation in her necessity; by reason whereof these are commonly
the first occupations wherein our Fancy seeks some divertisement: and this
entertainment may lighten the weight a little, by removing it to and fro in our
Fancy, not letting a sad apprehension setle upon our minds; but all this
agitation of discourse, as long as it is but in circumference about this world,
and in the element of secondary Causes, is still but a circular motion, which
makes no progression to our end: for till our minds are risen and fixed upon
the supreme Cause, all the various projects and motions of our Fancy, are but
cooling a Fever with ^anning upon the distempered patient, where the air may
afford some exterior refreshment, which may be an inflaming of the disease; but
if our Will be (...)eled at first, with the Dove of the Psalm. 54.
Psalmist, she flies up immediately to her rest: The sooner then we spread our
thoughts upon the wings of Faith, the more haste we make to be lodged in rest
and tranquillity of Spirit.

Liberty and Society are two so dear Proprieties of Humane Nature, as natural
Reason can give no equivalent exchange in satisfaction for them: The Author of
Nature can only recompense this privation of two of the best Functions of our
being, and this by a communication of no less then his own Nature, which is, by
filling up these breaches with his own Spirit, otherwise our Spirits will
certainly remain empty and destitute of peace and consolation: For God, who
made Man's Society out of Man himself, has left the love of Company so
inviscerated in him, as that deprivement seems now to take more then a rib
out of him, even the better half of his Mind seems entrenched from him;
insomuch as his Reason seems to be left but one-handed, to minister to him in
this Exigence, which would require a reduplication rather for his support; But
Nature is so unable to make this supply, as for the redintegrating of his
mind, he must resort to a Supernatural suppeditation.

. II.
The deficiency of single Natural Reason argued for Consolation in this case;
and the validity of Grace asserted.

WHen I consider the strange undertakings of the Philosophers, me thinks they
have charactered to us the power of Natural Reason, in a fabulous figure or
Romance, setting it out as vanquishing all corporeal sensibleness, armed with
never so many strong afflictions, dissolving and disinchanting all the Charms
and Spells of Passions, although their characters be set never so powerfully
against the efficacy of Reason, which they exhibit in this predominancy,
dispersing all Errors, rectifying all oblique Opinions; thus have they fancied
the superior part of the mind, inthroned in such power as may easily blow away
all air, even of any Sedition, that rises in the inferior Regions of the
imaginative or sensitive faculties; Reason remaining in the posture of the
Queen of the Revelation, proclaiming, I sit Queen, and am no Widow, and shall
see us sorrow.

But they who account upon this Self-sufficiency, shall quickly find how
impracticable these strong speculations will prove, when they are bound, and
the Philistines are upon them; that is, enclosed in Solitude, and assailed by
Natural distresses and vexations; if they shall then expect such a Hercules of
their Reason, as they have seen painted by the Stoics, that should break
through all these Monsters, and remain fortified by all these labors, they will
soon perceive their projected securities had more of Poetry then of Prophecy:
And sure I believe one that trusts to the power of Natural Reason, upon the
word of Philosophy, to deliver him from all faintness or deficiency of Spirit
in this state of Violent Solitude, does as if one should persuade himself
inspired with the virtue of some fabulous Hero, with whose character he had
been strongly affected by reading his Romance; for when he comes to combat his
vitiated Nature in this Spiritual achievement, he will find such a vanity in
his speculation. The Fable of Ixion is a good figure of this kind of
presumption; for projecting to enjoy Juno (that is, some celestial Prerogative)
they do but embrace a cloud, and by this mixture they beget nothing but
Chymera's.

Certain it is, that Christianity does afford such Spiritual Samsons, as carry
the gates of their Prisons away upon their shoulders up to the Mountains, and
break all their chains as flax, raising their minds, with the Psalmist, up to
the mountains, contemplating Gods Providence and his design upon them in so
high a degree of resignation, as even their Prison and their Solitude are
rather Marks to them of their liberties, then Manacles of their Spirits; but
the strength of such Samsons is derived from the vow, not from the veins or
sinews of Nature: Is it by their offering up and consecrating their Reason to
that Spirit, whose breath overthrows all the strong holds, and destroys all
the councels 2 Cor. 10.
of Self-sufficiency, and replenisheth the evacuation which is made of our own
Reason, to make room for that infusion: therefore such victorious Spirits
profess, That the weapons of their warfare are not carnal, but such as are
mighty to the destroying of all the counsels of humanity, and bring into
captivity all understanding unto the obedience of Christ; for as he himself
assures us, If the Son of man make you free, you shall be free indeed: John 8.
36.
So that all such infranchised minds are convinced of the incapacity of their
single Nature, to preserve this immunity, and acknowledge this condition to
that Spirit which ima(...) this freedom, by the degrees of restriction ^o
puts upon them of his own bands; for where the Spirit of 2 Cor. 3. 17.
our Lord is, there is liberty. This Spirit made St. Peter s^eep soundly in his
chains between his two guards, that is, hold him reposing in a perfect stilne^s
of mind in all his ex(...) disquiets, and preserved him in as much freedom of
Spirit before his irons were struck off, as after the iron gates of (...) City
flew open before him; even while he lay in his Dungeon he was surely in the
same freedom of mind, bound in his chains, as sitting on his chairs of Rome
and A(...); and the Centurion that fell down before him at Ces^^ea, constrained
his Spirit more then the Soldiers between whom he was laid down at Jerusalem.

The Soul of man then is capable of a state of much peace and equanimity, in
all exterior bands and ag(...)ions; but this capacity is rather an effect of
the expropriation of our Reason, then a virtue resulting from her single
capacity, for it is the evacuation of all self sufficiency that a(...)h a
replenishment from that Divine plenitude, from whose fullness we receive grace
for grace; so that it is a super ve(...) 1 John 16.
gift, not a native graft in our Reason: And this tranq(...) of Spirit, he that
led captivity captive has given as a gift unto men, whereby we become
partakers of his Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.
in this calm and serenity of mind, which he pa(...) out to us in all his
several postures: Wherefore in our copying of this equality and imperturbation,
we must protest with the Apostle, We have not received the Spirit of the World,
1 Cor. 2. 12, 13.
but the Spirit which is of God; not in the l^a^ned words of man's wisdom, but
in the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost.

Nevertheless, it is our familiar presumption, to (...) much upon the virtue of
Humane Reason, whereof the Philosophers have made so lovely Images, as many
full (...) Pygmal^ons Fancy, of falling in love, as it were, with the Statu^ of
Morality, which wanting the soul and a(...) of Grace, will be found cold and
speechless, when they expect the spirit and life of Consolation, in such
pri(...) as these of Liberty and Company, which seem to shake even the Center
of our natural app(...)es.

Those who ^^st then upon the power of natural Reason, for the dispossessing
themselves of all anxieties and vexa^ions of Spirit, will be served like the
Sons of S(...); for the malignity of the world will answer them. The grace of
God Acts 19.
I submit unto, as having a power to displace and ex^el my Mischiefs; but who
are you, that undertake by Nature, to cast our all those Evils where with you
are possessed, and to ^^ee your Spirit by a lesser power, then that which does
possess it; your Senses in your vi^iated Nature being stronger in their
appetites, then your single Reason is in her discourses: So as when their
Senses are much offended by the worlds Malices, such undertakers will be
prevailed upon by the present passion, and ^e put to fly naked and wounded in
this Enterprise, as the Sons of S^^va were in their Exo^cisms.

The Philosophers who projected Reason to be such a powerful Actor, thought she
was only to contend against the infirmity of Flesh and Blood, knowing not that
the Mind was to wrestle with Superior powers, Spiritual rulers, in high
places; against which, there is no fence, but the putting on the whole armor of
God: for bare Reason cannot be of proof against those fiery darts of Murmr,
Repinings and Desolations of Spirit, which great extremities of sufferance cast
at our hearts; Reason being so far from making a constant resistance, as very
often she joyneth with the provocations, and concurreth, with the persuasion of
revolting against Patience, as a more reasonable thing to complain and repine,
then to resist our Senses, in this only appetite which is left to satisfy our
Nature, the ease of bemoaning and lamentation.

We are so much more enlightened then they who boasted of this
Self-sufficiency, as we are in defiance like Enemies, with those they
worshipped as gods; so that we had need have better Arms then those they have
left us, to combat with* And we may observe the insufficiency of (...)
presumptions by this instance, that what they erected (...) Trophy of their
Victory, is to us the greatest brand of infamy and poverty of Spirit, which was
the running away out of this life, upon any extremity of pressure: This even in
rectified Reason, is the ignoblest way of yielding, rather then an act of
conquering; insomuch as this, which seemed to them a demonstration of their
position of the minds impassiveness, is an evident confutation of their
opinion, for this is a total surrender to the power of that passion which has
made this life intolerable.

Cat himself, whom Seneca adoreth as the Deity of Philosophy, dissolved all the
frame of his Maxims, when he was fain to open a violent passage for the flight
of his Spirit out of the pressures it either felt or feared; Was it not
(...)fillanimity to choose in favor of his Senses, a softer blow from his own
hand, then he feared from Fortune* He should have suppressed the apprehension
of tyranny, and not have drenched his thirst of liberty in his own blood; why
did he not quench that and or, by casting away his dag(...), as he did the
glass of water in the Desert, where he refreshed his whole Army, by
extinguishing his own Natural appetite: This had been the best proof of the
apathy of his mind, the resolving to suffer even servitude in an Imp(...)ble
temper; but by this Self distrusting, he did sign with his blood the
retractation of his Maxim, confessing Se^vitude to be insufferable to his
mind; This precipitation cannot be vindicated from the charge of impatience
and discomposure in his mind, which is the disproof of all the Stoical
assertions: Christianity glories not in (...)y innate, but in an infused
virtue, saying, He that is in you, (...) (...) John 4.
greater then he that is in the world.

And so the power that holds the Spirit of a good Christian, is Foreign and
Divine, and consequently (...) stronger then any that can shake it, although
the worlds Earthquakes may make a local mutation of his person, (...)mains
still calmly in any posture wherein God shall set him, upon whose providence he
knows all rowlings and fluctuations to be current, and sees his own
security, with the Psalmist, at his right hand, which stays him from being
moved; Psalm. 15.
the same hand that removes him in all his local changes, holds him in a
tender love to that power, which together with the pains of his senses,
introduces the spirit of resignation: These reflections may be well applied,
to dispossess that presuming spirit of the children of this age, who pretend to
expel all sense of misfortunes, by the Exorcism of Moral Philosophy and Natural
Reason.

. III.
Great benefit acknowledged to Moral Philosophy, and the right use thereof
directed in order to our solacing.

BY this redargution of the arragancies of mere Rationalists, I do not purpose
to reject the use of Moral Philosophy, in this great work of consolation in
distresses, but to rank it in a due order, ministering and subservient unto
Grace; For when the peace of God, which passes all understanding, is seated as
the Principal, then Moral Reasons are sitly received, as serviceable
Accessaries to the Solace and Recreation of the mind: If we should first
examine and try the Principles of Christian Religion, by the best extent of
Humane Reason, we shall never accept the Mysteries of the Trinity from the
single hand of Rational persuasion; But when we have pitched our belief of this
Verity upon the Word of God, when our Faith has carried our assent as high as
Heaven upon her wing, from thence we may then descend to the Orb of Reason,
where Discourse affords us many Similitudes and Congruities, to open and
illustrate to our apprehension this Mystery, in such sort, as to bring it as it
were within sight of Humane Reason, in some obscure and imperfect notion: So
when we have first erected our expectance of confort and support upon the
Divine station of Grace, then we may step downwards upon the paces and
gradations of Reason, and find there solidity of Recreation for our minds
whereupon to rest, walk and exercise themselves; For then we use Moral
Discourse, but as an Organ whereby God conveyeth to us the clarity and
elucidation of the nobleness of the soul, endued by his grace with this
capacity of remaining impassive in all exterior violence.

In order to the illustrating this Position, the precepts of Philosophy come in
the stronger, when they enter in their due places, unfolding to us the nature
of the Universe, and spreading fairly before us the contempt of all
Temporalities, by diverse detections of the infidelity of all things sublunary.
Thus after the right marshalling of this Auxiliary succor, the more stock we
have of Moral Philosophy, the more enlargement we may make of the Recreations
of our Spirit, in these straights of our condition; For as a very learned
Humanist, converted to Christianity, is the more able, by the means of this
learning, to explicate and illustrate the Doctrine whereof he is persuaded: In
like manner, after this first conviction of our minds, touching the necessity
of our primary recourse to Grace, for the rectitude and conformity of our
hearts, they who are the most conversant with the Precepts of Reason and
Philosophy, shall be the best qualified by these helps, for the amplification
of their entertainments, and sweetning the Natural asperity of Solitude.

We must be sure then to fix this Principle in our thoughts, that all Humane
Philosophy does but the part of the wate^ of Sil^^, it does but wash off the
dirt of Ignorance from our eyes; it is the virtue of the superior direction,
which sends us to that sort of Application, which commands this admirable
effect; Reason is used by that supreme agent, to take off the foulness and
impurity of terrestial objects from the eye of our Mind, and to open it into
the speculation of virtue, but it is Grace which works the Miracle of this
Serenity of Spirit, by these instrumental illuminations of Reason: As long then
as Philosophy is kept only as a handmaid, with her eyes looking always upon
the eye of her Mistress Ephesians. 2.
(which is Grace, the gift of God) so long she proves very useful to her
service; but where she is seated as single commander of the family, all her
specious precepts and directions will prove (as the Apostle terms them) but
learned fables, when this practical office is required of them, to instate the
mind in that regularity and apathy whereof they are so confident projectors.

Having settled this Maxim, as Disciples of the Psalmist, for the fundamental
article of Spiritual composure, My soul, wait thou upon God, for from him is my
patience; then Psalm. 61.
the discoursings and arguments of Morality are proper stuff to adorn our
minds, that they remain not bare and naked, but furnished with convenient
matter of meditation and entertainment: Humane literature may be used in this
order, as Ceremonies are in Religion, which are requisite to excite and detain
Devotion and Reverence in our Nature, that is affected much with sensible
coverings of Spiritualities, which affording, as I may say, no hold for our
Senses, our Minds are not so easily staid and fixed in an attention upon such
Duties; therefore such occupations of our Senses, are very pertinent toward
the raising and arresting our Devotion. In like manner the flowers and
adornments of Moral Philosophy, are apt and serviceable for the affecting and
entertaining our Imagination, by the gracefulness and elegancy of their
persuasions, which are very congruent with the nature of our Affections, that
incline most to notions a little aspersed with sensible matter, and so are
easiliest staid and quieted in such attentions, which hold our Spirits in a
more cheerful application to the Arguments of rectified Reason.

In this order, Philosophy may be acknowledged to be a convenient discipline,
belonging to the doctrine of Peace and Tranquillity of Spirit, which is grounded
in that pax vobi^; that comes in like the Master of it resuscitated, not
through John 20.
the doors of Humane Reason; and then this peace uses discourse and argument,
as Christ did his body, who in condescendence to the weakness of the Faith of
his Disciples, made them feel and handle it: So does the Holy Spirit clothe his
Grace with sensible Reasons, so correspondent to our Fancies, as they do the
easilier acquiesce unto them, and thus contribute to the minds repose and
regulation: Surely this is the proper function of literate elegancy, to figure
virtue in so lively and fresh colors, that our imagination may be so taken
with the beauty of virtue, as it may invite our minds to make love to her in
solitude; and in this suit our Reason may make good company, even out of all
our wants and desolations, as employing them to do us good offices to this
Mistress, by their testimony of our patient acceptance of all sufferings, that
may advance us in this pursuit, which nothing does more then a temperate
constancy in Distresses, wherein virtue loves to try the fidelity of her
servants: And thus we may make even Solitude prove our access and mediation to
our love, whileg* we are in research and suit to virtue, for unto her we know
it is confessed, that difficulties give the best introduction and entrance.

So that the uses of Philosophy are much improved by this their proper
application, to illustrate the amiableness of virtue; and by the gaining of our
Fancy, to facilitate the subjection of our Affections to our Reason, whereunto
Humane learning conduces in many respects; and it may not unaptly be said to
be a kind of Spiritual Heraldry that does blazon the Arms of Natural Reason,
showing the genealogy and descent thereof from the Father of Lights, and
marketh the affinities and alliances between Grace and Nature, keeping a
Register of the Antiquity and Nobility of Moral Virtue, in the examples and
precedents of all Times; and in these respects is very pro^itable in all
states, especially in Solitude, both to recreate and rectify the mind of man.

And indeed nothing inableth us more for the best improvement of the stock of
Philosophy, then having our wills first fastened unto Gods design upon us,
before our understandings range abroad into the documents of Morality for
exercise and recreation: Me thinks we may well be allowed to apply these orders
of the Temple of Solomon to our present Argument, and say as they, who by their
consecration were admitted into the holy place of the Temple, had liberty to
come out, and entertain themselves in the outward Courts of the Laye^y, and the
station of Gentiles; but they who were not qualified by some holy Character,
were not admitted into the inward part of the Temple, or the Sanctuary: So they
who have devoted first their Reason to the inscrutable Order of God, and have
this Character of Christianity imprinted on them, may freely and usefully
recreate their minds in the outward Galleries of Philosophy, where Humane
Reason has an enlargement and spaciousness for the exercise and solace of the
understanding; but if our Spirits are but of that rank which are without, in
the arches of Philosophy, and conversant only in the porches of Moral Virtue,
this constitution does not sufficiently qualify our minds for admission into
the interior Sanctuary of Peace and Tranquillity of Spirit: So that all I have
so much pressed, tends to persuade every one in this case of Distress, to
begin, by devoting their minds entirely to Gods Order, and to expect the
liberty of their Spirits from the virtue of that Christian consecration; and in
this method, all their studies and occupations in Humanity or Morality, will be
like the Gold upon the Altar, which though it be noble by nature, yet was
sanctified but by application to Divine uses, and so all Humane sapience (which
though virtuous, is but secular) by this Dedication becomes Sacred and
Religious.

. IV.
The Disposure of our time treated and advised, for improvement as well as ease
of our Minds.

HAving laid the groundwork of our peace and acquiescence upon that Divine
Assignment which Christians are to account upon, which is the provision of it
by the All-sufficient power, that gives not such John 14. 27.
peace as the world gives, but such as none shall take from us; upon this
foundation we may design the frame of our time into several rooms and offices,
respectively to our Duties to God, and the diversions of our own mind, to make
this sort of life both as useful and as agreeable as we can: For this kind of
Solitude is acknowledged to be a burden to our Nature, and so by parting and
dividing it as it were into several parcels, we seem to carry the less of it at
once; whence it becomes of easier portage. By the experience I have had of the
benefit of this method, I should advise every one in this case to make
partitions of the day into several hours, assigned to distinct occupations,
beginning in the morning with the intentional Sacrifice of the whole day to the
honor of God, looking upon this memorial S. Bernard perused every morning,
Bernarde ad quid venisti? Bernard, what were thou born for? This question to
our selves, of what we are come into the world for, may easily afford us this
resolution, That we have no time to spare in the longest day, for that work for
which we were created; having then in the beginning of every day made this
Free Will offering of all our time, we may take such portions as are allowed us
back, after this consecration, and divide them into such pieces, and dress them
in those manners, as best agree with the appetites of our mind, both to nourish
our Soul, as well as to solace and recreate our Imagination.

I should advise then, that every day may be cut out into several portions of
entertainments, in that company (which I suppose only allowed) that is, the
conversation of Books; which address I need not recommend to any in this case:
for in this civil death, we do naturally repair to the society of the dead; and
in Books we find a civil Resurrection of the dead for our conversation: And by
this sort of intombning our thoughts, we revive our Spirits, and have better or
worse company, according to the qualities of those Spirits we choose to
converse with (for I suppose this allowance in this civil death, of free
intelligence with all these kinds of Shrines and Relics of the dead) and I
do not mean to make a new commitment of any body's mind, restraining them
only to Mount Thabor, with Moses and Elias, that is, to Books of Devotion and
Contemplation; they may, as I have explained, walk not only innocently, but
usefully in the ways of the Gentiles, out of all sorts of Philosophy, History,
Policy, and out of lighter food of Humanity, there may be wholesome nourishment
drawn and assimilated to a good constitution of mind; yet certainly the
solider and purer the aliment is we feed upon, the stronger and sounder
complexion we shall induce: But what licenses soever our Fancies take for their
recreation, our Spirits must be regulated in this, to taste constantly of the
Morning and Evening Sacrifice of the Temple; that is, in each half of the day
there ought to be some hour assigned, to the reading of some Book of Devotion;
this practice will keep the fire on the Altar always alive, which by an
insensible perspiration breaths out a pious warmth into all the other
innocent occupations of our minds; nor is it required, that the notions of
Religion and Piety should be always blazing in our cogitations*

When we have thus portioned out our day into several assignments of Prayer,
Reading or Meditation, we shall not feel the weight of the whole day upon us
all at once, only such hours by themselves as are successively chained upon
one another, by links of various occupations, and every such division, as it
has some air of variety in it, seems rather a recreation, then a charge upon
the mind, which must be cherished with those diversities that may (as near as
we can draw them) resemble liberty; and when all our time is parcell'd out into
different voluntary addresses, there being no spaces left void or empty, time
weighs much the lighter, the less vacuity is left in it; for nothing
nauseateth the mind so soon, as an emptiness of thoughts, bespoken and fitted
for her entertainment, since in that vacuousness the winds and vapors of
tediousness and displicence rise and fume out of our imagination into our
Spirits, whereas a convenient replenishment of the Fancy, with change of
attentions, does much suppress such fumes.

We may learn, me thinks, by the eye of the body, how to accommodate objects to
the sight of the mind, for both of them are best pleased with the diversity of
species, and the competent determination of the prospect; which order and
interposure of various and alternate attentions, affords both the change and
the limitation agreeable to each of these appetencies, every several trancision
of our thoughts to different occupations, breaks the vastness of Solitude, by
a competent termination of the prospect, when our imagination looks no
farther then that term of time allotted for that single exercise. These
intersertions of differing entertainments, are like woods or hills, which rest
the sight in this vast prospect of Solitude, affording our Fancies this
agreeable intermixture of variety and rest: So that by this method of an
interchanging mixture of Prayer and Study, one may approach to that Blessing
the Prophet Isaiah describes, The Lord will make our wilderness like Eden, and
our Isa. 51. 3.
desert like the garden of the Lord.

Having given this advice for the lightening of our time, we must not forget
some order for the weighing it, that the value may be taken together with the
measure; for indeed the worth of time rightly pondered and balanced by reason,
may outweigh any Liberty or Company, which either imbase the value of time unto
us, or steal from us any excessive proportions of that which is the only Stock
we have for the purchase of a blessed Eternity: And we know how familiar it is,
to assign our Liberties and Companies to the discharging us only of our time,
as if the pleasure of our life were but the smothering or making away of
precious time: They then (who seriously reflect upon the loss of Liberty,
wherewith vain passions may be charged (by which our minds are truly
imprisoned, while they are dallying with these similitudes of Prisons and
Chains, to enlarge the liberties of their Fancy) when they come to understand
and affect rightly the freedom of their minds) may judge this severing from
such temptations and fascinating vanities, to be a state of real
infranchisement, and esteem the other giddy agitation of their persons up and
down the world, floating upon their Fancies, but as a Prisoners Dream, wherein
he may imagine himself Master of his own Keepers, while he is faster in hold
then when he is awake, and truly apprehending his condition.

They whose minds then are guilty of these kinds of crimes, of making away
their time, and using their former liberties, as instruments in this mischief,
let them Arraign their Imaginations upon this Indictment of their Memories; for
by judging and casting themselves, they may make a new life out of this
suffering and execution of their faulty liberties; which if their Prison put to
death in their affections, as it does extinguish in their practices, they will
conclude themselves rather resuscitated then restrained: How happy may they be
accounted, who come to redeem time ever by the evilness of their days, to whose
civil death and moral resurrection this of the Apostle may be applied, What was
sown in corruption, is raised in incorruption; and 1 Cor. 15. 43.
what was sown in infirmity, is raised in power.

This being admitted, let those who lie under this sentence of Sequestration
from the world, in stead of setting th^^^ hearts upon the Suit of their Habeas
corpus, apply them to (...) out, as I may say, their Habeas (...)tem, in which
Plea they are sure they have to deal with so indulgent a Judge, as he takes
their own Will for Security, to free their Mind upon it; the which being at
liberty, will be well pleased with the Commitment of their bodies, upon the
Action of their Time against them, when they conceive that this Arrest was the
easiest way for them to acquit that Debt, by the discharge whereof they can
only recover their forfeited Estate of real Liberty: And when their minds
look upon the lovely Image of redeemed and improved time, figured upon the
walls of their enclosures, by falling in love with time, they may disprove the
Proverb, and make a lovely Prison, while that becomes a possession of their
love; and are not their affections happily placed, when time contributeth to
the beauty of the object? This Spiritual inamourment has all these
preheminences, and the indearments of such loves, are made by the professions
of liberty and infranchisement; how much a nobler engagement then is this of
our minds, above that of such loves, which have all direct contrary
qualifications.

Such therefore as address their thoughts to this suit and research, shall by
degrees find their familiarity with this love, introduce them into the
acquaintance of that truth which unvaileth the various miseries of all
conditions in this life, by the light of Contemplation, wherein this promise of
the Prophet is verified, Then shall thy light rise in obscurity, Isa. 58. 10
and thy darkness be as the m^n day; for by this clarity we may discern the
whole world in several chains and mancipations, and those the most inflaved,
who are sweating in the world as in a forge, to hammer out their own Man(...),
which they make even while they are laying bolts and irons upon others that are
cast under them, but as it were by the rolling of the Ship on the one side, for
another contrary wave coming, turns them back again, beneath those they lay
upon, and then all the irons they had put on them, prove their own surcharge.
The speculation of these truths, may keep the Spirits of Sufferers in more
steddiness then is compatible with that estuation of mind which is inseparable
from insolent prosperity: These calm Meditations suggested by the Spirit of
Truth, may bring Prisoners into that state which is promised to the clients and
followers of these Verities, You shall know Truth, and Truth shall set you Joh.
8. 32.
free.

These Advices, in order to the valuation of Time, as they do primarily respect
eternity, so incidentally they refer to the reconciling us unto the great
acerbities of the moments of this life; where unto, I conceive, this adjunction
also of some Counsel, in point of Improvement of Time, in relation to the
acquiring of Humane knowledge, may be a very useful ministry and suppeditation.

. V.
A method proposed in point of Study, and the Use may be derived from Story,
toward a right understanding of Divine Providence.

I Do not pretend to design to any their Studies and Recreations in Lecture,
every several Vocation will ^^sily fit it self with inst(...) pertinent to
their Profession; I shall advise only a general method, in order to their
thriving best in this Spiritual Pasture. As I have proposed partitions of our
hours, into several Applications, so should I counsel a^ every such Section,
between the change of Books, the making some convenient pause of Medi^a^ion
upon the matter of our last attention: For when we read cursorily, we do but
smell and scent the flowers as they grow; but this rumination of the notions,
is a gathering and collection of them, and a kind of carrying them away in
Nosegays, and holding to our minds the sums and digest^ of their substance, by
which means their odor lasts the longer, and leaves our memory always the
more perfumed; so that when our reflections resort thither to smell again the
same odours, they may find some of their air remaining in that conserve: And
those (who intend to lay in any store of Knowledge, to distribute and dispense
it upon premeditation) must not only gather these flowers, and entertain their
breaths the longer by these recogitations, but must set themselves to work upon
them, and as I may say, distill their essences through their Pens; and thus
extract the Spirits of them, making them up in these vessels of Note-Books,
distinguished by common places, which are, as (...) were, so many several
viols, marked with their peculiar properties, and sorted respectively to their
uses, and are kept in this Cabinet of our Note-Book, ready by us to draw out
again, either through our pen, or to distribute in our conversation, or any
other function of our profession: For when we have thus extracted these Spirits
out of the Books we have wrought upon, it is a Spiritual treasure lying by us,
which we may rely upon as a stock for all our necessities, either for private
and interior provision, o^ public and foreign communication.

This way of distillation or confection of our studies, preserving them for
lasting uses, is (even without any (...)ference to their participation unto
others) the best (...) the perfuming and sweetning our time to our selves, in
(...) unpleasant air of Solitude; for this work breaths an (...) into our
Fancy all the day long, which by filling it, keeps out the fumes of our
natures disease, and impresseth the more strongly on our imaginations, now
Images of intellectual acquisitions, which successively entering into (...)
thoughts, keep out the unhandsom representations of our condition, wherewith
our Fancy is apt to stuff it self, if it have not some such intentive
preoccupation: This is therefore the best prescript all my study of Solitude
can administer, which I am bound to recommend, in gratitude to the benefit I
must acknowledge to this method, desiring to make a prisoners return for the
alms of Confort I have received, to repay a Benefactor in reputation, by
divulging (as handsomely as I can) his good qualities: And truly I have intended
in this piece of Solitude I am working on, to follow the order of Painters,
rather then Poets, in the describing the person of a Benefactor; for I have not
sought to indear my resentments, by the highest praises I could excogitate, but
to draw the figure I expose, the nearest the life I could exhibit it: For those
excesses that may express Art in the Poet, may proclaim Ignorance in the
Painter, if he should think to value his gratitude to his obliger, by drawing
his picture in such perfection of shape and beauty, as did not render the
person knowable by that Image: I have therefore set forth these good qualities
of Solitude (to which I profess much obligation) so truly copyed, as I dare
say, that those who have never seen it, if ever they come to compare these
lineaments of my hand with the life they do character (of Solitude employed in
this method) shall find, my pen has not made a Fancy, (...) a Copy, and done
this sort of life but right in the Resemblances of her good qualities, whereof
I may be bold to say in the terms of the Holy Spirit, The Desert, and the Land
without passage, Isa. 35.
shall be glad, and the Wilderness shall rejoice, and flourish as the Lilly.

After a little taking my (...) off from my work (to give you in a few stroke*
a little (...) of the ingenuity of my own Mind, in designing this Labor for an
Altar-piece, rather then a Cabinet Ornament, desiring you to conceive my
intendment i^ it ^^cha^itable utility, not barely a recreating Imagery* I shall
proceed to another Advice in this point of Lecture, and represent to you how
(...) who read without any intention to converse with (...) Books, and to
retain their suggestions, but only, a^ (...) say, to kill so much time, abuse
themselves in this un^^vi^edness; for they shall find their time like a
c^^case, m^^h heavier when it wants this animation of studio^sness (...)d
intendment, then when it is quickened, as it were, by this Spirit of design and
addition to benefit: For this principle of Activeness, seems to breathe a
kind of life and ^^imation into our time, which makes it lighter, and (...)
better company, when our future designs and purposes (...) to converse and
entertain us, with Repli^^ and Deb^te^ of our Propositions: And they (who read
in order to the uses and profits may be extracted, not only for their present
^ivertisements, but for their general improvements) may even in Civil History
read Lectures ^o themselves of Con(...)tion in all their Distresses and
E^igencies, even the confusions of this Sublunary world, may be converted (...)
sufficient con^orts, by contemplating the various (...) of all conditions,
shuffled and tossed together (...) appearing order of equity, Sometimes
servants (...) horseback, and Princes walking ^n the ground (...) servants;
(...)d Eccles. 10. (...).
again, how often does this Scene show innocent (...) groaning and oppressed by
Tyrants, and sometimes (...)mate Princes distressed and vilified by Rebellions
(...), and (as the Wiseman ^aith) we find (...) c(...)g out of a (...) up to a
Throne, and another meeting him, dragged fro(...) a (...) to a D(...)geon: They
(who consider seriously these vic(...)tudes of all states, this continual
subversion of on^, (...)d substitution of another into the same room, all
things succeeding in this broken and abrupt inter(...)ture) will easily find
their own Nativity cast in this Universal Sch(...) the world, and so need not
wonder or complain of ^y injurious (...)tion in their private Fortune, when
they (...) so many va(...)ions assigned unto them* (...) they are p(...) this
(...) Universe; In which, the (...) order of things seems to be disposed a^
the natural is, wherein corruption and generation mutually entertain one
another; but in civil changes the reason is fa^ more obscured to us, for in the
alterations of nature, our reason is more trusted with h^^ secrets, and so i^
not offend^^ at the present ruin of such things, whereof we are acq(...)ted
with their design of renovation; but in the civil perishing and corruption of
equity, our reason is more pe^plexed, as being no way privy to the intent of
such inversions, the destruction of virtuous persons and the exaltation of
vicious, the inf^licity of good causes, sinking under impious adversaries, are
such occurrencies, as confound humane ratiocination, for in these cases the
divine providence seems disguised to our eyes in the habit of Chance; so that
our faith must look well upon her before it can know her in this dissimilitude
to justice.

Me thinks reflecting upon the confusion of this world, there may be many such
things as were said by the Holy Spirit, Philip. 2. 7.
of God being in the (...) of man, applied not unfitly to the divine
providence b^ing among men; (which being the wisdom of God in that respect is
the same they were said of) May we not then say that Gods providence converseth
upon earth, in the habit and similitude of Fortune, and seems exposed to all
the weakness and inequality of Chance, and that (sin only excepted), bears all
the infirmities of injustice; and surely if faith did not assure us, that under
the vail of humane confusion, the wisdom of God were subsisting, we might
easily judge of Gods providence as the world did of Christ's person, and condemn
it as a mere natural figure of fortune, destitute of all divinity; we know most
of those who were to resolve this question, by their single reason, about the
government of the universe, either tied up God in the chain of fate, or left
all loose upon the wheel of fortune; but we (who sit in the light prepared to
lighten the Gentiles) see by the eye of faith, that the liberties Luke 2.
of God and man are consistent with the divine providence and preordinanion,
and that the necessary sequences of such effects as are annexed by order to
their respective causes, do no more impeach Gods freedom, then his necessary
production of two persons equal to himself, does restrain or abate his liberty.

But should we release our minds from this bond of Faith, whereby they are
obliged t^ pay an acceptance of all changes unto the Divine Order, the very
rational consideration of the equal exposure of all conditions to adverse
vici^^itudes, might correct our private relunctancies; the Story of all Times
shows us such frequent ^uptures and diss^lutions of all kinds of Union, so
familiar Subversions of all Foundations, of Government and Superiority, such an
alternative transmutation of all p^ivate Fortunes from one into another* as
they who look but upon the Theater of this world (which needs but History for
the maker of his Scenes) cannot wonder justly at any part which is put upon
their particular. To those then that shall repiningly lament their turns, or
expect their exemption, I may safely apply the Prophet Jeremy's Commission
against this Jer. 45. 4.
pretense, The Lord says thus, Behold, that which I (...) built I will break
down, and that which I have planted I will pluck up over this whole Land; and
seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not.

. VI.
Some special Meditations proposed, proper for the divertisement of our Mind.

I Have upon my ruminating on the Stories of the world, been presented often
with such an imagination as may prove Instructive as well as Recreative, to
such Moral Chymicks as can extract a ^alt out of the freshest matters their
minds do work upon: I have thought one that had the Historical Map of the
world lying before his thoughts, might suppose himself seated upon a high Rock,
and looking down upon a fair and vast prospect, divided into some Cities and
Palaces of the one side, on the other into lovely Gardens and pleasant Groves,
or fruitful Fields and Pastures, and suddenly seeing a Mine playing upon the
Cities, and all sorts of things blown up confusedly into the Air, where Princes
and People are broken and mangled indifferently, the Chains of the Prisoners
flying up, and shivering, perhaps, the Crowns that laid them on, and many other
civil dissipations that may be adapted to the confused eruptions of Mines; and
being affrighted at this dismal object, he turns his Eye upon the Fields,
Gardens and Groves, as flying into privileged Retreats, exempt from such
violent distractions, and presently he finds an Earthquake, playing, as I may
say, upon all of them successively in their several turns, rending the Cedars,
deflowering the Gardens, swallowing the fruits of the Campagnes and Vineyards,
leaving all the pleasure of his Prospect inverted into objects of Horror and
Amazement. The Story of the world does often afford such a kind of
Representation; sometimes it presents a fair view of glorious MONARCHS, and
flourishing Nations, symbolized by the Magnificence of Cities and Palaces; high
and eminent Prosperity in the Grandees of the Earth, figured by the Cedars;
plentiful and opulent private Estates, emblem'd by the pregnancy of the Fields,
happy and easy (...)d ^y the orderly sweetness of Gardens; All these
conditions the Story of every Age shows shattered in pieces, by some violent
Changes and Subversions.

Thus much light may be derived from our ascen(...) the upper stories of this
Fabric of the Universe, whi^^ overlook this Earth by a narrative view only of
the condition and constitution of this world: Surely the Prince of this World
knew not who he carried to the top of the Mountain, to tempt by the Glories of
that Prospect, ^e understood him better afterward, when he begged of him not to
be cast out of the world himself, and ^^ed to him but for a few Swine, to whom
he had before offered the whole world; But when the Holy Spirit carries any
o^^ up to the Mountain of Contemplation, the object (...) poseth of the
subjacent Earth, is not only illumi^a(...) but operative; he does not simply
inform the understanding in the estate, but rectifieth the will in the
estimation of this world. Saint Paul looked down upon the Earth from (...)
Mountain, when he proclaimed, that The figure of t(...) 1 Cor. 7. 31.
world passes away: And Saint John (whose Spirit was (...) were exhaled above
the Earth by that heat it felt always of the Divine bosom) dis^^rned clearly
this (...)uctuant state of our Globe, when he advertiseth us, Th^s the world
pass(...) 1 John 2. ^7.
away, and the concupiscences thereof.

They who take then either of these guides, Reason o^ Grace, to carry them up
to this cli^^ of Meditation, may ^ast down their thoughts in a ^alm despection
of all those shining attractives which they see to be so (...)y; they that
contemplate this universal undermining of all (...) stations, need no^ wonder
nor complain to ^^^de them(...) ^^rn from the upper part of the world, and ^unk
under the earth in the playing of the Mine: They who are, as it were, thus
(...) and b^^yed in a prison, let them imagine themselves in that posture where
in the playing of the Mine has laid them, and so be conf(...)d, as involved in
the general constitution of this hollow and unfaithful world; and by figuring
to themselves this (...) of the Universe, they may conclude, That the wall^
which enclose them are undermined also, by the common instability of all
Fortunes; and when the time co(...)h that the Train of Change takes fire, then
they are to be carried in^^ another position: So that the impermanency of all
things (...)y, which does deduct so much from our Temp^^ary ^elicity, may be by
these thoughts made to (...) proportionably the sense of our secular adversity.

Thus by the advice of Natural Reason, we may derive much stability of mind
from the infidelity of all (...)(...): Na^, Philosophy proposes to (...) a
firmer settlement of our Spirits, upon our duty to Nature, and ^h^rgeth any
(...) or (...)lousness, in what state soever of distress; with sedition and
(...) even against the Laws of N(...) ^^^ce it is by the order of the Universe
we stand (...) with all o^^ private grievances, insomuch as to di(...) fro(...)
tha^ order, see(...) an a(...)mpt of our wishes, to confuse and discompose the
whole frame of Nature. These, and many other (...)adings, do the S^o^c^s make,
to entitle rectified Reason to this power of con^erving the mind in an estate
of imperturbation, amidst the changes and translations of all vicis^^^udes.

But to Christians these melodious voices of the Philosophers, serve but as
Music to their Church Anthemes, for they are the sacred words of our Faith
(put into the airs of Humane Elegancy) that make the Music Religious, nor the
(...) of their sweet persuasions, whereunto single Philosophy does but report:
I may therefore ^itly present you with this holy Lesson of the great Apostle
St. Peter, We have a firmer 2 Pet. 1. 19.
word of Prophecy, which we do well to attend to, as unto a light that shines
in a dark place; in all the obscurities of our Fortunes, we have the Day Star
of Faith shining in our hea(...) (in respect of which, all Philosophy is but
Lamp-light) that gives us a clear sight of the Providence of God; in all our
turnings and transportations we have this Word, even of God himself, organized
by the voice of the Evang(...) Prophet, I form the light, and create darkness;
I make (...) Isa. 45. 7.
and create evil(...) I the Lord do all these things. The answer of a Christian
therefore is well made for us by the Prophet ^eremy in Prison, and in all the
bitter tastes of these cups of Gods mingling, as the Psalmist found before him,
My (...) Psa. 74. 9. Jer. 10. 19
is g^ie(...) but I have said, Truly, this is my grief, and I ^ust bear it; The
belief of Gods special design in all things (...) befall us, must answer all the
perplexities of a Christian; and we have not only this order, but this ability
imparted to us from our suffering Head, whose members working by (...) virtue
of his animation, cannot say^less to God the Father then Not my will, but
thine, O Lord, be done.

This little intermixture of a Garden-plat or pattern, (...) both with the
flowers of Nature and the fruits of Grace, may be no unpleasant walk or (...)
for the uncon^^ned (...)tion of some solitary Prisoner, to whom I dedicate
(...) piece of Entertainment, which, I hope, may in some (...) water and
refresh his mind, and help to keep it in this temper of the Prophet, Her leaf
green in this time of droug(...) Jer. 17. 8
and not ceasing to yield fruit.

. VII.
Some speculations suggested to recreate our Spirits in sufferance, and to
invigorate our Faith.

IF I have made any extraordinary discovery of Springs, passing so long through
this Desert (in my journey ou^ of Egypt unto the Land of Promise) I hold my
self bound to set the best marks I can upon all such Refreshments, that they
may the easilier be resorted to by such as by any accident shall be engaged in
this desolate Peregrination; and I need not fear to be tedious in this office,
no more then Physicians in their attendances upon Patients: I will impart
therefore another Receipt I have found very efficacious, which is mixed with the
wine of Philosophy, and the oil of Divinity, it has both the quickness and
vigor of Reason to work upon our Fancy, and the unction of Faith also to supple
and molifie the unpleasantness of our Nature, in these constraints of Solitude:
This is then the prescript, to make even the multiplicity of the evils and
diseases of this life medicinal unto us, by considering how many we are free
from, of those we might easily have altogether; as for Example, If we are in
Prison and in health, to remember we have a greater blessing then that we want,
and how much ^reer we are then diseased Princes, close Prisoners within their
Curtains. If we chance to be sick and in Prison both at once, we may consider,
That we have as much of this violent restraint taken off from us, as is imposed
upon us by this Natural one, in which we are committed by our own body, since
in this case all states are reduced to the same confinement, being under the
Arrest of Sickness, and therefore our liberty may seem as it were recover (...)
by our infirmity, since no body is in pain to want what they could make no use
of if they possessed it.

The more then we have of this evil of sickness, the lest we have of this other
of imprisonment, for the sicker we are, the less capable we become of the use
of liberty; so that we may say, Nature seem^th to have provided, that the (...)
of our bodily evils, should cure the next worst of our corp(...) su(...)s,
since the wa^^ of health (...) prop(...)nately to remedy the privation of
liberty.

And again, if this violent separation from the world ^e but the policy of an
adverse party, to intercept all ou^ contributions, to the promoting of the
cause which they impu(...), then we may reflect, how much better our condition
is, then if we were under the indignation of some inh(...) tyrannies, which use
tor^^res as instruments which (...), curiosities play upon, to draw those tunes
out of th(...) their fancies or their fears have set; and ^o such mis(...), we
may remember our selves to be exposed: thus we (...) discourse over all the
mischiefs of this life, wh(...) we might have been condemned, and it is likely,
we shall find upon this account, the number of our exemptions in our present
stare, a just mitigation of our senten(...) this ingenious diligence of our
reason, we may find (...) be^s enough of miseries, that stand as I may say,
Neu(...) and levying them thus by our meditation, we may bring th^^ in to our
succor, to defeat those which are actually declared against us, whereby we may
be said to overthrow (...) the multitude of her own forces, while (by ou^
(...)ptions from so many of the worlds greater ^alamiti^s) (...) facilitate the
carriage of our own portion, and by the (...) of the Gospel, we may properly
make, in this occa(...), those which are not against us to be with us.

This little hint will serve to lead our thoughts into (...) fields of
meditation, upon the numerous in(...) of (...) Age, which surrounding by
enemies, the more it (...) the likelier it is to draw our eyes up to the
mo(...) with the Psalmist, from whence we may expect our (...) and looking
faithfully up to those hills with the (...) we shall de^ery supernatural
Auxiliaries, whereof we may 2 Kings 6. 16.
truly say ^o our fearful se^ses, as to our amazed servants, (...) for there
are more with us then against us.

I have set most of my spiritual notions with the foilies of humane
persuasions, considering how much such conjunctions conduce to a be^tering the
water of the jewels of Divinity into the eyes of our nature; S. Paul used this
art, when he was content to speak after the manner of men for the infirmity of
our flesh. But now I will present you with an advise Romans 6.
sincerely Divine without any, plau^ible adjunction to illustrate it, which is
in this order of distributing the day I have proposed, to assign some special
part of every day, (the measure whereof I do not define) to a serious
meditation upon the immensity of eternity, and the momentariness of this life,
we may consider the time of all ages, like a little globe of smoke vanishing
into the vast region of air; for all time holds less proportion to eternity,
then the least vapor does to the whole air into which (...)s vanished; if then
the duration of all time, be so disproportioned to eternity, when we sever our
single part in this point of time, how near a Nothing must it appear to us; and
it may be the time of our suffering is but a small parcel even of our own life:
This computation must needs show us the shortness of that time, which our weak
Nature thinks often long, measuring it not as it is in flu^, but as it seems
staying in our ^aney, and distant from some earthly desire whereunto we would
be carried; and so this our miscounting of the length of time, arises always
from this error, that we do not reckon upon it, as it is in motion toward
eternity; but rather regard it under the notion of a remora or retardment, in
that haste we have to satisfy some passion, in pursuit whereof Time it self
seems too slow for our P^ney.

This irregularity in our nature, may be much corrected, by pondering seriously
every day the property of time, and the state of e(...)ity: I do not mean to
impose upon any body a subtle penetration into any abst^use conceptions upon
these subjects, only a pious reflection upon the familiar notions of each of
them, as the lightness and inanity of the one, the weight and immensity of the
other; unto which every one may conceive himself passing on, as a straw upon a
^orrent; and at the foot of this precipice, suppose an Ocean of endless joy or
misery, which has a division in it of these two qualities, of Good or Evil,
but no difference in the infinity of either; and we may contemplate, how we are
not carried to either of these, as we are the greater or the lesser straws, but
as we come off clean or fowl from this torrent of time; it is not by the
greatness, but by the purity of our lives, that we are delivered over to these
diverse states, in this indivisible eternity; these are (...)tations competent
to all sises of minds, in reference to this method of meditation on Eternity:
When King David was upon this application, as he says, I thought upon old
Psalm. 76. 6.
days, and the Eternal years had I in mind; he tells us th^^ he swept his
Spirit, that thought presently applied him to the cleaning of his Spirit, which
temporary objects had bedusted; and sure our soul in this point is like our
eye, which may have dust and filth in it, while it is closed, whereof it is not
sensible, but as soon as it is open, it presently finds the offense: so our
mind, wh(...) she is shut to the apprehension of eternity, may have many
impurities in her which she discerns not, but as soon as her thoughts are
wide open upon that object, she feels the offensiveness of every fowl Atome
sticking on her, so as this cogitation of the Royal Psalmist, is the readiest
Matthew. 5.
address to that cleanness of heart, to which our Savior has annexed the
seeing of God.

Me thinks this lesson is given us by the nature our soul, which partaketh both
of Time and Eternity, (as having a beginning and no end) to couple in our
thoughts the images of both these Beings, that as the mind draws fluent and
transitory affections from time, she may derive also fixed and permanent
desires from Eternity; and this intermixture of these diverse impressions, is
the greatest setlement or simplicity a soul can attain unto during her
operation, by such organs as are merely temporary; and the Holy Spirit gives
this security, to the frequent meditation on the ending and endlesness of our
two lives, In all thy works Ecclus.
remember thy latter ends, and thou will not sin for ever: And surely this
habitual prospect on our end, will abate much the sense of any present
condition; for it affects us not with what we are, or have been, but with
what we are to be for ever: and since by Na^^ue death has a share in every day
we live, they who let this debt run on, without paying unto it any of their
time, will find the sum risen so high, as they will at last come to owe death
even their eternity: But by this order I propose, of assigning some parcel of
every day to this discharge, we may convert that portion we pay death, into a
debt accrening unto us, of eternal life, which at our last day death shall be
forced to deliver to us.

In order to this address of your cogitations, I will offer you this obvious
conception, to suppose all states of life imbarqued upon one vessel, and that
continually sinking, (which surely is sensible enough to such as are not dizied
and distracted by the motions of it) and when the vessel is palpably sinking,
does the General who is commanding above, think himself in a better state, then
the slave working in his chains? Does he that is in the lanthorn account
himself happier, then he that lies in the hold, because he is like to perish
some minutes later? Do not they all then alike forget what they have been, and
think only on what they are to be? they who will accustom themselves to
ruminate upon this similitude, reporting aptly to all the conditions of this
life, which are in an equal certainty of expiration, may easily forget their
present posture, and be possessed entirely with their future expectation, which
in one instant becomes unalterable to all Eternity; and they cannot be assured,
that this instant is not as near them as their next thought I surely then I am
persuaded, that whosoever shall fasten his thoughts attentively once every day
upon this meditation, shall not be disquieted with that kind of life he is
reduced unto, but rather joyed, to consider that he is in a capacity of making
our of any sort of life, never so grievous, a life everlasting, and eternal
beatitude, whereof he may be assured from S. Paul, the Pattern and Patron of
prisoners, whom he may suppose speaking this to him in his chains, Our light
affliction (which is but for a moment) works for us a far exceeding and
eternal weight of glory; and if our 2. Cor. 4. 17.
prisoner be one that has the thorns of an ill life to pull out of his
conscience, he will think himself much happies while he is in a state which
conduces to his repenting of what he has done, then when he was in a
condition that did contribute to his doing what he was to repent.

. VIII.
The final and most solid assignment of confort for this condition.

NOw then to sum up the true account of all my propositions, I do not pretend
they should amount to so much as the Stoics have vainly reckoned upon their
precepts; I do not promise the mind such an apathy or insensibleness of all
distresses and afflictions, as those Rational Charl^tans have undertook; this
deading and stark calming of all passion, is rather a dream of Philosophy, then
the rest of a Christian; and of that fancied slumber of theirs, we may say with
the Psalmist, of these men's fancied riches, They have slept their sleep, and
have found nothing; a Christian must not affect to say, I have slept a good
sleep, but I have fought a good fight, and my Crown hangs where I must take it
away by violence, it will not fall upon my head while that lies upon the
pillows of my sensitive appetites; they therefore who are the best studied in
the precepts of Reason, or the power of Grace, must expect to meet with some
dark obscure parenthesis's in their Solitude, which at sometimes they cannot
understand, and the more contestingly they set their Reason to explain them,
the more intricate they, perhaps, will find them at that conjuncture; for
there are some intervals of wearisomness and disfavor in our Spirits, which no
Reason can clear to us, though it may be they have a coherence with the whole
contexture of our peace, as being interposed by God, to introduce patience and
resignation, by these intervening trials of our temper; and likely the thoughts
we have in temptations to frowardness, are the copies of our mind, upon which
God judges their proficiency in the school of patience, which he has put them
to: There are diverse forms in prisons, to which God prefers our minds by
degrees, and the highest seems to be, the remaining humbly patient in a
destitution of all sensible consolation from the Spirit of God, to which we
rise not but after some experiments of such desolations; so that the best
advice to this case, is in our propensions to frowardness and petulancy, to
conclude, That we are then set to bring in those exercises of virtue, that must
prefer us to a higher form; all the Saints have passed by this exam^n, insomuch
as David says in this case, My Psalm 76. 4.
soul refused to be conforted, I was mindful of God, and was delighted: here
you see the storm, and the passing of it over, by remembering the qualities of
such blasts and stresses of temptations.

He is then the best scholar, that studieth the least by his own arguings, to
clear to himself these obscure interjections of displicence and ill humor, and
cieling up his thoughts; flies directly to the top of the Cross, resting
there, with the Man of sorrow; where his mind, finding (My God, why have thou
forsaken me?) may easily be answered in all her own perplexities and
desolations; and in stead of fearing her self to be forsaken, may suppose she
is following of Christ in this anxiety, to which he was voluntarily subjected,
to solace by his Society our Nature in this infirmity, whereunto that is
necessarily exposed; so as in these disquiets, when the book of our Spirits
seems closed up to us, and we are ready to weep for our not being worthy to
open it, we may suppose our good Angel doing the office of the Elder to St.
John, bidding us not Apoc. 5.
to be dismayed, for the man of sorrow has opened all these sealed anguishes,
by his taking the same impression upon his Spirit; and indeed, when our minds
are well died in the blood of the Lamb, these aspersions of disquiets do not at
all stain our Soul, though there may seem some refractariness in our Spirits,
in these overcast intervals; But to secure us from incurring any irregularity
by this Spiritual Contention in the Temple of the Holy Ghost, the safest way
is, not to seek a defense by the power of our Reason, but to yield up our
Spirits to suffer under this indisposition, as long as it shall please the Holy
Spirit to remain withdrawn, even within our own Spirit, beyond our discernment;
and many times in this ari^ity of our Devotion, when our hearts are, as I may
say, parched and cracked in this drought of Divine Refreshment (if our wills
are faithfully resigned to this exercitation of our Faith) every such crack or
overture in our hearts, caused by the shutting up of Heaven, proves a mouth
opened, and calling for that holy dew which never fails to be showered down in
due season, upon such necessitous fidelities; insomuch as this aridity and
desolation interposed for some time, does often prove more fruitful then a
common kindly season of repose and acquiescence.

I desire therefore to recommend specially this Advice (to this state of
Solitude, which is very liable to these obscure interjections) not to expect
peace of mind only from what we do sensibly receive from God, but also from
what we do sensibly give unto him; for in this our commerce with Heaven, there
is this Supernatural way of Traffic, we do not onel^ pay God with his own
gifts, but we may give him even what we want, and do not receive from him; that
is, we may present him with our privation of his sensible Graces, by our
acceptance of this poverty and destitution; And this offering of our emptiness,
is no less propitiatory, then the first fruits of our Spiritual abundances.

This Advertisement I conceive very pertinent to my design, of furnishing my
fellow Soldiers with the armor of Ephesians. 6.
God, that they may resist in the evil day, and in all things stand perfect;
for it may be properly said of their condition, that they are to wrestle not
only against flesh and blood, but against the Rulers of the darkness of this
world, the Flesh shooting all her sharpest darts in the privation of Liberty,
and the Spirit his* in the destitution of the most humane sympathy of
Conversation: This resignation then which I have proposed, includes a
disswasion of any anxious solicitude, concerning the cause of our sufferance;
for the ranging of our thoughts to spring second causes, may keep us too much
upon the scent of the earth, the Apostle's advice is properer Col. 2. 20.
in this case, Seek upward, and not upon the earth, which was the first point
from whence this circle of my discourse did set forth; and to allay this
feverish disquiet in our Patient, I may fitly apply this Opia^e of the
Apostle, If you are dead to Col. 3.
the elements of this world, why do you yet decree as living in the world? This
perplexing your selves with the thoughts of the world, is to lose the benefit
of this your civil death, whereby you may rest from the labors of the living.
This you may rest upon in general, That in this life there is no sort of
Suffering, but may be converted into Sanctification: If you lie under a just
sentence, you may, by an humble conformity to Gods Justice, make it a release
of a greater penalty, then you feel in all your deprivements: If you suffer
injuriously for your engagement in a righteous Cause, your Consolation is so
much supposed, as you have a command to rejoice Matthew. 5.
in (...)tion, in view of the glory of your reward* And if every imprisoned
Christian may be said to be a rough draught of Christ (since he avoweth his
personation in them) they who suffer for the Defense of Justice and Virtue, may
be said to be Christ's Images, colored and more exactly finished; wherefore
such may expect to be readily received, with, I know you easily, your scars and
wounds which you bring with you, coming out of my service, have finished the
figure of my similitude: And we may resolve, That such Champions shall be set
near Christ, where the number of their wounds shall be so many marks of their
Consanguinity with the bleeding Lamb, and the weight of their Chains shall be
the estimate of their Crowns.

All sorts of Christians then may fill their several measures of Confort out of
this Fountain of Christian Doctrine, that all they, who do not directly suffer
for Christ, may yet suffer as Christians, and so attain the reward of a
Prophet: I will then close up my Present to them with this Seal of the Bands of
our fellow- Prisoner and Master Doctor, Let us forget Phil. 3. 13.
th^se things which are behind, and reaching forth (...) th^se things which
are before, press forward to the mark for the pri^^ of the high calling of God
in Christ: Let as many therefore (...) be perfect, be thus minded; and those
who are otherwise, I beseech God to reveal this unto them.

The twentieth Treatise. Of the Contempt of the World. Divided into two
Sections.
. I.
Arguments to discredit all the Attractives of this Earth, and Gods
contribution thereunto, produced.

I Have, in effect, shot all my Quiver at this one Head, viz. The love of this
World, and have set such points to my Arrows, as I conceived most proper to
enter those Helmets of Perdition, wherewith the Prince of this World commonly
armeth his Militia in this quarter I aim at, namely, Presumption or
Inconsideration; Wherefore now, me thinks, I may say to this Age, with the
Psalmist, Childrens Arrows are made thy wounds, relating Psa. 63. 9.
either to my former Alliance to the world, or to the present weakness of the
hand that has made these Ejacu^ations: But surely the Head that has been my
Mark, may be fitly compared to that of the Beast in the Revelation, which
(having been wounded as it were to Rev. 13.
death) was afterward healed, and Worshipped the more upon this Cure: For the
love of this world seems very often mortified, and lying as it were dead in
our minds, being wounded by the Sword of the Spirit, and yet (...) viveth, and
grows stronger then ever in our Affections. And as these two Heads do not
differ much in their Allegories, since all the Heads of the Beast may be said
to signify several mundanities; so are they consorted in this point, of having
both the same Surgeon, the old Serpent, who venteth all his Art upon the
recovery of this Head, namely, The love of mundanity, wherein do indeed reside
the vital Spirits of the body of Sin, the only Subject of the Prince of this
Ages Empire.

So that considering the dangerous convalescence of this wounded Head, I have
conceived it requisite to do my best, not only to kill it outright by playing
Jael's part, driving this Nail, that is, this express Tract directly through
the temples of it, but also to endeavor the burying it, as I may say, in this
holy ground of Spiritual Joy and Acquiescence, which is the safest course to
prevent the revival of it; for the alacrity of the Spirit keeps the inferior
appetites, as it were, under ground: and in this figurative interment, the
Balms and Spices of contemplative Solaces, contrary to material ones, have this
virtue, quickly to consume and dissolve this matter, when they are applied unto
it: I shall therefore endeavor to draw out of the enclosed Garden of the
Spouse, such precious Spices as may work these two different effects, to
dissipate and consume the love of this world, as well as preserve and persume
the love of Heaven.

One Sin infected our whole Humane Nature, by reason that all succeeding
individuals had then their voices comprised in one person Representative of the
whole Species: And when we see the whole Mass of the Earth accursed at Genesis 3.
17.
once, me thinks we may speculate this to have been some part of the reason,
that in the little portion of Earth, composing the body of Man, the whole Globe
thereof seemed represented, and consequently all tainted by the inquination of
that one parcel; for the sensitive part of Man consisting of Earth, that may
well be charged as a Complice in the Crime, since that portion of Man, although
it were not Principal, was yet an accessory in the Crime, the body having acted
the transgression: This may give an ingenious reason for the Condemnation of
the whole Earth, to bear only Thorns and Briars naturally, and fruits not
without enduring wounds and violences, to wit, the contamination of the whole,
in the vitiousness of this first ungrateful portion of Earth, which, in the
person of Woman, may be said to have put forth some Briars to catch the Soul of
Man, even before it was accursed. This I presume to be a better Reason for the
sentencing of the whole Earth, then can be given for the Soul of Man's adhering
to this Earth by his affections; forasmuch as this convinces us of the
terrestrial parts of conspiration of our ruin, and so may well averse the Soul
from such an adherency.

How evident is it, that God never intended that the Soul of Man (after this
first injury) should set her affections upon the Earth, since Man was presently
removed from the most lovely part thereof, and that was fenced against his
access to it, not only to shorten his time upon Earth, but also, as we may
suppose, to abridge his Delights and Solaces in that short time, since no other
part of the World could afford such a complete deliciousness, as the earthly
Paradise out of which Man was excluded; whereby God seems to have provided
against Man's having the strongest Motives the Earth might offer him, to draw
down his affections upon it, and has left him a continual quarrel, as it were,
with the Earth; to wit, the Contention of his labors against her sterility, to
entertain this disagreement between it and the love of Man, since the Earth
allows him nothing, but at the price of his sweat and ^atigation: This might
seem sufficient, considering our lazy Nature, to admit no kind or friendly
correspondence between us; nay, there are many who suppose the world long since
not to have had so much invitation left for Man to love it, as the containing
the terrestrial Paradise: This at least is very probable, That even since the
Flood, the beauty, fecundity and pleasantness of that portion of the Earth is
utterly deflowered and ^faced; But this is positively true, That God did not
expulse Man out of Paradise, to allow him the making another Paradise for
himself out of the Earth: These speculations do (as Saint Paul says) speak
after the manner of men, to implead all title this Earth can claim to the
affections of a reasonable Soul; and through all the body of this Miscellany,
there run veins enough of disparagement to this world; so that they may well
terminate in this Center of Contempt and despection.

The Apostle of love, whose fiery tongue casts forth 1 John 2. 15.
as many Scintillations of love, as he does lines, in that Work which may be
fitly called, An Epistle commendat^ry of Love to Christians, does not allow the
world so much as one spark of it, he rather straineth his breath to blow out
and extinguish every flash of affection to it; enjoining us expressly, Not to
love the world, nor the things that are in it: And it is remarkable, That he
alleges not the miseries and disgusts of the world to discredit it, but
brings even the most amiable alluremonts thereof for Reasons against our
affecting it, arguing upon the worlds having nothing in it, but the
concupiscence of the eye, and of the flesh, and the pride of life, in which
consist the most powerful Attractives the world has for our love: And if all
these which are acknowledged the worlds Proprieties, are turned against the
valuation thereof, what has it left whereby to allure us? May not that be
justly then contemned, which either afflicts us for the present, or betrayeth
us for the future.

O how admirable is God in this piece of distributive Justice to Mankind! who
(having by his Providence comparted the conditions in this world into such a
diversity of states, as cannot admit all to the fruition of secular Delights)
has commanded that none should love them; by which order the lowest ranks are
much compensated in this respect, That it is a harder task to forbear loving
such things when we enjoy them, then it is to contemn them when we know we can
neither expect them, nor ought to love them: If they who use this world, must
be 1 Cor. 7.
as though they used it not, those who use least of it may be said to be seated
the nearest to this performance; and certain it is, That their state is the
most conterminate to that of the true Propriator of the whole world, while he
was upon the earth, who did himself use those things most, which we use to love
the least, and yet allows us to enjoy even the most pleasing proporties of
the earth, provided we do not love the world in that relation.

All secular goods were so unworthy of the love of the God and Man Christ
Jesus, as they are not allowed the love even of single Mary; for all the most
precious and glorious things of this world, are ordained to serve Man as his
slave, unto whose offices there can be assigned no love, for this wages does
presently invert the two conditions, rendering the lover the slave: How
reasonable then must it be to address unto him all our love, who has by his
love to us subjected all these things unto us, and has so disposed it, as to
maintain our Prerogative, there is required no Art, but the contemning of what
stands thus subjected.

Whereupon I may well press you in this point, as the Apostle does, Let this
mind be in you, which was also in Phil. 2. 5.
Christ Jesus; his comportment toward the world, was intended to give you the
same mind: Look then upon your Nature in the author and finisher of our Faith,
and you shall see Man's dominion over the World maintained by contemning it; the
world was so perfectly crucified to him all his life, as he contemned the being
crucified by the world, despising (as the Apostle says) even the greatest
shame and Hebr. 12.
confusion of this world: And what could this Divine Man do more to imprint in
us this aversion to the world, then these two acts, in not vouchsafeing to
enjoy any of those things, the cupidities whereof use to vitiate us, to leave
all them abased and vilified, and in not declining the sufferance of such
things (whereof the terror does likely subject us to the world) to render them
easy and acceptable: What has the world then left in it, for Motives either
of our love or fear of it, that even God himself may not be said both to have
undervalued and undergone? And what we are enjoined neither to love nor fear,
cannot seem uneasy for us to despise; especially when this advantage is
annexed, That we gain more by contemning the whole world, then we can by
enjoying our own divident therein: For whereas Fortune keeps many worldlings
poor, the Contempt of the world keeps Fortune her self wanting and indigent,
leaving her nothing to give to such a disposition; So that in stead of
incurring the reproach of the Prophet, in setting up a Table to Fortune, and
offering libaments Isa. 65. 11
upon it, this habit of mind sacrifices and destroys Fortune upon the Altar
of the Holy Spirit; and thus even the feathers of Fortune, to wit, The vanities
and levities of this Age, when they are incensed and consumed by a holy
Contempt of this world, may make a sweet Savor in the Temple of God; whereupon
I may say, That these sorts of feathers, which while they are burning in the
flame of our sensitive passions, yield an odor of death unto death, when they
are consuming in this Sacrifical fire of a zealous Contempt and Renunciation of
them, afford a savor of life unto life, in this act of their destruction in our
minds.

In the time of the Law, when the Commodities of the Earth seemed to be
proposed as the Salary of Man's virtue, there might be some color to love this
world, and so in that state God accepted the Beasts of the Earth for
Holocausts: But in the Gospel, when no less then the enjoying of God himself,
and all his goods is exhibited for the term of our desires, it cannot seem
unequal, that even the whole World should be required for a Holocaust,
immolated and consumed by a Religious Annihilation of it in our Minds, to the
honor of such a Remunerator.

. II.
Motives by the property of a Christian to contemn the World.

When we consider our selves under the notion of Members to such a Head, as
has offered up as a Holocaust even the Creator of the whole Universe, it
seems not strange, but rather suitable for such Members to Sacrifice the
whole World, to hold some proportion unto their Head, especially since his
offering of himself was in order to the enabling us to Sacrifice and destroy
this world; Does not this our Head God and Man Christ Jesus say, That John 1^.
32.
even in his life the judgment of this world was given? it was sentenced to
Contempt by his despising it; he that did not disdain to own the Infirmities of
Man, did notwithstanding protest against his being of this world, so much has
Joh. 8. 24.
he left it vilified to us: And does not he say, If he were exalted above the
earth, be would draw all men unto him? So that in this exaltation is proclaimed
our Duty, and capacity of transcending this world, and treading on it with
Contempt, by the attractive Virtue of this our Head, raised above all the
Heavens: And we may remember, That the first Members he was pleased to unite
unto him upon Earth, were instantly elevated to that height of being above the
world, seated in this abnegation and despection.

May I not then fitly say with Saint Paul, These things 1 Cor. 10.
were done in a figure of us, since what they left to lighten them for this
transcendency, is an apposite figure of what we are to do in order to this
elevation, namely, To relinquish our Nets in this world, which we may
understand in two senses, that comprise all our directions in this case; to
wit, either as we are actively catching and chasing the Commodities of this
Age, or as we are passively taken and entangled in the love of what we enjoy:
In the first of these states, we may be said to have our Nets in our hand, and
in the second to have them in our hearts; so that to leave our Nets, signifies
to relinquish both our solicitous Cupidities and Passions, in point of pursuing
the goods of this World, and our Inordinate love in case of their possession:
And this disposition of Mind raises us to that exaltation above the Earth,
whereunto Christians are attracted by their Head; and truly they who will not
Sacrifice their Nets, with the Apostles, in this Habac. 1. 16.
sense, do Sacrifice to their own Nets in the sense of the Prophet, they
Worship the World, wherein they are taken and ensnared: Let such Worldings
remember what CHRIST says to them from his elevation above this Joh. 8. 23.
world, even while he was in it, Whither I go, you cannot come; And the Reason
follows, You are from beneath, I am from above; you are of this world, I am
not of this world: And let them reflect on what was said to the relinquishers
of their Nets, That they shall sit with the Son of Man in Majesty upon Thrones,
judging the world, Mat. 19. 29.
which in some imperfect measure is fulfilled, even in this Life, by the most
Sublimated Contemners of this World, of which God says by the PROPHET, He will
raise them above the altitudes of the Earth; and by the APOSTLE, That they have
not received the Spirit of 1 Cor. 2. 12.
this World, but the Spirit that is of God, that they may know the things that
are given them of God.

I have sufficiently delivered my self in this Point, throughout all this Work,
not to be misunderstood now at last, in this Sacrificing of our Nets, which I
have proposed, since I have often concluded, That all several Vocations have
their respective capacities of Contemning this World, even while they seem the
most affected by it: So that this Discourse does not aim at the frighting any
one out of their station in the world, since those who have the most of this
world, using it as if they 1 Cor. 7.
used it not, may do as well in their order, as those who choose to use the
least they can of it, for fear of abusing it: For we know the Earth is
familiarly, and may be properly compared to a Sea, in this respect, as it is no
place of abode, but of passage through it; and in their course there are no
Vessels that have not somewhat more or less of them under water, that is, some
thoughts and attentions upon this world; and as they are lighter or heavier
laden with the Commodities of this Life, they carry the more or less of
themselves above water; the less their cogitations are immersed in
Temporalities, the higher their minds pass through this World: But as there
are Vessels of several lasts, so it is the property of some to draw more water
then others; therefore such cannot be said to be nearer sinking, because they
have more of them under water then lighter Barques: Every condition has his
respective Freight of Application to this World, which may draw some deeper
then others into the solicitudes of this Age; but unless we voluntarily
overcharge our Vocation, every one may pass safely with his proper Weight: But
we must remember specially this particular in the Comparison, That as in Ships,
the part which saileth them and carries them on their course is all above
water, so that portion of our Mind, those Thoughts and Intendments that
advance and carry us to Heaven, are those which are Spiritual, and elevated
above this World; the ballast of our Mortal part, will keep some portions of
our Thoughts in all conditions somewhat immersed in the Earth, but the sails of
our Immortal portion, must carry on the whole Man to his Celestial Harbor: I
may therefore justly exhort and animate all conditions in the Contempt of this
World, in this voice of the Apostle, You are of God, little children, and have
overcome it, because greater is he that is in you, 1 John 4.
then (...) that is in the world.

The one and twentieth Treatise. Of the Preheminences of a true contemplative
life; Divided into five Sections.
. I.
Contemplation defined, and some excellencies thereof discoursed.

COming now off from this troubled Sea; for the finishing touches of this
persuasion, I will carry your eyes a little upon the pourtraicture of such a
Sea as was showed to Saint John by the Angel for a marvelous Rev. 15.
Sign: For indeed, this state of Mind I purpose in this last place to expose
unto you, is, me thinks, fitly emblem'd by that Sea of glass mingled with fire,
on which they stand, having harps in their hands that have overcome the image
of the Beast: And in this order may follow the application. The spaciousness of
their Souls that are extended in perfect contemplation, is aptly figured by
that property of the Sea; their equanimity and clearness, by the smoothness and
lucidness of Glass; the fervor of their Spirits is fitly symbolized, by a
mixture of Fire in this Sea of Glass: this Spiritual ardor being as requisite
to compose this temper, as fire is to make Glass: And farther we may say, That
as Glass is formed of many unconsisting parts, that are consolidated and
clarified by fire; so is this even and clear habit of mind composed of diverse
intellectual Verities, compacted and elucidated by the flame of Contemplation;
and the Harps in their hands represent the harmony and concordancy between the
sensitive organs and rational powers in the minds of devout Contemplators,
which keeps in tune a Spiritual joy and acquiescence.

It was an ingenious project of Archimedes, the undertaking to remove the whole
material World, in case there were assigned him a Center out of it, upon which
to place his Instrument: This work we may say to have been effected in a
Spiritual sense, by the Man Christ Jesus, and by such a manner as the other was
contrived; namely, by having an Engine fixed upon a Center out of this world,
which was his Humanity upon his Divinity, upon which basis rested all his power
wherewith he removed the whole Spiritual frame of the world; and upon this
Center he stood, when he said, I am not of this world; and even by a weak Reed
fixed upon Joh. 8. 23.
that Center, he removed and cast forth the Prince of the World; for his Humane
Nature was as it were the Engine or Instrument standing upon his Divine, as on
a Center extrinsecal to this World, and so that wrought instrumentally upon the
World, and was sufficient, when it was exalted from Joh. 12. 32
the earth, to draw all things to it self; And why may I not say, that some
such capacity seems communicated to the Members of Christ Jesus, that is, of
fixing their minds, though but Humane, upon a Center extrinsecal to this
world, viz. The contemplation of Divine* Verities; and by that means to remove
all this World out of that place where it uses to stand in our corrupted
Nature: And certain it is, That many have and do act this power upon the Earth,
by fixing their Spirits upon Contemplation, which is a Center without this
world. It were easy for me to point at many of these elevated Spirits, which
like the Constellations in the Firmament, are known by Names, more then the
other Star(...) But to decline all show of any particular preference, I shall
single none, but do my obeisance in general to all ranks of such blessed
Contemplators; of whom I may say with the Apostle, That in the midst of a
perverse generation, they Phil. 2.
have shined as lights in the world; their minds seeming to be kinds of
Spiritual fixed Stars, which never altered their distances from the Earth, and
intended only the finishing their course at the same time, imparting light
unto the world by diverse irradiations, respective to their positions therein,
either of Prayer or other Edifications: Wherefore of such habits of mind the
Holy Spirit says, The path of the just is as Prove. 4.
the shining light, that proceeds even to perfect day, which is Contemplation
consummated, when the Day Star (whereby Saint Peter expresses it) shall be
risen in our hearts; whereof these acts of our intellect seem to be some
inchoative or imperfect rays, and to give you as fair a view as I can of this
abstruse object, I shall set it in the most luminous definition I can deliver
it, out of the mouth of S. Augustine.

Contemplation is a clear int(...)on, and a delightful admiration Contemplation
defined.
of perspicuous Verities; so that the mind in that state may be said to walk
in the meridional light of Faith, toward the incomprehensible clarity of
perfect vision; and this light of Grace, wherein a pure Contemplative Soul
inhabiteth, may (me thinks) be said to hold some such proportion to the purer
light of glory she expects, as the sight which the three Apostles had of
Christ's Body transfigured on Tabor, holds to that they are to have of it
glorified in Heaven; for as the brightness of Lightning, and the cand or of
Snow, did in some measure represent to them the far transcending luster and
beauty that was to be looked for in his Body beatified, so these admirable
intellectual Verities, which are the objects of a true Contemplative Soul in
this life, do in some degree figure to it the unexpressible notions, rising out
of a fruitive Contemplation of the increated Verity; insomuch as these elevated
Spirits may be conceived to have such a kind of advantage over others, who may
also be faithful in lower stations of Christianity, as the three Disciples
called up to Tabor had of them that were left below the Mountain: For certainly
this sight must have imprinted in their minds a more lively and affecting
image of the amiableness of glorified Bodies, then the others could apprehend:
But as Christ admitted few even of his Apostles to this sight of him, so does
God vouchsafe to select and elevate but very few to this superlative pitch of
Contemplation, of whom we may say with the Psalmist, This is the generation
Psa. 23. 6.
of them that seek the face of the God of Jacob, who we know was one of the
most eminent in this high vocation, feeding on this bread of Angels, and having
this Spiritual Manna show^red down upon him, while he was feeding the flocks of
others in a servile obligation: And holy David, in all his exterior
bitternesses tasting of this Spiritual reflection, says, as it were, this
Grace to it, How great is the Psalm. 30. 20.
multitude of thy sweetness, O Lord, which thou have hid for them that fear
thee; thou shall hide them in the secret of thy face from the disturbance of
men: This expresses well their state of mind, which is covered from the sight
of the world in the secret of Gods face, that is, in his most private and
reserved kindenesses; and as God hides himself in his own inaccessible light,
so such Souls, adhering unto God, and becoming (as the Apostle ^aith) one
Spirit, are hid to the world 1 Cor. 6.
in the excessive light of their Graces, which common apprehensions cannot
penetrate; of such minds we may most peculiarly say, Who knows the things of
such men, save 1 Cor. 2.
the Spirit that is in them, which searches the deep things of God? while
their apprehensive faculty perfecteth it self by extracting the pure species of
Truth, and their affecting power is perfected, by transmitting it self
exteriorly upon the object that attracteth it: Thus the understanding is never
satiated by a continual receiving, nor the affection ever diminished by an
incessant issuing it self out upon the object, but does rather acquire by this
perpetual Self-alienation.

In this admirable commerce does the true Contemplative Soul negotiate with her
own Maker, while what is imported from him into the Understanding, obliges the
Will to export unto him her faculty of loving; and thus knowledge infused,
draws forth love, and love efused, remitteth back fresh illuminations: This
Angelical correspondence with God, the Contemplative Man entertaineth, and has
in proportion to his Nature, the same privilege that Angels have, when they
assume apparent Bodies for their ministry on Earth; namely, to find no
intermission of their seeing God: So in all the exterior offices which the Soul
acts by the ministry of the Body in such persons, the Mind does not remove
out of that apprehended presence of God, whereof her transitory state is
capable; insomuch as a profound Contemplator may be said to be never so much
alive to this life, as when he seems to be the most dead to it: For in the
image of Death, when the other powers of his Mind cannot control his Fancy,
that may introduce imaginations into him superfluously relative to this life,
and removed from the scope of all his reasonable cogitations, which never move,
but in a presential reverence of God: So that the Natural Man may be said to
live in him no longer by the strength or power of his Nature, but merely by the
infirmity of it, that requires such a suspension of the Spiritual Man, which
lives so powerfully in such a person, as he seems fully in possession of
Christ's promise, of his Fathers and John 14. 23.
his coming, and making his ab^de with him: which according to the division
made by the Holy Ghost of the whole Man, may be conceived to be done in this
manner; The Father residing in that portion called the Soul, as it imports the
Origin of all vital operations, the Son resting in the Mind, as that is the
seat of our actual intelligence or understanding, and both of them may be said
to expirate and breathe forth the Holy Ghost into the Heart, as that is taken
for the continent of our affections; and by this means the whole Man comes as
near the loving God with all his Soul, with all his Mind, and with all his
Heart, as this traverse and interposed vail of Flesh and Blood can admit him,
forgetting (with Saint Paul) the things that are behind, and stretching Phil.
3.
forth himself to those that are before, by this constant Application,
preserving the whole Spirit, Soul and Body, without blame to the coming of our
Lord Christ Jesus.

Considering then the properties of these golden vessels of Charity placed
within the outward vale of the Temple, and looking continually toward the
Propitiatory, seated within the inward vale (which figured the beatifical
vision) even their Bodies may be well compared to the grate upon the Altar of
Incense, from which all the ashes of carnal appetites fall away down under the
Altar it self, represented by their minds, from whence the fume of those
fragrant Odours of Vocal and Mental Prayer, is directed toward the wings of
the Cherubims; and so what is sweet in the Spirit ascends to Heaven, and what
is unclean in the Flesh falls to the Earth, and does not remain as a foulness
upon the Altar, which is kept always bright and odoriferous; And in these
Temples of the Holy Ghost, there is not only a continual emission of fire from
Heaven falling upon the Altar, but even a fresh provision of materials to
incense upon it, that is to say, new supplies of Meditations, descending from
the Father of light, from whom the same beam imparteth at once the ardor of
love and the light of Science; so that this matter can never want that flame,
nor that flame ever want this fomentation.

O how incomprehensible is the clarity of the Divine Elsence, whereof if the
little light shed on us do shine so strangely even in us, being as yet but dark
lanthorns to carry it, how much must those splendors of purity and sanctity
radiate, which never issue out of it self, whereof we have but few or no
glances in this imperfect state of Contemplation, to wit, little or no
intelligible perception of the Mysterious light of the glorious Trinity,
consistent with that most simple Unity in which the Trinity of persons is
comprised; and yet the simplicity of the Unity is not at all diminished: In
which speculative Verity, the best plumed S^raphins of our mortal Nature, when
they soar never so high on these two wings of Grace and Contemplation, must
cover their faces with these two other, of Faith and Wonder, singing with the
Psalmist, I shall be satisfied when thy glory appears, and in thy light we
shall see light.

. II.
The gradations whereby we ascend ordinarily up to this station.

I May well suppose that there will be many, who being dazzled by the radiancy
of the faces of these Moses's Exodus 35.
we have exposed, will, with the people, turn their heads away from this
object: And I may imagine, that some (as being taken with the beauty of this
light) will conclude with the Apostles, That it is good to live upon this
Mount, and may perchance think of making Tabernacles for their abode in this
place; that is, design all the powers of their minds to the forming in
themselves such a state of Contemplation: wherefore it may be pertinent to look
a little downward upon such subjacent stations as are the direct way up to the
top of the Mountain, whereunto the nearest conterminate part is that of
Speculation; and the next to that, Lecture; and after that Mortification, which
lies indeed as the basis of all the elevation: and as it has this property of
the groundwork, to consist of the most gross matter, so has it this likewise,
of being the support of the whole erection; and in that order I will re-ascend
to the summity from whence I have dismounted.

While the Soul of Man receives no intelligible species, but such as are raised
from sensible matter, and acts only by corporeal organs, by Natural Reason
it is evident, why Mortification is requisite for the best extent of her
intellectual powers, as rendering these passages the clearer through which all
images enter into our discursive faculty, and also keeping that power the more
free and active in all her exercises: The purer the glass is, the better we see
all things in the room, and the farther we may see out of the room, when we
look outward through the glass; so both the species that enter into our minds
through clean and unobstructed organs, are the clearer, and the acts also of
our discourse and speculation, looking outward toward immaterialities, are the
more sharp and penetrating.

I shall not need to argue how much corporeal pleasures and sensualities do
obscure the light received by the apprehensive faculty, and clog the operations
of the reasoning power of the Mind; Wherefore even in this Natural respect, a
convenient suppression of the appetites of the Flesh seems the platform of
all Spiritual exaltation; but we have a firmer supernatural ground, whereupon
to raise this Conclusion, of the requisiteness of Mortification toward
speculative gifts, the word of the Holy Ghost saying, They that are in the
flesh cannot please God; and if they be removed Romans 8.
even from Gods favor, they must needs be very distantial from that grace and
familiarity, which is imparted to Contemplation: Saint Paul was allowed so
little to think of his body, when he was raised to his highest point of
illumination, as he knew not whether he had any body about him, or no, at that
time: And we find that he took the best course he could all his life, to feel
the least he might possibly of his body; in order whereunto he says, He did
not only chastise his body, and keep it in subjection, but 1 Cor. 9.
affirms likewise, That he did dye daily: It seems he found no means of
clearing the operations of the Soul, but by making, as it were, a quotidian
separation between her and the Flesh; And, me thinks, we may say of all Saint
Paul's converted life (notwithstanding his humility in owning infirmities) that
which he himself said of some part of it, namely, Whether this man in Christ
lived in his body, or out 2 Cor. 12.
of his body, we know not, God knows, so little sense we find him to have
had of his body, in point of Mortification, and so little impediment by it in
Contemplative operations: And does he not say himself, That it is not he that
lives, but Gal. (...).
Christ in him, and referring to us, he declares the requisiteness of
Mortification, telling us, That they that be Christ's have crucified their
flesh, with the vices and concupiscences; and if this kind of crucisixion be
requisite even for the practical part of Christianity, whereunto all are
called, much more must it be pertinent to the perfect speculative state
thereof, to which so few are chosen. Psalm. 83.


I am therefore well warranted to lay Mortification as the ground or foot of
this Mount of Moria, which signifies the Land of Visions, whereunto all such
as shall despise ascensions in their heart, must take their rise from this
foot, and remember what was figured by Abraham's leaving his Servants and his
Ass afar off, when he saw the Mountain, and the prohibition of any Beast to
come near to Mount Sinai, to wit, that no carnal or sensual dispositions might
Genesis 22.
presume to approach toward the mysterious lights of God: So that whosoever
aspired to go up to this mount Moria of Contemplation, must be advised to
follow Abraham's order, to leave afar off all voluptuous and sensual appetites,
figured by the Servants and the Ass, and carry in his hand the Fire and the
Sword, that is, Zeal and Activity for the sacrificing of his Flesh and Blood to
the honor of God: This is the Fire that he who was typified by Isaac brought
into the earth; and this the Sword, which he says he came to send, and not
Peace. Wherefore this hostility declared against our Flesh, must be remembered
to be the first Article of that peace of the Spirit, which is concluded in
Contemplation.

. III.
The requisiteness of Lecture, in order to this Spiritual elevation.

THe next Stage whereby we are to rise, is pious Lecture; which subject calls
back my thoughts upon the first state of man's knowledge; wherein we may
consider, That the first Humane Soul came into this world, perfect in the
intellectual part, by Science infused, and needed not stay for the help of her
corporeal organs to acquire any, for those instruments whereby she was to act,
were ready in their perfection, before she was seated in them, since Gods
forming perfectly the body of man, preceded his breathing into it the breath of
Life: And so we find that he was able to read presently in the book of Gods
works, wherein he read the character of Gods hand in every creature that was
set before him; and, as I may say, superscribed their names upon them, by the
secret impression he read of their Nature: But not being satisfied with this
excellent degree of intelligence, he began to affect the reading even in Gods
own increated book, The knowing like God himself. Upon this presumption the
rational soul of Man was cast down from this high form, and set so much
backward, as ever since both the Vegetative and Sensitive souls precede her
long in the perfection of their acts, and she is obliged to stay their leisure
before she can act her best according to her faculty, which must cost her also
pains and care to reduce it unto the best extent thereof.

Thus is now the rational Soul, sentenced to feed her self by her kind of
sweat and labor; so that she is not only to acquire most of her natural
knowledges, by a laborious industry, but she is also set to work by study and
attention, even upon those supernatural Principles that are infused into her,
as those of Faith, Hope and Charity; even these infused habits will not so much
as remain in her, without her own study and solicitude to preserve them, much
less can they be improved to their best degree, without much intendment and
application: And to facilitate the perfection of the Soul in this life, God
has been pleased to make his own Character, and to leave it legible under his
own Hand, his holy Scriptures, wherein all his attributes are penned in the
fairest manner, to affect our understandings, and to take our affections;
insomuch as of the holy Writ it may be well said to God, The light of thy
countenance is impressed upon it: This living spring of Verities the Holy Ghost
has left upon Psalm. 4.
the earth, from whence all the rivelets of pious Books derive their waters,
which are so proper to refresh and see undate the mind of Man, as the Holy
Ghost does but rarely use his own power of impregnating and replenishing Souls
with immediate inspirations, but vouchsafes, for the most part, to be conveyed
into our minds by the mediate spirations into them of virtuous notions, from
his subalternate instruments, the pens of his holy Ministers, which he does
certainly inspire with qualities ^o well proportioned to our capacities, as
they deliver Divine Truths unto our minds, under such familiar and agreeable
forms as are most apt to work upon our affections.

This is the design of the Holy Ghost in all pious Books, wherein his Spirit
remains covered in the elements of man's conceptions (for words may be said to
be a kind of body to thoughts) as the Divinity of Christ did under the vails
of Flesh and Blood. In like manner it is the Divine virtue of the Holy Spirit,
that works all those devout effects which are produced by the instrumental
conceptions of pious Writers: Wherefore as the Scriptures are to be read with
persuasion, that God is presentially speaking to us, so all Books of Devotion
are to be used with this opinion, of their speaking to us, as delegated and
deputed from God.

The mind of Man abhors vacuity, and though her Nature tend upward to be
replenished with Spiritual notions, yet if she be void of them, she sinketh
presently to earth, to take in any grosser furniture; so that if she be not
provided with such pure species as may keep her pointing at her own Center, in
stead of being elevated, as it were, above her self in Contemplation, she will
fall below her self into some terrene amuzement: Wherefore a habit of pious
Lecture is most necessary, in order to the replenishing her with Spiritual
Images, that may keep her eye always erected up upon them; and may we not well
infer the requisiteness of reading, for the support of the Spiritual Man, since
Saint Paul does not only advise his 2 Timothy 4. 13.
so elevated Disciple Timothy to attend unto reading, but charge him with
great solicitude to bring him some Books, even after he had told him he had
consummated his 2 Timothy 4.
course, and the time of his revolution was near; If he who had been in
Paradise already in a transcient state, and was so near his going thither to a
permanent, did still make use of Books, how necessary must they be for all such
as aspire to any Spiritual exaltation?

. IV.
Speculation placed as the last step in this ascent of the Soul.

THis last station carries us up to the top of this Mount Moria, from whence
we have descended, and so is the steepest part, and the uneasiest mounting of
all the rest, as it is nearest the vertical point of our fixure: This last step
then is Speculation or Meditating, which act of our discursive faculty, is
commonly taken as univocal, with this other of our mind fixed in
Contemplation; but when they are rightly distinguished, there appears such a
diversity, as is between the last strains of motion, and the term of
acquiescence: For Speculation is Speculation defined.
properly the busy attention of the mind in the inquest of truth, ranging and
casting out all ways, to bring in conclusions for the Spirit to fix and rest
upon in Contemplation; which (as I have said) is a fruitive possession of
Verities, which flowers the mind does no longer gather or collect, but rather
hold in her hand ready made up in nosegays that she is smelling to.

Me thinks these two different states of the Mind may be rendered very
intelligible, by a conception my Fancy has sprung, while it is ranging for
some fit expression of this very act which my Mind is now exercising* and I
may say, That Speculation and Contemplation differ ^ust so, as my present
writing of their differences does from my reading them anon when I have
finished them: For now my imagination is beating and casting all ways, for some
well suited similitude, whereby to illustrate the diversity of these two acts,
and my memory is sifting and sorting apposite words, to express my conceptions*
and thus by degrees I shall by means of this studious Application of those
powers of my Mind, form some digested Character of what I design; which
finished Draught of my own thoughts, when I shall read over, I shall no longer
work upon it, but behold the Image I have framed out of the past divisions and
compoundings of my thoughts, and then my Mind will rest and enjoy my
determined notions: So that as I do now speculate, and shall upon the finishing
of these two Characters, contemplate them, without any farther agitation of my
Mind: In like manner the state of Speculation is a disquisition of sundry
Divine Verities, whereby to form some determined notions, which are the objects
that Contemplation is to be fixed upon in an acquiescent state, when the
discursive motion is arrived at the term of rest it pointed at; and then
contemplating the result of our former discoursings, we do, as it were, read
over and enjoy this digest of our Imaginations: wherefore as the act of our
Comprehending does excel that of our Reasoning, in respect the intellect sees
at one look or intuition what the Reason collecteth but by diverse circuits of
Discourse, and so seems but a purveyor of what the intelligence possesses in
one instant: In like manner the Contemplative state, by the same reason,
transcends the Speculative; and, (...) thinks, in such a proportion as the
intellect of Angels excels that of rational Souls: for the first
comprehends in one act, without the tardity of discourse, all intelligible
species connatural to it, and the last is fain to stay upon the abstracting of
intelligible species from materialities, and the conferring and co(...) of them
with one another by ratiocination, before it can settle conclusions, wherefore
Speculation seems to be a Humane act, and Contemplation, as it were, an
Angelical.

These lines have, I hope; drawn a fair par^ition between these two acts of a
devout Soul, whereby they appear not to be coincident, as they are commonly
misunderstood, although they are co ordinate to one another, not that I do
presume that God has obliged himself to this order, of transfusing this grace
of Contemplation always through the medium of studious Speculation: For I am
not ignorant of his immediate communicating this hand of intuitive fruition of
his Verities to some choice Souls, unqualified for this preparatory course of
Reading and Meditation; God is admirable in his Saints, in manifesting his
Grace and Omnipotence by diverse manners: but as Saint Paul says, Though none
(...)eth the mind of the Lord, yet 1 Cor. 16.
we have the mind of Christ, wherefore I have given this direction, as I said,
when I first entered upon it, to conduct Travelers in this path, which is
Christ's high way marked for us, of Asking, Seeking and Knocking; and this is
the beaten track of his Church, which does not circumscribe God within this
method: Sometimes the Spirit of the Lord catches up some humble illiterate
Souls, and sets them immediately upon the top of this Mountain, as he did
Philip the Deacon at Az^^us; but for the most part he conveyeth Acts 8.
those he calls to this land of Visions, as he did Abraham, by these three
days journeys I have gested to you, Genesis 22.
before they come to this high station: For God does commonly carry these
Spiritual discoverers which he calls to take a little sey of the fruits of
the Land of Promise, all over this course of Spiritual exercises, before they
come to gather this fruit of Contemplation, which seems to be a bunch of
Grapes of that immense Vintage of Wine, whereof the Psalmist speaking, says,
They shall be inebriated by the fullness of thy house: For an inchoative state
of Contemplation in this life, is as it were a cluster of Grapes of the same
Vine, to wit, the Grace of Christ, which afterward is reduced into what was the
last intent of the planter, that is, into the Wine of the Saints, perfected
Contemplation of the Divine Essence.

So that having given you clear and practicable instructions, in order to the
taking a right way toward this state of acquiescence (the singular
excellencies whereof I have with my best skill pourtraicted unto your
judgments and affections) I shall add only this laudative of the Holy
Spirit, as very appliable to this happy state of Contemplation, Many daughters
have gathered together riches, but thou Prove. 31. 21.
have passed them all.

Upon these premised Considerations, I may conclude the same order observable
in the offering up this Spiritual Incense, which was held in the preparing and
burning the material Incense of the Tabernacle (which act was a figure of this
our Religious Duty) we must then first by Mortification keep clean and fair the
grate of the Altar; by Lecture and studiousness we are to gather and mix the
Gums and Spices of pious Conceptions; by Speculation and meditating we must
bear and pounce the Odours into a fine powder, to wit, collect pure and refined
images of Verities, and then by Contemplation we come to fire and exhale the
perfume of the whole Composition; By this method we erect our hearts, according
to those gradations designed by the Psalmist, and the Lawgiver shall give a
blessing, when Psa. 83. 8.
they go thus from virtue to virtue, the God of gods shall be seen in Sion.

. V.
Of the sensible delight springing from this Head of Contemplation; as also the
close of the whole Work.

HAving treated the blessedness of the intellectual part of this Contemplative
state, which may be said to stand for the Soul thereof, there remains the
adjoining that portion which answers to the Body in this compound of
happiness, which is, the sensible joy wherewith the affections are replenished;
which delectable good affecting the sensitive powers, is a redundancy or waste
falling from the virtue of that Truth which overfloweth in the supremest
portion of our Mind, in some such manner as the beatitude of the Body is
derived from the superfluent riches of the Soul, in the state of glory, and as
the Soul shall then over-pay all the ministerial offices of her Body in this
life (by the mediat^on whereof, her powers are now exercised) imparting to the
Body far more noble capacities; So does the intellect in this life, when the
mind is in the state of Contemplation, superabundantly recompense the
ministry of the Senses, for the conveyance of those species whereupon the
understanding acreth in Lecture and Speculation, by far exceeding joys and
^uavities diffused upon the affections, such indeed as are not to be conceived,
unless it be by those that have tasted them, whereof the Psalmist says,
Blessed is the people that knows jubilation; upon Psalm. 88.
which words St. Gregory notes, that the Holy Spirit says, Not speaks, but
knows this jubilation, because it may be conceived, but not fully expressed
by the enjoyer of it: The Sovereign Contemplator King David, by the assistance
of the Holy Spirit, gives us the fairest light we have of it, when he says,
My heart and my flesh have rejoiced in the living God; the first whereof
imports the satisfaction of the intellectual, and the last the solaces of the
appetitive part of the Soul, that is, the seat of the Affections; which though
they are not always equally feasted with delectation, yet are they for the most
part entertained with a competent measure of gladness and exhileration, and
sometimes are recreated with an extraordinary jucundity, in such a manner, as
the Prophet Elisha's trenches were filled with water, without 2 King. 3.
any appearance of wind or rain to produce this effect; that is to say, the
inferior part of the Soul feels a sensible delight and refreshment, without
any inordinate emotion or alteration of those sensitive powers, wherein this
delight is excited, insomuch as they find the sweet effects of these two
Affections, both Love and Joy, the first rising not from the wind of passion,
and the other not being instilled by the rain of any material fruition; and
thus the delights of these two Affections, from to be in such minds, as they
are in Angels, and Souls separate from Bodies, to wit, as they are acts of the
Will, not alterations of the sensitive appetite.

How blessed is the state of such Souls, when even the sensitive power of their
Mind seems to operate, as if their Spirits were totally abstracted, or their
Natures were Angelical; and therefore may not improperly be said to measure
this world with such a golden Reed, as the Angel in Apoc. 21. 17.
the Revelation did the heavenly City, that Saint John says, was the measure
of a Man, which is of an Angel; for this squaring of their affections by the
rule of pure Charity, renders them in a great measure proportionate to the
same Angelical operations: And in this admirable manner does the hand of their
Maker square and model such choice Souls to fit and adjust them for the filling
up the vacant rooms of Angels, according to the design of him who has said,
They shall be like the Angels of God i^ Mat. 22. 30.
Heaven.

Having conjoined this sensitive portion unto the the rational, we have
exhibited this Contemplative stare, in that accomplished beatitude this life
admits; And surely the Soul of Man in this mortal state, does as naturally
cover the adjunction of this delectable part in her affections, unto the other
illuminated portion of her intellect, as a Soul though glorified, does the
addition of her Body: And as by this last accession the Soul does not augment
her beatitude by way of intersion or exaltation, but only in point of
extension and amplitude, so does the addition of this delight of the
affections, rather enlarge and dilate the blessedness of this state of
Contemplation, then elevate or heighten the virtue of the Soul in that
condition, the felicity whereof I may will leave sealed with this Signet of the
Holy Spirit, This is the gift of God, and the possessor thereof shall not
Eccles. 5. 19.
much remember the days of his life, because God answers him in the joy of
his heart.

After this edition of the high Prerogatives of the true Contemplative life,
lest any one should conceive the inferior Vocations any way discredited, I will
present all the several stations of this world, with this Consolation and
Instruction of Saint Paul, As God has distributed to every one, as 1 Cor. 7.
17.
the Lord has called every one, so let him walk: For although the ear have not
an absolute dignity equal with the eye, yet in the dignity of proportions there
is an equality between them; Wherefore I will offer this excellent Conclusion
of Saint Austine, to all the engaged conditions of this world, The love of
Truth desires a holy vacancy, the pressure of Charity imposes just
occupations; which charge, if it be not laid on by some charitable obligation,
the best is, to attend unto the perception and contemplation of Truth; but in
case of our being entered into a lawful Engagement, that is to be born for the
necessity of Charity, but yet not so as the delectation of Verity be totally
deserted, lest that Religious S^avity being subtracted, we ^e the easilier
oppressed by the other secular necessity. This Advice may serve for a
convenient direction, to all such as are drawing in the yoke of any secular
Engagement, or are loose in the state of a tree Election of entering into this
sweet yoke of Christ, drawing in the Chariot of Contemplation.

Being now arrived at the farthest point of the Horizon of this state of Grace,
we cannot pass forward without entering upon the other Haemisphere of the state
of Glory; which, I hope, God will enable me to exhibit unto you in the other
part of this Map I first designed, which I will leave now divided by this
Equator, severing the two halfs of that Spiritual Globe, whereof I had first
intended to give you an entire Edition; But finding in the other part many
Spiritual Positions, according to the old Doctrine of the Suns moving, and the
Earths being fixed; which Maxims would not well agree with the new
Mathematical Discovery, of the Earths moving and cotation: I have thought
better to publish at first this uncontroverted part of my Work, and reserve the
other till a farther decision of this question. And since the whole Work was
designed as a Sacrifice of a Leper, in order Lev. 14.
to his cleansing; the purgation being yet very imperfect, I may not unfitly
say, That this is one of the Sparrows, which I humbly offer up upon the running
waters of a penitent Soul; and promise, That the other shall be let fly into
the world hereafter, when God shall be pleased farther to advance the
emundation; for the accelerating whereof I humbly request all their Prayers,
who shall be so benign as to conceive they owe me any thing for this Part, or
shall make any account of my owing them the other: And I may fitly end this
Semicircle of my Pen, with the best half of Saint Paul's valediction to the
Romans, Now Romans 15. 30.
I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of
the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in your prayers to God for me, that
the oblation of my service may become acceptable in Jerusalem to the Saints.
Now the God of peace be with you all.

Amen.
Sicut portavimus imaginem terreni: portimus and imaginem coelestis, 1 Cor. 15.
49.
Nam prudentia carnis mors est: prudentia spiritus, vita and pax, Romans 8. 6.
FINIS.
Imprimatur,

NA: BRENT.
Junii 12. 1647.
An Alphabetical TABLE OF The most remarkable Points of Instruction in these
TREATISES.
A
AFfections planted in our sensitive nature, for good use, page 37. section 4.
Advantages of conformity to virtue in our sensitive part of the mind, p. 38.
sect. 2. Ambition consistent with Devotion, p. 42. s. 4. Ambitions ordinary
acceptance, p. 43. Advantages to be made of love to enemies, p. 284. s. 3.
Advices for the best method of reading, p. 355. Advantages which true
contemplators have above other sorts of pious lives, p. 387.
B
BEauty may be honored without offense to Piety, p. 39. sect. 2. Beauty's
prerogatives allowed, p. 39. s. 3. Beauty perverted to be reproached, p. 40. s.
2. Beauty abusing us with apparences, as fishes are cousened in the water, p.
173. s. 2. Beauty how innocently it may be honored, p. 175. s. 2, 3.
C
COnfort to humane frailties, p. 10. sect. 2, 5. Contemplation honored, for
what reason, p. 66. s. 3. Courtiers common error in point of felicity, p. 73.
s. 2. Courts considerable as figures of heaven, p. 86. s. 1. Courts of Heathen
Princes not to be urged against the piety of Christian ones, p. ^0. s. 1, 2.
Courtiers of all ranks bound to proportionable exemplarity, p. 92. s. 1.
Companions of Princes to b(...)fully chosen, p. 94. s. 2. Courtiers advantaged
for humility by their vocation, p. 102. s. 2. p. 104. s. 2. Civilities and
complements how allowable in Courts, p. 109. s. 4. Contempt to enemies not
allowed for our neglect of revenge, p. 280. s. 2. Charity to enemies, what
proportion it must hold with that of Christ, p. 281. s. 1* 2. Counterfeit
forgiveness of enemies censured, p. 284. s. 2. Charities prerogatives in a
sincere love to enemies, p. 285. s. 1. Causes wrongfully judged by events, p.
292. s. 1, 2. Constancy in our undertakings preferred before irresoluteness, p.
294. s. 2. Curiosity of the causes of advers events, dissuaded, p. 298. s. 3.
Conformity of our Wills to Gods Order in all events, determined, in what degree
it is required, p. 299. s. 2. Constancy enjoined in good causes upon all
events, p. 310. s. 1, 2. Courts advantaged, by examples of benefits procured to
Christianity, p. 115. s. 2. 3. Contemplation a kind of Heaven, p. 321. s. 2.
Confort for Prisoners, p. 362: s. 3. Contemplation described, p. 385. s. 1.
Contemplation defined out of St. Augustine, p. 387. s. 2. Conversation ought to
be kept pure, p. 130. s. 3. Circumstances aggravating the faultiness of loose
speech, p. 146. s. 1.
D
DEath reads to man, p. 7. sect. 1. Despair of cure is worse then our
infirmity, p. 14. s. 2. Divinity discernable by grace, p. 22. s. 1 Devotion
described, p. 23. s. 2. Devotion defined, p. 28. s. 2. Devotion is only
sincere, when it is conformable to the order of Superiors, p. 29. s. 1.
Devotion may be prejudiced by too much austerity, p. 46. s. 4. Devil disswadeth
prayer* p. 80. s. 1. Dissimulation may be rendered virtuous in some case, p. 96.
s. 2. Dissimulation in humility decryed, p. 102. s. 1. Duties precisely in all
cases belonging to enemies, p. 275, 276. s. 1, 2. Death and the love of enemies
have like aspects at the first sight, p. 276. s. 3. Dissimulation in point of
love to enemies, very absurd, p. 278. s. 2. Different deceits in humors,
toward judging of reasons of causes, p. 312. s. 2. Detraction or Medisance
defined, p. 126. Detraction commonly connived at, p. 127. Delusions in
Spiritual vocations, p. 335. s. 2. Detraction how handsomely disguised, p. 129.
s. 3. Detraction imposed as it were by Princes acting in it, o^ encouraging it,
p. 134. Description of what it is to be in love, p. 150. s. 2.
E
EXamples of man's frailty, p. 9. sect. 3. Example is meritorious in Devotion,
p. 29. s. 2. Examples of Saints rejoicing rightly in temporal goods, p. 69. s.
2. Errors of those who wonder they are not happy, p. 73. s. 1. Errors of our
judgment in discerning Truth, illustrated by a Simile of Zeuxes the great
Painter, p. 76. s. 1. Examples of Princes why more dangerous then others, p.
92. s. 1. Enemies a difficult object for love, p. 265. s. 1. Example of Christ
requisite to enable us for the love of enemies, p. 267. s. 2 Enemies in some
respect more useful then friends, p. 269. s. 2. Experience of suffering is the
only security of our capacity, of discharging the duty of loving enemies, p.
286. s. 1. Examples of Gods unconceiveable Providence in the defeats of good
Princes in good causes, p. 307. s. 4. p. 308. 1, 2. Examples of eminent
sanctity in Courtiers, p. 115. s. 1. Excuses of Courtiers for irreligious
complaceneies, refuted, p. 124 s. 1. Errors discovered in the election of
solitary vocation, p. 322. s. 2. Errors of Philosophers in point of single
reason, being sufficient for consolation, p. 343. s. 2.
F
FAith rested on gives an ease above Reason, p. 23* s. 2. Felicity determined
to consist in a rejoicing in Truth, p. 65. s. 3. Fortunes falacies more
discernable at Court, p. 105. s. 3. Flattery described, and impeached of
falsehood, p. 107. s. 1, 2. Flattery is the issue of pride, p. 108. s. 1, 2
Forgiveness of enemies an excellent sacrifice, p. 279. s. 3. Friendship is
allowed another kind of love then that we owe enemies, p. 283. s. 1.
Forgiveness of enemies does not obstruct the course of Justice, p. 288. s. 3.
Faith follow de(...)tures as confidently as victories, p. 312. s. 2. Foulness
of speech a greater crime then many imagine, p. 14^. s. 1, (...). Flatteries to
women are upon the Devils Commission, p. 161. s. 2. Flattery raises self-love
in women, p. 162. s. 2. Friendship with women, how ^ar allowable, p. 176.
Filial love defined, p. 187. Friendship sincere is a safeguard against passion,
p. 177. s. 1. Filial love urged upon us, p. 193. Fraternal love a mark of our
being in the way to filial love to God, p. 196. s. 3.
G
GRace was superadded to Reason in all the first perseverers in the belief of
one God, p. 23. sect. 2. Greatness inclines naturally to be flattered, p. 112.
s. 3. Grace of Christ enabling us to love enemies, and the gift greater then
the exaction, p. 267. God is single, yet not solitary, p. 317. s. 3. Grace
proportioned to several callings, p. 121. s. 3. God works upon different
tempers by diverse applications, p. 330. s. 2. Grace, not single Reason,
fortifieth our mind in great distresses, p. 341. s. 2. Gods mercy is
universal, in commanding that all should despise this world, p. 378. s. 3.
Great persons delighting in it, promoteth Medisance with great self-guiltiness,
p. 132. s. 3.
H
HOly Ghosts impression on our nature, p. 18. s. 3. Hypocrisy displaid, p. 33.
s. 3. Honor goes under the title of Virtue, p. 44. s. 1. Humility does not
prohibit the pursuit of honor, p. 45. s. 4. Happiness temporal defined, p. 51.
s. 1. Happiness wherein it is truly to be found, p. 63. s. 1. Honors temporal
may excite us to the pursuit of eternal, p. 89. s. 1. Humility truly described,
p. 104. s. 1. Humility a security against all temptations of Courts, p. 101. s.
2. p. 106. s. 2, 3. Hatred to enemies imitateth those we hate, more then him we
pretend to love, p. 268. s. 2, 3. Hatred to one another, from whence derived
originally, p. 270. s. 2. Humility like the Marrine^s need, p. 113. s. 2. Hope
often abused, p. 159. s. 1.
I
INfirmity of Man evidenced by Solomon, p. 8. sect. 3. p. 9. s. 2. Incarnations
mercy, p. 12. s. 2. Infirmities of man may be turned to the torture of the
Devil, p. 17. s. 2. Inconstancy of vain affections, p. 41. s. 2. Incredulity in
prayer a mental stammering, p. 83. s. 1. Imitation of Princes is very familiar
for the reasons of gain, p. 91. s. 2. Justice for our first fault requires the
love of enemies, p. 272. s. 2. Injustice prospering, not to be wondered at, p.
307. s. 2. Imperfection of Man's Will in many election consisting with his
liberty, p. 325, 326. Iealousies nature treated, and the good use of it in Gods
love, p. 155. sect. 1, 2. Instincts of expressing our passion, shows our
loves to be due to God, p. 161. s. 2.
L
LOve justifies the Incarnation of God, p. 13. s. 3. Love from man enjoined by
the Incarnation of God, p. 13. s. 2. Love rendering it self to Devotion is not
ill treated, p. 38. s. 4. Love to enemies forgot in the Law, and revived in the
Gospel, like the fire of the Altar after the Captivity, p. 266. s. 2. Liberty
rather given to our Souls, then restraint made by the Precept of loving
enemies, p. 267. s. 1. Love of enemies proves a counterpoison to the forbidden
fruit, p. 269. s. 3. Love to enemies misinterpreted in a figurative sense by
many, p. 273. s. 2. Love to enemies not ordains as they are simply enemies, p.
275. s. 2. Love irregular, causes our aversion to the love of enemies, p. 282.
s. 1. Liberty dear to Humane Nature, p. 339. s. 2. Learning how it becomes
most useful toward consolation, p. 348. s. 1, 2. Liberty of mind gained,
overpays the captivity of the body, p. 354. s. 1, 2. Love of the world
recovereth often after our having wounded it by Grace or Reason, p. 376. s. 1.
Lecture proved necessary for the passage to Contemplation, p. 394. Liberties of
jesting, how they are allowable, p. 131. s. 1. Liberties indecent, though
little, disfigure the reputation of women, p. 147. s. 3* Liberties of
scurrility excused by the presumers in them, p. 137. s. 2. Love, though
mercinary, how to be accepted, p. 182.
M
Man's nobility by creation, p. 2. s. 3. p. 3. Man's excuse of his fall, p. 3. s.
2. Man's self-deceit, p. 6. s. 1. Meditation conducent to peace of Spirit, p.
58. s. 2. Meditation on the changeableness of all the pleasures we enjoy,
serves toward the securing our happiness, p. 61. s. 3. Moral Philosophy
answers not to the promises of Speculation in our necessities, p. 62. s. 1.
Man's reason for his forgiving the first injury of women, p. 275. s. 1. Morality
more studied at Court then Religion, p. 117. s. 1, 2. Moral civility useful to
improve the zeal of religious duties, p. 118. s. 1. Mirth a great disguise of
Medisance, p. 128. s. 2. Morality single is insufficient for our support in
great pressures, p. 342. s. 3. Moral Philosophy set in a due order for
consolation in distresses, p. 345. Meditations on the vain figure of this
world, p. 361. s. 1. Meditation on eternity a relief against all temporary
pressures, p. 367. s. 1. Mortification of the flesh requisite for all acts of
pure Speculation, p. 392. s. 2. Medisance most entertained by the encouragement
of great persons, p. 129. s. 1. Mercy of God miscon^^ived, p. 156. s. 2. more
158. s. 1. Mercy rightly understood, p. 158. s. (...). Mercinary love, how far
allowed, p. 185. Mercinary love of the nature of dwarfs, p. 185. s. 1.
N
NVns eminent purity, p. 18. s. (...). Nature gives some light toward the
sight of God, p. 1^. s. 2. Nature discredited single for happiness* p. 57. s.
2. Naturalists shall rise up in judgment against ill Christians, p. 277. s. 3.
O
OPinion of Temporalities confuted, p. 7. s. 2. Order given by God for
direction in Religion, p. 28. s. 1. Opinion why it prevails often above
Truth, p. 68. s. 2. Obligation in point of love to enemies, p. 283. s. 2.
Orders of Providence not discerned, occasioneth all our wonder, p. 305. s. 1,
2. Order described, p. 327. Order for disposing our time pleasantly and
usefully in Imprisonment, p. 351. s. 1. Order of the three Persons of the
Trinity residing in a Contemplative Soul, p. 389. Order of rising up to
Contemplation, p. 391. s. 1.
P
PRide first introduced, and how continued, p. 3. s. 3. Philosophers deceived
in the Divinity, p. 21. s. 2. Piety advised in all religions, p. 24. s. 2.
Passion it self makes use of Religion to express it self, p. 32. s 2. Passion
transferred may honor God in a double respect, p. 33. s. 1, 2. Piety does the
office of a Lawgiver, not of an Insulter, p. 35. s. 3. Piety not incompatible
with pleasure, p. 37. s. 2. Pleasures allowed by Devotion, p. 41. s. 1, 2.
Propriety in temporal goods abateth the value, and Piety repairs it, p. 42. s.
2. Philosophers variances concerning happiness, p. 51. s. 2. Prayer assigned
for the way to find truth, and consequently happiness, p. 79. s. 2. Prayer
must be sincere and fervent to become officious, p. 82. s. 2. Prayer is often
accepted, when the suit is not accorded, p. 84. s. 1. Princes virtues may make
Courts schools o^ Piety, p. 91. s. 1. Princes especially obliged to piety, p.
91. s. 2. Prudence for Courtiers, p. 97. s. 1. Praises allowable in many cases,
and how they are to be applied, p. 110. s. 2, 3. Princes obliged to forgive
personal injuries, p. 280. s. 1, 2. Providence not to be judged of by pieces,
p. 295. s. 2. Prayer against Gods menaces allowed the Prophets, p. 301. s. 1.
Providence seems as it were disguised upon earth, p. 359. s. 2. Presumption
on our power to resist the temptations of Beauty, is dangerous, p. 166. s. 2.
Q
THe quality of peace expectable in this life, p. 84. sect. 2. The quality of
private conditions toward the discernment of the worlds instability, p. 105.
s. 1. Quarrels with the world do sometime occasion good vocations to sanctity,
p. 328. s. 3. The qualities of profane passion, p. 152. s. 2. The quality of
temptations slighted at first, as easily masterable, p. 171. s. 2.
R
REason much degenerated in our fallen Nature, p. (...). sect. 2. Reason injured
by opinion, p. 7. sect. 2. Repaired Nature by Christ exalted above the original
innocence, p. 15. s. 1. p. 16. s. 2. Revenge contrived unto piety, p. 17. s. 2.
Reasons course up to Divinity, p. 21. s. 1. Repentance may convert even our
sins into good fruit, p. 30. s. 2, 3. Remedies extractable out of the
meditation of our frailty, p. 60. s. 1. Riches possessed and improved toward
piety, p. 70. s. 2. Religion lightly considered may perplex us in the judgment
of events, but more profoundly looked into, setleth on us, p. 292. s. 3.
Religion the only refuge in the perplexity of advers events to a good cause,
p. 302. s. 2, 3. Reason of distracting events not to be hoped for in this
world, p. 304. s. 2. Retreats out of the world turned into delusions by the
Devil, p. 332. s. 2. Reason single vainly overvalued by the Philosophers, p.
340. s. 2, 3. Remedies drawn out of the evils themselves of our life, p. 362.
Remedies for the correcting indecent liberties in jesting, p. 132. s. 2.
Remedies against foulness of speech, p. 142. s. 1.
S
SIn vainly excused, p. 4. sect. 2. Solomon's glories are ascribed to a special
reason, p. 8. s. 2. Sin removes man more from God then his own first nullity,
p. 12. s. 2. Sensual men excluded from happiness, p. 55. s. 1. Success ought
not to assure us of the goodness of a Cause, p. 294. s. 1. Sorrow allowed in
ill successes, p. 298. s. 2. Solitude described, and treated truly, p. 316.
Sanctity in great persons affords more communicative influences then in other,
p. 120. s. 1. Sociableness of Man's Nature, in order to common good, p. 327.
Spiritual joys suppresseth the love of the world, p. 376. s. 2. Speculation
distinguished from Contemplation, p. 397. s. 1. s. 2. Sensible delight afforded
by Contemplation, p. 401. s. 1. Self-love keeps us in darkness, p. 163. sect.
1. Self-love a kind of punishment of women, p. 163. Self-loves motion, p. 185.
s. 1.
T
TRuth defined, and duly valued, p. 66. s. 2. Truth to be sought in all
temporal fruitions, and to be found as the ground of our happiness, p. 68. s.
4. Truth impugned by the Devil to seduce our happiness, p. 74. s. 2.
Temptations most frequent in Courts, p. 100. Temptations of Courts resistable
by Prudence, p. 100. s. 2. Temptations against the love of enemies, p. 272. s.
1. Toleration of injuries eases more then revenge, p. 277. s. 2. Temptations
in Courts, how to be overcome, p. 122. s. 2. Time to be weighed in Solitude, p.
352 s. 3. Time weighs heaviest upon, when it is least applied to particular
designs, p. ^5^. Time neglected brings us in debt even of our eternity, p. 369.
s. (...). Temptations to be resisted at the first approach, p. 160. s. 2.
Temptations of the Flesh dangerous, though they appear little at first, p. 169.
s. 1.
V
VAnity in our fancy argued, p. 5. sect. 1. s. 2. Vanity of riches, beauty, p.
7. s. 1. Voluptuous persons exceptions against Devotion, p. 34. s. 3. Vanity of
Philosophers concerning the power of Reason, p. 52. s. 3. Uses to be made of
the Stoics Opinions, p. 54. s. 1. Verities intended, do not dull the joys of
our sensitive appetite, p. 75. s. 2. Unhappiness man's own fault always, p. 80.
s. 2. Vulgar errors in judging of Causes, p. 297. s. 1. Vocations supernatural
to Solitude, solaced by God, p. 319. s. 3. p. 320. s. 1. Vanities do truly
captivate those they pretend to give liberties, p. 353. s. 1. Universal changes
may confort all private calamities, p. 358. Vanities of this world sacrificed
to God, afford a sweet savor, p. 380. s. 1. Vocations respectively allowed more
or less application to the world, p. 383.
VV
THis world was never meant as an object of man's love, p. 377. s. 2. The worlds
contempt is ordained by God, by his subjecting all things in it to Man, p. 379.
s. 2. The world easily contemnable by the consideration of Christ's demeanor in
it, p. 381. s. 1. Women obliged especially to much purity in conversation, p.
146. s. 2. Words equivocal wrested to an unclean sense, very blameable, p. 143.
s. 3. Women prejudiced by flatteries, p. 164. s. 2. Women more commiserated
then men, in faults occasioned by man's temptations, p. 164.
Z
ZEal and Charity make the best temper of a Religion, page 26. sect. 2.
FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
BEhold a Printer, extraordinary both in his fault, and his confession, who
acknowledges the having offended all the several parties of these times, and
can think of no excuse, unless it be, the influence of the erring Planets of
this Conjuncture, reigning over our Presses and working Errata so commonly,
either in the matter or the form of our Trade; and the piety of the Author,
having preserved his Pen untainted, the malignity of our Stars, has prevailed
much upon our Pensils, in miscopying his Pen; Insomuch, as the Author is the
only abused person in this new Book, who having for some years past, enjoyed
no liberty but that of his Pen, we must confess it a great injury in us, to
have so often restrained his sense, in this excellent piece of spiritual
Enlargement, his Prison has presented the whole Nation: For my indulgence from
the Author, I will take sanctuary in his own charitable Treatise, of forgiving
Injuries: And for my pardon from the Reader, I may resort to a contrary
pretense, namely, the merit of having been the deliverer to him of so
over-weighty a Piece of Piety and Reason, as may bear a deduction of more
sense, then I have clipped from it, and consequently the delight of the Reader,
may well endure the allay of so much pains, as the looking often upon my Errata.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 35. after Wiseman says, add, What art thou proud of dust and
ashes? p. 5. l. 15. r. momentarinesse. p. 5. dele Romans 8. in the marg. p. 6. l.
25. r. often. p. 7. l. 15. r. this manifest. p. 7. l. 19. r. futile. p. 8. l.
18. r. clarity. p. 8. l. 20. dele I. p. 8. l. 24. r. become. p. 9. l. 25. r.
^er. p. 10. l. 8. after seen r. the. p. 17. l. 2^. r. receives. p. 23. l. 9.
r. giant. p. 27. l. 21. r. them. p. 31. l. 19. r. wherein. p. 35. l. 5. r.
mutiny. p. 37. l. 12. r. immaculate, and l. 14. r. born. p. 40. l. 25. dele
not. p. 45. l. 35. after also, r. there. p. 48. l. 15. r. my fetters. p. 50. l.
16. r. treat. p. 56. l. 7. put the Coma at point, p. 58. l. 23. r. portable. p.
61. l. 10. r. we should. p. 63. l. 17. r. habit, and l. 38. make the full point
at delighted. p. 64. l. 3. r. no exterior. p. 65. l. 20. r. debasement, and l.
18. r. his issue. p. 66. l. 31. r. present. p. 76. l. 33. r. but in. p. 88. l.
12. after method r. they. p. 89. l. 18. r. to this. p. 90. Title, r. Courts
censured. p. 91. l. 14. r. make. 94. l. 18. r. rending. p. 97. l. 7. dele these
and the Coma. p. 100. l. 17. r. made of links. p. 101. l. 9. r. no way. and l.
31. r. situation. p. 116. l. 19. r. he was there, and l. 22. r. displaced. p.
120. l. 22. r. Palaces. p. 124. l. 33. r. that shield. p. 128. l. 1. r.
fecundity. p. 131. l. 15. dele in. p. 132. l. 25. r. charged with. p. 133. l.
11. r. deference. p. 134. l. 4. r. proscribe. p. 138. l. 31. r. without. p.
149. l. 7. r. source. p. 152. l. 25. r. we suppose. p. 154. l. 6. r. lending
out. p. 159. l. 21. r. inventive p. 143. l. ult. r. bending. p. 161. l. 1. r.
faultiness of and. l. 3. r. curiosity of man. p. 162 l. ult. r. fuel. p. 164.
l. ult. r. Samaritans. p. 167. l. 12. r. leaps on. p. 170. l. 20. r. but. in
place of so. and l. 33. this parley. p. 171. l. 6. r. read. and l. 10. r. as
take up. p. 172. l. 31. r. undertaking. p. 186. l. 14. r. holy effort. p. 118.
l. 7. r. improved. p. 189. l. 17. r. preposure. and l. 33. r. degree. and l.
35. r. compared. p. 192. l. 19. r. dispensing. p. 271. l. 33. r. vestiges. p.
272. l. 22. r. examination, and l. 25. r. incitation. p. 273. l. 19. r. of his,
and in the same line, the parenthesis ends at revenge. p. 275. l. 1. r. mirror.
p. 277. l. 17. dele of. p. 279. l. 23. r. disbursement. p. 280. l. 6. r.
scenes. p. 302. l. 15. r. scruples. p. 311. l. 15. r. scrutiny. p. 313. l. 9.
r. nescience. p. 316. l. 9. r. prejudication. p. 320. l. 23. dele Col. 3. 15.
p. 321. l. 14. r. in such a. p. 324. l. 2. r. to this. p. 334. l. 18. r. is a
very. p. 339. l. ult. r. retrenched. p. 369. l. 17. r. accruing. p. 377. l. 13.
dele of. p. 379. l. 14. r. single man. p. 393. l. 15. r. dispose. and l. 21. r.
aspireth. p. 396. l. 15. r. resolution. p. 399. l. 21. r. gisted. p. 404. l.
17. r. rotation. p. 405. l. 11. r. portemus.


