HOROLOGIOGRAPHIA OPTICA Dialing Universal and particular. Speculatiue and
Practical together with ye description of the Court of Arts by a new Method
By Sylvanus Morgan

JJ. sculp


Horologiographia Optica.

DIALLING Universal and Particular: Speculative and Practical.

In a threefold PRAECOGNITA, viz. Geometrical, Philosophical, and
Astronomicall: and a threefold practice, viz. Arithmeticall, Geometrical, and
Isntrumental. With diverse Propositions of the use and benefit of shadows,
serving to prick down the Signs, Declination, and Azimuths, on Sun-Dials, and
diverse other benefits.

Illustrated by diverse Opticall Conceits, taken out of Augilonius, Kercherius,
Clavius, and others.

LASTLY, TOPOTHESIA, OR, A feigned description of the COURT OF ART.

Full of benefit for the making of Dials, Use of the Globes, Difference of
Meridians, and most Propositions of ASTRONOMY.

Together with many useful Instruments and Dials in Brass, made by Walter
Hayes, at the Cross Daggers in More Fields

Written by Silvanus Morgan.

LONDON, Printed by R and W. Leybourn, for Andrew Kemb, and Robert Boydell*^
and are to be sold at St Margarets Hill in Southwark, and at the Bulwark near
the Tower. 1657.

TO WILLIAM BATEMAN, Esqrs. TO ANTHONY BATEMAN, Esqrs. TO THOMAS BATEMAN, Esqrs.
Sons to the late Honorable THOMAS BATEMAN, Esquire Chamberlain of LONDON,
Deceased.
GENTLEMEN,
YOur late Father being a Patron of this Honorable City, does not a little
invite me to you, though young, yet to patronise no less then the aspiring of
Coelum, which, as the Poets feign, was the ancientest of the gods, and where
you may see Sol only of the Titans, favoring Jupiters* sign, and by their
power and operation has established Arts or Learning, the fable rather
according to that establishment which God has given them, they are, I say,
sought out of those that take their pleasure therein: Pardon my boldness, I
beseech you, if like Prometheus I have made a man of clay; and now come to
light my bundle of twigs at the Chariot of the Sun, desiring that you would
infuse vigor in that which cannot at all move of it self, and if your
benevolence shall but shine upon it, the angles of incidence and reflection
shall be all one: your love invites me to be so bold as to think you worthy of
my labor, wherein, if faults shall arise in the Cuspis of the Ascendent, they
shall also have their fall upon my self. And if any shall be offended at this
Work, my device shall be a Dyall with this Mottoe, Aspicio ut aspiciar, only
to all favorers of Art I am direct erect plain, as I am, Gentlemen, to you,
and desire to be

Yours in the best of my services, S. M.

TO THE READER.
REader, I here present thee with some Celestial operations drawn from the
Macrocosmall World, if I should tell you of plurality, it may seem absurd, but
I Will distinguish the word.

Mundus the World is sometimes taken Archtypically, and so is God, only in whose
divine mind is an example of all things.

Mundus the World is sometimes taken Angelical, and this is the Hierarchicall
government of Angels in Ceruphins, Cherubins, and Thrones.

Mundus the World is sometimes taken elementary, and this is the Philosophers
common place: the Salamander in Fire, the Birds in Air, the Fish in Water, and
Men and Beasts on Earth.

Sometimes Macrocosmally, considering the whole Universe, as well Aetheriall as
Subterene, yea, and every Orb, and this is imaginarily set down in the
Praecognita Astronomicall.

Sometimes Microcosmally, as in the little World man, and this is described in
the last Chapter of the Praecognita Philosophical.

Sometimes Typically, and that either Geographicall or Gnomonicall, or mentally
in the mind of the workman.

Geographically in Maps or Globes, or Spears in plano. Gnomonicall in this
present Art of Dialling, of which it may be said that

Umbra horas Phoebi designat climate nostro
Nodus, quod signum Sol tenet art docet.
And by which they must necessarily trace out our times by the orbiculation of
the Rady of the circle of the body of the Sun.

Again, the World is mentally considered in the mind of an Artist, as in
Painting, Graving, Carving, etc. But having thus defined the word, you may
think from hence that I am with Democrates Platonissans, acquainting thee with
infinity of Worlds, and in his words, Stanza 20.

-- -- and
To speak out though I detest the Sect
Of Epicurus for their manner vile.
Yet what is true I may not well neglect
Of truths incorruptible, ne can the style
Of vicious pen her sacred worth defile.
If we no more of truth should deign to speak
Then what unworthy mouths did never soil,
No truths at all among men would find a place
But make them speedy wings, and back to heaven apace.
Howsoever thou have here a field large enough to walk in, which if thou
affect the light, thou may trace out the truth, and I presume I have done
that for thee who art a learner, the most plain ways that were ever published,
and have studied not to make it the Art of shadows, so much as the shadow of
that art whose Gnomons may be said to touch the Poles, and whose planes may be
several Planispheres, a Scale to the Geometrician, a Pole to the Navigator, a
Chart to the Geographer, a Zodiaque to the Astronomer, a Table of Houses to the
Astrologian, the Meridian and Needle to the Surveyor, a Dyall to us all, to put
us in mind of that precious time which says to us Fugio, Fuge, and which time
shall be swallowed up of Eternity, when there shall be but one day without
Tropicall distinctions, where thou shall not need helps from any other, nor
from me who am thine,

S. M.

In Solarium.
HIc tibi cum numero spectantur Nodus and umbra,
Quae tria quid doceant, commemor are libet
Umbra notat dextre quota cursitet hora dici,
Hincque monet vitam sic properare tuam
Ast in quo signo magni lux publica mundi
Versetur mira nodulus art docet
Si vis scire, dies quot quilibet occupet horas,
Id numerus media sede locatus habet.
On my Friend Mr. Silvanus Morgan, his Book of Dialling.
THe use of Dials all men understand;
To make them few: and I am one of those.
I am not of the Mathematick Band:
Nor know I more of Verse, then Verse from Prose.
But though nor Diallist I am, nor Poet:
I honor those in either do excel;
Our Author's skilled in both alike, I know it,
Shadows, and Substance, here run parallel.
Consider then the pains the Author took,
And thank him, as thou benefit'st by's Book.
Edward Barwick.

On the Author and his Book.
DAres Zoil or Momus for to carp at thee,
And let such Idiots as some Authors be
Boldly to prosecute or take in hand
Such noble subjects they not understand,
Only for ostentation, pride, or fame,
Or else because they would get themselves a name,
Like that lewd fellow, who with hateful ire,
Flinch'd not, but set Diana's Court on fire:
His name will last and be in memory
From age to age* although for infamy.
What more abiding Tomb can man invent
Then Books, which (if they are good) are permanent
And monuments of fame, the which shall last
Till the late evening of the World be past:
But if erroneous, soothed with virtues face,
Their Authors cridit's nothing but disgrace.
If I should praise thy Book it might be thought,
Friends will commend, although the work be naught,
But I Will forbear, lest that my Verses do
Belie that praise that is only due to you.
Good Wiue requires no Bush, and Books will speak
Their Authors credit, whether strong or weak.
W. Leybourn.

ERRATA.
REader, I having writ this some years since, while I was a child in Art, and
by this appear to be little more, for want of a review has these faults, which
I desire thee to mend with thy pen, and if there be any error in Art, as in
Chap. 17, which is only true at the time of the Equinoctial, take that for an
oversight, and where thou find equilibra read equilibrio, and in the
dedication (in some Copies) read Robert Bateman for Thomas, and side for sign,
and know that Optima prima cadunt, pessimas aeve manent.

page line Correct. ^ 10 equal lines 18 16 Galaxia 21 1 Galaxia 21 8 Mars* 24
12 Scheame 35 1 Has 38 8 of the Tropicks and polar Circles 40 22 AB is 44 31
Artificial 46 ult heri 49 4 forenoon 63 29 AB 65 11 6 80 16 BD 92 17 Arch CD 9
ult in some copies omit center 126 4 happen 126 6 tovvard B* 127 26 before 126
prop. 10* for sine read tang. elev. Figure of the Dodicahedron false cut page 4
LF omitted at end of Axis 25 For A read D 26 In the East and West Dial A
omitted on the top of the middle line, C on the left hand, B on the right 55
Small arch at B omitted in the first polar plane 58 For E read P on the side of
the shadowed line toward the left hand I omitted next to M, and L in the center
omitted 81 K omitted in figure 85 On the line FC for 01 read 6, for 2 read 12,
line MO for 15 read 11 96 A small arch omitted at E and F, G and H omitted at
the end of the line where 9 is 116 I and L omitted on the little Epicicle. 122


THE ARGUMENT OF THE Praecognita Geometrical, and of the Work in general.
WHat shall I do? I stand in doubt
To show thee to the light;
For Momus still will have a flout,
And like a Satyr bite:
His Serpentarian tongue will sting,
His tongue can be no slander,
He Is one to wards all that has a fling
His fingers ends has scanned her.
But seeing then his tongue cannot hurt,
Fear not my little Book,
His slanders all last but a spurt,
And give him leave to look
And scan thee thorough, and if then
This Momus needs must bite
At shadows which dependant is
Only upon the light.
Withdraw thy light and be obscure.
And if he yet can see
Faults in the best that ever writ,
He must find fault with me.
How ere proceed in private and deline
The time of the day as often as sun shall shine:
And first define a Praecognitiall part
Of magnitude, as useful to this art.
THE PRAECOGNITA GEOMETRICAL.
THe Arts, says Arnobius, are not together with our minds, sent out of the
heavenly places, but all are found out on earth, and are in process of time,
soft and fair, forged by a continual meditation; our poor and needy life
perceiving some casual things to happen prosperously, while it does imitate*
attempt and try, while it does slip, reform and change, has out of these same
assiduous apprehensions made up small Sciences of Art, the which afterward, by
study, are brought to some perfection.

By which we see, that Arts are found out by daily practice, yet the practice
of Art is not manifest but by speculative illustration, because by speculation:
Scimus ut sciamus, we know that we may the better know: And for this cause I
first chose a speculative part, that you might the better know the practice;
and therefore have first chose this speculative part of practical Geometry,
which is a Science declaring the nature, quantity, and quality of Magnitude,
which proceeds from the least imaginable thing.

To begin then, A Point is an indivisible, yet is the first of all dimension;
it is the Philosophers Atome, such a Nothing, as that it is the very Energie of
all things, In God it carries its extremes from eternity to eternity: in the
World it is the same which Moses calls the beginning, and is his Genesis: it is
the Clotho that gives Clio the matter to work upon, and spins it forth from
terminus a quo, to terminus ad quem: in the Alphabet it is the Alpha, and is in
the Cuspe of the Ascendant in every Science, and the house of Life in every
operation. Again, a Point is either centricall or excentricall, both which are
considered Geometrically or Optically, that is, a point, or a seeming point: a
point Geometrically considered is indivisible, and being centrall is of
magnitude without consideration of form, or of rotundity, with reference to
Figure as a Circle, or a Globe, etc. or of ponderosity, with reference to
weight, and such a point is in those Balances which hang in equilibra, yet have
one beam longer than the other. If it be a seeming point, it is increased or
diminished Optically, that is, according to the distance of the object and
subject. It Is the birth of any thing, and indeed is to be considered as our
principal significator, which being increased does produce quantity which is
the required to Magnitude; for Magnitude is no other then a continuation of
Quantity, which is either from a Line to a plain Superficies, or from a plain
Superficies to a Solid Body: every of which are considered according to the
quantity or form.

The quantity of a Line is length, without breadth or thickness, the form
either right or curved.

The quantity of a Superficies consists in length and breadth, without
thickness, the form is diverse, either regular or irregular; Regular are
Triangles, Squares, Circles, Pentagons, Hexagons, etc.

An equilaterall Triangle consists of three right lines and as many angles,
his inscribed side in a Circle contains 120 degrees.

A Square of four equal right lines, and as many right angles, and his
inscribed side is 90 degrees.

A Pentagon consists of five equal lines and angles, and his inscribed side
is 72 degrees of a Circle.

A Hexagon is of six equal lines and angles, and his side within a Circle is
60 degrees, which is equal to the Radius or Semidiameter.

An Angle is the meeting of two lines not in a straight concurring, but which
being extended will cross each other; but if they will never cross, then they
are parallel.

The quantity of an angle is the measure of the part of a Circle divided into
360 degrees between the open ends, and the angle it self is the Center of the
Circle.

The quantity of a Solid consists of length, breadth, and thickness, the form
is various, regular or irregular: The five regular or Platonic Bodies are, the
Tetrahedron, Hexahedron, Octohedron, Dodecahedron, Icosahedron.

Tetrahedron is a Solid Body consisting of four equal equilaterall Triangles.





A Hexahedron is a Solid Body consisting of six equal Squares, and is right
angled every way.



An Octahedron is a Solid Body consisting of eight equal Equilaterall Triangles.



A Dodecahedron is a Solid Body consisting of 12 equal Pentagons.



An Icosahedron is a Solid Body consisting of 20 equal Equilaterall Triangles:
All which are here described in plano, by which they are made in pasteboard: Or
if you would cut them in Solid it is performed by Mr. Wells in his Art of
Shadows, where also he has fitted planes for the same Bodies.

A Parallel line is a line equidistant in all places from another line, which
two lines can never meet.

A Perpendicular is a line rightly elevated to another at right angles, and is
thus erected.

Suppose AB be a line, and in the point A you would erect a perpendicular: set
one foot of your Compasses in A, extend the other upwards, anywhere, as at C,
then keeping the foot fixed in C, remove that foot as was in A toward B, till
it fall again in the line AB, then if you lay a Ruler by the feet of your
Compasses, keep the foot fixed in C, and turn the other foot toward D by the
side of the Ruler, and where that falls make a mark, from whence draw the line
DA, which is perpendicular to AB. And so much shall suffice for the Praecognita
Geometrical, the Philosophical follows.



The end of the Praecognita Geometrical.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE Praecognita Philosophical.
NOt to maintain with nice Philosophy,
What unto reason seems to be obscure,
Or show you things hid in obscurity,
Whose grounds are nothing sure.
It Is not the drift of this my BOOK,
The world in two to part,
Nor show you things whereon to look
But what has ground by Art.
If Art confirm what here you read,
Sure you will confirmed be,
If reason wont demonstrate it,
Learn somwhere else for me.
There Is showed to you what shadow is,
And the Earths proper place,
How it the middle does possess,
And how heavens run their race.
Resolving many a Proposition,
Which are of use, and needful to be known.
THE PRAECOGNITA PHILOSOPHICAL.
CHAP I.
Of Light and Shadows.

HE that seeks Shadow in its predicaments, seeks a reality in an imitation,
he is rightly answered, umbram per se in nullo praedicamento esse, the reason
is thus rendered as has been, it is not a reality, but a confused imitation of
a Body, arising from the objecting of light,

So then there can be no other definition then this, Shadow is but the
imitation of substance, not incident to parts caused by the interposition of a
substance, for, Umbra non potest agere sine lumine. And

And it is twofold, caused by a twofold motion of light, that is, either from a
direct beam of light, which is primary, or from a secondary, which is
reflective: hence it is, that Sun Dials are made where the direct beams can
never fall, as on the seeling of a Chamber or the like.

But in vain man seeks after a shadow, what then, shall we proceed no
farther? surely not so, for qui semper est in suo officio, is semper orat, for
there are no good and lawful actions but do condescend to the glory of God,
and especially good and lawful Arts.

And that shadow may appear to be but dependant on light, it is thus proved,
Quod est and existit in se, id non existit in alio: that which is, and
subsisteth in it self, that subsisteth not in another: but shadow subsisteth
not in it self, for take away the cause, that is light, and you take away the
effect, that is shadow.

Hence we also observe the Sun to be the fountain of light, whose daily and
occurrent motions does cause an admirable luster to the glory of God; seeing
that by him we measure out our Times, Seasons, and Years.

Is it not his annual revolution, or his proper motion that limits our Year?

Is it not his Tropicall distinctions that limits our Seasons?

Is it not his Diurnall motion that limits out our Days and Hours?

And man truly, that arch type of perfection, has limited these motions even
in the small type of a Dyall plane, as shall be made manifest in things of the
second notion, that is, Demonstration, by which all things shall be made plain.

CHAP II.
Of the World, proving that the Earth possesses its own proper place.

WE have now with the Philosopher, found out that common place, or place of
being, that is, the World, will you know his reason? it is rendered, Quia omnia
reliqua mundi corpora in se includit.

I Will tell you of no plurality, not of planetary inhabitants, such as the
Lunaries* lest you grabble in darkness, in expecting a shadow from the light
without interposition, for can the light really without a substance be its own
Gnomon? surely no, neither can we imagine our earth to be a changing Cynthia,
or a Moon to give light to the Lunary inhabitants: For if our Earth be a light
(as some would have it) how comes it to pass that it is a Gnomon also to cast
a shadow on the body of the Moon far less then it self, and so by consequence
a greater light cannot seem to be darkened on a lesser or duller light, and if
not darkened, no shadow can appear?

But from this common place the World with all its parts, shall we descend to a
second grade of distinction, and come now to another, which is a proprius
locus, and divide it into proper places, considering it as it is divided into
Coelum, Solum, Salum, Heaven, Earth, Sea, we need not so far a distinction, but
to prove that the earth is in its own proper place, I thus reason: Proprius
locus est qui proxime nullo alio interveniente continet locatum: but it is
certain that nothing can come so between the earth as to dispossess it of its
place, therefore it possesses its proper place, furthermore, ad quod aliquid
movetur, id est ejus locus, to what any thing moves that is its place: but the
earth moves not to any other place, as being stable in its own proper place.

And this proper place is the terminus ad quem, to which (as the place of their
rest) all heavy things tend, in quo motus terminantur, in which their motion
is ended.

Hence we reason, that a Mil-stone, or any ponderous thing cannot pass the
center of the earth, because the center of the earth is the farthest from the
Heavens, for we all know that no man can dispose any heavy thing in the air
to rest, neither can any one force a stone to pass through the earth if there
were a way perspicuous, for having passed the center of the earth, it is as it
were to throw astone upward which will again return to its center. For example,
suppose the great Circle ABC D to be the co^. cave superficies of the
Firmament, which all men know to compass the earth on all sides, and let the
earth be the smaller Circle within that, the center whereof is E. Now if a line
and plummet at A be let fall toward the earth it will tend in a right line
toward E: also, if another plummet be let fall from B or any other place as C
or D, that will fall also in a right line toward E, so that they would all
meet in the center E, which point they cannot pass, for then they return as it
were upward, and so must fall in the Sky or nowhere, contrary to all ponderous
motions, whence is proved the earth to be the center of the World, and what
manner of center shall be shown in the next ensuing Chapter.

CHAP III.
Showing how the Earth is to be understood to be the Center.

A Center is either to be understood Geometrically or Optically, either as it
is a point, or seeming a point.

If it be a point, it is conceived to be either a center of magnitude, or a
center of ponderosity, or a center of rotundity: if it be a seeming point, that
is increased or diminished according to the ocular aspect, as being sometime
nearer, and sometime farther from the thing in the visuall line, the thing is
made more or less apparent.

A center of magnitude is an equal distribution from that point, an equality of
distribution of the parts, giving to each end alike, and to each a like
vicinity to that point or center.

A center of ponderosity is such a point in which an unequal thing hangs in
equi libra, in an equal distribution of the weight, though one end be longer
or bigger than the other of the quantity of the ponderosity.

A center of rotundity is such a center as is the center of a Globe or Circle,
being equally distant from all places.

Now the earth is to be understood to be such a center as the center of a Globe
or Sphere, being equally distant from the concave superficies of the Firmament,
neither is it to be understood to be a center as a point indivisible, but
either comparatively or optically: comparatively in respect of the superior
Orbs; Optically by reason of the far distance of the one from the earth; as
that the fixed Stars being far distant seem, by the weakness of the sense, to
be conceived as a center indivisible, when by the force and vigor of reason
and demonstration, they are found to exceed this Globe of earth much in
magnitude; so that what our sense cannot apprehend, must be comprehended by
reason: As in the Circles of the Celestial Orbs, because they cannot be
perceived by sense, yet must necessarily be imagined to be so. Whence it is
observable, that all Sun Dials, though they stand on the surface of the earth,
do as truly show the hour as if they stood in the center.

CHAP IV.
Declaring what reason might move the Philosophers and others to think the
Earth to be the center, and that the World moves on an axis, circa quem
convertitur.

OCular observations are affirmative demonstrations, so that what is made plain
by sense is apparent to reason: hence it so happens, that we imagine the
Earth to move as it were on an axis, because, both by ocular and Isntrumental
observation, in respect that by the eye it is observed that one place of the
Sky is semper apparens, neither making Cosmicall, Haeliacall or Achronicall
rising or setting, but still remaining as a point, as it were, immovable,
about which the whole heavens are turned. These yet are necessary to be
imagined for the better demonstration of the ground of art; for all men know
the heavens to be supported only by the providence of God. Thus much for the
reason showing why the World may be imagined to be turned on an Axis, the
demonstration proving that the earth is the center, is thus, not in maintaining
unlikely arguments, but verity of observation; for all Gnomons casting shadow
on the face of the earth, cast the like length or equality of shadow, they
making one and the same angle with the earth, the Sun being at one and the same
angle of height to all the Gnomons. As in example, let the earth be represented
by the small circle within the great circle, marked ABCD, and let a Gnomon
stand at E of the lesser Circle, whose horizon is the line AC, and let an other
gnomon of the same length be set at I, whose horizon is represented by the line
BD, now if the Sun be at equal angles of height above these two Horizons,
namely, at 60 degrees from C to G, and 60 from B to F, the Gnomons shall give a
like equality of shadows, as in example is manifest. Now from the former
appears that the earth is of no other form then round, else could it not give
equality of shadows, neither could it be the center to all the other inferior
Orbs: For if you grant not the earth to be the middle, this must necessarily
follow, that there is not equality of shadow. For example, let the great Circle
represent the heavens, and the less the earth out of the center of the
greater, now the Sun being above the Horizon AC 60 d. and a gnomon at E casts
his shadow from E to F, and if the same gnomon of the same length does stand
till the Sun come to the opposite side of the Horizon AC, and the Sun being 60
degrees above that Horizon, casts the shadow from E to H, which are unequal in
length; the reason of which inequality proves that then it did not stand in the
center, and the equality of the other proves that it is in the center. Hence is
also most forceably proved that the earth is completely round in the respect of
the heavens, as is showed by the equality of shadows, for if it were not round,
one and the same gnomon could not give one and the same shadow, the earth being
not completely round, as in the ensuing discourse and demonstration is more
plainly handled and made manifest.

And that the earth is round may appear, first, by the Eclipses, when the
shadow of the earth appears on the body of the Moon, darkning it in whole or
in part, and such is the body such is the shadow. Again, it appears to be round
by the orderly appearing of the Stars, for as men travel farther North or
South they discover new Stars which they saw not before, and lose the sight of
them they did see. As also by the rising or setting of the Sun or Stars, which
appear not at the same time to all Countries, but by difference of Meridians,
and by the different observations of Eclipses, appearing sooner to the Easterly
Nations then those that are farther West: Neither do the tops of the highest
hills, nor the sinking of the lowest valleys, though they may seem to make the
earth un-even, yet compared with the whole greatness, do not at all hinder
the roundnesse of it, and is no bigger then a point or pins head in comparison
of the highest heavens.

Thus having run over the Systeme of the greater WORLD, now let us say something
of the Compendium thereof, that is MAN.
CHAP V.
Of Man, or the little World.

MAn is the perfection of the Creation, the glory of the Creator, the
compendium of the World, the Lord of the Creatures.

He is truly a Cosmus of beauty, whose eye is the Sun of his body, by which
he beholds the never resting motions of the heavens, contemplatively to behold
the place of motion; the place of his eternal rest. Lord, what is man that
thou should be so mindful of him, or the son of man that thou so regardest
him? thou have made a World of wonder in his face. Thou have made him to be a
rational creature, endowed* him with reason, so that his intellect becomes his
Primum mobile, to set his action at work, nevertheles, man neither moves nor
reigns in himself, and therefore not for himself, but is born not to
himself, but for his Country; therefore he ought to employ himself in such
Arts as may be, and prove to be profitable for his Country.

Man is the Atlas that supports the Earth,
A perfect World, though in a second birth:
I know not which the complete World to call,
The senseless World, or man the rational:
One claims complete in bigness and in birth,
Says she is complete, for man was last brought forth.
Man speaks again, and stands in his defense
Because he is rational, has complete sense.
Nature now seeing them to disagree,
Sought for a means that they united be:
Concluded man, that he should guide the Spears,
Limit their motion in Days, and Months, and Years:
He thinking now his Office not in vain,
Limits the Sun unto a Dial plain:
Girdles the World in Circles, Zones, and Climes,
To show his Art unto the after times.
Nature that made him thus complete in all,
To please him more, him Microcosmus call,
A little world, only in this respect
Of quantity, and not for his defect:
Pray, Gentle Reader, view but well their feature,
Which being done, pray tell me who is the greater?


For he has given me certain knowledge of the things that are, namely to know
how the World was made, and the operations of the Elements, the beginning,
ending, and midst of times, the alteration of the turning of the Sun, and the
change of Seasons, the circuit of years and position of Stars, Wisd. 7. 17.

The end of the Praecognita Philosophical.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE Praecognita Astronomicall.
You Are come to see a sight, the World's the stage,
Perhaps you will sayt's but a Star-gazing age,
What come you out to see? one use an Instrument?
Can speculation yield you such content?
That you can rest in learning but the name
Of Pegasus, or of swift Charleses Wane?
And would you learn to know how he does move
About his axis, set at work by Jove?
If you would learn the practice, read and then
I need not thus entreat you by my pen
To tread in Arts fair steps, or to attain the way,
Go on, make haste, Relinquent do not stay:
Or will you scale Olympic hills so high?
Be sure you take fast hold, ASTRONOMY:
Then in that fair spread Canopie no way
From thee is hid, no not Galezia.
They that descend the waters deep do see
Gods wonders in the deep, and what they be:
They that contemplate on the starry sky
Do see the works that he has framed so high.
Learn first division of the World, and how
It Is seated, I do come to show you now.
THE PRAECOGNITA ASTRONOMICAL.
CHAP I.
Of the division of the World, by accidental situation of the Circles.

COSMUS, the World, is divided by Microcosmus the little World, into
substantial and imaginary parts: Now the substantial are those material
parts or substance of which the World is compacted and made a Body, by the
inter-folding of one Sphere within another, as is the Sphere of Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Sol, etc. And these of themselves have a gentle and proper
motion, but by violence of the first mover, have a racked motion contrary to
their own proper motion: whence it appears, that the motion of the heavens are
two, one proper to the Spears as they are different in themselves, the other
common to all.

By Phoebus motion plainly does appear,
How many days do constitute one year.
Will you know how many days do constitute a year, he tells you who says,

Ter centum ter viginti cum quinque diebus
Sex horas, neque plus integer Annus habet.
Three hundred sixty five days, as appear,
With six hours added, make a complete Year.
The just period of the Suns proper revolution.

Perpetuus Solis distinguit tempora motus. The Imaginary part traced out by
man's imagination, are Circles, such is the Horizon, the Equator, the Meridian,
these Circles have of themselves no proper motion, but by alteration of place
have an accidental division, dividing the World into a right Sphere, cutting
the parallels of the Sun equally or oblique, making unequal days and nights:
whence two observations arise:

First, Where the parallels of the Sun are cut equally, there is also the days
and nights equal.

Secondly, Where they are cut oblique, there also the days and nights are
unequal.

The variety of the heavens are diversely divided into Spears, or several
Orbs, and as the Poets have found out a Galazia, the milkie way of Juno her
breasts, or the way by which the gods go to their Palaces, so they will assign
to each Sphere his several god.

Goddess of
Heralts. Caliope in the highest Spears does dwell, Astrology. Amongst the
Stars Urania does excel, Philosophy. Polimnia, the Sphere of Saturn guides,
Gladness, Sterpsicore with Jupiter abides. History, And Clio reigns in man's
fixed Sphere. Tragedic. Melpomine guides him that gvids the year Solace. Yea,
and Erata does fair Venus sway. Loud Instruments. Mercury his Orb Euturpe does
obey. Ditty. And horned Cynthia is become the Court Of Thalia to sing and laugh
at sport.
Where they take their places as they come in order.

The Sphere is said to be right where the Poles have no elevation, but lie in
the Horizon, so that to them the Equinoctial is in the Zenith, that is, the
point just over their heads.

The Sphere is oblique in regard of its accidental division, accidentally
divided in regard of its orbicular form; orbicular in regard of its
accidental, equal variation orbicular, it appears before in the Praecognita
Philosophical, his equal variation is seen by the equal proportion of the
earth answering to a Celestial degree, for Circles are in proportion one to
another, and parallel one to another are cut equally, so is the earth to the
heavens; having considered them as before, we will now consider another sort of
Sphere, which is called parallel.

This parallel Sphere is so that the parallels of the Sun are parallel to the
Horizon, having the Poles in their Zenith, being the extreme intemperate,
cold, and frozen Zone: Ovid in his banishment complains thus thereof.

Hard is the fright in Scythia I sustain,
Over my head heavens Axis does remain.
CHAP II.
Of the Circles of the Horizon, the Equator, and the Meridian.

THe greatest Circle of a Sphere is that which divides it in two equal parts,
and that because it crosses diametrically, and the diameter is the longest
line as can be struck in a Circle, and therefore the greatest, which great
Circles are represented in the following figure, representing the Circles of a
Sphere in an oblique Latitude, according to the Latitude or elevation of the
Pole here at London, which is 51 degrees. 32 min. being North Latitude, because the
North Pole is elevated.

The Horizon is a great Circle dividing the part of heaven seen, from where we
imagine an Antipodes, the inhabitants being to us an Antipheristasin, our
direct opposites, so that while the Sun continues visible to us, it is above
our Horizon, and so continues day with us, while it is night with our
opposites; and when the Sun goes down with us it appears to them, making day
with them while it remains night with us, and according to the demonstration,
is expressed by the greot Circle marked NSEW, signifying the East, West, North,
and South parts of the Horizon. So now if you imagine a Circle to be drawn from
the Suns leaving our sight, through those Azimuth points of heaven, then that
Circle there imagined is the Horizon, and is accidentally divided as a man
changes his place, and divides the World in a right or oblique Sphere.



The Meridian is a great Circle situated at right angles to the Horizon,
equally passing between the East and West points, and consequently running due
North and South, and passes through the Poles of the World, being steadfastly
fixed, it is represented by the great Circle marked NDSC, and is accidentally
divided, if we travel East or West, but in travailing North or South alters
not, and when the Sun touches this Circle, it is then midday or Noon: Now if
you imagine a Circle to pass from the North to the South parts of the Horizon,
through your Zenith, that Circle so imagined is your Meridian, from which
Meridian we account the distance of hours.

The Aequinoctiall likewise divides the World in two equal parts, crossing at
right angles between the two Poles, and is therefore distant from each Pole 90
degrees, and is elevated from the Horizon on the contrary side of the Poles
elevation, so much as the Pole wants of 90 degrees. elevation, demonstrated in the
Scene by the Circle passing from A to B, and is accidentally elevated with the
Poles as we change our Horizon, and when the Sun touches this Circle, the days
and nights are then equal, and to those that live under this Citcle the days
and nights hang in equilibra continually, and the Sun does move every hour 15
degrees of this Circle, making the hour lines equal, passing 15 degrees in
one hour, 30 degrees in two hours, 45 degrees in three hours, 60 degrees for
four, and so increasing 15 degrees as you increase in hours. This I note to
the intent you may know my meaning at such time as I shall have occasion to
mention the Aequinoctiall distances.

The Axis of the World is that which the Style in every Dial represents, being
a line imaginary, supposed to pass through the center of the World, from the
South to the North part of the Meridian, whose outmost ends are the Poles of
the World, this becomes the Diameter, about which the World is imagined to be
turned in a right Sphere having no elevation, in an oblique to be elevated
above the Horizon and the angle at the center, numbered on the arch of the
Meridian between the apparent Pole and the Horizon, is the elevation thereof,
represented by the straight line passing from E to F, the arch EN being
accounted the elevation thereof, which according to our demonstration is the
Latitude of London.



The Stars that do attend the Artick or North Pole, are the greater and lesser
Bear, the last star in the lesser Bears tale is called the Pole Star, by
reason of its neerness to it: this is the guide of Mariners, as appears by
Ovid in his exile, thus

You great and lesser Bear whose Stars do guide
Sydonian and Grecian ships that glide
Even you whose Poles do view this lesser Ball,
Under the Western Sea near set at all.
The stars that attend the Southern Pole is the Cross, as is seen in the Globes.

Lord be my Pole, make me thy Style, Lord then
Thy name shall be my terminus ad quem.
Video Coelos opera manuum tuarum, lunam and stellas que tu fundasti.

CHAP III.
Of the several sorts of Planes, and how they are known.

DYals are the days limiters, and the bounders of time, whereof there are
three sorts: Horizontall, Erect, Inclining: Horizontall are always parallel to
the Horizon: Erect, some are erect direct, others erect declining: Inclining
also are direct or declining: for more explanation the figure following shall
give you better satisfaction, where the Horizon marked with diverse points of
the Compass shall explain the demonstration: Now if you imagine Circles to
pass through the Zenith A, crossing the Horizon in his opposite points, as
from SW through the vertical point A, passing to the opposite point of
South-west to North-East, those, or the like circles, are called Azimuthes,
parallel to which Azimuthes all erect Sciothericals do stand.

Those Planes that lie parallel to the Horizontall Circle are called
Horizontall planes, and his Style makes an angle with the Pole equal to the
elevation thereof; then the elevation of the Pole is the elevation of the Style.



Erect Verticals are such which make right angles with the Horizon, and lie
parallel to the Vertical point, and these, as I told you before, were either
direct or declining.

Direct are those that stand in a direct Azimuth, beholding one of the four
Cardinal Quarters of the World, as either direct East, West, North, or South,
marked with these letters NEWS, or declining from them to some other indirect
Azimuth or side-lying points.

Erect North and South are such as behold those Quarters, and cuts the Meridian
at right angles, so that the planes cross the Meridian due East and West, and
the Poles are their Styles, equally elevated according to the aequinoctiall
altitude, being the complement of the Poles elevation. For in all North Faces,
Planes, or Dials, the Style beholds the North Pole, and in all South faces, the
Style beholds the South Pole: therefore, where the North Pole is elevated,
there the North Pole must be pointed out by the Style, and where the South Pole
is elevated vice versa.

The second sort of Verticals are declining, which ate such that make an acute
angle with the Quarter from which they decline; for an acute angle is less
then a right angle, and a right angle is 90 degrees: these declining Planes
lying in some accidental Azimuthe.

For supposing a Dial to turn from the South or North toward the East or
West, the Meridian line of the South declines Eastward, happening in these
Azimuthes or between them.

South declining East South declining West S by E 11 15 Or to these points of
the West decliners, or between them. S by W 11 15 S S E 22 30 S S W 22 30 S E
by S 33 45 S W by S 33 45 South-East 45 00 South West 45 00 S. E by E 56 15 S W
by W 56 15 E S E 67 30 W S W 67 30 E by S 78 45 W by S 78 45 East 90 00 West.
90 00


Again, North decliners, declining toward the East and West, do happen in
these Azimuthes or between them.

North declining East North declining West N by E 11 15 Or to these points of
the West decliners, or between them. N by W 11 15 N N E 22 30 N N W 22 30 N E
by N 33 45 N W by N 33 45 North-East 45 00 North West 45 00 N E by E 56 15 N W
by W 56 15 E N E 67 30 W N W 67 30 E by N 78 45 W by N 78 45 East. 90 00 West.
90 00


By which it appears that every point of the Compass is distant from the
Meridian 11 degrees 15 minutes.

The third sort of planes are inclining, or rather reclining, whose upper face
beholds the Zenith, and in that respect is called Reclining, but if a Dial be
made on the nether side, and thereby respect the Horizon, it is then called an
incliner, so that the one is the opposite to the other.

These planes are likewise accidentally divided, for they are either direct
recliners, reclining from the direct points of East, West, North; and South,
and in this sort happens the direct Polar and Aequinoctiall planes, as infinite
more according to the inclination or reclination of the plane, or they are as
erect planes do become declining recliners, which look oblique to the
Cardinal parts of the World, and obtusely to the parts they respect.

Suppose a plane to fall backward from the Zenith, and by consequence it falls
toward the Horizon; then that represents a Reclining plane, such you shall you
suppose the Aequinoctiall Circle in the figure to represent, reclining from the
North Southwards 51 degrees from the Zenith, or suppose the Axis to represent a
plane lying parallel to it, which falls from the Zenith Northward reclining 38
degrees, one being Aequinoctiall, the other a Polar plane.

But for the inclining decliners you shall know them thus, forasmuch as the
Horizon is the limiter of our sight, and being cut at right angles represents
the East, West, North, and South points, it may happen so that a plane may lie
between two of these quarters in an accidental Azimuth, and so not beholding
one of the Cardinal Quarters is said to decline: Again, the said plain may
happen not to stand Vertical, which is either Inclining or Reclining, and so
are said to be Inclining Decliners: First, because they make no right angle
with the Cardinal Quarters: Secondly, because they are not Vertical or upright.

There are other Polar planes, which lie parallel to the Poles under the
Meridian, which may justly be called Meridian plains, and these are erect
direct East and West Dials, where the poles of the plane remain, which planes
if they recline, are called Position planes, cutting the Horizon in the North
and South points, for Circles of position are nothing but Circles crossing the
Horizon in those points.

CHAP IV.
Showing the finding out of a Meridian Line after many ways, and the
Declination of a Plane.

A Meridian Line is nothing else but a line whose outmost ends point due North
and South, and consequently lying under the Meridian Circle, and the Sun
coming to the Meridian does then cast the shadow of all things Northward in
our Latitude; so that a line drawn through the shadow of any thing
perpendicularly eraised, the Sun being in the Meridian, that line so drawn is a
Meridian line, the use whereof is to place planes in a due situation to their
points respective, as in the definition of this Circle I showed there was
accidental Meridians as many as can be imagined between place and place, which
difference of Meridians is the Longitude, or rather difference of Longitude,
which is the space of two Meridians, which shows why noon is sooner to some
then others.

The Meridian may be found diverse ways, as most commonly by the Mariners
compass, but by reason the needle has a point attractive subject to error,
and so overthrows the labor, I cease to speak any further.

It may be found in the night, for when the star called Aliot, seems to be
over the Pole-starre, they are then true North, the manner of finding it, Mr.
Foster* has plainly laid down in his book of Dyalling, performed by a
Quadrant, which is the fourth part of a circle, being parted into 90 degrees.

It may also be fouhd as Master Blundevile in his Book for the Sea teaches,
being indeed a thing very necessary for the Sea, which way is thus: Strike a
Circle on a plain Superficies, and raise a wire, or such like, in the center to
cast a shadow, then observe in the forenoon when the shadow is so that it just
touches the circumference or edge of the Circle, and there make a mark; do so
again in the afternoon, and at the edge where the shadow goes out make another
mark, between which two marks draw a line; which part in half, then from that
middle point to the center draw a line which is a true Meridian.

Or thus, Draw a great many Circles concentricall one within another, then
observe by the Circles about noone when the Sun casts the shortest shadow, and
that then shall represent a true Meridian, the reason why you must observe the
length of the shadow by circles and not by lines is, because if the Sun have
not attained to the true Meridian it will cast its shadow from a line, and so my
eye may deceive me, when as by Circles the Sun casting shadow round about,
still meets with one circumference or other, and so we may observe diligently.
Secondly, it is proved that the shadow in the Meridian is the shortest, because
the Sun is nearest the Vertical point. Thirdly, it is proved that it is a true
Meridian for this cause, the Sun, as all other Luminous bodies, casts his
shadow diametrically, and so being in the South part casts his shadow
northward, and is therefore a true Meridian.

But now to find the declination of a wall, if it be an erect wall draw a
perpendicular line, but if it be a declining reclining plane, draw first an
horizontall line, and then draw a perpendicular to that, and in the
perpendicular line strike a Style or small Wyre to make right angles with the
plane, then note when the shadow of the Style falls in one line with the
perpendicular, and at that instant take the altitude of the Sun, and so get the
Azimuthe reckoned from the South, for that is the true declination of the wall
from the South. The distance of the Azimuthes from the South, or other points,
are mentioned in degrees and minutes in the third Chapter, in the definition of
the several sorts of planes: or by holding the straight side of any thing
against the wall, as is the long Square ABCD, whose edge AB suppose to be held
to a wall, and suppose again that you hold a third and plummet in your hand at
E, the Sun shining, and it cast shadow the line OF, and at the same instant
take the altitude of the Sun, thereby getting the Azimuthe as is taught
following, then from the point F, as the center of the Horizon., and from the
line FE, reckon the distance of the South, which suppose I find the Azimuthe
to be 60 degrees from the East or West, by the propositions that are delivered
in the end of this Book, and because there is a Quadrant of a Circle between
the South, and the East or West points, I substract the distance of the
Azimuthe from 90 degrees, and it shall leave 30, which is the declination of
the wall, equal to the angle EFG: but to find the inclination or reclination,
I shall show when I come to the use of the Universal Quadrant, or having first
found the Meridian line, you may prick down the Azimuthe.



CHAP V.
Showing what houre-lines may be drawn upon any Plane.

LIght being the cause primary of shadows, shadows being but the imitation of
the secondary cause, that is substance, does delineate unto us the passing away
of time, by receiving light on the substance casting shadow.

Nevertheless, substance receives not light, if either they want the immediate
beam or reflecting light, which is the reason that some Dials are vacant of
diverse hours, or else are vacant for a certain Season of the year, wherefore
we will show some reasons why the Sun beams cannot be received on diverse
planes, which is caused by the accidental situation thereof, which we will
consider by this figurative demonstration, by the Analemma, described in Mr.
Gunters Book.

The Sun, though he never moves from the line Ecliptique wherein he has his
annual or yearly motion, yet have a declination from the Aequinoctiall North
or South, making his diurnall or daily motion, altering the days and nights
according to all the diversities thereof: for the Sun being in the
Aequinoctiall has no declination, but in his diurnall motion still declyning
from the Aequinoctiall makes his progress toward the North or South,
describes many parallel Circles, being parallel to the Aequinoctiall, whose
farthest distance from either side is 23 degrees. 30 minutes, so that so many
degrees that the Sun is distant from the Aequinoctiall, so much is its
declination.

Now if you imagine the Circle before described to represent the Meridian
Circle which crossed diametrically, which diameter shall represent the
Aequinoctiall, then laying down the greatest declination, on either side of it,
drawing two lines at that distance, on either side of the Aequinoctiall,
parallel to it, represent the Tropicks, the upper representing the Tropic of
Cancer, marked with GE, the other the Tropic of Capricorn, marked with HI: and
if from each several degree you draw parallels too, they do represent the
parallels of the Sun, which shall show the diurnall motion of the Sun: now if
you cross these parallels with a line from E to H, that then represents the
Ecliptique; now if you cross the Aequino-Ctiall at right angles with another
line, that line represents the Axis of the World: then if you lay down from the
Poles the elevation thereof, to wit, the North and South Poles, according to
the elevation of the North Pole downward, where the number of degrees end make
a mark; then account the same elevation from the South Pole upward, and there
also make a mark, from which two marks draw a right line, which shall represent
your Horizon, and cuts the parallels of the Sun according to the time of his
abiding above the Horizon.

As in example, they that live under the Aequinoctiall have their days and
nights equal, for under the Aequinoctiall the Poles lie in the Horizon, and
have no elevation, so that you see the Axis AB cuts the Aequinoctiall at right
angles, and then must needs cut the parallels of the Sun equal, so that the
continuing of the Sun above the Poles or Horizon, is equal to his continuance
under the Poles or Horizon; so that there is represented a right Sphere where
the days and nights are equal. But if the Pole has elevation, as here at
London, 51 degrees 30 minutes, then the Horizon is represented by CD, where you
see that then the horizon cuts the parallel of the Sun oblique, representing an
oblique Sphere, so that now the lines grow longer while the Sun declines in
them toward the North pole A, then the day is represented by the parallel OF,
and the night by FG, when the Sun is in his greatest North declnation, so that
you see that then in the night the Sun is no lower under the Horizon then from
C to G, and then it is twilight all night. Again, the Sun having his greatest
declination toward B the South Pole, then he continues but the arch ID above
the Horizon, then the day is represented by KI: and the night by HK: Thus you
see the reason of the days and nights inequality in an oblique Sphere, and
equality in a right, you may likewise perceive by those parallels, why the Sun
cannot shine on all Dial Planes, as we will now show.

First, An East and West Dial lies parallel to the Meridian, therefore the Sun
in the Meridian cannot shine on them; nevertheless, though an East and West
Dial cannot have the hour of 12 on it, yet an East or West position may,
because it crosses the Horizon in the North and South.

Secondly, A direct North Dial can have but morning and evening hours on it,
and then of no use but when the Sun has North declination, for then his
Amplitude or distance from the East and West is Northward, and so at morning or
night shines on the face thereof.

Thirdly, A North reclining may show all the hours all the year, if it recline
from the North Southward, the quantity of the complement of the least Meridian
altitude, but if but the complement of the elevation of the Aequinoctiall, and
so become a Polar Plane, it can then but show while the Sun is in the North
Signs, for the Dyall lying parallel to the Aequinoctiall while the Sun is in
South declination cannot shine on the plane because it lies under.

All upright planes declining from the South may have the hour line of 12, so
also may all North decliners, but not in the Temperate Zone, which is contained
between the degrees. South incliners also may have the line of 12, whose upper
face is not below the least Meridian altitude, as also if greater then the
greatest Meridian altitude, then does the upper face want it.

Fifthly, all North recliners reclining more then the greatest meridian
altitudes complement, may have all the hours but will show but one part of the
year.

Sixthly, All South declinets or recliners may have the line of 12 on them. And
now having proceeded thus far in some theoricall demonstration or grounds of
Dials for the Geometrical projection, we will in the next Chapter lay down the
theoricall demonstration for the Arithmeticall Calculation, and so proceed to
our practical way of operation as ensues.

CHAP VI.
Being the definition of the several lines of Sines, Tangents, and Secants, to
be understood before we can come to Arithmeticall Calculation.

THe Arithmeticall part for calculation is thus to be understood, there are
certain right lines from every degree of a Quadrant, named by certain words of
art, which for illustration we will consider in their nomination and
definition, whose names are these, Sines, Tangents, and Secants, which have
certain arches of degrees and minutes of a Quadrant answering thereto, and
howsoever the Question is propounded, are resolved by these numbers as in the
Golden Rule, by still adding the second and third number together in stead of
Multiplication, and substracting the first instead of Division, does leave the
arch of the Question as it was propounded, which well considered, nothing shall
seem difficult. A right Sine is half the subtense of the double arch, which
subtenses are represented by the lines passing from D to D* and from E to E,
and from F to F, the half of which lines subtending the arches are the right
Sines.

A Tangent is a right line without the peripherie to the extremity of the
Secant to the Radius being perpendicular eraised, such is represented by the
line BC.

A Secant is a right line drawn from the center through the circumference to
the Tangent, such is represented by the line AB, the Semidiameter of the same
Circle is called the Radius.

You may furthermore for very convenient uses have those lines placed on a
Ruler, for if from one degree of one Quadrant of a Semicircle you draw lines to
the same degree of the other Quadrant, cutting the line GA, that line so cut
shall be a line of Sines, and if from the center you draw lines to the Tangent
line through every degree of the Quadrant, that line so cut is a Tangent line,
whose use is most exquisite and infinite for the solution of many excellent
propositions.

CHAP VII.
Being the fundamental Diagram for the Geometrical projection of Dials.

THe Style being the representation of the Axis of the World, does become the
Gnomon or substance casting shadow on all Planes lying parallel to some Circle
or other, as to circles of Azimuthes in all Vertical Dials.

So that the figure following is a representation of diverse semidiameters, does
plainly show the theoricall ground of the practick part hereof.

Where the line in the demonstration, noted the semidiameter of the Horizon,
signifies the Horizon, for so supposing it to represent an Horizontall Dial,
the style or Axis must be elevated above it, according to the Poles elevation
above the Horizon, and then the semidiameter or Axis of the World represents
the style or Axis casting shadow being the line AC.

The Geometrical projection of Dials.


Where note by the way, that if you set one foot of the Compasses in B, and
with the Semidiameter of the Equator, fix the other foot in the line BC,
keeping that last foot fast, and at that center draw a Quadrant divided into
six parts, and a ruler from the center of the Equator through each division,
shall divide the line AB as a contingent line, and if from C to these marks on
the line AB you draw lines, it shall be the hour lines of a Vertical Dial.

But supposing a Dial to stand vertical, or upright to the Horizon AB, as the
line BC, then that is represented by the semidiameter of the Vertical, and his
style again represented by the semidiameter or Axis AC, being distant from the
Vertical equal to the complement of the Poles elevation, and again, the
Aequinoctiall crossing the Axis at right angles, the semidiameter thereof is
represented by the line BD, the reason why the angle at A has to his opposite
angle at C, the complement of the angle at A, is grounded on this, the three
angles of any right lined triangle are equal to two right angles, and a right
angle consists of 90 degrees: now the angle at B is 90 degrees, being one right
angle, and the angle at A being an angle of 51 degrees, which wants of 90 39
degrees, which is the angle at C, all which being added together do make 180
degrees, being two right angles: here you see that having two angles, the third
is the complement of 180 degrees.

CHAP VIII.
Of the proportion of shadows to their Bodies.

SEeing the Zenith makes right angles with the Horizon, and a right angle
consists of 90 degrees, the middle point betwixt both is 45 degrees, the Sun
being at that height, the shadow of all things perpendicularly raised, are
equal to their bodies, so also is the Radius of a Circle equal to the Tangent
of 45 degrees: and if the Sun be lower then 45 degrees it must necessary
follow the shadow must exceed the substance, because the Sun is nigh the
Horizon, and this is called the adverse or contrary shadow.

Contrarily, if the Sun exceed this middle point, the substance then exceeds
the shadow, because the Sun is nearer the vertical point. Mr. Diggs in his
Pantometria laying down the manifold uses of his Quadrant Geometrical, does
there show, that having received the Sun beams through the Pinacides or Sights,
that when the Suns altitude cuts the parts of right shadow, then the shadow
exceeds the substance erected casting shadow as 12 exceeds the parts cut: But
in contrary shadow contrary effects.

CHAP IX.
To find the Declination of the Sun.

TO give you Orontius his words, it is convenient to take the beginning from
the greatest obliquation of the Sun, because on that almost the whole harmony
of all Astronomicall matters seem to depend, as shall be manifest from the
discourse of the succeeding Canons.

Wherefore prepare of commodious and elect substance, a Quadrant of a Circle
parted into 90 equal parts, on whose right angled Radius let be placed two
pinacides or sights to receive the beams of the Sun.

Then erect it toward the South in the time of the Solsticials, either in
Cancer the highest annual Almicanther, or in Capricorn the lowest annual*
meridian altitude, also observe the equilibra, or equality of day and night in
the time of the Aequinoctials, from the Meridian altitude thereof substract the
least Meridian altitude, which is, when the Sun enters in the first minute of
Capricorn, the remainer is the Declination, or substract the Aequinoctiall
altitude from the greatest Meridian altitude, the remainer is the Declination
of the greatest obliquity of the Sun in the Zodiaque.

The height of the Sun is observed by the Quadrant when the beams are received
through the sights by a plummet proceeding from the center, noting the degree
of altitude by the third falling thereon.

You may also take notice that for the continual variation of the Suns
greatest declination it ought to be observed by faithful Instruments: for as
Orontius notes that Claudius, Ptolomie found it to be 23 degrees 51 minutes and
20 seconds, but in the time of Albatigine the same number of degrees yet but 35
minutes, Alcmeon found it of little less, to wit 33 minutes, Purbachi and some
of his Disciples do affirm the same to be 23 degrees only 28 minutes, yet
Johanes Regiomontan. in the tables of Directions, has allotted the minutes to
be 30, but since Dominick Maria an Italian, and Johannes Varner of Norimburg
testify to have found it to be 29 minutes, to which observation our works do
exactly agree. Albeit all did observe the same well near by like Instruments,
nevertheless, not justly by exact construction, or by insufficient dexterity
of observation some small difference might happen, but not so much as from
Ptolomie to our time.

Having this greatest Declination, to find the present Declination is thus, by
calculation: As the Radius, is to the Sine of the greatest Declination; so is
the Sine of the Suns distance from the next Aequinoctiall point, that is Aries
or Libra, to the declination required: wherefore in the Natural Sines, as in
the Rule of Proportion, multiply the second by the third, divide by the first,
the Quotient is the Sine of the Declination. Or by the natural Sines, add the
second and third, and substract the first, the remainer is the Sine of the
present Declination.

Degree. Degree. D m D m D m 0 0 0 11 29 20 10 30 1 0 24 11 50 20 23 29 2 0 47 12
11 20 35 28 3 1 11 12 31 20 47 27 4 1 35 12 52 20 58 26 5 1 59 13 12 21 9 25 6
2 23 13 32 21 20 24 7 2 47 13 52 21 30 23 8 3 10 14 11 21 40 22 9 3 34 14 30 21
49 21 10 3 58 14 50 21 58 20 11 4 21 15 8 22 7 19 12 4 45 15 27 22 15 18 13 5 8
15 45 22 23 17 14 5 31 16 3 22 30 16 15 5 55 16 21 22 37 15 16 6 18 16 38 22 43
14 17 6 41 16 56 22 50 13 18 7 4 17 12 22 55 12 19 7 27 17 29 23 0 11 20 7 49
17 45 23 5 10 21 8 12 18 1 23 9 9 22 8 34 18 17 23 13 8 23 8 57 18 32 23 17 7
24 9 19 18 47 23 20 6 25 9 41 19 2 23 22 5 26 10 3 19 16 23 24 4 27 10 25 19 30
23 26 3 28 10 46 19 44 23 27 2 29 11 8 19 57 23 27 1 30 11 29 20 10 23 28 0 De
De

But I have here added a Table of Declination of the part of the Ecliptique
from the Aequinoctiall, the use whereof you may discern is very plain, for if
you find the Sign on the top, and the degrees downward, the common angle
shall be the Declination of the Sun that day. As if the Sun being in the 10
degree of Taurus or Scorpio, the declination shall be 14 degrees 50 minutes,
and if you find the Sign in the bottom, you shall seek the degrees on the
right hand upward, so the 20 degreee of Leo or Aquarius has the same
declination with the former.

The end of the Praecognita Astronomicall.
THE ARGUMENT OF Practical Sciothericy Optical.
REader, read this, for I dare this defend,
Thy posting life on Dials does depend,
Consider thou how quick the houre's gone,
Alive to day, to morrow life is done:
Then use thy time, and always bear in mind,
Times hary forehead, yet he is ball'd behind,
Here Is that that will deline to thee and show
How quick time runs, how fast thy life does go:
Yet (festina lent) learn the praecognit part,
And so attain to practice of this art,
Whereby you shall be able for to trace
Out such a path, where Sol shall run his race,
And make the greater Cosmus to appear,
Delineating day and time of year.
Horologium Vitae.
Latus ad occasum, nunquam rediturus ad ortum
Vivo hodie, moriar cras, here natus eram.
HOROLOGIOGRAPHIA OPTICA.
CHAP I.
Showing the making of an Horizontall plane to an Oblique Sphere.

FRom the Theoricall Demonstration before, take the semidiameter of the Horizon
with your Compasses, then draw the line AB, representing the Meridian or line
of 12, and setting one foot in A, describe the Quadrant CAB, and CA must be at
right angles to AB, to which Quadrant draw the tangent line FA, which is the
line of contingence, then take from the Theorical demonstration the
semidiameter of the Equator, and placing that on the line AB desctibe a
quadrant touching the line of contingence also within the other, represented by
the Quadrant H e I which divide into 6 parts, and a Ruler laid to the center e,
make marks where the Ruler touches the line of contingence, which must be
continued beyond F, that so the hour lines may meet with the line BF, where it
crosses that line make marks: then removing the Ruler to the center A of the
horizontall Semicircle, draw lines through each mark of the line of contingence
which shall be the hours, number the morning hours from the Meridian toward
your left hand, and evening or afternoon hours toward the right. The Style
must be an angle equal to the elevation of the Pole, the 12 hour must lie
under the Meridian Circle.

The Arithmeticall Calculation.
As the Radius, Is to the Tangent of the Aequinoctiall distance of the hour
from the Meridian;

So is the Sign of the elevation of the Pole, To the Tangent of the hours
distance from the Meridian.

The definition of the Aequinoctiall distance is in the definition of the
Aequinoctiall Circle, Chap. 1. Praecognita Astronomicall.

The figure of an Horizontall Dial, for the Latitude of London 51d. 30m.
South


The hours of the afternoon must be the same distance from the Meridian, 1 and
11, 2 and 10, 3 and 9, and so of the rest, this is very plain, neither wants
any expositor, only you may on the Horizontal plane, prick down beyond the
hour of 6 a clock, the morning hours of 4 and 5, and the evening hours of 7
and 8, by reason that the Sun will shine on the Horizontall plane as soon as it
is above the Horizon.

The figure of a South Vertical plane, for the Latitude of London, which is
parallel to the Prime Vertical.


The semidiameter of the Vertical is but the Tangent of the elevation of the
Pole to the Radius of the Horizon.

And the semidiameter of the Horizon, the Tangent of the elevation of the
Equator to the Radius of the Vertical.

CHAP II.
Showing the making of a direct Vertical Dial for an Oblique Sphere, that is,
a direct North or South Dial plane.

EVery plane has a Vertical point, and for the making of a Vertical Dial
for the Latitude of London, out of the theoricall demonstration Chap. 7.
Praecog. Astron* take the semidiameter of the Vertical, and with that, as with
the semidiameter of the Horizon, describe a Quadrant, and draw the tangent line
FG, and with the semidiameter of the Equator finish all as in the Horizontall:
the Style must proceed from the center A, and be elevated from the Meridian
line AF, so much as is the complement of the Elevation of the Pole, and must
point toward the invisible Pole, viz. the South Pole, and has but 12 hours on
it.

The Arithmeticall Calculation.
As the Radius,

Is to the tangent of the Aequinoctiall distance of the hour from the Meridian;

So is the Cosine, that is, the complement sine of the elevation, to the
tangent of the hour distance from the Meridian required.

CHAP III.
Showing the making of a direct North Vertical Dial for an Oblique Sphere, as
also a more easy way of drawing the South or Horizontall Planes.

THe North Dial is but the back side of the South Dial; and differs little
from it, but in naming of the hours, for accounting the sixth hour from the
Meridian in the direct South vertical, to be the same in the direct North
Vertical, and accounting the first hours on the East side of the South, on
the West side of the North plane, and so vice versa, the first hours on the
West side of the South, on the East side of the North plane, as by the figure
appears.

And because the North Pole is elevated, the Style must point up toward it the
visible Pole.

It must have but the first and last hours of the South plane, because the Sun
never shines but at evening or morning on a North wall in an oblique Sphere,
and but in Somer, because then the Sun has North Declination, but in a right
Sphere, it may show all the hours as a South Dial, but for a season of the
year.

But if you will make the Vertical plane or Horizontall in a long angled
Parallelogram, you shall take the Secant of the elevation of the Pole, which is
the same with AC in the fundamental Diagram, and make that your Meridian line,
and shall take the Sine of the elevation of the Pole above the Meridian, which
in a direct South or North is equal to the elevation of the Aequinoctiall, and
in the Fundamental Diagram is the line DE, and prick it down from A and C at
right angles with the line AC, and so enclose the long square BADBCD, it shall
be the bounds of a direct North or South Dial; lastly, if from the fundamental
diagram you prick down the several tangents of 15, 30 45, from Band D on the
lines BB and DD, and the same distances from C toward B and D, and lastly if
from the center A, you draw lines to every one of those marks, they shall be
the houre-lines of an erect direct South Dial.



To make an Horizontall Dial by the same projection you shall take the Secant
of 38 degrees. 30 min. the elevation of the Equator, which in the fundamental
Scheme is the line AF, for the Meridian, and the Sine of the elevation of the
Pole, which in the fundamental diagram is the same with DA, and prick that
down from the Meridian at right angles both ways, as in the former planes, and
so proceed as before from the six of clock hour and the Meridian, with the
several Tangents of 15, 30, 45, you shall have constituted a Horizontall plane.

I have caused the pricked line that goes cross, and the other pricked lines
which are above the hour line of six, to be drawn only to save the making of a
figure for the North direct Dial, which is presented to you if you turn the
Book upside down, by this figure, contained between the figures of 4, 5, 6, the
morning hours, and 6, 7, 8, the evening. And because the North pole is
elevated above this plane 38 degrees. 30 min. the Axis must be from the center
according to that elevation, pointing upward as the South does downward, so as
A is the Zenith of the South, C must be in the North.

The Arithmeticall calculation is the same with the former, also a North plane
may show all the hours of the South by consideration of reflection: For by
Opticall demonstration it is proved, that the angles of incidence is all one to
that of reflection: if any be ignorant thereof, I purposely remit to teach it,
to whet the ingenious Reader in laboring to find it.

The Figure of a direct East and West Dial for the Latitude of London, *51
degrees. 30 min.
East Dial. West Dial.


CHAP IV.
Showing the making of the Prime Vertical planes, that is, a direct East or
West Dial.

FOr the effecting of this Dial, first draw the line AD, on one end thereof
draw the circle in the figure representing the Equator; then draw two touch
lines to the Equator, parallel to the line AD, these are they on which the
hours are marked: divide the Equator in the lower semicircle in 12 equal
parts, then apply a ruler to the center, through each part, and where it
touches the lines of contingence make marks; from each touch point draw lines
to the opposite touch point, which are the parallels of the hours, and at the
end of those lines mark the Easterly hours from 6 to 11, and of the West from
1 to 6. These planes, as I told you, want the Meridian hour, because it is
parallel to the Meridian. Now for the placing of the East Dial, number the
elevation of the Axis, to wit, the arch DC, from the line of the Equator, to
wit, the line AD: and in the West Dial number the elevation to B; fasten a
plummet and third in the center A, and hold it so that the plummet may fall on
the line AC for the East Dial, and AB for the West Dial, and then the line AD
is parallel to the Equator, and the Dial in its right position. And thus the
West as well as East, for according to the saying, Contrariorum eadem est
doctrina, contraries have one manner of doctrine.

Here you may perceive the use of Tangent line, for it is evident that every
hours distance is ^^t the Tangent of the Aequinoctiall distance.

The Arithmeticall Calculation.
1 Having drawn a line for the hour of 6, whether East or West, As the tangent
of the hour distance, is to the Radius, so is the distance of the hour from
6, to the height of the Style.

2 As the Radius is to the height of the Style, so is the tangent of the hour
distance from 6, to the distance of the same hour from the substyle.

The style must be equal in height to the semidiameter of the Equator, and
fixed on the line of 6.

CHAP V.
Showing the making a direct parallel Polar plane, or opposite Aequinoctiall.

I Call this a direct parallel Polar plane for this cause, because all planes
may be called by their situation of their Poles, and so an Aequinoctiall
parallel plane, may be called a Polar plane, because the Poles thereof lie in
the poles of the World.

For the projecting of the parallel polar plane, first draw the horizontall
line AB, then with Scale and Compasses protract an angle of 15 degrees, at each
end crossing as in the following figure: which crossing is the center of the
Equator, and the least distance between the horizontall line AB and the center
of the Equator, is the semidiameter of the Equator circle, then with the
turning of the compasses one foot fixed in the center, describe an obscure
circle, at the length of the diameter of that circle, draw a parallel line to
AB, which is CD, now for the hour distances, the Equator must be divided into
24 parts, the hours of a natural day, for the performance of which, you shall
thus do it easily. First, take the semidiameter of the Equator with your
Compasses, and place one foot, resting at that opening, in either the angle ABC
or D, which in example is at B, then with the other foot describe an arch from
the horizontall line to the line BC, which is the small pricked arch OF, which
is the 24 part of the Equator, which parts prick about the circle, numbering
from the diameter 12 each way; then lay a ruler through each division and the
center, and where it crosses the horizontall lines AB and BC make marks, then
from each opposite marks draw lines parallel to the diameter, which are the
hour lines, as in the second figure.

The Gnomon must be a quadrangled Parallelogram, whose height is equal to the
semidiameter of the Equator, as in the East and West Dials, so likewise these
hours are Tangents to the Equator.

Arithmeticall calculation.
Draw first a line representing the Meridian, or 12 a clock line, and another
parallel to the said line for some hour which may have place on the line, say,
As the tangent of that hour is to the Radius, so is the distance of that hour
from the Meridian to the height of the Style.

2 As the Radius is to the height of the style, so the tangent of any hour, to
the distance of that hour from the Meridian.



CHAP VI.
Showing the making of a direct opposite polar plane, or parallel Aequinoctiall
Dial.

AN Aequinoctiall plane lies parallel to the Aequinoctiall Circle, making an
angle at the Horizon equal to the elevation of the said Circle: the poles of
which plane lie in the poles of the world. The making of this plane requires
little instruction, for by drawing a Circle, and divide it into 24 parts the
plane is prepared, all fixing a style in the center at right angles to the
plane.

As the Radins, is to the sine of declination, so is the cotangent of the Poles
height, to the tangent of the distance of the sub-stile from the Meridian.

If you draw lines from 7 to 5 on each side, those lines so cut shall be the
places of the hour lines of a parallel polar plane, now if you draw to each
opposite from the pricked lines, those lines shall be the hour lines of the
former plane.

CHAP VII.
Showing the making of an erect Vertical declining Dial.

IF you will work by the fundamental Diagram, you shall first draw a line,
such is the line AB, representing the Meridian, then shall you take out of the
fundamental diagram the Secant of the Latitude, viz. AC, and prick it down
from A to B, and at B you shall draw a horizontall line at right angles, such
is the line CD, then you shall continue the line AB toward i, and from that
line, and where the line AB crosses in CD, describe an arch equal to the
angle of Declination toward F if it decline Eastward, and toward G if the plane
decline Westward. Then shall you prick down on the line BF, if it bean Easterly
declining plane, or from B to G if contrary; the Secant complement of the
Latitude, viz. AG in the fundamental Diagram, and the Sine of 51 degrees, viz.
DA, which is all one with the semidiameter of the Equator, and therewithal
prick it down at right angles to the line of declination, viz. BF, from B to H
and G, and from F toward K and L, then draw the long square KIKL, and from B
toward H and G, prick down the several tangents of 15, 30, 45, and prick the
same distance from K and L toward H and G: lastly, draw lines through each of
those points from F to the horizontall line CD, and where they end on that line
to each point draw the hour lines from the point A, which plane in our example
is a Vertical declining eastward* 45 degrees, and it is finished. But because
the contingent line will run out so far before it be intersected, I shall give
you one following Geometrical example to prick down a declining Dial in a
right angled parallelogram.

Now for the Arithmeticall calculation, the first operation shall be thus: As
the Radius, to the co-tangent of the elevation, so is the sine of the
declination, to the tangent of the substiles distance from the meridian of the
place. then,

II Operation.
Having the complement of the declination and elevation, find the styles
height above the sub-stile, thus,

As the Radius, to the cosine of the declination, so the cosine of the
elevation, to the sine of the styles height above the substyle.

III Operation.
As the sine of elevation, is to the Radius, so the tangent of declination, to
the tangent of the inclination of the Meridian of the plane to the Meridian of
the place.

IV Operation.
Having the styles height above the substyle, and the angle at the pole
comprehended between the hour given and the meridian of the plane say.

As the Radius, to the sine of the styles height above the substyle; so is the
tangent of the angle at the pole, comprehended between the hour given and the
meridian of the plane, to the tangent of the hour distance from the substyle.
Thus the Arithmeticall way being laid down, another Geometrical follows.

YOu shall first on the semidiameter of the Horizon, viz. AB, describe the arch
BC the declination of the plane, and BD the complement of the elevation of the
pole, then shall you draw the lines AC and AD, and at B you shall raise the
perpendicular DCB.



Now if from the fundamental diagram, or from a Tangent whose Radius or
semidiameter is equal to AB, you prick down the several Tangents of 15, 30,
45, which, as I often repeat, are the several Aequinoctiall distances for the
first, second, or third hours from the Meridian or hour line of 6, and at
each point raise perpendiculars to intersect the lines D and C, they shall
divide the line DC, so as by making a Rombus of the lines AD, AC, they shall be
the parts to be pricked down from the Meridian and the hour line of 6. Now our
example is a South declining Eastward 30 degrees, which is here propounded to
be drawn: You shall first draw the perpendicular line and horizontall at right
angles one to another, viz. the line A and CD. From any part of the line AB, as
at E, number the declination of the The Figure of an upright plane declining
from the South Eastward 30 degrees.
plane, viz. the angle FEG, contained by the line OF, then if from the center
G, where the Meridian and the Horizontall line cross, you shall again lay down
the same angle toward the left hand, such is the line GH, which intersects the
line OF in H, then shall you take the length of the line HG, and prick it down
from G to K, from whence you shall number the elevation of the complement of
the elevation of the pole, viz. 38 degrees. 30 min. and where that line intersects
the Meridian, as at I, there shall be the center of the hour lines, and the
point through which from E to I the hour line of 9 must pass: then if you
take the two lines divided by the tangent in the former operation, and prick
the line AD from the center on the meridian, and the line AC, and prick it down
on the six a clock line from I toward E and L, and lastly, draw the oblique
angled parallelogram, and prick down the divided line AD on the two sides, and
the line AC from the Meridian both ways, making marks, to which places, and
from the center, draw the hour lines. Now for the placing of the style you
must always note that the style is on the contrary side to that quarter where
the plane declineth to, and for the line of the sub* style on which it must
stand, number the length of the line IG, which is the distance of the center
from the horizontall line, in as many equal parts as you please, as into 5,
and at the end thereof draw the line MN perpendicular, then take the distance
between G and the foot of the style, and prick down the same number of parts;
so if from the center you draw the line IM it shall be the line of the
substyle, for the same proportion as IG to DG, the same proportion is IN to MN,
as is manifest by the fourth proposition of the 6 Book of Euclide. On the line
of the style IM, draw in any part the perpendicular OQ equal to the height of
the style NO, and to which point the line IQ being drawn, shall be the axis of
the world, then if from Q shall be drawn the perpendicular QS, cutting the line
of the style IM in S, gives the right line from E to S for the Aequinoctiall
line, and shall be perpendicular to IM if you have performed right. By this
proposition which is laid down in Clavius his descriptio Horologiorum, it is
manifest that if a style had stood in O, and the length of that style had been
pricked down perpendicular to the point O, as at H, and if from H we had laid
down an angle equal to the complement of the declination of the wall, that
line would intersect the horizontall line drawn at the foot of the style at E,
and if at R we raise a perpendicular, it shall intersect the horizontall line
at G, to which if I draw a perpendicular it shall be the meridian of the plane,
and if I proceed as before, to find the center of the hour lines which I
found at I, it is manifest that by this means is made a dial from any point
assigned, which I leave to your own genius till something more shall be spoken
and written of it by a more able pen.

Now good Reader, labor to understand my plain meaning in this, laboring
only not to confound thy memory or capacity, and therefore give you also to
understand that such are the hour distances of a Westerly declining plane, as
are those of an Easterly, only changing the side of the plane, and naming it by
the complementall hours, the complemental hours I call those that added
together make 12, as follows.

Forenoon hours of the declining East plane. 6 Complemental hours are 6 are
afternoon hours of a declining West plane. 7 5 8 4 9 3 10 2 11 1

So that if the hours of the Easterly declining plane be 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, 1, 2, 3, the hours of the Westerly declining Dial is 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1,
12, 11, 10, 9, still keeping the same distances of the hour lines in one as the
other, so that if an Easterly declining be but turned the back side, it
represents a Westerly declining Dial as much, and the style must stand over his
substyle, and whereabouts the hour lines are closest or nearest together,
thereabout is the substyle.

Now having showed you the making of all Horizontall and Vertical, whether
direct or declining, Polar or Aequinoctiall, I shall proceed to show the
projecting of those which are oblique, whether declining reclining, or
inclining, reclining, etc. whereto, for the more ease, I have calculated to
every degree of a Quadrant the hour arches of the Horizontall planes, from one
degree of elevation till the Pole is in the Zenith. The Table and use follows
in several Chapters.

Here follows the Table of the arches of the hour lines distance from the
Meridian in all Horizons, from one degree of elevation, till the Pole is
elevated 30 degrees, by which is made all direct Murall, whether upright, or
reclining Dials.
1

11

2

10

3

9

4

8

5

7

6

6

1 0 16 0 35 1 00 1 44 3 43 2 0 32 1 9 2 00 3 27 7 25 3 0 48 1 44 3 00 5 11 11
3 4 1 5 2 19 4 00 6 54 14 36 5 1 20 2 53 4 59 8 65 18 1 6 1 36 3 27 5 58 10 16
21 19 7 1 52 4 1 6 57 11 55 24 27 8 2 8 4 35 7 54 15 9 30 3 9 2 24 5 9 8 54 15
9 30 3 10 2 40 5 44 9 51 16 45 32 57 11 2 56 6 18 10 48 18 18 35 27 12 3 11 6
51 11 44 19 48 37 49 13 2 27 7 24 12 41 21 17 40 1 14 3 46 7 57 13 36 22 44 42
5 15 3 59 8 30 14 31 24 9 44 0 16 4 14 9 2 15 25 25 31 45 49 17 4 28 9 35 16 17
26 51 47 30 18 4 44 10 7 17 10 28 9 49 4 19 5 15 11 10 18 53 30 39 51 55 20 5
15 11 10 18 53 30 39 51 55 21 5 29 11 41 19 43 31 50 53 13 22 5 44 12 13 21 20
34 5 55 34 23 5 58 12 43 21 20 34 5 55 34 24 6 13 13 13 22 8 35 10 56 37 25 6
28 13 43 22 54 36 12 57 37 26 6 42 14 12 23 40 37 13 58 34 27 6 57 14 41 24 25
38 11 59 27 28 7 10 15 00 25 9 39 11 60 37 29 7 24 15 39 25 52 40 2 61 4 30 7
38 16 6 26 36 40 54 61 49

The continuation of the arches of the Horizontall planes, from 30 to 60 degrees.
of elevation of the Pole
1

11

2

10

3

9

4

8

5

7

6

6

31 7 51 16 34 27 15 41 44 62 30 32 8 5 17 1 27 55 42 32 63 11 33 8 19 17 27 28
37 43 20 63 49 34 8 31 17 54 29 13 44 5 64 24 35 8 44 18 20 29 50 44 49 64 58
36 8 57 18 45 30 27 45 31 65 30 37 9 10 19 9 31 2 46 12 66 ^0 38 9 22 19 34 31
37 46 50 66 29 39 9 24 19 58 32 11 47 28 66 56 40 9 47 20 22 32 44 48 4 67 23
41 9 58 20 45 33 16 48 39 67 47 42 10 10 21 7 33 47 49 13 68 10 43 10 21 21 30
34 18 49 45 68 33 44 10 32 21 51 34 47 50 16 68 55 45 10 44 21 45 35 16 50 46
69 15 46 10 54 22 33 35 53 51 15 69 34 47 11 6 22 54 36 11 51 43 69 53 48 11 16
23 14 36 37 52 9 70 11 49 11 26 23 33 37 2 52 35 70 27 50 11 36 23 51 37 27 53
0 70 43 51 11 46 24 10 37 52 53 24 71 13 52 11 55 24 57 38 14 53 46 71 24 53 12
5 24 45 38 37 54 8 71 27 54 12 14 25 2 38 58 54 30 71 40 55 12 23 25 19 39 19
54 49 71 53 56 12 32 25 35 39 39 55 9 72 5 57 12 40 25 51 39 59 55 28 72 17 58
12 48 26 5 40 18 55 45 72 28 59 12 56 26 20 40 36 56 2 72 39 60 13 4 26 33 40
54 56 19 72 49

The continuation of the arches of the Horizontall planes, from 60 degrees. of
elevation, till the Pole is in the Zenith.
1

11

2

10

3

9

4

8

5

7

6

6

61 13 11 26 48 41 10 56 34 72 58 62 13 18 27 1 41 26 56 49 73 7 63 13 25 27 13
41 42 57 3 73 16 64 13 32 27 26 41 57 57 17 73 24 65 13 39 27 37 42 11 57 30 73
32 66 13 45 27 49 42 25 57 42 73 39 67 13 52 27 59 42 38 57 54 73 46 68 13 56
28 9 42 50 58 5 73 53 69 14 3 28 19 43 2 58 16 73 59 70 14 8 28 29 43 13 58 26
74 5 71 14 13 28 38 43 24 58 36 74 11 72 14 18 28 46 43 34 58 44 74 16 73 14 22
28 55 43 43 58 53 74 21 74 14 26 29 2 43 52 59 1 74 25 75 14 30 29 9 44 0 59 8
74 29 76 14 34 29 5 44 8 59 15 74 34 77 14 38 29 22 44 15 59 21 74 37 78 14 41
29 27 44 22 59 26 74 41 79 14 44 29 32 44 28 59 32 74 44 80 14 47 29 37 44 34
59 37 74 47 81 14 49 29 42 44 39 59 41 74 49 82 14 51 29 44 44 43 59 43 74 50
83 14 53 29 49 44 47 59 49 74 53 84 14 55 29 52 44 51 59 52 74 55 85 14 57 29
54 44 53 59 54 74 57 86 14 58 29 56 44 56 59 57 74 58 87 14 59 29 58 44 58 59
58 74 59 88 14 59 29 59 44 59 59 58 74 59 89 14 59 30 44 59 59 59 75 90 15 30
45 60 75

CHAP VIII.
Showing the use of this Table both in Vertical and Horizontall planes.

FOr an Horizontall Dial enter the Table with the elevation of the Pole on the
left hand, and the arches noted against the hours and the elevation found, are
the distance of the hours from the Meridian.

For a Vertical or direct South or North, enter the Table with the complement
of the elevation on the right side, and the common meeting of the hours at
top, and the complement of elevation, is the distance of the hours from the
Meridian in the said plane. For every horizontall plane is a direct Vertical
in that place whose Latitude or distance of their Zenith from the Equator, is
equal to the complement of the elevation of the Horizontall planes Axis or
style.

As to make an Horizontall Dial for the Latitude of 51 degrees, I enter the
Table and find these Arches for 1 and 11, for 2 and 10, etc. Now the same
distances are the distances of the hour lines of a direct South plane, where
the Pole is elevated the complement of 51 degrees, that is 39 degrees, for 51
and 39 together do make 90.

So to make a Vertical dial, I enter the Table with 39, the complement of the
elevation of the pole, and find the arches answering to 1 and 11, to 2 and 10,
etc. Thus much in general of the use of the Table, now follows the use in
special.

CHAP IX.
Showing the use of the Tables in making any Declining or Inclining direct
Dials.

LEt the great Circle ABCD represent the Meridian, A the North, and C the
South, then the line OF represents a South reclining plane, while it falls back
from the South Northward, and represents an inclining plane while it respects
the Horizon. This is sufficiently discussed before.



So much as the plane reclines northward beyond the complement of the elevation
of the Pole, so much is the North pole elevated above the plane, as here the
plane is represented by OF, the elevation of the style or Axis the arch EG,
therefore in this case substract the complement of the reclination of the plane
from the elevation of the elevated pole, and the remainer is the arch of the
poles elevation above the plane, with which elevation enter the Table in the
left margent, and there are the hour arches from the meridian. If the
reclination of the plane be less then the complement, as is IK, substract the
arch of reclination from the complement of the elevation, there is left the
elevation of the South pole above the plane, and with the complement of the
elevation of the pole above the plane enter the table on the right margent, and
there shall you find the distance of the hours: and herein Mr. Fail failed,
for instead of substracting one from the other, he adds one to another,
causing a great error. The distance of every hour of the North incliner on
the back side of the South incliner as much are equal, saving that the hours
on the North side must be named by the complement hours to 12, and as the
North pole is above one plane, so is the South pole above the other, you may
also conceive the like in making of all South incliners and recliners, by
framing the position of the plane on the South side as the figure is on the
North: and in North recliners less then the elevation of the pole, add the
reclination of the flat, which is the elevation of the North pole above the
plane: herein Mr. Fail failed also, as depending on the former, following the
doctrine of contraries, which foremost well examined would have saved the
opening of a gap to this second error: With the said elevation found enter the
Table for the Horizontal arches, and thereby make a Horizontall* plane as is
showed, so is the Dial also prepared.

If it recline that it lie between the Horizon and the Equator, then to the
elevation of the Pole add the complement of the reclination, which is the
height of the style above the plane, and finish it as a Horizontall plane for
that latitude, and not as a Vertical, as Mr. Fail would have it, because
every reclining plane is a Horizontall plane where the pole is elevated
according to the style.

In a given plane oblique to the Meridian, and to the Horizon, and to the prime
Vertical, that is, a given plane Inclining declining, to find as well the
Meridian of the place as of the plane, and the elevation of the pole above the
plane: Prob. 3, Petici, Liber Gnomonicorum.
TO give you the parallel of Pitiscus his example, we will prosecute it
according to the natural Tangents in his example, and give you his words. Let
the Meridian of the place be ABCD* the Horizon AEC, the prime Vertical BED,
the Oriental point E, the Vertical declined BKD, and right angled at K, the
poles of the World G and I: the poles of the planes H, the Meridian GHI, the
angle of declination EBF, the arch of inclination BK. But before all things the
arch K, or the distance of the meridian of the place NL is from the Vertical
plane KL should be sought by the second Axiom, then the arc BN by the third
or fourth Axiom, after these the angle BKN, that is, in one word, the Triangle
BKN is found, by which discharged, the arc BN is found either equal to the
poles elevation, or greater or lesser. If the arc be equal to the complement
of the poles elevation, by it is a token the plane is oblique under the
Meridian, to be inclined unto the Pole, in that case the meridian of the place
and of the plane, and also the Axis do concur in the same line G L* if the
plane be supposed to fall in the same great circle KN, but if the plane be not
supposed, but in some parallel of the same, and the Axis be somewhat carried
away, as necessarily it is done if the Sciotericall be absolved, the Meridian
of the plane and place are two lines parallel between themselves, and are
mutually joined together according to the difference of longitude of the place
and of the plane, which difference is according to the angle HGC, which is the
complement of the angle BNK late found, because the angle KGH is right by 57.
p. 1. yea, forasmuch as the meridian of the plane may go by the poles of the
plane, but concurring at G or N are equal to two right, by 20 p. 1.



Example, Let the plane meridionall declined to the right hand 29 de. 59 m.
inclining toward the pole artick 23 de. 3 m. the elevation of the pole 49 de.
35 m. and there are to be sought in the same the meridian of the place and the
plane, and the elevation of the pole or Axis above the plane. The calculation
shall be thus.

To 67874 the tangent of the arc KN the distance of the meridian of the place
from the Vertical of the plane, 34 de. 10 m. per ax. 2*

The sine of the arc NC 49de. 35 m. whose complement is the arc BN 40de. 25 m
per axi. 4.

To 60388 the sine of the angle BNK 37d 9m. whose complement is the angle HNC,
or HGC 52 de. 51. m. the difference of the longitude of the plane from the
longitude of the place, or the distance of the meridians of the place and plane.

Therefore let the horizon of the place be LC, the vertical of the plane KL,
the circle of the plane of the horizon KNC, in which there is numbered from K
toward C 34 de. 10m. and at the term of the numeration N, draw the right line
L N E, which shall be the meridian of the plane and place, if the center of the
Sciotericie L or F is taken for the center of the World, and the right line L N
F for the Axis, but because in the perfection of the Dial, IG remains the
Axis, with E the center of the world, not in the right line L N F, but above
the same, with props at pleasure, but notwithstanding it is raised equal in
height with EI and OG, and moreover the plane is somewhat withdrawn from the
axis of the world, therefore the line L N F is now not altogether the meridian
of the place, but only the meridian of the plane, or as vulgarly they speak,
the substilar.

But you may find the meridian of the place thus, draw IH at right angles to
the meridian of the plane, which they vulgarly call the Contingence to the
common section of the Equator, which in the plane let E the center of the world
be set from the axis IG in the meridian of the plane L N F.



Then to the center E, consisting in the line L N E, le the circle of the
Equator FK be described, and in the same toward the East, because the horizon
of the plane is more easterly then the horizon of the place, and moreover the
beam is cast sooner or later upon the meridian of the plane then the place,
let there be numbered the difference of longitude of the place and plane 52 de.
51 m. and by K the end of the numeration let a right line be drawn, as it were
the certain beams of the Equator EKH, which where it touches the common
section of the Equator with the plane, to wit, the right line FH, by that point
let C the meridian of the place be drawn perpendicular.

The second case of the third Problem of Pitiscus his Liber Gnomonicorum.
Sivero arcus BN, repertus fuerit, etc. But if the arc BN shall be found less
then the complement of the poles elevation, it is a sign the plane does
consist on this side the pole artick, and moreover above such a plane not the
pole Artick, but the pole Antartick shall be extolled to such an angle as ILM
is, whose measure is the arc IM, to which, out of the doctrine of opposites,
the arc GO is equal, which you may certainly find together with the arc NO
thus. As MOG the right angle, to NG the difference between BN and BG, so ONG
the angle before found, to OG, per axi. 3. As the tangent ONG to Radius, so the
tangent OG, to the sine O N, by axi. 2.

Example; Let the plane be meridionall declined to the right hand 34 de. 30 m.
inclined toward the pole artick 16 de. 10 m. and again, let the elevation of
the pole be 49 de. 35 m. and there are sought:

The meridian of the place: the longitude of the country

The meridian of the plane: the longitude of the plane?

The elevation of the pole above the plane.



The Calculation.

1. As BF Radius, 100000, to FC tangent complement of declination 55 de. 30 m.
14550, so 27843 the sine of the inclination 16 de. 10 m. to 40511, the tangent
of K N 22 de. 31 / 3 m. the distance of the meridian of the place from the
Vertical of the plane, per axi. 2.

The sine of the arc N C 62 de, 532 / 3 m. whose complement is B N 27 de. 61 /
3 m. by which subtracted from BG the complement of the poles elevation 40 de.
25 m. there is remaining the arc N G 13 de. 182 / 3 m. by axi. 4.

^

To 61108 the sine of the angle B N K, or O N G 37d. 40 m. per axi. 3. and
comp. 1.

To 14069 the sine of the arch OG the distance of the axis GL from the meridian
of the plane* OL 8de. 51 / 3m. by ax. 3.

To 18410 the sine of the arch N O, the distance of the meridian of the plane
OL, from the meridian of the place N L 30 degrees. 36 m, by axi. 2.

The calculation being absolved, let there be drawn the horizon of the place
AC, secondly, the vertical of the plane BQ, thirdly, the horizon of the plane
ABCQ, in whose Quadrant AQ, to wit, according to the pole antartique, which
alone appears above such a plane. First, let be numbered the distance of the
meridian of the place from the vertical of the plane 22 de. 3 m. and by the
end of the numeration at P, let the meridian of the plane LP be drawn, then
from the point P, let the distance of the meridian of the plane from the
meridian of the place be numbered, by the term of the numeration M, let the
meridian of the plane LM be drawn. Finally, from the point M, into whatsoever
part, let the proper elevation of the pole be numbered, or the distance of the
axis from the meridian of the plane 8 de* 51 / 3m. and by the term of the
numeration I, let the axis* LI be drawn, to be extolled or lifted up on the
meridian of the plane LM, to the angle MLN.



The third case of the third problem of Pitiscus his liber Gnomonicorum.

Si denique arcus BN repertus fuerit major, etc. Lastly, if the arc BN be
found greater then the complement of the poles elevation BG, it is a token the
plane to be inclined beyond the pole artique, and moreover the pole artique
should be extolled above such a plane to so great an angle as the angle GLO,
which the arc GO measures, which arc, together with the arc ON in the end
you may find in such sort as in the precedent case.

Example, Let there be a meridian plane declining to the right hand 35 de. 54
m. inclining toward the pole artique 75 de. 43 m. and let the elevation of the
pole be 49 de. 35 m. but there is sought the meridian of the plane and place,
together with the elevation of the pole above the plane, the calculation shall
be thus.



to 133874 tangent of the arc KN, the distance of the meridian of the place
from the vertical of the plane, 53 de. 14 m, by axi. 2.

The sine of the arc NC 8 de. 29^ m. whose complement is BN 81 de. 30 m. from
whence if you substract BG 40 de. 25 m. there remains the arc GN 41 de. 5 m.

to 97982, the sine of the angle BNK, or ONG, by axi. 3.

to 64399 the sine of the arch OG, the distance of the axis from the meridian
of the plane 40 de. 51 / 3 m. by axi. 3.

to 17483 the sine of the arc O N the distance of the meridian of the plane
from the meridian of the place, 10 de. 4 m. by axi. and comp. 2.



The calculation being finished, let the horizon of the place be AC, the
vertical of the plane KD, the horizon of the plane AKCD, in which let be
numbered from the vertical point K toward C the distance of the meridian of the
place from the vertical of the plane 53 de. 14 m. and by the end of the
numeration let be drawn the meridian of the place LN, then from the meridian of
the place, to wit, from the point N backward, let the distance of the meridian
of the plane 10 de. 4m. be numbered, and by O the end of the numeration, let LO
the meridian of the plane be drawn, from which afterward let the proper
elevation of the pole be numbered, or the distance of the axis from the meridian
of the plane 48d. 5m. and by the term of the numeration G, let the axis LG be
drawn, being extolled above the plane BO, to the angle GLO.

CHAP X.
In which is showed the drawing of the houre-lines in these last planes not
there mentioned, being also part of Pitiscus his example in the fourth Problem
of his liber Gnom.

SO then, says he, Si axis, etc. If the axis be oblique to the plane, as the
foregoing are, as in any plane oblique to the Equator many of the houre-lines
do concur at the axis with equal angles, but they are easily found thus.

From any point of the axis, as it were from the center of the World, for
example in the meridional declining to the right hand 30 de. From the point E
of the axis, let be drawn a line at right angles, as it were any radius of the
Equator OF, which right line where it does fall in the meridian of the plane,
whether the same be the meridian of the place or not, thereby the meridian of
the plane let another right line be drawn at right angles FQ, which shall be
the common section of the Equator with the plane, the Radius of the Equator FE
let be set again in the meridian of the plane, as is FG, and from G, as from
the center of the world, let the circle of the Equator be described as great as
you please, and again, let another Radius of the Equator be drawn from the
center G to the intersection of the line of the Equator with the meridian of
the place, or with the 12 hour line, which Radius, where it shall cut the
Equator Circle, which here is in the point K, from thence the beginning being
made, let the opposite semicircle of the Equator be divided into 12 parts, in
the common sections of the Equator and plane, and by every one of the divisions
from the center, let right lines be drawn, which may be put out, such are GP,
GQ, etc. which when they shall touch the common section of the Equator, then
the hour lines answering to those divisions necessarily shall pass, and so of
every one of the hour lines to be drawn two points shall be obtained, one in
the center L of the Dial, where they all meet, the other in the common section
of the Equator and the plane, or in the line FQ, by which they all pass, by
which two points, if the right lines LQ and LP be drawn, those so drawn are the
hour lines. The like may be done of any other.

But because Pitiscus is mute in defining which part he takes for the right
hand and which the left, we must search his meaning.

Pitiscus was a Divine is evident by his own words in his dedication,
Celsitudini tuae tota vita mea prolixe me excusarem quod ego homo Theologus*
etc. If we take him as he was a Divine, we imagine his face to be toward the
East, then the South is his right hand, and the North is his left hand.

That he was an Astronomer too, appears by his Books both of proper and
common motion, then we must imagine his face representing the South, the East
on his left hand, which cannot be, as shall appear.

Neither must we take him according to the Poets, whose face must be imagined
toward the West.

In short, take him according to Geographie, representing the Pole, and this
shows the right hand was the East, and left the West, as is evident by the
Dial before going, for it is a plane declining from the South to the right
hand 30 degrees, that is, the East, because it has the morning hours not the
evening, because the Sun shines but part of the afternoon on the plane. Thus in
brief I have run throngh all planes, and proceed to show you farther
conclusions: But I desire the Reader to take notice that in these examples of
Pitiscus. I have followed his own steps, and made use of the Natural Sines and
Tangents.

CHAP XI.
Showing how by the help of a Horizontall Dial, or other, to make any Dial
in any position how ever.

HAving prepared a Horizontall Dial as is taught before: on the 12 hour, as
far distant as you please from the foot of the style, draw a line perpendicular
to the line of 12, on that describe a Semicircle, plasing the foot of the
Compasses in the crossing of the lines, this Semicircle divide into 180 parts,
each Quadrant into 90, to number the declination thereon, let the arch of the
Semicircle be toward the North part of the Dial. Then prepare a plane slate,
such as will blot out what has been formerly made thereon, and make it to move
perpendicularly on the horizontal plane on the center of the semicircle, which
will represent any declining plane by moving it on the semicircle. Now knowing
the declination of the plane turn this slate toward the easterly part, if it
decline toward the East, if contrary to the West, if toward the West, and set
it on the semicircle to the degree of declination, then taking a candle and
moving the Dial till the shadow fall on all the hours of the horizontall
plane, mark also where the shadow falls on the declining plane, that also is
the same hour on the plane so situated, drawn from the joining of the style
with the plane. It is so plain it needs no figure.

So may you do in all manner of declining reclining, or reclining and
inclining Dials, by framing your instrument to represent the position of the
plane.

Note also that the same angle the axis of the Horizontal Dial makes with the
plane, the same elevation must the axis of that plane have, and where it
shadows on the representing plane when the shadow of the horizontal axis is on
12, that is the meridian of the place.

By the same also may you describe all the conclusions Astronomicall, the
Almicanthers, circles of height: the parallels of the Sun, showing the
declination: the Azimuthes, showing the point of the Compass the Sun is in:
and all the propositions of the Sphere.

Seeing this is so plain and evident, nay a delightful conclusion, I will not
give you farther directions in a matter of so great perspicuity, as to lay down
the several ways for projecting the Sphere on every several plane, but
proceed to show the making of a general Dial for the whole World, which we will
use as our Declinatorie to find the situation of any wall or plane, as shall
be required to make a Dial thereon, as follows in the next Chapter.

CHAP XII.
Showing the making of a Dial on a Cross form, as also a Universal Quadrant
drawn from the same projection, as also to describe the Tropicks on Meridian or
Polar planes.

THis Universal Dial is described by Clavius in his eighth Book de
Gnomonicis: But because the Artists of these times have found out a more
commodious contrivance of it in the fabrique, I shall describe it according to
this Figure.



You shall therefore of commodious matter prepare in silver or brass a concave
Cross, such as is represented to your eye, whose three limbs EFG shall be
equal, then shall you on the limb 12 E describe as before a parallel Polar
plane, as accounting that the height of the style, again, on the side of the
Cross AF you shall describe an Oriental or East Dial, and on the other side
a Western Dial, accounting the arms of the Cross as the height of the style,
so have you prepared the plane: you shall again provide a Box with a
magneticall needle to be within the body of the Cross, which shall be
contrived to move on the shoulders of the Cross, so as by the help of the
degrees of a Quadrant numbered on the limb of the Box; you may depress or
elevate the end of the Cross E according to the complement of the latitude of
the place.

Now to know the hour of the day, you shall turn the plane by the help of the
needle, so as the end A shall be toward the North, and E toward the South, and
elevate the end E to the complement of the elevation, then bringing the Box to
stand in the Meridian, the shoulder of the Cross shall show you the hour.

Upon this also is grounded the Universal Quadrant hereafter described, which
Instrument is made in Brass by Mr. Walter Hayes as it is here described.
Prepare a Quadrant of Brass, divide it in the limb into 90 degrees, and at
the end of 45 degrees from the center draw the line A B, which shall represent
the Equator, divide the limb into 90 degrees, as other Quadrants are usually
divided, then number both ways from the line AB the greatest declination of
the Sun from the North and South, at the termination whereof draw the arch CD
which shall be the Tropicks, then out of the Table of declination, page 45,
from B both ways let there be numbered the declinatio^ of the Signs according
to this Table.

G M 00 00 11 30 20 30 23 30

First, for Taurus and Virgo, and his opposite Sign 11 degrees. 30 m. namely,
Scorpio and Pisces, whereby divide the arch CD, which if you should draw a line
from the center A, one should be the beginning of Taurus and Virgo, the other
the beginning of Scorpio and Pisces. Again, if from B both ways you number 20
de. 30 min. the end of which shall be the beginning of Gemini and Leo, or
Sagittarius and Aquarius, number it as is described, together with a letter for
the beginning of each month. So you have a quarter of the Zodiaque, and a
quarter of a year projected on it.

Now the plane it self is no other then an East or West Dial, numbered on one
side with the morning hours, and on the other with the evening hours, the
middle line AB representing the Equator. And to set it for the hour, you shall
project the Tropicks and other intermediate parallels of the Signs upon them
as is hereafter showed, but that the plane may not run out of the Quadrant you
shall work thus, opening the Compasses to 15 degrees of the Quadrant, prick that
down both ways, at which distance draw parallels to the line AB, and with the
same distance, as if it were the semidiameter of the Equator, describe the
semidiameter of the Equator on the top of the line AB, which divide into 12
parts, and laying a ruler through the center and each of those divisions in the
semicircle to those parallel lines on each side of AB, mark where they cut,
and from side to side draw the parallel hour lines as is taught in the making
of an East and West Dial, make those parallel lines also divided as a tangent
line on each side AB, so if this Quadrant were held on an East or West wall,
and a plummet let fall from the center of the Equator where the style stands
(which may be a pin fitted to take out and in, fitted to the height of the
distance between the line A B and the other parallels, which is all one with
the Radius of the small Circle) it shall I say, be in its right situation on
the East or West wall if you let the plummet and thread fall on the elevation
of the Pole in that place.

But because we desire to make it general, we must describe the Tropicks and
other parallels of declination upon it, as is usual to be done on your Polar
and East and West Dial, which how to do is thus.

Having drawn the hour lines and Equator as is taught from E the height of the
style, take all the distances between it and the hour lines where they do
cross the line AB, and prick them down on the line representing the Equator in
this figure from the center B. Then describe an occult arch of a Circle,
whereon describe a Chorde of 23 degrees 30 minutes, with such other
declinations as you intend on your plane. Then on the line representing the
Equator, noted here with the figures of the hours they were taken from, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, at the marks formerly made, that was taken from E the height of
the style, and every of the hours, from these distances I say raise
perpendiculars to cut the other lines of declination, so those perpendiculars
shall represent those hour lines from whence they were taken, and the
distances between the Equator and the several lines of declination shall be
the same distances from the Equator, and the other parallels of declination
upon your plane, through which marks being pricked down upon the several
hourelines from the Equinoctial.



If you draw those Hyperbolicall lines, you shall have described the parallels
of declination required.

But if you will perform the same work a second and easy way, work by this
Table following, which is universal, and is composed out of the Table of Right
and Versed shadow.

Put this Table before thee, and for the point of each hour line whereby the
several parallels of the Signs shall pass work thus.

The style being divided into known parts* if* into 12, take the parts of
shadow out of the Table in the same known parts by which the style is divided,
and prick them down on each hour line as you find it marked in the Table
answering the hour both before and after noon. As suppose that a Polar plane I
find when the Sun is in Aries or Libra at 12 a clock the shadow has no
latitude, but at 1 and 11 it has 3 parts 13 min. of the parts of the style,
which I prick from the foot of the style on the hours of 1 and 11 both above
and beneath the Equator: and for 2 and 10 I find 6 parts 56 min. which I prick
down also from the center to the hour lines of 10 and 2, and so of the other
hour lines and parallels, through which if I draw those lines they shall
represent the parallels of the Declination.

A Table of the Latitude of shadows.
Cancer. Gemini Leo Virgo Taurus Libra Aries p m p m p m p m p m a m 12 5 13 4
25 2 26 0 0 12 1 6 17 5 35 4 5 3 13 11 2 8 11 8 35 7 27 6 56 10 3 14 5 13 31 12
39 12 0 9 4 23 15 22 45 21 21 20 27 8 5 49 6 47 57 45 45 44 47 7 6 Vmbra
infinita. 6

If you would find the hour of the day by this Quadrant, you shall fix the
style being of a small pin of the height of the semidiameter of the Equator in
the center, then holding up the Quadrant till the thread and plummet fall on the
degrees of the latitude of the place on the Tangent lines either on the morning
or evening hours, and withal turning the Quadrant till you have caused the
shadow to fall on the declination of the Sun for that day among the parallels,
the thread still falling on the elevation, the shadow of the Gnomon shall then
give the hour of the day: the declination may be sought in the limb of the
Quadrant answering to the day of the month, and this Quadrant may be made use
of diverse ways for very good uses, especially if you cause to be drawn two
lines more between the Equinoctial line and tangent line, divided on either
side, which shall be very apt for the making of any sort of Dial: but if you
desire you may have the same on a Ruler, together with the use thereof, by the
Instrument maker before mentioned: the manner of making whereof is as
follows* and the use whereof is in part laid down in the Chapter entreating
of Declining planes. Let there be a right angled parallelogram ABCD, of what
magnitude you please, on the longer side BC let be cut off a line equal to the
shorter AB, which shall be BE, and at E as a center describe the arc of a
Circle FG, whereon prick down the Radius FG, then draw the line EA cutting the
arch in H, the arch FH shall be the eight part of the Circle or the half of
the Quadrant or right angle, and FG shall be four parts of the whole Circle
divided into 24, whereof FH shall be three of those parts of which H G is one
part, so that if you do divide from H to F in three parts the arc FH shall be
divided into three equal hours, let there be drawn from E occult lines
cutting the side AB in L and M, the same distances shall be placed in the
opposite side CD, so the right lines CO and CN shall be equal to BM and BL,
then draw the right lines MO and LN, which are parallel to the sides BC and AD,
so BC shall be the hour of 6 and 12, but the line MO of 11 and 1, and of 5 and
7, then the line LN is the hours of a and 10, as also 4 and 8, and AD the hours
of 3 and 9; so as BC is the hour of 12 from midnight, that is midday; M O 1
from the meridian, LN 2, AD 3, and again LN 4, MO 5, BC 6; and again NO 7, LN
8, AD 9; and again LN 10, MO 11, and BC 12; for the half hours and quarters,
you may divide the Arches HI, IK, KF, into 2 or 4 equal parts, now if you
divide any side, as the tangent in the quadrant is divided to the radius AB;
this ruler shall be of excellent use, which also you may very well put upon a
diagonall Scale without prejudice to the other work* the use of this Ruler you
have in Clavius his Gnomonices. But to conclude this Chapter by reason I have
showed very many plain ways, I shall now endeavor because I have had occasion
to speak in this Chapter of the parallels of declination, and have showed how
they are drawn in meridian and polar planes, I shall here insert a table of
Shadows, by which you may be able to do the same on any other plane, but I
would have you note that wherein my example was last upon a polar plane, by the
table of the latitude of shadow, the work is however the same on a meridian
plane, only accounting the hours in this plane from the 6 a clock hour, as in
the polar from the meridian, this quadrant as other quadrants is used, to take
the inclination, or reclination of planes, which I will mention with a few
cautions hereafter following.

Having promised in the description of the use of this Instrument, to show how
to find the inclination and reclination of a plane, I shall proceed to give you
some cautions; First then, the quadrant is divided in the limb, as other
quadrants are into 90 degrees, by which is measured the angles of inclination
or reclination, for if it be a declining plane only, the declination is
accounted from the North or South toward the East or West, if it decline from
the North, the North Pole is elivated above it, and the meridian-line
ascends, if it decline from the South, the south pole is elivated above that
plane, if it decline from the South Eastward, then is the style and sub-style
refered toward the west side of the plane, if to the contrary the contrary, and
may have the line of 12 except north decliners in the temperate Zone, you may
make use of the side of the quadrant to find the declination, as is taught
before page 33, observing the angle as is cut by the shadow of the thread held
by the limb, and through the center, and that side that lies perpendicular to
the Horizontal line which shall be the angle, as is before taught: And if the
south point is between the poles of the plane and the Azimuth, then does the
plane decline Eastward, if it be the afternoon you take the Azimuth in, if it
be the forenoon you take the Azimuth in, and the south point be between it and
the Poles of the planes horizontal line, it does decline Westward, if contrary
it is in the same quarter where the sun is: For an inclining plane, which is
the angle that it makes with the Horizon* draw a Horizontall line and cross
it again with a square, or vertical line, then apply the side of the quadrant
to the vertical line at the beginning of the numeration of the degrees. on the
quadrant, and the angle contained between the thread and plummet, and the
applied side is the inclination; in all north incliners the north part of the
meridian ascends, in south incliners the south part, and in east and west
incliners, the meridian lies parallel with the Horizon.

And for the reclination it being all one with the inclination, considered as
an upper and under face of the same plane, if you cannot apply the side of the
quadrant, you may set a square or ruler at right angles with the vertical line
drawn on the upper face and apply the side of the quadrant to the edge of the
ruler, and measure the quantity of the angle by the thread and plummet: but this
is of direct, howsoever these are subject to another passion of declining and
inclining together, which must be sought severally, and such are those whose
Horizontal line declineth toward the north or south and inclination from north
or south, toward the east or west, which must be sought severally.

Here follows the Tables of Right and Contrary shadows. A Table of Right and
Contrary shadow, to every Degree and tenth minute of the Quadrant.
Alt 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Alti^ S S S S S S S S S S p m p m p m p m p m p m p m
p m p m p m Horizontal shadow 0 41378, 54 687 34 143 44 229 0 171 37 137 10 114
11 97 44 85 23 75 46 60 Vertical shadow 10 4137, 53 589 16 317 14 216 54 164
44 132 43 111 4 95 26 83 37 74 22 50 20 2065, 23 515 46 294 31 206 3 158 23 128
33 108 7 93 15 81 55 73 1 40 30 1376, 6 458 22 274 54 196 13 152 29 124 38 105
19 91 9 80 18 71 43 30 40 1031, 45 412 29 257 40 187 16 147 1 120 56 102 40 89
9 78 44 70 27 20 50 825, 13 374 55 242 28 179 6 141 56 117 28 100 8 87 14 77 13
69 14 10 60 687, 34 343 54 229 0 171 37 137 10 114 11 97 44 85 23 75 46 68 3 0

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 S S S S S S S S S S p m p m p m p m p m p m p m
p m p m p m Horizo^tall shadow 0 68 3 61 44 56 27 51 59 48 8 44 47 41 51 39 15
36 57 34 51 60 Vertical shadow. 10 66 55 60 47 55 40 51 18 47 32 44 16 41 24
38 51 36 34 34 31 50 20 65 49 95 52 54 53 50 38 46 58 43 46 40 57 38 27 36 13
34 12 40 30 64 45 85 59 54 8 49 59 46 24 43 16 40 31 38 4 35 52 33 53 30 40 63
43 85 7 53 24 49 21 45 51 42 47 40 5 37 41 35 31 33 35 20 50 62 43 57 16 52 41
48 44 45 19 42 19 39 40 37 18 35 11 33 16 10 60 61 44 56 27 51 59 48 8 44 47 41
51 39 15 36 56 34 51 32 58 0

20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 S S S S S S S S S S p m p m p m p m p m p m p m
p m p m p m Horizo^tall shadow 0 32 58 31 16 29 42 28 16 26 57 25 44 24 36 23
33 22 34 21 39 60 Vertical shadow. 10 32 40 31 0 29 27 28 3 26 45 25 52 24 25
23 23 22 25 21 ^0 50 20 32 23 30 44 29 13 27 49 26 32 25 21 24 15 23 13 22 15
21 21 40 30 32 6 30 28 28 58 27 36 26 20 25 10 24 4 23 3 22 6 21 13 30 40 31 49
30 12 28 44 27 23 26 8 24 58 23 54 22 53 21 57 21 4 20 50 31 32 29 57 28 30 27
10 25 56 24 47 23 43 22 44 21 48 20 56 10 60 31 16 29 42 28 16 26 57 25 44 24
36 23 33 22 34 21 39 20 47 0

30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 S S S S S S S S S S p m p m p m p m p m p m p m
p m p m p m Horizo^tall shadow 0 20 47 19 58 19 12 18 29 17 47 17 8 16 31 15 55
15 22 14 49 60 Vertical shadow. 10 20 ^9 19 50 19 5 18 21 17 41 17 2 16 25 15
50 15 16 14 44 50 20 20 31 19 43 18 57 18 15 17 34 16 56 16 19 15 44 15 11 14
39 40 30 20 22 19 35 18 50 18 8 17 28 16 49 16 13 15 38 15 5 14 33 30 40 20 14
19 27 18 43 18 1 17 21 16 43 16 7 15 33 15 0 14 28 20 50 20 6 19 20 18 36 17 54
17 15 16 37 16 1 15 27 14 54 14 23 10 60 19 58 19 12 18 29 17 47 17 8 16 31 15
55 15 22 14 49 14 18 0

40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 S S S S S S S S S S p m p m p m p m p m p m p m
p m p m p m Horizo^tall shadow 0 14 18 13 48 13 20 12 52 12 26 12 0 11 35 11 11
10 48 10 26 60 Vertical shadow. 10 14 13 13 43 13 15 12 48 12 21 11 56 11 31
11 8 10 45 10 22 50 20 14 8 13 39 13 10 12 42 12 17 11 52 11 27 11 4 10 41 10
19 40 30 14 3 13 34 13 6 12 39 12 13 11 48 11 23 11 0 10 37 10 15 30 40 13 58
13 29 13 1 12 34 12 8 11 43 11 19 10 56 10 33 10 11 20 50 13 53 13 24 12 57 12
30 12 4 11 39 11 15 10 52 10 30 10 8 10 60 13 48 13 20 12 52 12 26 12 0 11 35
11 11 10 48 10 26 10 4 0

50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 S S S S S S S S S S p m p m p m p m p m p m p m
p m p m p m Horizo^tal shadow 0 10 4 9 43 9 23 9 3 8 43 8 24 8 6 7 48 7 30 7 13
60 Vertical shadovv. 10 10 1 9 40 9 19 8 59 8 40 8 21 8 3 7 45 7 27 7 10 50 20
9 57 9 36 9 16 8 56 8 37 8 18 8 0 7 42 7 24 7 7 40 30 9 54 9 33 9 12 8 53 8 34
8 15 7 57 7 39 7 21 7 4 30 40 9 50 9 29 9 9 8 50 8 30 8 12 7 54 7 36 7 18 7 1
20 50 9 47 9 26 9 6 8 46 8 27 8 9 7 51 7 33 7 15 6 59 10 60 9 43 9 23 9 3 8 43
8 24 8 6 7 48 7 30 7 13 6 56 0

60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 S S S S S S S S S S p m p m p m p m p m p m p m
p m p m p m Horizo^tall shadow 0 6 56 6 39 6 23 6 7 5 51 5 36 5 21 5 6 4 51 4
36 60 Vertical shadow. 10 6 53 6 36 6 20 6 4 5 49 5 33 5 18 5 3 4 48 4 34 50
20 6 50 6 34 6 17 6 2 5 46 5 31 5 16 5 1 4 46 4 32 40 30 6 47 6 31 6 15 5 59 5
43 5 28 5 13 4 58 4 44 4 29 30 40 6 45 6 28 6 12 5 56 5 41 5 26 5 11 4 56 4 41
4 27 20 50 6 42 6 26 6 10 5 54 5 38 5 23 5 8 4 53 4 39 4 24 10 60 6 39 6 23 6 7
5 51 5 36 5 21 5 6 4 51 4 36 4 22 0

70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 S S S S S S S S S S p m p m p m p m p m p m p m
p m p m p m Horizo^tal shadow 0 4 22 4 8 3 54 3 40 3 26 3 13 3 0 2 46 2 33 2 20
60 Vertical shadovv. 10 4 20 4 6 3 52 3 38 3 24 3 11 2 56 2 44 2 31 2 18 50 20
4 17 4 3 3 49 3 36 3 22 3 8 2 55 2 42 2 29 2 16 40 30 4 15 4 1 3 47 3 33 3 20 3
6 2 53 2 40 2 26 2 13 30 40 4 13 3 59 3 45 3 31 3 17 3 4 2 51 2 37 2 24 2 11 20
50 4 10 3 56 3 42 3 29 3 15 3 2 2 48 2 35 2 22 2 9 10 60 4 8 3 54 3 40 3 22 3
13 3 0 2 46 2 33 2 20 2 7 0

80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 S S S S S S S S S S p m p m p m p m p m p m p m
p m p m p m Horizo^tall shadow 0 2 7 1 54 1 41 1 28 1 16 1 3 0 50 0 38 0 25 0
13 60 Vertical shadow. 10 2 5 1 52 1 39 1 26 1 14 1 1 0 48 0 36 0 23 0 10 50
20 2 3 1 50 1 37 1 24 1 11 0 50 0 46 2 34 0 21 0 8 40 30 2 0 1 48 1 35 1 22 1 9
0 57 0 44 0 31 0 19 0 6 30 40 1 58 1 45 1 33 1 20 1 7 0 55 0 42 0 29 0 17 0 4
20 50 1 56 1 43 1 31 1 18 1 5 0 32 0 40 0 27 0 15 0 2 10 60 1 54 1 41 1 28 1 16
1 3 0 50 0 38 0 25 0 13 0 0 0

CHAP XIII.
Of the general description and use of the preceding Tablein, the pricking
down and drawing the circles of declination and Aximuths in any planes.

THe Table you see consists of 11 columns, the first being the minutes of the
Suns altitude, and the greater figures on the top are the degrees of altitude,
all the other columns consist of the parts of shadow, and minutes of shadow,
noted above with S for shadow, and p m for parts and minutes of shadow,
answerable to a gnomon divided into 12 equal parts, and it is, As the sine of
a known altitude of the sun, is to the sine complement of the same altitude; so
the length of the Gnomon in 10 or 12 parts, to the parts of right shadow: or
for the versed shadow, as the sine complement of the given altitude of the sun,
to the right sine of the same altitude; so the style in parts, to the length of
the versed shadow So if we enter the Table with the given altitude of the Sun
in the great figures, and if we seek the minutes in the sides, either noted
with horizontall or vertical shadow, according as your plane is, it shall give
you the length of the shadow in parts and minutes in the common angle of
meeting together. As if we look for 50 de. 40 m. the meeting of both in the
Table shall be 9 parts 50 min. for the length of the right shadow on a
horizontall plane: But for the versed shadow, take the complement of the
altitude of the Sun, and the minutes in the right side of the Table, titled
vertical shadow, and the common area of both shall give your desire. By this
Table it appears first, that the circles of altitude either on the
horizontall or vertical planes are easily drawn, consicering they are nothing
else but circles of altitude, which by knowing the altitude you will know the
length of the shadow, which in the horizontall Dial are perfect circles, and
have the same respect unto the Horizon, as the parallels of declination have to
the Equator, but in all upright planes they will be conicall Sections, and by
having the length of the style, the altitude of the Sun may be computed by the
foregoing Table with much facility, but for the more expediating of the work in
pricking down the parallels of declination with the Tropicks, I have here added
a Table of the altitude of the Sun for every hour of the day when the Sun
enters into any of the 12 Signs.

A Table for the altitude of the Sun in the beginning of each Sign, for all
the hours of the day for the Latitude of London.
Hours. Cancer. Gemini Leo Taurus Virgo Aries Libra Pisces Scorpio Aquar
Sagitta. Capric. 12 62 0 58 43 50 0 38 30 27 0 18 18 15 0 11 1 59 43 56 34 48
12 36 58 25 40 17 6 13 52 10 2 53 45 50 55 43 12 32 37 21 51 13 38 10 30 9 3 45
42 43 6 36 0 26 7 15 58 8 12 5 15 8 4 36 41 34 13 27 31 18 8 8 33 1 15 7 5 27
17 24 56 18 18 9 17 0 6 6 6 18 11 15 40 9 0 5 7 9 32 6 50 11 37 4 8 1 32 21 40

This Table is in Mr. Gunters Book, page 240 which if you desire to have the
point of the Equinoctial for a Horizontall plane on the hour of 12, enter the
Table of shadows with 38 de. 30 m. and you shall find the length of the shadow
to be 15 parts 5 m. of the length of the style divided into 12, which prick
down on the line of 12 for the Equinoctial point, from the foot of the style.
So if I desire the points of the Tropic of Cancer, I find by this Table that
at 12 of the clock the Sun is 62 de. high, with which I enter the Table of
shadows, finding the length of the shadow, which I prick down on the 12 a clock
line for the point of the Tropic of Cancer at the hour of 12. If for the
hour of 1, I desire the point through which the parallel must pass, look for
the hour of 1 and 11, in this last table under Cancer, and I find the Sun to
have the height of 59 de. 43 m. with which I enter the table of shadows, and
prick down the length thereof from the bottom of the style reaching till the
other foot of the Compasses fall on the hour for which it was intended. Do so
in all the other hours, till you have pricked down the points of the parallels
of declination, through which points they must be drawn Hyperbolically. Proceed
thus in the making of a Horizontall Dial, but if it be a direct vertical
Dial, you shall then take the length of the vertical shadow out of the said
Table, or work it as an Horizontal plane, only accounting the complement of the
elevation in stead of the whole elevation.

For a declining plane you may consider it as a vertical direct in some other
place, and having found out the Equator of the plane and the substyle, you may
proceed in the same manner from the foot of the style, accounting where the
style stands to be no other ways then the meridian line or line of 12 in a
Horizon whose pole is elevated according to the complement height of the style
above the substyle, and so prick down the length of the shadows, from the foot
of the style, on every one of the Hour lines, as if it were a horizontal or
Vertical plane.

But in this you must be wary, remembering that you have the height of the sun
calculated for every hour of that Latitude in the entrance of the 12 signs,
in that Place where your Plane is a Horizontall plane, or otherwise, by
considering of it as a horizontall or Verricallplane in another latitude

For the Azimuths, or vertical circles, showing one what point of the compass
the sun is in every hour of the day it is performed with a great deal of
facility, if first, when the sun is in the Equator, we do know by the last
Table of the height of the sun for every hour of the day and by his meridian
altitude with the help of the table of shadows, find out the Equinoctial line,
whether it be a Horizontall or upright direct plane, for having drawn that line
at right angles with the meridian, and having the place of the Style, and
length thereof in parts, and the parts of shadow to all altitudes of the sun,
being pricked down from the foot of the Style, on the Equinoctial line,
through each of those points draw parallel lines to the meridian, or 12 a clock
line on each side, which shall be the Azimuths, which you must have a care how
you denominate according to the quarter of heaven in which the sun is in, for
if the Sun be in the easterly points, the Azimuths must be on the Western side
of the plane, so also the morning hours must be on the opposite side.

There are many other Astronomical conclusions that are used to be put upon
planes, as the diurnall arches, showing the length of the day and night, as
also the Jewish or old unequal hours together with the circles of position,
which with the meridian and horizon distinguishes the upper hemispheare into 6
parts commonly called the houses of Heaven: which if this I have writ beget any
desire of the reader, I shall endeavor to enlarge my self much more, in
showing a demonstrative way, in these particulars I have last insisted upon. I
might hear also show you the exceeding use of the table of Right and versed
shadow in the taking of heights of buildings as it may very well appear in the
several uses of the quadrant in Diggs his Pantometria, and in Mr. Gunters
quadrant, having the parts of right and versed shadow graduated on them, to
which Books I refer you.

CHAP XIV.
Showing the drawing of the Seeling Dial.

IT is an Axiom pronounced long since, by those who have writ of Opticall
conceits of Light and Shadow, that Omnis reflectio Luminis est secundum lineas
sensibiles, latitudinem habentes. And it has with as great reason bin
pronounced by Geometricians, that the Angles of Incidence and Reflection is all
one; as appears to us by Euclides Catoptriques; and on this foundation is
this conceit of which we are now speaking.

Wherefore because the direct beams cannot fall on the face of this plane, we
must by help of a piece of glass apt to receive and reflect the light, placed
somwhere horizontally in a window, proceed to the work, which indeed is no
other then a Horizontall Dial reversed, to which required a Meridian line,
which you must endeavor to draw and find according as you are before taught,
or by the help of the Meridian altitude of the Sun, your glass being fixed
mark the spot that reflects upon the seeling just at 12 a clock, make that one
point, and for the other point through which you must draw your meridian line,
you may find by holding up a thread and plummet till the plummet fall
perpendicular on the glass, and at the other end of the line held on the
seeling make another mark, through both which draw the Meridian line. Now for
so much as the center of the Dial is a point without, and the distance between
the glass and the seeling is to be considered as the height of the style, the
glass it self representing the center of the world, or the very apex of the
style, we must find out those two Tangents at right angles with the Meridian,
the one near the window, the other farther in, through several points whereof
we must draw the hourelines. Let AB be the Meridian line found on the seeling,
now suppose the Sun being in the highest degree of Cancer should shine into the
Glass that is fixed in C, it shall again reflect unto D, where I make a mark,
then letting a plummet fall from the top of the seeling till it fall just on C
the glass, from the point E, from which draw the line A B through D and E,
which shall be the Meridian required, if you do this just at noon: Now if you
would find out the places where the hour lines shall cross the Meridian, the
Center lying without the window EC, you may work thus

Divide the line EC into 12 parts, then may you enter the Table of right and
versed shadow, seeking the degrees and minutes of Elevation of the Equator,
viz. 38 degrees. 30, to which answers 15 parts 5 minutes of the parts of the
Style, which prick down from E to F, and at that point draw the line FG, at
right angles to the Meridian A B, which shall represent the Equator. Now to
know the center of the hour lines, if you look again in the Table of shadows 51
degrees. 30 min. the elevation of the Pole, you shall find 9 parts 33 min. of
shadow, which added to FE, 15 parts 5 m. shall give the center at B, making the
whole line from F to B to be 24 parts 38 primes, and at 6 shall the center of
the hour lines meet. Lastly, supposing the former work to be done upon the
floare, for the more easy working, and having drawn a line representing the
Meridian AB if from B you prick down 9 parts 33 min. of the radius EC, and at E
draw it perpendicular to AB, and 15 parts 5 min. from E to F, where if you draw
the line FG perpendicular to AB, also, if from the Center B you shall proceed
to make a horizontal Dial as is above taught: it shall divide the lines EC and
FG in such parts by drawing the hour lines from the Center through those lines,
which if they are transferred from thence to the seeling on each side the
Meridian, upon the same line EC and FG, you have finished, for FB shall be the
same as in the fundamental Diagram I call the Semidiameter of the Horizon; and
FC shall be the semidiameter of the Equator: by the same means also may be made
hour lines, on a Wall receiving it is light only through some hole in a glass
window: as also very recreative Dials on the sides of Buildings, having water
or glass so placed, as that it may reflect the Beams according to several
Azimuths: but the best way for the placing the glass is, by preparing the
hourlines first, and by a known altitude of the Sun at some known hour of the
day, to mark out on that hour-line where the reflection ought to fall, and
expect that hour precisely, and depresse or elevate the glass til it fall on
that spot or mark assigned.

CHAP X.
Showing the making and use of the Cylinder Dial, whose hour lines are
straight, as also a Dial drawn from the same form, having no Style.

THis may be used on a Staff or other round, made like a Cylinder being drawn
as is here described, where the right side represent the Tropicks, and the left
side the Equinoctial: or it may be used flat as it is in the Book; the
Instrument as you see, is divided into months, and the bottom into signs, and
the line on the right side is a tangent to the radius of the breadth of the
Parallelogram, serving to take the height of the Sun, the several Parallels
downward running through the pricked line, in the middle, are the lines of
Altitude, and the Parallels to the Equator are the Parallels of Declination,
numbered on the bottom on a Sine of 23 de. and a half.



For the Altitude of the Sun.
The use of it is first, if it be described on the head of a staff, to have a
gnomon on the top, equal to the radius, and just over the tangent of Altitudes,
to turn it till you bring the shadow of it at right angles to it self, which
shall denote the height required.

For the Hour of the Day.
Seek the Altitude of the Sun in the middle pricked line, and the Declination in
the Parallels from the Equator, and mark where the traverse lines cross;
through the crossing of the two former lines, and at the end, you shall find
the figures of 2 or 10, 3 or 9, etc. only the summer Hours are sought in the
right side* where the Sun is highest, and the traverse lines longest; and in
the winter, the Hour is sought on the left side, where the traverse lines are
shorter.

For the Declination and degree of the Sign.
Seek the day of the month on the top marked with J. for January, F for
February, etc. and by the help of a horse hair or thread extended from that all
along of Parallel of Declination, till it cut on the bottom where the signs
are numbered: the down right lines that are parallel to the Equator counted
toward the right hand, is the degree of the Declination of that part of the
Ecliptic which is in the bottom, right against the day of the month sought on
the top.

The pricked line passing through the 18 degree of the Parallel of Altitude, is
the line of Twy-light; this projection I had of my very good friend John Hulet,
Master of Arts* and Teacher of the Mathematics.

You may also make a Dyal, by preparing of a hollow Cylinder, and if you do
number on both ends of the Circle, on top and bottom, 15 de. from line to line;
or divide it into 24 parts, and if from top to bottom you draw straight lines,
first, by dividing the Cylinder through the middle, and only making use of one
half, it shall have 12 hours upon it. Lastly, if you cut off a piece from the
bottom at an angle according to the Elevation, and turn the half Cylinder
horizontal on that bottom, til the shadow of one of the sides fall parallel with
any one of those lines from top to bottom: which numbered as they ought, shall
show the hour without the use of a Style; So also may you project a Dyal on a
Globe, having a round brim on the top, whose projection will seem strange to
those that look upon it, who are ignorant of these Arts.

CHAP XVI.
Showing the making of a universal Dyall on a Globe, and how to cover it, if
it be required.

A Globe (says Euclide) is made by the turning about of a semicircle, and the
Diameter fixed; this Dyal if universal, will want the aid of a magnetical
Needle to set it, and it must move on an Axis in an horizon as the usual Globes
do; in whose Equator, let be divided into 24 hours, the proporion of the day
natural, then on the Axis let a semicircle move. The figure is plain in the top
of the Title, supported by the boy: this Globe set to the elevation of the
Pole, and in the Meridian, let be placed the 12 12 a clock line: then turn the
Semicircle till it shadow not: then does it cross the hour: which hours are
drawn from the poles to each of the 24 divisions.

If you desire to cover the Globes, and make other inventions thereon, first
learn here to cover it exactly, with a pair of compasses bowed toward the
points, measure the Diameter of the Globe you intend to cover, which had, find
the Circumference thus; Multiply the Diameter by 22, and divide that product by
7, and you have your desire.

That Circumference, let be the line A B, which divide into 12 equal parts, and
at the distance of three of those parts, draw the Parallel C D, and E F,

A Parallel is thus drawn, take the distance you would have it asunder, as here
it is; three of those 12 divisions: set one foot in A, and make the Arch at E,
and another at B, and make the Arch with the other foot at F, the compasses at
the wideness taken, then by the outward bulks of those Arches, draw the line E
F, so also draw the line C D.

And to divide the Circumference into parts as our example is into 12, work
thus, set your compasses in A, make the Ark B F, the compasses so opened, set
again in B, and make the Ark A C, then draw the line from A to F, then measure
the distance from F to B, on the Ark, and place it on the other Arch from A to
C, thence draw the line C B, then your compasses open at any distance, prick
down one part less on both those slanting lines; then you intend to divide
thereon, which is here 11: because we would divide the line A B into 12, then
draw lines from each division to the opposite, that cuts the line A B in the
parts of division.

But to proceed, continue the Circumference at length, to G and H, numbering
from A toward G9 of those equal parts, and from B toward H as many, which shall
be the Centers for each Arch.

So those quarters so cut out, shall exactly cover the Globe, whose
Circumference is equal to the line A B. Thus have you a glance of the
Mathematics, striking at one thing through the side of an other: for I here
made one figure serve for three several operations, because I would not charge
the Press with multiplicity of figures.

CHAP XVII.
Showing the finding of the Elevation of the Pole, and therewithal a Meridian
without the Declination of Sun or Star.

THis is done by erecting a gnomon horizontal, and at 3 times of the day to
give a mark at the end of the Shadows: now it is certain, that represents the
Parallel of the Sun for that day; then take three thin sticks or the like,
and lay them from the top of the gnomon, to the places where the shadows fell,
and on these three so standing, lay a board to ly on all three flat, and a
gnomon in the middle of that board points to the Pole: because every Parallel
the Snn moves in, is parallel to the Equinoctial, and that is at right Angles,
with the pole of the World.

Now the Meridian passes through the most elevated place of that board or
circle so laid, neither can the Sun's Declination make any sensible difference
in the so small proportion of 3 or 4 hours time.

CHAP XVIII.
Showing how to find the Altitude of the Sun, only by Scale and Compasses.

WIth your Compasses describe the Circle A B C D place it horizontal, with a
gnomon in the Center, cross it with two Diameters; then turn the board till
the shadow be on one of the Diameters, at the end of the shadow, mark, as here
at E, lay down also, the length of the gonmon from the Center on the other
Diameter to F, from E to F draw a right line: then take your Compasses, and on
the chord of 90, take out the Radius the Ark of 60, set the compasses so in E,
describe an Arch, then take the distance between the line E F, and the Diameter
D B; which measure on the chord of 90, and so many degrees as the compasses
extend over; such a quantity is the height of the Sun, in like manner any
Angles being given, you must measure it by the parts of a circle.

Here follows the problematical Propositions of the Office of shadow, and the
benefit we receive thereof.
Prop. 1 By shadow, we have a plain demonstration that the Sphere of Sol is
higher than the Sphere of Luna, to confirm such as think they move in one Orb.

Let the Sun be at A, in the great Circle, and the Moon at B, in the lesser,
let the Horizon be C D, now, they make one Angle of height, in respect of the
Center of the Earth, notwithstanding though they so equally respect the Earth,
as one may hinder the sight of the other: yet the shadow of the Sun shall pass
by the head of the gnomon E, and cast it to F, and the beams of the Moon shall
pass by E to G much longer, which shows she is much lower, for the higher
the light is, the shorter is the shadow. I call the Moon a feminine, if you ask
my reason, she is cold and moist, participating of the nature of Women; and we
call her the Mother of moisture, but that is not all, for I have a rule for it,
Nomen non crescens.



Prop. 2. By shadow, we are taught the Earth is bigger then the Moon; seeing in
time of a total Obscurity, the Moon is quite overshadowed; for the shadow is
cast in this manner.



By the same we learn also, that seeing the shadow comes to a point, the Earth
is less then the Sun: for if the opacous body be equal to the luminous body,
then like two parallels they will never meet, but concur in infinitum, as
these following figures show.



Or if the luminous body were less then the opacous body: then the shadow would
be so great in so long a way, as from the Earth to the Starry Firmament, that
most of the Stars as were in opposition to the Sun, would not appear: seeing
they borrow their light of the Sun.

It is also sufficiently proved by shadow, in the Praecognita Philosophical,
that the Earth is round, and that it possesses the middle as proprius locus
from which it cannot pass, and to which all heavy things tend in a right
line, as their terminus ad quem.

Prop. 3. By shadow we know the altitude of the Sun, as was showed partly
before; but here according to Pitiscus his example after this manner, let the
plane of the Horizon be GADEF* and in that let a gnem^m be perpendicularly
erected AB, the end B representing the center of the World, which gnomon let be
divided into equal parts, which here let be 100, and let there be observed the
right shadow of the Sun, AD struck from the highest part of the Suns body
at C, for the shadow AD is struck from the center; I cannot conceive by reason
that part of that shadow DE, from the upper bowing of the Sun is
perpendicularly illuminated, I say let the right shadow observed of the upper
bowing of the Sun 83 parts, also let the Angle A DB be inquired equal to the
Angle of the Altitude IBC, as AD the right shadow 83, to AB the gnomon 100, so
the Radius 100000, to AD 12040 the tangent of the angle ADB or IBC the Altitude
required 50 degrees. 18.

From which the semidiameter of the Sun 15 min. subtracted does remain the
Altitude of the center of the Sun 50 de. 3 m. the Altitude required, or

Let the vertical Plane be CED, and in the same the Gnomon OF perpendicularly
fixed, touching his extreme end, the center of the World F, and divided into
100 equal parts, and let the versed shadow of the Sun be EG 103 432 / 10000
parts, showing the Altitude of the lower part of the Sun: for the total shadow
EH, again, I cannot perceive because the part HG s illuminated from the lower
bowing of the Sun I, but let the Angle of the Altitude H FG or IL G be
required, I say as FE, the Gnomon 100, to EG the versed shadow 103 234 / 1000,
so FE the Radius 100000, to EG 103432 the Tangent of the Angle E FG or IFA,
that is the Ark IA 45 degrees. 58 m. to which if you do add the semidiameter of
the Sun IL 15 min. there is made the Altitude of the center of the Sun, 46 degrees.
13 min.

From this or the former Proposition we may take notice that there is no Dial
can show the exact time without the allowance of the Suns semidiameter: which
in a strict acception is true, but hereto Mr. Wells has answered in the 85
page of his Art of shadows, where says he, because the shadow of the center is
hindered by the style, the shadow of the hour-line proceeds from the limb
which always precedeth the center one min. of time answerable to 15 min. the
semidiameter of the Sun (which to allow in the height of the Style were
erroneous) wherefore let the al^owance be made in the hour lines, detracting
from the true Equinoctial distances of every 15 degrees. 15 primes, and so the
Arches of the horizontall plane from the Meridian shall stand thus.

Prop. 4. By shadow we may find the natural Tangent of every degree of a
quadrant, as appears by the former example.

Hours. Equinoctial distances. True hour distances. 12 0 de. m. de. m. se. 11
1 14 45 11 38 51 10 2 29 45 24 6 31 9 3 44 45 37 4 2 8 4 59 45 53 19 12 7 5 74
45 70 48 6 6 6 89 45 89 40 51

For the Sun being 46 degrees, 13 min. of Altitude makes a shadow of 95. parts of
such as the gnomon is 100, so then multiply the length of the gnomon 100 by the
Radius, and divide by 95, and it yields 105263 the natural Tangent of that Ark.

Prop. 5. By shadow we may take the height of any Building, by the Rule of
Proportion; if a gnomon of 6 foot high give a shadow of 10 foot: how high is
that house whose shadow is 25 foot? resolved by the Rule of Three.

Prop. 6. By shadow also we learn the magnitude of the Earth, according to
Eratosthenes his proposition.

Prop. 7. By shadow we learn the true Equinoctial line, running from East to
West, which crossed at right Angles is a true Meridian, where note, that in the
times of the Equinoctial that the shadows of one gnomon is all in one right
line.

Prop. 8. By shadow we know the Earth to be but as a point, as may appear by
the shadow of the Earth on the body of the Moon.

Prop. 9. By shadow we may learn the distance of places, by the quantity of the
obscurity of an Eclipse.

Prop. 10. By gnomonicals we make distinctions of Climates and People, some
Hetorezii, some Perezii, some Amphitii.

Prop. 11. By shadow the Climates are known, in the cold intemperate Zones the
shadow goes round. In the hot intemperate Zones the shadow is toward the West
at the rising Sun, and toward the East at the setting Sun, and no shadow at
Noones to them as dwell under the Parallels. And to them in the temperate Zones
always one way, toward the North, or toward the South.

Prop. 12. By shadow we are taught the Rule of delineating painting, according
to the perspective way, how much is to be light or dark, accordingly drawn as
the center is disposed to the eye: so the Office of shadow is manifold, as in
the Optical conclusions are more amply declared; therefore I refer you to
other more learned works, and desist to speak.

But for matter of Information, I will here insert certain definitions taken
out of Optica Agulion ii lib. 5.

First, says he, we call that a light body from whence light does proceed;
truly says he, the definition is plain, and wants not an Expositor, so say I,
it matters not whether you understand the luminous body: only that which does
glister by proper brightness as does the Sun, or that which does not shine but
by an external overflowing light, as does the Moon.

2. That we call a diaphon body, through which light may pass, and is the same
that Aristotle calls perspicuous.

3. It is called Adiopton, or Opacous; through which the light cannot pass, so
says he, you may easily collect from a diaphon body the definition of shadow:
for as that is transparent through which the light may pass: so also is that
opacous, or of a dense nature wherein the light cannot pass.

4. That is generated from a shining body, is called the first light, that has
his immediate beginning from the luminous body, it is called the second light,
which has his beginning from the first, the third which has his beginning
from the second, and so the rest in the same order.

Whence we make this distinction of day and light, day is but the second light,
receiving from the Sun the first, so that day is light, but the Sun is the
light.

5. Splendour is light repercussed from a pure polished body; and as light is
called so from the luminous body: so this is called splendent from the splendour.

Theor. Light does not only proceed from the Center, but from every part of
the superficies.

Theor. Light also is dispersed in right lines.

Theor* Light dispersed about every where, does collect into a Spherical body.

6. The beams of light, some are equi distant parallels, some intersect each
other, and some diversely shaped. Let A be the Light, a beam from A to B, and
another from C to D are parallel, A D and C B intersect; and the other two do
diversely happen, one ascending, the other descending: its plain.



7. That is called a full and perfect shadow, to which no beam of light does
come.

8. That is called a full and perfect light; which does proceed from all parts
of that which gives light; but that which gives light but in part, is
imperfect: this he exemplified by an Eclipse, the Moon interposing her self
between the Sun and Earth, does eclipse the perfect light of the Sun: whereby
there appears but a certain obscure, dim, glimmering light, and is so made
imperfect.

Hence we may learn to distinguish day from night; for day is but the presence
of the Sun by a perfect light received, which we count from Sun rising to Sun
setting.

Twy-light is but an imperfect light from the partial shining or neighborhood
with Sun: whereas Night is a total deprivation or perfect shadow, to which no
beam of light does appettain.

Yet from the overflowing light of the Sun, the Stars are illuminated; yet
because shadow is always in the opposite, those Stars that are in direct
opposition to the Sun, are obscure for that season, and hence proceeds the
Eclipse of the Moon.

Hence it is with the Sciothericalls as it is with the Dutch Emblamist,
comparing Love to a Dial, and the Sun with the Motto, Nil sine te, and his
comparison to

Coelestis cum me Sol aspicit ore sereno,
Protinus ad numeros men's reddit apta suos.
Implying that as soon as the Sun shines it returns to the number, so a Lover
seeing his Love on a high Tower, and a Sea between, yet ( protinus ad numeros)
he will swim the Sea and scale tbe Castle to return to her: So here lies the
gradation, first, from the Suns light, from the light by the opoacus body,
interposition, shadow, and from the shadow of the Axis is demonstrated the
hour. Add also, the beam and shadow of a gnomon, have one and the same
termination or ending, toward which I now draw my pen; desiring you to take
notice that the whole Method of Dialling, as may appear by the former
discourse, does seem to be fourfold, viz. Geometrical, Arithmetical, or by
Tables mechanically, or by Observation. So that the Art of shadows is no other
then a certain and demonstrative motion of the Heavens in any Plain or
Superficies, and a Gnomonical Hour is no other then a direct projecting of the
hour lines of any Plain; so as that it shall limit a Style so to cast its shadow
from one line to another, as that it shall be just the twenty-fourth part of
the natural day, which consists of 24 hours; and this I have laid down after
a most plain manner following: A gnomonical day is the same that the Artificial
day is; which the shadow of a gnomon makes from the rising of the Sun, till
the setting of the same in a concave superficies: which length of the day is
also projected from the motion of the shadow of the Style, a gnomonical Month
is also described on Planes, which is the space that the shadow of a Gnomon
makes from one Parallel of the sign, to an other succeeding Parallel of a
sign, again, a gnomonical year is limited by the shadow of a Gnomon, from a
point in the Meridian of the Tropic of Cancer, till it shall revolve to the
same Meridian Altitude and point of the Tropic, and is the same as is a
tropical year: wherefore, above all things we ought first tobe acquainted with
the knowledge of the Circles of the Sphaere* Secondly, to have a judicious and
exact discerning of those Planes in which we ought to project Dials. Thirdly,
to consider the Style, Quality, and Position of the axis or Style, with
consideration of the cause, nature and effects in such or such Planes as also
an artificial projecting of the same, either on a Superficies by a Geometrical
Knowledge, and reducing them to Tables by Arithmetic, which we have before
demonstrated, and come now to the conclusion: So that as I began with the Dial
of Life, So we shall Dye-all, For,

Mors ultima linea.
TO ABRAHAM CHAMBRELAN Esquire. S M. consecrateth his Court of Arts.
SIR.
IF the Original Light be manifestatiu, by it I have made a double discovery,
your genius did so discover it self according to the quality of the Sun, that I
am umbrated and passive like the eclipsed Moon, yet cannot but reflect a beam
which I have received from the fountain of Light; it is you which I make the
Patron to my fancy (which perhaps you may wonder at the Idleness of my head, to
tell you a dream, or a praeludium of the several Arts: howsoever knowing you
are a Lover of them, I did easily believe you could not but delight in the
Scaene; though in most I have written, I have in some sort imitated Nature it
self, which dispenses not her Light without Shadows, which will truly follow
them from whom they proceed, and shall Sir, in time to come render me like
Pentheus whose curiosity in prying into Secrets makes me uncertain. Et Solemn
Geminum duplices se ostendere Thebas, and while I know neither Copernicus, nor
Ptolomies Systeme of the World, dare affirmatively reject neither, but run
after both; and submitting my wisdom to the wisest of men, must conclude, that
Cuncta fecit tempestatibus suis pulchra, and has also set the World in their
meditation: Yet can not Man find out the Work that God has wrought. Sir,
pardon my boldness, in fastening this on your Patronage, who indeed are called
to this Court of Arts, as being Nobly descended, whom only it concerns; and
only whose Virtue has arrived them to the Temple of Honor, who are all
invited as appears in the conclusion of this imaginary description, wherein,
whilst I seem to be in a dream; yet Sir, I am certain, I know my self to be

Yours in all that I am able to serve you, S. M.

TOPOTHESIA. OR An IMAGINARY DESCRIPTION of the COURT of ART.
Coming into a Library of Learning, where there was more Languages then I had
Tongues, that if I had been asked to bring brick I should have brought mortar,
and going gradually along, as then but passus Geometricus, there I met Minerva,
which said unto me ( Vade mecum) and had not the expression of her gesture
be-spoke my company, I should have shunned her; she then taking me by the hand,
led me to the end, where sat one which was called as I did inquire, Clemency,
the name indeed I understood, but the Office I did not, whose Inscription was
Custos Artis, I being touched now with a desire to understand this Inscription;
began with Desire, and craving leave, used diligence to peruse the Library, and
found then a Book entitled the Gate of Languages, by that I had perused it, I
understood the forenamed Inscription, and craving leave of Clemency in what
respect she might be called the Keeper of Arts, who answered with Claudanus
thus;

Principio magni Custos Clementia Mundi,
Quae Jovis incoluit Zonam quae temper at Aethrum,
Frigoris and flammae mediam quae maxima natu,
Coelicolum: nam prima Chaos Clementia solvit,
Congeriem miserata rudem, vultuque sereno,
Discussus tenebris in lucem saecula fundit.
And arising from a Globe which was then her seat, she began to discourse of
the Nature and Magnitude of the Terrestiall body, and propounded to me
questions: as first,

If one degree answerable to a Celestial degree yield 60 miles, what shall
360 degrees yield, the proportion was so plainly propounded, that I resolved it
by the ordinary rule of Proportion, she seeing the resolution, propounded
again, and said, if this solid Body were cut from the center how many solid
obtuse angles might be cut from thence, at this I stumbled, and desired,
considering my small practice, that she would reduce this Chaos also, and turn
darkness into light: seeing then my desire and diligence bid me make
observation for those three were the ways to bring me to peace, and resolved,
that as from the center of a Circle but three obtuse angles could be struck, so
from the center of a Globe, but three such angles could be struck and from
thence fell to another question, and asked what I thought of the motion of that
body: I answered, Motion I thought it had none, seeing I had such Secretaries
of Nature on my side, and was loath to join my forces with the Copernicans.

She answered, it was part of folly to condemn without knowing the reasons, I
said it should still remain a Hypothesis to me, but not a firm Axiom: for the
resolution of which I will only sing as sometimes other Poets sang concerning
the beginning of the world, and invert the sense only, as that in another
case, so this for our purppse.

If Tellus winged be
The Earth a motion round,
Then much deceived are they
That it before nere found.
Solomon was the wisest,
His wit never this attained;
Cease then Copernicus,
Thy Hypothesis vain.
And he says, man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun, and
if it be so, how comes it that a cloud, which is but the motion of the air; if
it move westerly, that the earth does not leave it behind, seeing that is of a
more swift motion; but clemency told me, it was not for man to inquire of the
things unrevealed, least he wade from his own, till he come beyond his own
depth, and come short of his expected shore; the truth is the same, if we
suppose the earth to move, and the rising of the Sun, Moon, and Stars shall
keep the same correspondence that now. Beside, if the great Body of the Heavens
should move, it must move 42 398437 and a half, a motion incredible, whereas if
the earth move about, it does not move a thousand miles in an hour: if you
allow the earth 24 thousand miles in compass, which is more then your
Astronomers allow. Then in respect of yet an unresolved novelty, I propounded
another question to her, whether it were probable to be a habitable world in
the Moon, to which Clemency made answer, if that were maintained, she would ask
them but one question, and leave them in a dilemma for their salvation, viz.
Did Christ suffer in the Jerusalem above, or here below? now there is no
Jerusalem above but the glorified Jerusalem; but if there be a Jerusalem also
in that planet, then take which you will: if Christ dyed there, there the old
Adam was made alive, and his death quid proficit te? if he dyed here? either
they are no sinners, or he came not to save sinners: I thanked her, and turning
spoke to Minerva, desired she would now show me part of her Diety; she asked me
what I would learn, I told her Dyalling; she then after many Definitions of
such Circles as were on the Globe, turning it about, set it to the Elevation,
and said; this done, put the Equinoctial colure under the meridian, which is
the circle described between Aries and Libra, passing by the two poles, then
number 15 degrees on the Equator, and where the circle passing through that
point does cross the horizon, that is the distance of the first hour, which
measure on the degree of the horizon, for the second hour, number that colure
30 degrees, for the third 45, for the fourth-60 degrees, etc. on the horizon;
so having the hour distances on the horizon, it is aesie to protract them down
with a chord or part of a Circle; but the more to exercise you, I will leave the
others to you to conceive, and must apply my self elsewhere: in the mean, I
will commit you into the hands of two of my attendants, and so bid me take my
leave of Clemency, and follow her, for in the paths of virtue, there was to be
no stay, and so brought me into a yard, where stood a pillar, consecrated to
Art, where on the South side stood Astronomia, respecting the Sun, and on the
North side Geographia, respecting the Pole: but their Instruments only remains,
as it fell out happened to come while I was there. So that Clarentieux his
share fell to Astronomia, and Norroy to Geographia, to show that Art as well as
Antiquity. shall have possession of the North and South, and so Minerva took
her leave. Then I fell in the protection of Geographia, who had a marine
compass in her hand, he and it always respecting one star.

And began to discourse of the longitude of the earth, and then I demanded what
benefit might incur from thence to a young Diallist, she answered above all
one most necessary Problem, which we may find in Petiscus his example, and
propounded it thus; The difference of meridians given, to find the difference
of hours.

If the place be easterly, add the difference of longitude converted into time
to the hours given: if it be westerly, substract the easterly places, whose
longitude is greater and contra, as in Petiscus his example, the meridian of
Cracovia is 45 degrees. 30 min. the longitude of the meridian of Heidelberge is 30
degrees, 45 minutes, therefore Heidleberg is the more westerly.

One subtracted from
45 30 30 45
the other shows the difference of longitude, to which degrees and minutes
does answer o ho. 59 m. for as

^ Therefore when it is 2 hours post merid. at Cracovia; at Neidelberg, it is
but 1 hour, 1 minute past noon. For,

^

There is left 1 hour 1 minute.

Thus out of the difference of meridians, the diverse situation of the heavens
is known, and from the line of appearances of the heavens, the diverse hours of
diverse places is known, and this is the foundation of observing the longitude:
if it be observed what hour an Eclipse appears in one place, and what in
another, the difference of time would show the longitude, and hereby you may
make a dyall that together with the proper place of elevation, shall show for
any other country; for this Proposition I did heartily gratify Geographia, and
turning, said Astronomy, why stand you so sad? she answered, Art is grown
contemptible, and every one was ready to say ( Astrologus est Gastrologus) then
I said, what though virtue was despised, yet let them take this answer:

Thou that contemnest Art
And makes it not regarded,
In Court of Art shall have no part
None there but Arts rewarded.
Gnashing the teeth as if ye strive to blame it,
Yet know I Will spare no cost for to obtein it.
Perceiving your willingness said Astronomy, I will yet extend my charity and
lay down the numbers, so that if you add the second and third and substract the
first, it shall give the fourth; the question demanded, and then I being
careful of the tuition of what she should say, took a Tablebook and writ them
as follows.

1 The sine comp. elevation pole 38, sine 90; sine of the decl. of the sun
yields the sine of the amplitude ortive: which is the distance of the suns
rising from due East. 2 The sine 90, the sine ele. pole 51d; the sine of decli.
yields the sine of the suns height at six a clock. 3 Sine comp. of altitude of
the sun, sine comp. declina. sine 90; the sine of the angle of the vertical
circle, and the meridian for the Azimuth of the sun at the hour of 6: The
Azimuth is that point of the compass the sun is on. 4 Sine comp. decli. of the
sun: sine compl. eleva. pole 38d, sine Altitude of the sun; the hour distance
from six. 5 Sine compl. of decli. sine 90; compl, of sine suns amplitude to
sine compl. of the Assentional difference. 6 The sine of the difference of
assention, Tang. decli. sun; sine 90: Tangent complement of the elivation. 7
Sine altitude of the sun, sine declina. of the sun; sine 90: Elevation of the
pole. 8 Sine 90, sine com. of distance from 6; sine com. declination of the
sun: sine comp. of the altitude sun. 9 Sine 90, sine eleva. pole; sine alti. of
a star: sine decli. of that star. 10 The sine of a stars altitude in an east
Azimuth, sine amplitude ortive; sine 90: sine of the elevation. 11 The greatest
meridian altitude, the less subtracted sines; the distance of the Tropicks,
whose half distance is the greatest declination of the sun; which added to the
least meridian altitude, or subtracted from the greater, leaves the altitude of
the Equator: the complement whereof, is the elevation of the pole. 12 Tang.
eleva. pole, sine 90; Tang. decli. of the sun, to the cosine of the hour from
the meridian, when the sun will be due east or west.
By these Propositions said Astronomy, you may much benifit your self; but let
us now go see the Court of Art: I liked the motion, and we went and behold the
sight had like to made me a Delinquent, for I saw naught but a poor Anatomy
sitting on the earth naked exposed to the open Air, which made me think on the
hardness of a Child of Art, that it had neither house nor bed, and now being
at a pitch high enough resolve never to follow it: this Anatomy also it seems
was ruled by many, both Rams, and Bulls and Lions, for he was descanted thus on.

Anatomy why do not make thy moan,

So many limbs, and yet can govern none;
Thy head although it have a manly sign,
Yet art thou placed on watery feminine.
It Is true, yet strong, but prithee let me tell ye,
Let not the Virgin always rule your belly:
For what, although the Lion rule your heart;
The weakest vessel will get the strongest part.
Then be content set not your foot upon
A slippery fish, that is in an instant gone;
A slippery woman, who at Cupids call
Will slip away, and so give you a fall:
And if Rams horns she do on your head place;
It is a dangerous slip, may spoil your face.
Here at I smiled, then said Astronomy, what is your thought? then said I, do
men or Artists so depend on women, as that their strength consists in them? she
said, I misunderstand him, for the Ram that rules the head is a sign
masculine, because it is hot and dry, the Fish that rules the feet is cold and
moist is therefore called feminine.

Pisces the Fish you know's a watery creature,

It Is slippery, and shows a woman's nature;
So women in their best performance fail,
There Is no more hold then in a Fishes tail.
But the more to affect the beholder, I will typigraphe this Court of Art.



Under was written these lines, to show man's misery by the fall, which I will
deliver you, as follows:

When Chaos became Cosmos, oh Lord! than
How excellent was Microcosmus, Man
When he was subject to the Makers will,
Stars influence could no way work him ill:
But since his fall his stage did open lie,
And Constellations work his destiny.
Thus man no sooner in the World did enter,
But of the Circumference is the Center.
And then came in Virtue, making a speech, and said;

Honor to him, that honor does belong:
You stripling Artist, coming through this throng,
Have found out Virtue that does stand to take
You by the hand, and Gentleman you make.
For Geometry, I care not who does hear it,
May bear in shield Coat Armor by his merit:
We respect merit, our love is not so cold,
We love men's worth (not in love with men's gold)
Not Herald-like to sell, an Arms we give;
Honor to them that honorably live.
And then she told me, she would leave me, and withal said there was an Arms
for my reward, and I loath to leave her made Apologies for her stay, which I
could not obtein, then I prayed Astronomy to be my Associate, but he said, she
could go no further then Virtue would give her leave: this done, my dream
vanished, and I awaked, but I found my self in a maze, and began to think my
self to be a Child of Art, finding my self without a house, though those
Planets which have their names from Error wandering had two houses, only the
Sun and Moon were in Conjunction, and had but one house a piece, while I was in
this muse, and this maze, which my memory has here depicted, there appeared
unto me one in a long robe, named Caliope, which was the first and highest of
the 9 Muses, who said unto me, why art thou so distracted? to whom I told; the
progression I had made in the Court of Art, and how I was bereft of all her
lovers, and had only the appearance of a reward, being a Coat of Arms; which
while I looked after a painted show, I find I had but a seeming amends, then
said Caliope, thou have obtained a favor beyond thy expectation, for thou art
brought to the Temple of honor by the hand of Virtue, and whereas before thou
saw the outward Court, I shall now show thee the inward Garden, wherein thou
may take notice first of this maze so ordered, that if thou set thy foot
in Aries, and continues thy course, thou shall find it to be one of the houses
of Mars, and continuing this course by the same line it shall bring thee to
Scorpio, the other house of the same Planet: so that thou see here a way
whereby thou may presently know the several houses of the Planets, for the
signs thou see beginning with Aquarius are successive, as also the Planets in
their order, and if the one sign be the day house of one Planet, the next is
the night house of the next Planet, and if thou account this first sign for
January, and so the months successively, thou know in what sign the Sun is
in. I being pleased at these speculations, I was led to an Arbor Royal, where
I saw that that gave me yet more content, for there methought I saw over the
entrance thereof a fair Coat of Arms, which being my profession, I was
inquisitive at that time to blazon it, but being then in the presence of
Caliope, the Goddess of Heralds, I desired her to blazon that Coat (which she
said was that Arms as was given to me and Artists) she then said unto me, that
because I professed a love to the Mathematics, it was most proper to be
blazoned by Planets, and began thus.

The noble Professors of the Sciences, may bear as is here blazoned, ( viz.)
the field is Jupiter, Sun and Moon in conjunction proper, in a chief of the
second, Saturn, Venus, Mercury in trine or perfect amity; and Mars in the
center of them; Mantled of the Light, doubled of the night, and on a wreath of
its colors a Helitropian or Marigold of the color of Helion with this Motto,
Quod est superius, est sicut inferius; then did I desire to know, what did each
Planet signify in color, she then told me as follows.

Or Gold Argent Silver Gules Red Azure Blew Sable Black Vert Green Purpre Purple

And by mantled of Light, she meant Argent and of the night she meant an Azure
mantle, powdered with Estoiles, or Stars Silver. I indeed liked the Blazon, and
went in, where also I found a fair Genealogy of the Arts proceeding from the
Conjunction of Arithmetic and Geometry collected by the famous Beda Dee in his
Mathematical Praeface. Both number and magnitude says he have a certain
original seed of an incredible property; of number a unit, of magnitude a
point.

Number, is the union and unity of Unites, and is called Arithmetic. Magnitude
is a thing Mathematical* and is divisible for ever, and is called Geometry.
Geodesie, or Land measuring Geographia, showing ways either in spherick,
plane, or other the situation of Cities, Towns, Villages, etc Chorographia,
teaching how to describe a small proportion of ground, not regarding what it
has to the whole etc. Hydrographia, showing on a Globe or Plane the
analogicall description of the Ocean, Seacoasts, through the world, etc.
N^vigation, demonstrating how by the shortest way, and in the shortest time a
sufficient Ship, between any two places in passages navigable assigned, may be
conducted, etc. Perspective, is an art Mathematical which demonstrateth the
properties of Radiations, direct, broken, and reflected Astronomy demonstrates
the distance of magnitudes and natural motions, apparances and passions proper
to the Planets and fixed stars. Cosmographie; the whole and perfect description
of the heavenly, and also elementall part of the world and their homologall and
mutual collation necessary. Stratarithmetrie. is the ki^^ appertaining to the
War^^, to set in figure any number of men appointed: differing from Tacticie
which is the wisdom and foresight. Music, says Plato, is sister to
Astronomy, and is a Science Mathematical, which teaches by sense and reason
perfectly, to judge and order the diversity of sounds high and low. Astrology,
several from, but an offspring of Astronomy, which demonstrated reasonably
the operation and effects of the natural beams of light, and secret influence
of the Stars.
Statick; is an Art Mathematical, demonstrating the causes of heaviness and
lightness of things. ^^thropographie, being the description of the number,
weight, figure, s^^uation and color of every diverse thing contained in the
body of man. Trochilike, descended of number and measure, demonstrating the
properties of wheel or circular motions, whether simple or compound, near
Sister to whom is Holicosophie, which is seen in the describing of the several
conicall Sections and Hyperbolicalline in plants of Dyals or other by Spirall
lines, Cylinder, Cone, etc. Pneumatithmie, demonstrating by close hollow
figures Geometrical, the strange properties of motion, or stay of water, air,
smoke, fire in their continuity. Menadrie, which demonstrateth how above
natures virtue and force, power may be multiplied* Hypogeodie, being also a
child of Mathematical Arts, showing how under the sphaericall superficies of
the earth at any depth to any perpendicular assigned, to know both the distance
and Azimuth from the entrance. Hydragogie, demonstrating the possible leading
of water by Natures law, and by artificial help. H^rometrie, or this present
work of Horologiographia, of which it is said, the commodity thereof no man
would want that could know how to bestow his time. ^ographie, demonstrating how
the intersection of all visuall Pyramids made by any plane assigned, the
center, distance and lights, may be by lines and proper colors represented.
Then followed Architecture, as chief Master, with whom remained the
demonstrative reason and cause of the Mechanic work in line, plane and solid,
by the help of all the forementioned Sciences. Thaumaturgike, giving certain
order to make strange works, of the sense to be perceived, and greatly to be
wondered at. Arthemeastire, teaching to bring to actual experience, all worthy
conclusions by the Arts Mathematical.

While I was busied in this employment which indeed is my calling, I questioned
Caliopie, why she put the note of Illegitimacy upon Astrology; she said, it
indeed made Astronomy her father, but it was never owned to participate of the
inheritance of the Arts, and therefore the Pedigree does very fitly say, does
reasonably not, quasi Intellective* but Imperfective; then did I ask again, why
Arithmetic had the distinction of an elder brother the Labell, she told me,
because it was the unity of units, and has three files united in one Lambeaux,
and did therefore signify a mystery, then said I, why do you represent
magnitude by the distinction of a second Brother, to which she said, because as
the Moon, so magnitude in increasing or decreasing is the same in reason, then
did she being the principal of the nine Muses, and Goddess of Heralds summon
to Urania, and so to all the other to be silent, at which silence was heard
Harmonicon Coeleste by the various Motions of the Heavens, and Fame her
Trumpeter sounded forth the praise of men, famous in their generation; and
concluded with the Dedication and Consecration of the Court of Arts in these
words of the learned Vencelaus Clemens.

Templum hoc sacrum est, Pietati, Virtuti,
Honori, Amori, Fidei, semi Deum ergo, and
Coelo Ductum genus, vos magni minoresque Dei,
Vos turba ministra Deorum vos inquam.
Sancti Davides, magnanimi Hercules, generosi Megistanes
Bellicosi Alexandri, gloriosi Augusti, docti Platones,
Facundi Nestores, imici Jonathanes, fidi Achatae.
Uno verbo boni
Huc adeste, praeiste, prodeste
Vos vero orbis propudia
Impii Holophernes, dolosi Achitopheles, superbi Amanes,
Truculenti Herodes, proditorus Judae, impuri Nerones,
Falsi Sinones, seditiosi Catilinae, apostatae Juliani.
Adeoque, quicunque, quacunque, quodcunque es
Malus, mala, malum, exeste
Procul hinc procul ite prophani.
Templi hujus Pietas excubat antefores,
Virtute and Honor vigilantibus
Amore and fide assistentibus
Reliqua providente aedituo Memoria,
Apud quam nomin^ profiteri
Fas and Jura sin^nt.
Quantum hoc est? tantum
Vos caetera, quos demisse compellamus, praestabitis,
Vivite, vincite, valete, Favete.
Et vos o viri omnium ordinum, Dignitatum, Honorum, spectatissimi amplissimi,
christianissimi, etc.

Which being done, the Muses left me, and I found my self like Memnon, or a
youth too forward, who being as the learned Sir Francis Bacon says, animated
with popular applause, did in a rash boldness come to encounter in single
combat with Achilles the valiantest of the Grecians, which if like him I am
overcome by greater Artists, yet I doubt not but this work shall have the same
obsequies of pity shed upon it, as upon the son of Aurora's Bright Armor,
upon whose statue the sun reflecting with its morning beams, did usually send
forth a mourning sound. And if you say, I had better have followed my Heraldry
(being it is my calling) henceforth you shall find me in my own sphere.

FINIS.

