THE WELSH MAN'S INVENTORY HAN INFENTORY OF THE COVDES OF William Morgan, ap
Renald, ap Hugh, ap Richard, ap Thomas, ap Evan, ap Rice, in the County of
Clamorgan, Shentleman.


INprimis in the pantry of poultry for her own eating, one great pigge 4.
week old, one Coose, one Cock gilding, two black pudding, three Cowfoot.

Item, in the pantry of plate, one Cridiorn, one frypan, one trippan, three
wooden Cup, six wooden spoone, one wooden ladle, three Cann.

Item, in the Napery, two towell, two table cloth, four Napkin, one for her
self, one for her wife Shone, two for her cosen Sh^n ap powell, and Thomas ap
Hugh when was come to her house.

Item, in the Wardrope one Irish Rugg, one frize shirkin, one sheep skin
Tublet, two Irish stockin, two shoe, six leather point.

Item, in the Tarry, one tosting she is, three Oaten cake, three point of Coat
milk, one pound Cow putter.

Item, in the Kitchen, one pan with white curd, two white pot, two Redherring
nine Sprat.

Item, in the Celler, one firkin of whiggan, a sower sider, one pint of pirry,
one little pottle of Carmarden Sack, alias Metheglin.

Item, in the Armory of weapon to kill her enemy, one pack sword two edge, two
welsh hook, three long Club, one Cunn, one mouse-trap.

Item, in the Carden, one ped Carleke, nine Onion, twelve Leek, twelve worm
six frog.

Item, in the Leasway, two Tun cow, one Muntaine calfe.

Item, in the common field, two welsh Nag, twelve long leg sheep, fourteen and
twenty Coat.

Item, in the proome close, three Robbin Runhole, four hare, her own coods if
her can catch her.

Item, in the Parne, one half heblet of Oate, seven pea, two peane.

Item, in the study, py cod was almost forgot her, one welsh piple, two
Almanac, one Errapater, one seven Chapions for St. Taffie sake, twelve pullet,
one pedigree.

Jtem, in the Closet, two straw hat, one pouse.

Jtem, in the ped, two naked pody, one shirt, one flannell smock at her peds
head

Item, more cattle about the house, two Tog three cat, twelve mouse, pox on her
was eat her tossed she is 1000. white flea with plack pack.

Item, more lumber about the house one wife, two shild, one call her plack
shack, and the the other little Morgan.

Item, in the yard under the Wall one Wheel, two pucket, one ladder two Rope.

This infentory taken note of in the presence of her own cosen Rowland
Meridith, ap Howell, and Lewellin Morgan, ap William, in Anno 1849. upon the
ten and thirty of Shune.

A Note of some Legacy of a creat deal of goods bequeathed to her own wife
and her two shild, and all her cosens, friends and kindred, in manner as
follows.

Inprimis, was give to her teere wife Shone Morgan owl her couds in the ped,
over the ped and under the ped.

Item, was give to her eldest son plack shack, 40 and 12 card to play at whippe
sh^ay 4 Ty to sheat her cosen, besides all her land to the full fallu of 20.
and ten shillings three groat, per Annum.

Item, was give to her second son little Morgan ap Morgan, her short ladder
under the wall in the yard and two Rop.

Item, was give to her cosen Roland Merith, ap howell and Lewellin Morgan, whom
was make her Executor full power to pay owl her Te^, when her can get money.

Scaled and telivered in the presence of Evan ap Richard a shinkin ap shone,
her own cosen, the Tay and year above written.

FINIS.
LONDON. Printed for Thomas Lambert dwelling in Smithfield, 1641.


