THE NECESSITY OF Christian Subjection.

Demonstrated, and proved by the Doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles; the
practice of Primitive Christians, the rules of Religion, cases of conscience,
and consent of latter Orthodox Divines, That the power of the King is not of
Humane, but of Divine Right; and that God only is the efficient cause thereof.

Whereunto is added, An Appendix of all the chief Objections that malice it
self could lay upon His Majesty, with a full Answer to every particular
Objection.

Also a Tract entitled, CHRISTVS DEI, Wherein is proved that our Sovereign
Lord the King is not only Major singulis, but Major universis.

1 PET. 2.17. Fear God, Honor the King.

OXFORD Printed in the Year. 1643.

THE NECESSITY OF CHRISTIAN SUBJECTION.
ROM* 13.5* Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake.


WOuld men but meditate, or were they persuaded of the truth of the Prophets
speech, (1 Samuel 15.22.23.) Behold to obey is better then Sacrifice, and to
hearken then the fat of Rams; for Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and
stubbornness is as Iniquity and Idolatry. (Were they I say persuaded of this
truth) there would not be so little hearkening to the commands of Authority,
nor so little obeying what they hear; nor would men run so fiercely into the
fearful sin of Rebellion, only to maintain and justify their own
sacrifice of fools; Eccle. 5.1. Olympio. do^. in lo^.
which is indeed no other then their foolish imaginations have devised, and
their vain thoughts have set up as an Idol to themselves. Or were we not
fallen into those last and worst of times prophesied of by the Apostle (2 Timothy
3.1.5.) wherein men that make show of godliness (yea many that most show of
it) have only a show, but deny the power of it, being proud, cursed speakers,
disobedient to parents: Proud indeed, when they dare exalt themselves against
Gods Vicegerent; His Majesty's large Declaration, p. 12. 13 225. 256. 257. etc.
Cursed speakers, when they dare libell and slander Prince and Prelate;
Disobedient to Parents, Natural, Ecclesiastical, and Political were we not I
say fallen into such times, I should not need to (...) the Apostles inference,
which the unseasonable sins of these seasons make so seasonable: [Wherefore ye
must needs be subject, etc.]

In which words, Infert conclusionem Principaliter intentam, Aq. wherein;
Concludit Paraenesin subjectionis ejusque necessitatem, Roll. showing that we
must obey the Magistrate, not only for fear of punishment, but much more
because that (although the Magistrate has no power over the conscience of man,
yet seeing he is Gods Minister) he cannot be resisted by any good conscience,
Gen: Notes, ex Calv, and Bez. In qua duas potissimum urget causas ob quas
potestatibus necessario obediendum, Marlor. First their power to cause fear of
wrath. Secondly our conscience to obey Gods ordinance; In respect of both which
we must be subject not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake:

Wherein I shall consider these 5 particulars.

1. The Illation, [Wherefore,] 2. The Duty, [subject] 3. The Necessity, [must
needs] 4. The persons obliged, [Ye] 5. The Reasons persuading, and those
twofold: 1. From fear of wrath, although [not only for wrath.] 2. For
conscience, [But also for conscience sake.]

Aquin. Lyr. Calv. Bez. Marlor. Rolloc.
1. The Illation and inference in this word [Wherefore] being a conclusion,
wherein Quod initio praeceperat de praestanda Magistratibus obedientia, nunc
per modum collectionis repetit, sed cum expositione: Calv. It will be
convenient for conceiving fully the Apostles meaning, and the force of his
Arguments, and the drift of this conclusion, that we reflict back as far as
the beginning of this Chapter; where (besides those two mentioned, verse. 4. Of
1. Terror to the ill, which I reserve to be handled under that of wrath. 2. And
Reward to the good, which I refer to that of conscience.) We shall find
four Reasons premised to enforce this conclusion, [Wherefore ye must needs be
subject, etc.]

1. First, (...), ( v. 1.) for there is no power but of God. How much soever we
may perhaps dislike them, and how ill soever they may sometimes use their
power; As Pilate did his, Jo. 19.20. Matthew. 27.26.
in crucifying him whom he should have closed, and loosing him whom he should
have crucified, yet our Savior himself acknowledges, that even this abused
power was (...), given him from above; ( Ioh. 19.11.) For misery comes not out
of the dust, neither does affliction spring out of the earth: ( Job. 5.6.) But
as Omne bonum desuper, August. de Civitat. Dei, l. 5. c. 21.
Every good gift is from above, ( Iam. 1.17.) so is there no evil in the City,
and the Lord has not done it, ( Amos 3.6.) (i.e.) Majum poena, no evil of
punishment.

Per me Reges regnant, By me Kings reign, is the general ground of the
Charter, both of good and evil Princes, and Nobles, and all the Judges of the
earth, ( Prove. 8.15.16.) He it is that raises unto David a righteous branch, a
King who shall reign and prosper, and execute judgment and justice upon the
earth, Jer. 33.5, 6. Hos. 13.11.
in whose days the people shall be safe; And he it is that gives an evil King
in his anger, and takes a good King away in his wrath: Qui regnare facit
hominem hypocritam propter peccata populi. (Job. 34.30.) vulg. So that whether
they be good or evil, we must be subject, sithence there is no power but of
God; (...), lest we will be found fighters against God, Act. 5.39.
whose power none is able to resist, whether it be for protecting or for
punishing; [Wherefore we must needs be subject.]

2. Secondly, they are not only not without God, (...), Citat.
and so of him permissive; but they are the ordinance of God himself, and so of
him positive, (...), ordained of God ( v. 1.) whereupon they worthily use in
their style, not only Permissione Divina, or Providentia Divina, although
those be good titles taken in a good sense; (yet they imply some intermediate
means betwixt God and those who bear them:) But Princes write Dei Gratia: for
by the Grace of God (no favor of man) they are what they are; so that I may
say of their government, Gal. 1.1.
as Saint Paul said of his Apostleship, It is not of man, nor by man, but by
Jesus Christ, and God the Father, For, Cujus jussu homines nascuntar, hujus
jussu and Reges constituuntur; apti his, qui in illo tempore ab ipsis regantur.
(Iren. lib 5 cap. 24.) Which may be demonstratively evidenced, if we shall take
a survey of the Series, and succession of Governors, from the first man that
was placed upon the earth, whom we find created with an intention to make him
Gods Vicegerent; ( Genesis 1.26.) and at his very first setting foot upon the
earth, actually invested with Monarchical government; ( ver. 27.28.) That
government being indeed the special form, Boet. de unit. and uno. Apoc. 4.11.
Romans 11.36.
whereby he could resemble the image of God who is in Heaven, as he made him
upon Earth the sole unequalled Monarch, from whom alone Quicquid est ab uno
est, and est id quod est; and therefore he is worthy to receive glory, and
honor, and power, for of him, and for him, and through him are all things.

Nor was it his intention that he should only govern the Beasts already
created, But also he made him to be the Monarch, And confirmed his Authority
Iure naturali, Potestate patria, over all mankind, T^eophil. l. 2. Chrysostom.
Hom. 34. in 1 Co^.
which should be propagated after him; who as the Angels and those of Heaven,
had their beginning from God by Creation, and therefore were subject to him; so
all the Armies upon earth were to deduce their offspring from that one Adam by
Generation, and so to owe to him subjection; whereas had not God intended to
have Principality, depended only upon his own institution and not upon the
subordinate Nobles, nor the multitudes of popular election, It had been as
easy for him, to have Created a Company, a Colony, a Country, a Nation, a
World of men upon earth, with his own faciamus, As it was, and as he did, so
many Legions of Angels in the Heavens; that so out of those choice Colonies
themselves might have made choice of a Commander. But he, who found the Heavens
not free from mutiny, when he produced a multitude of inhabitants there,
although all were his offspring, Apoc. 12.
would not give the least color to contention, for superiority or equality,
nor pretext of disobedience against his Monarch upon earth, whilst he suffers
no Subject to be set by him but such as owed the Subjection and duty of a Son
in Descending from him; Thereby teaching all posterity, how the power of a
Prince over his Subjects is, and ought to be acknowledged, as natural, as the
power of a Father is over his son; yea and also thereby signifying, That as
Naturally there can be but one Father of one Child, Theophil. Chrysostom. ubi
supr.
So Politiquely there should be but one Prince and Monarch of one People and
Nation. Whereupon God did not create two men (no nor Eve, but out of the rib of
Adam) that so from them all others should issue, and they might rule
promiscuously, or that each of them should rule such as would make choice to be
under his government, rather then under the others, Gen 10.9, 10.
(although perhaps propagated of the other) Nor that the mightiest Hunter, he,
that could get most, should govern most, as afterward it fell out in the
degenerating days of Nymrod. But he created only one, Dan. Aphoas, Polit. p.
402. 24.
thereby to intimate, How far Monarchical government is to be preferred before
any other, Aristocraticall, Democraticall, Oligarchicall, or the like. This and
this alone of man on earth, being an Idea or resemblance of Gods government in
Heaven; and we pray daily, that his will may be done on earth as it is in
heaven; And how can it be so, if we reject or resist that form of government?
Marth. 6.10.
As also, thereby he implies, that all other forms of government are against
the course of nature, different from the pattern of heaven, diverse from
divine institution, and indeed punishments rather then blessed governments, If
they be compared with Monarchy; Which made the wisest of Kings affirm, that
many Princes are imposed for the transgression of a Land, But that Realm only
indures long which is ruled by one man of understanding and knowledge ( Prove.
28.2.) Which Doctrine seems to be squared to Gods own practice throughout all
ages, whenever he designed any government over his people the Jews (after
they were taken notice of for his peculiar) although for a long time he
retained the royal supreme Title of King to himself, (during which time, 1 Samuel 8.
he often times immediately delivered his Regal mandates by Urlm, Thummim,
Visions, Oracles, Prophesies. etc.) Yet he appointed one Supreme Vicegerent
over them, and not many (for as for the Sanhedrine they were but as Moses or
the High priests Privy Council, Or as delegated Judges because of the
multiplicity of businesses) One I say and not many, Judge. c. 10 c. 15.
witness Moses 40. years betwixt Egypt and Canaan, Joshua near 60. years
settling them in Canaan, after them Judah, after him Othniell, then Ehud, then
Shamgar, then Deborah, then Gideon, then Tolah, then Iair, then Iephthah, then
Sampson, But never above one at one time. And how lamentable the times were
when there was not one Supreme, but the multitude took power into their own
hands; that hideous story of the licentious Danites, Judge. 19, and 20.
and the ravished Levites wife, and the revenge of one upon another may serve
to astonish all posterity, and affright them from affecting Anarchie; yea and
when God, after that he had in mercy looked upon their misery, sent them new
Judges, Holy, and Samuel successively, and they not therewith satisfied would
have a King like other Nations, he does not set several Kings over them, 2 Samuel
8.5 Josh. 12.
as Joshua found 31. over the land at their entrance, but he appointed them
only one King (1 Samuel 8.22.) As being safest for his people, best resembling
his government and most agreeable to his Ordinance; Wherefore we must needs
be subject to such form of government, for it is the Ordinance of God.

Oh! how much therefore are those too blame who go about to alter this form
of government, and to introduce a new deformed device of their own ambitious
invention, wherein they are not agreed, whether they shall be styled, 1. The
States of England as some of their Preachers (forgetting the King in their
prayers) have sycophantically phrased them; 2. Or whether they shall be
entitled, The perpetual Senate, or Assessours of the kingdom, as some have
endeavored to derive their style, as the Impresse of a Republic; 3. Or
whether they shall be dignified with the Princely Attribute of Gentlemen of the
Crown of England (to which should be annexed the power of electing their King
although hereditary) as some of themselves have ambitiously expressed their
affectation in assimilation to that of Poland; only to the end that themselves
might be sharers in Supremacy. A Government which admitting a Monarch whom yet
they dare not deny, is neither Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy, nor
Oligarchie; and Anarchie, I dare say, they would not have it entitled; A
Government which if Aristotle himself were to sit in Council at their close
Committees, he could not yet resolve what to call it, a government never
grounded on the Ordinance of God, nor practiced in any established
Commonweal. And what fearful effects must necessarily follow it, Besides,
that it is to conjecture when men leave the fountains of the living waters,
and take themselves to Cisterns of their own digging. It may also be apparent
to any indifferent understanding who reads or hears the story of Hen. 3. when
there was an attempt of 24. Assessours and a traiterous appointing Les Douze
Piers, Speed H. 3. p. 635. ex. Mat. Westmonast. Martin. H. 3. p. 66, 67, 70,
71, 73, 74.
far short of this confused insolency, what Robberies, what Rapes, what
Murders, what Burglaries, what Extortions, what Exactions followed, (every one
shrouding himself under that Assessour, which he followed, yea and every one of
the Assessours after a little time, bandying himself against another, either
for their own faction, or favoring of their followers) is rather to be
imagined then reported, yet those times too really felt it, and all must
necessarily taste the like bitter fruit, who will plant and nurse the tree of
popular faction.

Upon the Lords Prayer.
And alas how foolish and fond of flitting (to use King James his Scottish
Proverb in another case) are those people which will be bewitched to follow
these many-headed Hydra's, before the voice of the Lamb, and never consider
that old Adage Citius impletur unus saccus, quam plures? has there been so
much pains bestowed in vain, if it be in vain, (As the Apostle speaks in
another case) to bring this Kingdom from an Heptarchie to a Monarchy; that
now one part of this Island should be turned from a Monarchiy to a Roman
Decemvirate, a Venetian Senate, a Low Country State, nay to the government
without a name, God forbid: Vis unita fortior, but a Kingdom divided cannot
stand. Mat. 12.25.
I beseech you therefore brethren mark them diligently which cause divisions
amongst you, and avoid them: ( Romans 16.17.) for those who at first cause
divisions, in Opinion, in Doctrine, and in Religion, will at the length attempt
divisions in Government, in Policy, in Countries and Kingdoms. Let us in the
fear of God consider with our selves, That if there be no power but of God,
even the punishing and persecuting power, and if we must be subject even to
that, lest we should fight against God, Esaias 49.23.
Oh how much more then, where Kings are nursing fathers, ought we to show our
subjection with all readiness and cheerfulness? If Saint Paul enforce
obedience to the Prince with so many forcible arguments, when that Tyrant Nero
(who devoured Christians like a Lion) reigned and raged. Oh how should we urge
and press this point, when a Constantine, a Patron of the Church, and pattern
of piety is our president in religious exercises, 2 Timothy 4.17.
as well as president over us with righteous government: for certainly, [They
that resist, Resist the Ordinance of God] which is the third reason whereupon
our Apostle grounds this inference, Wherefore ye must needs be subject.

Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Pet. 2.13. ver. 14.
and for the work of the Ministry: so God in the Commonweal appointed some
to be Kings (...), most eminent and excellent above all other, some to be
Governors under them (...), sent by Commission from them: Amongst whom some
are Nobles, some Judges, ( Prove. 8.16.) some Priests (for those howsoever some
conceive of them, were not incapable of government in the Commonweal:) yea,
Exodus 40.1.5. Heb. 7.8.
some things there are which could not be decided without them. ( Deu. 17.8. to
12.) some are Governors of Cities, ( Deuteronomy. 21.3, 4.) some Rulers of thousands,
some of hundreds, some of tens, ( Exodus 18.25, 26.) and some live merely in
subjection, as the inferior poor servant, Polit. l. 1. c. 3.4.
etc. whom Aristotle that Linceus of Nature affirms, Nature it self framed
only to that use; and every man bound in conscience by the law of God to abide
in that state wherein God has placed him, and to be contented, with his
Vocation, Degree, and calling, (1 Cor. 7.20, 21, 22.) unless he will be as
guilty of confusion in the body politic, or Ecclesiastical, as the members
should be in the body natural, if one should strive to usurp another place;
1 Cor. 14.12. to 31.
The foot the head, the ear the eye; and unless we will be as guilty in
resisting the ordinance of God, as they should be of deforming the act of his
Creation.

1 Pet. 2.13. to 17. Mat. 20.14
Submit your selves therefore to all manner of ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, (...), Take that which is thine own and go thy way. If thou be a
Ruler, do it with diligence: If an Officer, wait on thy office: If a Teacher,
attend to teaching: If but a servant, do that without slothfulness, ( Romans
12.7. to 11.) If a Judge, Deuteronomy. 17.9. to 13.
be learned, ( Psalm. 2.11.) yea, and upright too, ( Psalm. 58.1.) If thou art to
be judged, be obedient, or else thou must be cut off, both for thine own sin,
and also for others example. Nor must thou be obedient only when Superiors be
good and courteous, but even when they are cruel and froward: Nor only when
they punish thee justly for ill doing, but even when thou suffer wrongfully,
yet must thou endure for conscience sake, (1 Pet. 2.18, 19.) which the Apostle
confirms by the example of our Savior Christ, to ( verse. 25.) who when he
suffered resisted not, no nor so much as threatened, ( verse. 23.) although he
could have had more then twelve Legions of Angels, ( Mat. 26.53.) teaching us,
that we must not resist Authority, although unjustly oppressing: (muchlesse
justly ruling although punishing.) First, Neither offending it, ( Mat. 17.27.)
Secondly nor defending our selves against it, ( Mat. 26.52.) what specious
pretenses soever we may make for it. For who might have pretended fai^er in
that kind, than the Primitive Christians against Idolatrous Persecutors?
Ambros.
yet they profess, that Armasunt preces and lachrimae; so that nemo nostrum
quando apprehenditur, reluctatur; nec se adversus injustam violentiam vestrum,
quamvis nimius, and copiosus noster sit populus, ulciscitur: Cyprian. Who might
have pretended more rightly the defense of himself, of his fellow Disciples, of
his Master, yea of Religion, than Saint Peter? Yet hear our Saviors mandate
and his menace, his mandate: [Put up thy sword into thy sheath:] His menace,
[For all they which strike with the sword, shall perish with the sword.] [All]
whosoever Clergy or Laity, strike against authority, or without the license of
it, in what case soever without exception of 1, Se defendend^, Aug. l. 22.
cont. Faust. c. 75.
or 2. Maintenance of a Covenant, or 3. Defense of Religion. And what manner of
Christians those men are who dare resist their rightful, righteous, religious
Sovereigne: Or what manner of Religion that is, which they pretend gives
privilege to such rebellious practices, I leave to every good Christian to
consider: Only give me leave to tell you, sure I am, it is not such as was
known to Primitive Christians: It is not such as was allowed by our Savior to
his Apostles, nor is it such as the Apostles taught the People of their times:
for they without any cloak, His Majesty's Proclamation and Declaration, etc.
Sub moderamine inculpatae tutelae (which indeed never can be by Arms but only
by Laws) Howsoever Pontificians and Consistorians conspire: as Buchanan
labored to beguile his Nation, and some of our Contrymen have beguiled
themselves, and Jesuits would have beguiled the whole world, and without any
distinction so offensive and defensive disobedience, the Apostles taught the
Church of God, That he which resists, (be it how it will) resists the Ordinance
of God.

[And he that resists purchases to himself damnation.] which is the fourth
reason to enforce this [Wherefore, etc.] and bears a threefold reading, 1.
Iudicium, Judgment: Tremel. 2. Condemnationem, Condemnation: Beza and Tompson.
3. Damnationem, Damnation: Vulgar and Kings Bible. All which are but the
Graduations of the punishments, implied by the original, (...); for not only
(...), ( Matthew. 5.22.) they shall be in danger of the judgment of censure and
condemnation of the censorious: Although this be a punishment which an
ingenious spirit would willingly escape, which made David pray, ( Psalm. 39.8.)
Let me not be made a rebuke unto the foolish, whilst they censure, reprove,
condemn my actions in their Assemblies, much more a man that is shot through
the head with popularity, as His Majesty says of the then revolted Rolloc,
Larger Declaration. p. 25.405.
as indeed all factious persons in Church and Commonweal are, especially if
they aspire by, or adhere to the popular faction; For such, like the Camelion,
which turns to all colors save white, lives only by the air, and delights
rather in breath then other, Ac si mallet coctam quam crudam; so they who apply
to popularity, and suit themselves to all company, saving the innocent, can
live no longer (at least not with delight) then they suck the breath of
applause from the multitude. Ps. 69.12.
But behold, not only those which sit in the gate (the Rulers) speak against
such disobedient persons, but if they escape the songs of the Drunkards (who
perhaps may whoop on their sides) yet shall verybabes and sucklings chant their
disloyalty, and the Vipers tongue shall slay them, ( Job. 20.16.) Thus an evil
condemnation shall fall upon them, Prove. 10.7
whereby their name shall rot, and their memorial shall stinck, even (...),
under the censure of those who are as censorious as themselves: Nor only so,
but (...), They shall receive Judgment, and Condemnation: Ps. 41.8. Ps. 109.6.
Ps. 1.15.
1. Both Judgment before the Tribunal of men, where the sentence of
guiltiness shall proceed against them; and when sentence is given upon them,
they shall be condemned, for such ungodly persons shall not be able to stand in
Judgment, neither these sinners in the Congregation of the righteous. 2. And
also they shall receive Condemnation from the Justice of God, who stands in the
Congregation of Princes, Ps. 82.1.
(as to survey, so to assist) and is a Judge amongst the earthly gods, yea even
of those whom they sometimes cannot come by to judge according to their
deservings; Verse. 8.
who when he shall arise (as he will arise) to judge the earth, he will
recompense such wicked persons after their deservings; Ps 50.21.
he will reprove them, and set before them, even in Order, the things that they
have done: As first their Pride, next their Covetousness to maintain it,
after that their rebellion to declare it, then their Hypocrisy and
counterfeiting Religion to veil and defend it, Ps. 55.16.
and at the length he will bring Death hastily upon them, and they shall go
down into hell, sithence such wickedness is in their dwellings and amongst
them; and is not this a fearful Judgment and Condemnation? so fearful, as
what can be conceived to be added? And yet behold, 3. (...), Romans 14.23. (...),
the Judgment, Condemnation, yea, Damnation of an accusing conscience shall
consummate their misery, even such as drove Judas to be his own Executioner
upon earth; Matthew. 27.3, 4, 5.
This shall do continual execution of Gods just judgment upon them in hell,
by that worm that never dies, and that fire which never shall be quenched,
where their rebellious carcasses shall be an abhorring to all flesh; Esaias.
66.24.
wherefore for the escaping such fearful 1. Judgment. 2. Condemnation, 3.
Damnation here, and hereafter from God and man; We must needs be subject.

2. [Subject] Which is the duty; That as the Devil overcame man by his
disobedience to God, Matthew. 20.27, 28. Philip. 2.4 Verse. 5. to 9. Romans 12.10.
Matthew. 18.2.
so man may return to God and overcome the Devil, by obedience to man for the
Lords sake. Christianity is a School of Humility, and we must not look every
one upon our own excellencies, but upon other men's; having the same mind in
us, which was in Christ Jesus, in giving (not in taking) honor, preferring one
before another, (...), humbling our selves as little children; As they submit
to their Parents, so must we be subject to our Prince, for he is the Person to
whom principally the Apostle presses this subjection; as Aquin. Dion. Carth.
Bruno. and Claud. gloss it. The subjection to others being for his sake, as
the subjection to him is for the Lords sake; which that we may perform aright,
let us consider these three particulars: 1. Qualibus, To what manner of Princes
we must be subject. 2. In quibus, In what things we must be subject. 3.
Quomodo, How we must express our subjection.


1. Qualibus, To what manner of Princes we must be subject. As the Apostle
injoynes Servants concerning obedience to their Masters, so say I to Subjects
concerning their Sovereigns; 1 Timothy 6.1, 2.
Let as many as are under the yoke count their Governors worthy of all honor,
( Sive fideles, sive infideles, whether they be gentle, or whether they be
cruel) that the name of God and his Doctrine be not ill spoken of: 1. And if
they be believing, let us not despise them because they are faithful and
beloved, and partakers of the benefit, to wit redemption. 2. Or if they be
unbelievers, let us not rebel, nor resist them; because although, 1. Quidam
illorum dantur ad timorem and poenam, and increpationem, Some of them are sent
merely for a terror and a punishment. 2. Yea, Quidam ad illusionem and
contumeliam, and superbiam; Some of them set up themselves in pride, merely to
contemn, and scorn, and scoff at their Subjects, as the persecuting
Emperors did, when they exposed the Christians naked to fight with beasts and
beastly Heathens. 3. As Well as Quidam ad correctionem and utilitatem
subjectorum, and conservationem Iustitiae; For a fatherly reformation of
offenders, a loveing protection of the obedient, and the preservation of
Justice for both: Yet we must consider and confess, that Ad utilitatem
Gentilium terrenum Regnum positum est a Deo, non a Diabolo, qui nunquam omnino
quietus est; Imo qui nec ipsas quidem gentes vult in tranquill^ agere, ut
timentes regnum humanum: Earthly Kingdoms are erected by God, not by the
Devil, who as he is never quiet himself, so would he not have the people live
in peace, (as appears by his late practices) which government is the means to
procure and preserve, preventing men from devouring those that are more
righteous then themselves: Hab. 1.13.14.
And for being like the fishes of the Sea, or the creeping things who have no
Ruler over them: for, Per legum positiones repercutiant multiplicem gentilium
injustitiam, Kings and Princes by their Laws restrain and bridle the fury and
violence of our natural corruptions: yea, and the worst of Princes is never
worse then Quemadmodum populi digni sunt Dei justo judicio in omnibus
aliqualiter superveniente: Iren. l. 5. c. 24. such as the people have provoked
God to set to afflict them, whose just judgment always interposeth it self in
such weighty cases. Although sometimes we know it not, oft-times we will not
acknowledge it: which being so, may oblige every one of us to be subject to all
powers, of all qualities, conditions, dispositions, tempers, religions, under
whom the Lord has placed us: Sive 1. Nutriciis, sive 2. Hypocritis, sive 3.
Haereticis, sive 4. Tyrannis: Whether they be noursing fathers, for whom we
must praise God: or dissembling Hypocrites, or obstinate Heretics, or bloody
Tyrants, for all which we must pray to God: Whatsoever Sanders, Allen,
Stapleton, Parsons, Mariana, Boucherius, Santarellus, etc. on the Romish part:
And Knoxe, Buchanan, Gilbey, Goodman, and Daneus, on the other extreme have
formerly taught, Calderwood has followed, and some too fiery spirits of late
have seditiously and scandalously put in practice, of whom I may say in the
Apostles language, 1. Tim. 6.3, 4, 5.
If any man teach otherwise (then what I have affirmed) he consents not to
the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine which is
according to godliness: but is puffed up and knows nothing as he ought to
know, but doateth about questions and strife of words, whereof comes envy,
strife, railings, evil surmiseings, froward disputations of men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth, which think that gain is godliness,
(howsoever they pretend godliness rather then gain) from such separate thy
self: For howsoever we must perform active obedience to such Princes only so
far as lawfully we may, Calv. Bez. Marl. Roloc. Genev. usque adaras, so long as
Cum Deo non comparabuntur, Scorpias.
they are not set in competition with God: Tertul. Yet we must perform passive
obedience and absolute subjection, suffering without resistance, Act. 4.19.
being subject without rebellion, even if they should command the most unjust
superstitious, idolatrous, profane, or irreligious things which can be
imagined; yet I say we must not rebel, unless we will renounce Christianity,
Gloss. inte^lin.
but we must let this be Probatio subjectionis, the touchstone of our
subjection, even our patient and constant sufferings:

For, Quae passos Apostolos scimus manifesta est Doctrina, Tertul. ubi s^pr.
The truth of this Doctrine is sealed by the Apostles sufferings, who endured
of Heathen Princes, and for not renouncing Christianity, Carceres, Vincula,
Flagella, Saxa, Gladios, Impetus Indaeorum, Coetus Nationum, and Tribunorum
Elogia, and Regum auditoria, and Proconsulum Tribunalia, and Caesaris nomen
interpretem non habent: Imprisonment, Bonds, Stripes, Stoning, Wounds, Violence
of the Jews, Conventing before the Gentiles, Questioning in the Courts of
Tribunes, Examinations and Answers before Kings, Arraignments at the Tribunals
of Proconsuls, yea and could not find an Appeal to the Emperor, any
protection for their innocence; yet they not only submitted themselves, and
possessed their own souls with patience, but also taught all pious people so
to do; as here our Apostle makes it apparent, and ( Titus 3.1, 2.) presses it
to all posterity: Put them in remembrance (for indeed we are too apt to forget)
that they be subject to the Principalities and Powers, and that they be
obedient, and ready to every good work; that they speak evil of no man, His
Majesty's Declaration ubi supra.
(much less of Princes and Prelates, as some of late have done) That they be
no fighters, (much less Armed Rebels) but soft, lowly, gentle, showing all
meekness to all men, much more to Rulers; yea, and such effect did this
Doctrine produce, that Sanguis Martyrem semen Ecclesiae, Cypr. The blood of the
Martyrs was the seed of the Church. The blood, not the sword, that were too
Turkish. And however, Circa majestatem Imperatoris infamemur, Tert. ad Scap. l.
2. They were slandred as disloyal to the Emperor; yet, Nunquam Albiniani, vel
Nigriani, vel Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani: Never any Nigrian, who
made Religion the stalking-horse for Rebellion; Nor never any Cassian who
assaulted his Sovereign by Assassination, could be found amongst the
Christians: Christianus nullus est hostis nimirum Imperatoris, quem sciens a
Deo suo constitui, necesse est ut and ipsum diligat, and revereatur, and
honoret, and salvum velit, cum toto Romano Imperio, quousque seculum stabit,
tam diu enim stabit: Colimus ergo Imperatorem, sic quomodo and nobis licet, and
ipsi expedit, ut hominem a Deo secundum, and quicquid est a Deo consecutum, and
solo Deo minorem: For no true Christian can be an enemy to his King or
Emperor, whom he knows to be placed over him by God, and therefore upon
necessity must love him, reverence him, honor him, pray for him, and desire
and endeavor his safety as the safety of the Kingdom; as being next to God,
lesser only then God, and endowed with the power which he has from God, over
all the men in his Dominions. Hereupon was it that the Christians fought so
many valiant battles, and obtained so many glorious victories, even for Heathen
and persecuting Emperors, yea even for Julian the Apostata himself: but never
did they fight any battle, pitched any Field, arrayed any Army, armed any
Legions, or so much as entered into consultation against their Emperor. And
thus you see, Qualibus, to what manner of Princes we must be subject. And I
think all will willingly conclude, Si parendum est magistratui prophano, certe
multo magis obedire oportet Sancto and Christiano, In Matthew. 22.21.
Bez. If Heathens were thus obeyed, much more should Christians; If
persecuting, much more pious Princes, such as our Gracious Sovereign, whose
clemency may challenge our love, as well as his power command our duty, whom
God preserve, and prosper long over us in honor and felicity, and give us the
grace and gratitude to be subject, not only for fear, but even for conscience
sake. And so I come to consider

2. In Quibus? In what things we must be subject? Wherein the true stating of
the Question is much differenced from the mistaken and mistaking Tenants of
many of these times, who conceive and would bear the world in hand.

1. That they are bound no further to Subjection, then with a Rightly Regulated
Conscience, they may perform Active Obedience to all their Superiors Edicts
and Commands.

2. That they are not bound to Active Obedience, where they have a doubting
conscience, although not fully informed by the right rule of Reason, or
express authority of Gods word.

3. That the Supreme Magistrate, must have express affirmative warrant in the
word of God for all his injunctions, or else the Subject needs not obey them.

Whereas the truth is,

1. Concerning the first, That although Active Obedience binds only in the
Lord, yet absolute subjection is due without any resistance for the Lords sake,
(...), Ephesians. 6.^.
To humane Ordinances (1 Pet. 2.13.) Even when man ordaines; not the Load (1
Cor. 7.12.) yet such a man as is ordained of the Lord, and so presumed to
ordain according to the Lord, we may not in any wise resist.

2. And as concerning the second, Although when man is left to his own liberty,
The rule is to be observed, Quod dubitas ne feceris, because he that doubts
is condemned of his own Conscience, yet when we are Commanded by Authority,
Romans 14.23.
and we only doubt in our selves whether that be good and lawful which is
commanded, or not, The Rule of Saint Augustine must be observed Si dubitas
feceris, If you only doubt do it, except you have express warrant out of
Gods word, or the Analogy of faith, and undeniable necessary Consequence to
the contrary; Authority must turn the scale of thy doubting conscience, and
weigh down thy Judgment to Active obedience, so that

3. The Magistrate is not bound to express Text for warrant of each of his
particular edicts; It is sufficient that it is contained in his general
Commission Dixi Dii estis, I have said ye are Gods. ( Psalm. 82.6.) and
therefore have committed my delegated power to you, Per me Reges Regnant, By me
Kings Reign ( Pro. 8.15.) And therefore by my authority may lay injunctions
upon their Subjects, and they are obliged to Active Obedience, except they can
produce a negative Act of Parliament out of the high Court of Heaven; for
Princes are not only instead of God by representation ( Exodus 4.16.) but they
have the power of God over those to whom they have commission ( Exodus 7.1.) I
have made thee Pharoahs God, yea and put case the Subject could produce a
contradictory command of God to that of his King, yet is not his passive
obedience dispensed withal, nor any part of his absolute subjection dissolved
or cancelled, Ambros. To. 3. Epis. l. 5. Orat.
But we must needs be Subject, (at least by suffering if not by doing) in all
things, even against the dictate of a doubting, yea, or a discerning conscience.

3. But then in the next place it remains to be resolved by what means, or in
what manner this subjection is to be expressed, which must be by these seven
means following; where there are not Iura Regni by mutual consent of Prince
and people to supersede them, or dispense with any of them.

1. First by praying for them (1 Timothy 2.1.10.4.) I exhort therefore that first
of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made
for all men, for Kings and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, for this is good and
acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved,
and to come unto the knowledge of the truth. Where observe we must pray, 1. To
the end that we may live godly and peaceably, when we did not live so before:
2. That they may come to the knowledge of the truth, when they knew it not
before: 3. And that they may be saved, when they were not in that state before.
None so bad then, to and for whom we are not to express our subjection by this
duty.

(...). Tit. 3.1, 2. Citat.
2. Secondly, we must speak no evil of them; ( Exodus 22.28.) Thou shall not
revile the Gods, nor curse the ruler of the people. Is it fit to say to a King,
thou art wicked; and to Princes ye are ungodly? ( Job. 34.18) No certainly,
nothing less, and therefore follow the counsel of Martialis, who lived in the
Primitive times, learned of the Apostles, and taught to succession A
murmuratione custodite corda vestra; Keep not only your hands from mutiny,
and your tongues from muttering, but even your hearts from repining.

3. Thirdly, we must not dispute their Commands, for where the word of a King
is, there is power, and who may say unto him, what do thou? ( Eccles. 8.4.)
(i. e.) Not publicly and illegally to raise opposition against him, only we
may privately inform our own judgment, to prepare as peaceably either for
active obedience or for Martyrdom.

Josh. 1.16, 17
4. Fourthly, we must express our subjection by doing all their commands which
are not directly against God, resolving with the Israelites, All that thou
command us we will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us we will go, only
the Lord thy God be with thee.

Fifthly, we must express it by suffering all punishments patiently without any
resistance; for those things which we dare not do when they command them,
because they appear (not seem) to be directly against God, (as has been
before demonstrated;) imitating S. Chrysostom, (Epist. ad Cyriacum) Cum a
civitate fugarer, dicebam intra meipsum, si quidem vult Regina me exulem agere,
agat in exilium; Domini est Terra and plenitudo ejus; and si vult secare,
secet; idem passus est Isaias, etc. Et si substantiam auferre, auferat, nudus
exivi ex utero matris meae, nudus etiam revertar; If the Queen will have me go
into banishment, let her banish me; The earth is the Lords, and all that
therein is. If she will have me sawen in sunder, I submit my self; Isaias
suffered so before me. Apoc. 13.10.
If she will confiscate my goods, I am contented; Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked must I return again. Behold, this must be the
patience of the Saints.

Sixthly, by supplying means, Ad necessaria secundum status sui conditionem;
Lyr. paying due tribute to our Princes; for this is the manner, Quomodo velit
te subjici protestatibus, redere jubens cui Tributum, Tributum: cui Vectigal,
Vectigal; (i. e.) quae sunt Caefaris, Caesari, and quae Dei Deo. Tertul. Which
tribute must be paid without limitation of the quantity before, or account of
the disposing of it after payment, Gloss. Ordinar, If Calvin understand it
aright, (which I dare not assure, nor will I dispute) for, Calvan ver. 6.
Neque nostrum est vel Principibus praescribere, quantum in res singulas
impendant, vel eos ad calculum vocare: We have no power to prescribe to Princes
what they shall expend upon occasions, nor to call them to account for their
employment of what is expended which I conceive to be intended where there are
not Pacta inter Principem and Populum: nor fundamental Laws of the Land to
the contrary.

Seaventhly, we must express our subjection by guarding of the Princes person,
fighting for him upon occasion, 2 Samuel 8.11, 12. Et 10.26. 2 Samuel ^. 2 Samuel
11.11.
and sparing him from going out with us to battle, lest he should quench the
light of Israel, (2 Samuel 21.17.) And what kind of consciences those men have,
who can let their liege Lord go out to battle without them, (they being
required) or who can leave him in his Tents in the field, when they return to
their own houses, I leave both to men experienced in the Word, and practiced in
the sword to consider: and so proceed.

3. To the third part of my Text, which is the necessity of this duty of
subjection, employed in these words [must needs.] Must is for the King, and so
it is indeed: and so is this: And therefore implies a double duty by these two
words [must] and [needs] terms of double necessity; Matthew. 21.3.
Dominus opus habet, Our Lord the King, the Lord of us and all we have has
need, and who will not then let all go presently? He must have it: in case of
true absolute, imminent necessity, to save our selves and the public,
according to the Laws of the Land: Luke 10 42.
The supporting of His State is that Vnum necessarium for our safeties, and the
safety of the whole Kingdom; and therefore the Apostle does does not only say,
1. It is convenient that we be subject, (i. e.) for ornament sake. 2. Or it is
fit that we be subject (i. e.) for order sake. 3. Or it is profitable that we
be subject (i. e.) for providence and discretion sake. 4. Or it is contenting
that we may be subject (i. e.) for peace and quiet sake. 5. But (...), It is
necessary Obligationes juris and propter vim coactivam superioris, viz. quia
tenemini and potestis ad hoc compelli ad profitendam veram subjectionem. [We
must needs be subject] for absolute necessity sake: Dion: Carth:
Necessitate salutis, Aq. even for the necessity of our salvation in Heaven,
and of our safety upon earth. What is it but subjection which continues the
blessed Harmony in Heaven amongst the Angels? What is it but Rebellion which
bred that confusion in Hell amongst the damned spirits? What is it but
subjection which can continue Peace, Plenty, Piety, Order, and Unanimity
amongst men upon earth, Whereas Rebellion brings forth War, Waste, Wickedness,
Confusion; Desolation, and Destruction: wherefore for avoiding these, and
preserving those, We must needs be subject. And so I come

4. To the persons obliged, which is the fourth thing proposed in my Text, in
this word [Ye] (...), Theoph. And so Saint Chrysostom before him, (...). With
whom consent Theodoret and Oecumenius amongst the Greeks, and Greg. Mag. and S.
Bernard amongst the Latins, express themselves both in opinion and phrase to
the self same purpose; we the Clegy, ye the Laity; we the Priests, ye the
people; or ye the mighty Peers, ^al^. Inst. l. 4. c. 20.
we the many multitude. 1. For neither are Peers excepted and reserved like the
Lacedemonian Ephori, Roman Tribunes, or Athenian Demarchi, to restrain the
insolences or exorbitances of Princes oppressions. 2. Nor are the Priests
exempted like the Roman Hierarchy, to be insolent and exorbitant in the
Commonweal. 3. Nor are the people privileged (as is pretended by some
schismatic Demagogi) to carry all by force of their collective body; But we
and ye, 1. Peers, 2. Priests, Buchan.
3. People, must all needs be subject: And that

5. [Not only for fear, but even for conscience sake.] Which is the last
member proposed for prosecution. [Not only for feare] And yet we must be
subject for fear too, which, Cogit vel invitos, Marlorat. Compels those that
have no Conscience; Theophylact. Lombard.
Imo and possunt potestates etiam sine causa irasci, Hieron. And yet we must
fear and be subject too (though they oppress our tender conscience) for fear
of punishment from God, and from the Prince.

1. From God, who will not suffer his Ordinance to be contemned; Non enim
privati est hominis abrogare imperium ei quem Dominus cum potestate nobis
praefecit. Calv.

2. From the Prince; for, Vltionem reposcere possunt magistratus ob dignitatis
suae contemptum. Idem. They may justly avenge the contempt of their authority,
1. Either by their Laws, by which In legum transgressores and inobedientes
severiter animadvertunt: Marlorat. Or else by Arms; for, Portat gladium, He
bears the sword, ( verse. 4.) And if He draw it against Schismatiques,
Heretics, or Rebellious persons, Magistratus just punit gladio, Lib. 1. and
Parmon. c. 7.
Aug. They must not cast off fear, and encourage themselves and their company
against his commands, as if resisting for the cause of God (as they pretend)
they were to be accounted Martyrs; for they are no more capable of Martyrdom,
dying in contempt of lawful Magistracy, then the Idol Priests, or the devils
themselves were by the subversion of their Temples, or ceasing of their
Oracles, by virtue of our Saviors Incarnation; or by the command of the
Emperor, converted to Christianity: Aug. ubi supra. But on the contrary it may
be verified, that they who under the royal command of a rightful King,
obediently, conscionably, zealously, and courageously fight against a
Schismatic, or Heretical Rebellious people, (who make Religion the pretext
for Rebellion) if they die, they dye Martyrs, if they live, they live
Confessors: and therefore we must fear even the Princes sword. That I may not
insist upon loss of favor, friends, honor, credit, and the like; Prove. 20.2.
Although a wise man will consider even in this, that the indignation of a King
is as the roaring of a Lion; A^^^ ^ ^
and if this Lion roar, who can but be afraid? for he that provokes him to
anger, sins against his own soul; and what then shall become of his body? Or
if any be so foolhardy as not to fear, yet must he be subject nevertheless,
Not only for fear,

[But even for conscience sake.] Non solum, quia resistere potentioribus and
armatis impune non liceret, quemadmodum tolerari solent injuriae quae
propuls^ri nequeunt: Sed sponte docet obeundam hanc submissionem, ad quam verbo
Dei obstringitur conscientia: Call. Not only because they are armed and can
over-master us, for so men suffer injuries from private men, because they
cannot withstand them: but the Apostle teaches, that a Christian is bound to
subjection to his Sovereign by the Word of God; and the tie of conscience more
firm and close, then by a Soldiers Belt, or Jaylors Bolts and Manacles:
Ambros. Theophylact.
So that, Etiamsi certo constaret nos manus illorum (alioqui valde longas)
posse effugere: Marlorat. Although we were assured that we could escape their
reach, or oppose their power: Yea, Etiamsi exarmatus esset magistratus quem
impune lacescere, Calv.
and contemnere liceret, nihilo magis id tentandum quam si poenam statim
imminere cerneremus. Although the Magistrate had neither Arms, nor Armies, so
that men might provoke and contemn his power in respect of punishment, must we
not presume to neglect him any more, then if we did see Arms and Armies, Racks
and Gibbets, and all engines for execution prepared before us: Quia nisi omnino
subjiciamini Principi polluta esset conscientia vestra obvians divinae
ordin^tioni, Bruno. Because unless we be absolutely subject to our Prince
(pretend what purity we will) our conscience is defiled, and every step we
march against him, we set our selves in battle array against the Ordinance of
God: And indeed I cannot but wonder what hard hearts and cauterized
consciences those men have, who do not presently smite themselves, and their
hearts die within them like Nabals when they find themselves guilty of
subtracting subjection from their Prince, 1 Samuel 25.37.
(a greater ingratitude then which cannot be excogitated, and ingratitude is
one of the greatest sins;) for Subjects are obliged.

1. By the rule of right Reason, to obey him, without whom we cannot be safe;
but without the King the Commonweal cannot be safe, no more then a ship
without a Pilot in a stormy my Ocean; And therefore by the rule of right reason
we must obey him.

2. By natural equity, which binds to do good to them which do good to us,
but Kings and Princes do good to us, for by their means we obtain great
quietness, and by their providence many worthy things are done to our Nation:
Act. 24.2.
By them we receive honor, enjoy riches, peace, plenty, and freely profess
and practice piety: and therefore even for natural equity, We must needs be
subject, which is the least good we can do to them.

3. By moral civility we are bound to be subject to him who protects us: But
Kings and Princes protect us from evil doers, who would violently take away
our lives, insolently usurp our lands, prodigally mispend our goods,
laciviously deflowr and ravish our wives, and mercilesly slave our children,
yea, they are the Protectors and defenders of our faith, and therefore we are
bound at least not to rebel sithence all these mischiefs have been, are, and
will be the effects of such disobedience, from which Good Lord deliver us.

4. By Christian Religion and conscience, which enjoins, that we must not
resist the Ordinance of God: but Kings and Princes are the Ordinance of God,
and therefore we must not resist them. verse. 1, 2.

And do 1. Right reason, 2. Natural equity, 3. Moral civility, 4. Christian
Religion and conscience oblige us to subjection? Oh then take heed, and never
trust any (though never so fair Professors) who pretend conscience to
countenance disobedience, at least to cast off subjection, as it is hard to
disobey and not to rebel. Yet such always have been the fair pretense of the
foulest practices. Thus the color of the common good to free the people from
Subsidies, Taxes, and Oppressions (which then seemed by their Governors to lie
upon them) led the people of the Jews, yea and some Romans too, to follow
Theudas, Judas of Galile, Iosep. Antiq. Iudai. l. 18. c. 1. and l. 20. c 6.
Salust. conjurat. Catilin. Speed.
Catiline, and their companions. Thus the Rebels of elder times in this Island,
christened their Insurrections, the Army of God and the holy Church, making
Religion the Patroness of their impiety. Jack Straw, Jack Cade, Wat Tyler,
Friar Ball, alias Wall, and such others, made 1. The oppression of the Commons,
2. The insolency of the Nobility, 3. The covetousness of the Priests, and the
inequality of men of equal merit, the vail of all their violence and villainy.
Hollinshed Rich. 2. p. 429. Graston p. 330, 331.
Thus the Rebellion in the North, Lincolnshire, and Norfolk, were raised under
pretense of 1. Reforming Religion, 2. Freedom of Conscience, and 3. Bettering
the Commonweal, yea, and they are always masked under the vizard of, 1. Pro
Lege, 2. Pro Grege, 3. Pro Rege; whereas indeed they are against the King, L.
2. de Bello Iudaic. c. 16.
break the Laws, and make spoil of the people, as Josephus relates the story
of the Rebellious Jews, pretending only against Florus harsh, unjust, and
cruel usage, and not against the Romans: Naucler.
But as King Agrippa cleares it by his Remonstrance, They did but only say so;
for their actions were such as worse could not have been done by the greatest
Enemies of the Roman Empire, for they sacked the Towns, robbed the
Treasuries, burnt the Houses, wasted the Fields; neither were they the Towns,
the Treasuries, the Houses, the Fields of Florus, but of the Roman Empire. I
will not make Application, but sit hence these things have ever been so, Prove.
24.21, 22.
I will only conclude with Solomon's Admonition: My son, fear God and the
King, and meddle not with them that are seditious; for suddenly shall their
destruction come, and who knows the ruin of them? Yet certain it is that
ruined they shall be, and perhaps when themselves least suspect it, suddenly as
with the Arrow of Lightning shot from the Bow of God, which may serve as a
Corollary to our Apostles premises to enforce this conclusion, [Wherefore ye
must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but even for conscience sake.]
Which God grant us all grace to be, for Jesus Christ's sake, the Pattern and
Patron of perfect obedience; to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all
honor, glory, power, might, majesty, and dominion, from this time forth for
evermore. Amen.

FJNJS.
CHRISTVS DEI, The LORDS Anointed. OR, A Theological Discourse, wherein is
proved, that the Regal or Monarchical power of Our Sovereign Lord KING
CHARLES Is not of Humane, but of divine Right, and that GOD is the sole
Efficient cause thereof, and not the people.

Also that every MONARCH is above the whole Commonwealth, and is not only
Major Singulis, but Major Vniversis.

Written in Answer to a late Printed Pamphlet entitled, Observations upon some
of His MAJESTY'S late Answers and Expresses.

1 Pet. 2.13. Subjecti estote omni humanae creaturae propter Dominum, sive Regi
quasi Praecellenti.

Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake, whether it
be to the King as supreme.

Printed by HS MAJESTY'S Command AT OXFORD. 1643.

CHRISTVS DEI, OR, A Theological Discourse, wherein is proved, that Regal
Power is not of Humane, but of Divine Right, and that God only is the Efficient
cause thereof, and not the People.
Preface.
1 THere is a Book come forth of late, barely entitled, Observations upon some
of His Majesty's late Answers and Expresses, without any name of the Author or
place where it was printed. Wherein the Observer (so I must call him not
knowing him by any other name) aims chiefly and directly to prove, that the
Hereditary, Regal, and Monarchical power of our now present dread Sovereign
King Charles, is inferior and subject to the power of the now present
Parliament.

2 Which to evince he undertakes to lay down the original foundation of all
Regal power whatsoever, according to the efficient and final causes thereof.
And having made the final cause to be the safety of the people, together with
their Civil or Political happiness; he also makes the efficient cause to be,
not God, but only the people, and the isntrumental cause of conveying and
deriving this Regal Power to be, not any divine law, nor nothing else (amongst
Christians) but the mere humane pactions and Agreements of the Politic body
of the people. And then arguing by a rule in nature; that quicquid efficit tale
est magis tale, he issues out this just infe^ence (as he calls it) that
though the King be singulis major, yet he is universis minor, and therefore
inferior and subject in power to the Parliament.

3 Having perused this discourse, and finding it to be most injurious to Regal
Power or Monarchy, contrary to the true principles of State and Divinity, or
Orthodox Christian Doctrine: I thought I might do my King and Country good
service, to confute these desperate and more than dangerous Positions, by
declaring and proving the true Original foundation, according to the final
and efficient causes of Regal or Monarchical Power: which (with Gods good
help) I hope to do perspicuosly in the few ensuing Paragraphes.

SECT. 1. Of the Primary Final cause; as also of the efficient cause of all
Civil Societies or Republiques.
Because whatsoever is done, is done for some end or purpose, without which it
should not have been done, nor had a being: therefore it is the constant
Doctrine of all Philosophers, that the end is the chief and Principal of all
causes: and therefore, for methods sake I will begin with it. Now to find out
the Primary end of all Civil Societies or Commonwealths, we, that are
Christians, must reflect attentively upon those words of the holy Ghost. Pro.
16.4. Universa propter semet ipsum operatus est Dominus. By which we are
ascertained, that God Almighty created not only all other Creatures; but all
mankind also, as for their Primary end, for himself, and his own Praise and
glory.

And as for man in particular, God created him to his own image and likeness,
endowing him with an understanding and a will, that he might know how to honor
and love his Creator, and by such love and honor might finally become happy in
the fruition of his eternal, unspeakable and inestimable glory in heaven: for
means whereto, first God dictated certain Divine precepts and principles unto
man, and imprinted them with his very creation upon his natural reason (for
which cause they are called divine natural Laws written in every man's heart,
says St. Paul. Romans 2.15.) that every man might be equally capable to know
them, and equally obliged to obey them. Secondly, God infused into him Faith,
hope, and Charity, and other supernatural virtues, all tending to this
conducement, that man following them as his guides, might, through his
obedience to God, attain to his own salvation. Thirdly, to bind man more
strongly to his subjection, and to make it appear more illustriously unto him,
that therein principally consisted his Welfare, as the very End and Center, for
and to which he was created, He gave him an express divine Law, not to eat of
the tree in the midst of Paradise upon pain of death. Fourthly, by Revelation
he instructed him in many particular sacred forms and Rites of exterior
divine worship, as sacrifice and other; for though we read not any where in
holy Writ, that Adam offered Sacrifice, no more than we do of Isaac; yet we
read there that Cain and Abel did, and that Abraham and Jacob did. But it cnnot
be imagined that Cain and Abel were the first Inventors of this most, religious
and divine worship, (no more than that Isaac dd neglect it) but by Paternall
tradition and example they received it from Adam.

3. All which duly considered, it will appear evidently, that the primary end
for which all men are created, is to serve, honor, love, obey, and worship
God. From whence it follows, that this being man's highest and principallest
concern, it ought also to be his highest and pincipallest care to attend to
it. But most certain it is, that men, living divided and scattered over the
face of the world without the instruction and assistance one of another cannot
possibly perform this for every particular man's behoof, as is requisite. And
therefore from this final cause arose primarily a necessity amongst men to
unite and combine themselves into civil Societies and Commonwealths. This end
could not be prefixed by men; but men were created for this end by God. And
therefore this is the primary, spiritual, supernatural, and divine final
cause of all Republikes, to which every other end must be but secondary,
subordinate, and subservient.

4 And from hence it follows further, that since on the one side no natural
agent can by it is natural power compass the attaining of a supernatural end;
and on the other side Civil Societies ought not to be instituted in vain: we
must needs conclude, that the Primary efficient cause of all Commonwealths is
only God.

PARAGR. 2. Of the Secondary final Cause, and also the only Efficient Cause of
all Civil Societies and Republiques.
1 Every Creature in the world strives to preserve its own kind. We see what
pains and Care Beasts and Birds take to rear their younglings. Trees and
Plants bear fruits and seeds to produce the like when they are perished. Yea,
the inanimate Creatures (according to their predominant Element and mixture)
strive every one to obtain and enjoy their Center. And all this not only for
their own particular, but also for the harmonious Accommodation and
preservation of the Universe, the great and most excellent work of nature,
wherein she does nothing in vain. But in vain had man been, if he also had
not been provided of necessary means toward the Preservation of his kind. For
which cause God said it was not good for man to be alone: and therefore gave
him a Woman to be his Helper, that so by means of generation he might
propagate his offspring to the worlds end.

2 This Preservation then of mankind, is the maine natural and secondary end
of man. And to ths end God gave him his blessing to increase and multiply, from
whence arises, that of necessity there must be at least private families. But
man and Woman finding (by woeful experience) most true what God said to Adam
and Eve; that he should eat his bread in the sweat of his brows, that she
should bring forth her children in pain, found also presently, that every
private family is not sufficient of it self to maintain ths work of
Preservation, without the help of one another. For first, to say nothing of
women's deliveries in chld-birth, which cannot possibly always and every where
be performed requisitely by themselves and their families, without the help of
some other, or others: and yet even upon this preservation of mankind holds a
most necessary and principal dependence. I will only speak of man's part, who
with the sweat of his brows, with extreme toil and labor must provide food
and clothing, and all other necessary supports and sustentations for his
family. But to do this he must of necessity (I speak not of barbarous inhumane
people) have some certain place of abode; and in this he must have some
peculiar right, some propriety of possession, by virtue whereof he may reap the
fruits of the earth, and maintain his Cattle. And how shall every private
family be able to do this with security? will not every one strive for the
best possession? will not the shepherds of Abraham and Lot, and of Isaac and
Gerera fall to contention for water and pastures, and such like other necessary
elbow room? And in these uncivil and unsociable quarrels, must not all
private families be made like to the fishes of the sea. Hab. 11.13.14. where
the stronger must devour the weaker?

3. Secondly, God endowed man in in his creation with an understanding and a
will. This understanding is of that infinite capacity, that it has for its
Adaequate Object omne ens as it is verum And man therefore is in perpetual and
restless search of knowledge, to perfect his understanding by experience and
learning, The will also has for her Adaequate Object omne ens as it is bonum.
And man therefore is in perpetual pursuit of Reciprocal love to perfect his
will by friendship and justice. Over and above these, God gave to man the
faculty of speech, to be the reciprocal conveyance of learning and friendship.
So as for this very reason Aristotle said excellently well, that man is by
nature a sociable creature, for neither warning nor friendship, nor justice (in
which consists essentially man's Civil or Political happiness) nor safety or
security (which is the only preservation of every man's being) can possibly be
acquired and maintained in the division of men in their priviate families. And
therefore for this very end it was naturally necessary for men to unite and
associate themselves into Civil Societies and Communities, that so they might
preserve their Kind.

From the learning, experience and Industery of the understanding proceed all
Arts, Tillage, Manufactures, Trade, and Traffic, which bring in Gain, and
that brings plenty, from the friendship and justice of the will proceed Peace
and security: in which secure peace and plenty consists perfect salus populi.
Now since this cannot be had in divided private families, and without this
there can be no preservation of Mankind, it follows; that Civil Societies or
Commonwealths are naturally necessary. Whose natural final cause is truly
and only (in the manner as I have explicated) Salus populi.

Now furthermore, seeing that Commonwealth is not the design of Art and
Invention of particular men, nor of any positive law of theirs, but proceeds
from the Common necessity of all mankind, intimated unto them by the Law of
nature, of which God is the sole cause and Author: it follows that the
efficient cause of all Republiques is only God.

SECT 3. Of the Final and Efficient cause of Civil Power in a Commonwealth.
1. As for the final cause there is little or no difficulty; for seeing that
the final cause of every thing must needs be that, which that thing
necessarily refers unto, as to its end for which it is done or has its being:
it is manifest, that since civil societies have for their natural and
secondary final cause Salus populi; the power also which must not be ad
destructionem, but ad aedificationem, to maintain those civil societies, can
have no other final cause, but that whereunto they direct and are directed,
which is Salus Populi.

2. The material cause in whch this power original, resides and inheres; as
the former to make up a complete Body of a Commonwealth, is the people. And so
the Observer says very well in this kind of cause, power is originally
inherent in the people: most certain then it is, that even at the very first
uniting themselves into a Civil society, there is an inherent power in the
people to govern themselves, and by such Government to preserve themselves in
safety. For this is the only necessary natural end for which they met (as I
have very briefly shewene before) that they might be able and powerful to
secure themselves, and preserve their kind. But this meeting would have been in
vain, and this preservation wholly made frustrate, if there were not this
power inherent in them.

3. If in the natural body of man there were not an interior Directive
Governing Power to guide every particular member in the operative use of its
function, and to contrive those operations to the mutual good of one another,
and the conservation of the whole man; that body could not possibly but
suddenly perish. For if the teeth will not chew, nor the throat swallow, nor
the hands reach, nor the feet stir, nor the eyes look out, when nature
requires her necessary food, she and they and all must starve. So in a
political Body; if all members should do what they list, and should not be
compelled by some absolute power to contribute their strengths and endeavors to
the preservation of one another, and the whole Community, it would be but
Regnum in se divisum, that of necessity must fall to desolation, as the holy
Ghost confirms also else where, saying Prove. 11.14 Ubi non est Gubernator
dssipabitur Populus.

4 The maine difficulty is: who is the efficient cause of this power, Wherein,
not to be tedious to my Reader, but to yield him the satisfaction of his
expectation in a brief and resolute answer, I present unto him this Decretory
Assertion. This power is not a humane but a divine Right; and God only is the
immediate efficient cause thereof. This I prove by five Arguments.

5. Arg. 1. There is a rule in nature (to use the Observers own words) Quod
dat esse dat consequentia ad esse. But the esse of a Republike cannot have a
simpliciter esse without the esse of this power. Therefore he that is the
efficient cause of the Republique, is also the efficient cause of this power.
But (as I have proved before SECT. 2. n. 5.) God is the sole efficient cause of
all Republiques, therefore he is also the sole efficient cause of this power.

6 Arg. 2. The Primary final cause of Civil Societies (as I have proved SECT.
1.) is divine worship, which man could not prefix to himself as his end, but
he was created by God for and to that end, and only God prefixed that end to
man. Therefore this is a divine end which cannot be achieved without a divine
Power (as I have also proved in the same Section, n. 4.) only God then is the
immediate Efficient cause of this power.

7. And from thence it proceeds, that Kings, acknowledging themselves to have
received this divine power, principally for this primary end, their Oaths at
their Coronation are (as the Observer very grutchingly grants) more precise
in the care of Canonical Privileges, and of Bishops and Clergy men, than of
the Commonalty: and not from the reason which he gives. viz. because they were
penned by Popish Bishops. For whether the Bishops were Popish or Protestant,
surely they are not to be blamed ex hoc capite, but most highly to be
reverenced, that according to their profession and duty they put Kings in mind,
in the first place, of divine worship, and their own and their peoples
eternal salvation depending thereupon. And I cannot understand why the
Observer should give that reason, but only to seduce the Vulgar into a base
and profane misconceiving and vilifying of the royal power of Kings, and their
sacred Oaths. For Popish without all doubt in his Dictionary signifies
superstitious at least, if not Idolatrous. But, if it be superstition for a man
to be more precise in the care of Divine Worship, and his souls everlasting
salvation, than of any other his temporal end or affair (see Section 1. n.
3.) in vain then have all Christians hitherto believed that they were in a
true Religion. Let the Observer consider what censure he deserves for thus
finding fault with Kings Oaths, and whether he gives not just cause of
suspicion, that he is rather an Atheist than a Christian. It is well known to
all Christians, that Quaerite primum Regnum Dei and justitiam ejus is no
invention of Popish Bishops, but our Blessed Saviors own Doctrine and Rule,
not only to Bishops, but to all Kings and people whatsoever, as the principal,
to which as an Accessorium follows, and haec omnia adjicientur vobis. Mat.
6.33.

8. Arg. 3 When private families first joined themselves into a Common body of
society, before any Condictum, Paction, or Agreement amongst themselves, to
enact positive Laws for their government, there was an inherent power in them
to enact such Laws. For who can make a Law without a power? But this power,
not being the effect, but the most necessary cause of all humane pactions, or
positive Laws, cannot have its origin from man, but only from God. Ergo God
is the sole Efficient cause of this power.

9. Arg. 4. When men first associated themselves into a Commonwealth, they
were all of equal Right and Power, so that none (I speak of several families
still as before) could challenge superiority the one over the other. For, this
divine natural power, viz. Se defendere, and vim vi repellere, was inherent in
every one of them, and obligeing them. The power then which accrewed to to the
aggregation of the whole society, was not made but brought, as being no other
than what was in all and every particular Member of that society before. But
that is a Divine power, and the immediate effect of God. Ergo. And indeed in
the due mnnaging or excercising of this divine natural law of se defendendo,
and vim vi repellendo consists totally the security and Salus Populi, and the
power of the Commonwealth to maintain it.

10. Arg. 5. God Almighty is so solely the Legislator and Author of his own
Laws, without the concurrence or consent of any other Council, ( quis enim
consiliariu^^^us fuit, aut quis prior dedit ei? Rom, 11.33.) That they have
their establishment only in and by his own will. So that no power whatsoever
of his Creatures, can by any contraition against him, invalid or annull those
Laws. But non occides is a Divine natural Law and precept expressed in the
Decalogue. Therefore no Pactions or agreements of men can give this power of
putting a man to death, no more than Cain could kill Abel. But on the other
side it is manifest, that Republikes have a lawful power of putting men to
death, without which they could not preserve their own safety. Therefore they
have it from God. And how soon God gave this power to men I know not, nor
cannot find, until after the flood; when Genesis 9.6* we read this express
positive divine Law and precept given to the Civil Magistrate. Quicunque
effuderit humanum sanguinem, fundetur sanguis illius.

SECT. 4.
1. The Final Cause of Regal power must of necessity be the same that is of
the Commonwealth, because the King is the administrator of the power of the
Commonwealth, to the same end no doubt, for which it was first ordained: of
which having spoken largely before, I have no need to say any thing here.

2. The maine question is, who is the efficient cause of Regal or Monarchical
power? Which the Observer boldly averres to be, not God, but the people. And
upon this false ground he vents all those swarms of false inferences
throughout his whole discourse.

3. But before I lay down the true Resolution of this question, I must desire
my reader to mark with good heed the great difference that is between the power
it self of a Commonwealth, and the authority to administer that power: for
the people may be the Efficient Cause of this second, though not of the first.
As for example, the Aldermen of London may elect, nominate, and constitute such
or such a man to be their Lord Major to administer the power that belongs to
the Corporation of that City; and herein they may be the Efficient cause of his
Authority to administer the power of the City, but not of his power; because
that is the gift of the King by his Charter, of which his Majesty therefore is
the only efficient cause, and not the Aldermen, nor all the people of that
Corporation whatsoever.

4. I have proved all along in the precedent Sections, that the Civil power of
a Commonwealth, is not a humane, but divine power, of which, not the people,
but God only is the Efficient cause. It is true indeed, that it is in the
voluntary election of the people to authorize one, or few, or more with the
administration of this power. And as long as this Authority is still elective
in the people, they may by consent of the major part alter their form of
Gubernation into Democraticall Oligarchicall, Aristocraticall, or Monarchical,
as they please. And herein the Observer says truly, that God is no more the
Author of Regal, than of Aristocraticall power: for whether this power be in
many, or in one, it is still the same divine power of the Commonwealth, though
diversely administered, of which God only is the efficient cause. But when the
people have once resigned up all their authority into the hands of one, and his
heirs for ever, so that now it is not any longer elective in them, but
hereditary in him: then not only the power, but the authority also to
administer that power is solely inherent in him and his heirs, unalterably and
irrevocably for ever.

5. This then is my first Assertion. The Efficient cause of Regal or
Monarchical power, is not the people, but only God. I speak in this
Assertion, not of conditional Princes, but only of absolute Kings and
Monarchs. My first proof then is. When the people create a King, they elect
his person, and authorize him with the administration of the absolute power
which is inherent in the whole Commonwealth to govern it self: otherwise he
is no absolute King, of whom only I speak, and so does the observer also. But
this power (as I have proved) is not an humane, but a divine power, of which
God only is the Efficient Cause. Therefore God only, and not the people is
the Efficient Cause of Regal power.

6. My second proof, God says expressly, Prove. 8.15. Per me Reges regnant,
etc. Then their Dominion or power by which they reign is immediately from God.
Christ says to Pilate, Joh. 19.11. Non haberes potestatem, etc. nisi tibi
datum esset desuper. Then this power is not from below from men; but from
above, from God. St. Paul says, Rom, 13.1. Omnis anima potestatibus
sublimioribus subdita sit: non est enim potestas nisi a Deo. And qui resistit
Potestati, Dei Ordinationi resistit. And, non sine causa gladium portat. For
what cause? Dei enim minister est, v^ndex in iram, etc. Then Regal Power is
Divine power and the Ordinance of God, wherein the King is not the peoples, but
Gods Minister, as being invested and anointed interiorly in his person by him
with a Divine power; of which the exterior Unction is a sacred, Ceremonous,
Commonefactive and solemn Testimony. And for this cause Gyrus though a Heathen
King is called by God himself. Isay 45.1. Christus meus, Gods own anointed.
The holy King Josaphat says to those whom he had constituted Judge. 2.
Paralip. 19.6. Non hominis exercetis judiciam, sed Domini. Then it is not a
humane power, but a divine power by which the King does judge and rule his
people.

From hence I infer two Corollaries.

7. The first: That there is a twofold trust in the King. The one of his
power. The other of the administration of his power. The first is Gods trust
unto him* to exercise his divine judgments. The second, is the peoples, to
administer it Propter salutem populi. But if he swerve herein; seeing that the
power is divine and residing and inhering only in him, and not in the people,
he is not liable to the people, but only to God.

8. The second Corollarie. As God is the sole efficient cause of Regal power;
so the isntrumental cause which conveighes this power, is the divine natural
Law obliging men to unite themselves into Civil societies. For God gives a
power to men to govern themselves by obliging them to unite themselves. And
consequently the election of the people (with all the Observers pactions and
agreements) is but Causa sine qua non, by way of approximation, that this
divine power may reside in those few, or more, or one rather than in any other.
As in my former example n. 3. The efficient cause of the Lord Majors power is
only the King. The instrumental cause by which this power is derived unto him,
is the Charter of the City, granted to them at pleasure, more strictly or more
largely by the King. And the Aldermens election of this or that particular man,
is but the approximation, that the Kings power may reside in him to govern the
City, rather than in any other.

9, My second Assertion. Every absolute King (invested and anointed with a
divine power by God himself to exercise his judgments through the election of
the people to be sole administrator thereof) is in power super totam
Rempublicam; Superior absolutely over the whole Commonwealth. And therefore
is not only Major singulis, but Major Vniversis, and super omnes simul. This
Assertion is evident out of the former. For the power that was inherent in the
whole Commonwealth to exercise Gods judgments, and to govern and preserve it
self, was a divine power, not only super singulos, but super omnes simul, and
therefore Major Universis. But this power is now totally and absolutely
inherent in the King only. Ergo he is super totam Rempublicam: and Major
Universis.

10. In confirmation of this argument, I argue thus. Either the whole power of
the Commonwealth is in one, or no. If no, then he is no absolute King or
Monarch, contrary to our supposition. But if he be a Monarch, I ask again; if
there be a powet in the Commonwealth, which is not in him, is it subordinate
to his power, or no? if it be subordinate, then his power is above that power,
and so super totam Rempublicam, and Major Universis. If it be not, then there
are simul and semel two supreme Civil powers in a Commonwealth, two supreme
contrary Masters at once to be obeyed, one and the same individual Kingdom and
Gubernation, and yet divided against it self, which are most absurd and
impossible.

11. From hence it is evident, that his Majesty said most truly, and most
learnedly; that the administration of the whole power of the Commonwealth
being committed in trust absolutely and irrevocably to him and his heirs for
ever, it is impossible that a power above that trust should be committed to
others.

12. This the Observer in effect plainly confesses. But relapsing into his
wonted Paroxismes of strong malice against Regal Power, he labors (by his
most false erroneous Principle Rex est minor Universis) and tires himself in
vain to answer it. And because the strength of all his long tedious and
farraginous discourse depends wholly upon these two false grounds, viZ. that
the people is the efficient cause of Regal power; And that Rex est minor
Universis; and I have manifestly confuted them both: I presume I have also
sufficiently confuted all the rest; and therefore conclude in those sacred
words, Data est a Domino Potestas Regibus, and virtus ab Altissimo. Power is
given to Kings of the Lord, and Sovereignty from the highest. Sapient. 6.3.

FINIS.

