A most true RELATION Of the great and bloody BATTLE Fought upon Monday last
near the Coast of England, by three of the Earl of Warwicks ships; Namely, the
James, George, and Gray-hound,

Against Col. Goring with 7. ships, who was coming to assist his Majesty
against the Parl. Declaring also the wonderful Victory which they has
obtained against the said Col. Goring, sinking three of his ships, and making
all the rest to fly.

Also how the States of Holland has taken 30. Sail of ships that were coming
to England, laden with great store of Arms and Ammunition, which were sent from
the Prince of Orange and the Dutch Cavaleers to his Majesty.

December. 8. Printed for L. Wright, 1642.

THE STATES OF HOLLAND And Zealand, Their Propositions to the King and
Parliament, for an accommodation of Peace and Union betwixt the two Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, and them selves, to oppose all Nations that shall come
against them.
THE States General for a long time have bin very scrupulous in declaring
themselves, but since they began to discern what the Designs against the
Parliament of England were (and if brought to pass would in conclusion prove
their Rain.) Therefore the States of Holland and ^ealand for the better
preventing of these designs of foreign Nations, they unanimously consented to
have a general meeting, at Amsterdam, where they concluded, and were more
forward to advance this Association then before they were backward, being now
sensible of the Prince of Orange his forwardness in giving way that Arms,
Ammunition, men, money, and other warlike provisions should be brought over
^^ther, tending to the ruin of this present Parliament.

And furthermore for the preventing of these designs and Conspiracies, they are
concluded for to declare their Resolutions to the Parliament of ENGLAND, and to
present these following Propositions to that Grave and worthy Assembly. Viz.

1.
THat whereas all foreign Nations having intelligence of the Distractions and
the great Disturbances that are now in this Kingdom, and the differences that
are betwixt his Majesty and his great and honorable Assembly the High Court of
Purliament, have endeavored and combined together, to raise a great power and
strength, together with an invincible Sail of ships, with a wicked Resolution
to come against these two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, to cast down and
utterly destroy the true Protestant Religion: Therefore for the preventing of
this damnable and Hell-bred Conspiracy, the States General, and the States of
Holland and Zealand do unanimously desire, that there may be a compliance with
the Parliament, and that there may be an Association and firm union between
them, and the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

2.
That as they understand, that in diverse Places of Christendom there are great
preparations making for war, for the destroying and subverting of all the
Protestant Religion, so they most earnestly desire, that the three States may
join together to defend the same.

The States further declared unto the House, that they had made stop of all the
provision provided there to be sent to the King, and are resolved that no aid
shall be sent from thence.

The States are now in great controversy with the Prince of Orange for his
forwardness to send supplies to the King, and for his combining with Papists
in foreign parts.

It was also further signified to the honorable houses of Parliament, by
Letters from Mr, Strickland, that the Prince of Orange had provided 30. sail of
ships to transport Arms and Ammunition to his Majesty the King of England, but
the States having information of them, immediately hindered his proceedings, and
made stopping of the said shipping.

The Parliaments Answer to the States Propositions.
UPon consideration of this business, the Commons have orderd that a Letter of
Thanks be returned to the States for their fidelity to the Parliament, and to
inform them that the Parliament do with much cheerfulness embrace their
Proposition for an association, and firm Union betwixt these two Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, and them, and that they will hazza^d their lives and
fortunes in defense of the true Protestant Religion.

It is declared, that Collonell Goring with 1500. Germans and French has taken
shipping, and is coming for England to aid and assist his Majesty against the
Parliament.

But the Parliaments Navy which is now at Sea, having intelligence of their
coming, immediately hoysted Sail and made toward them, the James, the
George, and the Gray-hound drew nearer and nearer to them, and let fly two or
three pieces at Colonel Goring and his Cavaliers, which made them tremble at
the noise of the Canon, insomuch that they thought to have betook themselves to
flight.

But Colonel Goring thinking himself sufficient enough to encounter with
them, charged a broad side against them, but the James and the George coming
up with much fury, sunk two or three of Colonel Gorings ships, and held the
rest play for the space of 4. hours, till at last the gorged Cavaleers began to
betake themselves to flight.

There were slain of the Cavaleers in this battle about the Number of 500. as
it is supposed, and of our side 20. with little or no hurt to the ships.

The Lords and Commons assembled in Parl. do declare, that all soldiers that
do commit any offense contrary to their Orders shall be brought to condign
punishment, and that they may be severely proceeded against according to Law.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum

FINIS

