Motives to persuade people to abstain from one meals meat in a week, and to
give the value thereof unto the Trustees for propagation of the Gospel:
especially for maintaining hopeful poor Scholars at the UNIVERSITIES.
September: 15th 1646
1. THere wants in England and Ireland at this day more then fifteen thousand
Preachers, as will easily appear, if the unworthy be all put out, and the
numbers of Churches, Chapels, Noble Families, Armies, Navies, foreign
Plantations, and where Merchants have settled tradings, be all reckoned up.

2. When people use not the means to prevent spiritual famine, God usually
sends corporal famine, Hag. chap. 1. and chap. 2. And when they provide to
have plenty of spiritual food, God ( Malach. 3.) bids them prove him if he
will not send them plenty of corporal food: Prove. 3.9, 10. honor the Lord
with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase: so shall
thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out with new wine.
2 Samuel 24.25. And David built there an Altar unto the Lord, and offered
burnt-offerings and peace offerings, so the Lord was entreated for the land,
and the plague was stayed. This was the Lords prescription then for the cure of
the pestilence.

3. Nature teaches every man and woman to give of their meat to such as be
ready to starve; and Grace much more: Luke 3.11. And he that has meat, let
him do likewise. Isa. 58.7. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry? Romans
12.20. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him. Mat. 25.42. I was an hungry,
and ye gave me meat. And our Savior ( Mark 3.4.) makes it all one not to
save life, and to kill. But what is feeding of bodies, compared to feeding of
souls? or saving of lives, to saving of hunger-starved souls? If Paul (2 Cor.
8.) begged to save poor saints lives, ought not all Ministers much more to beg
of their people to save poor souls? If Dives, Luke 16. went to hell for not
refreshing Lazarus his body with the crumbs which fell under his table; what
hope can they have to go to heaven, that will not give one meal in a week to
save many souls? And if, as Haggi, Malachie, and Paul have done, Ministers will
not preach and press this duty at this time, how will they answer it to God
another day? and thereupon if the people will not do it, are not their gods
their bellies, as Paul ( Phil. 3.19.) shows them? All parents that are not
unnatural, have a provident care how their little children shall live if they
survive them, and bethink themselves who shall bring them up: and all parents
that be more then carnal, will provide not only Gardians for their children,
that they may the better live temporally; but also Preachers that they may live
eternally.

4. All other kind of alms costeth a man something; but if the meal be
forborne, and the value given, this gift costeth a man nothing: For example;
suppose a man would forbear his Sabbath days dinner, and only take a very
small refection at noon that day, (so much as might stay his stomach till
night) and at supper deduct or abate as much as that refection came unto;
behold how many blessings would come thereby: First, no work would be hindered
thereby, (as perhaps, if this abstinence were on a weekday, some would
allege). Secondly, some more might be at Gods public worship, when none
stayed at home for cooking of meats. Thirdly, all drowsinesse would be avoided,
and many be much fitter in the afternoon to worship God. Fourthly, at supper,
the rich man would have the poor man's stomach; and much meat, which is now cast
away in many houses, would then be eaten: experience of this we have in our
monthly Fasts; for the fragments left the day before, are dainties upon the
Fast Day at night; especially for the first course: verifying that which
Solomon writes, Prove. 27. ver. 7. The full soul loatheth the honey comb, but
unto the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.

5. God promises a man Deuteronomy. 15.10. for opening his hand wide, and giving to
his poor brother but bodily relief, to bless all that such a man puts his
hand unto: If so; O then how much more will God bless him for his charity to
many souls? And with what peace of conscience and joy in the holy Ghost might
such a one, each Sabbath day at night, go first to supper, and afterward to
bed, and yet do all this without expense of one halfpenny?

Object. It is contrary to the nature of the Sabbath (which should be a day of
rejoicing) to fast.

Answ. 1. Daniel, Chap. 9.3. and 10.3. fasted full three weeks; namely, each
day from morning until night, and at night did eat no pleasant bread, nor did
flesh or wine come in his mouth, neither did he anoint himself all that
while: in which space there must needs be three Sabbath-dayes; yet God was not
offended, but greatly pleased with Daniel for this.

2. We have the like cause; for the seventy weeks of our Captivity are now
also expired.

3. We fast not, but abstain somewhat, and prepare to sanctify the Sabbath
the better, and that our ordinary supper might be more then a feast unto us at
night after we have offered our dinners unto God in this service, and our
praises and prayers in his public worship. And perhaps, if the practice of the
Jews be well searched into, they did eat little or no dinners on their
Sabbaths or Feast-dayes; but first feasted their souls, and after their
bodies: as the Master first feasteth, but the servant when he has done.

4. Let us prove, if we do thus, whether our ordinary suppers shall not be
blessed, and go farther then otherwise they would, even as the five loaves and
two fishes did. People often have such blessings, but too seldom do observe
how the Lord does make (many times) a little meat to fill many, and that much
more at one time then at another.

5. When this objection is well examined, perhaps it will appear to come out of
the stomach and belly, rather then out of the head, or to have any weight of
reason in it. Whatsoever some have written, and others said in their
incogitancy, especially in regard that the abstinence here reasoned for (and a
very small refection taken at noon) tends generally to the better
sanctification of the Sabbath, which is the scope and end of the fourth
Commandment: and whatsoever makes for the better keeping of it, is virtually
commanded in it. But if there be some few particular men and women, who
(undeceived) find that feasting or eating liberally does more fit them to
sanctify a Sabbath; they, and they only may take such liberty: but all others
doubtless shall do better to eat so as may the better fit them for the
services of the day.

Object. Yet the Devil, who would not have this to be done, will suggest, that
the family will eat as much more at night as was spared at noon.

Answ. But that will not be so, if the Governors or Governesses of families
do their duties as (for the good of the Commonwealth, sparing of victual,
avoiding of famine, and causing plenty) they ought to do: and may more easily
do, then is done in besieged Cities: for a man or woman may better proportion
the victual of an house, then a Governor can do it in a whole City; and yet
we have often seen that done in Cities by the Governors.

Object. But you will hardly get people to abstain.

Answ. 1. Yet it is a lesson worthy to be taught, learned and pactised.

2. The voluntary meal first yielded (after an Ordinance enforcing all to pay
it) brought many families in London to observe it ever sithence; and our
enemies in the Kings Quarters to do the like: And if this was done without
Ministers pressing it in the pulpit, because people found the benefit; and has
been the cause that we have had, and have at this day the more plenty, and
England in some degree has thereby been cured of her former gluttony: if
Ministers hereafter do their duties, and do but urge these reasons (as they
will, and many more) why may we not hope to bring the people willingly unto
their good, that are too much disposed to novelties and new fashions, though in
their own nature, and apparent reason they be so unprofitable and noxious?

3. In all godly families let the Governors but allege these reasons, and
then ask their children and servants if they will be contented to give their
parts, and they shall find that none will deny it, lest those that be willing
should make those ashamed that be unwilling; and these leading, the rest will
follow, or may be driven: and this will be not only no charge to the
Governors, but a gain; for (if it become general) it will make victual so
much cheaper; so that their money will be restored to them again, as Jacobs
sons were, Genes. 42.28. and with interest also, if afterward by means thereof
they pay less for victual.

6. The money thus raised is better both to Church and to Commonwealth, then if
some foreign State gave it; for we by this means not only have it for
nothing, but have it as it were wrapped up also in so much victual as by this
means is saved.

7. When people have once learned this way of sparing, any famine foreseen,
with Gods blessing may be prevented thereby. Suppose we had now but half so
much vituals in England as would furnish us with two meals a day, until God
sent us more, if betimes we did eat but one meal in a day, our victual would
hold out until the Lord did relieve us.

8. The poorer any one is, the more reason he has to give a meal, if this may
be a means to prevent dearth; for famine kills the poor, before it kills
the rich; and the poorest of all first of all.

9. It is a Godly policy in time of plenty to teach and to bring people to such
a diet, that when need requires they may save their lives by offering of it.

10. Solomon tells us of a poor Wiseman Eccles. 9. that saved his City. But
2 Samuel 20. We read of the Wise-woman of Abel, that saved that City, when all
the Wisemen in it either could not, or would not: Women (in London especially)
have the charge of meats in all Families: and are there no Godly and Wise-women
that will undertake this work, and get a meal a week to be spared, and the
value given, and promise and become sureties for God that he shall bless so
the meal in the barrel, and oil in the cruse (I mean the rest of the victual in
every house that does so) that it shall go farther, and fatten also; as Daniels
and his fellows water and pulse did: This Christ will take to be more kindness
showed unto him, then those Women's ministering unto him of their substance, Luke
8. Also, if that Woman's pouring the precious ointment on his head Matthew. 26.
should be told for a memorial of her wheresoever the Gospel should be preached,
surely such women as by this means shall procure maintenance for poor Scholars
at the Universities, whereby Christ may have many more Ministers bred up, shall
have a most honorable memorial wheresoever the Gospel shall hereafter be
preached by such poor Scholars; yea by many thousands more.

Truly if men shall not stir herein, nor Ministers move them (which God forbid)
I shall pray that Women may do this work, and have the honor thereof from
men, and the reward thereof from God.

That Mother that like Hannah breeds but one Samuel for the Lord, doubt less
she shall not lose her reward: much less shall those Women that are the means
of breeding and bringing up of multitudes of Samuels.

If all the Men and Women that were wise-hearted did* so cheerfully work with
their hands for the Tabernacle in the time of the Law, that they wrought and
brought too much, and were commanded to bring no more: will men and women now
for Gospel Tabernacles not do that which will ask but some of them a little
labor, and none of them any cost at all, but be so pleasant and profitable as
has been showed, and refuse the honor to be instrumental in the enlargement
of Christ's Kingdom, and their own and their posterities temporal and eternal
happiness? But in this offering unto the Lord, Let none (as Ananias and Saphyra)
keep back apart (by undervaluing their meal) but rather make God good measure,
pressed down, shaken together, and running over; and then pray as Nehemiah,
Nehem. 13.14. Remember me O my God concerning this, and wipe not out my good
deeds that I have done for the House of my God, and for the Offices thereof:
and then expect Gods blessing, and the like honor that Nehemiah has had and
shall have in all after Ages.

FINIS.
Imprimatur:

JAMES CRANFORD.
September. 11. 1646.

