A REMONSTRANCE OF THE BARBAROUS CRUELTIES AND BLOODY MURDERS COMMITTED By the
IRIsh REBELS Against the PROTESTANTS in IRELAND Both before and since the
Cessation, COLLECTED Out of the Records at DUBLIN, by Thomas Morley, Gent.

Being the examinations of many who were eyewitnesses of the same, and
justified upon oath by many thousands; Presented to the whole Kingdom of
England, that thereby they may see the Rebels inhumane dealings, prevent their
pernicious practices, relieve their poor brethrens necessities, and fight for
their Religion, Laws, and Liberties.

Published by special command and Authority.

London, Printed by E. G. 12 June. 1644.

WE His Majesty's Commissioners for the inquiry and examining of the losses and
sufferings of the loyal subjects of the Kingdom of Ireland by means of the
present rebellion Do hereby certify all those whom it may concern; That Tho:
Morley of Coughes in the Kings County gent. by his examination upon oath lately
taken before us deposed, that since the beginning of the present Rebellion, and
by means thereof he has bin and still is deprived, robbed, or dispoiled of
his goods, chattells and estate, of the value and to his loss of one thousand
ninety seven pounds ster.

All which by direction from the right honorable the Lords Justices of the same
Kingdom we certify under our hands from the City of Dublin this, fifth day of
January. 1643. Henry Jones John Watson. Henry Brereton. John Stern. Ex. per
Tho. Waring.


THese are to certify that the bearer hereof, Thomas Morley Gent. having by
means and occasion of this late Rebellion in Ireland, lost all his whole
estate, was constrained upon the insurrection to flee to my Castle at Parsons
Town alias Birr, in Com. Regis where he became a Trooper and was shot in his
Majesty's service so, that he was constrained to go upon crutches for the
space of eighteen months, or therabouts. And now by warrant from the Lord
Lieutenant, and council is amongst the rest of my Troop disbanded without any
pay, and is constrained to go for England to seek for relief, or else to
starve;

All which at his request I signify under my hand, this 18 day of March, Anno
Dom. 1643. William Parsons.

YOu and every of you, are hereby required to permit, and suffer the Bearer
hereof Thomas Morley, and John Morley his Son, who were lately driven out of
Ireland, and landed at the Port of Dover quietly to pass for London, without
any of your lets, or molestations; And this shall be your warrant.

Given under my hand and seal the first day of May, 1644. WARWICK.

To all deputy Lieutenants, Colonells, Lieutenants Colo. Capts Commanders, and
all other Officers whom it may concern.
A Brief Collection of some part of the foul Murders and barbarous
cruelties, committed by the traterous Rebels the Papists of several Counties
within the Kingdom of IRELAND.
And first of their Murders and Cruelties In the County of Cavan.
The witnesses.
THirty persons at one time most barbarously murdered, and slain outright by
the popish Rebels, and about 150. more cruelly wounded; so that Traces of blood
issuing from their wounds, lay upon the high way 12 miles together in their
flight. And many young children were left and perished in the way, to the number
of 60. The Rebels vow, if any dug graves for them they should be buried
therein themselves: Adam Glover.
so as many were left unburied and some hid in the bushes when they were dead,
because their weak parents could carry them no further, nor bury them: and
some were carried a great way before they durst bury them. And that one Phillip
o-Rely then and yet Shierffe of the County, relenting at their continued
cruelties, his own son told him that if he did revolt from that action and
authority; he ought to die and should surely be hanged.

Mary Sharp.
In the County of Cavan. Anthony Sharp being directed by Hugh Brady Gent. to
leave his goods with him in trust, and promising to secure them for him from
the other Rebels, when afterward Sharp came for them, Brady in stead thereof,
cut off his head.

Will. Bellis.
In the County of Lowth. Captain Dergis a Rebel having robbed him of his
goods, and being desired to spare him somewhat of his own, he being sick,
answered, he had 100 l. of the Kings Subsidy moneys and 40 l. of the Bishop of
Dromors, and all was too little for the Army; and so he going away was stripped
of all his clothes, and getting into a bed; the Rebels set the house on fire,
out of which he hardly escaped, and the rebels then hanged two Protestants.

Nathanaell Higginson, Thomas Knowles, Rich-Braishagh. Richard Walker, says, 40
more were murdered many wounded and 100 dead.
In the County of Fermanagh. That Captain Mac Roy Guire Captain O Donnelle and
other Rebels killed one of his Tenants, and at the least 80 English Protestants
more and wounded, stripped, and hurt so many more of the English as dwelt
thereabouts: yet killed few outright, but left them in ditches and other places
mortally wounded, where they pined to death, the Rebels affirming their priest
commanded them so to do.

George Butterwick-Iohn Moreton says, 18 Protestants were murdered at another
time.
In the County of Cavan. Phillip O Relly and others promising to conduct the
Protestants to the next County, and to secure their goods, they relying thereon
put their old and weak people and children upon Cars* taking (by the Rebels
liberty) some small relief with them. But before nine miles passed, an Army of
their Soldiers came against them, and their Convoyes, without more money,
would not help or protect them; but assisted the army to rob, strip, and wound
them, so as 100 died outright, and many after: but at the beginning the
Protestants were there near two thousand young and old. Robert Hancock Barbary
Moreton Will. Moreton. Agnes Machem. John Heys, Charles Short.


In the County of Fermanagh. To prove that very many, viz. 100 and above in the
parish of Drumully are dead through hunger, and cold, since they were put out
of their habitations, and diverse able Protestants most cruelly and barbarously
massacred and murdered.

John Bowser, Barbary Maine, George Gascoine, Eliz. Ardwick, Eliz. Cotes, Eliz.
Dewsbery, Hugh Stokes, Will. Cross, Anne Bath her smock ripped down with a
skeane. Richard Watson, Abraham James.
In the County of Fermanagh. Tho. Bowser murdered in his wifes arms, and many
more also at several times murdered.

Magret Wilson, James pressick. Rich. Knowles, Elenor James, Margaret Fermony.
Burning of the Houses of Protestants, and of cruel usage of the popish Rebels.

One Lund, a man of 80. years old most barbarously murdered. Mr. James most
barbarously murdered and after stripped naked, fifteen protestants more slain.

Mary. Loftus, Eliz. Massy.
Mary Loftus had her husband quartered in her sight.

Elizabeth Massies Husband killed in her arms, and two children starved.

Eliz. Bowser, Margret Parkin.
That by credible report of all the Town, the Rebels boyld a young child of a
protestant to death in a caldron, or great kettle in the Church at Newton.

Mary Loftus.
Mary loftus had her husband quartered and thrown into a River, and then the
Rebels said it was good beef.

Anne Cheetam.
In the County of Armagh. Protestants detained prisoners with the Rebels.

Davy Williams, Rich-Runckorn. Will. Bickerdick.
In the Kings County. Richard Warrins wife and 5 children detained.

In the County of Fermanagh. Richard Sallyard Gent. most cruelly murdered
because he would not go to mass, and his wife wounded.

Jo. Smithso^ clark her husband, Io. Heys and others Antony Hubert, Sara
Doughty, Darby Lea. Will. Robinson, Margret Maning. Mary Comms. Margery Sharp.
In the County of Dublin. Mistress Smithson a ministers wife and her maid hanged
up to death.

Mistress Dirrick Hubbert, and others robbed and murdered at the skirries by
the Rebels, and all the Protestants there also robbed; other foul murders in
the County of Dublin.

In the County of Mead. Cruel murders in the Town of Navan.

Mary Comin^ dragged up and down in a rope.

Mr. Sharp the minister most cruelly murdered, and denied burial, the Rebels
having first enforced him to trample and spoil all his books in the water.

Jane Pressick.
Tho. Pressick, James Haukin, both most cruelly murdered at Trym, being first
robbed, and their wives and children thereby undone.

Reinold Griffith
In the County of Armagh. Reinold Griffith robbed, cruelly wounded, and pursued
16 miles for his life, and his wife and children imprisoned three weeks by the
Rebels, and then the Rebels took her son of 14 years old and drowned him in a
bog-pit, holding him down with a sword in her sight, and this done at the New^y.

Rich. Warrin.
William VVarin robbed, and imprisoned by the Rebels 12 days, then driven into
the River, there stripped, thrown into the water and drowned with a 100 more
women and children: his wife and six children left at the rebels mercy.

Lidia Smith, Isaac Keen.
In the County of Longford. O^e Smith robbed there, had his head cut off in
defense of the Castle, and 14 more protestants then, and there murdered also,
and his wife and children stripped.

Henry Palmer.
In the County of Wexford. Diverse that kept the Castle of Fethert wounded to
death, and others stripped, and almost starved to death.

Henry Steel, Robert thrown, Clark.
In the County of Monoghan. M. Blany a Justice of the peace and Knight of the
shire, and Committee for the Subsidies, hanged up, stripped, Hugh Culme, Gent.
Henry Calladine John Greg.
and buried in a ditch by the rebels in the County of Monoghan, because he
would not turn and go to mass; and the next night one Luke Ward hanged and
thrown into a ditch; and they and diverse others were robbed, and the rest kept
in prison, without relief from them that robbed them.

Other murders and cruelties of others, within the County of Manoghan by the
rebels. Dorothy Ward.


William Perkins Anne Borrell.
In the County of Cavan. Fourteen or fifteen hundred Protestants all robbed and
stripped together, and some stripped 20 several times.

Richard Lewis, Gent. Mary Ward Elizabeth Birch John Carter Mary Owlet John
Heron Nich. Michael Henry Barnes Philip Ward Christopher Ayrey Silvanus Bullock
The Arms and Town of Belturbat delivered to the o Relys, and their company of
Rebels, upon their promise to the Townsmen that they should enjoy their goods
safe, and have them preserved against the Mac Gueres, and other Rebels of the
County of Fermanah. But after, upon pretense that Mac Guere threatened them, the
Protestants were turned out of the Town, with their clothes, and had a guard
from the o Relys one day; but the second day they were stripped and a great
number slain, and many perished through cold and famine; and many little
infants left alive by the way languishing, and gaping for breath.

Protestant houses pulled down, and diverse taken and kept prisoners, many
stripped, and many died of cold and want, Franc. Posnet Tho. Tailor
and many children left miserably alive by the way, because the parents were
able to bring them no further.

And a very old woman carried 6 miles on her sons back, was forced to be
left by the way. And a Minister killed by the Rebels and thrown into a ditch,
who had 3 children, Nich. Swainson
two whereof he carried on his back, which were left by the way at his death.

In the County of Monoghan. One who was executed the 15 of February 1641. at
Dublin for murdering a Protestant woman, John Montgomery, Gent. and above 100
more witnesses
confessed upon the gallows that he was set on to do it, and that after he
washed his hands in her blood.

A man who had several young children borne and alive, and his wife near her
time of delivery of another, was most cruelly murdered by the rebels, his wife
flying into the mountains, the rebels hastily pursued her and her little
children, Mr. John Montgomery.
and found her newly delivered of her child there; they pitying no such, nor
any distress, presently murdered her and her other children which run with
her thither, and in most inhumane and barbarous manner suffered their dogs to
eat up and devour the newborn child.

Philip Tailor John Wisdom
In the County of Armagh. One hundred ninety six Protestants drowned by the
Papists, rebels, at a Town near Armagh, all together. Many others most
cruelly massacred, and amongst the rest a poor woman with child had her belly
ripped up, and two children tumbling out, they threw both her and them into the
ditch; and after Philip Tailor found and drove away a Swine that was feeding
upon them.

In the County of Armaugh and Province of Vlster. The rebels there by special
command from Sir Philem o Neale, dragged Lieutenant James Maxwell out of his
bed in the rage and height of a burning-feaver; and lest any of his friends or
acquaintance should bury him, they carried him two miles from any Church, and
there cruelly butchered and murdered him, when he knew not what he did or
said, and so Sir Philem paid him 260 li. which he owed him.

His wife Grizell Maxwell being in child birth (the child half borne, half
unborne) they stripped her stark naked, and drove her about an Arrows flight to
the water and drowned her.

The like they did to another English woman in the same parish in the beginning
of the rebellion; which was little inferior (if not more unnatural and
barbarous then the rosting of Mr. Watson the Minister alive after they had cut
a collop out of either buttocke.

A Scotch-woman was found in the Glynwood, lying dead, her belly ripped up, and a
living child crawling in her womb cut out of the cawle.

Mr. Starkie, sometime School master in Armagh, a Gentleman of good parentage
and parts, being upwards of 100 years of age, they stripped naked, caused two of
his daughters likewise naked to support him under each arm, (he being not able
to go of himself;) and in that posture carried them all three a quarter of
mile to a turf-pit and drowned them, feeding the lust of their eyes and the
cruelty of their hearts with the self-same objects at the same time.

At the siege of Augher they would not kill any English beast, and then eat
it, but they cut collops out of them being alive, leting them there roar till
they had no flesh upon their backs, so that sometimes a beast would live 2 or
3 days together in that torment. The like they did at the Town of Armagh.

They murdered Hugh Eccline Esquire, and hanged all his Irish servants that
they thought had done him any good, and had proved faithful unto him.

Henry Cowell Esquire, a gallant and wel-bred Gentleman was murdered because
he would not consent to marry a beastly trull Mary Neale, near kinswoman to
Sir Philem. He was proffered his life without the blowse if he would have gone
to mass, but he refused to do either.

They murdered also Robert Ecklin his son (a child of 11 or 12 years of
age, because he would not go to mass.

Very many of the British Protestants the rebels buried alive, and took great
pleasure to hear them speak unto them as they dug down old ditches upon
them, burying none otherwise, nor suffering any to perform that duty for them.

The rebels would send their children abroad in great troops, especially near
Kinnard, armed with long wattles and whips, who would therewith beat men's
privy members until they beat or rather threshed them off, and then they would
return in great joy to their parents, who received them for such service, as
it were in triumph.

If any women were found dead, lying with their faces downward, they would
turn them upon their backs, and in great flocks resort unto them, censuring
all parts of their bodies, but especially such as are not to be named; which
afterward they abused so many ways and so filthily, as chaste ears would not
endure the very naming thereof.

Many of the Protestants the rebels would grievously wound, but not kill
outright, but being half dead would leave them entreating for no greater
favor at their hands three or four days after but to kill them outright,
which sometimes was granted, sometimes denied.

A young youth having his back bone broken was found in a field, having like a
beast eaten all the grass round about him: it could not be learned that they
killed him outright, but that they removed him to a place of better pasture.

County of Antrim.
The rebels themselves confessed and told it to Dr. Maxwell while he was
prisoner among them, that they killed 954 in one morning in the County of
Antrim; and that besides them they supposed they had killed 1100. or 1200 more in
that County.

County of Down.
They told him likewise that Colonel Brian o Neille killed about 1000 in the
County of Down, besides 300 killd near Killelengh and many hundreds both
before and after in both Counties.

At Sir Philems return from Lisuegarvy, some of his soldiers forced about 24
British into a house, where they burnd them alive; whose terrible outcries
they desired very much to imitate and express unto others.

Sir Philem himself confessed and reported that he killd 600 English at Gervah
in the County of Derry; County of Derry, Tirone.
and that he had neither left man, woman, nor child alive in the Barony of
Mounterlong in the County of Tinone betwixt Armagh and the Newry in the
several Lands and Plantations of Sir Archebald Atcheson, John Hamilton Esquire the
Lord Cawfield, and the l. Mountnorris,

There were above 2000 British murdered in their own houses for the most
part) whose houses were seen by a Scottish man filled with their dead bodies.

In the Glenwood toward Drumore there were slaughtred above 1200 in all,
Armagh.
who were all killd in their flight to the County of Down.

The number of people drowned at the bridge of Portadon are diversely reported;
but by their own report there were 150 drowned with Mr. Fullertor. At another
time they threw 140 over the bridge. At another time 36 or 37. and so continued
drowning every day more or fewer for seven or eight weeks, so that the fewest
that can be supposed there to have perished must needs be above one thousand;
besides as many more drowned betwixt the bridge and the great Lough of
Mountjoy; besides those who perished by the Sword, Fire, and Famine in
Cloubrassill and the English plantation adjacent, which in regard there escaped
not 300 out of all those quarters, must needs amount to many thousands; near
unto Doctor Maxwels house 37 persons were thrown from the Curr-bridge at one
time 18 or 19. at another time 56 men, women, and children, all taken out of
Doctor Maxwels own house; and at several other times several other numbers;
besides those who were drowned in the blackwater at Kinnard; in which Town and
Parish of Tynon there were drowned, slaughtred, and died of famine, and for
want of clothes, about 600.

To these may be added many thousands more; but reference being had to the
number in gross which the Rebels themselves have upon enquiry found out and
acknowledged, which notwithstanding will come far short of all those that
have been murdered in Ireland, there being above one hundred fifty four
thousand wanting of British within the very precincts of Vlster in March 1641.
as by their monthly bills brought in and made by their Priests by special
direction appears.

It is proved by diverse witnesses, that after the drowning of the many
Protestants at Portadowne, strange visions and apparitions have been seen and
heard there upon the water; sometime a spirit assuming the shape of a man has
been seen there with his hands held up and closed together; and sometimes in
the likeness of a woman, appearing waste high above the water, with hair
disheveled, eyes twinkled, elevated and clasped hands, crying out, revenge,
revenge, etc. and appearing, and crying so many nights together. Other visions
and strange voices, and fearful scritchings have been heard where they have
drowned the English at other places, as at Belturbat-river in the County of
Cavan; a lough near Loghgall in the County of Armagh, which have also deterred
and affrighted the Irish soldiers and others, that they durst not stay near
the place, but fled away:

A boy not above fourteen years of age killed at Kinnard in the County of
Tirone fifteen able men with his Skeine, they being disarmed, and most of
their feet in the stocks. And it has been most usual in all parts for the
very Irish women and children to murder the English, and to be more fierce and
cruel to their powers then the men themselves. And sometimes the rebels
children with lath Swords, heavy and well sharpened, would venture upon men and
women of ripe years.

In the County of Armagh it was ordinary and common for the rebels to expose
the murdered bodies of the British so long unto public view and censure,
that they began to stink and infest the air, (which being a thing very
strange) would not sometimes happen until four or five weeks after the
murder committed. Then at length they would permit some of their bodies to be
removed and cast into ditches, but so as they must be laid with their faces
downward. The reason they gave for the same was, that they so placed them to
the intent they might have a prospect and sight of Hell only. And therefore
when they killed any of the Protestants they used always these words, Anim
Dewll, which is, thy soul to the Devil.

It was usual sport with one Mr. Maghan Captain of the Castle and Town of
Monoghan, to take a wodden prick or broach and thrust it up into the fundament
of an English man or Scottish-man; And thereafter to draw him up and down the
room with a Joint-stoole, until through extreme pain, he either fainted or
gave content to the spectators by some noteable skips and frisks. And it is
further of undeniable truth that the said Maghan, and other Rebels in the
County of Monoghan (after a great feast there held,) took an English or
Welsh-man, and bound him naked upon the Table; At which they drank after
dinner, and at every health gave him a gash or wound (but not mortal) until
his whole body became (as it were) one continued wound; And thereafter flung
him out upon a dunghill where he died, partly of his wounds, and partly of
famine, none daring to relieve him.

In the County of Kildare and province of Leinster, the Rebels shot an English
protestant in his thigh, then took him, made a deep hole in the ground, and
made him stand upright therein whilst they filled the hole full of earth
again; and fast ram'd all his body and Arms and all but his head therein, so
as he could not stir nor help himself; In which state and posture the
barbarous villains left him to Languish, Pine, Starve and die there as he did.

In the County of Catherlagh two English protestants being almost starved for
want of food at Catherlagh Castle, went out to gather a few ears of Corn;
were seized on and hung up on a Tree by the hair of their heads all a whole
night and more; The next day the Rebels took them down, and finding yet life
in them both, mangled, murdered, and cut them in pieces.

Tipprreary Province of Munster.
At the silver works in the County of Tipperarie, one Captain Kenedy and two
Soldiers on a Sabbath day, suddenly fell upon above 20 of the miners being
Englishmen, and murdered them all. And soon after the same Captain (because
he was hindered from doing the like mischief upon others of the English) sell
into a mad frantic fit and drowned himself.

Sligo Province of Connaght.
Teige O Conniers Sligo, reputed General of the Rebelt in the County of Sligo,
and his brothers and diverse other bloody Captains, and a great number of their
Soldiers in December, 1641. Surprised and took the Town of Sligo; and
quarter promised to the British there for their lives, they being 38. who were
kept three weeks by the said Teige O Conniers; he having taken all their goods
of great value. But then those 38. British were by consent of the said Teige
put into the goal of Sligo: and about midnight were most barbarously
murdered, with butchers Axes, Sledges and other things, and cut all to pieces
by the brothers of the said Teige, and others of the name and Sect of the
Conniers; And a Gentlewoman there attempting to go away, she being great with
Child, was taken and had her belly ripped up: So as her Child's Arm appeared in
her Womb.

In the County of Kilkenny, in the Province of Munster, and elsewhere in that
Province (as well as in Vlster in the North) It is a thing most common, and
ordinary to bury the English alive. To dig up the dead Corpse of others in the
Churches and Churchyard, and to cast them out to open view, and there to leave
them: And those that attempted to bury any of the English were murdered and
denied burial themselves.

In Dungavon in the County of Tirone, or near thereunto the Rebels murdered
316 Protestants, between Charlemont and Dungavon above 400.

By Benbarb in the black water in Com. Armagh, were dround 206. And the rebel
Patrick Mac Crew of Dungavon murdered 31. in one morning.

Two yound Rebels named John Beg, and Brian Harvy murdered in the County of
Tirone 140. poor Women and children.

The Wife of Brian Kelly of Loghgall, in Com. Armagh, did with her own hands
murder 45.

Doctor Hodges with forty four more, was murdered within a quarter of a mile
of Charlemount, in the County of Armagh.

At a Mill-pond in the Parish of Killaman, and County of Tirone, there were
drowned in one Day 300. protestants, and in that parish there were murdered,
of English and Scotch, 1200.

Many young Children were cut into quarters and gobbets by the Rebels, and 18.
Scotch infants were hanged up upon a clothiers Tenter-hooks.

A young fat Scotch-man was murdered, and the Rebels made Candles of his
grease.

They took another Scotchman and ripped up his belly, that they might come to
his small guts. The one end whereof they tied to a Tree, and made him go round
until he had drawn them all out of his body. They then saying, they would try
whether a dog, or a Scotchmans guts were longer.

Many other bloody murders and massacres of protestants by the popish Rebels,
and other most intolerable outrages, within twenty several Counties of the
Kingdom of Ireland at the least; and all protestants generally dispoiled of all
their goods, and clothes, turned away from their habitations naked; whereby
many thousand have died of cold, hunger, and want: to prove which there are now
in Dublin many thousands of witnesses.

THE Impious, wicked, and lewd actions of the Papists, against the Protestants,
and their Religion.
HVgh o Rely a ringleader of the rebels in the County of Cavan, William Hoe.
said, that the English thought to cut the throats of the Irish for their
Religion, but the Irish would prevent them and cut their throats first for
their Religion.

In the County of Cavan, James o Rely, Hugh Brady, and other rebels often took
the Protestant Bibles and wetting them in puddle water, Adam Glover.
did five or six several times dash the same in the faces of Protestants,
saying, come I know you love a good lesson, here is a most excellent one for
you, and come to morrow and you shall have as good a Sermon. And as the
Protestants were going to the Church the rebels took and dragged them into the
Church by the hair of the head; where they whipped, robbed, stripped, and most
cruelly used them, saying, that to morrow you shall hear the like sermon.

Robert Brown, Io. Montgomery John Wisdom. Eliz. Tailor, and many others.
That Rory Mac Guire, Sir Philem O Neale, and the Northren Rebels in the
Counties of Monoghan, Armagh, Lowth, Cavan, Mead and other places where they
came, burnt, tore, or otherwise trampled under their feet, and spoiled all the
Protestants Bibles, and other good Books of the Protestants.

Henry Palmer.
In the County of Wexford. That Derucot man Dooley, the Rebel, and his company
went into the Church at Fethert, and cut the Pulpit-Cloath, and Ministers
books in pieces: and strewed them about the Churchyard; and caused the Piper
to play whilst they danced, and trampled upon them under their feet, calling
the Minister dog, and stripping him of his Clothes.

The General cruelty to Ministers against Protestants and that religion duly
exercised by the Papist-rebells scornful malicious and contemptuous words and
blasphemies, are so many and frequently used, and by too woeful experience
found and proved by a multitude of witnesses.

FINIS.

