A most sad and serious LAMENTATION OVER THE HEARDS-MEN of the Flock and
People of GOD.

Written in Germany in the year 1631. And Printed there in the beginning of
1639.

Cum facultate ejus, qui erat and est and erit.

EXODUS 3. REV. I. EZEKIEL. 19. 1, 2. But make a Lamentation over the Princes, and
Prelates of Israel. and thou shall say: What? thy mother the Lyonnesse has
layne among the Lions, in the midst of the young Lions she has multiplied
her whelps etc.

Now Published in English, that all true-hearted-Christians in Great Britain
and Ireland, to whose hands it shall come, may take the same into their
Consideration.

LONDON, Printed for G. Thompson, and are to be sold at his Shop, over against
Lincolnes Inn. 1642.

[Ier. 50. Verse. 6, 7.]
Mr People have been lost sheep, a forlorn heard, their Heards-men, or
Pastors have caused them to errc, they have wandered from the Mountains, they
have gone from the Mountain to the Hill, they have forgotten their resting
place. All that found them have devoured them, and their enemies said, we have
done none unrighteousness, because that they have sinned against the LORD, the
habitation of Righteousness, and against the Lord the Hope of their Fathers.

Wis. 6. Elay 28. Deuteronomy. 17.
Harken ye Heards-men and Stewards, ye that Lord-it over the People; attend
and listen to the message which the LORD GOD does send unto you ye that lift
up your selves above your brethren.
Genesis 3 19.
A Certain great and mighty KING, having appointed Heards-men and
overseers-over the Flocks, and Herds of all his Foulds and Pastures, men that
with all faithful diligence, and in the sweat of their brows night and day,
should tend, and tender their Charge, seek what is lost, heal and comfort the
sick and seeble, keep the fat from harm, that they become not a prey to the
claws or jaws of Wolves; and other wild beasts, but rather that they might
grow fat and well liking, increase and prosper, and bring forth much fruit, and
gain unto their King and master.

And this same King, having likewise given a liberal and plentiful allowance
unto the said Heards-men, of food and raiment, and other sustance; so that
they had no reason at all to seize on the sheep, their slecce, milk, flesh, or
bones; or to estrange any thing from their Master; but rather to feed and keep
the Flock with all faithfulness, both in the heat by day, and in the cold by
night, like Jacob. Gen 31. 40.


Howbeit also these hearders had vowed and promised in exquisite terms, how
tenderly they affected the sheep, what care and pains they would take to
guard and keep the fame; yet they performed and held nothing, neverthlesse
they would seem, and be reputed faithful shepherds: they were so well
instructed by their Teachers, in the Art of simulation, and dissimulation, and
dissimulation, and practiced in falsehood and hypocrisy; and when they said
white or light, they meant black, Esaias 5.
and dark. But when as they began to grow wanton, in the enjoying of that
plenteous entertainment, which the bounty of their great, and gracious Master
had bestowed on them; going about to hoard up glory and Treasure for
themselves, they chose Vnder-keepers, and Vice-leaders, and put off the pains
of watching and feeding the Flock, from themselves upon others.

Zeph: 1. 9.
These under-keepers likewise sought their own, skipping over their Masters
threshold, bragging only of their Masters Interests, struggling and striving to
fill their own, and Masters houses, with subtilties, lies and deceit; with
Robberies, Rapine, and ransaks; glozing all such practices of theirs with a
specious Title, which they call the shepherds right and prerogative; and
showing no pity 1 Samuel 8.
or tenderness at all toward the poor sheep, but distressed, flayed, tore
and devoured them greedily, grievously, utterly: As for the Amos 5.
Heards-men or Shepherds themselves, they gave themselves over to their own
carnal pleasures, continually and fully to satisfy the wilfulness of their
own corrupt, and inveigled reason. They began to advance still the seat of
violence in their Governments, and all according to their own greedy lusts, and
appetites, and not to conform Amos 6. Wis. 2.
and frame their practice to the order of the great Monarch, the LORD of Lords,
in keeping and feeding the Flock, committed to their charge. They did eat
early day by day, and heated themselves Esav 5. Amos 6.
with Wine, drinking the same in Gilt, and Silver, and Crystal Bowls; they
slept on soft and precious beds, and besides this voluptuous fare, they had
their Psalteris, and Musical instruments, their Trumpets, shoutes, hollowings,
and jollities. They disported themselves with the fowls and birds of the Air,
and exercised a cruel Barue 3.
and butcherly pastime with the beasts of the field, with much care and
painfulness, as if the great King and Monarch had appointed this for their
only employment: They sought out and entertained cunning Masters of pleasures,
that studied nothing else, but to find out new variety still of pleasures and
delights for the Heardsmen, in statoly, sumptuous, and far fetched seasts and
banquetings; in gay, strange, and wondefull habits, and accoutrements; in
dancing and sporting, and other the like worldly and carnal wantonnesses, and
vanities: so that they went continually but from one pleasure to another, and
nothing was more to be seen with these Heards-men, but a continued course, and
enterchange of luxury, and bravery; all pleasure, delight, and gloriousness,
the lust of the eyes, the lust of the Amos 6. 1 John 2.
flesh, and the pride of life. Nay they grew to that pass of proud conceit and
arrogant insolence, in their revolted hearts, that they did ^cornefully
disdain, and set at naught; the sheep and Flock of their Lord and Master,
never regarding nor looking after them, unless it were to see them fleeced,
and fleyed with the sharpest Razers, even unto blood, if not life and all: yet
condoling them out of a false and Mic. 3. Za. 11.
hypocritical heart, how loath they were to proceed in this manner, but they
could no way remedy the same, their estate and condition required and enforced
it so. Thus they went on still, and multiplied their pride and luxury, roabing
and arraying themselves, their wives, Children and Servants, with the gory
wool of the sheep, in costly garments, with Gold, Silver, precious stohes,
without either scope or measure of all their riotous and chargeable profusions:
thus their perverseness still increased, advancing from one iniquity to another,
continually coveting to have it yet more glorious, more gallat, more sumptuous;
and were not at all troubled for the affliction, and distress of the sheep:
further more they hired also sundry wise men for themselves, filling their
hands, and seeding them largely with the Milk, Wool, 1 King. 12. 31. 2 Timothy 4.
and Blood of the Sheep, to preach lies unto them, and together with this
Luxury, to please and tickle their vain ears with a curious, artificial,
sweet, and comfortable babbling. These were a commending and magnifying the
Heardsmen, how they were entrusted with their staff by so great a KING, how
worthily they did weld the same; they were indeed the Crown and Glory of the
Sheep. What a deal of toil and pains they took, to lead and govern the
Sheep, by the same, comforting and promising them instead, and in the Name of
that great KING (though they neither knew, nor were sent by him) how the same
KING was ready abundantly to reward their great paines-taking, in his Royal
Palaces; for as for those daily refreshments, which they now enjoyed, according
to their hearts desires during the attendance of their so weighty charge; that
was but a small trifling matter, the best and true reward should follow them
hereafter.

By this means, namely the soothing of such Bablers, these Heardsmen were
mightily encouraged in all their wicked and licentious courses, that they
regarded neither the Will, Charge, and Order of the great KING, nor the good of
the Sheep. But now, when as by all the waste of this excessive Pride and
insolency, the liberal Allowance of the great KING fell short of their
expenses; then the Heardsmen began to forget that they were but Heards-men and
Servants in trust, and not Lords and owners of the flock of the Sheep, and
that they must be accomptable unto the great KING their Master, that Wis 6. lob
24. Matthew 18. 1 Samuel 8.
entrusted them with this office, of keeping and feeding the Sheep; and in
these their blind-foulded hearts, they wickedly perverted their original
instalment into their place and function, even as the unrighteous Steward dealt
with the Bills; and pretended both Sheep Luk 16. Ezekiel. 29. 3
and pasture, fold and flock, both Earth and the Rivers, were all their own,
they were the true proprietors and Lords of all: securing themselves of force
and violence, according to their own pleasure and fancies, and not according to
the Order and Rule of the great KING, to govern with rigor, and severity, not
to the great KINGS or Sheep, but all to their own Glory, Profit, and
advantage.

Zeph. 3. Esaias 46.
And thus the Heards-men, were turned into Lions, Wolves, Thieves, and
Murderers, building their Shepherds houses with sin and unrighteousness;
feeding and pampering themselves, all their aims and endeavors being set upon
Covetousness and Rapin, and to make prey and havocke of the Sheep, none
daring to control or demand them, what are ye doing? Amos 5. Ier. 12. Iam.
5. 1 King. 21.


But by the wiles and plots of Iesabel, Naboth was put to silence, nay to
death, rather than that he should maintain the Right of the LORD, and of his
Sheep; pretending he had blasphemed GOD and the KING.

For their conceited, selfe-willed Ratio Status, or State Policy, and arrogated
greatness, could not other wise endure it: what were Sovereignty and Royalty
else, and what would become of the Reputation, if they should not have an
absolute and arbitrary Power to rule and command as they listed.

Mic. 2.
Thus then they fell upon the poor Sheep, with all the fierceness and
cruelties they could devise, not contenting themselves with the Wool and
Milk, which they had alienated from the great LORD, but fleyed off both skin
and flesh together, and devoured it; nay they brake their very bones, and chope
them in pieces as for the pot, Mic. 3.
and held it no sin, for they would not know of any other Lord and Master:
and the Vnder-keepers followed the same practice, so that the poor dismayed
Sheep were fleeced and torn and devoured on all hands.

At all this the lucre-tyed and belly-hired Babblers, not only winked, but they
approved of it, saying, the Heards-men might do it lawfully, none ought to
gainsay it, but be ready at all times to yield and offer both Wool and Milk,
nay body, life and all. They were the Heards-men appointed by the great
Monarch, to whom they would be responsible well enough; the same was a rich and
gracious Lord; that would not deal so strictly with the Heards-men, but easily
pass by and pardon, what they had done either too much or too little; for he
being a tender and merciful Master, and they also (the Babbless themselves) had
absolute power and authority to astoile and absolve the Heards-men of all such
exorbitances, in the name and stead of the great KING himself. Therefore none
should undertake to reprove or tax them, although they went not in the right
paths, and were somewhat harsh and froward; they could not be so exict and
precise under the weighty burden of leading and governing all the slock; and
it were their duty also to entertain their State, Pomp and Magnificence, for
the honor and renown of their great Master.

Thus presumptuously they reposed themselves in all their wickedness, Mic. 3.
Zach. 11.
greediness and cruelties, upon the LORD GOD, holding themselves no ways
guilty, or liable to judgment.

These vanities and wilful courses, having prevailed thus far, the
Heards-men that were appointed here and there, began to grudge and envy one
another, and it vexed them still in their soul, when ever any saw another have
a greater share of Honor, Treasure, Power, or larger foulds and fatter
pasture; then they sought to provoke one another to Warn, and every one to
subdue and subjugate the other, either by cunning Plots, and practices, or by
open force and violence.

^^^el. 16.
And this was caused and advanced chiefly, by those hired and squeaking-frogs
and babblers, who did likewise exercise their peculiar enmities, about their
selfe-conceits, and the manifold Idols of their fond opinions, enticing and
irritating their Masters, to Emulation, Iealousies, Wrath, and implacablenesse;
that every one must maintain his selfe-chosen Bablers and Idols and defend them
to the utmost.

Yet the Heards-men were loath to hazard their own heads, to 2 King. 13. 29.
go see one another, but they gathered together a great rabble of daring
bloody Mastives, whom they had entertained before hand with the milk and flesh
of the Sheep, together with a number of other fierce and cruel Hounds and
ravening Wolves, and other wild beasts. These were not only to feed themselves
together with and of the Sheep, to fleece and fley them at pleasure, that they
might grow strong, and gay, and lusty by it, but besides they were to lead and
hale on the Sheep in mighty droves-unto the shambles, or butcheries where they
were barbarously set upon, hewne, hackt, and massiened, defeated, chased,
disperied.

And there was appointed players and Minstrels, Drums and Trumpets, that all
the while the rage of this worrying and slaughter lasted, must fill the air
with strong and cheerful noyles, that the horrid and woeful cry of the
miserable Sheep might not be heard nor pityed?

And the cunning perverse Bablers did not at all control or check this
manifest and open theeving, robbing, murdering, but still endeavored to
maintain their own, and that Wars and jars had always been in the world.
Ezekiel. 13.


Now the Sheep had deserved no better; it was necessary these troubles should
involve them, for as much as they (the Bablers) had been contemned, and not
honored as they deserved, nor rewarded sufficiently Mic. 3.
with the Wool and Milk, and Flesh of the Sheep; the Heards-men their Masters
being so much straightened and abridged, of reaping their own fill from them.

Now although these Heards-men found, that by all this fleecing, sleying,
worrying and slaughtering, their assumed state and condition, rather impaired
than improved; yet did these wild natured beasts persuade them, they were but
Dogs, Hogs and vermin, they ventured, and it little mattered for sheep to be
shorn unto blood, discomsited, torn, scattered, lost, destroyed: Might the
Heardsmen but remain Lords and Possessors of the fould and pastures, and by
their blood hounds, and ravening Wolves, but maintain their liberties, to do
and dispose of all things at their own pleasure, to their own glory, advantage
and delight, they should no doubt get sheep enough again from other parts;
though the Sow should run away and perish, no matter, as long as the sty and
draught remained, others would come and be glad of the purchase: Better all the
Sheep be lost and destroyed, than that the Shepherds suffer hazard, and
forfeit their prerogative: for without such fleying and worrying, they would
never be able to maintain their greatness, and selfe-willed rule and Dominion.

The great KING now advertised, how his appointed Heardsmen abused their
charge, and the Sheep likewise mightily groaning unto him for reliese, he
forthwith sent his messengers unto them, and caused that great and woeful cry
of the Sheep against their perverle and violent administration, to beset before
their eyes, and the eyes likewise of their Bablers, flatterers and Idols,
saying and upbraiding them, is not the earth mine, and neither yours, nor the
Devils are Psalm. 24.
not the Sheep and flocks all mine, and none of your own? have not I set you
to be Shepherds over my Sheep, that with all integrity of Psalm. 50. Ier 27.
Psalm. 18. 71 72, 73.
heart and faithfulness, you should lead and seed the same, as did my servant
David, that the Sheep might grow fat and strong, and might reap much fruit by
them, wherefore have ye laid my earth thus wast, and why have you so utterly
forgotten the duty of your charge entrenching upon the Sheeps Propriety, and
performing nothing of Dan. 7. Lev. 16: Will. 6. Romans 13. Ezekiel. 34.
all I have ordered and commanded you? Ought not the Shepherds seed the
Flock? why then do ye eat the fat and wear the Wool, but yet refuse to seed
the Sheep, the weak ye tend not, the strayed ye gather not, the lost ye seek
not, but with force and cruelty ye bear rule over them, and my Sheep are
scattered as those that have no Shepherd, they go straying in the mountains,
and are become a prey to the wild beasts, and none regard them.

Why have you thus sucked up the blood of my Sheep, spilt their Ezekiel. 13.
blood and lifted up your eyes to your Idols, whom ye do feed and entertain
with the sweat and blood of my sheep: Why do ye thus go on still with
fleying, murdering and devouring, and practice one oppression upon another,
promising your selves thus to make your possession firm?

Know then that since ye did not seed my Sheep, but slaughtered and devoured
them, and held it no transgression at all, thus to dispossess Mic. 2.
them of what I had bestowed upon them; nay, joyed and gloryed in your hearts,
that amongst you, ye sound out devices, how to enlarge your Treasure, and to
increase your power and greatness by the destruction, and ruin of the sheep
of my Fould.

Therefore ye can henceforth be my Stewards or shepherds no Ier. 23.
longer, but I will visit you for your evil courses, and my sheep whom ye
devoured, and abandoned to become the prey and food, both of your own, and
other wild ranging beasts, whom you let in upon them, all these I will demand
of your own hands, and make an utter end of you, taking the care of my Flock,
upon my self; and I will seek them, as a true and faithful shepherd does
seek his own sheep, and will deliver them, and bring them back again, from
all the places, where by your wilful, violent, and wicked courses they are
scattered, but upon your right arm, and upon your right eye shall come the
Sword; your arm shall be clean dried up, and your right eye Zac. 11.
utterly darkened; and down ye must into the everlasting darkness until ye
shall have paid the uttermost farthing, of all your Robberies and Worryings.

Now therefore howl ye shepherds, cry out, and welter your selves in dust
and ashes, ye mighty of the Flock; for the time is Ier. 25. Iam. 5.
come and at hand, that ye shall be slaughtered and scattered, and broken into
shivers, like unto a precious vessel, and the shepherds shall not be able to
escape, and the mighty ones over the Flock, shall not be able to save
themselves; then they shall cry and howl, that the LORD has laid waste their
goodly pastures, and that their pleasant fields are made desolate before the
fierce anger of the LORD GOD, he has forsaken his Tabernacles like a young
Lion, and thus their land is destroyed before the wrath of the Tyrant, and
before his fiery indignation.

He that has ears to hear let him hear?
A sound warning to all Temporal or Civil Govereours, and Officers in
Christendom,
HE that desires to be a true and sincere Christian in this visible and
transitory world, where the Kingdom of GOD or Gal. 1. and 4 1 Ioh. 5. 26 Ephesians
6. 10. II etc. Mat. 10 15.
CHRIST, and that of the Devil are in continual combat one against another,
the same does mightily endanger his soul, and lays himself open to very
strong temptations, if he be in any place or charge of temporal command or
government.

For the Devil, as the Prince and GOD of this world in darkness and vanity,
does continually shoot the spirit of Pride into Ioh. 14. 30. Ephesians. 1. 2, 3 Psalm
73. Luk 22 31.
man's heart and mind, enticing and drawing him on to hautinesse,
covertousnesse, sensualities, and other works of darkness, and is so busy
and restless about such charges and offices, that he gives not over, till
he has grasped and seized on the governing, and governors of it; to the end,
that as a GOD of this world he may by such Ministers and proper instruments of
his, whose sense and reason are blinded by him, go on still to maintain and
enlarge his kingdom 2 Cor. 4: Iam. 4.
of sin and darkness, and every way to weaken as much as in him lies, the
Kingdom of GOD or Christ.

And hence it is, that in his like-affected rule-itching Creatures, Psalm. 55.
10. Io. 15. 18 19, 20. Phil. 3. 20. Psalm. 101.
he cannot endure any true and sincere Christian, in any offices together with
him; knowing well that such a one has the mind of Christ, and his conversation
is in Heaven, and that in such a place and government, he is disposed and
resolved to seek nothing but the Glory of GOD, together with the Temporal and
Eternal weal and welfare of the subjects and underlings in trust, for whose
sake and good, GOD has ordained government. The Devil desires and Wis. 6.
Sir. 19. Mic. 7. 2, 3, 4. Ezekiel. 22.
requires no other, but such as are full of craft, worldly with and subtilty;
such as in the greedy pursuit of their own glory, profit and preserment, are
ready and dextrous to find out ways and means, how under a gay and glorious
show and pretext, they may draw and squeese out the sweat and blood of the
poor, so to maintain their pride, glory, and Luxury: in all which courses, he
dresseth and trimmeth them with the glosing garb of outward hypocrisy, Elay
5. Amos 1. 22 Ier. 11.
Complements, and ceremonies; and in all their villainies, violences, cruelties,
and oppressions of the poor, and other Sodomiticall practices, he covers
them over with the Purple-robe of CHRIST'S most precious merit and satisfaction,
that 2 Pet. 2.
those Devills-clawes of theirs, may lie hid and undiscovered underneath.

Therefore now, if it happen, that a true Christian do sit in any office or
government together with such worldly wise, and wilelyones, Psalm. 26. 4, 5, 9
10, 11, 12 Ephesians. 5.
and if according to the power of the true living faith, and according to the
testimony of his conscience, he does not assent to, and side with
unrighteousness, deceit, and other such like works of the flesh and
darkness; neither is pleased with such violent and pernicious courses of
government, nor will any way further or advance the same; but desires and
endeavors to do the Will of God in Christ, according to the Law and
Testimony. The same is most sure, that the 1Cor, 1. 12 1 Cor. 6. 14 Psalm. 35.
64 Amos 5. 10 Ier. 20. 10. Psalm. 78. 71 72.
Devil, whose Kingdom suffers by this practice, will raise enemies and
adversaries against him, and do his utmost still by slandering reports, and
other snake-snbtle devises to entrap and sell and ruin him.

It behooveth then a true Christian, to use great care and diligence in the
discharge of such offices, and with most hearty and instant prayer, and a
sincere and upright Christian conversation to strive and fight against the
Devil, that sets still so siercely 2 Cor. 10: Psalm. 140. Matthew. 4. Heb 12.
Ephesians. 6.
upon him both without, by the grudges and enmities of his venomous fiends and
instruments, and within by his restless temtations: so as never and no manner
of ways to consent and yield unto any unrighteousness; fraud, deceit,
destruction, or oppression of the poor, upon what pretext and show of reason
whatsoever, yea, rather to quit and abandon the place and office, nay life it
self, that he may keep his soul safe, and not engage and enslave the 1 Timothy
2. 25
same to Satan.

But and if any such do find and discern in his heart and conscience and
consesse it also freely, that the affairs or actions which he is about, Romans
2. 15. 1 Timothy 4. Eze 16 49 Job. 24.
or commanded to perform, do thwant and overthrow the glory of GOD, and the
foundation of the true Faith, and of the love of our NEIGHBOVR; the poor being
thereby grinded, distressed, and oppressed soul and body, and even forced
likewise to stretch our their hands to unrighteousness, and overreaching Psalm.
125.
of their brethren; insomuch that being convinced of the heinousness thereof,
by his own conscience, and the Word of GOD, is in a strait and perplexity about
it: yet not withstanding all this, Romans 2. 15. Mic. 7. 2, 3. 4.
he goes on to perform and execute the same things, for fear of offending
those GOD-contrary, self will, mighty Grandees; or to maintain themselves in
their grace and favor, and to avoid and shelter themselves from eminent
danger, the same has not the mind Tit. 1. 16. Number. 15. 30
of Christ, but is altogether worldly minded, denies the Faith, dishonors
GOD in the power of his word and in his members, and walks in the common and
well beaten road, and high way of this world which leads into Perdition, for
as much as he does fear and Psalm 58. Esaias 5. Matthew 7. Acts. 2. Cha. 5. 19.
Psalm. 9. 17. Romans 6. John. 8. 34. Romans 2. 23. Esa. 11. 15. lud. 14. 2 Pet. 2.
Rom 14 12
honor the Devil, in those his haughty and self mighty vassals more than
GOD: forgets GOD and his Word in his heart and conscience, and by the
practice of such works does make himself a bondslave of Satan, and GOD the
searcher of the heart takes no excuse here, admits of no subtle evasion, or
putting it off on this or that, straight command, tyrannical threats or the
like; much less will the outward ceremonial hypocrisy, in going to Church,
confession, communion, avail or bail him: but in the day of judgment he must
himself give account unto GOD, of whatsoever he has presumptously done, and
perpetrated against the Dictates and warning of his own conscience. And there
is no Prince nor Potentate whatsoever shall dare, or will be able to shield or
protect him, against the severe and heavy justice and judgment of GOD, Psalm.
49. Psalm. 146.

For every one both higher and under-governor shall be judged according to the
bottom of their hearts, and according to the works 2 Cor. 15. 10. Romans 14 12
Col 5. 24. Rev. 2. 23.
issued and streamed forth from thence, which are written and engraven upon
their souls, and follow them for ever: for having not served God and his
neighbor, according as the office of the ordinance of God required it, but the
Devil, who is unrighteousness it self; therefore also have his servants,
himself for their reward; as on the contrary Ier. 17. 1. Rev. 14
those faithful servants of GOD, that for truth righteousness like, and for
the love of their neighbor resisted the Kingdom of the Devil in deed and in
truth, to the hazard and loss of Liberty, estate, and life it self, shall
have GOD himself for their great Reward and Praise, and Glory, and they shall
see how the wicked shall be recompensed, and their violence returned and powered
out with vengeance upon their own heads. Psalm. 68. Sir. 14. 17, 18.


Every one therefore search his own conscience, and forsake the Kingdom of
Satan, least his soul be ensnared with everlasting darkness, for the time of
judgment is near at hand, 1 Cor. 13. 5. Wis 6 O LORD! who shall d well in the
Hill of thy Holiness? He that does no evil to his neighbor; in whose eyes a
vile person is contemned; He that honors them that fear the LORD. Psalm. 15.

A discovery how Christ is driven out of his Temple, and he abominat^on of
desolation set up in the holy pl^ce, both by the old and new Popes, written in
the year, 1629. DAN 9. ver. 27.
BY the wings there shall stand abomination of desolation, and it is
determined, that it shall distill down over the desolation unto the end.

CHRIST, The light of life and Throne of mercy, is ever present 1 John 1. Rom:
3. Matthew. 28: Ephesians. 4.
with his People unto the end of the world, and has power both in Heaven and
on earth as a KING and head of his Church.

But when by the works of darkness and unrighteousness, he is driven out of
his spiritual Temple, viz. out of the Soul of man; and an abomination of
desolation set up there by the deceit of the false Prophets, then Antichrist
prevails, and is powerful in the same.

Of this Abomination Custerus the Papist writes his Enchiridium in manner as
follows.

O what a great mercy of God is it upon the Christians, worthy to be compared
with his greatest benefits, that here on earth there is one The man of sin. 2
These. 2.
sinful man like unto ourselvs, whom God for our sakes has ordained to be the
witness of his truth, the interpreter of his mind, and the teacher of the
Christian people; Whose tongue he so moves that it deceives not; whose speech
he so guides, that it teaches no error, whose pen he so governs that it
destroys heresies. And all this not indeed for that Man's; or Persons sake;
who may happen to be wicked, vicious, and altogether unworthy, but for the
Elects sake, to whom GOD does vouchsafe his mercy, for all things, says the
Apostle, are to be done for the Elects sake. 2 Timothy 2. 10. We grant indeed that
it may come to pass, an Heir and successors of Peter's Chair to be a
worshipper of Idols, to have no sound esteem or oppinion of the Faith; nay to
give himself over to Diabolical Arts altogether. But as these are that man's
own peculiar or personal vices, so they clearly testify unto us, the
goodness of God, who does convey his gifts and graces unto us by such stinking
rotten conduites, having no other aim, but that we may receive good by it, let
the conduit otherwise (whereby we receive it) be affected and disposed, as it
will.

Thus far Costerus the Papist.
And do not the new Popelings and young Antechrists vaunt the 2 Timothy 3.
self same thing of themselves, and their pretended office and Authority? for
albeit they know nothing inwardly in their hearts, of Christ the covenant of
the new Testament, that living Law in his members 1 John. 4. Heb. 10. Col 1. 4.
Ephesians. 2.
according to which the true believers are united togetherin the spirit by the
bond of peace; But do rather according to the course of this world and
according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, viz. according to the spirit
that now has his work in the children of unbeleife, lead their conversation
in the lusts of the flesh and carnal reason, freely acknowledging that they do
not prove examples to the Flock, and not being able to say with Paul, be ye
followers of me, even 1 Pet. 5. 3, 1 Cor. 11. Phil. 3. 2 Pet 2. 2 These. 2.
as I also am of Christ; yet nevertheless, they cease not to brag with
swelling words, and cunning terms, how they do and perform all things in the
name and stead of Christ, by whom they were sent and appointed as Angels and
Messengers; what they speak and propound must be the Word of God, and be
esteemed as Oracles from heaven; that by them, though never so sinful men, and
unclean vessels, Psalm. 12.
God is pleased to teach and feed the souls, to pardon their sins, and to
impart the holy Ghost, and all manner of spiritual blessings: pretending God
deals no more now, as in former times: the heavens are shut up now, since
Christ's ascending to heaven, and God does instruct and govern and assoyle them
now by them, and that therefore we ought to repair and address our selves to
them, making men believe; that as the next and principal offices and attendants
of a Prince are able to prefer a poor man's petition, and procure a gracious
and fruitful hearing; wherefore they are deservedly honored and rewarded; so
they are the next and mightiest Ministers, nay Means with God, able to prefer
and redress the cause of poor sinners: to the therefore they should have their
recourse for help and assistance; and by reason thereof yield unto them all
honor and deserved recompense

But these new Popelings do complain, where are the men now-a-dayes, Mic. 3.
Luther in his Postill over the Epistle on the 2 Sunday after Epiphany fol. 70.
that seek unto, honor and reward us for all this? There is none comes any
more to show himself to the Prists, as Christ commanded. But we are rather
despised, therefore also are the times so bad, and all these WARS are come
upon us.

Behold, dear friends, these are the new papisticall Idol-Intercessors, and
Saviors, which men did burden themselves withal, like unto Micha, Jeroboam,
and others, which do not enter into the Fould by Christ, but justify
themselves before men, and are eminent among them 2 Timothy 4. Luke 16. Phil. 3.
as standing in Gods stead, though indeed abominable in his sight being
altogether earthly minded, serving their Bellies, and being lead away captive,
like unto the Children of this world under the power of darkness, to perform
the will of the flesh and carnal Reason.

John. 10. Acts. 10.
Now although Christ the Arch-shepheard never sent such withered branches and
members of Satan into his Church, they being indeed but Wolves; and coming only
to rob and worry souls, yet the world does love and dote on them, as their
Idols, and the children of this world are grown wrath for their sakes, and to
defend and maintain these Idols of theirs, thereby destroying the land and
butchering the poor and guiltless sheep without remorse or pity. Revel. 11.
Zac. 11


Ezekiel. 13.
Let them, I pray, go now, make themselves a wall and stand in the gap, that
God proceed no further with his judgments, but draw back his wrath and
smarting rod over Germany, that so it may appear, whether they do know God and
be sent by him indeed.

Ah Germany! thy Prophets are like Foxes, they go not up into the Gaps, they do
not make themselves a fence about the house of Israel, they stand not in the
battle in the day of the Lord; they brag much indeed, and take great pains
to maintain their own; comfort the people in their adversity, by saying peace,
peace, here is Christ, here he is in the Church; such evils will not betide us.
But alas poor Germany Esaias 3. Col. 2. 1 John ^
thy Comforters have beguiled thee, and confounded the way, wherein thou
should walk. They have persuaded thee, to banish Christ the light of life,
wherein thou should have walked, out of the Temple of thy heart, and to
entertain there those Antichristian abominations, which thou do cleave unto.
Thus they have brought thee Ier. 38.
nto the mire, and there they leave thee helpless, and hopeless.

But now, in what account these daubbers and pillow-makers are Ezekiel. 15.
with GOD; how they have taken Bribes, cleared and absolved all Thieves, and
swearers according to the long and large roll of their Zac. 5.
constitutions, conclusions, and Idol-writings; strengthened the hands of the
wicked, and gathered the Kings of the earth together into Rev. 16.
the Battle, adjudging thereby to death the souls that should have lived: and
profaning GOD in his People, only for their bellies sake, Esaias 48. 11
all this God now brings forth to light, and suffers it to light on the house
of him that steals, and on the house of him that swears falsely by his name,
and boasts of Christ.

Ezekiel. 13.
For a stormy wind of GODS fury draws on upon them, and overflowing showers
of his anger, and great hailstones in fury, bring it down to the ground, that
the very foundations therefore discovered.

Lo these are thy Prophets that preach peace unto thee, when there is no
peace, comforting the people in their carnal courses, to entrap the souls
both of old and young, and promising life and Salvation unto them, that so they
may hang and depend on such Idols, and Mediators, and forsake Christ the living
spring of the water of life.

Ezekiel. 34.
Therefore now, God will take himself the care of his Floeks, and deliver his
People from such Idols and their shepherds, that the Glory of his name shall
no longer be polluted, and that the poor fully sheep may be rescued from the
dangers they are in thralled with all, both in soul and body.

FINIS.

