The mournful Cries of many thousand Poor Tradesmen, who are ready to famish
through decay of Trade. Or, the warning Tears of the Oppressed.
OH that the cravings of our Stomachs could be heard by the Parliament and
City! Oh that the Tears of our poor famishing Babes were botled! Oh that
their tender Mothers Cries for bread to feed them were engraven in brass! Oh
that our pined Carcasses were open to every pitiful Eye! Oh that it were
known, that we sell our Beds and clothes for Bread! Oh our Hearts faint and
we are ready to swoone in the top of every Street.

O you Members of Parliament and rich men in the City, that are at ease, and
drink Wine in Bowls, and stretch your selves upon Beds of down, you that
grind our faces and Flay off our skins, will no man amongst you regard, will no
man behold our faces black with Sorrow and Famine, is there none to Pity. The
Sea monster draws out the breast and gives suck to their young ones, and are
our Rulers become cruel like the Ostrich in the Wilderness, Lament. 4. 3.

OH ye Great men of ENGLAND, will not (think you) the righteous GOD behold
our Affliction, does not he take notice that you devour us as if our Flesh
were Bread? are not most of you either Parliament Men, Commitee-men, Customers,
Excize-men, Treasurers, Gouernonrs of Towns and Castles, or Commanders in the
Army, Officers in those Dens of Robbery the Courts of Law? and are not your
Kinsmen and allies, Collectors of the Kings revenue, or the Bishops rents, or
Sequestrators? what then are your ruffling Silks and Velvets, and your
glittering Gold and Silver Laces, are they not the sweat of our Brows, and the
wants of our backs and bellies?

Its your Taxes, Customs, and Excize, that compells the Country to raise the
price of Food, and to buy nothing from us but mere absolute necessaries; and
then you of the City that buy our Work, must have your Tables furnished, and
your Cups overflow; and therefore will give us little or nothing for our Work,
even what you And since the late Lord Major Adams, you have put in exccution an
illegal, wicked Decree of the Common Council; whereby you have taken our
goods from us, if we have gone to the Innes to sell them to Countrymen; and you
have murdered some of our poor wives, that have gone to Innes to find
Cuontrsmen to b^ie them.
please, because you know we must sell for monyes to set our Families on
work, or else we famish: Thus our Flesh is that whereupon you Rich men live,
and wherewith you deck and adorn your selves. Ye great men, is it not your
Plenty and abundance which begets you Pride and Riot? and do not your Pride
beget Ambition, and your ambition Faction, and your fact on these Civil
broils; what else but your Ambition and Faction continue our Distractions and
Oppressions? Is not all the Controversy whose Slanes the poor shall be?
Whether they shall be the Kings vassalles, or the Presbyterians, or the
Independent factions? and is not the Contention nourished, that you whose
Houses are full of the spoils of your Country, might be secure from Accounts,
while there is nothing but Distraction, and that by the tumultuousnesse of the
People under prodig ousoppression, you might have fair Pretenses to keep up
an Army, and Garrisons, and that under pretense of necessity you may uphold
your arbitrary Government by Committees, etc.

Have you not upon such pretenses brought an Army into the bowels of the City,
and now Exchange does rise already beyond Sea, and no Merchants beyond Sea will
trust their Goods hither, and our own Merchants conveigh their The Merchants
have already kept back from the Tower, many hundred thousand pounds, and no
bullion is brought into the Tower, so that money will be more scarce daily.
Estates from hence, so there is likely to be no importing of Goods, and then
there will be no Exporting, and then our Trade will be utterly Lost, and our
Families perish as it were in a moment.

O ye Parliament men hear our dying Cry, Settle the Commonwealth, settle the
Commonwealth! strive not who shall be greatest until you be all confounded.
You may if you will presently determine where the supreme Power resides, and
settle the Just common Freedoms of the Nation, so that all Parties may equally
receive Justice and enjoy their Right, and every one may be as much concerned
as other to desend those common Freedoms; you may presently put down your
Arbitrary Committees and let us be Governed by plain written Laws in our own
Tongue, and pay your ministers of Justice out of a common, Treasury, that
every one may have Justice freely and impartially.

You have in your hands the Kings, Queens, and Princes revenue, and Papists
Lands, and Bishops, and Deanes, and Chapters lands, and Sequestered lands, at
least to the value of Eighteen hundred thousand Pounds by the year. Which is
at least five hundred Thousand pounds a year more then will pay the Navy and
all the Army, and the Forces which need to be kept up in Engl^nd and Ireland;
and out of that the Kingdoms debts would be paid yearly; whereas now you
run further into Debt daily, and pay One thousand pounds by the Day at least
for use Money; besides you may if you will Proclaim Liberty, for all to come
and discover to a Committee of dis-ingaged men, chosen out of every County, one
for a County to discover to them what Moneys and Treasure, your own Members
and your Sequestrators, etc. have in their hands, and you may by that means
find many Millions of money to pay the Public debts. You may find 30000. l.
in Mr. Richard Darley's hand 25000. l. in Mr. Thorpes hands M William Lenthall,
Speaker of the House, to cover his cozenage, gave two and twenty thousand
pounds to his servant M. Cole, to purchase Land in his own name, though for his
use; which he did, and then dyed suddenly, and the Land fell to his Son, and
the widow having married a Lawyer, keeps the Land for the child's use, and says
he knows not that his predeces for received any money from the Speaker, and
now Master Speaker sueth in Chancery for the Land. A hundred such discoveries
might be made.
, a Member of Yours who first Proclaimed Sir John Hotham Traitor. And thus you
may take off all Taxes presently, and so secure Peace, that Trading may revive
and our Pining, hungry, famishing Families be saved.

And O ye Soldiers who refused to Disband, because you would have Justice and
Freedom, who Cried till the Earth ecchoed Justice, Justice; forget not that
Cry, but cry speedily for Peace and Justice, Louder then ever. There is a large
Petition of some pitiful men that is now a broad, which contains all our
desires, and were that Granted in all things, we should have Trading again,
and should not need to beg our Bread, though those men have so much mercy as
they would have none to cry in the streets for Bread.

Oh though you be Soldiers, show bowels of Mercy and Pity to a hunger starved
People; Go down to the Parliament, desire them to consume and trifle away no
more time, but offer your desires for Us in that large Petition, and cry
Justice, Justice; Save, save, save the Perishing people; O cry thus till your
importunity make them hear you.

O Parliament men, and Soldiers! Necessity dissolves all Laws and Government,
and Hunger will break through stone walls, Tender Mothers will sooner devour
You, then the Fruit of their own womb, and hunger regards no Swords nor
Cannons. It may be some great oppressors intends tumults that they may escape
in a crowd, but your food may then be wanting as well as ours, and your Arms
will be hard diet. O hark, hark at our do^res how our children cry Bread,
bread, bread, and we now with bleeding hearts, cry, once more to you, pity,
pity, an oppressed inslaved people: carry our cries in the large petition to
the Parliament, and tell them if they bo still deafo; the Tears of the
oppressed will wash away the foundations of their houses. Amen, Amen so be it.


