A MOTION FROM THE ARMY OF Their several Requests to the PARLIAMENT WITH The
Votes and proceedings of both Houses upon the same.

London Printed for R. Simpson, 1667.

MORE NEVVES FROM THE ARMY
I. THat whereas it pleases the honorable Houses of Parliament, upon
misinformation falsely suggested unto them, to declare and immediately publish
in print to the kingdom, that the Petition of the Army, being but only an
intention, did tend to put the army into a distemper and mutiny, to obstruct
the relief of Ireland, and to put conditions upon the Parliament, and declaring
the petitioners if they shall proceed therein, no less then Enemies to the
State, and disturbers to the public peace, which said heavy charge remaining
upon record, we cannot choose but be deeply sensible thereof, and with amazement
wonder, how so humble and innocent address, intended to the general, could
beget so strange an interpretation.

The House of Commons have voted to call in the said Declaration according to
this Proposition, and that it shall not remain upon Record against them, and
the concurrence of the Lords desired therein.

II. Thet whereas those persons that have attempted to beget and attempt, and
fo^en^ divisions between the Parliament and their army, by their surrepticion^;
obtaining and mis-representing our petitions, and by producing other scandalous
letters from unknown hands by them produced, the Authors when are concealed, and
not brought forth to make a judicial proof of those things laid to our charge
which we cannot but look upon as a just cause of grief, that the suggestors of
such untruths seem to be encouraged, and we who are innocent remain
unjustified.

III. That diverse Officers of the Army of public and known integrity, have
been (upon what grounds we know not) sent for to the Parliament as
Celinquents; some whereof do at this present attend there, and cannot procure a
trial having nothing considerable laid to their charge, etc.

Col Lilburn, Major Sanderson, and the rest are discharged from any further
attendance.

IV. That whereas we understand, that the Parliament has voted a sudden
disbanding of the Army, not having made sufficient provision for the auditing
of our arrears, makes us sensible; how difficult it will be after our
disbanding, for obtaining thereof.

Both Houses voted to refer it to the Committee of the army, to consider of
Instructions for stating the Arriers, etc.

V. That no provision has been made for the payment of our dearly earned wages
by the expense of our blood, and often hazard of our lives, that it will
inevitably expose us (especially the private Soldiers, to great extremities)
being hardly sufficient to maintain many of them in their journies to their own
homes.

The Commons have voted the common Soldiery and inferior Officers all their
pay, and chief Officers three Months pay.

VI. That nothing as yet has been perfected for our future security for things
done as Soldiers, in relation to the war, which the exigency thereof has
compelled thereunto, etc.

The Commons have voted to pass a fuller Ordinance for Indemnity of the
Soldiers, and the Lords concurrence to be desired.

VII. That we stand in fear of being pressed, to serve as soldiers out of the
Kingdom.

Votes have passed, that such as have willingly served the Parliament shall not
be forced to serve out of the Kingdom in any wars, etc.

VIII. That the parliaments Declaration, in respect of freedom to those that
were Apprentices, may be put in force against such Ma^^^ts as refuse it.

Votes have passed for the making free of Apprentices, reckoaing the time spent
in the Parliaments service, as if they had been with their masters.

IX. That many soldiers who have lost their lives, widows who have lost their
husbands and children their parents in this service, and thereby reduced to
great extremities, even to beggary for want of provision for their subsistence,
are not sufficiently provided for a future livelihood.

May 28. An Ordinance passed both Houses for relief of maimed soldiers, and
the widows and Orphants of such as have dyed in the service of the Parliament.

Having thus as fully as we are able, accounted and mentioned what was the true
^^nuine ^^^^e of the Army, and not their imaginary co^ceits, but their
grievances, that inevitably fall upon us, unless the Parliament take course to
prevent then: if the time allowed us by you would admit, we could more fully
demonstrate. We assume the boldness to entreat you to be deeply sensible of,
and represent to the Parliament these particulars, in such an humble way, and
to right us if we shall be misrepresented to the Parliament by any, and so
far as you can cover our weaknesses, that have or may slip from us, and
prevent any scandals, that the malice of any men do seek herein to asperse us,
when we shall be inquired into.

A Declaration, an Ordiance for oblivion, and other Papers also are to be sent
to the Army, and declared to them at a general Randezvouzes.

FINIS.

