TWO LETTERS FROM Colonel MORGAN Governor of Gloucester, to several Members
of the honorable House of COMMONS.

Relating the Summons, Answer, and the manner of taking the Town and Castle of
MONMOUTH:

And therein 7. Pieces of Ordnance. 4. Sling-pieces. 300. Muskets. 100. Pikes,
10. Barrels of Powder, with Bullet and Match proportionable. 24. Barrels of
Peter and Brimstone. All other Ammunition and provision


Likewise two Letters from an Officer in Monmouth, concerning the free coming
in of the Country to block up Hereford, and the driving M. Genesis Washington with
1500 horse and foot out of Glamorganshire.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bates, at the sign of the Maidenhead on
Snow-hill, Holborn conduit, 1645

Col. Morgan Governor of Gloucester, his first Letter to a worthy Member of
the honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
SInce my last, informing you of Washingtons being in this County with his
commanded men from several garrisons of the enemy, it has pleased God to
bless my proceedings hitherto, in giving me a good entrance yesterday into
this Town with small opposition, the enemy having betaken themselves to the
Castle. This morning I summoned the Governor to surrender to me for the
Parliaments use the Castle, with all the Arms and Ammunition therein, which he
refused, saying, that he was commanded by the King to keep it for his
Maj^sties use. My Miners go to work this day, and I doubt not (God willing)
but to give a good account thereof in a short time, as well as of the Town* if
it please G^d that I may keep out relief. The Country rises very freely
since my taking in Chepstow. Sir Trevor Williams is near with above one
thousand Clubmen, they all declare themselves absolutely for the Parliament. If
God bless my proceedings in this design, Wales will be in a good condition.
Sir, I rest,

Your affectionate servant, THOMAS MORGAN.
Monmouth, October. 23. 1635.
A Letter from Col. Morgan Governor of Gloucester, to several Members of the
honorable House of Commons.
Gentlemen.
MY desire is to acquaint you with our proceedings in this County since the
reducing of Chepstow; and how we have caused Major Genesis Washington, who had
1500 horse and foot, besides a great faction in the County, to quit it, and
refused to fight with us. My forces consisting of 1500 horse and foot, and the
Monmouthshire Clubmen under Sir Trevor Williams, being 1500 foot and 200 horse.
Both these being joined we concluded to attempt Monmouth, in which design it
pleased God to prosper us; upon the first attempt we got the Town, the enemy
betaking themselves to (their last refuge) the Castle, which being three days
besieged, discovered our Mines, which were almost ready to spring, and then
they beat a parley, which we entertained, concluding the delivery of the
Castle, with all the Arms, Artillery, Ammunition, and provisions therein (save
only the Officers to march away with their Horses and Arms) immediately unto
us, for the Parliaments use, which was instantly acted, sending with them a
convoy toward Hereford.

We took in the Castle seven pieces of Ordnance, four sling pieces, 300
Muskets, 100 Pikes, ten barrels of Powder, with Bullet and Match
proportionable, 24 barrels of Peter and Brimstone, and a reasonable quantity of
all sorts of provision. By these successes all South wales is brought into a
good condition, and declare themselves for the Parliament. So I rest,

Gentlemen, Your servant, THOMAS MORGAN.
Monmouth, October. 24. 1645.
Two Letters from an Officer in Monmouth, to a Gentleman in London.
Worthy Sir,
SIr Trevor Williams met us upon Monday and Tuesday last between Chepstow and
Monmouth at our Rendezvous, with 2000 Monmouthshire men well armed. Whereupon
our Governor Col. Morgan (who notwithstanding his sickness showed in all
these enterprises much activity and valor) advanced yesterday within view of
Monmouth, and upon drawing out into parties to storm the Town, Sir Trevor and
his men with unexpected resolution joined with us, which the Townsmen of
Monmouth perceiving laid down their Arms, whereupon Sir H. Lunsford (not Sir
Thomas Lunsford) the Governor betook himself to the Castle, and we possessed
the Town. Our Forresters are mining heartily already, and I doubt not but I
shall certify you of the taking it shortly. However it is impossible for them
to be relieved (for they have left us the Town extremely well fortified.) The
Herefordshire men have sent to Col. Kerle (who is now here with us) to join
with them, and that they will all rise in Arms against Hereford and block
them up; so soon as this castle is taken Col. Kerle will assist them in the
service. This Colonel was one that was formerly for the King, but for a year
did express his affection and real intention for the Parliament, and upon his
coming in brought a Troop of horse, and obtained the delivery of the castle to
the Parliaments forces, which might have continued theirs, had it been as
carefully kept, as he faithful in performance. Sir, my present extraordinary
employment here enforces me to break off abruptly, but rest,

Your humble servant, K. R.
Monmouth, October. 23. 1645.
SIR,
SInce the writing of the enclosed we have taken the Castle, with above 400
Arms, and good store of provisions. Sir Trevor Williams is left Governor, and
deserves to have it established by the Parliament, having engaged all the
Country for the Parliament; Col Kerle did very good service in the reducing
both of this Castle and Chepstow, and before relieved Ca^non Froom. He now
intends to place a Garrison between Hereford and Gotheridge, and then those
Garrisons will be so impoverished, that they will not be able to keep so many
soldiers, as to spare any into the field to annoy these parts. The Country on
both sides Hereford have promised to join with him in distressing thereof; Col.
Liggins who was here with some forces had the honor given him by Col. Morgan
to command the horse, and expressed much courage; and the resolution of our
brave governor of Gloucester was not inferior to any. Sir, at present I have
no more to acquaint you with, but rest,

Your affectionate servant, K. R.
Monmoth, Octo. 24: 1645.
FINIS.

