Motives and Reasons, CONCERNING His Highness the Prince ELECTOR PALATINES
coming into ENGLAND.

Presented to both the Honorable Houses of Parliament by His said Highness,
on Satterday the 14. of September. 1644.

With two Letters that were formerly sent from the HAGV^.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon used as printer's device

LONDON, Printed by JANE COE. 1644.

Motives and Reasons, Concerning His Highness the Prince Elector Palatine, His
coming into ENGLAND.
Presented to both the Honorable Houses of Parliament, by his said Highness.
ALL actions whatsoever being obnoxious to diverse censures, His Electorall
Highnensse, thought it necessary, openly in this kind to declare Himself, and
the integrity of his intentions in his present coming into this Kingdom; that
if it be possible, Malignancie might be silenced, Candor and Charity moved to
speak for the Truth, having made the God of Truth his refuge and confidence;
and knowing, that the children of Truth and Innocence (who are neither changed
with the frowns nor smiles of this inconstant World) must be his best
friends, and under God, His greatest confidence.

The present troubles of this Kingdom, and his Highness present condition,
(both of them from the same Supreme Providence) the great affairs of the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, and His own near relation (which will not
suffer him to account himself a Stranger) will, as he conceives, suficiently
satisfy for the manner of his coming, since by a solemn and Public warning,
He might have seemed to expect Ceremonies, in these Conjuctures very
unseasonable.

But his Hignesses resolution to come at this time, is more material; and may
(he now finds) be subject to such exception a^ his sincerity would not permit
him to feel or apprehend.

That it did not proceed from any sinister intention; his last departure out of
this Kingdom, his behavior whilst he was abroad, and his approving of the
Cause jointly prosecuted by these Kingdoms; (since which time he has had no
reason to change, many reasons to confirm his mind) are real evidences. And
that it did not arise from unjust ambition, or desire to intrude himself into
the public affairs of these Kingdoms; he chooses rather to make really
appear against all calumnies and jealousies, of what nature soever, by his
comportment and actions, during his abode in this place; then by word or
writing. Misconstructions are not the least part of the many sufferings which
not only the innocent, but the most deserving, must resolve to bear, till
Truth which is the daughter of Time, make them vanish.

Neither can his Highness forbear, with unspeakable grief, to observe, that
the public actions of some of the nearest of his blood have been such, as have
administered too much cause of sorrow and jealousy, even from such persons,
upon whose affections, in respect of their love and zeal to the Reformed
Religion, his Highness does set the greatest prize. But as his Highness is not
able to regulate what is out of his power, so is he confident, that the justice
of the Parliament and all honest men, will not impute such actions to him, as
are his afflictions, and not his faults.

It must needs be known to the Christian world, and to no man should it be
better known then to his Highness, that the commotions which exercise and
distract these Kingdoms, are originally derived from the same Popish
Principles, hammered upon the same Jesuiticall Anvile, and drive to those
Antichristian ends; which have brought such deplorable and lasting calamities
upon Germany.

And his Highness was confident, that the Parliaments, and people of God in
these Kingdoms, through the justice of the Cause which they maintain, and
their Piety and Wisdom in the managing thereof, would in the end, by the
blessing of God prevail against what ever Spain, Rome, or the G^tes of Hell
could do or devise to the contrary. And that, when Truth and Peace should be
settled in these Kingdoms, They out of their zeal to the glory of God, and the
true Protestant Reformed Religion, and in pursuance of their former Christian
and favorable Declarations, would direct their Counsels, and bend their power
for the relief, deliverance, and restitution of the oppressed; amongst which
his Electorall Family, by Gods permission, whose judgments are unsearchable,
has had the deepest and most durab e sufferings.

These and the l^ke considerations, were the motives of his Highness departure
out of this Kingdom, in the beginning of these unhappie troubles. To which his
Highness must also add this important reason, That by his absence he might be
free of all counsels and actions, tending to the prejudice of that Cause which
he ought zealously to affect; as having his hope in Heaven, and wherein all his
expectations on earth are included.

The same sense of Religion, and public Interests, has now drawn him again
into this Kingdom, that he may in person profess himself to be what he is,
against all jealousies, insinnations, and what malice in his absence might have
suggested against him.

It needs not to be remembered here, what His Highness Princely Predecessors
have done for that Religion, ever since the blessed Reformation, for which he
now suffers; nor how willingly his enemies would make him restitution, of his
Dominions, Rights and Dignities, could they persuade him to become an Enemy to
the Truth. But God has taught him, rather to choose Affliction then Iniquity,
Persecution then Impiety. And in this his affliction and persecution, by many
open and secret Enemies, whether should He address himself, but to these
Kingdoms, which profess and defend the same Religion, and are in affliction
for the same Cause, and from which the strong bonds of nature and Christian
compassion; make him expect such Comfort, Assistance, and Protection in this
time of His exile and distresses, as his Cold Friends may be heated thereby
into more affection, and his Enemies cooled of their rage and violence, till
God be pleased to send, first unto these Kingdoms, and afterward, by their
means, to himself and His Subject; full deliverance, establishment, and Peace.

His Electorall Highness, having thus represented the reason of his coming,
and condition of his affairs; in the next place returns his thanks unto
both Houses of Parliament for their free Declarations and promises, of taking
his Affairs and interests into their care and Consideration; And as he shall
ever hold in high esteem and value the advice they shall think fit to give
him, so in the particular of his Residence at this time in Foreign parts, His
Highness is necessitated to offer this to their consideration; That he has
many Eenemies abroad, and that they are not a little increased, since the late
Troubles in these Kingdoms, and for his porfession to this Cause, which will
render his abode unpleasing, and it may be for may reasons unhappie to him in
those parts, where his and their Enemies have as yet so great an influence.

His Highness the Prince Electors Letter, to the Right Honorable the Lord
Gray of Warke, Speaker of the Honorable House of Peers.
My Lord,
THe pious Loyalty and Generous professions of both Houses of Parliament for
the establishment of the true Protestant Religion, the Kings honor* and
happiness, and the peace and safety of his Dominions, being lately Confirmed
by the Covenant, taken jointly with the Estates of Scotland; do give me
occasion, to desire your favor, in representing on my behalf, to the
Honorable house of Peers, the joyful Concurrence of my hearty Wishes to the
same effect: beseeching them, that when they shall have obtained it, They will
be pleased, to consider my public Interests, with that favor, as they have
formerly declared in my behalf. Whereby they will oblige me, still to
endeavor all means of Gratitude and service toward them; Not doubting, but
the Estates of Scotland will, according to my request upon this occasion, and
their former promise, willingly join with the Parliament of Englandtherein.
And I shall accknowledge toward your particular the good Office, you will be
pleased to do me in this business, with no less desire to prove my self.

Hague the 12/22 of Febr. 1644. Your Lordships, Most affectionate friend, to
serve you: CHARLES LODOVIC.


His Highness the Prince Electors Letter, to the Hnourable William Lenthall
Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS.
Master Speaker,
HAving observed by the late Covenant, taken by the Honorable Houses of
Parliament of England, and the Estates of Scotland, a Confirmation of their
pies; loyal; and generous Designs, formerly expressed, for the Establishment
of the true Protestant Religion, the Kings Honor and Happiness, and the
perfect Peace in his Majesty's Dominions; I could not omit, to desire you
herewith, to assure that part, wherein you have most interest, of the
contentment I receive thereby, and of my constant and hearty wishes, that the
effects of those their professions may have a speedy and a happy issue. How
much my desires, actions and int^r^st have ever concurred therewith, you have
been suficiently certified by my Servants, Letters, and my own behavior, since
these unhappy Troubles: And the public notice, which the Honorable House of
Commons has formerly taken of my Families sufferings, with the particular
consideration, it has lately had, for the supply of my present
(notwithstanding its own urgent) necessities, is so great a tie, besides what
my blood ^^eth them, upon ^^e, that I shall think my self happy, whenever I
s^^ll be enabled to answer it with some real and serviceable gratitude. In the
mean time, I beseech the said H^use, that in pursuance of its bounty such Order
may be taken in the settling of what has been assigned me, as may render it as
effectual to m^, as by the said House it has been ordered and intended; In
confidence, that when it shall please God, to bless the endeavors of both
Kingdoms, as to settle Truth and Peace in (...) His Majesty's Dominions, the
said H^use will, according to its for^^^ Declaration, with no less favor and
affection undertake the reestablis^ment of my Public Interests abroad: not
doubting, but the E^^^^ of Scotland will, according to my request to them, upon
this occasion (...) their former promise, willingly concur with the
Parliament of Englan^ therein.

This is all at this time which I desire, you would be pleased to repres^^t
unto the Honorable House of Commons from me; Which will be (...) addition of
what I owe you for the like favor, whereby you have obli^ged,

Hague the 12/22 of fe, 1644. Your most affectionate firiend: Charles Lodovic.


FJNJS.

