A MOST LAMENTABLE INFORMATION OF PART OF THE GRIEVANCES OF MUGLESWICK Lordship
in the Bishopric of Durham, sent up by Master George Lilburne, Major of
Sunderland to be communicated to the House of Commons.
TO all Christian people to whom these presents shall come, know that we are a
people in that our Parish of Mugleswicke who have been destitute of a
preaching Minister; yea, ever since any of us that now are breathing were
borne, to our souls great grief and dreadful hazard of destruction; neither
is it our case alone but also ten, yea or twelve Parishes all adjoining are in
like manner void of the means of salvation, whose case and condition is
deeply to be deplored: And as for us in Mugleswicke we have had none, neither
good nor bad since Martinmas, Anno Dom. 1640. but such as the Scottish
Presbiterie furnished us withal (bemoaning our miserable estate) for he who
then supplied the place, departed this life about the day of the date above
mentioned; and we immediately after his death rode to one Master Jam^s,
Minister of Riton, being one of the Prebends of Durham, entreating him with all
earnestness with an humble Petition, because he then was in authority, and no
more of that sect left in the County, but all fled because of the Scots; that
this our poor Parish of Mugleswick might once at length have the fruition of a
faithful Minister, but he answered that they (viz.) the Prebends had already
appointed us a man, namely one John Duery whom we knew; Then with all our
souls we besought him that we might be exempted of that Duery, because we
knew him to be no Preacher, and his life and conversation scandalous, and had
two plaees at that present already as we told him; and also that he publicly
confessed in a Pulpit before an open assembly that he could not preach, and
yet that aspiring Prebend (whose lifelesse conscience we leave to your censure)
replied that they had once authorized him, and we neither could nor should
depose him, and he also told us in plain terms, that if he could read the
prayer book, and an homily, it was nothing to us what kind of man he was; so
when things would be no better, it behooved us to come home with these cold
comforts, having heavy hearts that our souls should a longer season be
inthralled to such a simple, yea (we dare say) sinful Minister, who is
ignorant of the very principles of Religion: (yet our Allsufficient God (seeing
that we were but breeding and beginning in Christianity) would let no more be
laid upon us then we were able to bear) and so seeing us unwilling to accept
of him he gave over. Then the place being void for the space of a whole year,
we our selves betwixt grief and necessity went abroad to seek, and it
pleased our God to send such an one as our souls longed after, and no sooner
found we one whom our minds affected, but immediately those Prebends (who
whether they were friends or foes to Christ, judge ye) that will not stick to
hazard their heads, so they may hinder the truth, do impose one Braidly upon
us, a bird brought out of the nest of their bosoms, who (we may say without
sin) is one of the most deboist amongst the sons of men, for he will
neither preach himself nor yet permit others, but upon the Sabbath day he
took the Lock from the Church door, and fastened on one of his own, so as
that the Parishioners were forced for to stand in the Church yard to discharge
divine duties with their Minister in cold frost and snow, to the infinite
dishonor of the Almighty the great grief of their minds, and the dreadful
indangering of themselves in that stormy time of the year; other times before
he came into the Church whilst our own Minister was in his exhortation, and
stood up beside him reading with a loud voice in a book to overtop the sound
of his words, Afterward pulled him by the coat when he was in the Pulpit, but
when neither of these would cause him to desist from duty, he goes and rings
the Bells all aloud; neither is this all, but out of malice calls a Communion and
enters upon the sacred action without any preparation Sermon before the day.
Now the people having protested before as they were directed to do before by
the Parliament against all Popish innovations, they doubted and therefore durst
not communicate with him in these his corrupt courses. And likewise the said
Braidly had affirmed before the open assembly, that the Protestation was false.
Then he after that venteth his inveterate envy with his secret and sinful
intention, for after that he had come and collected a Catalogue of the names of
those that had restrayning consciences; at the next Sessions after he indicted
them all above 14. years old and above, yea many of them being such as a
prudent Pastor would in no wise have admitted to partake of those precious
ordinances, by reason of their minority and nonage, and so at this instant
scarce liable to the censure of the Law, to the number of 67. souls or more,
yea many of them being indicted again and again, are so prosecuted and
perplexed as that they are even forced to forsake their vocations and callings,
and cast themselves upon the Lords special providence, and others of them that
stay, are driven to excessive expenses, many of them to more then they have of
their own; and others again, namely old women, and infirm women, being so
great with child or so newly delivered of child that they can neither ride nor
go, therefore do desire to keep out of their claws, yet their own houses
cannot keep them safe from certain pestiferous Bayliffes, who through the
procurement of the said Braidly are preferred to the office, that like for lewd
lives they could no where else have found among Christians, for they are full
as inhumane as those Rebels in Ireland, that neither doubt nor dread superior
powers; yea they will not stick to burst and break open doors, pick bars,
and being come within the house they draw their Swords, and hold out Pistols
against poor women's breasts, commanding them to light candles, otherwise they
shall let them see a lamentable light with their Pistols; and do so astonish
poor simple women with children that they drive them to a desperate condition,
well nigh beside themselves. Some of the said parties got a Warrant from a
Justice to bind them to the peace, and delivered it to the Bayliffe to serve,
and so they went before some of his Majesty's Justices of peace (whereof Sir
John Conyers was one) who refused to bind those deboist fellows; now the
Bayliffes names are as follows, Master Clement Richardson (who said that they
who had taken the Protestation had need to go to the Parliament to beg a
pardon or else they would be beggered) Hugh Joplin, Thomas Foser son in law
to the said Joplin, Cuthbert Hopper and Robert Simpson, these through the
assistance of one Thomas Miss, who is intimate with authority, and makes his
brags openly that he is the author of all these troubles, and only uses the
rest as agents for the effecting of these his mischievous prankes. Now know to
whomsoever these presents shall come, that we are a poor people, not fully as
yet brought forth by the spiritual birth, and therefore help, help, help,
as you tender the honor of your heavenly King; and finally know this, that all
herein is truth, and nothing but the truth, as all those whose names are here
subscribed will testify.

Mr. William Moore. John Iley. Isahell Iley. Elizabeth Iley. George Oliver.
Richard March. Jane His wife. John March. Thomas March. Jane March. Elizabeth
March. Edward Ward. Margret Ward. Robert Raw. John Readshaw. Elizabeth
Readshaw. William Loborne. Jane Loborne. John Arde. Francis Lampton. Robert
Readshaw. George Rippon. Elizabeth Rippon. Anne Carrudders. Rowland Harrison.
Jane Harrison. Thomas Lonsedale. Francis Ward. Cuthbert Ward. Cuthbert Ward,
Elder. Mary Ward. Elizabeth Ward. Cuthbert Harrison. Jane, His wife. John
Hopper. Anne Hopper. Margret Ioplin Widow. John Ioplin, William Ioplin.
Elizabeth Ward. Margret Ioplin. Richard Chester. John Blenkinsop. Cuthbert
Pallesor. Robert Kirkeley. Alice, His wife. Thomas Maddeson. Anne, His wife.
Thomas Maddeson, Jun. Anne Maddeson, Jun. Alexander Maddeson. Andrew Raw.
Nicholas Kirkeley. George Raw. Arthur Kirkeley. Jane Kirkeley. Elizabeth
Kirkeley. Steven Raw. John Darnell. Margret Ioplin. Elizabeth Wheeteley Margret
Wheeteley. James Carry Mary Richardson. Nicholas Maughen. John Dridon. Matthew
Stokoe.
These are all indicted.


