ANIMADVERSION Upon General Monck's LETTER To the GENTRY of DEVON: Wherein his
Arguments for Anarchy are considered, and the weakness of his Harringtonian
Principle detected.

By M. W.

Orbis, ut orbita, volvitur, incita, turbine miro.

Printed in the year 1659.

ANIMADVERSIONS Upon General MONCK's LETTER To the Gentry of DEVON.
AMBITION is of a greedy nature, not content with the bodies and estates of
men, but strives to attaque their souls also, and to take-in that by policy or
the force of Argument, which will hold out against all the force of Arms.

The rise and progress of Mahomet, and the Ottoman Family, are solemn
testimonials of this sad truth; but we have nearer instances of it: A few
Members of the House of Commons of late, stealing into the Seat of Government,
by the help of Sampson and his Locks, are not content to seize our Bodies and
Estates at pleasure; but, with the strength of his Jaw Bone only, would force
our Understandings also, and persuade us to be mad with reason.

We thought General Monck might have been our Pilot, and were so fond as to
believe, He would steer us toward harbor, not by faction and private
interest, but by Reason, and Christian prudence; that, seeing we could not
avoid the horror of a fearful storm, we might evade the error of a final
Shipwreck: but, instead thereof, being dispossessed of our Estates by Violence,
he would argue us into a belief, that it is best to entail our welfare on them
that wrong us; and prove it more rational, that we suffer our Vessel to
remain in a continual storm, than to return again to that harbor, from whence
we first took sail.

And thus he displaies his strength, Before these unhappy Wars, the
Government of these Nations, was Monarchical in Church and State: These Wars
have given birth and growth, to several interests, both in Church and State,
heretofore not known: though now upon many accounts very considerable, as the
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist, and other Sectaries of all sorts, as to
Ecclesiastics; And the purchasers of the King's, Queen's, Prince's, Bishops,
Deans, and Chapters, and all other forfeited Estates; and all these engaged in
these Wars against the King, as to Civils. These Interests again are so
interwoven by purchases, and inter-marriages, and thereby forfeited, as, I
think, upon rational grounds, it may be taken for granted, that no Government
can be either Good, Peaceful, or Lasting to these Nations, that does not
rationally include, and comprehend the security, and preservation of all the
aforesaid Interests, both civil, and spiritual. I mean so far as by the Word
of God, they are warranted to be protected and preserved. But,

1. If the Sects he mentions, had their Birth in the Wars, it is without
dispute, that all of them are gross Errors, (truth being of an elder
offspring) and so not fit to be secured, unless he means, in the Soldiers
Dialect, to be restrained; nor are they then to be preserved, unless it were
lawful to do evil, that good may come thereof.

2. If the parties he mentions, were engaged in Wars against the King, they
were perjured, and faithless Persons, and so no security to be had for their
illgotten Estates; they swearing with hands lifted up to the most High, to
maintain his Person in Honor and Safety; and, during all the Wars, declaring
their intents to remove his evil Counselors only from him; and to say, There
was a condition in their Oath to preserve him, till they had him in their
power, is a strain beyond the invention of Machiavill, and a mental
reservation, first found out in Hell. But to destroy his Person, take his
Estate, and then to provide for the security of the purchaser, will make us
worse then Heathens, and their practices to upbraide our provisions; for,
Majores nostri religiosissimi, (says Salust) nihil victis cripiebant, praeter
injuriae licenciam. And Seneca commends the practice, nihil ex Rege victo
praeter gloriam sumere.

3. Suppose the interests aforesaid are to be preserved and secured: Why cannot
Monarchy preserve them as well as any other species of Government? in regard,
it partakes with all the advantages of the other forms, without sharing in
their disadvantages. Sure if they ought to be preserved, Monarchy is no more
exclusive of them in England, than of Hugonets and Sects in France; or the like
interests upon the admission of Charles the fourth, into that Kingdom: Yet let
the People have their free Elections in Parliament, and there choose their own
Government, (sure they know what is best for them) and what ever they shall
there establish, no doubt the Nation will acquiesce in, and yield conformity
and obedience unto it; but it is unreasonable to put them upon that election of
a Junior in the mess in Cambridge, either to take the Rump or Nothing.

But, because the General supports his Arguments in part upon Mr. Harrington's
principle, that the support of Monarchy being taken away, that Government
cannot be admitted; I must first remember him, that the King's Lands are not
all the support of Monarchy: and then tell him, Mr. Harringtons principle, that
all Government is founded upon overbalance in propriety, is a weak and an
uncertain proposition. For,

1. He might with as much truth have told us, that the Government of a ship is
founded upon overbalance of propriety in that ship; or the Government of a
Town, in the overbalance of Estate in that Town. But his thin fallacy is
transparent to him that can distinguish that which is constitutive of a thing,
from that which is consequutive of it.

2. I think he is no Peripatetique; Arist. 2. Analyt. lib. 1. cap. 2.
for, his principle has nothing of Aristotle's requisites in principles, that
is, that they be vera necessaria, immed ata, priora, notiora, and causae
conclusionis; I mean, principia complexa sen praemissa Demonstrationis (...) --
His Overbalance is not a new coined word, but it is analogum proportionis,
purely Tropicall, and so unfit to be used in a principle of Demonstration.

3. If by propriety he intends all the species of it, whereof Principality is
one, Parturiunt montes, etc. And yet that is not always true, for he that has
the Legislative, Judiciary, and Military power, and not the Right also, has
the Government; that is, he has jus possessionis, but he has not jus
proprietatis, the propriety of it. But if by Propriety, he intends only the
largest Estate in Lands or Goods, his assertion is every way false: for one may
have the largest Estate, and yet not the power aforesaid; and one may have the
power aforesaid, and not the largest Estate; because they are genera
co-ordinata, and, by consequence, eorum differentiae sunt specie diversae, I
mean ultimate constitutivae. The Law of the Land might have informed him this.
Indeed, it calls them both Inheritances: yet he that incroacheth upon the power
of the Sovereign, is said to dis-inherit him; but he that enters upon his
Estate, is only termed an Intruder, and works no change at all upon the
Estate: It is also manifest in the distinction of tenures in Capite, from
the other tenures which Littleton acquaints us with.

4. Lib. 2. cap. 3. De jure Belli and Pacis.
Moreover all Government is relative to the people, and an Estate is so far
from being the foundation of it, that Prince and People both, may consist
without it. Let Grotius judge: Imperium (says he) duas solet habere materias,
sibi subjacentes: primariam, Personas (quae materia solum inter dum sufficit,
ut in exercitu virorum, mulierum, puerorum, quaerente novas seeds):
Secundariam, Locum, (qui Territori^m dicitur, etc.) Quanquam autem plorumque
uno actu quaeri solent, Imperium and Dominium; sunt tamen distincta.

5. Examples of the rise of Governors make against him John de Medices, the
raiser of his Family in Florence, got the government of the City by his wisdom
and great discretion, not by overbalance in propriety, as Guicciardine may
inform us. And to instance in Sparta; What overbalance of propriety had
Lycurgus in Lacedaemon, being only Protector of Carilaus? yet He, by his own
power, could mould the Government as he list, make a Senate, and bestow the
Supreme Power as he pleased. I could produce moreapt instances, were it not to
serve the Commonwealths men, in their own Country.

6. It is unreasonable, that a rich man (in a reduplicative sense) shall govern
me, because he has contracted a larger estate than I; but it is natural for
the strong to rule the weak, as, for a man to govern a child, or the wise to
govern a fool.

7. His Principle is destructive of his Equal Commonwealth: for, if all
Government be founded upon Overbalance in Propriety, his Equal Commonwealth
is no Government: But all Government is founded upon Overballance in Propriety:
Therefore, etc. The Connection is plain: for where there is an Equality, there
is no Overbalance; where no Overbalance, (upon his ground) no foundation
for Government; and where there is no Foundation, there can be no
Superstructure: the assumption is his own principle: therefore it is necessary,
that his Commonwealth be no Government. Thus, while others in fighting for
Propriety in Government, have reduced us to no Government at all, Mr. H. by
laying foundations for his imaginary Commonwealth, has principl'd us for a no
Commonwealth at all.

But the General has another Argument, we may well call Argumentum Hercul^um,
That the Army will never endure Monarchy. I answer, 1. Who made Cromwell
Protector? ab esse ad posse is a good Argument. 2. It Is in vain for him that
will do good, to ask advice of him that never intends any. Nulla fides
pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur, is the Motto of most Soldiers; and has
seldom been falsified, but in that noble Legion, which chose rather to die
Martyrs, than live Traitors. 3. If the Soldier rule us, then it is their
Government, not Republique; for it is not Republique to be under force. 4. It is
Aristotle's Argument, Arist. polit. lib. 4. cap. 2.
That Monarchy is the best Government, because Tyranny, its opposite, is the
worst: It shall be my Argument, ad hominem, by way of retortion, To have
Monarchs as the best Governors, because Soldiers, the worst of Tyrants, are
the most against it. Opposita juxta se posita magis elucescunt.

Lastly, The General has one other Argument deserves more consideration, to
wit, That Introduction of Monarchy will occasion a new war. But, 1. Will the
seclusion of it procure us Peace? or rather intail a War upon us and our
posterity? 2. Can we ever purchase peace with the price of iniquity? 3. Can
there be any way imaginable to reconcile all interests, but by a full and a
free Parliament, where the grievances of all parties may be heard, and the
injuries of the greatest be redressed? for without this, let a bribed Orator
prate what he will, or a seditious Burgess plot what he can, it is as impossible
to obtain peace and safety, or for a man to be at ease while he is upon the
Rack; as to empty a River, until the Springs thereof be stopped. And set up by
force what Tribunitiall Power you please, you will find to be true the words of
Livie; Tribuni militum, lib. 4.
consulari potestate, quatuor creati sunt (says he), Quintius Paenus ex
consulatu, C. Furius M. Posthumous, A. Cornelius Cossus. Ex its Cossus,
praefuit urbi. Tres, delectu habito profecti sunt Veios, documentoque fuerunt
quam plurium imperium bello inutile esset. I endendo ad sua quisque consilia,
cum aliud ali^ videretur, aperuerunt ad occasionem locum host: incertam namque
aciem, signum altis dare receptui, al^is cani jubentibus, invatere opportune
Veientes: Castra propinqua turbantes, ac terga dantes accepere. Plus itaque
ignominiae quam cladis est acceptum. Moesta civitas fuit, vinci insueta; odisse
Tribunos, poscere Dictatorem, in eo verti spes civitatis. Iliad 2:
And you will be forced to say with Homer at last, (with which Aristotle
concludes the twelfth of his Metaphysics)

(...)
Non multos regnare bonum est: Rex unicus esto
Unius imperium; cu: Jupiter aurea magnus
Sceptra dedit, juss^que suis dare jura tuendis.

FINIS.

