The Doctors' Dispensatory. ^he Art of Physic restored to practice.
a doctor studies liquid in a glass vial in his shop. Two women, a lady and
nurse, with a baby stand in front of his bookshelf.

The Apothecarys' Shop opened.
an apothecary accepts a prescription from a man in his shop. Around them are
his ingredients and instruments. Dispensatory

Sold by N; Brook at ye Angel in Cornhill.



The Expert DOCTORS Dispensatory.

The whole Art of Physic Restored to Practice.

The Apothecaries Shop, and Chyrurgions Closet opened; wherein all safe and
honest practices are maintained, and dangerous mistakes discovered; and what
out of subtilty for their own profits they have endeavored to reserve to
themselves, now at last impartially divulged and made common.

Together with a strict survey of the Dispensatories of the most renowned
Colleges of the World, which being corrected, are here epitomized, and drawn
into an easy and useful method for Practice. Containing, First, the Latin
Names of all Simples and Compounds Englished. Secondly, The Virtues, Qualities,
Properties, Quantities, and uses of all Simples and Compounds. Thirdly, The way
of prescribing remedies; together with the Forms and Rules for the making of
all manner of medicines daily used by our English Physicians, Chyrurgians, and
Apothecaries. Fourthly, The Nature, Qualities, and Symptoms of all diseases.
Fifthly, Cautions for the applying all both internal and external medicines.


To which is added by Jacob a Brunn, public Professor of Physic in Basil, a
Compendium of the Body of physic; wherein all the Medicaments Universal and
Particular, Simple and Compound, are fitted to the practice of Physic; and
these forms of remedies now before prescribed by the famous P. Morellus, chief
Physician to the King of France, and Chancellor of the University of
Monpellier.

Dedicated to that excellent Anatomist VESLINGIVS.

London, Printed for N. Brook at the Angel in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange,
1657.

NICHOLAS CULPEPPERS Approbation, OR Rather his Wish after his perusal of that
Famous, Morellus his Dispensatory.
WHereas I was put upon the design of the London Dispensatory, which with good
success I translated, and published, a Friend of mine, not long after, sent me
the more refined Work of Morellus, that most knowing Physician to the King of
France, whole method and plain directions for the making of all manner of
Physic, set forth with the Annotations of Jacob a Brun Professor of Physic in
the College of Basil, I so honored and admired, that had I been before
acquainted with his Work, I had made it my business to have translated it, and
presented it to my Countrymen, as the most useful, compendious, and exact
Dispensatory that in all my reading I ever met with.

Thine, N. Culpepper.

The Epistle of JOHN WINAND Doctor of PHYSIC of the University of MONTPELIER.
To John Jacob a Brunn, sometimes his beloved Chamber-follow, in praise of that
excellent piece of Morellus's Dispensatory.
IT was truly and judiciously spoken by Herophilus, (most excellent Doctor)
that Remedies are the hand of God if rightly applied; but if otherwise by an
unskilful and emperical hand, nothing is more prejudicial. Now seeing that in
all earthly enjoyments nothing is more desirable then health, without which the
whole Series or length of life is an heavy and unsupportable burden of
miseries depressing of the most heroic and noblest spirits; Therefore there is
nothing more profitable and excellent then those things which do either
preserve the present life, or restore the same anew when brought almost to the
last act on the Theater of Mortality. Those Remedies which do restore or renew
nature, whose benefits if once discerned by the Patient, how can he choose but
to affirm, that in them he has found the immediate acting hand of a Deity?
Hence is that most ancient prerogative of Physicians, not only acquired by
admission, and their function, but also rendered illustrious, and noted by a
regal benevolence, and affection, by how much the greater prudence, experience,
and happy and succesful applications has equalized them to the God of Nature.
This felicity or happy application of Remedies being erected on the foundation
of Science, and receiving its rise from the same, is absolutely necessary for a
judicious Physician; wherefore having found out the enemies to Nature,
industriously and artificially digested and compounded Remedies, which lie on
derivative or transient efficacy and virtue, penetrate the most secret parts of
the body, expelling the enemies to Nature from their fortresses, and strong
holds, and strengthening the inward parts against a second onset, by repressing
and excluding of their Wiles. Such a Physician is Morellus (if I may so say
without prejudice) or was at the least, as no understanding man can safely
deny, whom for to commend, is out of my sphere; his genius, learning,
indefatiable pen, and excellent accomplishments now above the vein of my pen,
as the stellified Heavens, and planetary Orbs are above the meteors, the style,
and fruit, and benefit of the same sufficiently speak of him: for a Tree does
not feed without Apples, though it do boast with spreading branches, and vainly
delude with blossoms; should I go about to express the sublimeness of the
work, the weakness of my Genius would fail in expressing of the same; how
should I elevate, or exalt its perfection which is apparently manifestly to
all? yet though the confession of two or three, yea all may take place, and
testify an undubitable probation, removing all scruple, or contradicting that
vanity or presumption which may cast scurrillous aspersions by an approved
testimony, I shall here make known to the Reader, that this Tract published and
sent into the world was compiled by the illustrious and famous man Peter
Morellus, in the most famous and ancient University of Montpelier, being first
privately communicated to me, and by me divulged, neither shall I acknowledge
any other Author but Morellus, it being the chief Dispensatory from whence
others have borrowed, as Renodeus witnesses, and in one word all the Tumultuary
Dispensatories, who have washed off tenement but from him; vnd the Reader, in
having Morellus, has Homers Works in one Nutshel, the quintessence of
practical Physic, and Apothecaries Art, so that he may desist from buying
others of the like nature. Now I shall evidence as much as in me lies why you
should be moved to publication of the same, as I have discerned by your Letters
to me; first for the good of the Aesculapian practitioners, and laborious
Initiates in the Art of Physic, showing the way, and assisting their
endeavors by the light of your admirable method for the ascension of the Muses
mount. Also to animate such who though they have taken their degrees, yet never
as yet have conflicted with an adversary, or else being unskilful leaders, both
in order, time, and place, fear him as wanting those arms, and Auxiliary helps
which should elude and nonplus his stratagems and designs, of which sort of men
when you perceived and understood many adorned with the Title triumphantly, and
in a bravado, though inglorious, yet vainly to glory, great in name, but small
and bare in knowledge, borrowing forms of Remedies from learned men, or else
confounding of the balsome with Assa Faetida, Aloes with Sugar, Pills with
Electuaries, and Potions with Decoctions, and so transcending the doses, or
never arriving at the same, either by no examination of the Ingredients, or
else to the prejudice and great danger of the party affected; you have
therefore resolved to eject them from the society of Physicians and skilful
Apothecaries, and also to have a respect to the Public good and welfare. Oh
the worthy praise of a generous spirit! thus to mind the public safety, and
particular worth of such a master, in recollecting those favors received from
him, and commemorising them with a large encomium of his insignal deserts. My
last request Sir is, that you would eternize his memory both with tongue and
Pen, from the gulf and shiprack of oblivion, in asserting him from the injury
of a surreptious honor; for my own part, seeing this Treatise entitled by one
to whom I did communicate the same, who touched with an itch of fame, has
sought a diserving from the endeavors of another in setting forth this Book,
and wholly changing of the method, you presently judged such an arrogance
worthy of suppression, and the whole work without fucation, or violation by a
proposterous method, to be divulged and communicated to the world in the name
of the right Author, who for his great pains and study employed in Physic his
singular affection toward the Germane Nations his candideness, and lastly The
great Emolument conferd by him on the Family of the Muses and all Mankind,
does deserve an eternal honor and name, freed from the dust and enclosure of
the Sepulcher, well knowing how unjust a thing it is for one to be elated with
the pains of another man, and to deprive the right owner of his deserved
praise, according to that admonition of the acute and noble Scaliger,
Exercitation 160. Section 3. where he says, I shall willingly leave,
dimissively grant, and liberally bestow on every one the praise and reward of
his labor, not like to some drones and ungrateful persons who are so impudent
as to usurp the Titles which are deservedly bestowed and placed upon others,
dissembling of the gratitude which they do owe, by their malitiousness
abolishing the memory of the right Author, that they may ascribe the same to
themselves; hut these new Vpstarts, new Judges of Causes shall have their
Consciences for an accuser, and posterity for their Judges. If this had been
thoroughly considered by this new seeker of Honor, the very shadow of such a
man would have deterred him from ever claiming of the Book of Morellus for his
own. At first I happily admired at the inconsiderateness of the man; may be he
supposed that the fraud of an ignoble planet might obscure and counterfeit the
beams and light of the sun, or else when the sun is once set, that it shall
never rise again, or at last never dissipate those thick clouds and mists which
do labor to eclipse his rays and brightness; or lastly, that none of the
other stars would attest the derivation of the light; so let him go and assume
the reward assigned him by Scalger. Finally, in this you have evidenced that
the University of Montpelier, as in former Ages, so also in this of ours has
by a natural pronity and felicity been productive in learned men, (as Ophir is
of Gold, India of Gemmes, Pactolus and Tagus of Gold oar, Gallia Narbonensis of
the grain Kermes, Rosemary, and other wholesome herbs; and therefore in other
things giving place to none, he that shall undertake to number them all in one
continued Series for the space of six hundred years, and following, may with
the like presumption attempt the calculation of the stars. Certainly he can
hardly collect these of the first magnitude, those Men I mean who have
gloriously shone forth in this Olympus of Apollo for learning and writing; let
the flower of this Academy suffice for an instance, Bernard Gordonius, Arnoldus
Villanovanus, Stephen Arnoldus, Gerard de solo, Anselm de Janua, Guido de
Cauliaco, Valescus de Taranta, John de Tornamira, Falco Schyron, Dionysius
Fontanius, Antonius Sapporta, William Rondolet, John Bocand, Andreas
Laurentius, and in my time the great Francis Ranchinus Chancellor of the
University; he having adorned me with the Docteral Laurel, John Varrandeus,
Jacob Pradillius, and the rest of the regious professors, and illustrious
Counselors, noble for their deserts; Lastly, famous Morellus which shall give
a testimony of the rest, which I have not mentioned, who either through the
default of time, or envy of the destines, have sustained a suppression of their
Names. So that it shall be a step to Virtue and Eternity of fame to be admitted
into this Temple of Aescu. lapius, to admire and adore these bright and shining
lights, to be rendered illustrious by them, and exhaust full Springs of Science
from them, and in the end immortal honor shall be the Crown of their
endeavors, seeing that I have naught else to say of Morellus, he as I said
before, being above the Elegies of my Pen, his Works do sufficiently testify
his praise, and you your self understand well enough. Go on in your laudible
enterprise, and spin out the whole thread you have begun in opening of the
Morellion fount, from whence you derive your Name, replenish the sublime wits
of the Studient, with the plentiful flowing waters of his brain. Farewell,
happily follow the footsteps of those illustrious Physicians of Basil, Plater,
Bauhine, Stupom, so that you may live long to the good of the Commonwealth of
Aesculapius.

The BOOKSELLER To all ingenious PRACTITIONERS IN PHYSIC.
LEARNED READERS,
NExt to my happiness of having this Author so carefully Translated for the
public benefit, I thought it not the least part of my Duty to dedicate his
Labors to your ingenuous perusals more especially, as I know that it could not
but be acceptable in respect of the Authors pre-eminence and esteem amongst the
best Writers of his time; for these and some other more weighty considerations
I could not entertain a higher ambition then to present you with his
Dispensatory, as I knew you the most equal Judges in these studies, and as you
have ever been the continual and indefatigable preservers of my Countrymen; I
do acknowledge it is grown too much a custom to have physical Authors
englisht, more especially as some of them have been surreptitiously,
adventerously, and dangerously set forth, whereas if civil approaches had been
made to you for your safe and more learned approbations, I dare with confidence
affirm it, that the Nations had been preserved from so many to be lamented
Empericall destructions, under which without your timely and future
preventions, they are still likely to groan. This Volumne with all its
accomplishments only waits and attends on you as a servant and fathfull
testimonial of that I shall ever cordially wish, that the best endeavourers for
the public good would address themselves to you honestly, and modestly making
known to the World, that it conduces to their Reputations to be subservient to
your censures, on such, and no other terms this volumn is presented to you by.

Prolegomena.
THe Composition of Medicines may be considered two ways; first, according to
their external form; Secondly, according to their internal, which does wholly
belong to the method of Physic. This again may be considered two manner of
ways; for either it does show on what basis a compounded Medicine does consist,
whether it be Convective, Preservative, or decoctive, wholly to be taken from
the nature of the Indication; or an Alterative Medicament; as for example, such
a one which is heating in the second degree, consisting of diverse simples, and
those hot in the first, second, or third degree; or else cold in the same
degrees, according to the indications, which do show many or few must be used
in a dosis, that the end may adaequately result, I shall not discourse of this
internal Medicine, considered according to its internal form, but rather of the
former, which does perspicuously teach after what manner. The Medicinal may be
concinnated into diverse and convenient forms, either as the desire of the sick,
which is not always the same, or the affections, or Morbifical causes, or the
various constitution of the part affected does require, according to that
Philosopher in the last book of his Analyticks. Learning and every discipline
proceeds from apermitted cognition. Wherefore I shall premise those things
which are necessary to be known; so that the Prologomena, may be reduced to
four heads; the first of Medicinal weights and Measures. The second of the
Notes and abbreviations of Physicians; the third is a Tractate of the
differences and distributions of forms; and the Fourth what things are to be
observed in every form.

1. Of the Weights and Measures used in Physic.
SEeing that the whole manner of Composition does depend on the proportion of
simples, which are estimated by Weight, Measure, Number, and bulk: I shall
therefore necessarily insist on them. First dry things are generally expended
by weight; which having diverse differences in the Monuments of the Ancients,
the more used are to be followed by our Physicians in their prescriptions. A
grain is the basis and foundatition of the weight (as the unite of numbers,
adequate in weight to a white Peppercorn.

A scruple, which according to the Ancients should contain 24 grains, yet
according to an ill received use has now but twenty.

Dram, a dram has three scruples.

Vncia, an ounce has eight drams; where note by the way, that when three are
prescribed by the Name of a Measure, they are termed quartarium, or a quarter
of a pound.

Libra, a pound has twelve ounces.

Mensurae, or Measures are for liquids, designed by vessels and ounces; for the
modern Physicians do not measure in certain hollow vessels as the Ancients were
wont, but estimate the measures by weight, so that every meafure may be
answerable exactly to the weights: now seeing that the same weight of Liquids
is not correspondent to the weight of Arids.

The quantity of Medicines in magnitude is prescribed by handfuls, Fasciculi,
and Pugils.

Manipulus, is that quantity which may be held in the hand, answerable to half
an ounce.

Fasciculus, as much as one can hold, or enclose within the arm.

Pugillus, a Pugilis either greater or less; the greater is as much as may be
taken in all the five fingers; the lesser Pugil as much as may be taken in
three fingers; the greater in weight a whole dram, the lesser half a dram.

In number also the quantity of Medicines is considered, and that either
equally, or unequally as for example by three or four Lupines.

In species, the orders of Medicaments are considered;

Roots, Barks, and Wood are weighed.

Leaves are measured by Manipulus; but if prescribed for baths by Fasciculs;
for leaves observe that in purging potions they are used to the third part of a
Manipule.

The doses of seeds are for the most part expressed, yet Barley and Rife are
measured by the Pugil.

Flowers are also defined by the Pugil.

Fruits are either greater or less; if less, as Corans and Raisins, are
exhibited by weight or number; if greater, as Apples, Prunes, and Figgs, they
are presented in number.

Aromaticks, Gums, and Rosins are difined by weight.

Efficatious, and precious Liquors, and distilled oils by drops.

2. Of Physical abbrevations, and Notes.
Physicians with less difficulty, and loss of time have certain letters by
which either weights in the place of words are expressed in their forms, or
else certain abbreviations do design the beginning or end of the form.

The Notes of Weights used by Physicians and Apothecaries.
Gr. gr. Notes A Grain. ss Notes Half a scruple. j Notes A scruple. j Notes
A dram. ss Notes Half a dram. j Notes An ounce. ss Notes Half an ounce. lb j
Notes A pound. lb ss Notes Half a pound. M j Notes Manipule, or handful. M
ss Notes Half a Manipule. P Notes A pugil. quart. Notes A quartary, or 3
ounc. ana Notes Ana. i. e. an equal pound or measure of two or more Medicines.
an. part. aeq. Notes The equal parts of every one of them. q. s. Notes What
suffiseth, or a sufficient quantity.
Under one general Title are sometimes comprehended Simples.
The five greater opening Roots. Parsley, Fennel, Asparagus, Petroselinum, and
Ruscus.
The five lesser opening Roots. Guajacum, Rubia, Elecampany, Capparis, and
Ononidis.
The five mollifying Herbs. Mallows, Althea, Violet leaves, Mercury, Acanthus,
or Brancha Ursina. To the same add Wall-flowers, Bettony, and Atriplex.
The five Capillary Herbs. Adianthum, or Venus hair. Adianthum Mirum album, or
Ruta murar. Polytrichon Aureum. Trichomanes, Asplenium, or Ceterach,
The four great hot Seeds. Anise-seeds, Fennel-seeds, Carraway-seeds,
Cummin-seeds.
The four lesser hot Seeds. Of Parsley, Of Ammonium, Of Daucus, Of Ammeos.
The four greater cold Seeds. Cowcumber-seeds, Gord-seeds, Citrual seeds, Melon
seeds.
The four lesser cold Seeds. Endive-seeds, Scariol-seeds, Lettice-seeds,
Marjoram-seeds.
The four Cordial Flowers. Bugloss-flowers. Borage flowers, Rose flowers,
Violet flowers.
The fragments of fine precious Stones. Of Saphires, Of Granat, Of Smaragd, Of
Hyacinth, Of Sardus.
The four waters for the Pleuresie. Carduus Mariae, Taraxacon Carduus
Benedictus, Scabious.
The three Stomach Oils. Wormwood Oil, Cydonia, or Oil of Oranges, Oil of
Mastick.
The four hot Unguents. Aragon, Martiatum, Althea, and Agrippa's Ointment.
The four cold Ointments. Album Camphoratum, Rosatum Mesuae, Populeon,
Infridans Galeni.

3. Of the differences of forms and distributions of this Tractate.
IN way of a foundation, by the word form, I here understand a compounded
Magisterial Medicine, which is such an one as is prescribed by the Physician
for the present occasion; to difference the same from the Apothecaries, of
which I shall not here largely or purposely treat; but only by the way for the
affinity of the Argument. This Tractate is divided into two Books, whereof the
first is of internal medicines, the latter of external. The first book again
has three Sections; the first for the Forms and Compositions of Liquid
Medicines; the second of Soft Medicines; and the third and last of Solid
Medicines. The heads and forms of this Section.

CHAP. I.
1 Of an Apozeme 1 2 Of a Julip 24 3 Of a Potion 30 4 Of a Syrrup 51 5 Of a
Vomitory 72 6 Of Medicated Wines 81 7 Of an Emulsion 8 Of Ammygdalate 9 Of
Hordeatum 10 Of Milk and Whey 11 Of Hydromel 12 Of Water and Sugar with Barley
Water 13 Of the Diet 14 Of Dragon-broth 15 Of a Restorative Distillation 16 Of
Broths and Potages
The Chapters and Forms of the second Section. CHAP. I.
1 Of the Bolus 129 2 Of Opiates 134 3 Of Comfits and Conserves 143 4 Of
Preserves 146
The Chapters and Forms of the third Section. CHAP. I.
1 Of Pasta Regna 148 2 Of Pandaleon 150 4 Of Poineolate 4 Of Tablets 5 Of
Pills 6 Of Powders
The Second Book has two Sections, the first of common Remedies in diverse
parts, the second of proper Remedies. CHAP. I.
1 Of an Epitheme 169 2 Of a Lotion 173 3 Of a Fotion 176 4 Of a Bath 181 5 Of
a stove or Sudatory 183 6 Of Embrocation 185 7 Of the Liniment 188 8 Of
Unguents 190 9 Of a Cerecloth 194 10 Of an Emplaster 196 11 Of the Spanadrap
198 12 Of a Cataplasm 200 13 Of Rubisicating medicines The Dropax, 203 14 Of
Physical baggs The Vesicatory. 205
The Chapters and Forms of the Second Section, the Remedies proper to certain
parts. CHAP. I.
1 Of Frontal 2 Of Oxyrrhodinum 3 Of Cucupha 4 Of a Gargarism.
For the Nose.
3 Of a liquid Unguent 6 Of a Phlegmatic Purgation 7 Of a Dentrifice or
Medicine for the cleansing of the Teeth 8 Of an Errhinum or Medicine for the
Nostrils 9 Of a Suffiment. 10 Of an Odoriferous Medicine.
For the Stomach.
A Scutum or Releeving Medicine.
For the Womb.
Pessarum or a Medicine for the Womb.
For the Arse-hole.
Of a Suppository. Of a Glyster. Of a Nascale. Also diverse injections.
What Heads are to be observed in the Composition of every Medicine. In the
Composition of every Medicine three things must be observed. The Form or
Composition, the Use, and the Profit. In the Composition on the Material part
we shall observe in our prescriptions quantity, quality, and order; where
generally note that quality must be noted in single; and those first most
Appropriate and Efficacious, that in as much as possible may be, the party
affected may be restored to health very suddenly.

Secondly, They must be Safe, that if they do not remedy, they may no wise
prejudice the party, though in desperate Diseases, desperate Medicines may be
used with an exquisite Judgment.

Thirdly, They must be Pleasant and Jucund, in color, smell, and taste, yet
contrary and resistant to the disease, and in so doing, you may happily put a
gloss on nature.

Fourthly, such Remedies as are experienced and approved; for these will more
safely cure then those which are newly found out by a Physician, though of the
greatest judgment; for the quantity in a continuity they must all be moderate,
not commending the use of an ounce when a dram is sufficient. More
specifically, those Medicines which are bitter or nauseating, neither in taste
or smell, not being easily retained or taken by the Patient, must therefore be
compounded in a less dosis; for the discreet quantity or number of the
ingredients, those compositions must not be used where their simples are
sufficient. Also in the compositions of simples avoid much a vast and high bulk
made like a theriacal Medicine; these kind of Medicines causing a loathing in
the sick who takes the same, and a trouble to the Apothecary, in compounding
or forming of the Paste on that account, causing an omission, depriving the
Physician of his hope, and the sick of the operation of the Medicine, with the
loss of his health. For the order of the prescription, though naught of the
strength of the medicine do sink after what sort soever the Simples are
prescribed, so they are rightly prepared, yet it is far better, and more
elegantly to observe such an order in the prescription, as I have described in
every form, so that in the general I have nothing more worthy of animadversion
in the use of the prescribed form; First consider the quantity, or dosis, then
the time, and lastly the use; hence the words adnected, in which the form is
conceived. In the Utility I shall shortly and plainly demonstrate the universal
fruit which does emerge from the form of every medicine in the Genus and the
Species.

These two Physical Phrases are fit to be known by all English Men; Printed for
N. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill.

ADAM in EDEN, or the Paradise of Plants; a complete History of Plants, Fruits,
Herbs and Flowers. With their time of Flourishing and decreasing. Together with
their Physical Virtues; a Work fit to be known by all English men, by W.C. M:
D. and others,

THE DOCTORS DISPENSATORY: OR THE APOTHECARY HIS SHOP OPENED. SECTION 1. OF
LIQVID MEDICINES.
CHAP. 1. Of Apozems and Decoctions.
THat which the Latins call Decoction, the Greeks call Apozem, properly derived
from (...) which signifies to heat or boil.

But now an Apozem is only that liquid form of a Medicine which is made of a
Liquor saturated with the virtues of diverse ingredients, relished with Sugar or
Honey clarified, and spiced, repared in a sufficient quantity for four or five
doses, either to purge or alter.

Apozems are twofold one of the ancients, now out of use; another of modern
Writers, of which I here write; and from the general effect of it, it is
twofold, altering and purging.

Altering Apozems, or Decoctions.
THat is called an altering Apozem or Decoction which has a virtue to alter
the body, and things contained in it, especially the Humors, without that
visible evacuation which is usually called purging.

Such altering Apozems either alter the body in the qualities only, and these
are properly called alterers in general, or else as they are made of diverse
simples relating to each particular part, they are termed cephalical, cordial,
hepatical, etc. and these deserve to be accounted specifical alterers.

Or else (and that usually) they are given to make way for a succeeding purge,
and free the body from obstructions, and these are called opening Apozems.

They alter humors either in the first or second qualities, and that either
without intention of purging, and these are called simply altering apozems, as
heating, etc. or else also in the second qualities, and with intention of
future purging, and these are generally called preparers; or else as they have
relation to particular humors, they are specially termed preparers of phlegm,
Choler, etc.

To these Apozems are to be referred diverse decoctions, which are used to
provoke the courses, Urine, and sweat, as those water-wasting Medicines
hereafter to be mentioned.

But enough of them; in an altering Apozem these three things (as most relating
to a method of Physic) are to be chiefly considered, viz. 1. Composition: 2.
Use or manner of prescribing. 3. Benefit gained by them.

In Composition six things are diligently to be considered. 1. The matter out
of which the virtues are to be drawn. 2. The Liquor into which it is to be
conveyed, and the ingredients to be put thereinto. 3. The decoction, both in
boiling and after. 4. What things are to be dissolved in it. 5. The clarifying
of it. 6. The aromatizing or seasoning it with spices, etc. to make it grateful.


In the Matter these three things are to be regarded: 1. The Quality. 2. The
Quantity. 3. The reason and order in the prescription.

Concerning the quality: the matter or ingredients, prescribed in Apozems or
other decoctions, are chiefly roots, barks, woods, leaves, seeds, fruits,
flowers, spices.

The quantity or Dose in which the aforesaid things are prescribed are thus to
be moderated.

Roots are not to exceed 4 ounces, or six at the most.

Barks (if they go into the comp^sition) one ounce, o^ 2 ounces at most.

Woods in the same quantity.

Leaves are to be not above 8 large handfuls, or 10 at most.

Seeds to one ounce, or an ounce and half, seldom to 2 ounces.

Fruits are either the lesser sort, as Raisins etc. which are prescribed two
several ways, either in weight, as from one ounce to two ounces, or else in
number, and that usually by pairs, as to 4.6.10.20 pair.

Or the greater, and then they are prescribed only in number, either even or
odd, if they be of the greatest sort, (as Apples sliced, etc.) then 1, 2, 3,
etc. but if they are less, as Figgs, etc. they are prescribed by pairs, a
ficuum ping-paria 20, etc.

Flowers, from Pugil. 4 to 6.

Spices are better added in the seasoning then in the boiling; yet if it seem
requisite, in purging Apozems you may prescribe them from two drams to half an
ounce at most.

Concerning the order of the prescription: as they are to be prepared by the
Apothecary, so ought they to be prescribed by the Physician, viz: first roots,
(then barks and woods, if any be added.) 2 Leaves. 3 Seeds. 4 Fruits. 5.
Flowers, and with them the spices last of all.

The Liquor in which these are to be boiled is to be considered, either in
quality or quantity.

In relation to the quality, it is varied according to the intention of the
physician; but generally fountain, or the best well water is prescribed to the
decoction of most Apozems. Yet oftentimes when the intention is to cool and
cleanse (as in choleric affections) they prescribe barley water; but if to
attenuate, cut, and cleanse, and heat, as in phlegmatic affections, then the
smaller sort of Mead; in Melancholic distempers Whey, and sometimes in
obstructions of the Intrals chalibeated water: and sometimes the decoctions are
prescribed by Physicians to be made in Wine and Water, of each like quantities;
but it is better to add wine only in the latter end.

The Quantity of the Liquor is seldom prescribed by the Physician, only by q.
s. or as much as is sufficient: yet it were to be looked to, that by adding too
much Liquor the things might not be over-boyled, to reduce it to a reasonable
proportion, or by taking too little, the virtues not sufficiently extracted etc.

DECOCTION: The ingredients being recited, and ordered how to be managed, are
prescribed to be made into a decoction by a fiat Decoct: etc. to wit, in the
Liquor before mentioned, which is commonly singly set down without determining
to what quantity the Liquor ought to be wasted; yet usually it is prescribed to
what quantity it should be consumed, as fiat decoct. etc. to one pint, or one
pint and a half, etc: either way is allowable, so that the Decoction being
finished it be prescribed to take of the decoction strained, a pint, or a pint
and a half, etc. for Apozems are usually intended for four Doses; and if you
take one pint and a half, there will be for every Dose about 4 ounces and a half
more or less; but if you intend it for five Doses, prescribe 20 ounces and no
more, for else it is apt to corrupt or mould before it be spent.

Things to be dissolved in these Decoctions are either to help them to keep the
longer, or to give them the better relish, or to add strength and efficacy to
them; and in all these we must consider both quality and quantity.

In respect of their quality, either it is 1. some syrup only, and that such as
is proper both for the disease and part affected, and this should always be
added, both because it helps to sweeten the decoction, and imparts its own
virtues to it; by which means are also helped the defects of the Apozem it
self; and other faults which may arise, either by the carelesnes, covetousness,
or malice of the Apothecary, are much prevented.

2. Sugar alone in some affections, and humors as well hot as cold.

3. Syrup and Sugar together.

4ly. Or Honey, which is profitable in all cold affections of the Head and
breast, and in the vvinter; and this is used either simply, or Medicated: i: e:
altered by the infusion of some simples or other, as honey of Roses, honey of
Rosemary flowers, etc. in affections of the head proceeding from abundance of
slimy phlegm.

5ly. Besides these sweetners, one or two of which are always to be mixed with
every apozem, there are oftentimes very commodiously (to make it the more
effectual) mixed with them;

Either the juyces of diverse herbs, according to the several intentions of the
Physician: as the juyces of Fumitory and Hops, in Melancholy; of Borage and
Bugloss, if choler be mixed with it; as also the juyces of Sorrel or Mercury in
diverse affections of the Womb, and suppression of the Terms etc.

Or the juyces of fruits, and those for the most part acid, as the juice of
Limons, in choleric; the juice of Pippins, in Melancholic; and of
Pomegranats, in choleric distempers where Urine is also to be provoked;

Or juyces in more vulgar use, as 1 Vinegar in ho^ and choleric affections,
which powerfully extinguisheth heat, or else to open obstructions, though cold
ones; and also to cut and make thin gross humors; yet because it is hurtful to
the Womb, in Women you must abstain from the use of it. 2. Wine in cold
affections and tempers, in gross and clammy humors, obstructions, or when you
would have the virtue of the Medicine penetrate far into the body. 3. Aqua
vitae, etc. to the same intention that Wine is added.

Note that when juyces or other Liquors are to be dissolved in your Apozems,
then sugar alone is usually chosen to sweeten it, very seldom syrups.

The quantity of things to be dissolved differs according to the nature of
them. Sweetners are usually dissolved from 4 ounces to six ounces at most; so
that every dose of the Apozem may have between an ounce, and an ounce and half
in every Dose, which is the common quantity for doses.

But where syrup and sugar are mixed together, the quantity of the syrup is for
the most part about three ounces, and the sugar prescribed only with a q.s. is
left to the palate of the Patient to determine.

Juyces and other strong Liquors, as Vinegar, Aqua vitae, etc. are prescribed
from one ounce to two ounces at the most; these also may first be dissolved
with the quantity of your sweetners.

Clarifying, and Aromatizing.
THese are usually prescribed thus, Fiat Apozema clarificatum and aromatizatum
pro quatuor dosibus, i: e: let your apozem be clarified, aromatized, and
prepared for four doses.

Of clarification see hereafter.
IN the Aromatizing or spicing two things are to be considered, the quality and
quantity of your spices.

In relation to the quantity, either it is done with some simple spice, as in a
cooling Apozem with yellow, or red Saunders; in a heating Apozem, usually with
Cinnamom, (you may also add Ginger and Saffron, in Melancholy affections, or
where the Terms are to be provoked) but in cold affections of the breast,
powder of the root of Ireos Florentine is much used. Or else with some compound
powder of the shops; as in hot distempers, with the spices of Diatrion
Santalon; and in cold diseases the spices of Aromaticum Rosatum, etc.

The quantity of spices for aromatizing your Apozem, is, if it be a simple
spice, from one dram to two drams; but if it be with the compound spices, from
one dram to a dram and a half will suffice.

The use or form of prescribing is this.
. i: e: Take etc. ( viz. the matter or ingredients) make a decoction in s. q.
of the Liquor beforementioned, take of the decoction strained, etc. make an
Apozem clarified and aromatized with, etc. for four doses in several mornings,
or for evenings two hours before meat.

The utility or benefit of this form of Medicine is evident; for being liquid
the humors that are to be altered (or purged, as hereafter) or other affections
deeply rooted in the body are by this form easier penetrated unto, and by the
virtue of the Medicine, and fluidness of its form dissolved, and made more
obedient; besides the drought of the body is tempered, Melancholy obstructions
the easier melted and dissolved, and the body made fitter to receive the virtue
of succeeding Medicines.

But more especially an altering Apozem serves chiefly for

1. Preparation, to render the succeeding purging easy and succesful, which
consists in two things, the preparation of the humors, and the body; for they
are prescribed for the concoction of the humors, or preparation of them in the
first and second qualities, by heating cold humors, attenuating and cutting
gross humors, by cleansing the clammy and viscid, tempering theservent,
incrassating those which are too thin, that by the Cooperation of the purge
attracting, and nature expelling, they may be the easier exterminated; as to
the preparation of the body, by opening obstructions, and making the body it
self permeable, and passable, that the humor may have an easy course, it
renders the following purge prosperous, to the commodity and ease of the sick
party.

2ly. For alteration either of the humors or body, without regard to any purge,
when the parts are to be reduced to their former temper diverse ways, but
chiefly by heating and cooling; and the humors also, especially hot and boiling
Choler; or the other humors also by other reasons with these instead of Juleps
may be fitly altered.

3ly. In opening Obstructions, if they proceed from gross adust humors; else if
they rise from cold humors, let your Apozem be purging

4ly: For moving Vrines, cleansing the Reins, and clearing them from gravel.

5ly. For provoking the Terms although two purgers conducing to the same
purpose are usually mixed with them.

Here is to be noted, that of late amongst modern practisers, it is usual to make
all Apozems both purging and altering at once, as shall be said, and in the
place of altering Apozems, Juleps, or broths are for the most part used; but
simply altering Apozems in continual Fevers, hot distempers of the parts and
humors; and also in moving of Urine, in extinguishing the fervency of the
Reins, and other parts, and consuming the relics of the Morbifical causes
which in the declination of Fevers is most usually done by Vrines.

But Apozems are for the most part prescribed in the Spring and Fall; as also in
the summer, because at these times Herbs flourish, and are ready at hand: they
may also be prepared in winter of the parts of Herbs dried, with greater
efficacy if they may be had; else we must use syrups and Juleps, which are
instead of Apozems, though not so efficacious.

A purging Apozem.
A Purging Apozem which is now most in use and not unknown of old to Mesues, is
so called because at once it both prepares the humors, and empties those which
are already concocted, and this at diverse times, ( viz: 4 or 5) sensibly, by
that operation which is called Epicrasis, by the virtue of those Medicines
which are properly called purgers, and is most agreeable in long diseases,
arising from copious and stubborn humors.

And this Apozem according to the several nature of the humor it is
appropriated to, is either Phlegmagogum, Melanagogum, Cholagogum, or Hydragogum.

In this sort of Apozems three things are to be considered, the Composition,
the Use, and the Profit.

In the Composition two things are to be regarded. 1. The ingredients by which
it is made purgative. 2. Those things that are to be dissolved in it.

The matter or ingredients by which it is made purging, are simple purgers with
their correctives, according to the variety of the humor they are intended
for, either boiled together with the matter of the decoction, or boiled in the
decoction, or else only infused in it.

In these three things are to be regarded the quality, quantity, and order of
prescription either for boiling or mixing.

In relation to the Quality note that those purging simples which are only
boiled are these, Senna, Polypody, Carthamus, Turbith, Hermodactils, Agarick
Epithymum, Hellebor, Spurge, and the seeds of dwarf Elder.

But those which use only to be infused, or very little boiled, are RHEUBARB,
Myrobolans, Tamarinds, and sometimes Cassia.

Concerning their quantity, they ought to be prescribed in such a proportion
that it may serve for four or five doses, but in general because the purging
virtue by boiling either may vanish, or not be sufficiently extracted, every
purging simple ought to be prescribed in much greater quantity then otherwise,
viz: double to the quantity they are given in substance, if they are the
stronger sort; or treble, or quadruple, if they are of the middle sort of
purgers; or a fix-fold proportion in the gentlest sort: yet are they so to be
prescribed that to two parts of the gentlest sort of purgers you must add but
one part of the strongest, and almost in every purging Apozem let these three
be prescribed as the basis of the decoction in a plentiful proportion, viz:
Senna, Polipody, and Carthamus: let others be added according to the diverfity
of the humor; but in a lesser proportion, from one ounce to an ounce and half
at most, in the interim having regard to the nature of the humor, as also its
distemper, either in first or second qualities; and lastly, its quantity, in
like manner, to the temper and constitution of the body, the cutom of purging,
natural inclination, condition of the country, time of the year, weather, sex
and age, and al other things limiting a Legitimate purging, and to those things
that may make easy or difficult the succeeding purgation; and accordingly the
stronger or weaker purgers are to be given in the greater or less quantity.

More specially therefore these three are to be chosen for the fundamentals of
almost every purging Apozem, (for they are convenient in Apozems that purge,
Phlegm, and Melancholy, and waterish humors, and that purge Choler also, where
Senna is chiefly necessary) which things are wont to be prescribed thus at
Mompelier.

Take the leaves of Oriental Senna,

The pith of the seed of Carthamus,

Polypody of the Oak new gathered, ana: two ounces, two ounces and a hal^,
three ounces for the ground of the decoction; yet so that sometimes you may
prescribe a bigger quantity of one, sometime of the other, according as your
intention is to purge this or that humor most.

But if Phlegm be to be evacuated, to the aforesaid basis or foundation you may
add of Gummy choice Turbith ha^ an ounce, or six drams.

Hermodactils half an ounce, or 6 drams.

Agarick newly made into Trosches tied up in a lawn rag, half an ounce, or six
drams; (and sometimes) Rheubarbtyed also in a ragg half an ounce, or six drams;
or else it may be infused by it self and afterward the infusion added.

Yet you need not add Turbithor Hermodactils, unless you have a purpose to
purge very strongly, or draw humors from the remotest parts; otherwise the two
last may suffice.

But if Melancholy be to be emptied (if you will leave out Carthamus from the
aforesaid basis, augmenting the quantity of the others) let these be added.

Epithymum of Crete six drams, or 1 ounce.

The roots or shavings of black Hellebor 2 drams, or half an ounce, (but this
seldom, and only in stubborn Melancholy.)

But Agarick and Rheubarb are oftener mixed with things that purge Melancholy,
perhaps because these durable obstructions are fomented by clammy muscilaginous
humors.

If choler be to be gently purged, you shall add to Senna (prescribed alone for
your basis, to cleanse adust excrements.).

Tamarinds an ounce and half, or two ounces.

Choice Rheubarb, etc. as before, half an ounce, or 6 drams.

The bark of citrine myrobalans (rubbed with oil of sweet Almonds) half an
ounce.

Yet it is better only to infuse the Myrobalans, lest they should impart to the
Apozem a greater astriction then you intend.

But if watrish and serous humors are to be drawn away, to the aforesaid basis
you shall join.

The roots of Ireos common one ounce.

The middle bark of Elder or Danewort two drams, or 3 drams.

The leaves of Soldanella. M. j.

Hermodactils half an ounce.

The roots of Mechoacan infused by it self half an ounce.

Spurg (where you would purge strongly) prepared with Vinegar one dram.

The purgers of Phlegm also before spoken of may be added.

To these purgers you must join their correctors as before; but the dose of
them is from two drams to half an ounce.

As to the order of prescribing and boiling, purgers in the prescription of an
Apozem are placed after the fruits, before the flowers, and the spices or the
correctors immediately after the purgers; nevertheless Polypody, because it is
always boy^ed in the beginning, may also be prescribed at first among the
roots.

Things to be dissolved in the strained decoction are either dissolved as
sweetners only, as those before numbered in the Altering Apozem, and in the same
quantity there mentioned, viz: when the decoction of the Apozem of it self is
sufficiently purgative: but if on the contrary it be but gently purging, other
catharticks are to be dissolved in the decoction strained; in which also are to
be considered their quality, and quantity.

Concerning their quality they are either purging syrups, and that always if
you dissolve no sweetners in it, as syrup of Roses solutive, for choleric and
serous humors; as also (according to the received practice) in all others; syrup
of Succory compound, in choleric humors; syrup of Fumitory, in the aforesaid,
and Melancholy.

Or the juice of Damask Roses newly expressed, or the complete infusion of
them, (which is most usual in the spring; in those cautionary purgations of the
choleric, and them which abound with serous humors) but then you must also
prescribe sugar as much as is sufficient.

And these are prescribed to be presently dissolved in the strained liquor.

Or else are they Electuaries of the shops, either in the form of opiates, as
usually in the phlegmatic, Diaphoenicum, which is also profitable in the
choleric and bastard Tertians: in merely choleric, Diaprunum simple, and
solutive; Electuary de Psillio, when to be had, and sometimes Manna-These are
prescribed to be dissolved only in the last Dose, and that in the time of
present use, if the Apozem be not sufficiently purging of it self, otherwise
abstain from them.

Concerning their quantity, Syrups may be dissolved to four ounces, or 6
ounces, the juice or infusion of Roses to four ounces, opiats and tabulets to
two drams, or 3 drams, according as either they or the Apozem are more forcible.

The use and form of prescription is the same with that of the altering Apozem;
in this only it differs, because it is said, Take, etc. Let it be made an
Apozem clarified, (or if we desire it the stronger, not clarified) and
aromatized, etc. for four doses in the mornings, in the last of which dissolve
some Electuary (when your intention is to eradicate, or when your Apozem has
not sufficiently purged) and so make it into a potion.

It differs also, if before the use of your Apozem a moderate purge should be
given, then is said in the prescription for four morning doses, in the first
and last of which dissolve such an Electuary, etc. and make a potion.

Touching the Commodity, Apozems of late are at once purgers and alterers, for
so by little they prepare and concoct the humors, which because they cannot at
once be wholly eradicated, are thus by parcels, per epicrasin, drawn forth
without violence; A happy remedy in lasting Chronical diseases which are
fomented by an abundance of Phlegmatic and Melancholy humors: these being the
fountain of rebellious and contumacious affections are by this art rooted out;
in hot diseases proceeding from fervent humors they are less needful; and if at
any time they seem necessary, they are to be composed of the gentler sort of
purgers of choler, if it be much; for a small quantity of matter needs not a
divided evacuation, but being simply altered may easily be rooted out with one
evacuation; they are also esteemed most convenient in the declination of
diseases, to draw away the Relics, and in preservation to prevent diseases.

But it is now generally received, that before the use of this sort of Apozems,
some Minorative Medicine may be first prescribed, to diminish the humors either
in the form of a potion, bole or pills, and afterward by leisurely purging in
this manner to prepare them to be wholly eradicated.

ANNOTATIONS.
COncerning the MATTER this is chiefly to be obved, that many do condemn the
making your decoctions of such variety of things of diverse parts: but because
it is received in the practice of very famous Physicians (though it may seem to
some to augment the pomp of the Receipt, that such large Decoctions or Apozems
should be prescribed, of Roots, Leaves, Seeds, Fruits, Flowers heaped
together;) it may very well be allowed. This one thing is to be condemned, that
when four or five sorts of leaves, etc. will suffice for the variety of
indications, they should not be multiplied needlessly; Or for example, if the
latitude of the dose of seeds in the Apozem of eight or twelve several kinds be
of each one dram, if half an ounce of two or three sorts will serve, why should
they be augmented; this were to make a Decoction as copious as Treacle, to
beget tediousness in the Apothecary that prepares it, or to give him cause to
omit some things, thereby to frustrate the Physician of his hope, and the
Patient of the benefit, to the great indamagement of his health.

2 Concerning the Quantity or Dose of the ingredients of an altering Apozem
nothing can be certainly verified, that may be imitated profitably: the usual
law prescribed and confirmed by practice at Mont Pellier, and by the benefit of
the sick persons, is that the dose seem not too large, whereby the Patient
might loath it; on the contrary, a sparing hand will hardly be able to give the
virtues of the Medicine sufficiently effectual to resist the diseases; if
therefore you would have the Apozem flaugh^ with the virtues of the simples,
because a sufficient quantity of essence cannot be had unless you prescribe a
greater quantity, it ought to be prescribed, for what virtue can you hope for
out of half a pound of the matter of your Apozem for four doses; when besides
by the ^^ult of a less industrious Apothecary, or his carelessness, or the
shortness of his b^yling, or by his over-haste (the bonds in which it is
restrained not being sufficiently loosed) the virtues are not dissolved and
extracted as they ought to be: or else by over-boyling through the vehemence of
the heat and fire. And lastly, by imprudently uncovering the vessel wherein it
is boiled, their virtue may evaporate and vanish: the first defect, and this
last less, you may prevent by preparing your decoctions, plentifully
impregnated with the virtues of the simples, not too watrish, or such as may
frustrate both Physician and Patient of their wished expectation.

Therefore in general, let them be prescribed in the aforesaid quantity, seldom
in a greater; in something a less, if the simples are dried, because most
effectual; also if either by nature, or the swinge of their virtues, they be of
an acute quality, or a bitter or biting taste; or if ungrateful, or if you
desire the decoction small in quantity, or gentle in operation, and so for the
contrary.

But in special concerning roots, you must mark that these roots which are
usually called openers, though they are by modern Practisers often mixed with
others that provoke sweat (and that happily, for by attenuating the humors
they are the easier turned into vapors and sweat) yet ought it to be done in a
smaller quantity, as to two ounces or three ounces at most; otherwise they will
turn the attenuated humors to the passages of the Urine which diminishes
sweat; to which intention the Arabians and modern Writers mingle them with the
decoction of Lentils against the Small Pox: them roots also that are very bitter
should be added only to the quantity of six drams, or one ounce, as Gentian,
Bryony, Elecampane, etc. if they be dried, half an ounce, or six drams will be
sufficient.

So also bitter herbs are to be in a little quantity, unless you desire the
decoction very effectual, which were to be wished, to which purpose you see the
bitterest of all joined where cold obstructions are, as Centaury the less,
Wormwood, to M 2, 3, or 4.

But fruits are either prescribed only to alter; as to cool, sharp Prunes,
Apples; to heat, Raisins and figgs, to ten or twelve pair; but when the belly
is to be mollified, cleansed, or purged, Raisins, Figgs, sweet Prunes, and
Dates may be prescribed to twenty pair, more or less: but in affections of the
breast and Lungs hot or cold, they are prescribed in a larger proportion; as
Raisins, I^jubes, Sebestens, sweet Prunes, etc. viz: to 30, 40, or 50 pair, yet
beware the decoction be not made too thick and clammy, that it can hardly be
strained; to which purpose when Figgs are joined, let them be only to 4 or 8
pair prescribed.

Here is to be noted that though seeds are prescribed by weight, yet barlie and
red vetches, or cicers, as flowers, are usually prescribed by P: j: or M: ss:
so also is Epithymum sometimes with them prescribed to P: j: yet it is also
very often prescribed by weight, as one ounce.

Concerning Fruit; if they be the lesser sort, as Corans, or if some parts of
them are to be excluded, (as Dates prescribed cleared from their strings,) then
are they never set down by number, or pairs, but by weight, but the greater, if
whole, by number, T^marinds only by weight, Raisinseither whole or cleansed
both by weight and number.

3. As to the QUANTITY of purgers in a purging Apozem, that they may be set
down securely, we must note that the purging quality cannot be plentiful in
decoctions prepared the usual wa^; unless the simples are prescribed in a
larger quantity, either they may perish in boiling, or not be sufficiently
extracted for reasons before rehearsed; to which add this, that Catharticks are
boiled in the liquor of the Apozem, after it is well thickened and impregnated
with the juice and virtues of other simples, by which means their force cannot
so well be dissolved and mixed with the liquor, because being first imbibed with
the substance of the alterers, and by that made thick it cannot so well insinuat
it self into the parts of the matter last added, to dissolve and extract the
purging quality, for this is to be performed by a tenuitie of parts; therefore
are they to be prescribed in a greater dose near this proportion; those things
which in substance are given in the smallest quantity should be added (in the
decoction) in a double proportion to that they are given in substance (for
reasons aforesaid) as those which are vehement, as Turbith, Hermodactils,
Hellebor, etc. if they be moderate, as Agarick, etc. let their proportion be
trebled: if the weaker sort (as Senna, Polypody, Carthamus, Epithymum,
Tamarinds, etc.) a fourfold quantity may be allowed by the consent of
Authors, and truth of practice; from this foundation, because every Apozem is
likely prescribed for four doses, the purgers must be taken in such a quantity
as may suffice for these four; that is, four several doses of them are to be
put into the decoction, as always these three, Senna, Polyoo^y and Carthamus,
after the usual manner, which you must appoint for the basis: as for example,
to purge Phlegm four times together, to one ounce, or one ounce and a half of
Senna, and as much Polypody; and although you have prescribed also as much
Carthamus, yet shall you add a fourth, as Agarick to half an ounce, or six
drams, and you will have your aim: but if besides Agarick you desire other
phlegmagogues, as Turbith, or Hermodactils, then either the dose of this or the
others is to be diminished, or at least a less proportion of these stronger is
to be prescribed; and this is a general rule safe every where; yet you may
prescribe a less quantity in respect of the sex, age, and time of the Year,
etc. The Montpelier Physicians out of custom do usually prescribe a greater
quantity, as was before noted in the Composition; so that against the common
rules of others they take of the gentlest purgers to a sixfold or eight-fold
proportion of the more vehement, as (Turbith) to a fourfold quantity; but
although the Montpeliers do this (other circumstances being seen to) securely,
yet is it not to be followed in all places, nor the dose so indifferently to be
prescribed, but rather rely on the common practice before mentioned; or else
search out the several doses of the simples in the substance, by comparing of
which you will readily find out the several doses for the decoctions: this only
is to be (...) ted, that though Tamarinds by this rule of proportion might be
boiled to eight ounces, which is the fourfold proportion, because they are
given in substance to two ounces, yet we seldom in the decoction transcend the
dose in which they are given in substance, because being viscid they make the
decoction clammy and gros^, hard to be clarified. Myro^tilans, also though they
(...) purge, yet are they never to be prescribed in the ^eattr, but always in
the less dose, at most to half an ounce, or 6 drams, because they make the
decoction too much astringent contrary to the intention of the Physician
therefore also are they to be only lightly boiled, in an Apozem purely purging,
but rather to be infused, as by the counsel of Mesues is rightly admonished
against the vulgar practice.

4. But the ingredients of either Apozem are not to be prescribed promiscuously
in any order, but in a certain manner according to the nature of the things
that are to be boiled, and according to that order which the Apothecary
observes in preparing decoctions, by the rules of art, as first roots, 2ly.
Leaves, etc. and so they add the rest severally to be boiled, as is above set
down: yet although this be so, the root of Liquorice, because (for its tenuitie
of substance) it is boiled in the rank with the flowers, it may also be
prescribed with them; so if sweet Woods, or Aromatical barks, as Cinamom be set
down with the number of Roots, yet because they ought to be boiled last, for
their spirits which are easily vanishing, therefore ought they to be prescribed
last, either with or immediately before the flowers.

Seeds should be added after the Leaves, yet the four greater cold Seeds,
especially of Melons and Gourds, are prescribed just before the leaves; so your
red soicers are to be prescribed either with, or just before the leaves, and
Barley is seldom set among the seeds, but with the leaves, for this is chiefly
to be boiled; but Mucilaginous seeds are to be added but just before the
flowers, as the seeds of Mallows, Marsh Mallows, etc. lest by too long boiling
they make the Decoction too thick and troubled.

I have before said yt Catharticks are to be prescribed before the flowers, yet
Polypody of the Oak is most usually added amongst the roots, but: Epithymum
usually among the Flowers, and often in their quantity, (viz. by the Pugil.)
correctives are to be placed immediately after the purgers.

5. Concerning the Liquor this is to be noted, that Wine is usually added to
Apozems or Decoctions in cold affections, obstructions, when gross humors are
to be attenuated, or when the force of the Medicine is to be conveyed far into
the body; but not so conveniently prescribed, when they say, in equal parts of
Wine and Water, because it is without commodity: for if by a most gentle heat,
nay warmth, the spirit of Wine (from whence Wine has his acuteness and
energie, and without which Wine is but water without life) in distillation does
ascend, and be elevated into the air the vessel being opened in the boiling;
what can we hope for but the whole loss of it by such boiling? hence we must
conclude that Wine is much more profitably added at the last after boiling.

Here is to be noted, that the opening roots are usually macerated in Vinegar,
with a good Proviso; but they do ill-which after pour out the Vinegar, and boil
roots only, robbed of their virtue; for the virtue of them is passed into it,
which by this means is poured away; for any sharp Liquors do effectually draw
forth the force and essence of things, as we may see in Extracts, the Liquor
therefore should not be poured away, for it serves to dissolve the things
decocted.

6. It is to be noted, that the limits of the decoction is ambiguously defined
only; in general, the ingredients should be boiled til they have left all their
virtue in the Liquor: which in special some note by the change in the color;
and alteration of the appearance of things, viz. that the hard things should be
softened, others wasted. Galen appoints to the Thirds, sometimes to half. Mesue
to almost half; modern Writers are various: but that truth may be found, both
the faculties and nature of the Medicaments are to be considered; for they
whose virtues are easily dissolved are to be boiled the less time, as to the
consumption of the third or fourth part, lest the efficacy of the simples
consisting in a thin substance should vanish; but they whose virtues will
hardly exhale, may be boiled to the wasting of two thirds: they whose virtues
are of a middle temper may be boiled to halves: And (that which is
correspondent) those things that are boyld in four times their quantity of
Water, to the thirds; they which are boyld in 6 times their quantity, til half
be wasted, as for the most part are all Apozems and Decoctions; from whence
this may be gathered, that simples of a solid close hord substance, as Roots,
Woods, and Barks that are without smell, should be boyld in eight times their
quantity of water; those which are of a rare, thin, soft, subtle substance, as
Flowers, Spices, Purgers, in four times their quantity; those of a middle
substance between these, as Leaves, Seeds, and Fruits, in six times their
quantity of Water.

7. Concerning Clarification, note that if we desire the decoction the
stronger, it is not to be clarified; therefore they do il who boil it again,
and clarify it with the white of an Egg, because by that means the virtue and
essence wastes; it should therefore be thus appointed: first it should be
placed in Balneo Mariae, or in a pot well stopped, over warm ashes; so is the
virtue preserved, and the dregg; and residence which otherwise would make it
apt to putrify, will settle to the bottom; and the thin liquor clear in the
upper part, as if clarified, may be kept for use.

8. Concerning the Form of PRESCRIPTION, these few things are also to be noted,
that fit words in prescribing forms and ingredients ought to be observed by an
Artist, lest he be derided or seem unskilful, therefore these following things
are wont thus to be prescribed.

. Of the common, or opening, or diueretical roots macerated a night in white
Wine (for cold obstructions, or for them whom Vinegar hurts,) or Vinegar, etc.

Liquorice shaved and a little bruised, etc.

The Bark of the roots of Capers, etc.

The middle Bark of Ash, etc.

The middle Bark of Tamarisk; which three Barks are always prescribed by the
Montpellians in Obstructions and Melancholy affections.

The leaves of Borage, Bugloss, Dandelion, Sorrel, Cichory, Endive with the
roots, or with the whole, etc.

The tops of Fumitory Hops, Mallows, Hysop. Wormwood Pontick, or the tufts of
it, etc.

Whole Barley (where you would cleanse and open) huld Barley, where you would
lenifie; and in the affections of the Breast.

The seeds of Melons and Gourds cleansed; or the kernels of the seeds of Melons
and Gourds, etc.

Red Vetches, etc.

Juniper berries, etc.

Pippins pared and cut in slices, N. 1, 2, 3.

Raisins of the Sun picked and stoned, etc.

Dates cleansed from their strings, etc.

Fat Figgs, or new Figgs, etc.

Sweet Prunes, etc.

Kernels of Pine Nuts washed, etc.

Make a Decoction in Barley-water perfectly boiled, etc.

CHAP. II. Of Julebs.
THis Medicine used chiefly for alteration unknown to the antientest Greeks, is
the invention of the Arabian, so called because it is made of sweet and
pleas^nt things, the word Julep, or Juleb, signifying in the Persian tongue a
sweet potion; but the latter Greeks after the manner of the Arabians call it
Julapium; and Jolabion which words yet remain among Physicians, although the
thing it self be grown out of use.

This is found twofold among Authors, one of the Ancients, another of modern
Writers.

The Juleb of the Ancients is wholly different from ours, but simple,
consisting of some juice, distild water, insusion of Barley, or the decoction
of one thing and sugar, most commonly made for present use, as was usually the
Juleb of Roses, otherwise called Alexandrinus, or Regis, most famous against
thirst and heat.

But the Julep of modern Writers which is at this day every where prescribed,
retains the name of the Ancients, not the form, and is every where called a
Julep, although some very late Writers call it a syrup or Sera^ium as to this
day some Italians do, perhaps because a syrup is the basis of Juleps; but at
Montp^llier they are called Juleps.

But a JULEP is a fluid Medicine composed of an appropriate Liquor, and Syrup,
( and sometimes Sugar) mixed together without boiling, for (...) or five doses,
either to prepare or alter humors otherwise, or to strengthen the body.

Hence this altering Medicine may be judged twofold, either it prepares the
humors for purgation, as the praepotions of the ancient Greeks, which were fore
running potions of general purgations, which may therefore rightly be called a
concocting potion; or else alters the humors without any scope or intention of
purging; as also the spirits, and other parts of the body: hither appertain a
strengthening and Cordial Julep.

In this three things are to be considered, the Composition, the use, and the
benefit.

In the Composition two things chiefly are to be weighed. 1. An appropriat
Liquor, of which it is to be made. 2. What things are to be dissolved in it.

In the Liquor two things are to be regarded, the quality and quantity.

In relation to the Quality, either there is prescribed a single distilled
water, regarding both the affection, and the affected part, which is most
frequent (especially in the winter time for the defect of Herbs) either for a
Julep to prepare the humors, or alter them any other way, or strengthen the
faculties of the body.

Or else a distilled water and a juice together, which is most usual for a
Cordial and strengthening Julep.

Or else a decoction for simple potions to be prescribed in half the quantity
of an Apozem, and almost in the same manner, which is often to be put in
practice, for the concoction and alteration of humors.

But the quantity for every dose of Liquor is to be prescribed to three ounces,
or four ounces; so that when the Julep is prescribed for 3 or 4 doses, the
quantity of the Liquor for the whole Julep should be eight ounces, or twelve
ounces, if for 3 doses; to twelve ounces, or sixteen ounces, for four doses,
having in the interim regard to the age, and growth of the body; for 4 ounces
will hardly be sufficient for great bodies, unless it be powerful in virtue, or
strong in taste.

We must mark that when distilled waters, and Juyces are prescribed together;
sometimes they are prescribed in equal quantities; sometimes the Juice,
sometimes the water exceeds each other two or three ounces; but you must
observe that when the Juice that is added is sour or sharp, one ounce, or two
ounces will be enough for a Julep of two doses.

Things to be dissolved are considered in respect of their quality and quantity:

A to their quantity, either it is sugar alone which is seldom seen, or some
appropriate syrup respecting both the affection, and part affected, which is
generally received every where.

Besides these sweetners, some other thing is always to be dissolved in a
Julep: sometimes therefore there is dissolved,

1. In a preparing Julep, if you prescribe it of a decoction like apozems the
same things that are dissolved in altering Apozems as aforesaid; for this kind
of Julep is as it were a pretty Apor zem.

2. In a Cordial or strengthening Julep, either some cordial Confection, and
that alone, as confectio Alkermes, and de Hiachintho, especially where we are
to strengthen in fluxes of the belly, small pox, and Worms; or Treacle in
contagious times.

Or e^se some Cordial powder alone, and that either simple, and this again
arematical, as Saunders; or not aromatical, as is usual in the small Pox, as of
Hartshorn, Ivory, Coral-Pearls, Unicorns horn, and also in other malignant
humors, and in the Worms; as also Coralline among them, etc. Or compound, as
the powder of some elect ^ary of the shops, as species of Diamargariti frigidi,
etc. as your indications shall require;

O^ else some confection and powder together: but because in this respect a
Cordial Juleb is made of the same things that a strengthening potion is, in his
place such a potion uses to be prescribed for one dose only, and so to be
renewed as you have occasion: but either of these ways are unblameable.

Of late also spirit of Vitriol does often use to be dissolved in Juleps,
especially where there is an ebullition of the humors to be extinguished, or
infection to be taken away, or putrefaction to be prevented; it may also be
profitably mixed where humors are to be attenuated whether hot or cold; as also
where obstrustructions are to be opened.

But in relation to the quantity, there is usually prescribed for one dose,

Of sweetners, from one ounce to an ounce and half at most.

Of clarified Juyces, or Liquors made of decoctions as being strong, if sour,
half an ounce, if not, one ounce.

Confections from a scruple to two scruples at most.

Powders from one scruple to two scruples at most; if of the rarer sort, as
Bezoar, ^o gr: 4 or 6. Unicorns horn to half a scruple; Pearls from half a
scruple to one scruple, for the richer sort.

From hence it is easy to find the quantity for a Julep for three or four
Doses: and because Confections and Cordial powders are esteemed as one thing,
if they are prescribed together, it is not difficult to limit the quantities of
both conjoined.

And if spirit of Vitriol be used, the dose is prescribed by saying as much as
is sufficient to give it a grateful sharpness (that is which may neither smite
the Lungs, or set the teeth on edge.)

The use and form of prescribing is set down thus:

. etc. (that is, the Liquor and things convenient to be dissolved in it) make a
Julep for three or four morning doses, (it may also be prescribed for the
evening, especially if it be a Cordial, and for one dose.)

But if the Julep be made of a decoction, it is to be prescribed in the same
manner as an Apozem.

If besides the Liquor, and Syrups (of which only the more simple Juleps both
for altering (and preparing are usually composed) you shall add some simple or
compound strengthening powder to aromatize it; you may say, make a Julep which
shall be aromatized with one dram, or one dram and a half of such a powder, for
three or four Doses

The Juleps of Infants are to be prescribed, out of a spoon twice or thrice a
day.

The benefit and fruit of a Julep is very plentiful, as the use of themis at
this day famous. First, when you desire to prepare the humors for purging; for
by this double form the concoction of the humors is perfected, viz. of a Julep
and Apozem, and is chiefly to be prescribed in the Spring and Autumn, for the
same end.

A Concocting Julep is chiefly useful for the Winter, and may supply the place
of an Apozem, when not easily to be prepared, either through the defect of
green herbs, or want of opportunity to keep them dried; or by the scantiness of
time, or urgency of the affection, cannot be made ready neither that nor any
other altering Medicine that requires much labor, then an extemporary Julep
may be prepared by the mixture of distilled waters and syrups, and some fit
Confection, and this way also is cheaper for the poorer sort; so that a
concocting Julep may be the deputy of an altering Apozem; but although by this
means there is a present remedy applicable, both safe and pleasant, yet can it
not be expected to have the same efficacy, for the virtues of an Apozem are
much more effectual.

2ly. When your indications require the alteration of the body, humors, or
spirits, without intention of a succeeding purgation; but chiefly to extinguish
any fervent heat of them, or Fevers, or other hot affections, or to bridle the
malignity of them.

They are used chiefly against hot distempers, to which they are peculiarly
dedicated, as also to repress the heat of the Head and Heart, continual and
burning Fevers, that are troublesome by their intolerable heat; as also to
quench the ardencies of the Liver, Reins, and Bowels, and to quench the thirst.

So also is the ardor of the humors restrained and if any malignity be joined
with it, it will be commodiously repressed by this cooling Cordial Liquor; so
are they usual to prevent the malice of the disease, strengthen the heart,
restore the strength, confirm the spirits and vigor, through the whole course
of the disease, and partly to alter the affections themselves.

So also to restrain the motion of the humors, as cruptions of blood, from what
part soever; as in the beginning of Pleurisies following the preposterous
motion of the spirits, as in extraordinary watchings, etc.

In sum, this liquid form is convenient to prepare humors for purging, to
strengthen the heart, restore strength suddenly, or alterto any other
intention; to perform it speedily when the parts afflicted, either humors or
affections, lie deep in the body; to which place alterers in any other form
cannot so well be conveyed.

CHAP. III. Of Potions.
A POTION is a liquid form of Medicine, made of things conducing to the
purpose, either Catharticks, Cordials, or others dissolved in a meet Liquor, to
be prescribed for one dose only, and to be drunk down (from whence the name)
prepared either to purge, strengthen or alter the body any manner of way.

Hence a Potion is usually 3 fold, Purgative, Cordial, or Strengthening, and
altering.

A Purging Potion
Is often understood under the name of Potion spoken simply, so that this name
is generally received to signify a purging Potion, and of late is called a
dose, because it is not to be drank otherwise then at one time, not at diverse,
unless some days after, or some short time be interposed.

But it is a liquid form of a Medicine composed of a purging Medicine, decocted
or infused, or dissolved some other way in a Liquor and added, and a syrup; to
be given at once, purging either some certain humor or diverse, and specifically
casting it out by stool.

Hence the differences of a purging Potion are taken from the difference of
humors they cast forth; hence some are Cholagogues, some Phlegmagogues, others
Hydragogues, others Melanagogues, and others composed of all these proprieties
are called Panchymagogues, or Holagogues.

In general three things are to be considered in them, Composition, Use, and
Profit or Vtility.

In COMPOSITION two things are to be regarded, an apt Liquor of which it is
made, and such things as are to be dissolved in it.

The LIQUOR that is fit to dissolve your Medicines for a purging potion, is to
be considered in quality and quantity.

In respect of the quality, there is prescribed either, 1. Some Decoction, or

2. Some Infusion, or

3. Both Decoction and Infusion together, or

4. Some other Liquor serving to the scope and intention of the Physician.

In special, 1. the decoction that is usually prepared to make a Potion is
either purging, altering, or both together.

A purging decoction is usually prescribed of only Senna, (for a Liquor to
purge Melancholy, and Phlegm) to half an ounce, six drams, or one ounce,
(according as you intend to purge; or some other purgative of the shops, viz.
electuary or syrup, to be dissolved in the Liquor) adding it is proper
correctives, as Aniseed, Cloves, etc. to 1 dram: you may also add of the
cordialflowers (as Borage, Bugloss, Violets) of each P. j. and at Mont Pellier
they call these sorts of decoctions simply purging decoctions, and take it
absolutely so, when some purging Medicine, as for example, Diacarthamum, is
prescribed to be given with it.

And this sort of decoction may be made of other Catharticks in such a quantity
that may suffice for one dose; according to the diversity of the humors, adding
also their Correctors, as for your Phlegmagogue potion Turbith, Carthamus, and
Hermodactils: for a Melenagogue, Polypody, Epithymum, and Senna; but the first
is least in use, because Senna can make the Liquor sufficiently purging to
supply their place, and make it otherwise satisfy the diverse intentions of the
Physician: but this sort of purging decoctions are very necessarily and
profitably to be prescribed when we want the proper purging Electuary, or would
purge that only humor; which often happens in a phlegmagogue, and melanagogue
potion; for seeing there is no Electuary that merely purges phlegm, if the in
lication require such a purge, prescribe your decoction of Senna for the basis,
adding Carthamus; or if you would have it work more strongly, or draw from
remote parts, add Turbith, or Hermodactits, to the fourth part of that
proportion that is prescribed for a purging Apozem, correctives also being
added; so because there is no Melanagog^e effectual, (for Diasenna is weak) or
safe, (for confectio hamech the greater composition being both dangerous, and
of doubtful operation is seldom used) and the lesser so cried up against
Melancholy, rather purges choler) for it neither has Senna (a chief purger of
Melancholy) and the whole composition has but ten parts of Melanagogues, but
of Cholagogues viz. of Sammony, forty eight parts or doses; so that the purgers
of choler are more then the purgers of melancholy by above three parts;
therefore for these causes when Melancholy only is to be purged, we rightly
prescribe a decoction of Senna, Epithymum, Polypody, Fumitory, etc. thus much
for a purging decoction.

An altering decoction such as is used at this day every where, may be presumed
two fold, one usual of the shops such as the Apothecaryes make every where,
without the prescription of a Physician: Another which is never made but for
the present occasion, and this may fitly be called a Magisterial decoction.

The shop decoction is threefold, viz. the common docoction for a Medicine;
the decoction of fruits and flowers, and the pectoral decoction.

The common decoction for a Medicine, so called because it is commonly used to
make purging potions with all as fit for every part and humor, is thus
compounded.

Take of Barley P. j. sweet Prunes 4 or 6 pair, Raisins of the Sun, and
Liquorice shaved and a little bruised, ana. half an ounce, Aniseed, Fennel
seed, and the four greater cold seeds (in the summer,) ana. 2 drams, the 3
Cordial flowers, ana. p. j. Make a decoction.

But it is not wont to be thus usually prescribed in every particular by the
Physician, but uses to be noted singly in the receipt by its name, which is
also to be understood of the decoction of flowers, and fruits, and the pectoral
decoction.

The use of this decoction is threefold, for it serves both to dissolve simple
purgers in, but chiefly compound, as Electuaries and syrups for potions, which
is most usual; or else to infuse simple purgers in: or lastly, to decoct them
in, to the same scope or purpose.

2. The decoction of Fruits and flowers is made of Liquorice shaved, etc. and
Tamarinds, ana, two drams, Raisins of the Sun stoned half an ounce, Jujubes,
Sebestens, sweet Prunes, ana. 4 pair, flowers of Borage and Bugloss, ana. pug.
1. etc. Make a decoction.

In Italy where this is most frequent, they use to make it purgative, by adding
Senna to half an ounce, or six drams; and there they use it to dissolve other
Medicines in, that are proper for the Breast and Reins chiefly, and also for
the Choleric

The pectoral decoction of Mesues particularly intended for the affections of
the Breast consists of whole Barley, P. 1. Liquorice and Raisins of the sun,
ana: half an ounce, Maidenhair, M j. Hysop dried, M. ss. fat Figgs, Jujubes,
and Sebestens, ana, three pair, or in number, six. Make a Decoction.

The principal use of this is in cold affections of the Breast, to dissolve
Medicines in that purge phlegm, or to infuse them, or boil them in.

Sometimes this it self is made purgative by adding Senna, as is said in the
cordial Decoction.

The Magisterial or altering Decoction that is prescribed by the Physician for
present use, and is never otherwise extant in the Apothecaries shops, is
composed of diverse parts of plants, which are to be prescribed to a quarter of
the proportion of the altering Apozem aforesaid, (for as that is ordained for
four doses, so is this for one only) although to av^id trouble in the
dispensation of it, you need not add all the parts of the several plants that
are in an Apozem, to make a heap, but 'twil suffice if you prescribe the
leaves, or two or three which you shall see most convenient, of each one pugil,
etc.

This sort of decoctions is extreme profitable and necessary, as often as it is
convenient to be us sed, whereby the purging Medicine dissolved is made
amicable to the part with which otherwise it would have no convenience; or if
of it self it have no peculiar inclination to the humor, it is by this means
made correspondent; hence you must choose for these Decoctions, simples which
have a propriety to the parts affected, and that may direct the force of the
purging Medicine to the humor by a secrret disposition they obtain; then will
the commodity of the purging Medicine appear most plentiful in it is operation.

But the chief use of this decoction is to be a convenient Vehiculum for the
decoction, insusion, or dissolution of your appropriate purgers.

Sometimes in the place of an altering decoction is substituted (to the same
end) the broth of a Chicken altered with the leaves of Endive, Sorrel,
Maidenhair, Borage, etc. the use of this is best in hot distempers, in the
summer time especialy, to dissolve Catharticks in.

A Decoction both altering and purging is oft^n prescribed, for reasons before
mentioned, two several ways.

1. Either it is prescribed with Senna alone boiled in one of the common
decoctions of the shops, or in a magisterial decoction, for a potion to purge
either Melancholy or Phlegm, which is now very frequent.

2. Or else with other purgers boiled with it in the decoction, as is before
said in the purging decoction, which is also a received practice.

And the use of this is as those before, either to infuse, boil, or dissolve
purgers in.

I ^. INFUSION: as to infusion, you must understand that here by that word is
meant the maceration or steeping of any thing in a fit Liquor, whereby it is
virtue loosened from its earthy body is conveyed (after the manner of
tinctures) into the liquor, which impregnated with those virtues is called an
infusion or dilution.

In it two things are considerable, 1. The purgers that are to be infused, and
2. The Liquor in which they are to be macerated.

In both the quality and quantity are to be regarded.

The things to be infused in respect of their quality may be al purgers, as
Senna, Agarick, etc. (except Manna: and also Aloes and Coloquintida, for their
bitterness) for at this day in Paris they often infuse Cassia Fistula.

In relation to their Quantity: if the infusion only should be sufficiently
purging without dissolving any other either simple or compound Cathartick in
the strained Liquor, they ought to be prescribed in a larger quantity, than if
they were given in substance, yea in a double proportion, if they are the
stronger sort: or in a treble quantity if they are the gentler sort, adding
also their proper correctors, to a fourfold proportion, if strong: or to a
six-fold quantity, if weaker.

The Liquor as to the quality is either simple, as common water which draws
forth the virtues of things but slowly, or some certain distilled water,
especially in hot affections: Whey of Milk in Melancholy; the broth of flesh,
and Aqua vitae, which is endued with a wonderful faculty of extracting the
virtues, dissolving the spirits, and operating substance of things, and
attracting it to it self; in which it surpasses all others; and therefore
chiefly to be used for cold affections, and infusions to correct Phlegm and
Melancholy, a small portion of it being mixed with the Liquor of the i^fusion
White Wine is next in praise for extracting and inbibing the virtues of things,
w'h is most fit in cold affections, if you make the infusion in it and water,
of each a like quantity; or otherwise you may find some other convenient Liquor.

Or else compound, as some of the aforesaid decoctions.

The Quantity is not determined, but left to the discretion of the Apothecary,
and is prescribed by the Physician with q-s. that is, a sufficient quantity.

But although in general the infusion of Catharticks be so used as is said,
that of all, or either, you may excusedly prepare an insusion for purges to
better purpose than when they are boiled, as is said in the Apozem; yet more
specially of late i^ is grown in use, only to have two kinds of infu^^ons for
the Liquor of a purging potion, which as most usual are wont to be generally
prescribed.

(...) An infusion of Rhoubarb alone, to one dram, or a dram and a half,
correctives as Cinamom or Spikenard being added to gr. 6 or helf a scruple in
cold persons; or else in hot tempers, yellow Saunders to half a scruple, for
the liquor of a Cholagogue potion, as also for a Phlegmagogue. 2. Or the
infusion of Rheubarb from (...) dram to a dram and half, 2 scruples of Agarick
being newly made into trosches being added with his correctors, for a
phlegmagogue potion, or where Phlegm and Choler are mixed together.

An infusion is usually made in the distilled waters of Endive and Succory, as
in Ch^l rick people; or Plant ain water, if a flux of he belly be present: it
may also be made either in an altering or purging decoction, or some of the
aforementioned, or in some other appropr^^t Liqu^r.

III. A DECOCTION and INFUSION together are very usual; and when it shall be
prescribed, let such purgers with their Correctors be infused in s q. of some
of the abovementioned decoctions; to which purpose are Rheubarb and Agarick
only usually admitted; so at this day it is most usual and frequent, to have
the decoction o^ Senna rescribed to be mixed with the infusion of ^heubarb
alone, or Agarick; according as the indications require; a potion purging
either Phlegm, Melancholy, or adust choler.

IV. Any other LIQUOR that can satisfy the intention of the Physician, is
sometimes taken to make a purging potion, and dissolve Cath^rticks in; as for
example, any of these, as Diacarthamum, and may be prescribed to half an ounce,
or six drams, to be dissolved in such a water or broth, and to be made into a
potion; and this is chiefly useful, when sometimes, (as in a sudden case,
through the urgency of the affection, or the shortness of time, or want of
leisure, or for other inconveniences) decoctions, or infusions cannot be
prepared.

As to the quality of the Liquor, some distilled water respecting the part
affected, and humor that is to be evacuated, is to be chosen; or broth (so we
usually prescribe Manna to be taken in broth, either simple of flesh, or else
of a chick altered with cooling herbs for the choleric; so for phlegm a tablet
of Diacarthamum is usually prescribed with them,) or else white Wine, with
which the root Mechoacan and Jalop (which of late is come in use, for the same
things that Mechoacan is used) are usually taken, in substance to one dram, or
one dram and a half, after they have slightly infused, for phlegmatic and
serous humors; or else Whey of Milk, or Mead; but this matter is treated of
thrice before.

As to the quantity, the dose of the liquor in which the things are to be
dissolved, varies much according to the age of the Patient; for to Boys two
ounces will suffice, to Youths three ounces, to elder people four or five ounces
at most; because seeing they require a greater quantity of purging Medicines,
to be moved with all, unless you dilute them with a considerable quantity of
Liquor, your potions will be too thick and ungrateful.

Things to be DISSOLVED are considered either in quantity, or quality.

In relation to the quality, there are dissolved,

1. Purgers, viz. when the Liquor of the potion is little or not enough
purgative, which because it usually happens, there are for the most part
always purgers dissolved in it.

2. Alterers, viz. tweetners, which are always to be dissolved in it, for the
better relish sake;

Purgers that are to be dissolved in it are either simple or compound.

Simples are, Manna, Cassia, which are usual in purging choler gently; as also
to lenifie the affections of the Breast, and Reins: or hard and dry, viz. in
the form of powder, as usually the powder of Rheubarb, in the spitting of
blood, dysentery, or other flux of the belly, etc. Mechoacan for phlegmatic
and waterish humors, and the root of Jalop^ which of late is used in the room
of Mechoacan.

Compounds are either officinal or magisterial.

Officinal, or the purgers of the shops, are either syrups, as syrup of Roses
solutive, of Succory with Rheubarb, of Fumitory compound, De pomis Regis Sabor
(if to be had) honey of Roses strained.

Or Electuaries, which are either soft as Opiates, or solid as Tabulets;
Opiates either purge al humors, as Catholicon; or phlegm only, as Diaphoenicon,
Indum minus, benedicta Laxativa, Hiera picra, though unpleasantly; or Choler,
as Diaprunum simplex, Diacassia, Tryphera Persica, Diaprunum solutivum,
Electuar. of Roses Mesues, Electuary de Psillio; or Phlegm and Choler together,
as Diaphoenicum, Indum minus; or Melancholy, as Catholicon best of al, Diasenna
solutive, Confectio hamech minor; or else watrish humors, as Benedicta
laxative; solid Electuaries either respect choler, as Eleci: de succo rosar: or
phlegm, as Diacarthamum, Electuary de citro solutives or Choler and Phlegm
together, as the two last.

Or some powder extant in the shops, as Diaturbith in Germany, for phlegm and
waterish humors.

Magisterial purgers use to be prescribed by the Physician, for present use,
and as is the infusion of Rhuebarb always prescribed, but chiefly for
choleric humors, thus; let the infusion of 1 dram, or a dram and a half of
Rheubarb made in Endive, or Succory water; or else the expression of one dram,
or a dram and half of Rheubarb: or the infused Liquor of one dram, or a dram
and a half of Rheubarb; for these three ways sound the same thing.

ALTERERS or Sweetners, besides those now mentioned, are usually syrups, (but
Manna is often given alone with broth; Diacarthamum, Rheubarb, and Mechoacam
are most commonly prescribed to be taken in white Wine.

And these in respect of their quality are only used as alterers (if the
decoction or infusion be sufficiently purging it self; or if a sufficient
quantity of other purgers be dissolved in the strained Liquor,) and those
respecting both the humor, and part affected, from whence succeeds a happy
event.

Or purgers also, when things are otherwise; and the most usual, for all potions
almost is syrup of Roses solutive.

But in relation to the quantity, in general, the dose of the purgers to be
dissolved shall be more or less, according as the decoction or infusion, or
both, shall be nothing at al, or more or less purging: for Catharticks are to be
dissolved in such a quantity that they may make one whole and allowable dose
with the simple purgers (if any be either decocted or infused;) which may
easily be known by the several doses both of simple and compound purgers: as
for example, the dose of Senna in a decoction, that it may only moderately
purge, is an ounce, or an ounce and a half, or rather from half an ounce to an
ounce; of Rhubarb in the infusion, that it might moderately purge, from a dram
and half, to half an ounce; so that if you prescribe a decoction, of half an
ounce of Senna, in which it should be infused, because half an ounce is only
one third of the dose in which it may be given, that is, of an ounce and a
half, in which it purges moderately; and also prescribe one dram of Rhuebarb,
which is but a fourth part of the whole dose of Rheubarb; it comes to pass that
these joined make only 7 twelfths of the whole dose, which make not up the
whole dose by five twelfths, to supply which you must dissolve so much of some
fit Electuary as may make the dose complete, as Electuary Diacarthamum, whose
dose since it is fix drams, you must borrow from thence 7 twelfths, viz. two
drams and a half, so have you the proportion which may allowably be dissolved,
that with the help of the others it may moderately purge the body, where other
contingencies are indifferent. And thus the dose of those things that are to be
dissolved is to be examined, that al things may be prescribed safely, not
dangerously or by chance.

But in special, when the Liquor of a potion is little or nothing purging, at
Montpellier (for a body where al things are moderate, we may dissolve

Manna to 2 ounces, or 3 ounces.

Cassia in a small quantity, and not unless some powerful indication require it,
(as in lenifying the affections of the breast and Reins,) because it makes
potions gross and ungrateful if it should be dissolved in his legitimate dose,
therefore 'twil be best to dissolve not above three drams, or four drams; but
that this small quantity may be made up, you may add the stronger sort of
purging electuaries to three drams, or half an ounce; wherefore usually that it
may be more acceptable in potions, 'twere better to infuse it as they do at
Paris.

Rheubarb if it be dissolved in substance against the dysentery or flux of the
belly, etc. you may do it to one scruple, half a dram, or one dram; for a
purging powder should not much exceed one dram, otherwise it may be too thick,
and thereby ungrateful;

Mechoacan to one dram, and a dram and half.

Jalop to one dram.

Syrup of Roses solutive new to three ounces, and four ounces, for old syrup is
not used.

Some things are seldom used or dissolved, to purge by themselves, as the syrup
of Roses solutive, unless in delicate persons, as to them that are easily
purged, or else (as it is sometimes) when the decoction of it self is very
purgative.

Electuaries of the shops in the form of opiats, if gentle, as diaprunis
simple, diacassia, Tryphera Persica, Diasebesten, Catholicon, (though seldom)
to one ounce, or an ounce and half at most; for in a greater quantity they
thicken the Liquor too much; diaprunis solutive, and Electuary de Psillio, to
half an ounce, six drams, or one ounce at most for strong people, Indum minus,
Diaphoenicum, from three drams to six drams: Benedicta laxativa, from two drams
to five drams.

But those which are in the form of Tabulets, as diacarthamum, de citro
solutive, de succo rosarum, from 3 drams to six drams at most in the strongest
people.

The dose of the infusion of Rheubarb is abovementioned.

Sweetning syrups, when altering, (although purgers are only dissolved) from
one ounce to an ounce and half; when purging, from one ounce to half an ounce,
unless you would purge with them only, which is seldom seen.

The USE and FORM of prescribing is various, according to the variety of the
Liquor.

I. If the Liquor be any of the abovementioned decoctions, it is prescribed..
etc. (viz. the said ingredients) make a decoction in q. s. (of a fit Liquor) to
three ounces, or four ounces, strain in it, etc. (or without straining make a
decoction, etc.) take of the strained Liquor three ounces, or four ounces (for
either way is usual) in which dissolve, etc. make a potion to be taken in the
morning with care and order, having eaten a light supper the night before.

But if you would not describe your decoction at length, 'twil be sufficient,
if (having set down the purgers) you prescribe any, as for example, the
decoction of Endive, Agrimony, Maidenbair, etc. Make a potion, etc.

II. If of any officinal decoction,. etc. (viz. the things that are to be
dissolved) with q. s. of such a decoction, make a potion, etc. or else turning
the order say, etc. (viz. of such or such a decoction 3 ounces) in which
dissolve, etc. Make a potion.

This same form is likewise commonly used, with the common purging decoction of
the Shops.

II. (...) of an (...).. etc. ( viz. those things that are to be infused) make
an infusion in q: s. of some Liquor before mentioned (over hot embers twelve
hours, or a whole night; or if you please without noting the time) then strain
it, and dissolve in it, etc. so make a potion.

It may otherwise be more briefly prescribed thus.. The expression of one dram,
or a dram and half of Rheubarb made in a fit water, in which dissolve, etc. So
make a Potion.

This is to be noted, that when Mechoacan, or the root of Jalop are infused,
they should be prescribed to be infused in white Wine; so let it be given in
the morning with the usual ordering, without any expression to one dram, or a
dram and half.

IV. If of a decoction, and an infusion together,. etc. viz. those things that
are necessary to be b^yled^ make a decoction in q. s. of some appropriat
Liquor, in a sufficient quantity of the strained Liquor; infuse, etc. viz.
those things mentioned before in the infusion; then having strained them
dissolve etc. so make a potion; and this order is now most usual.

V. (...) without these, the potion be prescribed of some other Liquor, then
thus.. etc. viz. the purger that is to be dissolved, as Diacarthamum, six (...)
to purge a phlegmatic person, make it into a potion with s: q: of such a
Liquor.

The UTILITY: a potion in general is very commodious when we have an indication
of purging, either with a minorative Medicine to lessen the humors before
concoction, or an eradicating Medicine to exclude the humor already prepared
and concocted, or else of otherwise evacuating it without this preparation,
which seeing it may be done with Medicines under the threefold form of pills,
boles, and potions, (for powders and purging tablets, as also syrups never come
in use, unless in the form of a potion, dissolved in some convenient Liquor) of
these a potion is to be preferred in these cases,

When humors in respect of their situation are gathered in the first region
of the body; and are to be expelled without any perturbation of the body, not
to be drawn from far, for in this liquid form the purging quality soon descends
into the belly with the Liquor, and is soon communicated to it, so that in so
short a time the purging quality cannot be diffused to the more remote parts,
(although some small evacuation happen also to them by consecution of the
humors) unless you boil or dissolve stronger Medicines, and in a greater
quantity, which cannot be done so safely; in which case pills are better, which
staying long in the belly, the virtue of them at last insinuates it self into
the habit of the body; therefore a potion is most commodious, in affections of
the stomach, and neighboring parts, Pancreas, Mesentery, Spleen, Liver, and
other inferior parts.

But in respect of the several sorts of humors to be evacuated, the form of a
potion (as also of a bole) does more agree with tempers and affections that are
choleric then the solid form of pills; because both to moisten, lenifie, and
cool, (which three properties such a hot and dry constitution requires,) those
things which are suppable and liquid do more aptly perform, and therefore
rather to be used, unless a great weakness of the stomach, and a broken
strength (which are more dissolved by Liquid things) require the contrary: then
it is better to use pills or boles.

It Is also very profitable to purge Melancholy, because this humor as it were
dusty with drought may be washed down by such actual moisture, and the ways by
which it is to pass made slippery, and al other hindrances relaxed and
moistened; It Is also very useful in phlegmatic affections, unless the stomach
be very weak, so that the plegm be found in the first or second region of the
body: for if it be in the third Region, or remore parts, it will be little
advantageous, unless composed of the stronger and greater quantity of purgers
from whence danger.

It Is also useful in obstructions of gross, dry, condensated humors; and also
in the summer, as pills in the winter.

A Corroborating Potion.
A Corroborating Potion, which also sometime is called a Julep, drink, or
Cordial potion; is a liquid form of medicine composed of Confections, or
Cordial powders, and a syrup dissolved in a fit liquor to strengthen and
confirm the principal parts, restore strength, and help the peculiar affections
of the heart.

In this three things are considerable, the Composition, Use, and Vtility.

In COMPOSITION two things are to be regarded.

1. A fit Liquor of which it is made.

2. What things are to be dissolved in it.

The Liquor is to be regarded in relation to his quality, and quantity.

In relation to his quality there is prescribed.

1. Some distilled Cordial water, as of Borage, etc.

2. Some distilled water and a convenient juice together, which is most usual;
for it is seldom made of a Juice alone, and seldom also of decoctions or
infusions.

In respect to its quantity the dose is the same, as of the purging potion,
three ounces, or sour ounces, yet in summer, and in the great heat of Fevers,
and other hot affections, you may prescribe a larger quantity.

Things to be dissolved, are also considered in respect to their quality and
quantity.

In relation to the quality there is always dissolved some fit Cordial syrup,
and besides it always,

1. Either some Cordial confection alone, as usually Confection Alchermes, de
Hyacintho, etc. of which see in the Juleps.

2 Or some Cordial powder alone, and that either simple, as Hartshorn, Coral,
Bolearmoniack Terra sigillata, Pearls, Fragments of preticus stones, Unicorns
horn, Bezar stone, these may be prescribed, and are to be chosen according to
the urgency and variety of the affections: Or else compound, as the powder of
some electuary of the shops, (as Diamargaritum frigidum, etc.) and this is most
usual to be prescribed for this sort of Cordial Potions, as the simples are
though much seldomer.

3 Or some Confection or powder together.

In relation to the quantity, syrups are usually prescribed to an ounce and an
ounce and half.

Cordial confections from half an ounce, to an ounce, and an ounce and half at
most.

Cordial powders from one scruple to two scruples, or one ounce at most.

But if it be of the more scarce and precious sort, let it not exceed one
scruple; so for the most part it is prescribed to half a scruple, and one
scruple.

The fragment of precious stones and Vnicornshorn from gr 5, to half a dram.

Bezoar stone to gr 4, or 6.

Confections and powders together are so to be prescribed that they may
complete the whole dose, taking the greater quantity of this or that, or equal
parts as you see fit.

The USE is for 1 dose only, according to the present necessity, at any time of
the day, or the disease.

And this is the usual FORM of RESCRIBING. etc. viz. the Liquor, in which
dissolve, etc. so make a potion to be taken at such or such an hour.

Mark this, that because some Cordials are dissolved in the potion, they may be
prescribed in the said form: or else without the straining after dissolution
it is usual to prescribe all the ingredients, adding only, Make a potion.

The UTILITY: It Is very effectual against diverse affections of the heart, as
Swooning, panting, etc. malignant affections, poisons: and when it is to be
strengthened, being made weak by the violence of diseases; as also when the
virtues of it, and al other principal parts are dejected, they are through the
continuance of the whole disease to be assisted and restored; being weakened, to
be strengthened, and confirmed, being exhausted, to be recruited.

An altering Potion.
THat is to be called an altering Potion which is under a Liquid form not
allotted either to purge hurtful humors, or comfort the strength of the body
oppressed, so it be to alter any way, or evacuate, so it do it not by purging,
(as in expelling the stone of the Reins, etc.) prescribed for one only dose
to be taken by the mouth at one time

The COMPOSITION of it is the same, as of the corroborating potion, viz. of a
Liquor fitted for your present intention, either a distilled water only, or
else some Juice or decoction being added to it, and some convenient powder, to
be altered according to the variety of your indications, and a proper syrup
serving to the intention of the Physician; al which are prescribed in the dose,
and after the same manner as the strengthening potion, as you may perceive by
one or two examples following.

A somniferous potion, restoring and corroborating the strength exhausted by
over-watchings.

. Water of red Poppyes, water Lilles, and Lettuce, of each two ounces, syrup of
white Poppy, one ounce, syrup of Violets, half an ounce, Consectio Alkermes,
half a dram. Make a potion to be taken at the time of going to sleep.

A Potion for the Worms, and also Cordial.
Take the water of Purslane, and grass, of each two ounces, Confection of
Hyacinth, half a dram, powder of Earthworms dried, one scruple, Coralin, and
the shavings of Hartshorn, of each one scruple, syrup of Lemons one ounce. So
make a potion.

A potion to hasten delivery of a Child.
Take Hypocras (made by the infusion of Cinnamon, and Dittany in white Wine)
four ounces, or five ounces, Cinnamon water half an ounce, Corfectio Alchermes
one dram, Saffron half a scruple, syrup of Mugwort one cunce. So make a potion.

CHAP. IV. Of Syrups.
Diverse simples there are, Herbs, Roots Seeds, Fruits, Flowers, and others, or
the Juyces of them, which cannot be had always when need requires them,
especially in winter, and autumn, that decoctions, infusions, or other
Medicines may be prepared of them for a present use: or else they cannot be
preserved sound without loss of their virtues so long a time: or if they may,
yet the urgency of the affection, or other inconveniences do not always allow
such leisure as to attend the preparing of Medicines of them in diverse forms,
or til the virtues of them may be sufficiently extracted, from hence appears
the necessity of syrups for the diverse virtues of Plants thus kept and
preserved by the benefit of Sugar or Honey, in the form of a syrup, are always
ready for use in every pressing necessity to serve for the various scope of the
Physician; and are preserved sound without any depravation, having joined with
them a grateful taste; so that syrups are as it were a certain preserving of a
medicinal Liquor. Juice, decoction, or infusion, in which is retained the
efficacy of the Medicines.

But a syrup is the invention of the Arabians, and was scarce known to the
ancient Greeks; we read of only mention made of Oximel and cute, in Galen, and
Hypocrates; after whose example the Mauritanians have a lorned their
pharmacentick art with a various collection of syrups: the modern Greeks as
Actuarius, calls it Scrapium.

Some derive this name from the Greek, others from the Arabic, but this is
little considerable.

Whatsoever it is, though at this time it be taken either properly; for that
which I shall describe, and for that which is extant in the shops, or improperly
for a decoction preparing humors, or an Apozem (as Rondeletius and Jeubertus
have written) as an altering Julep, for the Italians at this day call a Julep
Serapium, (perhaps because a syrup is the basis of a Julep) yet at Montpelier.

A SYRUP: is a fluid form of a Medicine, made of a decoction, Juyces or an
infusion, preserved with Sugar or Honey, boiled to such a consistence, that a
drop on a marble or plate may not spread abroad, prepared either to alter or
purge.

It is of two sorts, an altering syrup (as was the syrup of the Ancients, and
this has been revived by our latest Physicians) and a purging syrup.

The altering Syrup.
The definition of an altering syrup is to be sought among those things which
we have said before in the altering Apozem, as also the differences there set
down.

But for the clearer method, use, and prescription sake, it is twofold,
Officinal and Magisterial,

The officinal or usual is that which is publicly extant (...) in the
Apothecarys shops, of which I (...) in the use of it, and in respect of the
prescribing of it, many things occur necessary to be known, hereafter to be
rehearsed.

And this diversely divided, as well in relation to its virtues, as its
composition.

The differences taken from the virtues are considered either in general, hot,
cold, moist, dry, temperate.

Or in special: in respect of the humors, and other parts of the body.

In relation to the humors, it alters either in the first qualities; to which
belong according to the diversity of the humor, that which alters, concocts,
digests, prepares either choler, phlegm, melancholy, or blood; or in the second
qualities, in which number are contained those which cut, attenuate, incrassat,
cleanse, bind; or in the third qualities, hither are referd those which cause
easy coughing, lenifie, expectorate, provoke Urine, break the Stone, provoke
the courses, condense the parts, expel poison, and corroborate.

In regard of the parts which they properly respect, some are Cephalical,
others Cordial, etc. which you may seek among the store of Physical remedies;
here I shall only propound the division of the Officinal syrups, according to
their composition and faculties, only considered generally, because other
things more appertain to the physical magazeen; withal intending to give a
Catalogue of the more usual sort, because some are here in use, which in other
places are grown obsolete, and so on the contrary; neither is there the same
number in use every where: here is to be noted that those which have a star at
their beginning fixed to them, are at Montpelier, of the more usual sort.

The altering Officinal syrup is compounded either,

1. Of Juyces only, and this is either temperate, as syrup of the juice of *
Borage, of h Bugloss, * Bizantines of Mesue, of Fumitory simple, * Oxymel
simple.

Or Cooling, as simple Syrup of * Vinegar, and Oxy saccarum, syrup of Verjuyce,
of the juice of Sorrel, Alexandrinvs or Julep of Roses, of the juice of
Citrons, Barberries, * Quinces, of the juice of Succory, Endive, Pomegranates
both sour and sweet, of Limons, of Apples, of red Corans, of Violets.

Or heating, as simple Syrup of Betony, Miva of Quinces though moderately,
especially the aromatical, Oxymel of Squils, though moderately.

2. Of INFUSION, and this also is cooling, as syrup of water Lillies simple h.
of red * Poppyes, and of dried Roses.

3. Of a DECOCTION, and this is either

Cooling, as syrup of * Succory compound, of * Jujubes, yet moderately, of
white Poppy, h.

Or heating, as syrup de Althea of Fernelius, of Bettony compound, of the barks
of Citron, of Calamint, of * Hysop, of * Horehound of the two roots, of the
five roots, of * Staechados, of Colts foot, h.

4. Of infusion made in

Juyces and Decoction together, and is either

Cooling, as Oxysaccarum compound, syrup of Purshine, h.

Or heating, as syrup of Wormwood, * Mints, Oxymel compound.

Or some other Liquor and a decoction, and is either temperate, as syrup of *
Maidenhair, and of Liquorice, which is moderately hot, or heating, as syrup of
Mugwort.

V. Or a decoction and a Juice, and this is either temperate, as Bizantinus
compound, or cooling, as syrup of Vinegar compound; but moderately, of Endive
compound; of Mirtles, of water Lillies compound; or heating, as syrup de
Eupatorio, or Maudiens, of Fumitary compound.

But as from this division of the syrups you may perceive how these altering
syrups are affected in the active qualities, so must you note also that all of
them are drying in the passive qualities, unless such that have the letter h.
annexed, which moisten and humect^ but how they severally are appropriated to
diverse parts and to concoct diverse humors, you must find in the Materia medica.

A magisterial syrup is that which is prepared for present use according to the
various scope of the Physician, composed of either more or fewer of the
precedents.

The division and differences of it are to be sought from what I have before
said in the officinal syrup, and in the altering Apozem.

In it three things are to be considered, the composition, the Use, and the
Utility.

In the COMPOSITION four things are to be regarded, the matter or Liquor of
which it is made; the things to be dissolved in it; the clarification and
aromatization.

The matter is to be weighed both in quality, and quantity.

The consideration of the matter is twofold, Remote, viz. the several parts of
simples spoken of in the Apozem, and near, which is threefold, Decoction,
Juice, and sometimes infusion prepared diverse ways of the aforesaid
ingredients, of which I must next treat.

1. The decoction of which the syrup is to be made is the same with the
decoction of the altering Apozem, made and prescribed by the same reason, of
the same things, and after the same manner and form, of which I shall say no
more in this place.

2. The Juice is drawn out of Leaves, Fruits, and flowers bruised and pressed,
and so effectually purified, is used with better Fruit, and to more purpose
than the decoction whether it be to strengthen or alter any way.

And this 3 several ways is used in the making of a syrup.

1. Either it is taken merely, either of one only thing, or drawn from diverse,
and that either of Leave, (as of Borage, Bugloss, Hops in melancholy people, of
Sorrel, Succory, Endive in the choleric, etc. and so in the rest according to
the diversity of the directors:) or of Fruits, (as of Limons in the choleric,
of Apples in the Melancholy) and is exactly to be purified from the feces by a
gentle heat, whereby they settle down at the bottom, else they may afford
occasion of corruption.

2. Or else for the greater efficacy, or some other reason, arising from the
indications, other things are boiled usually, three pound or four pound of the
clarifled Juyces is taken to prepare the syrup, and those things that are to be
decocted in it (which must respect the part affected, or humor) are to be
prescribed to half the quantity that is set down for an Apozem.

3. Or else more profitably specifical and proper ingredients are only infused
to the same intent, as Roots, Seeds, Flowers, Spices: and usually for the
quantity of a pound and a half or two pound, of a Juice for a syrup are
prescribed two ounces or 3 ounces of things to be infused, according to the
several efficacy of the ingredients.

3. An infusion sometimes is taken or used for the siquid subject of a syrup,
and is to be prepared of ingredients fit for the intention, of very forcible
virtues, and for the most part are spices, (the reason of which you may find
before in the purging Potion.)

In relation to the quantity, the usual proportion of a decoction, clarisied
Juice, or infusion for a syrup is a pound, a pound and half, or 2 pound at
most, according as we intend the use of it shall be more rare or frequent, or of
shorter or longer continuance.

Things to be dissolved in the aforesaid syrups, either to preserve them the
longer, or for tastes sake, are considered in relation to their

Quality, there is therefore dissolved in it, 1. either sugar, which is
convenient for all, both hot and cold affections, and more acceptable to the
sick; or sometimes Honey in cold affections of the head, and breast, or when
you would more effectually heat, cut, cleanse, or when natural heat languishing
is to be revived.

2. Or else together with the sugar some officinal syrup; but then the quantity
of sugar is to be lessened, for a syrup is but sugar dissolved, and then sugar
is only prescribed, q. s.

3. Besides some of the aforesaid sweetners that are perpetually dissolved in
it, there are also dissolved (especially in that syrup that is prepared of a
decoction, and sometimes in those prepared of infusions) some clarified Juyces
of Leaves or Fruits, and other Liquors, as Vinegar, Wine, etc. to m^ke them the
more eff^ctual* as is aforesaid in the altering Apozem, in which place see
more.

In respect of the quantity: sugar is dissolved in equal proportion with the
liquor; of this see in the animadversions following: so also is Honey (when
used,) in syrups to five ounces, or six ounces, but then sugar to a sufficient
quantity only: Juyces to six ounce^, more or less, according to the quantity of
the infusion or decoction.

Clarification and Aromatization, see of them before in the Apozem.

The USE and FORM of prescribing,

In the use of a syrup either officinal or Magisterial we must consider three
things methodically: after what manner, how much, and when they ought to be
prescribed and given.

1. How, or after what manner; that is, whether they are to be given in that
sorm or consistence, that they are of themselves, or whether diluted with other
Liquors, as in Juleps.

2. How much; that is in what quantity, or dose.

3. When, that is, at what time; neither does there appear more things
necessary to be considered in the right and legitimate administration of them.

As to the manner of taking them; because a syrup taken by it self, not diluted
with any Liquor, penetrates not so far into the body, neither can quickly or
easily without losing some strength and virtues; and withal works slower upon
the part affected, and humor that is to be altered; and on the contrary a syrup
diluted in the form of a Julep does sooner, easier, and farther insinuate it
self into the parts of the body, and noxious humors, (the clamminess little
hindering it,) and can come to the most intimate spaces with firmer and less
altered virtues, than when it is sincere, and does sooner alter whatsoever it
touches, so that according to the nearness and distance of the parts affected,
the affections themselves, or causes that are to be altered, this or that form
is chiefly to be used.

Therefore sincere syrups are prescribed commonly by themselves, and are taken

1. To intercept or stop defluxions by thickening them from falling violently
either on the Throat, Lungs, or stomach, for by the help of their clamminess by
reason of the stay they make in the mouth, and in regard they do not very soon
pass down, they easily stay the humor that is descending, and these are to be
taken out of a spoon, and to be held long in the mouth.

2. When there is a hoarsness of the throat, and a roughness of the Windpipe,
which by its gentle clamminess (where with it (as it were) smears it) it helps,
being swallowed by little and little, or licked down like lohochs.

3. For expectoration, or the spitting up of matter, collected and impacted in
the Lungs, by taking it by little and little out of a spoon, or licking it down
from a Liquorice stick.

4. To mitigate coughing after the same manner.

5. In diseases and affections of the stomach, especially cold ones, (for they
which are hot and dry, as in hot and choleric affections, should rather be
tempered by moisture, unless its strength be much decayed) although usually
they are dissolved in a small quantity of Liquor (except syrup of Wormwood) or
when your scope be to strengthen or bind.

6. In the affections of parts nigh the stomach, to which it may easily be
conveyed.

But diluted or dissolved syrup in the form of a Julep is best,

1. When the Liver, Spleen, or Mesentory are affected.

2. When the head, heart, Lungs, Reins, Bladder, Womb, habit of the body, and
Limbs are diseased, to which the virtue of a syrup could either not at al, or
very slowly, and much altered from its own nature, otherwise have entrance.

It Is to be prescribed to be dissolved in a fit, and appropriat Liquor, that
may either respect the humor, affection, or part affected, or al these
together: but most usually in some distilled water; or with a proper decoction
which is much more effectual than water, or with the broth of a chick, and that
either simple or altered, with Roots, Leaves, etc. agreeing to the same
purpose, as hereafter.

The quantity is to be considered, as singular and several.

As to the singular or united quantity or dose, an officinal altering Syrup may
be given from half an ounce to an ounce, an ounce and half, and two ounces at
the most, in defining which dose more exactly four things are to be diligently
regarded.

1. The situation, or distance of the part affected, for when the virtue of
the syrup is to be conveyed to parts far situated and remote, it ought to be
given in the greater quantity, yea in the highest dose of all if you see it
fit; otherwise you will hardly perceive any benefit in the operation, because in
a long passage its virtues must needs be much broken and altered; unless the
Liquor in which it is dissolved be also very effectual.

2. The action or motion of the affection it selt, and the morbifical causes,
and the quality of them, either vehement or remiss, that requires a middle, or
else the highest dose; this a lesser.

3. The Age: as to Infants half an ounce, which is the least dose; to Boys of
better growth one ounce, which is next the least, will suffice for the highest
of al.

4. The efficacy of the syrup it self, and the vigor it has naturally to
operate; hence 'twil suffice to prescribe syrup of Poppy, only from half an
ounce to an ounce at highest, because of his narcotick quality; so also
unpleasantness ought to lessen the dose, as usually one ounce does suffice for
the highest dose of syrup of Wormwood.

5. To these may be added the manner of taking it; for that which is taken to
be swallowed down by licking it leisurely, because they cannot be taken in a
large quantity, against diverse affections of the Windpipe and Lungs, for then
it would soon slip down without doing any good, therefore it is often to be
iterated, and is always prescribed to four ounces, or 5, or 6, for frequent
use to be often repeated; so that such ought not to be included within the
aforesaid rule; the same is to be said for such as are prescribed to quench
thirst in the heat of diseases, because the use of them is to be frequent, for
which purpose they are prescribed to four ounces, five, or six.

But the quantity of the Liquor, to dilute them in is much like that of the
J^leps, as to three ounces, or four ounces: yet you may prescribe less when the
stomach or any near part is affected: but more to allay thirst, as in Fevers,
and al sorts of hot, boiling diseases, especially in the summer time.

As to the several or divided quantity, digestives may be taken morning and
evening when the stomach is empty: but they which are given against thirst,
coughs, or to help spitting, are taken often; they which provoke sleep only
once, and that about the accustomed hour of sleeping, neither are they to be
reiterated unless necessity require it; others are taken either oftener or
seldomer, as the several occasions require.

As to the Time of taking them, preparing Syrups, and those which are allotted
for the digestion of humors, are to be taken in the morning 4 or five hours
before meat, lest the virtue of them should be stackned either by meat newly
taken, or not yet concocted: they may also be taken at evening when the
digestion of humors is to be accelerated, but at a good distance from feeding
when the stomach is empty: those for a cough, at any hour when it is
troublesome: they which provoke sleep, or are to stop defluxions, are best taken
at the time of going to sleep: these to expectorate, in the morning; those to
quench thirst, when they are dry; any others, as near as may be when the
stomach is empty.

As to the magisterial syrup, the use of it is either by it self, or else
diluted with some fit water, or other Liquor, simple or compound broth; and is
taken after the same rules as the officinal.

And this is the USUAL FORM of PRESCRIBING.

1. If it be made of a decoction.. etc. viz: (the ingredients of an altering
Apozem) make a decoction in etc. take of the strained Liquor, etc in which
dissolve, etc. make a syrup well boiled, clarified, and aromatized with etc.
keep it in a glass safe; let him take of it one ounce, an ounce and half, or
two ounces by it self, or with, etc. at such an hour, so often in a day, etc.
see more above.

2. If of a Juice without any other mixture;, of the Juice of such a thing
bruised, newly pressed out, and well clarified, etc. in which dissolve, etc. So
make a syrup.

3. If of a Juice in which other things are boiled or infused, of the Juice
(newly pressed out and clarified) of etc. in which dissolve etc. So make a
Syrup.

4. If of an infusion, etc. let them be infused in, etc. of such a Liquor, take
of the liquor strained, and gently pressed out, etc. dissolve, etc.

The Utility of a syrup in general is sufficiently declared above, whether
officinal or magisterial; for it is instituted to conserve diverse virtues of
plants, with which decoctions, Juyces expressed, and infusions prepared of them
are plentifully fraught, that they may be the readier at hand, and fit for use
without loss of their natural effica^y.

The efficinal also more specially serves for the making up of diverse forms of
Medicines: so is it added to Apozems, Juleps, and Potions, for taste sake, an^
also to add to their virtues; so also is it ^^ken to make up opiats, pills,
preserves, Lohochs, Troscischs into a convenient form or consistence, and for
the uniting of a compound Medicine, and preserving of it.

But the magisterial syrup as of old, so at this day, and has been chiefly in
request of late to prepare both humors, and the body; and is very necessary to
precede a prosperous purgation (of which see in the altering Apozem,) and is
very useful also to alter the body, or parts of it, diverse ways, both by
correcting the distempers of them, and tempering the peccant humors: of this
see also in the altering Apozem.

In sum, against al internal affections or causes, that engender them: and to
alter and strengthen the parts afflicted by them, any proper and specifical
Medicines, suggested by the indicantia (or things from whence you take
directions what is to be done) may be reduced into the form of a Syrup; so that
the utility of it is of large extent against any affections, dropsy, plague,
etc. but it is fittest to be prescribed, when you would continue your altering
for some time, or must cherish the strength continually: (when otherwise that
labor must be fain to be renewed often; with the trouble of a new prescription
of some Apozem, Julep, or potion:) hence it is most profitable in long diseases
and affections, and chronical distempers of the parts which have taken such
rooting that there must be a continual alteration to remedy them; yet because
some usual syrup is to be had, that has the same virtue, unless you think its
virtue less effectual, or decayed, or that it consists not of those things
which your specifical indications require, or that you hope to compose one more
powerful; prescribe them but seldom.

A Purging Syrup.
YOu must seek the definition and division of a purging syrup according to the
variety of the humors, in the chapter of the Apozem.

A Syrup is two-sold, officinal and Magisterial.

The officinal is here chiefly divided both in respect of the composition, and
the chiefest of their virtues, as you may see in the following table.

The of^^cinal purging syrup is compounded either of A decoction made A juice,
and purges Melancholy, as Syrup of Fumitory compound, Water, and purges
Melancholy, as Syrup de Epithymo. Water, and purges Choler, as of Succory
compound Water, and purges Mixed humors, as Diasereat, A juice, and purges.
Melancholy, as syrup de Pomis Regis Sabor.
Infusion in Water, and purges Choler As Syrup of Roses solut: Syrup of
Violets, each made with 9 infusions, sy. rup of Peach flow: Phlegm As Honey of
Roses strained.



The definition and division of a magisterial purging syrup may appear out of
what is aforesaid.

In it three things are to be considered; Composition, Use, and Utility.

In the Composition four things.

1. The matter whereby it is made purgative.

2 The things that are to be dissolved in it.

3. Clarification.

4. Aroma ization.

The matter of which it is made, is either remote, and this in regard of its
quality, are the purging simples with their correctives, either boiled or
insused; or near, and thus the matter is two-sold, either a purging decoction,
or a purging in usion.

A purging Decoction is nothing else then the decoction of a purging Apozem,
made of the same things, both alterers and purgers, varied according to the
intention of the Physician, to be prescribed after the same manner and order,
and upon the same conditions, as is before specified.

This only is to be marked, concerning the dose or purging Medicines, that the
Montpelier Physicians for a syrup do usually double the quantities of purgers
prescribed for Apozems; but 'twil suffice if you take only the same quantity;
or if I might persuade you, the double quantity (...) it matters not if it be
the treble, for so it will be contracted into the lesser dose, and be taken with
the less nauseousness to the patient, so that you exactly find out the true
dose, and not measure it according to the usual proportion; see the use.

It is also to be noted, that when fit juyces are to be used, the purgers may
be boiled in 4 ounces, or 5, or 6, with their correctors.

How a purging infusion is to be prepared, is said before in a purging potion,
and from thence easy to be collected; but how to preferred before a decoction,
see in the animadversions.

Things that are to be dissolved in the decoction or infusion, are also
considered in quality and quantity.

Concerning the quality, there is dissolved either sugar, or sometimes Honey;
or else together with the sugar some officinal syrup, and that either altering
or purging.

Besides those sweetners that are perpetually dissolved for its preservation,
there are frequently to the aforesaid purpose dissolved,

1. Some fit Juice, and that either altering, as of Leaves, Fruits, etc.
according to the indication; see in the Apozem; or purging, as the juice of
Roses, especially in the Spring time, against choler; of Fumitory or Hops for
Melancholy.

2. The complete infusion of Damask Roses, especially in the spring time, when
it is to be had, and most effectual.

3. Sometimes the infusion of Rheubarb (if the indication require it) made by
it self, and added at the latter end; otherwise should it be added in the
beginning before the syrup come to a consistence, its virtue may exhale by long
boiling.

In an infusion the same thing is to be observed, except concerning the
aforesaid Juyces, which it is best to prescribe in the beginning.

In relation to the quantity, sugar or Honey are to be added in the same
quantity with the strained Liquor, which for the most part is to be prescribed
to a pound, or a pound and a half; this one thing is also to be observed, that
the quantity of sugar or Honey is exactly to be set down, (contrary to that
custom which Physicians vulgarly use) and not to be left to the pleasure of the
Apothecaryes; otherwise you can never be certain of the exact dose, which is
one, where there is but a little sugar; another, where there is much. This
makes practicers stammer when a dose of a purge prescribed by themselves is to
be defined: then they admonish you to begin with a less dose, so proceeding til
you have found the true quantity without error.

If a Syrup be added, it is for the most part to 5, six, or eight ounces: and
because this is accounted of as sugar, 'twil be easy to find out the right
quantity, making an abatement for the quantity of syrup: but it matters not
whether it be altering or purging, so that you use this way to find out its
right proportion in your computation.

Juyces may be added to six ounces or eight ounces; only be mindful of the
purgers in appointing the dose.

See CLARIFICATION and AROMATIZATION before in the Apozem.

The USE and form of PRESCRIBING: in the use of a purging syrup whether
officinal or Magisterial, three things should be briefly considered; how it is
to be prescribed and ought to be given, in what quantity, and at what time.

As to the manner of giving an officinal syrup, it is either by it self out of a
spoon, or else diluted: the former way is rare; for every one of them use to be
dissolved, and that in a fit Liquor, as aforesaid.

As to the dose, in general, this may be appointed, viz. from one ounce, to two
ounces, three ounces, and four ounces, which is to be the highest; yet syrup of
Fumitory and de Epithymo may be given to five ounces, or six ounces; in the
mean time comparing other circumstances, which I have said should limit the
dose of purgers in the purging Apozem.

The time of giving it is the same as of other purgers, viz. in the morning,
the stomach being empty, lest the virtue of them should be dulled, or their
operation by the meat or chile be much retarded.

The magisterial syrup (as to the manner) is used either by it self, out of a
spoon, or (which is most usual) dissolved in some fit liquor, as above.

As to the quantity, and that the continued, or united, they usually but very
ill define it from two ounces to three ounces: they may truly look into the
quantity of the Catharticks, but it is but cursorily; and perhaps in the mean
time are ignorant of what quantity of sugar the Apothecary has made it up with all; hence is it that they are uncertain concerning the dose; I for my part
conceive it may be half an ounce, an ounce, an ounce and half, two ounces,
three ounces, 5, 6, according as the Liquor with which the sugar is boiled into
a syrup, is impregnated with the more copious or violent purgers but thus it
is, the doses of the purging decoctions, infusions, things dissolved, etc. are
to be accounted, for how many times they may serve to purge withal, considering
them all together. As for example, suppose them to suffice for eight times, and
to one pound of Liquor; impregnated with the virtues of those purgers you may
add one pound of pure Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup. If you shall divide those
twelve ounces into eight parts, (for there are eight purging doses) there will
be an ounce and half for one dose: and if you add only eight ounces of sugar to
make it to a syrup, there will be one ounce more for every dose: etc.

As to the divided quantity, it is usualy given once or twice a monethin
chronical diseases; and so that filth that is usually gathered is gently taken
away, that it cannot arrive at a quantity sufficient to breed a disease.

But the time of taking it is fittest in the morning, as before.

The UTILITY is great in chronical diseases, in which there is need of a
continual precaution, or a gentle evacuation to be frequently renewed; lest
otherwise, excrementitious humors that are apt to breed diverse affections
should be heaped together in such distempered bodies, and ill-affected bowels,
which are by this means opposed; and an occasion of future affections quite
taken away.

ANIMADVERSIONS of SYRUPS.
COncerning the quantity of Sugar for Syrups, it is much disputed on, so that
you will hardly find any precept absolute, and agreeable to the nature of every
thing: Mesues that Author of the Art is varying, for he prescribes in cold
Syrups, especially of juyces, to one pound of liquor eight ounces of sugar; as
in syrup of Verjuyce, so that the Liquor is more than the sugar by a third
part: in other places he prescribes the Liquor to double the quantity of Sugar:
as in Syrup de Ponnis Sabor; sometimes to treble it, as in the syrup of sour
Prunes, and that which is most wonderful, sometimes to be six times more then
the sugar, as in the sour syrup of Quinces: sometimes that the sugar should
double the Liquor, so that to six ounces of Liquor, he prescribes one pound of
sugar; sometimes to eight ounces of Liquor twelve ounces of sugar; sometimes he
prescribes a like quantities of Liquor and sugar; but most commonly Mesues
prescribes in hot syrups both of Sugar and Liquor, a like quantities, or a
little more or less, etc.

Modern Writers do much wrangle among themselves: sometimes they appoint
according to the rule of Syrups a like proportion both of Sugar and liquor,
sometimes more of the Sugar, or more of the Liquor, Silvius, Fernelius,
Joubertus, and Rondeletius, chief Writers of this Art, prescribe several
quantities.

In Syrups made of Juyces, the Liquor generally exceeds the sugar: but in
particular, for one pound of the Liquor they sometimes put seven ounces, seven
ounces and a half, eight, eight ounces and a half, nine, or of each a like
quantity, as the nature of each particular Juice requires.

In syrups made of infusions they every where put off the infusion and sugar,
and; but in syrups made of decoctions, sometimes of each alike, or (as it is
most commonly) they let the Liquor exceed the sugar by one third.

The thing seems indifferent to me, only the nature of the syrup is somewhat
more exactly to be weighed; in which two things are chiefly to be considered.
viz: 1. The sugar (or sometimes Honey) which is only as the subject to receive
the essence of the simples, and preserve their virtues. 2. That virtue or
essence, consisting in the Juice, Infusion, or Decoction, from whence the syrup
has his force or energie, as the conservation of that essence from the sugar;
the syrup being composed by the union of both, through the evaporation of the
superfluous humidity.

Now every one knows that if you dissolve one pound of Sugar in any quantity of
Liquor, it may easily be boiled to the consistence of a syrup; that is also
apparent, and approved to them that know the making of extracts, that the
Liquor in which the essence was diffused, and with which it was drawn forth
(which is correspondent to the Juyces,) whether it be 2, 3, 6, or 8 pound, etc.
may be wholly evaporated, set in Balneo, or over ashes, the essence by little
and little taking what consistence you will either of a syrup, or some solider
form; why therefore need they trouble themselves about the proportion of either
in vain, seeing they may reduce any of the aforesaid proportions to the form of
a syrup: for if the things compounding the syrup: (viz: Sugar, Juyces,
Decoctions, Infusions, etc. whatsoever be their quantity) can be boiled to that
ordinary consistence, by consuming the watrish parts, what matter is it in what
quantity they are joined. If Joubertus and Silvius boil three pound of Liquor
with one pound of Sugar to the height of a syrup; why may it not be done with
the like proportion of your Medicinal liquor, whether Juice, Infusion, or
Decoction; and on the contrary, if to three pound of Sugar you add only 1 pound
of the Liquor, as Rondeletius in his Syrup of Limons, why may not this be done
also; therefore in appointing the quantity of sugar for a syrup, we must not so
much regard the quantity as the force of it, and intention or purpose of the
Physician; as for example: suppose that one pound of simples decocted or
infused have imparted three ounces or four ounces of virtuous essence to four
pound, or five of the Liquor of the decoction or infusion strained, if you
prescribe of that Liquor and Sugar, and, one pound, as we usally do for a
syrup, 'twil truly make a syrup, but of l^^l^ efficacy; and in a pound of which
there with contained only a dram of essence; so that each ounce will con^^in
but v. gr. but if the aforesaid half ounce of essence be diflused only in two
pound of Liquor, and you prescribe one pound of syrup to be made of that and
sugar and, you will have a syrup, and that effectual, in which bound are
contained two drams of the essence, and in an ounce of which remains half a
scruple of essence: but if you boil those two pounds of Liquor in which four
drams of essence is contained with one pound of sugar only, you will have a
most effectual syrup, in which is contained three drams, or half an ounce of
essence, and in anounce of which is one scruple: but if you yet desire it more
effectual, take to those two pound of Liquor but half a pound of Sugar, and you
have also in this three drams, or half an ounce of essence; and in every ounce
of it will be half a dram, or two scruples of essence.

Therefore we must not so much look on the quantity of the Liquor, as on the
virtue and essence wherewith it is fraught; or from what quantity of matter it
is extracted. Lastly, what weight of Liquor soever you boil it in, whether a
pound, two pound, or three, etc. this is to be chiefly marked, (that you may be
the more certain of the efficacy of your syrup, and may prescribe it weaker or
stronger as shall be for your purpose) that you should see, to the virtues and
efficacy of it rather then to the quantity of Liquor you prescribe; therefore
it is best to follow the common rule, where they usually prescribe the Liquor
and Sugar in equal parts, that you may have some knowledge of its operation.

CHAP. V. Of Vomitoryes.
THe excrementitious humors, whether natural exceeding in quantity, or
preternatural in any quantity, either mixed with the blood in the veins, or
residing elsewhere, are apt to breed an il habit, and therefore require an
evacuation, chiefly that way they naturally tend, by conducing places or veins
for their expulsion, whether by purging (either particular or universal) Urine,
Sweat, insensible transpiration, or Vomit.

And although Medicines which perform either of these may in general be called
purgers, yet particularly they are counted so which draw forth the excrements
of the body by stool and vomiting: and of these those which by stool evacuate,
are significantly called purgers; those which expel things upwards, Vomitories.

A Vomitory is not so much a name of the liquid form of a Medicine as of the
faculty of it, taking its name from the operation; yet it usually signifies
both, viz. the Medicine procuring that motion or evacuation of the humors
upwards, and also the form in which it is prescribed; of which my intention is
here to write.

A VOMITORY therefore is a liquid form of a remedy prepared of a simple
emetical Medicine, boiled, infused, or dissolved in some Liquor, evacuating and
expelling perforce by the mouth any thing hurtful to the Stomach, and
superfluity, either of meat, or excrementitious humors from it and the
adjacent parts.

This from its effect may be said threefold, evacuating, revelling, and
deriving.

But from the manner of working one may be termed gentle, correspondent to the
mollifying and lenitive purger, working more by its quantity; another moderate,
which operates by its quality; another violent, answerable to those purgers
properly called Catharticks, provoking this motion by a specifical and internal
virtue.

Vomitoryes are simple, or compound.

The more SIMPLE consists of fair water warmed, drank suddenly to a pint or
better; warmed Barley water in a good quantity; the fat broth of flesh drank
plentifully, Mead plentifully taken, which Galen prescribed; any sore of drink
drank suddenly and liberally; Hydraeleum, i. e. water and oil, to eight ounces
or ten, common oil to four ounces or six drank warm, and melted butter.

The which and such like other gentle vomits (improperly so called) we use
chiefly, when those things that are to be voided this way, (whether things
taken down, or diverse sorts of impurities, and vicious humors contained in the
stomach,) are so ready for evacuation, that upon every little occasion, without
much trouble they may be expelled whether nature be inclined to it or not, or
whether she strive to shake off such a burden nimbly enough or not, or be not
sufficient of her self, then with these gentler sort do we give occasion of
such a motion to the excretive faculty, if it be dull, and as it were show her
the way: or else if she moves but unperfectly, we render her endeavor the more
easy by these means; which we often do also (without giving a vomit) by
thrusting the finger down the throat, or a feather dipped in oil. But those which
work only by their quantity, and move the excretive faculty by their warm
moisture and fatness, are not profitable when that that is to be vomited up,
either is not in the stomach, but in the adjacent parts; or else are contained
in the more remote parts; or if in it, are fixed in the tunicles of it; or are
not prepared; so that they cannot be shaken out without a greater and more
violent motion; for then it is better to use the compounds.

In the COMPOUND Vomitory two things are to be considered, 1. The matter of
which it is made. 2. The things to be dissolved in it.

The MATTER of a Vomitory is twofold, Liquid and solid.

The liquid matter (or liquor) with which I defined a Vomitory, and which is
for the most part used, either provokes vomit, or does not provoke it.

That Liquor which does provoke vomit is either a decoction or an infusion, or
sometimes water, or a disti^led Liquor.

As to the VOMITING DECOCTION, in it three things are to be regarded 1. The
matter or ingredients whereby it becomes a vomitory. 2. The Liquor in which
these things are boiled.

In either of these we must see to the quality and quantity.

The matter or ingredients, as to their quality are diverse parts of vomitive
simples, and those moderate (for the strongest sort seldom are put into
decoctions) as Roots, Barks, Leaves, and sometimes Seeds and Flowers, of which
2, 3, or four should be prescribed together.

As to their quantity, those moderate vomitories are prescribed almost as those
of Potions, that is, that they make in all one ounce, two ounces, or three
ounces at most; but particularly, if one or 2 of these following be added with
others, or should be prescribed of themselves, it should usually be in these
following doses.

The root of Asarum to one dram, two drams, or three drams.

The middle Bark of a Walnut-Tree, to 1 dram, or two drams.

The roots of Pompions dried to two drams, and half an ounce.

The flowers of Broom to two drams, or three drams, or so many pugils.

As to the quality of the Liquor in which they are boiled, you may take very
commodiously fair water, or (where the humors are also to be cleansed from the
stomach) Barley water, or some decoction (where they be dry, sharp, and hot,) or
Mead, (where gross clammy humors are to be attenuated, cut, and cleansed;) or
Oxymel made with water in either case, or fat and lenifying broth where the
acrimony is to be tempered, whether it be of the humors-or poisons taken, or of
sharp violent vomits, so also water and oil in the aforesaid case; which are
therefore chiefly convenient, because they are reckoned among the gentler
vomitories.

The quantity of the liquor is usually let to the judgment of the Apothecary;
yet you may prescribe it having regard to what is said before in the Apozem and
potion; only observe, that because for the most part they take eight ounces of
Liquor for a vomiting potion, those moderate vomitories should be prescribed to
double the quantity.

A Vomiting Infusion in relation to the quality of the things to be infused is
most commonly prepared of the strongest sort of vomitories, which are more
rightly infused then given in substance or decoction; as those two most famous
for their vehemence in working, white Hellebor of the Ancients, and Antimony of
modern practicers; and although to the same purpose we may take also the
moderate vomitories, as Asarum, Radishes, Pompion roots dried, the middle bark
of Walnuts, etc. yet because there comes no danger from them, either given
insubstance, or decoction, they are to be prescribed only in decoction; but in
these stronger it is better only to give the infusion, which communicates only
its spiritual virtue without any quantity of the substance, which might make
the operation last the longer, or irritate the excretive faculty too much.

Therefore two things chiefly serve to prepare an infusion of white Hellebor of
old most famous, not only in rebellious and desperate affections, but also in
the sleighter sort; but now scarcely used in the greatest, and then with
caution, which being prudently had, you may infuse it from half a dram to one
dram, and a dram and half in broth, adding withal one scruple of Cordials for
correctors.

In the place of this you may give an Apple made hollow a little, then filled
with the root of white Hellebore and roasted; afterward the Hellebor being
taken out give it to eat. So also the root of a Radish stuck through with slices
of it, then roasted and eaten.

But in the place of Hellebor (as it is now generally used) take Antimony, the
other growing out of date; neither let it trouble you that it has hitherto
been rejected by the unexperienced; for it is far safer than the other, and
finisheth its operation without any manner of suffocation, convulsion, or
danger of other vehement symptoms: to the same purpose some use Antimony
crude, some its Vitrum, and some the regulas of it: but it is better to choose
that preparation of Antimony which they call Crocus Metallorum, because so
prepared it is spoiled of its fetid sulfur, which otherwise may be the cause of
great symptoms.

To the same end take Antimony so prepared, to 1 scruple, or half a dram; or
rather half a scruple, or gr. 12 infuse it in three ounces, or 4 ounces of
white Wine over hot embers, strain the liquor through a brown paper, and give it.

Of the same Crocus is made that water commonly called Aqua benedicta: instead
of the aforesaid Crocus you may infuse the vitrum to one scruple, [or rather to
gr. 12.] in any fit Liquor.

As to the quantity of the things to be infused, what is said before will.
serves or these stronger; if you would use them which are moderate, you may
prescribe

The root of Asarum from one dram and a half to three drams, and half an ounce.

The roots of Pompion dried from one dram to three drams.

Nettle seed, from one dram to half an ounce.

The bark of Walnut to 3 drams, and half an ounce.

But it is better to use the Antimony before spoken of.

As to the DISTILLED Liquor it is seldom prescribed by a Physician, except
distilled Vinegar of late by the vulgar brought into Physical use, which being
most violent in workings is to be used with caution, and that in strong people
only: and it is prescribed two ways; either distilled alone out of a leaden
still, or else as it is in use by the Women of Montpelier, they take a Loaf hot
out of the Oven, infuse it in two or three pound of Vinegar, and so distill it;
the use of this Liquor as also of the former is, to give three ounces or four
ounces in Fevers, and chiefly Agues that are of long continuance, either before
or in the very fit. Hitherto of the vomiting Liquor.

The liquor that is not vomiting is also used commonly without the infusion or
decoction of any simple vomitory made in it, in which after is dissolved either
things helping to vomit, or preparing only for a gentler vomit, or some simple
vomiting powder in the manner of a julep.

But for the quality see that before in the quality of the liquor for a
vomitory decoction.

In relation to the quantity, it should be prescribed to 8 or ten ounces.

Thus far of the liquid matter of vomitories of which (as we have said) now
they are only composed, and which before I defined a vomitory, as that which
was the received form to give them in.

They may also be given in a form that is not fluid, viz. of powder, bole, etc.
some of your vomitories being powdered and incorporated with a conserve. (So
modern Authors prescribe vitrum antimonii, crocus metallorum, and Mercurius
vitae.) which thing may also be done with other vomitories which work in a
greater quantity, (as Asarum, the root of Pompion, etc. (except Hellebor, which
is not to be given in substance, but its purging virtue to be drawn out by
infusion: but a liquid form seems more commodious, because by its moisture the
stomach is wet and relaxed, that those things which are to be voided may be
erected with the greater ease, and more readily, because all things in the
stomach are as it were washed out, and cannot cleave to as otherwise they
would; as also because the stomach is filled, and thereby the readier to empty;
otherwise the whole bottom must be as it were inverted, and turned up to the
mouth of it before it could expel them. But as it is, if you desire to use that
solid form, you may by taking some of the following powders either of it self
in a spoon moistening it with a little liquor, or by mixing it with some fit
conserves, to two drams, or three drams, in the form of a ^ole; and thus the
usual things shall be prescribed,

Root of Asarum, from one dram to four scruples.

Pompion root dried, from two scruples to one dram.

Nettle seed, from half a dram to a dram.

Radish seed, from three drams to half an ounce.

Bark of Walnuts to one dram.

But if you take the vomitories of Minerals, used by late practisers, you may
take

Of Vitrum Antimonii to grains six and eight to the strongest sort.

Crocus metallorum to grains six or eight.

Salt of Vitriol to one scruple, or half a dram.

Roman vitriol or white vitriol prepared, from half a scruple to 1 scruple.

THINGS to be dissolved, are either not used when you in tend to move it
gently, and only to give occasion of motion to the excretive faculty, as above;
or when the Liquor is sufficiently vomitory; but chiefly if that that is to be
voilled upwards, be readily prepared; if otherwise, diverse things are dissolved
in the said liquor, which may be reckoned twofold, Vomitories, and not
Vomitories.

The not vomitories are often and usual in a vomitive decoction, and also in a
Liquor that is not vomitive; in relation to their quality, they are to a
threefold end, viz. for the stirring up of the excretive faculty; for the
preparation of the humor to be voided; and the correction of the symptoms,
which may arise either from the humor, or vomitory.

For some are oily and fatty, which move vomit by overthrowing the strength of
the stomach, and give occasion to the excretive faculty, though irritated when
it moves but slowly; and therefore are only used in the sleighter sort of
Vomits when the stomach is apt to vomit, else not so fit; they are also useful
for the quelling the sharpness of humors, or other things taken down, and
poisons, such are common Oil, Linseed Oil, and Butter.

Other things are used to bridle the violence of the choleric gnawing humors,
as Vinegar, Oxymel simple, Syrup of Vinegar.

Others (and this is the chief end of things to be dissolved) respect the
preparation of the humor that is to be voided, and are either cleansers when
vicious humors are to be loosened from the stomach, or when they are slimy,
clammy, and stick fast (as is usually phlegm;) these are Oxymel simple, Oxymel
of Squils, Sugar, Honey; you may also note that some do (much amiss) reckon
among the vomitories, (contrary to experience) Oxymel, and syrup of Vinegar;
when we see Vinegar it self (either smelt to or taken down) from whom the
former have their energie does bind, and that eruptions of blood, fluxes of the
belly, and vomitings are stayed by it; so that they can only be used to prepare
the humors that they may the more easily be voided.

In relation to the quantity, they should be prescribed from one ounce to an
ounce and half, or two ounces, but these are not wont to be dissolved in a
vomitory made by infusion, or of other distilled Liquor, because a preparation
ought to precede the use of them, and because that Liquor of Vinegar serves well
enough to the same purpose, yet 'twil be no great error if you do dissolve them
in it.

But Vomitories that are to be dissolved are best used when the Liquor it self
is no way vomitive, and are some of the foresaid, in the same dose there set
down.

The USE: in it three things are to be considered, after what manner, how much,
and when.

As to the manner, as Vomitories should be usually liquid, so should they also
be taken warm; for so they the easier make a nauseousnes, and stir the
excretive faculty; but if they are given in form of a bole, they are to be
taken as boles are wont: but 'twil be convenient to give some Liquor warmed
half an hour, or an hour after, to make the vomiting easier.

As to the quantity or dose, a simple vomitory may be rightly given to one
pound in them of ripe age, for so the excretive faculty of the stomach is more
oppressed.

A Compound, of a decoction and that moderate to eight ounces or ten. The dose
of an infusion (as also of a vomitive Liquor) is before noted, the proportion
also of a Liquor not vomitive, to 8 ounces, or ten ounces.

As to the time when, in chronical diseases they may rightly be taken in the
morning, the stomach being empty, like other purgere, especially if the humors
that breed the nauseousnes are thin: but when on the contrary they are tough,
gross and clammy, if you take them after meat; they will work the sooner and the
easier: in periodical diseases, and intermitting Agnes, as the fit begins;
because we see nature ordinarily endeavor this way of evacuation at that time
of her own accord. Yet take them at any time when poison, or any hurtful thing
has been taken down into the stomach.

And this shall be the FORM of Prescribing.

1. If of a Decoction, etc. make a decoction in, etc. q. s. take of the
straining, etc. make a vomitory to be taken warm at such an hour; and if he do
not vomit a little after, let him provoke a vomit by his finger thrust down his
throat: if you would dissolve some things in it, you may add, take of the
straining, etc. in which dissolve, etc.

2. If of an infusion, etc. Make an infusion in, etc. let them be strained and
filtrated through a brown paper (because an infusion for the most part consists
of the strongest sort; if you should be content with only straining it, there
were fear that some of the gross substance might pass through with the liquor,
which sticking long in the tunicles of the stomach might too long provoke
vomiting, and trouble the patient;) so make a vomitory.

3. If of a distilled liquor.. of such a liquor etc. let him drink it, and a
little after let him vomit.

4. If of a liquor that is not vomitive,. etc. in which dissolve, etc. Make a
vomitory.

5. If in a solider form, as of a bole,, of the powder etc. mingle it with
such a conserve, which let him take as a bole; a little after let him vomit:
but if in the form of a powder, etc. let him take it in a spoon in a fit liquor.

The UTILITY: vomiting and vomitories were used by the Ancients both to prevent
diseases, and also to cure them; for with them it was usual (for health sake)
to vomit every month, as may be observed out of Hipocrates; and for this
reason they did the more easily bear vomitories through custom.

But at this day they are only used for the cure of diseases; and they are very
few which in a sound condition will use them to prevent diseases, unless such as
are much given to intemperance: neither in our age will they give them
indifferently in any diseases, but in those which are rebellious and chronical.

But the utility of a vomitory is either particular, respecting the stomach, or
universal, regarding the whole region, or some other part of it, deriving the
offending humors of them; or if it flow from some other place to them,
withdrawing it; so that the motion of nature, and inclination of the humor,
together with the verge of the places, and parts wherein it stays, and where
into it falls, and the ways by which they are to be derived or withdrawn be
naturally disposed thereto, and have some proximity and communion with the
stomach by free passages by which they may communicate: so that a vomit is in
general an emptying or purging remedy, as well particularly of the stomach, as
otherwise universally for derivation and revulsion.

But it evacuates in special, 1. The stomach, from all excrementitious humors
both choleric and Phlegmatic, either thin, gross, and clammy, gathered by the
imbecility of that it self, or sent thither from the whole Body, Head, Bowels,
or Veins; which a vomit does clearly exclude whether they fluctuate in the
cavity, or are impacted in the tunicles of it.

Hence it is profitable in the proper affections of the stomach, especially
want of appetite, nauseousness, frequent vomitings, pains of the stomach, and
heart-burning, etc. and also for those diseases of other parts, contracted by
their sympathizing with it; for the very fountain from whence they sprang being
exhausted, they also must needs vanish; for this it was that Galen said, it
helped the affections of the Pericranium, and also the Falling Sickness,
Megrim, Suffusions, and all other affections of the head, engendered by sympathy
with the stomach, either by reason of the morbifical humors translation to the
part affected, or the expiration of some vapor arising from the filth
contained in the stom^^k: it also suddenly relieves the stomach, and frees it
from the hurt might arise by things taken down, either me^t or drink, so much
in quantity, or of an ill quality; also from Surfettings, ^ru lities, and
poisons.

Furthermore, according to Galen, it cleanses the first region of the body
from a various impurity, and purges forth the filth from the hollow part of
the Liver, the Spleen, P^ner as, Mesentery, and other parts adjaeent to the
stomach: and as he himself has noted, it excludes that at once which any other
vehement purger cannot eradicate at diverse times; and for this reason
contumacious diseases of those parts have been healed miraculously by it; for
from those parts to the stomach the passages are short and expedite, therefore
it is profitable in the proper affections of those parts, as Ill habit,
Jaundies, Dropsy, Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, Agues, which there
have their fomenting causes, etc. and also (as we have said) it helps the
stomach troubled by the diseases of other parts with which it has communion,
all whose impurities the causes of these sympathetick diseases are (according
to Galen) by this way eradicated.

Lastly, out of the same Author in his Lib. 1. concerning Fevers, it also
purges the second and third region of the body, but it is only by the
consecution of the humors, unless you use the strongest sort, as the Ancients
did their vomit of Hellebor, whereby they drew the ex^r^m^ntitious humors even
from the most remote ^arts into the stomach; by the sam^ reason that we see
your violent purgers do the like; therefore because it is not safe to use such
vi^lent means to empty withal, in rel^tion to those parts it is only to be
esteemed (...) revelling remedy.

It is, ^^o profitable when the humor is contained in the parts near the
stomach, or falls to them from some other place, which by this means is a^tly
derived; for which cause it is ^ood for the inveter^t^ affections of the Liver,
Spleen, Mesent^^y, and intrals, therefore good in hypochondriacal affections,
so that the diseases of those parts arise not rom^ventosity, a hot distemper,
or some tumor.

It also turns the course of the humors falling into diverse parts, whether the
original of the defluxion be the stoma^k, o^ other arts cont^ined in the first
region and recals the vicious humors (falling to them) to the stomach from
whence they are expelled by vomit; hence (as aforesaid) it is profitable in the
sym pathetick affections of the Head, Fluxes of the Be^ly, the Sciatick, and
pain of the joints; so that Galen concludes a vomitory the most wholesome of all
purging Medicines, so it work easily and moderately; but what observations are
to be had in the administering it, see Hipocrates in his Aphorisms.

CHAP. VI. Of Medicinal Wines.
MEdicinal Wines as they were in use among the Ancients, as may be seen in
Dioscorides; so also are they now in frequent use, especially among the
Northern people, and those which are curious palated; who abhorring both
altering and purging Decoctions, Syrups, infusions, and Potions, for their
unpleasantness, do more liberally admit this sort of Wines, stored with the
virtues of the same simples, and that to good purpose, as well because Wine does
plentifully draw forth the inmost virtues of things; as also because by the
help of his most piercing spirit, conveighs them into the farthest parts
speedil^; you may add also, that seeing many do fancy the taste of
Wormwood-Wine, and use that, and that which is called Hypocras familiarly,
diverse purgers may be concealed under the taste of the Wine, so that they shall
not find it out; who without such a deceit would hardly take a purging
Medicine.

A MEDICINAL WINE is that that has drank up the virtues of diverse simple
Medicines infused in it; prepared either to alter or purge.

Hence it may be counted twofold, one purging, the other altering.

Both these in general are compounded, 1. of Must or new Wine, such as can be
had only at the time of Vintage; and therefore you should then prepare) your
Wine sufficient to serve a long time, viz. that it may help chronical
affections. It is made in this manner; the medicaments dried and cleansed are
grossly bruised and sowed up in a thin linen sack or bagg; (either bigger or
lesser, according as you prepare more or less Wine, or intend it for a shorter
or longer time,) put them in a vessel full of new Wine, so that it may hang in
the middle of the Wine; let them boil together; afterward let them work some
days; and as your Must sinks put new to it to fill it; when it has done
working, the vessel being close stopped, let all things steep fifteen or twenty
days; then let your Wine so cleansed be drawn into other vessels, (lest by too
long steeping the ingredients should corrupt, and contract some ungrateful,
hurtful quality, and impart it to the Wine;) so lay it up for your use.

2. Or of Wine cleansed from the lees, and this may be prepared at any time,
and therefore may be made in a less quantity as you please, (according as the
present use requires) after this manner; let your medicaments being dried and
cleansed be somewhat grossly bruised, and put into a glazed vessel (either
bigger or less according to the quantity you intend to make) putting to them of
the best white Wine, (or other quick tasied) three, four, six or eight times
their weight (or more, as you intend the dose to be great or little, or the
coutinuance of it long or short) let all (the vessel being close stopped,)
steep eight, 12, 15, or twenty days (if it be prepared in a greater quantity;)
otherwise, (if you make but little, and would use it suddenly,) for three or
four days; afterward strain it, and shift it into other vessels for your use;
or else (to make it the more pleasant and palating) let it be strained through a
Hypocras bagg, (if it be prepared in a small quantity; else 'twil be better to
infuse the following things in it after it is strained:) let it let it be
aromatized, and sweetened with s. q. of sugar, thus made, you man call it either
purging, or altering claret or hypocras, especially if it be arom^tized by much
spice

But in special, because in either some things ^re to be specially observed, I
will treat of both, beginning with the purging Wine.

The Purging Medicinal Wine.
THat is called a Medicinal purging Wine which being impregnated with the
virtues of diverse purging sim^les, is prepared to purge either one humor alone
or more

1. In regard o^ its composition it is either simple consisting of one simple
Cathartick together with his correctors or commound, which is made of many
purgers together with their correct^rs, or in which are also infused diverse
^lterers, respecting the part affected or humor to be purg^d.

2. In respect of the quality of the purgers themselves, and the humers to be
evacuated, one is an universal purger, others etc.

3. La^ly it (...) made without sweetning or spicing, of the aforesaid things
only, and is simply called a purging Medicinal Wine; or else it is over and
above swee^ned with Sugar, and seasoned with spice, and strained diverse times
through a Hypocras bagg: and is called purging Claret, or purging Hypocras (for
that term absolutely taken signifies a Wine prepared for pleasure.)

In it three things are to be co^^i^lered, the Composition, the ^^se, and the
profit.

In the COMPOSITION three things are to be examined.

1. The Wine of which it is made.

2. The things to be infused in it.

3. The things that are sometimes dissolved in it.

In all these we must consider both the quality and quantity.

The WINE in respect of its quality is either new and uncleansed, which is
otherwise called Must, which is much commended for this purpose, because by the
protection of its color, and working heat, the color and taste of the
ingredients are the better obscured; or else Wine cleansed from the lees, and
kept for use, either red or white.

But in relation to the quantity, this in general is limited by the use and
dose; as, if the use be to continue long or short time, or the dose to be a
larger or a Iess quantity; as thus, it may exceed the things that are to be
infused, eight, six, four, or three times their weighty but those which add 12
times their weight do it in favor to them that love bibbing, perhaps not with
respect to the intention. And it will be always best to let the dose for a
purging Wine be as little as you can in quantity, that it may be the less, and
more acceptable.

But in special, they usually define the quantity of Wine and things to be
infused in it, thus; A purging Wine that is to be prescribed is to be used
twelve days, either together, or every other day; in which you must be sure to
have twelve several doses of the purgers with their correctors, and if it ^e
needful fit alterers; then must you compute the quantity of them all, as for
example, suppose them 8 ounces, now if you would have the dose o^ the Wine to
be about an ounce and a half, or two ounces, prescribe it to 3 times their
weight; and so for other quantities as you please; by the same way and reasons
you may proceed as you see fit: but if the Wine be purely purging, made of the
gentler sort of Catharticks, it is to be taken four, five, or six times,
allowing requisite internals, as in the magisterial syrups.

The things to be infused in respect of their quality, are 1. either purgers
only, with their correctors, (among which Cinnamom is chiefly used for
pleasantness of the spice; as also Calamus Aromaticus of the shops for its
fragrant smell) either one or more: and these are to be chosen such as are not
of a very strange and unpleasant taste; such are Senna, Polipody, Epithymum,
black Hellebor, (especially for Melancholy persons) Carthamus, Turbith,
Hermodactils, (for the phlegmatic) Scammony, Cassia, and Manna sometimes, (for
the choleric and sweet palated, though seldom) Me choacan, and the seeds of
dwarf Elder, (for purging serous humors;) of the which Wines may be prepared to
purge any humors; either of some of these single, or (for the mixture of
humors, and complication of intent ions) of diverse joined together.

2. Or else with them are also infused diverse alterers dried, as Woods, Roots,
Barks, Leaves, Seeds, Flowers, spices either fewer or more, such as respect the
humor, or part, whereby the wind is rendered more familiar to it, and generally
the Germans (because they are pleased with it) mix wormwood with it.

In relation to the quantity (whether it be a simple purging Wine, or made of
more things) the number of doses for which the wine is prepared shall direct
you, as for example: a Wine of Senna is desired for twenty doses; now the dose
of Senna an infusion is half an ounce, or six drams; therefore ten ounces or
fifteen of it is to be prescribed, adding correctors in the proportion
aforesaid.

If the Wine be prepared of many purgers both gentle and strong, and also
alterers joined with them; this proportion is for the most part to be generally
observed.

Of the gentle sort of purgers let there be one part.

Of the stronger sort, a quarter so much as commonly it is (though you may add
them to a third part or to half, it matters not so you find out the right dose
of the Wine,) of Correctors, a quarter so much as of purgers, or else to a
third part, if the purgers are the strongest sort.

Alterers should be half so much as the purgers, or a third part (if very
effectual, as dried Roots, Seeds, and Spices especially) marking this, that
dried Leaves are to be prescribed by handfuls, ounces, and drams; And flowers
by pugils, and ounces also, and drams.

THINGS that are to be DISSOLVED, in respect of their quality (if perhaps the
taste or smell does not please the curious palated) are Sugar, some certain
spices, especially Cinnamom, which are cast into the Wine (if it be much;) or
if a small quantity, they are put into a Hypocras bag g, and the Wine often
poured through them, and is made into a purging Hypocras.

As to their quantity: for every pound of purging Wine you may add 3 ounces, or
4 ounces of Sugar, and two drams of Cinnamom; as the Apozems, Juleps.
Hypocrass, etc. are wont to be made and aromatized.

As to the USE: in it two things are chiefly to be considered, how much, and
when.

As to the quantity or dose of Wine to be drank which is not always one but
diverse, and which (of whatsoever quantity of purgers or Wine you compose your
Wine withal) you shall thus find out, and exactly define.

Measure your Medicinal Wine when you strain it, and shift the vessels, and by
the measure collect the weight; or else by some other means; And (as for
example) suppose it to be three pound, and this was made purgative with four
ounces of Senna, two ounces of Polypody: of Epithymum and black Hellebor of
each an ounce and a half, there being one ounce, or an ounce and half of
correctors also added over and above; Now because all these infused suffice for
seventeen doses, they are also sufficient for seventeen times; then if you
divide it into so many doses, you may find it out without error, and the true
dose of it will be two ounces, if you would purge strongly, for once; but if you
would purge often and gently for some days together, half that dose will
suffice.

As to the time when; because a Medicinal Wine is usually destined for tedious,
stubborn, and especially cold affections, (such as many are that have had
continuance from dreggy mucilaginous humors) whose causes cannot suddenly, but
must by little and little be taken away; therefore the use of it is to be
continued for diverse days (especially in the winter time, to 10, 15, or 20
together, or every other day, like the usual pills; so may this also be drank in
the morning, or two hours before dinner: but if it be not intended for this
kind of purging (which is called Epicrasis,) but that you would give it for
once to work strongly; the use of it will be the same as of your other
eradicators in the morning, when the indication of purging shall require; or if
it be prescribed instead of your purging magisterial syrup the use is the same
with that once or twice in a month, in the morning like other purgers.

The FORM of Prescribing may easily appear from the manner of compounding it.

The UTILITY: as to the benefit arising from this form, whether you look upon
the virtues of the simples infused that are to be extracted, and which the Wine
does copioufly attract to it self, or the conveighing them into the most
intimate parts of the body, by the help of its piercing spirit: or whether you
consider the familiarity of it with our nature; which makes it be friendly
received by her; or its formal essence, what affinity it has by its very
substance with the radical moisture, heat, and spirit of the solid parts of our
body, for which cause it easily is converted into them, and united with them,
carrying with it the virtues of those simples steeped in it, I say considering
all these, it cannot but be to our great benefit: so that whether it be to
purge, and separate the dreggy humors, confused with the rest of the humors,
spirits, and solid parts, it can do it perfectly, by the familiarity it has
with our nature, whereby it may insinuate it self, and the virtues it is imbued
withal; or whether it be to alter diverse ways, either to cleanse away the
relics of the foregoing impurities, or restore the natural vigor by
appropriat means, or to strengthen the parts: either of these are this way
effectually performed through the sympathy it has with nature, and is united
to it, together with the Medicinal virtues it carries with it.

But though the benefit of Medicinal Wine be so great, yet it is not so
frequently used in all regions, nor at all times of the year; but is most usual
with them that inhabit cold Countries, and chiefly in the Winter, Spring, and
Autumn.

In general, it is good in a cold time of the year, a cold Country, and cold
temper of the body, etc. as is specially profitable in chronical affections,
and a cold time of the year for delicate palated persons, and is prescribed
against paleness of color, difficulty of breathing, confirmed obstructions of
the bowels; and for them that are also paralytical, though Wine be forbidden
to them, (in which respect wine made of Honey would be much better) in
affections of the stomach, and weakness arising from crude cold humors,
VVormwood-wine made purging would be excellent.

The Medicinal altering Wine.
UNder the notion of altering Wines are contained Wines imbued with diverse
faculties, which both respect certain parts, break the relikes of humors left
behind blot out the remainder of diseases, and also specifically corroborate
(as of simple Wines) are Sage wine for cold affections of the brain, Hysop and
Elecampane wine for the Breast, and wormwood wine which is familiar to the
stomach.) As also they which evacuate, yet without a purger, (as Wines
prescribed to move sweat, break the Stone, provoke Urine, and the courses;) as
also those which excite, cherish, and confirm the virtues of the principal
parts; as those which are made of spices to strengthen.

And this is (as the purging Wine) in respect of its composition either simple
or compound.

In respect of its essect, either altering the body, humors, or spirits, in the
first second or third qualities or else strengthening.

Moreover, it is made either without sweetning, or spicing, and is simply called
a Medicinal altering Wine; or else is seasoned with such things, and let often
run through a Hypocras bagg, as above, and is called a Claret or Hypocras,
although these names belong to such as are made for pleasure.

In it three things are to be weighed, the Compo. only sition, the Use, and the
Vtility.

The COMPOSITION is the same with that of the purging Wine; either it is made
with Must, (when the use is to continue long, for the altering of chronical and
stubborn affections,) and one simple medicament dried; or of more, respecting
the affection, humor, and part affected with a particular propriety; or else
with wine defecated.

But what ought to be the proportion of the must, and dried ingredients, is
before declared in the purging wine; yet you may add (because altering wines
may be taken in a larger quantity, and ought to be so) a greater quantity of
wine then in the former, to ten times, or a 11 times the quantity of the
ingredients.

But the quantity both of wine and ingredients is to be limited by the dose
that is to be taken either greater or less, by the short or long contiance of
its use. Lastly by the quality of the simples, either weak, or effectual, as
that which spices in art to it.

We have said before that this sort of Wines when they are passed through a
hypocrass bagg, and sweetened, are called clarets.

Hither also belongs that which is otherwise called Hypocras absolutely, which
is also corroborating, composed of diverse spices, pleasant both in smell and
taste; as of Cinamom, Ginger, Grains of paradise, Cardamomes, Pepper, infused
to two drams in one pound of claret Wine, for some hours, afterward strained
through a Hypocras bagg diverse times, adding sugar s. q. viz: two ounces or
three ounces; but '^is generally ma^e Iess compounded of Cinamom only, but if
in stead of sugar the Wine be relished with honey, 'twil be vere profitable in
cold affections, where wine alone is hurtful, as in the Palsy, etc. the
honey working most effectually; and this is called Oenomel, or honied Wine; and
also Mulsum, which the Ancients used much, made of one part of honey, and two
or three parts of Wine, Spices also being added if need required, either to
the quantity of half a part, or to one fourth part, or one fifth part.

The USE contains these two questions: how much, and when?

As to the time when, it may be given every day, or every other day, or
interposing a longer time, according as the disease requires, 1, two or three
hours before dinner.

As to the quantity or dose, that is moderated according to the quality and
quantity of the ingredients, and the diverse proportion of the wine they are
infused in; as when the ingredients infused (...)

In it three things are to be considered, Composition, Use, and utility.

In the COMPOSITION also three.

1. The matter of which stamped the milky juice is drawn forth of.

2 The liquor with which it is milked out.

3. Things to be dissolved in it.

In all these the quality and quantity are to be considered.

The MATTER in relation to its quality are both fruits, as Almonds, viz: the
sweet, blanched, and also seeds, viz. the 4 greater cold seeds, of which
emulsions are every where usually made.

To these are sometimes added both fruits, as the kernels of pine nuts in
affections of the breast, or where we would moysten, and also restore, as in
Hectic; and also seeds, as usually of white poppy, Lettuce, and Purslane, when
we would either-provoke sleep, or cool more effectually, or thicken thin and
hot humors, and temper their acrimony.

In respect of their quantity, both fruits and seeds are in general prescribed
from one ounce to three ounces, but in special, there may be of fruits, an
ounce and half or two ounces; of seeds, one ounce, or an ounce and half.

The LIQUOR with which this milky substance is drawn forth, in relation to his
quality is either fair water, or some simple distilled water; or usually the
decoction of whole Barley, especially where we desire to cleanse; or ptisan,
that is, the second decoction of huld barley, after the first w^ter is thrown
away, or else the decoction of liquorice, where we, would lenifie; or the
decoction of other pleasant things tending to the same purpose.

In regard of the quantity for every particular dose, three ounces, or four
ounces will suffice; hence (because Emulsions are for the most part prepared
only for three doses, for 'twil not be kept longer without corrupting) you may
prescribe 9 ounces, or one pound.

Things to be DISSOLVED, in relation to their quality, are sometimes Sugar
alone; or as it is generally received, some fit Syrup pleasant to the taste,
that may moisten, lenifie, and cool, as Syrup of Violets, and Maidenhair.

Sometimes to make it the more pleasant, there is added some Rose Water.

They also which dissolve Manus Christi made and with Pearls do very well.

As to the quantity of sweetners, one ounce, or an ounce and half at most will
serve for one dose; an ounce, or an ounce and half of Rose Water will serve for
the whole Emulsion, and a dram of Manus Christi for every dose.

The USE: in it three things are to be considered, the manner how, the quantity
how much, and the time when.

As to the manner; it is taken either by it self in the form of a drink, or else
it is often prescribed; 3 ounces, or 4 ounces of it with the broth of a chick
altered with appropriat things.

As to the quantity, the dose is apparent by what is already said.

As to the time when; it is taken morning and evening; and if it be prescribed
to procure sleep, then at the time of going to sleep.

The FORM of prescribing, etc. let them be beaten in a marble Mortar, pouring
to them by little and little, etc. in the strained Liquor dissolve, etc. so
make an Emulsion for three or 4 doses, to be used as aforesaid.

The UTILITY: an Emulsion is not only prescribed to lenifie and assuage the
affections of the Breast and Lungs, especially the hot and dry; the burning of
the Reins, and Bladder, sharpness of Urine, and Gonorrhea, as they usually will
have it; but to other uses also: against thirst, and to temper heat in any hot
diseases; and therefore is most peofitable in burning continual Fevers, to
temper the drought of them that always accompanies such diseases; therefore
are they very usual in the Hecticks, and to provoke sleep; and alter in Fevers
or any hot distempers instead of Apozems.

Generally it is used to lenifie, cool, and moisten.

CHAP. VIII. Of Almond Milk.
THis differs not much in color and taste from an Emulsion, only it is usually
thicker than it. This is twofold, one more liquid, being a milky substance
drawn out of Almonds, like the Emulsion as aforesaid; another thicker, made
thick with boiling, of which at present.

And this is a restorative Medicine, somewhat thinner of substance than syrup,
much like Milk, (hence it is called Almond Cream, and Almond milk) drawn and
sweetened with Sugar, prepared both to alter and nourish.

CHAP. IX. Of Barley Cream.
THat which we (from the matter it is made of) call Barley cream, the Ancients
from the manner of preparing called Ptisan: which was a meat made of barley
huld, and baked, (for the Greek word signifies, to hull and bark,) and water;
usually we call this barley cream; but our ptisan is a drink.

And though it be seldom prescribed, yet it is COMPOUNDED, either after the
grosser manner of barley cleansed and boiled, which is given together with the
broth, adding sugar as you list; but this is only convenient for sound people.

Or else that which is truly barley cream, of huld barley two ounces; let it
boil in fair water, over a gentle fire, then cast away the water, and boil it
is a new water four or five hours with a gentle fire, then pulp the barley
through a strainer, sweeten it with one ounce, or ounce and a half, or two
ounces of sugar, and after let them be a little boiled.

The USE: anciently it was wont to be the meat of feverish people, but now a
days it is given for the most part near sleeping time; and then if they are
troubled with over-watching, there is added to it little of the emulsion
prepared with white poppy seeds.

The UTILITY of it is much in fevers, in which it is an alimentory medicine,
cooling, cleansing, nourishing much, and breeding good juice; it moystens, and
is best for affections of the breast, and hecticks.

CHAP. X. Of Milk, and the whey of Milk.
MIlk also happens to be prescribed, but chiefly in the phthyfick and
disentery, and that with some caution, both in the sort of milk, and also in
the dose, and manner of giving it; Asses milk is chiefly commended in the
hectic, because it restores radical moisture, and is of good juice; Cows milk
is the fattest, and fullest of butter; sheeps milk is fullest of cheese, Goats
milk moderate between all, best for persons extenuated.

As to the USE, DOSE, and manner of PRESCRIBING, it is this, of Asses milk,
(when you would cool and cleanse, but Goats milk when you would nourish) four
ounces; of sugar or honey (left it corrupt or grow sour in the stomach,) one
ounce, and this for the first dose; for the second dose increasing one ounce,
to five ounces, so proceeding til you come to ten ounces, or twelve ounces, and
then decreasing again by the same degrees, til you are returned to the same
quantity: let it be taken 4 hours before meat, neither sleeping, nor moving the
body violenly after the taking of it. But the use of milk is never to be begun,
til the body be very well cleansed.

The UTILITY: it is chiefly prescribed for those that are hectical, for it
fattens, restores; in the use of it we must have a care that the body be not
impure, for in a cold stomach it sowres; in a hot, it turns to a nidorousness,
from whence comes Headache; it is not therefore profitable for them that are
Feverish, or have their short rib-region puffed up: but it is very commodious in
the dysentery, both to lenifie, and also cleanse and heal the Ulcer, especially
if it be chalibeated, and you give a good quantity of it morning and evening,
with one scruple of Terra sigillata, four hours before any meat.

The WHEY OF MILK is not nourishing, but medicinal, and evacuates both serous
and adust humors: if it be liberally taken it cools, and is good in those that
are Feverish, and in the heat of the Liver and Reins in summer time; but most
profitable in Melancholy, and affections proceeding from it, as the Leprosy,
Scabbiness, etc. especially if Fumitory be steeped in it.

This is the USE and manner of PRESCRIBING. VVhey of Milk let it be strained
and boiled, (both because it is windy, as also that any thing of curdiness in
it may be separated and settled;) then steep in two pound of it, for one night,
one handful of Fumitory, of Succory, m. ss. when it is strained add to it an
ounce, or an ounce and half of Sugar; but the second day two ounces are to be
added more; so every day increasing til you come to three pound; afterward on
the contrary decreasing til you come to one pound. Otherwise let one pound
serve every day for a month together, steeping in it the same quantity of
Fumitory, adding to it when it is strained one ounce of Sugar; and in Melancholy
people as much of the Cider or juice of pippins. Otherwise it is used for fevers
and heats, to eight ounces, with sorrel steeped in it, and that in the morning
four hours before meat.

(...) that they more hang in it tied in a ragg 2 drams, or more of yest, or
Leven, and add to it half a dram, or two scruples of spices; to every pound;
and so according to the quantity of Honey.

The USE and UTILITY, it is prescribed for the ordinary drink in cold
affections, and especially the phlegmatic, and where the abstaining from Wine
is advantageous, or where the use of it is hurtful, as in the Palsy; or when
we desire effectual virtues, powerful both to alter cold humors, and strengthen
the natural heat; it also wonderfully preserves from putrefaction: But as it is
convenient for them that are of cold complexion, and for old men; so is it
hurtful for those that are feverish, choleric, or hot of temper: because it
soon turns into choler, and grows bitter, as we may find in boiling it
overmuch, or by keeping it too long: therefore Hippocrates forbi^s it to them
that are very choleric, or that have great spleens, in which it is too
suddenly drawn into the body; from hence it is that it is the cause of
crudities, and incredible windiness of the intrals; it is also according to
Hippocrates diuretica), wonderfully cleansing and driving forth sand (...) or
gravel.

The Winish performs this more sorcibly, and like Malmsey powerfully concocts
cold humors, expectorates, ^^en^thens the stomach and concoction, discusseth
windiness, and concocts crudities; as also does the commoner sort according to
Galen; it wonderfully, loosens humors in the breast, and is good for them that
be asthmatick.

The Medicinal Mead is easily prepared of the simple by boiling dried simples
in it, respecting the part to which it is destined, and of those such as are
most pleasant; let them be boiled after it is clear scum'd, and let them be
(for example) four handfuls of Herbs; boil them, and strain the LIquor from
them, in which infuse for two or three hours half an ounce, or six drams of
spices.

The Vtility is great, and the virtue of it specifical, (besides what is
aforesaid) in taking away diseases, especially cold ones, and those of long
continuance, as the Palsy, etc.

CHAP. XII. Of Sugared Water, and Barley Water.
SUGARED WATER is a more sweet and pleasing drink than Mead, and is almost as
effectual, in those in whom we abstain from the use of Mead for fear of heat,
and is chiefly convenient for them that are abstemious.

It is made of Fountain water clarified at the fire, 12 parts, and sugar one
part, more or less to your palate.

You may aromatize it with Cinnamom, or in fevers with Saunders to 3 drams, or
half an ounce; so let them use it for their ordinary drink

PTISAN was a meat of the Ancients, which we now call barley Cream. Our ptisan
is a drink fit broth for the healthy, and Feverish, and when heat is either
present, or imminent, and where Wine is forbidden.

And this is made diverse ways, according to the desire of them that take it.

Either it is made simply of whole Barley, and fountain water, to one part of
Barley, ten, fifteen, or which is better, twenty parts of water, as it is
generally made in the shops, which is to be boiled to the consumption of five
parts, and til the barley swel much; ( Nicholaus therefore directs ill to boil
it to the consumption of fifteen parts, unless it be for meat) and such like is
vulgarly ealled in the shops, Barley water, and decoction of Barley.

Or else Liquorice, Raisins of the Sun, the roots of Grass or Sorrel, and other
things, according to the palate of him that takes it, are boiled in it, though
in small quantity; but it is seldom now a days prescribed by the Physician.

The UTILITY: it moistens, cools, cleanses, yields little nourishment, but such
as is fit for choleric and sanguine people, and for them that are in fevers,
or have hot affections of the Liver, Stomach, or Reins.

Note, that Barley water, or that which we now call Ptisan, consists of whole
barley, one part; of water, twenty parts, boiled til the barley swel, and the
cream of Barley, til it be bursted: but that which we call Barley cleansed and
boiled, is boiled til it go into a pulp, represents the Ptisan of the Ancients;
and if it be pulped through a hair strainer, it is called the juice of Barley.

CHAP. XIII. Of Dyet-drink.
BY this name of Diet, we do not so much understand the regulating of the six
things not natural, as diverse decoctions made of usual sweating Medicines;
through the whole use of which, because an exact and accurate way of living
temperately is to be observed, from hence it is that these have been absolutely
called by the name of Diet.

But that which we understand by the name Diet, is a decoction of one of the
usual sudorifical Medicines, or more, made in a fit Liquor, prepared either to
alter simply, or evacuate insensibly by transpiration, or sensibly by sweat.

Therefore a Diet-drink is to be accounted twofold, altering and evacuating.

The altering Diet-drink.
ALthough these four usual sweating Medicines seem to be destined only for
provoking sweat, yet are they often prescribed with very good success in diverse
affections without sweating; hence it is that I call it an altering Diet-drink.

In this three things are to be considered, the Composition, the Use, and
Vtility.

In the COMPOSITION three things also, the matter of which it is made, the
Liquor, and the things to be dissolved in it.

The MATTER in relation to its quality, is twofold.

1. Some of the common Sudorificks, as Guaiacum, China, Sassafras and
Salsaparilla.

2. Diverse alterers, as roots, leaves, seeds, flowers, etc. respecting the
affection, the humor offending, and part affected.

But in special, that matter is chosen diversely, according to the variety of
the parts in which the affections that are to be removed are inherent.

For in altering and removing powerfully phlegmatic and inveterate affections,
we usually take Guaiacum, China, or Salsaparilla, either alone, or mixed
together with fit alterers, as aforesaid.

But in affections of the breast, as the stuffing, Ulcer, and putrefaction of
the Lun^s, (in which now a days such an altering diet is usually prescribed,
and is every where called the pectoral decoction,) we choose either China alone,
or else there is sometimes added to it Salsaparilla, or Sassafras, together,
with alterers appropriated to the breast.

So that from what is said before, an altering Diet drink may be reckoned
twofold, 1. Not pectoral, insensibly consuming the phlegmatic affections of
diverse parts, 2. Pectorel, viz. a decoction of China, ( sometimes Sal^ap^rilla
being added) prepared of pectoral seeds and fruits, such is only now a days
prescribed.

As to the quantity; those sudorificks in a diet-drink not pectoral are
prescribed either alone, or mixed, to six ounces more or less, according as the
time, age, and region shall further require; but alterers, as Roots, Leaves,
Seeds, Flowers, either all or some of them are to be added to half the quantity
they are appointed for the Apozem aforesaid.

But in a pectoral Diet-drink, whose basis is China, this (if alone) is added
to one ounce; if other things aforesaid be joined to it, then to two drams, or
three drams of these, they usually take six drams of China.

Of alterers pectoral fruits are added to an ounce and a half, or two ounces;
pectoral seeds to an ounce, or an ounce and a half; and if (as sometimes in the
Phthysis) the flesh of Craw-fish, or tortoises be added, it is to an ounce, or
two ounces.

The LIQUOR, in relation to its quality in an altering Diet drink not pectoral,
is common water, or some other fit liquor, as before in the Apozem, chiefly
Mead) because these sorts of decoctions for the most part respect cold
affections, and humors. In a pectoral Diet-drink also, either common water, or
decoction of Barley is taken; but with this proviso, that the China be infused
in this Liquor for some hours; then let it be put up together with the pectoral
fruits and seeds in the belly of a chick, or hen; then let them boil in the
aforesaid Liquor til all be boiled to pieces.

As to its quantity, take 10 or 12 pints, or q. s. as is required to boil it
thoroughly.

Things to be dissolved, as to their quality, in a diet-drink not pectoral, are
sometimes syrup, or sugar, and are prescribed to be dissolved together with the
aromaticks, as in an altering Apozem.

In a pectoral drink sugar of Roses is generally prescribed, yet it may be also
some fit syrup.

As to their quantity, they are dissolved to an ounce, or an ounce and a half,
in every dose.

The USE: in it mark three things, the manner, the quantity, and the time.

The decoction not pectoral, as to the manner indrinking, is to be taken
without sweating.

As to the united quantity, or dose, it is to be taken to four ounces, or six
ounces; as to the divided quantity, it is to be used ten or fifteen days.

As to the time, this sort of alterer ought to be taken in the morning.

The pectoral drink also, as to the manner, is taken without sweat.

As to the dose, six ounces also, and is to be continued also for fifteen days.

The Time also is the morning.

And this is the FORM of PRESCRIBING.

In a decoction not pectoral,. etc. make a decoction, keep it in a glazed
vessel for four or five morning doses, which (the body being first purged) let
him continue for ten or fifteen days; in the mean time observing a moderate
and drying diet; and for his ordinary drink, let him use the second decoction
of the aforesaid ingredients, which is called a Bochette.

But in a pectoral one,. (China, or other thing, infuse them in, etc. of water,
then put them in the belly of a chick, together with the fruits, etc. boil it
til it be all to pieces, adding at the latter end of the decoction the leaves,
etc. ( viz. the preparers) strain all with a gentle pressure; in one pound of
the strained liquor dissolve, etc. for two doses, to be given in the morning,
keeping his bed two or three hours after, without sweating; let him continue
this fifteen, or 20, or 30 days, the body being first purged with Manna, which
is to be repeated once in fifteen days: in the mean time living temperatly,
and using the second decoction of China, or small mead, for his ordinary drink.

The Utility is remarkable in all long-lasting affections, when your scope
requires the attenuating, resolving, or otherwise insensibly consuming that
collection offilthy humors yt foments this sort of chronical affections; as
also to rarifie the ways and passages by which they are to be digested, and to
prepare them powerfully for expurgation: neither is it safe to use them with
sweat, as in the Asthma, and Phthysis especially, in which now a days this
sort of diet is only prescribed; in which affections it is pernicious to use
either purgers, or Sudorificks. Neither can we consume or evacuate those humors
that are the fomenters of such affections any other way.

An evacuating Diet, drink.
SVch as is now a days for the most part only prescribed, is here understood,
which consumes and empties the morbifical causes by sweat.

And this is twofold, one only sweating, the other is also purgative.

The sweating decoction is now only properly called a Diet-drink; and is (as I
said before) that which visibly consumes the Antecedent, and conjunct causes of
diseases by sweatings.

In this three things are to be marked; the Composition, the Use, and Vtility.

In the COMPOSITION two things are to be considered.

1. The matter of which this sort of decoctions are made.

2. The Liquor in which they are boiled.

And in either of them both the quality, and the quantity.

The matter, in respect of the quality is either sudorifical, or also altering
both at once sometimes.

As to the sudorificks, it is compounded either of Guaiacum, and its barkonly;
or only China, seldom of Salsapar^lla alone, and hardly ever of Sassafras alone.

Either of Guaiacum as the basis, with sometimes one, sometimes two of the
others mixed with it, according to the diverse intentions of the Physician; or
else that the too much heat of Guaiacum might be allayed, yet retaining the
same benefit of sweating.

Or of China as the basis with Salsaparilla, or Sassafras where the scope is to
heat less; yet it dries as much, and consumes vicious humors equally.

As to the alterers, it is most profitable (with the aforesaid) to add diverse
altering simples toward the end of the decoction, that may be appropriated to
the humor and part affected, whereby the Diet-drink becomes famous; or else
they are added to this end only to correct and allay the heating and drying
quality of the Guaiacum, lest it too much inflame the Liver; and for this are
used Roots, Leaves, Seeds, Fruits, Flowers, either more or less.

As to the quantity, sudorificks prescribed alone, or mixed, should be allotted
to one ounce, or an ounce and a half for every dose; and because a sweating
diet-drink is usually prescribed for 4 doses, only four ounces, or six ounces
ought to be prescribed; which quantity may be lessened or augmented according
to the variety of the tempers, age, strength, time of the year, constitution of
the disease, Country, etc.

But the alterers when they are added to them, should be prescribed to half the
quantity they are appointed for the Apozem; and as to their order they should
be set after the sudorificks; this is every where to be observed, that in the
decoction of Guaiacum you are to add Liquorice, and Raisins of the Sun, ana, an
ounce, or one ounce, and a half.

The LIQUOR, in relation to its quality is prescribed to be fountain water.

As to the quantity, although by the precepts of art in the decoction of Roots
and Woods it ought to be eight times so much as of the things to be boiled; yet
because in the decoction of these sweating drinks much of the Liquor uses to
be wasted, it ought to be twelve times their quantity; so that to one ounce of
Sudorificks should be one pint of water, and then to be boiled til half be
wasted, which is the most usual manner; it may also be prescribed to a pint and
half, and then boiled til two thirds be wasted.

The USE: as to the quantity, eight cu^ces of this sort of decoction may be
given.

As to the manner, let it be drank warm, covering the body with many clothes
more than is wont.

As to the time, it is best in the morning sometimes, though seldom it is
repeated at evening: in very strong and phlegmatic bodies, abounding with
excrementi^ious humors.

The FORM OF PRESCRIBING is after this example of Guaiacum,. the shavings of
the wood of Guaiacum four ounces, the bark of the same two ounces; let them be
infused in six or nine pints; of fountain water twenty four hours, over warm
embers, the Vessel being close stopped; then boil them with a gentle fire of
fresh charcoal without smoke, till half be wasted; afterward run them throrow
an hypocras bag, (but if you desire the decoction the stronger, press them out
gently, sweeten the decoction with three ounces, or four ounces of Sugar, and
aromatize it with a dram and a half, or two drams of Cinnamom (but this
sweetning and aromatizing may better be omitted in those that are less curious
palated) so keep it in a glazed vessel for your use; let him take of this
decoction eight ounces warm in the morning, covering him warmer than usually,
and let him sweat as he can reasonably endure it.

Note, that when Alterers are prescribed wi^h the sudorificks, it may be
appointed in the form thus, toward the end of the decoction add such things,
etc.

the remainders of the decoction aforesaid, ( viz. when no other simples are
added to it) add (if you will) an ounce of some of the aforesaid sudorificks
fresh, infuse them in 12 pints of founta in water, eight or twelve hours, boil
them till a third part or a quarter only be wasted, strain them through an
hypocras bag, sweeten it with s.q. of S^gar, and aromatize it with a dram and a
half, or two drams of Cinnamom, so make it for a second decoction, or a bochet
for your ordinary drink.

Observe, that this manner of diet should be continued for fifteen, twenty, or
thirty days (unless the strength fails, then may it be now and then
intermitted three or four days space) in which space let him rather use roast
meats then boiled, as mountain and field-birds stuck through with Cinnamom and
cloves, as also hens and capons, bisket-bread baked with anniseed, and raisms
of the Sun, torrified Almonds, and in the last course at table, coriander and
anniseed comfits: let him use the second decoction strained, and aromatized
with sugar and Cinnamom, q. s. for his ordinary drink, but if his belly be
bound, let a common glyster be now and then administered, or which is best,
every six or eight days, renew the use of pills, potions, or other purgers
prescribed, (that the more gross matter which (the thinner parts being consumed
otherwise) uses to remain behind in the bowels may also be expelled) on which
day let him abstain from the use of the decoction.

And as they ought to be purged well before the use of the decoction, so ought
they also every eleventh or twelfth day.

There uses also in the prescribing these dietdrinks, of digesting head-herbs,
(the hair being first shaved off) two bags to be applied to the head reasonable
hot for a quarter of an hour, til the sweat burst forth of the face, as soon as
the drink is taken down) to provoke sweat, and also after sweat is wiped off,
especially in affections of the head, as well todigest as consume the offensive
cause; and when these are taken away, the head is to be wrapped in warmed locks
of Hemp, fumed with the ordinary fume.

The UTILITY is eminent and plentiful, not only in external, but also in the
internal affections, especially the contumacious, whose causes have taken
deeprooting, and could not be removed by ordinary purgers, and alterers, so
that they need these sorts of medicines, which by their subtilty and tenuity of
parts may either insensibly dissolve them, or visibly expel them by sweat, and
discuss the relics of vicious humors; so also is it used against inveterate
defluxions from the head, and catarrbes of long continuance, the ill habit,
dropsy, and other affections of like sort, proceeding from abundance of
phlegmatic humors, and also aganst the French Pox, and. Thus much concerning
the sweating diet-drink.

But the PURGING-SWEATING diet- drink is a decoction, which in the aforesaid
diet moves both sweating, and to the stool together, an invention of the Modern
Physicians, and not used till within these few years; neither was it invented
without great hope of a happy success: seeing that by the help of this, both
the inner parts of the humors are expelled by sweat; and grosser relics,
which otherwife use to stick very firmly to the intralls and other parts, are
by this means profitably eradicated together; nor matters is all what some may
object, concerning the contrary motions for the natural heat, that instrument
of the expulsive faculty, together with the faculty it self, is ready
indifferently for any motion, so that where there is a way made by the
stimulation or attraction of the medi^ine, it indifferently stirs up it self
for the expulsion of the morbificall cause, especially since it is approved and
confirmed by experience it self; this discovers the reason of the name and
definition.

In this three things are considered, the composition, the use, and the Vtility.

In the COMPOSITION, chiefly two things.

The Matter or Ingredients, and the Liquer; in either of them, the Quality, and
the Quantity.

As to the MATTER in regard of its quality, you may take the aforesaid
decoction, consisting as is aforesaid of only sudorificks, or else also of
altering simples joined with them, from whence it has the name of sweating.

To this matter (that the decoction may be also purgative) those things are
added which are spoken of in the purging Apozem, as those purgers appointed
there for the basis, Senna, Car. thamum, and Polypody, as also other purgers,
that chiefly are appropriated to the phlegmatic humor, turbith,
hermodactills, rheubarb, and agarick, (together with their correctors) more or
less, as is for your purpose.

As to the quantity: concerning Sudorificks, and alterers, see before; but
purgers are to be added near the quantity they are prescribed in, for the
purging Apozem, or something less, ( viz. by a quarter) because the strength
can not bear such copious evacuations, both by stool and sweating together.

Of the Liquor, both touching its quality, and quantity, see before.

The USE: as to the quantity, it is given to four ounces, or five ounces; as to
the time, in the morning, and that for four days usually, in the beginning of
these sort of diets; for in the rest of the days following, the simpler
sweating diet drink is to be used without the purgers.

As to the FORM, it is this,. etc. i: e: the things aforesaid, o^ the
sudorifical decoction; in the end of the decoction add the purgers aforesaid;
or else with them the alterers; let them be strained, etc. see before.

This purging decoction being ended, and the four morning doses being finished,
let them use the same decoction (excepting the purgers) 15 or 20 days, etc.

The UTILITY: this sort of Diet-drink is most usual our late Physicians in
bodies that are very soul, and also strong, which require that double
evacuation; to expel hose morbifical humors residing in the first, second, and
third region, that both the gross with the thin might by one labor be cast
forth: but this as it is most profitable, so most usual in the ordering and
curing the French Pox.

ANIMADVERSIONS.
THis is to be noted about Sudorisicks, in the forms of Prescribing, and
specifically.

Of the Wood Guaiacum it is said,. of the resinous Lignum sanctum, i. e.
Guaiacum.

Of the Wood Sassafras,. of the wood Sassafras newly brought over, together
with his bark cut or shaved into thin slices. And

Of the Root China, of the weightiest root of China, not worm eaten or rotten,
cut in thin slices, etc.. and of the root

SALSAPARILLA, of Salsaparilla cut in slices, together with his hairy strings.

This also is to be noted, that the decoction of China is to be kept in a warm
place, otherwise 'twil grow sour, and the decoction of the Wood Sassafras if
kept will ose his grateful smell.

CHAP. XIV. Of a Bochete.
ABOCHET is the most profitable of the aforesaid diet Drinks; otherwise useful
in affections, in which Wine is not safely given, or where your scope is to dry
leisurely, and consume the dreggs of humors.

And it is (briefly) compounded, in diets of the residencie of your sudorifical
decoction; (so that no alterers or purgers have been boiled with it, as has
been above declared in the form of the sudorifical diet-drink; otherwise it is
to be prescribed, and prepared of fresh ingredients) one ounce, or two ounces
of the same, or some other sudorifick being added over and above; let all be
infused twelve hours in twelve pints of water, as above, solet them be boiled,
only to the consumption of a third or fourth part; let them be strained through
an Hippocras bagg, and relish it with half a pound, or a pound of sugar; or
else season it to your palate, and aromatize it with three drams, or half an
ounce of Cinnamom, so make a secondary Decoction or a ^ochete, to be kept in
glass bottles for your ordinary drink.

Or else it is made for present use, either in regard no diet-drink has been
prescribed before, out of whose residence this may be prepared (or because
perhaps it was composed of other simples, both alterers and purge^e, whose
virtues are not needful in this kind of ordinary drink,) then is it to be
prepared of some one or more of the suborificks, prescribed to two ounces, or
two ounces and a half, after the same manner as is abovesaid; so make a
Bochete, to be used as is said.

The USE, FORM, and UTILITY, are already sufficiently declared.

CHAP. XV. Of Cock-Broth.
THe reason of the name is plain; this was the invention of the Ancients, and
is much confirmed by the use and practice of late Physicians.

But this DECOCTION of a Cock is a broth prepared either to alter or purge, of
an old Cock, together with some certain sudorificks, and also alterers; and
sometimes also purgers.

From hence this sort of decoction is twofold, altering, and purging.

The altering Cock-borth.
IN the altering broth are considered chiefly the matter, and the Licuor, and
in both of them the quality and quantity.

As to the matter, in respect of its quality, an old COCK is taken (as it were)
for the basis.

Then either his belly is filled with these following things, or else they are
added near the end of the decoction, and they are usually these sudorificks, as
China, Salsaparilla, Sassafras, either alone, or mixed; in the Asthma, and
Hypochondriacal melancholy they are chiefly prescribed: as also to them
alterers, as Roots, Leaves, Seeds, Fruits, more or less.

As to the quantity, Sudorificks are prescribed to two ounces, but the alterers
much like their quantity in the altering Apozem, or somewhat less.

The LIQUOR, as to the quality, is always fair water.

As to the quantity, q. s.

The USE: as to the quantity, the dose is six or eight ounces.

As to the time, it is to be taken in the morning, continuing the use of if
fifteen days, or the space of a month.

And this is the FORM,. an old decrepit red Cock, or of four or five years old,
that has been tired with coursing, and beating; pull off his feathers whiles he
is alive, then strangle him, and take out his bowels, let his belly be filled
with the Sudorificks, fruits, and seeds as aforesaid, then sew it up, and boil
him in a glazed pot with a sufficient quantity of water, til the flesh be
consumed, and wholly fall from the bones; but when the broth is scum'd, at first
add the roots, etc. and toward the end of the decoction add the leaves and
flowers, etc. boil them til there remains about three pints of broth, strain
it, and press it out strongly, and keep the decoction in a glass bottle, in a
cold place, taking off all the fat when it is cold. Take of this broth from one
pint to eight ounces in the morning, adding if you will, especially in the
affections of the breast sugar, or some fit syrup to an ounce, continuing it
fifteen days, or the space of one month.

The UTILTY of it is much in stubborn obstructions; hence it is that it is
generally prescribed in the hypochondriacal melancholy: for which purpose there
is usually prescribed for this sort of broth the ^^ots of Parsley, Succory,
Grass, and Sparagus, the leaves of Ceterach, Baume, Bugloss, Burnet, Agrimony:
Fr^its, as Corans, and sometimes China, and Sass^fras wood: it is also used in
any other durable obstructions of the intrals, as also in the affections of the
breast, especially the Asthma; to which China is added, with fruits ^dedicated
to the breast; and in arthritical pains with wood of Sassasras, and for
paleness of the face, etc.

The purging Cock-broth.
IT differs not from the former, except that beside the aforesaid ingredients
there are also added purgers, and for the most part these, of Senna, Polypody,
Carthamus, and, two ounces, or two ounces and a half, Agarick one ounce, as
much Epithymum, which are shut up in the belly of the duck, and is prescribed
to be made a decoction to two pints, in which dissolve (if you will) four ounces
of sugar, and to be aromatized, etc. for 4 morning doses thus to be used every
month: And the hypochondriacal melancholy, obstructions of the bowels, Gout,
and Cholick: but it is very seldom used for the Asthma, or difficulty of breath.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Restorative distilled liquor.
WHere the sick are extremely weakened, either by the violence or length of the
disease, or some extreme evacuation, they very hardly digest any meat to
repair their lost spirits, or else through nauseousness they refuse all; yet
ought the strength both to be preserved and restored: wherefore the late
Writers have invented a way to preserve them by liquors distilled out offlesh,
that has both good and much nourishment. This from the effect is called the
distilled Restorative; as also sometimes from the matter it is made of, they
call it Capon-water.

This DISTILLED RESTORATIVE, distilled water, or Liquor thus drawn by a still,
imbued with the nourishing virtue of the flesh (chiefly of Capons) and with the
Medicinal virtues of diverse conserves, powders, waters, and Juyces, is chiefly
prepared to restore lost and decaying strength.

And in this three things are to be considered, the Composition, Use, and
Vtility.

In the COMPOSITION two things chiefly, the matter of which it is made, and the
things (...) be dissolved in it.

As to the MATTER, it is commonly the flesh of a Capon, or Hen, or else of two
Partridges, cut in the middle, cleansed from the fat and bones, washed in some
Cordial Liquor, as Rose Water, white Wine, etc. to this they take, and mingle
with it, ^ivers Conserves, Preserves, Cordial powders [to little purpose]
leaves of Gold, etc. and sprinkle all with a convenient Liquor, and distill it
in balneo Mariae: but because by this means the nourishing quality of the flesh
is very small, or none, in the distilled water, and this manner also is
reproved, the thing is to be more accurately performed; which will be done if
you boil the aforesaid flesh to a perfect pap, and thence strain forth the
broth, and with it mix the aforesaid things, and distill them.

The matter of this sort of distillation is twofold, nourishing, and Medicinal;
the nourishing matter, as to the quality, usually one Capon is chosen, (it may
also be a Hen) and that either alone, or else one Partridg may be added, or a
shank of veal; as also, if this distilled Liquor be prepared to restore one
that is either hectical, or phthysical, there may be prescribed the flesh of a
tortoise that lives in the woods, either one, or two; so the things of froggs
are also prescribed.

This nutritive matter is boiled in s. q. of water, and (according to the
medicinal quality required) diverse parts of plants, (as they also use to do in
altering broths,) as Roots, Leaves, Seeds, Flowers, etc. and for the most part
those that are the most grateful in smell, and taste, and which do most respect
the affection it self, the cause of that dissipation of the strength, and that
near the quantity they are prescribed for the altering Apozem, or somewhat
less; by which means you see to the restoring of the strength, and the
alteration that is to be made both together.

When all things are boiled to pap, so that the flesh falls from the bones, the
broth is strained, and the relics strongly pressed forth; and when it is
cooled, the fat that is congealed in the top of it is to be taken away.

And this broth the near matter of the future distilled Liquor, which is to be
prepared of three or four pints of it, and eight or tenounces of some fit
cordial waters, with which afterward are mixed four, five, or six ounces of
conserves, or fit Preserves, (and sometimes confections are taken, as Alchermes
in the greatest weakness, and also treacle, when there is malignity to three
drams, or half an ounce) or the powders of cordial simples, or officinal
electuaries, as Diamargariton frigidum, to half an ounce, or an ounce, where
it is less precious; and this is to be constantly noted, that Pearls, fragments
of precious hones, bole Armoniack, terra sigillata, and leaves of gold, are
added in vain, because this gentle sort of distillation by Balneo Mariae can
draw no virtue or spiritual essence from them: seeing they will scarce part with
any for a greater heat, and that in a dry still, though they have been
diligently prepared for it. The aforesaid things mixed are put into your glass
body, and are afterward distilled in that manner which they call Balneo Mariae:
Note also that if you desire the virtue of Ambergreece, or Musk, these to gr.
5, 6, or half a scruple, may be tied up in a thin linen ragg, and so tied to
the snout of the almebick, that the Liquor as it distills may pass through them,
and take their virtues along with it, which in this manner are more certainly
extracted than if you mixed them with the other things: the distilled Liquor is
to be kept in a glass bottle in a cool place.

Things to be DISSOLVED (though seldom used) are sometimes prescribed (and are
fit cordial juyces, as Juice of Limons, Juice of sour Pomgranats,) and that
profitably to three ounces, four ounces: according to the quantity of distilled
liquor, although they may also be mixed with the broth and waters before
distillation.

The USE: as to the manner, this sort of distilled liquor is either used alone
of it self out of a spoon, or dissolved with other broths and Panadaes.

As to the quantity, one, two, or three ounces may be taken.

As to the time, when you please, and that 3 or 4 times a day, or oftener.

The FORM is, the flesh of one of the best Capons, or Hens, (or with other
flesh as is said) slit in halves, and taken from the bones, or only from the
fat, put it into a pot glazed with s. q. of water, boil them, toward the end
adding the roots, etc. i. e. the alterers, when all are boiled to a pap, strain
them, and press them hard; then having taken off the fat as aforesaid, take of
this broth four pints, or five to which add etc. ( viz. the conserves, etc.
distill all in B. M. let the Liquor distilled be kept in a glass bottle in a
cold place, of which let him take, etc. by it self out of a spoon, and^.

The UTILITY is the same with other Analepticks, or restoratives, viz. suddenly
to restore, and (as it were) patch up the strength and spirits exhausted either
by the length of the disease, famine, or over much evacuation, to recreate the
languishing condition of the principal parts; much used in many affections both
of the heart, and other parts, not only in the ho^, but also cold epidemical,
malignant, and continual fevers, h^cticks, and consumptions of the Lungs.

In fine, it is useful when the vigor of the parts extremely languishing can
digest no stronger form of nourishment, and yet ought necessarily to be
refected; from hence we conclude that these distilled restoratives are rather
to recruit the strength and spirits, than firmly to nourish the body.

CHAP. XVII. OF Brothes:
BROTHS are also often prescribed by Physicians to this end, that by altering
we may also nourish, and that the virtue of the Medicinal things might be the
more eagerly received by the parts themselves, under the form of nourishment,
and thereby might be the less trouble some to them.

And these are either altering, or restorative.

Altering broths are made diversely, according to the scope of the Physician,
most frequently with a chick: As at Moutpelier they usually prescribe the broth
of a Chick altered with heoatical leaves, and roots, and also with cooling
things in fevers: It Is not particularly prescribed by Physicians, only
commanded, let them use the broth of a Chick, altered with such leaves, etc.
either 2, 3, or 4, in the morning, or else also in the evening; and this is
most usual in hot diseases.

Restorative broths prepared to restore lost strength, which are otherwise
(from this manner of working, and from the consumption wherein they are much
used) called Consumption broths: these are made of a fat Hen or Capon, (the
bowels taken out) out in pieces, boiled in a glazed pot, or an alembeck close
stopped, (lest any thing breath forth,) to a perfect pap; these are all
strained, and the juice pressed forth. Lastly, (when it is cold) the fat taken
clear off; and this Liquor is kept in a glass bottle for your use in a cold
place: in this broth sometimes other things are dissolved, viz: in each pound
of it three ounces of White Wind, (if your scope require it) or other cordial
liquor, two ounces of Sugar, one dram of Cinnamom, and confection Alchermes;
lot them warm til the suuar be dissolved, then strain them, and keep them for
your use. They labor in vain, which only for vain^glory add to these
Consumption broths, the leaves of gold, for they do no good.

The USE is the same with the distilled restorative.

And the UTILITY is also the same, only these Consumption broths are great
nourishers, and restore and nourish the solid substance of the body.

THE SECOND SECTION Of the First Book: OF THE SOFT FORMS OF MEDICINES.
CHAP. I. Of a Bole:
ABOLE is a form of Medicine, almost of the consistencie of Honey, or somewhat
thicker, prepared either to alter or purge; and because it is a bit a Medicine,
as much as the mouth can well contain, therefore it has its name.

A Boble is threefold, viz. purging, altering, and strengthening.

A PURGING BOLE.
WHat a purging Bole is, and what are his differences taken from the variety of
humors that are to be purged, may appear by what has been said before in the
Apozem.

But in it three things are to be considered, the Composition, Use, and Vtility.

In the COMPOSITION, chiefly the matter of which it is made; in which there is
to be considered its quality, and quantity.

As to the quality of the MATTER, in general it is composed of purgers both
simple and compound, as any purging powder, both simple and compound, and sugar.

As to the quantity in general, a bole ought not to exceed six drams, or 1
ounce, seldom 10 drams, unless it consist of the gentlest sort of purgers.

But in special, a purging bole, as to the matter, is composed,

1. Either of Cassia alone, which is most commonly the basis of a bole (or also
pulp of tamarinds, especially in the choleric,) though it is better to have it
of Cassia, and some other purger together, that its purging quality might be
acuated, which else is only lenifying; lest otherwise by staying too long in
the intrals it might overslacken them; and then as to the quantity, there is
prescribed half an ounce or six drams of Cassia; but of the purging opiate, or
tablet, two drams, or three drams, more or less, examining the doses by that
caution before noted; that if two or three be mingled with the Cassia, the
complete dose of all might be found out.

Note, that it is commonly used in the affections of the reins and bladder, to
prescribe a bole of the aforesaid Cassia, as the basis to six drams, to which
add two drams of Turpentine washed in violet, or pellitory water, with a
sufficient quantity of powder of liquorice and sugar: to which purpose also
Turpentine alone is prescribed, and sometimes with a scruple of Rheubarb added
to it, as is hereafter setdown.

2. Or of the purging officinal opiate; which is either prescribed alone in
that quantity which has been before in the potion, and shall hereafter be
defined; or else together with it is added a purging tablet, or solid electuary
in that proportion, that all together may make up the complete dose, yet should
the opiate somewhat exceed the others.

Note, that sometimes, either to these two joined, or to the opiate alone is
added some purging powder, and that either simple, as the powder of Rrheubarb,
Mechoachan, etc. from half a scruple to half a dram, or compound, as of
diaturoith, from half a scruple to a scruple, according to the quantity the
other things are prescribed in; or else sometimes not purgative, but either
directing or correcting, or strenghening, to half a scruple.

3. Or else of a tablet or solid electuary, either alone, in the dose aforesaid
in the potion, and hereafter to be set down, with some syrup or S^gar, or
sometimes an opiate being added, or a purging powder, as aforesaid.

4. Or, which is very seldom of a powder only, either simple or compound,
made up with a syrup or sugar, but this manner is less used.

5. Or else (which hardly deserves the name of a purging bole, yet is used in
affections of the reins) of Turpentine washed in violet water, etc. to two
drams or three drams; with a scruple of the powder of Liquorice.

The USE, as to the manner, it is taken by swallowing it down, which is easiest
done out of a spoon, with some syrup that is grateful to the taste.

A^ to the quantity, it is above defined.

The time is in the morning after the manner of other catarrticks.

The FORM of PRESCRIBING, when Cassia only is taken, is,. take the marrow of
Cassiae newly drawn, and (sometimes it is added) by the vapor of some
decoction, as of Barley, Liquorice, Mallows, for the Reins) or else it is said,
the pulp or flour of Cassia, etc. make a bole with Sugar.

If of an Opiate,. etc. with Sugar make it a bole.

But when a bole is made of the drier things, as tablets, and powders, so that
they can hardly stick together in the form of a bole, and. let them be
moistened with such a syrup, then with Sugar reduce them into the form of a
bole, which let him take etc. but when the bole is made of Turpentine,
Turpentine washed, etc. make a bole, let each bit be wrapped in Wafers, so take
them out of a spoon, with a convenient Syrup, as of Maiden hair, Violets, etc.
let them be swallowed down in the morning three or four hours before dinner,
and that usually for three days together.

The UTILITY is the same with that of a potion, viz. when the cause of the
affection is in the inferior region, or the parts adjacent; but a bole of
Cassia is particularly profitable in the reins and bladder, in which we should
deal very gently, and only lenisie.

The strengthening bole.
IN it three things are to be considered, the composition, use, and utility.

As to the COMPOSITION, in respect of its quality, it is prepared.

1. Either of officinall conserves, and a powder, which is either the Species
of some Electuary of the shops, or other aromaticall powder, as of Cinnamom,
etc. with Sugar.

Note, that sometimes with the aforesaid conserves are also taken cordial
confections, as alchermes, and de hyacintho.

2. or of some strengthening officinall confection alone.

As to the quantity, this bole in general seldom exceeds three drams, or half
an ounce.

In special, the quantities and dose of the first sort of these boles is this;
as of conserves let there be three drams, half an ounce, and powders a Scruple.

Of confections (if added) one scruple, or half a dram.

But of the second sort, viz. the confection, is prescribed from a dram, to a
dram and half.

The USE, as to the time; it uses to be prescribed, the day after a purging
Medicine, two hours before dinner, or otherwise at any other convenient hour,
simply to strengthen, without any purge preceding it.

As to the manner, it is to be swallowed out of a spoon (if you will) with
syrup, drinking aft^r it a little wine diluted, or other liquor fit for the
purpose.

The FORM;. etc. make it a bole with Sugar, which let him take etc.

The Vtility sufficiently appears in its name; see also the cordial potion;
but most usually they are prescribed after purging medicines, to comfort the
stomach and parts afflicted by them, as also by the violence of diseases, and
also simply to strengthen, without Relation to any preceding Purgation, as
often as the strength (growing weak, or feeble by any other cause) requires it,
as also to alter, together with the strengthening: so also this sort of boles
are used against fluxes of the belly.

CHAP. II. Of Opiates.
THe Ancients called those medicines which had in their composition either
opium or other narcoticks by the proper name of opiates, but now adays we
abusively and improperly call those medicines opiates, which are without opium,
whether to strengthen, alter, or purge, only for the consistency wherein they
are made, like Treacle, and other Opiates of like sort.

They otherwise call them more rightly, Electuaries, which now are in use
twofold; the solid, which is otherwise called a tablet, or the soft, otherwise
called an Opiate; both these were by the Greeks called antidotes, yet this name
extends not to include the purgers, as our appellation of Opiates.

But an Opiate is a medicine of a thicker substance than a syrup, scarce
running abroad (like that true Opiate treacle) prepared of diverse things, mixed
in honey or syrup, to keep long either to purge, alter, or strengthen.

Hence, it is twofold, purging, and altering, or corroborating.

The purging Opiate.
WHat it is (and its differences) may be sought in the purging Apozem and
potion.

Here I shall at present account it twofold, Magisteriall, and officinall.

What a Magisteriall is, see in the purging syrup.

Nevertheless three things are to be considered, the composition, use, and
Utility.

As to the COMPOSITION, it is prepared, 1. Either of powders only taken in
syrup, or honey, or both together.

These powders are every where chosen out of purging Simples (and sometimes may
be in use the spices of purging Electuaries) together with their fit
correctors, both Simples, and compounds, as also their directors.

As to the quantity, these sorts of purging powders ought to be prescribed,
according to the number of doses for which you desire or intend your Opiate; as
if you desire an Opiate for six times, you must prescribe six doses of purgers
in substance, adding also their correctors; as to the quantity of that they are
made up withal, they usually, though ill prescribe it, q. s. as is before
noted in the purging syrup; for as it is there said, the quantity of these is
also to be defined, and its proportion ought to be three or four times the
weight of the powder, and that expressly to be set down, that you may be
certain of the dose.

Note also, that when Cassia or other things which have the consistency of
honey, are added, they are to be accounted instead of so much honey.

2. Or seeing that now they are very seldom made of powders only, they are
usually prescribed of officinall purging opiates, Cassia being also added,
where we would purge more gently; or else there is also added a solid purging
Electuary of the shops, together with a purging powder, and their correctors;
all which are to be taken in a convenient syrup:

And this is their proportion.

To an ounce of opiate you may add a dram or two drams at most of a purging
powder.

But for the most part, four ounces of these sorts of Opiates are required, and
then the dose of the syrup is not defined, for there is need but of very little.

3. Or only of the softer sort of purging simples, as Cassia, tamarinds,
manna, pulp of prunes, raisins, or Sebestens, with their correctives, when you
would only lenifie; and if you would yet purge more, you may add the simple
purging powders in the proportion aforesaid.

4. Or else with all these together, as the lenifying Simples, officinall
Electuaries, purging Powders, together with the aforesaid proportion of syrup.

The more usual Officinall Opiates.
CAtholicon, all humors. Diacassia, chol. mel. Diaprun-simpl. chol- Diasenna,
or Elect. lenitivum, melanch. Hiera picra, phlegm- and choler, and all humors
that are easily moved. Diaprun. solutive, chol. Elect. de Psillio: phleg. mel.
Diaphoenicon. phlegm. and chol. Benedicta laxativa. phleg: and watrish humors.
Confectio hamech. chol. melanchol.
The less usual, are:
Elect: rosarum Mesues, purges choler. Triphera persica, chol: mel. Indum
majus, phleg. chol. Hiera Pac hii, phlegm.
The use of the officinal Opiate.
AS to the manner, they are taken either by themselves, as a Bole, or else with
a fit Liquor dissolved in the form of a potion, see before.

As to the time, it is in the morning, as other Catharticks.

As to the quantity or dose, it is this. Dose the least. moderate, highest.
Diasebesten, to dra. 6, ou, 1 and half, ounces 2 Diaprun-simpl. oun. 1, ou. 1
and half ounces 2 Dia prun-solut. ou. half drams 6 ounce 1 Elect. rosar. mes.
ou. half dram 6 ounce 1 Elect. de Psillio. ou. half drams 6, ounce 1
Diacatholic. dra. 6, drams 10 ounces 2 Triphera Persic. oun. 1, ou. 1 and half,
ounces 2 Diaphoenicon. dra. 2, drams 3 drams 6 Indum minus, dra. 2, drams 3,
dra. 5, scr: 2 or dr. 2. h. dra: 3, scr. 2 drams 7 Benedict. laxativ. scru. 4,
dr. 2 and half oun. ss. scr. ss. or drams 5.

The USE of the MAGISTERIALL Opiate.
As to the manner and time of using, it is as the Officinal.

As to the quantity in general, it is also as the officinal; but in special it
cannot be defined, unless (as is aforesaid) by computing the doses, and by the
weight of the whole purging opiate; for the whole mass is to be divided into
so many parts, as there be purging doses in the whole composition.

The FORM of PRESCRIBING.
etc. with a Syrup or honey, s. q. (which nevertheless is to be set down
precisely, that you may be certain of the dose) either to three or four times
the weight of the other things, so make an Opiate, of which let him take, etc.
either by it self, in the form of a Bole, or else dissolve it in broth,
decoction, or some other fit liquor, and that every fifth day, having taken a
Clyster the day before.

The VTILITY is the same with that of the purging Syrup, only as the Syrup is
used in Summer, so this in Winter; but the profit of it is, that it may by
little and little draw away vicious humors, that are heaped, or are abounding
in us, at certain distances of time; and that we may not suffer ill humors to
increase so far, as to produce a disease; therefore it is very useful for
Cacochimical natures: and where through the ill complextion, or temper of the
intrals, they use to gather many excrementitious humors, from whence comes the
original and durability of diseases.

And seeing, of these, one is only lenifying, another purging particularly; The
first is usually prescribed, for affections of the Reins, Bladder, and Breast,
and also to move the belly, and against the heat of the Liver, and consists for
the most part, of the Pulp of Cassia, Tamarinds, Prunes, Sebestens, Manna, etc.
with fit altering powders: Here is to be noted, that this form of medicine is
chiefly to be used in them whose Liver is heated, which with the use of pills
would be more inflamed.

The strengthening Opiat.
Beside the lenifying and purging Opiates, others use also to be new prescribed
by the Physician, for the present use, not only to strengthen, and confirm the
vigor, and restore the spirits, as aforesaid in the corroborating potion, but
also to alter the body in any manner, in first, second, or third qualities.

In a strengthening Opiate, three things are to be considered, Composition,
Use, and Vtility.

And in the COMPOSITION, two things chiefly; the Matter, and the Form-Giver;
and in both, their quality, and quantity.

The Matter, in relation to its quality, is either moist or dry; the moist is
some officinal conserve, of which, as its basis, a strengthening Opiat is
compounded.

To this is sometimes added, according to the scope, some officinal preserve, as
of roots, stalks, fruits, barks.

And if occasion require, Confections, as Alchermes, Confect. de hyacintho;
also Treacle, Mithridate, etc.

The dry, which is always joined with the Conserve, is some strengthening
powder, either simple of Spices, or some other strengthening proper things; or
compound, of some strengthening Electuaries, as of Aromaticum Rosatum.

As to its quantity, because the whole composition of a strengthening Opiate
should not exceed six ounces, or seven ounces of the aforesaid things, this is
to be their proportion,

Of Conserves four ounces.

Of preserves if admitted an ounce and a half or two ounces.

Confections if added 2 drams, 3 drams, or half an ounce.

But the proportion of powders in respect of the things aforesaid should be so
that an ounce of them should contain a dram, a dram and half, or two drams of
powders at the most, according to the efficacy, or as you desire the Opiate
more or less powerful, or according as the powder is more or less precious.

The FORM-GIVER, or that which gives it the consistence, as to its quality, is
some proper officinal Syrup, or the Syrup of some appropriate preserve.

As to its quantity, it is seldom expressed, only is set down, q.s. yet (as is
aforesaid in the purging Opiate, where it is to be three or four times so much
as the powder,) it may easily be defined; yet it is not here to be limited by
that proportion, in regard of the Conserves, which helps to the giving the form.

Here is to be diligently marked, that when the aforesaid matter is prescribed,
this order should be kept: 1. The Conserves. 2. The Preserves. 3. The
Confections. 4. The Powders: and lastly, the Syrup is to be prescribed, and
also Ambergreece, and Musk, are usually added to some few grains, and when
condited Mirobalans, and Nutmegs are joined, they are usually prescribed by
number, as one, two, etc. or else half an ounce, or an ounce, etc.

The Use, as to the manner, it is taken in the form of a Bole, and then (if you
desire it, and the scope of the Physician can admit it) drinking after it a
small quantity of wine, or some other liquor, according to the intention
prosecuted, that nothing might stay behind in the jaws or gullet, and that it
might be the easier carried down into the stomach.

As to the quantity, the dose is two drams, three drams, or half an ounce, more
or less, according as it is stronger or weaker from the quality or quantity of
the powders, or confections joined with it, otherwise it is prescribed to be
taken to the quantity of a Filberd or Chestnut, according to its faculty in
operation.

As to the time, it is generally prescribed an hour or two before dinner, if the
stomach or other intrals are to be strengthened, and that every other day in
which he abstains from these usual pills; for these two, the usual pills, and
strengthening Opiates, are successefully prescribed to be taken after one
another in Cacochimical bodies, where the intrals are also distempered; it may
be used twice in a day, as before supper also, when there is a greater
necessity of comforting: in affections of the head, they are taken to very good
purpose after dinner, and supper, for so with the sumings of the meat, the
virtues and spirits of the medicines are together easily elevated; but if it be
not strengthening, but only altering: or evacuating by urine, or the courses,
or to open obstructions, or for other the like inventions, let it be prescribed
when the stomach is empty, that the virtue of it may not be dulled, therefore
let it be taken long before meat.

The FORM of prescribing; etc. with the Syrup, etc. make an Opiate, of which
let him take, etc. i e. to two drams, or three drams, or to the bigness of a
Filberd or Chestnut, an hour before dinner, etc. drinking after it a little, etc.

The VTILITY is much to restore strength to the parts weakened, or afflicted,
and to preserve them, when there is need of a continued corroboration in
chronical diseases, in which together with these the usual Pills are prescribed,
then the use of this and them by turns is appointed. They are done also to
alter diverse ways, (as is said) diverse parts, and diverse affections, arising
from unlike humors, both in first, second, and third qualities; also to purge
by urine, open obstructions, provoke the courses, break and force out the
stone, etc. or where any malignant quality is to be prevented, or taken away.

CHAP. III. Of Lohochs, or licking Medicines.
THat which the Arabians call Loch, or Lohoch, and the Greeks Eclegma, from
Ecleicho, to lick, the Latins call Linctus, the name in all being taken from
licking them by little and little, the manner of taking them.

It is a medicine of the thickness of honey, mean between the consistence of a
Syrup and an opiate, composed of diverse thoracical simples, destined to diverse
affections of the Windpipe, Lungs, and Breast, which retained in the mouth, and
melting by little and little, with its smoothing slipperinesse imparts its
Cough-curing virtue to those parts; and this is twofold, Officinal, and
Magisterial.

The Officinal Lohoch or Lincture, is either heating, cutting, cleansing, Sanum
and expertum: De pineis: De farfara: Of Coleworts: Of Fox lungs: Of Squills,
simple and compound:
cooling, thickning De Papavere: De Psillio:


In the Magisterial, three things are considered, Composttion, Use, and Vtility.

As to the Composition, it is various.
1. It is compounded of powders taken in a liquor, or rather honeyish
substance, and made in the form of an opiate.

These powders, in relation to their quality, are appropriated to the lungs,
fit for the purpose, and those either simple, as the roots, leaves seeds, dried
juices, of bechical or cough-curing simples, or else of some thoracical
electuaries, as species diaireos, either alone, or mixed, to which often (if
the scope permit) are added sugar or penidies.

As to the quantity, they are most commonly prescribed to one ounce, with four
times the quantity of the liquor they are made up withal, so that a Lohoch
seldom exceeds three ounces, or four ounces.

That in which these powders are taken, in relation to its quality, is usually
some fit Syrup, sometimes honey or sape, called also cute, the muscilage of some
convenient gums or seeds, sweet wine, etc. as the indication requires; but most
usually they are made up with a Syrup.

As to the quantity, it is not expressed, but said s. q. yet it may be defined,
that the Syrup may be four times, or five times, the weight of the other; for a
lohoch or lincture ought to be thinner than an opiate or electuary.

2. Or else it is made of a decoction impregnated with the virtues of fit
bechical simples, but chiefly of leaves, fruits, and flowers, thickened with
muscilage, sugar, or something equivalent, as honey, cute, adding to them also
fit powders.

As to the drawing of that muscilage; first the decoction shall be described of
thoracical things, that are by their own nature muscilaginous; by this order,
that there may be of roots two or three ounces, of leaves four or five handful,
of the greater sort of fruits, pairs 18. of the lesser sorts pairs, 20.24: one
ounces and an half, of seeds one ounce, or an ounce and an half, so make a
decoction till all be pap, then press all strongly out of a press, with a new
strainer, so drive them through.

There is taken of this muscilage one quartern (for that will be enough) and
therefore the ingredients of the decoction are to be prescribed, for the making
it in a less quantity, for that which is set down will afford a pound. To this
muscilage is added one ounce, or an ounce and half of sugat only; or over and
above, the powder of some electuary, or other sit things, from half an ounce to
an ounce, more or less, according to the consistence of the muscilage.

3. Or of the pulp of fruits, as an ounce of the powders to six ounces of the
pulp. with Syrup, s.q.

4. Or of some officinal Lohoch, to one or two ounces, to which you may add two
or three ounces of powder, with Syrup, s. q.

5. Or of thoracical fruits, seeds, and juices, beaten all together, and forced
through a hair strainer, taken with syrup, honey, muscilage, according to your
intention; in this proportion, that there may be of fruits two ounces; of seeds
an ounce; juices half an ounce; syrup; s. q. And note, that a powder may also
sometimes be added.

6. Or which is most usual, a single pectoral Syrup may be prescribed for a
Iohoch, to four or six ounces, to which you may, if you will, add some fit
powders in the proportion aforesaid.

7. Or else, (and that chiefly in those that are phthisical) of astringent
conserves to two ounces and diverse powders to six drams, or an ounce syrup, s.
q. yet a greater quantity of these may be prescribed, because the use of them
ought to be frequent and daily.

Note also, that sometimes it is prescribed of butter, with twice so much sugar
or honey, in the cough and roughness of the windpipe, to which are sometimes
added three drams of powder, with s. q. of syrup; and evermore in cleansing a
cold matter, an ounce of Turpentine may be joined; or in its place, Oil of
sweet Almonds an ounce, in the Pleurisy and Phthisick.

The USE of the officinal; as to the manner, if a syrup only be prescribed, it
is said, let him take of this often out of a spoon, licking it leisurely; but
if it be a compound Lohoch, let him take it from a Licorice stick, bruised at
the end, licking gently and frequently.

As to the quantity, a Lohoch should not exceed three ounces, four ounces, or
six ounces, unless it be prescribed for them that live remote, then it may be
made to a pound and half, and if it be often to be used, you may exceed that
quantity; as also when it is prescribed fot the Phthisis: The particular dose
is about a spoonful, or as much as a liquorish stick bruised can take up: as to
the divided quantity, it is to be taken often, except Lohoch de Papavere, which
is to be taken only once a day, when the time of sleep is.

As to the time, let it be some distance from meat, either before or after it,
or at any time, if necessity requires.

The USE of the Magisterial is the same.
The FORM is, etc. Make a Lohoch, which let the Patient (holding his head a
little lifted up, or leaning forward, that the epiglottis which covers the
windpipe might open a little) use with a Liquorice stick etc. or out of a
spoon.

The Vtility: they are preseribed only in the affections of the Lungs and
breasts, as in the Asthma, Cough, etc. Catarrhs, and faults in the windpipe; so
that now adays they are prescribed; only to lenifie the asperity of it,
arising either from the acrimony of the humors, or otherwise composed of
bechical things that are both sweet and sharp: and in cleansing the clammy, of
things that are sweet and bitter; but these must be small in quantity: or else
to stay Rheums falling into the breast, or to thicken thin rheumes, of clammy
muscilaginous things; or else to bind in the spitting of blood, of healing
things; as also in drying up the Ulcers of the Lungs; but do this with caution,
for it stops the way by which the breath is drawn, and it is very necessary to
have an easy clear breathing to maintain life.

CHAP. IV. Of Candied Confections.
THis is an invention of late Writers, so called, because of the similitude it
has with the candying of flowers in sugar.

And it is a pleasant medicine, of a mean form, between electuaries and
powders, made of diverse strengtheners, to preserve the vigor of the principal
parts, and restore strength decayed.

In it three things are considerable, the Composition, Use, and Vtility.

As to the Composition, in respect of the quality, of conserves, as the basis,
to which are sometimes added cordial confections, but always a cordial powder
and sugar.

As to the conserves, in respect of their quality, they are chosen
strengtheners, and cordials, and such as are sweet; as also diverse preserved
fruits and roots, which are esteemed as the same thing; in respect of their
quantity, three ounces will suffice.

If a confection be taken, it should be in quality cordial, as Alchermes
chiefly, because of its pleasantness; and the quantity of it from a dram to
two drams.

A powder, in respect of its quality, should be also cordial and strengthening,
and that either simple, as of pearls, and fragments of precious stones, etc. or
the seeds of cordial simples, or compound of electuaries; to which for the
richer sort you may add Ambergreece: As to the quantity of the powder, for
every ounce of conserves, let there be one dram, or four handfuls of powder at
most.

Either white sugar, or sugar of roses in Tabulets, and that double or treble
to the other things is taken to make it into a confection, or else is
prescribed, s. q.

To these may be added also leaves of gold, in number six, but more for
ornament than any virtue comes from them.

The USE: as to the manner, it is either taken by it self, or dissolved in a
convenient liquor, or some simple water or other, or in a Julep wine, or broth.

As to the quantity, it is taken to a spoonful, or a spoonful and an half, or
two.

As to the time, if it be for strengthening the animal faculty, it is best after
meat, or at going to sleep; if for the vital, at any time, when need requires;
for the natural, either before, with, or after meat.

The Vtility, is to preserve the vigor of the principal parts, to restore the
strength wasted by diseases: Hence it is that the use of these candied
confections is wholly restorative, rather helping nature and the strength, than
regarding the disease, which nevertheless is not to be neglected; therefore
these candied confections are made heating, cooling, binding, etc. the use of
them is frequent in the hypochondriacal affection, panting of the heart,
consumption of the lungs, weakness of the stomach and liver, etc.

THE THIRD SECTION Of the First Book. OF THE SOLID FORMS OF MEDICINES.
CHAP. I. Of Paste-royal, and morsels.
THere is also an invention of modern Writers, which in consistence resembles
Pineolates, or Paste of Pine kernels, made of diverse things, wrought together
like paste, (from whence its name) and of sugar dissolved in some convenient
liquor, and boiled to the height of Tabulets; this is made into boles or
morsels, like Conserves of Roses dried, (hence it is called morsels) which
being leisurely dried are kept for use, and are sometimes gilded; and this is
called Paste-Royal, for the Sovereign virtues it has in affections of the
breast, lungs, and in extenuated bodies.

In this also three things are to be noted, Composition, Use, and Vtility.

As to the Composition, it is made two ways.

1. Either without the flesh of living creatures, (as shall be said) of
bechical fruits and seeds only, and sugar.

These fruits are for the most part blanched Almonds, washed, soaked, and
bruised; the kernels of Pistaches, and pine nuts, washed also in a fit water,
as of violets, or roses.

They are usually prescribed to the quantity of four ounces.

The seeds are the four greater cold seeds usually, huld and bruised, to which
(when sleep is to be provoked) the seeds of white poppy and lettice are added.

Let these be prescribed to the quantity of two ounces, or two ounces and an
half.

The sugar is to be chosen white, dissolved in a fit liquor; the quantity of it
is usually set down q: s. yet it should usually be double the proportion of the
rest.

2. Or else this paste is made restorative, with the flesh of the tortoses of
the wood, washed and boiled in barley water, the head and tail being left out;
and this is afterward called Testudinate paste, or paste of Tortoses; or with
the flesh of Crawfish, Capons, and Partridges, or else to these are added the
fruits aforesaid, seeds and powders mentioned in the Candies, and sugar
dissolved in Rosewater, usually in this proportion;

Of flesh, three or four ounces.

Fruits, three ounces.

Seeds one ounce, an ounce and half.

And let one dram of powders answer to every ounce of the rest, and of those
that are precious a less quantity.

Sugar is mentioned, q. s.

Sometimes Ambergreece and Musk are added in small quantity to some few grains;
sometimes also the paste is covered over with leaf gold.

The USE: the manner, is either by it self, or in broth.

The Dose, or united quantity, is to half an ounce, or an ounce, the morsels in
numb. one or two.

The divided quantity; it is to be taken often with meat, and in your meals.

The time is expressed.

The FORM, etc. make a confection in morsels, and sometimes it is added like
pineolate, so let it be used.

The VTILITY; the paste that is not nourishing is good for diverse affections of
the lungs and breast, to incrassate, lenifie, cleanse, or expectorate; etc: but
the restorative paste, both in the same, and the consumption, for them that are
extenuated and weakened by the ulcer of the lungs, it nourishes, dries, and
thickneth rheumes; therefore the use is wholly restorative, regarding also the
affections from whence that lack of nourishment, and dejection of the strength
proceeds.

CHAP. II. Of a Pandaleon.
THis invention of the Arabians, and latter Physicians; is a medicine dedicated
to the breast and lungs, made of pleasant ingredients, agreeing with the Lohoch
to the same purpose, differing only in form, in which it resembles Tablets:
From them also it differs in this, because they are made up in a certain shape;
but this (when the sugar is sufficiently boiled, and the ingredients mixed with
it) is poured into a box, and there suffered to harden, and at the time of
using it, a bit is taken out with a knife or spoon, etc.

Therefore it is a medicine solid, like Tablets, kept in a box like a cake,
made of powders, bechical conserves, and sugar dissolved and made into a Tablet
- consistence appointed for the same uses as Lohochs are.

And in it three things are to be noted, Composition, Use, and Vtility.

The COMPOSITION is two ways.

1. Either of bechical powders, simple or compound, several or mixed, and sugar
dissolved in a fit liquor boiled, in or near this proportion, that to half an
ounce of the powder there may be four ounces of sugar dissolved, or else q. s.

2. Or of thoracical fruits and seeds, powders of electuaries, sugar dissolved,
after these proportions.

Of fruits two drams, seeds an ounce, powders three drams, sugar q.s. Note that
conserves may sometimes be added to three drams, or half an ounce.

The USE; the manner is to contain it in the mouth, that it may leisurely melt,
and may gently be swallowed down, and used frequently:

The quantity; let a bit of this be taken from a spoon, or the point of a knife.

The time is the same with that of the Lohochs.

The FORM: etc. make a Pandalcon in a convenient box, of which, etc.

The VTILITY is the same with that of the Lohochs, from which this differs only
in form, and that this for the most part consists of the pleasantest things.

CHAP. III. Of Marchpane and Pineolates.
MArchpane is a most pleasant confection of latter writers, nourishing much,
convenient for people that are lean, and for affections of the lungs, instead
of sweet meats.

It Is compounded of blanched Almonds, three ounces Pistaches cleansed, one
ounce stamped in a marble mortar, with a little rosewater, adding half a pound
of white sugar, make a paste, which make into little cakes, to be baked gently
in an oven, till they begin to be colored yellow, and are a little hardened;
other pleasant things may also be added, as Cinamom, etc.

A PINEOLATE is made to the same end, of equal parts of pinekernels, and sugar
dissolved, of which are made morsels, adding musk for the better grace, if you
will; but this is to be enjoined by the Physician, not else to be usually
prescribed.

CHAP. IV. Of Tablets.
THat which they were wont to call the solid electuary, is otherwise called
from its flat shape, a Tablet; and because the sugar of which they are made
when it is boiled and flatted is cut into diverse figures; as when square they
were called Tessellae (i.e. little dice) and Lozenges, commonly by the
Apothecaries; or else when they were made round, in the fashion of Manus
Christi, they were called Rotulets, and Orbicles, from the rotundity of their
figure.

It is a solid medicine, chiefly of sugar dissolved, and a powder, boiled to a
higher consistence than syrup, and drawn into a flat board, as it were,
prepared either to alter or purge.

Therefore Tablets are twofold, purging and altering.

The purging Tablets.
The distinction and difference is as above, yet are these twofold, officinal
and magisterial, of which here chiefly.

In the magisterial Tablet three things are to be considered, Composition, Use,
and Vtility.

As to the COMPOSITION, they are made of powders, and sugar dissolved in a
convenient liquor, boiled beyond the consistency of a syrup; and sometimes
purging Tablets, and the species of purging Tablets are added.

The powder is either purgative, or altering, viz. some fit correcting spice,
or the species of some electuary.

As to the quantity, the doses of the purging ingredients are to be computed as
is aforesaid in the purging opiate; whatsoever they are (because the whole
composition should not exceed four ounces, or six) 'twill suffice to prescribe
one ounce of powder, and three or four times so much sugar dissolved, though
commonly they do not set down the quantity, the which is very ill.

The USE; as to the manner, it is either taken by it self, or dissolved in some
convenient liquor: See the potions.

As to the Dose, see the purging opiate.

As to the time, in the morning, as other purgers.

The FORM; etc. with, etc. of sugar dissolved in a convenient liquor, make
Tablets of the weight of three drams, or half an ounce; let him take, etc.

The Vtility is the same with that of the opiate, viz. to purge withal; and
being under a diverse form from electuaries, it is a means to avoid that
nauseousness which the often giving one medicine will procure; and besides,
it is a neat way to deceive the curious palated; for thus the purgers are
concealed, and they eat Physic instead of sweet meats.

The strengthening Tablets.
What they are, and their differences, see in the cordial potion.

As to the COMPOSITION, it is made of diverse sorts of strengthening powders,
either simple, as of some spice, or other proper things, or compound, of some
officinal electuary, and sugar dissolved in a fit liquor, that the whole mass
may not exceed six ounces, by this proportion of each several.

Of powders let there be one part.

Of sugar six, or eight, or ten parts, according as you desire your Tablets
stronger or weaker, or as the powders are more pleasant or unpleasant,
effectual or otherwise, more or less, though the sugar be only said, q. s. the
dose of powders is always expressed, and that usually to five or six drams.

Note, that to these powders is very conveniently added sometimes a confection,
is Alchermes to two drams, of which alone at Montpellier they make most
pleasant Tablets, and sometimes they add fit conserves, to three drams.

To these strengthening Tablets may be referred those which are prepared of
diverse things, (without cordials) only to alter, according to the scope of the
Physician, powdered and made up in the same manner with sugar, and in the same
dose, yet may they be prescribed in a greater, adding only three times the
weight of sugar, of which sort there are diverse extant in the shops, serving to
the various scope of the Physician.

The Use of the strengtheners; as to the manner, they are used chiefly by
themselves, or dissolved in some fit liquor.

As to the quantity, from one dram to three drams, according to the efficacy of
the ingredients.

As to the time, three hours before dinner, or also before supper; and that the
day after purgeing, if it has preceded; or if the usual pills are prescribed,
then are they to be taken by turns every other day; or otherwise where you will
simply strengthen, they may be used at any time.

The USE of alterers, as to the manner, is the same.

As to the quantity, one dram, two drams, or three drams, according to the
faculties of the powders, and the scope.

As to the time, that the nature of the affection must limit, yet it is usually
taken with an empty stomach.

The USE of the officinal Tablets, as to the manner, time, and quantity, is the
same.

The form of prescribing, etc. with s: q. of sugar dissolved in, etc. make
Tablets of the weight of one dram, three drams, etc. of which let him take one,
etc.

The VTILITY of the strengthening Tablet see before in the strengthening
Electuary; as also that of the altering Tablet in the same place, which usually
are every where prescribed to stay rheumes falling into the breast; of binders
and thickners, of which also one that is prescribed for use, is to be
frequently held in the mouth.

CHAP. V. Of Pills.
THey are so called of the Latins, in regard of the similitude they have with
a ball, which with them is pila; but of the Greeks they are called Catapotia,
because they are swallowed down whole.

It is a solid form of medicine, round like a ball, made of powders, and
sometimes gums, juices tempered with some clammy liquor, chiefly prepared to
purge withal, but sometimes also to alter and strengthen.

But for the clearer explication, they are three sorts, Purging, Usual, or
Epicratical, and altering.

The purging Pills.
Although in speaking properly Pills are purgeing, yet because they may be
prepared for diverse uses, and because those which purge do it either strongly
or gently, and are more strengthening, these last are commonly called usual
pills, the other purgeing Pills, which are seldom prescribed by the Physician,
because the officinal or shop pilis are wont to be used in their stead; yet
shall I hereafter declare the orders for making them.

And these are either officinal, or Magisterial; the officinal either purge, or
do not purge.

Those which do not purge are the pills of Bdellium and Cynogloss, the
Hypoglottides white and black; yet these do not properly belong to this place.

The purging Pills are those which are most usual, or less usual.

The more usual are,
Aureae, choler, Aloe phanginae, chol. phlegm. Aggregatia, chol. phleg. Sine
quibus, all humors, chol. de Agarico, phl. Cothiae, phl. Lucis majores, phl.
serous hum. Hermodactil, phleg. serous hum. Indae, melanch. phlegm. Fetidae
majores purge the same.

The less usual are, Pills of Rheubarb, cho. Assaiereth, chapter Eupatorio, chapter
Imperiales, chapter phleg. Ruffi, cho. de Hiera, chapter phleg. Arthriticae, chapter phl.
Arabicae, phl. Pil. de 5 generib. Mirobalanor. chol. phleg. melanch. of
Mastick, Phl. de Aloe, Sagapeni, Sarco collae, ante cibum, phl. chol.
Stomachicae, de Fumaria, Melanch. de Lapid. lazuli, melan. chol. phlegm.

The Magisterial, as to their composition, are made first either of some fit
powder, made up with a convenient liquor.

This powder, as to its quality, is either some purging simple, yet so that
Aloes (which is the basis of all Pills) must always be one ingredient) or else
some fit corrector, or appropriate director, as is said in the purging Opiate.

Note, that the purer sort of gums may be also added, as Ammoniack, Opopanax.

As to the quantity of the powder, one ounce will suffice, seldom to an ounce
and half; for seeing the dose of pills is near a dram, that will suffice for
eight doses, and will last a fortnight; but let two parts of this powder be
purging, and one part correctors.

The Liquor to make them up withal, in relation to its quality, may be cute;
some fit juice or muscilage, but more often honey boiled and clarified, but
generally some appropriate syrup.

As to the quantity, it is said, s: q.

2. Or (which is most effectual,) let the purgeers be boiled (after the manner
of extracts) to four or six ounces, together with their correctors, in some
appropriate liquor or juice, as for the Apozems, afterward straining and
pressing them out hard; in six, seven, or eight ounces of this strained liquor
dissolve six drams, or one ounce of Aloes Succotrine for a continuance of the
use; after coagulate to the consistency of Honey, then add some corroborating
powder to two drams, as also Scammony, if it be to the scope of the Physician,
(because that must not be boiled) to one, two, or three drams.

The USE of the officinal: as to the manner, they are to be swallowed whole.

As to the quantity, the stronger are given from one scruple in youths, to one
dram, in men of ripe age; as are Aureae, Cochiae, Fetidae majores, Arthriticae,
Indae, de lapide lazuli, de Hermodactilis.

The moderate sort from two scruples to four scruples, as Agregativae, sine
quibus, de agarico, de aloe, de 5 mirobalanis, de fumaria.

The gentler sort from one dram to two drams, as pill. de Rheubarb. assaiereth,
aloephanginae, antecibum, mastichinae, Ruffi, de hiera.

But if these be used after the manner of the usual pills, one scruple, or half
a dram will suffice, two hours before meat, dinner, and supper.

As to the time, in the morning, as other purgers.

The USE of the magisterial pills, as to the manner and time, is the same.

As to their quantity, see the purging opiate.

The FORM of prescribing the officinal pills; etc. i. e. the mass of such and
such pills, etc. Diagridium four or five grains, etc. (as a quickner of the
rest) in choleric people; as also four or five grains of the Troschiscks of
Alhandall, in phlegmatic; or four or five grains of Casior in cold affections
of the head; with such a water make pills in number six, seven, or eight, which
being gilded, let it be taken betimes in the morning, or else just after
midnight (if they should draw from the head) with the due care and custody,
having taken a light supper; or at going to sleep, if for the head, that the
purging faculty, together with the gentle vapors of the supper might be carried
up to the head:

The FORM of prescribing the magisterial pills,. etc. with etc. make a mass of
pills, which anoint with oil of sweet Almonds or anniseeds, and wrap it in a
bladder, and keep them in a convenient box. Take of this mass etc. and make etc.

The VTILITY: it is most eminent for purging from the habit and third region of
the body; then this form is chiefly to be chosen, for the purgative faculty
staying longer in the stomach, by reason of its slow dissolution, and not
descending so quickly into the intrals, has time to diffuse its virtue to the
very habit of the body, with great benefit; but the use of them is chiefest in
phlegmatic persons, and less in the choleric, rather in the winter than the
summer; they are effectual also in opening obstructions, for the reason
aforesaid, especially if they admit gum ammoniack, for the belly of such is apt
to be bound, and is scarce mollified, unless they contain ammoniack; and then a
little broth should be drank after it.

VSVALL PILLS.
These purge truly, but very gently, and are rather strengthening; and because
the use of them is often in a week, and that without any care or custody,
therefore are they called usual pills.

As to the COMPOSITION: they are made of Aloe succotrina, as the basis, to half
an ounce, or six drams, other gentle purgers being added, as rheubarb, agarick,
etc. to one dram or two drams, and some strengthening simples, as cinamom,
cloves, mastick, compound spices, to one dram or two drams, with s. q. of syrup
of wormwood, etc.

Note that ammoniack dissolved is generally added in obstructions, to one dram
or two drams, so is myrrh. Also in the ^orm, aloes mollified in the juice of
Wormwood, is sometimes profitably prescribed, and Rheubarb sprinkled with some
convenient liquor, til it be soft.

The USE, as to the manner, is as above.

As to the quantity, and time, half a dram of the aforesaid mass (of which is
made four pills) is to be taken; of which let him take two in the morning two
hours before dinner, and the other two two hours before supper, twice or thrice
a week; in those days in which he abstains from the strengthening Opiate, if
that be also prescribed; otherwise without this admonition, for they are
usually prescribed together, as aforesaid.

This is their form,. etc. with etc. make a mass of pills, of which take, etc.

The VTILITY is great, in bodies very cacochymical, especially the phlegmatic,
in whom the stomach is daubed with a continual drossie phlegm, from whence
springs the whole series of diseases: for they much strengthen the stomach,
help concoction: and if any noxious thing lurk in it, they purge it forth;
neither suffer they any noxious thing to be gathered in it: therefore they are
profitable in all affections arising from thence, either of the mesentery,
Head, Liver, Joints, etc.

Of the strengthening and altering Pills.
Although all pills properly ought to be purging, yet the solid form may, and
uses to be composed for other in tentions, to strengthen and alter variously,
both in first, second, and third qualities, viz. when we would have the
medicine stay and delay some time before it descend, either that the medicinal
quality may work more effectually on the part where it is, or that by its delay
might be diffused to other parts communicating with it, and might be
distributed both by secret and visible passages of the body.

And these either are retained in the mouth, and are not swallowed; or else are
swallowed.

Those retained in the mouth, are Pillul. Bechichae, so called for their round
form, (or else in a Lupine fashion, and then are they referred to the
Troschischs:) and from their admirable quality of stilling the cough, and from
the manner of using them, they are called Hypoglottides, or Sublinguales,
because they are contained under, or on the tongue, til they leisurely
dissolve, and are dedicated to the cough, and affections of the windpipe and
breast.

These are COMPOVNDED of a powder of lenifying thoracical simples, as powder
and juice of Liquorice, gum dragant, Arabic, Starch, Penidies, Sugar, White
Poppy-seeds, etc. to one ounce, or two ounces, as need requires, or the time
you use them be long or short.

And that powder is taken with a sufficient quantity of muscilage of gum
dragant drawn with Roserwater, or with the muscilage of Quincekernels, etc. or
with a pectoral syrup, and made into Troschischs, or pills.

The USE and FORM,. etc. with the muscilage, etc. make a mass, out of which
make pills to be dissolved on the tongue; of which let him frequently hold one
under his tongue til it dissolve of it self, and be leisurely swallowed.

The VTILITY is as above, to ease the cough, the roughness of the Windpipe and
Jaws, help hoarsness of the voice, and facilitate spitting.

Hither belong the Lupine fashioned Troschiscks, which are held in the mouth to
stay rheums.

But those Pills that strengthen or alter any way are commodiously swallowed
down, in the affections of the stomach, proceeding from its crude flatuousness,
and those which communicate with it, as the head especially, or those that are
nearly adjacent, as the Liver, etc. those made of appropriate strengtheners are
convenient in the affections of the head, by the continuance of them, in the
stomach especially, if they be taken after meat; for so the fuming quality of
them ascends; and so they conduce to the affections of the eyes, against the
dimness of sight, made of eye medicines, or ophthalmicks.

Or else they are given at going to bed; such are the sleeping officinal Pills,
as those of Cynoglosse, which are every where prescribed to stay and dry up
rheumes, and to provoke sleep; and hither Laudanum may be referred (as most
used) to gr. IV. or V. they are prescribed also for fluxes of the belly, of
strengtheners and binders, to be taken both before and with meat; as also
against the imbecility of the Liver, Gonorrhea, Ulcers of the Reins and
Bladder, Stone, and diverse affections of the womb.

But they are COMPOVNDED of a convenient powder, serving to the scope of the
Physician, as the affections shall suggest, and that prescribed to half an
ounce, five or six drams, which is to be made up with a convenient syrup.

The USE, as to the quantity, of one dram of the mass are made six Pills, of
which two are taken once or twice a day.

As to the Time, they may be taken morning, and evening; before, after, or with
meat, as aforesaid in the Candies.

As to the Manner, they are swallowed down; and if it be for affections of the
lower parts, as affections of the Liver, Bowels, Reins, Bladder, Womb, a little
of some convenient Liquor should be drank after them, that thereby the
Medicinal virtue might be conveyed to those parts the sooner, to good purpose.

The VTILITY is enough spoken of before.

CHAP. VI. Of Troschiscks.
THey are otherwise called Circulets, and little Cakes, by the Greeks, and
Pastils by the Latins, and of some Orbicles.

It is a solid and hard form of Medicine, in the forms of Lupines, made of
diverse powders into a paste with some convenient liquor, which made into little
round Cakes are dried and kept.

And these are either officinal or magisterial.

And both of them either internal or external.

The officinal internal ones, are either, Purgative, as Agaricus troschisatus,
trosch. of Alhandal, trosch. de violis.

Or altering, either without Opium, as trosch. of Vipers, of Squils, Cipheos,
Hidecroy: or with Opium, as trosch. de alkekengi, for the reins and bladder; of
Amber, for the Womh.

Or Cordial, as gallia Moscat. alipta matosc.

Or pectoral, as Bechici albi, nigri.

Or opening, as trosc. Diarrhodon, and of Rheubarb for the Liver, trosc. de
Lupatorio, of Wormwood, and de lacca, for the Liver and Spleen; trosc. of myrrh
for the Womb.

Magisterial, as they were formerly most usual, so are they now scarcely at all
prescribed, unless for fumings: (for which they are frequent, as shall be
said) or for coughs and defluxions, as the pills Sublinguales before mentioned;
they are also made usually for the ulcers of the bladder and reins, sharpness
of the water, and to stop fluxes of blood, seed, and the belly, both to bind
and open; and they may also be made to strengthen; ^n sum, they are prescribed
instead of powders, as more effectual; because in this form the medicinal
quality does not so easily vanish, but is preserved by this means commodiously.

They are COMPOVNDED of a convenient powder of diverse things taken in a
convenient Liquor, and mixed til they come to the form of pills, or a paste,
out of which they make little round cakes, which (being marked with your mark)
are to be dried in the shadow, and to be laid up for use and these are made to
the weight of 1 dram, 1 dram and a half, 2 drams, 3 drams at most, according to
the virtue and efficacy of the ingedients; but the powder of which they are
made is to be chosen out of diverse parts of vegetables, especially such as are
easily powdered; as also of gums that are powderable, as Cherry gum, Styrax
gum, Tragants; and also juyces thickened, as Acacia, Hypocistis: and generally
out of all things e^sie to be powdered.

As to the quantity, this sort of powder may be prescribed from an ounce, to an
ounce and half, and two ounces, according as your use of them shall continue;
but most commonly an ounce and a half will suffice.

That which these are made up withal, is either thin as wine, water, distilled
water, the juice of herbs; or clammy, as the muscilage of gum dragant, or
Arabic, drawn with a convenient water.

As to the quantity they are prescribed, q. s.

The USE, and form,. etc. Make Troschischs as bigg as Lupines, of the weight
of, etc. let them be dried in the shadow; when you use them; break one or two
according to their efficacy and weight; dissolve it in a fit Liquor; let it be
used either inward or outward, for they are prescribed as is said for both
internal and external uses: yet note, that those which are for fumings are not
to be dissolved, as neither are those called Hypoglottides.

The VTILITY is sufficiently expressed; for in this form may be kept both
Alterers and strengtheners. For Troschischs are rather invented to preserve the
virtue of the powders entire, than that it should be any otherwise a useful
form of a medicine; for we do not use them whole, but dissolved first in a
convenient Liquor, except the Hypoglottides, and these for Suffumiga^ions.

But this form is most profitable, because powders (especially the cordials)
and others that consist of a thin essence, easily exhalable) by this means
retain their virtues against the injury of the air, nor will suffer them to be
diffused, and as it were centers them, and so produces a more effectual united
faculty.

To the Troschischs are to be referred the Muscardines.
WHich are little pastils, so called from the musk they contain, chiefly
composed for the perfuming the breath, and to exalt venereall moriscoes; such
are these of Gallia moschata, that are most effectual.

They are compounded either simply of ambergreese, musk-grains three, four,
etc: as you will, and q. s. sugar dissolved in rose water with a little starch.

Or else more compounded of the powder of some aromatical things of sweet
savor, as cinnamom, Saunders one dram, musk, Ambergreese, gr. three or four, as
you list, and sugar q. s. make troschischs, of which let him hold one often in
his mouth.

CHAP. VII. Of Powders.
THe USE of POWDERS is extreme necessary, both that solid medicines may come in
use of themselves, as also that they may the easilier be mixed with other
forms of medicines; but that which the Latins call a powder, the Arabians call
by 3. names; Suffuff any gross powder, Alcohol the finest powders, and Seiff
the grinding of any sort of troschischs, which is done on a stone with a fit
water, for affections of the eyes; but a powder is either officinal or
magisterial, of which this discourse is.

The magisterial is either internal, or external.

The internal is either purging, strengthening, or altering.

Purging Powder.
The definition and differences may be sought out of what is aforesaid.

It is compounded of Catharticks, and for the most part those that are the
pleasantest with their proper correctors, in a proportion often before
mentioned.

As to the quantity, to an ounce; an ounce and half is the most is prescribed;
and note that sugar for the more delicate may be added, but in a small quantity,
or equal to the powder, and that exactly defined.

The USE, as to the manner, it is to betaken in broth, or some convenient liquor.

As to the quantity, the doses of the purgers are to be computed.

As to the time, in the morning with custody.

The FORM, etc. Make a powder, of which, etc.

The VTILITY is to purge, see before.

The strengthening powder.
Although it may be prescribed to strengthen diverse parts, according to the
scope of the Physician; yet it is either to confirm the stomach, and is called a
Digestive; or the heart, and is called a Cordial, and an Alexiterial; it may be
also made for other uses, as to strengthen the Liver, Intrals, etc.

The COMPOSITION, 1, of the digestive powder, is in general of stomachical
things that help concoction, dissolvers of wind, and binder.

But in special, Coriander-seed prepared is usually the basis, prescribed to an
ounce, to which are added things that discuss wind, as Anniseed to half an
ounce, or 6 drams; then strengtheners of the stomach, either simple or
compound, to 2 or 3 drams at most, with sugar of Roses in tablets, s. q.

2. The Cordial powder, or that which strengthens other parts, which is
compounded both of simple and compound powders of Electuaries, proper and
specifical to half an ounce, 6 drams, or 1 ounce, according as the use of it
shall continue, long or short, yet so that the more precious Cordial powders be
joined but in a small quantity, either to a fourth or sixth part; and these are
prescribed either alone, or for the better taste sake, sugar rosat is mixed
with them to three or four times their weight.

The USE and form of the Digestive powder,. etc. Make a powder, of which let
him take a spoonful, neither eating nor drinking after it.

But of a Cordial, or other strengthening powder, as hepatical, etc. this is
the form,. etc. Make a powder, of which let him take 1, 2, or 3 drams, with
water, broth, or other convenient liquor, and that in the morning, the stomach
being empty, or else when necessity requires, especially if it be Alexiterial.

The VTILITY, is for the strengthening of the principal parts, and others also,
and consists for the most part of hot things, yet with the same intention of
strengthening, they may be prepared of cooling things.

Hither appertains the altering powder, altering diverse ways, according to the
scope, in first, second, and third qualities, as that which is generally
prescribed of steel against obstructions, with other openers, to one ounce, or
two ounces, with an equal quantity of sugar; of which a spoonful is taken every
morning, drinking after it a little wine, or other convenient Liquor, so
against the stone or gravel, of stone-breaking medicines to an ounce, an ounce
and a half, and Sugar, s. q. of which take one dram, or a dram and a half, with
a diuretical Liquor: so to provoke the birth and courses; as also to bind the
fluxes of blood both by stool, and from the Womb and bladder: against all
kinds of fluxes, and to alter diverse ways, when moisture is one cause
offending.

Thus much of an internal powder.
The external powder is also sometimes prescribed, and is either physical, or
chirurgical.

The physical or medicinal is for the most part strengthening, as is usually
prescribed for comforting and drying the brain; of proper cephalical things, as
Roots, Leaves, etc. prescribed to two ounces, adding to it also, and that
frequently the violet or cypris powder to one ounce, or one ounce and a half,
more or less; but for the most part they take of roots two ounces, seeds six
drams, flowers three drams, spices two drams.

The USE and FORM, etc. Make a gross powder, with which let the head be dried
in the morning, which is most usual lafter the washing of it.

The VTILITY is to strengthen the brain, and dry the phlegmatic, and to waste
the excrementitious moisture of the hairs of the head. The Chyrurgical powder
is various, to be prescribed only by a Chyrurgeon, to cleanse, fill, and heal
Ulcers, stop the bleeding of wounds, etc. the quantity of prescribing it varies
according to the various occasion of its use.

THE SECOND BOOK. OF EXTERNAL REMEDIES.
The First SECTION: Of Remedies common to many parts.
CHAP. I. Of Epithemes, or liquors to be applied to any part.
IF you regard the signification of the name, every external medicine that is
applyable to any part may be so called; but now it claims a peculiar kind of
right in designing only those remedies that are externally applied to the
Heart, and Liver, and the nobler parts of the body to alter and strengthen; and
is twofold, liquid, and solid.

The liquid Epitheme.
The name is apparent, and it is fluid like water, or a Julep, chiefly composed
of a convenient liquor, and cordial powders.

In it three things are to be considered, the Composition, Use, and Vtility.

In the Composition we must regard the matter of which it is made, whether
liquid, or dry, (as powder) or mean between both: and in either of these the
quality, and quantity.

The Liquor, as to its quality, is for the most part a distilled water as the
basis, such as is proper both for the affection and part affected; and that
either alone, or else other things are joined with it, either chiefly to make
it penetrate, or give it the more efficacy, and this is most commonly white
wine for the heart, Vinegar for the Liver; so also for its greater virtues,
there are usually added the juyces of Fruits, as of Limons, or else of Leaves
proper for the affection.

Sometimes the Liquor is a very liquid decoction, of appropriate things, but
seldom.

As to the quantity, it is usually prescribed to one pint, or 15 ounces;
therefore if water be prescribed, it should be to such a quantity; but if other
liquid things be added, let this be the proportion; of water, 8 ounces; of
Juyces, from two ounces to three; of Wine, or Vinegar, from half an ounce, to
an ounce.

The Powder, as to its quality, is either simple, of Cordial or Hepatical woods
and barks chiefly; also of flowers, seeds, etc. or compound of strengthening
electuaries, and sometimes aromatical troschischs.

As to the quantity, to every ounce of liquor one scruple or half a dram of
powder will suffice, so that to the whole proportion, half an ounce, or 6 drams
may be prescribed, so that not above a dram or two of the species of
Electuaries may be taken.

The things of mean consistence, in relation to their quality; there is
sometimes besides the liquor and powder (of which an Epithe me always
consists,) a strengthening Opiate, or cordial confection, as Alchermes,
prescribed to one dram, or two drams.

The USE: as to the manner, it is applied with a scarlet cloth, or some soft
linen dipped in it, gently pressed forth, and applied warm; and when it either
grows cold or dry, it is to be renewed several times, and continued thus a
quarter, or half an hour, twice a day.

No quantity for each time is set down.

The time is in the morning and evening, if the affection be cold, or it be in
winter; otherwise it is to be used 4 times a day if hot, or it be summer; and
note this diligently that if the strength be extreme weak, after the use of a
liquid one, the solid one should be prescribed.

The FORM of prescribing, etc. Make a liquid Epitheme to be kept in a glass; at
the time of using it take a scarlet cloth, etc.

The VTILITY: it is generally used to corroborate, and also to cool, seldom to
heat, (for this purpose the solid form is more effectual) it is prescribed
against the hot distempers of the heart and Liver, as also to strengthen and
resist malignity, if there be any suspicion of it: their use is chiefest in
Fevers in the Summer time.

Note, that liquid Epithemes may be applied to the whole breast profitably, in
burning and hectic severs, composed of moist and cooling waters, or decoctions
prescribed in a greater quantity; as also in the burnings of the head,
Frenzy, etc. see Rose-vinegar.

They are also sometimes applied to the testicles in extreme heats; for by
their communication with the whole body, the very habit of the body and the
blood is cooled; therefore it is most profitable in the bleeding at nose or
otherwise, and to this purpose they use a mixture of vinegar and water; to the
same end sometimes cooling things are applied to the hand-wrists, against the
heat and fervency of the heart, so also to the fieriness of the face, etc. in
sum, every thing comprehended under the name of an Epitheme may be used to any
part inflamed or beset with a hot affection; though the word Epitheme be
properly understood of a thing in relation to the heart or Liver.

The solid Epitheme.
That is called so that is not fluid like water, though they are prescribed of
a diverse consistence, as well a soft as otherwise.

In it note three things, Composition, the Use, and Vtility.

As to the COMPOSITION, it is made diverse ways.

1. Either (and this is most usual) in the form of an Opiate, made of conserves
of flowers, powders of electuaries, (but seldom of a simple powder) and of
Confections as aforesaid, with a fit Liquor, distilled water simple or
compound, an appropriate juice, etc.

As to the quantity in general, it scarce exceeds four ounces; but in special,
let there be of conserves, three ounces; confections, three drams; powders, one
dram, or two at most.

2. Or else in form of a liniment, especially in hot affections of the heart,
as also in cold; they may also be used in affections of the Liver, of ointment
of Roses, ceratum santalinum, etc. two ounces; fit conserves, half an ounce,
six drams; to cordial powders, half a dram, or two scruples.

3. Or of [ See what Pipio signifies, for it is not a Pippin] a Pippin cut in
two, in the middle, and is most usual, which let bestrewed with one dram of the
powder of some cordial Electuary, or two drams of the powder of ordinary
Epithemes.

Hither may be referred Puppies and Kittens cut in halves to be applied to the
head, chiefly in the declination of Phrensies, sprinkled with a digesting and
strengthening powder, of the flowers of Roses, Chamomil, berries of kermes, and
such like, to half an ounce.

The USE: as to the manner, let the solid one in the form of an Opiate be
extended on a scarlet cloth wet in a convenient Liquor, and gently pressed; and
then be applied warm to the region of the heart, and that either after the use
of the liquid one, or otherwise also.

The time is indifferent, it may be renewed twice or thrice a day.

The FORM appears out of the composition, etc. make an Epitheme, etc.

The utility of a solid form like an Opiate is chiefly to strengthen and heat,
as also that in form of a Liniment and that made with a Pipio; see before; they
may also be made to cool of Conserves, in the form of a Liniment; but that form
is chiefly used, and most profitable for the Liver.

In general, they are made to alter and strengthen where the strength is much
wasted.

CHAP. II. Of Lotions.
THe reason and definition of the name is clear; for it is as it were a
particular kind of Bathe, dedicated chiefly to the head and feet; hence I
account it twofold; Cephalical, and for the feet.

The Cephalical Lotion.
Is COMPOVNDED of a decoction of Cephalical simples; in which two things are to
be considered, the matter, and the Liquor; and in these the quality, and
quantity.

The MATTER, in relation both to quality, and quantity; there is taken of
roots, to two ounces, or three ounces; of Leaves, from four handfuls, to eight;
seeds, from one ounce to two; flowers, pug. 4.

Note, that sometimes spices are added to half an ounce, or six drams, and when
you would dry powerfully, unmelted brimstone, half an ounce; and when the head
is to be particularly purged, after general means you may add Senna leaves to
one ounce, white Agarick half an ounce.

The Liquor, as to the quality, is either a Lie made of Vine ashes, or the
ordinary Lie of Barbers, adding white wine if you will, or to the wine add water
to 4 ounces. As to the quantity; it is said of wine, s. q. or of each a like
quantity.

The USE: as to the manner, the head is wet with it, in the sunshine, in a
clear day, and if you can, a quiet warm place; afterward the head is to be
thoroughly dried with sponges soaked in Aqua vitae; and lastly, it is to be
covered diligently with dried locks of hemp well fumed with suffumigations.

The time, let it be washed in the morning, two hours before dinner, the belly
being first evacuated.

The Form,. etc. Make a decoction, wash the head, etc.

The VTILITY is great after purging, where the relics of the matter imparted
is to be dissipated and consumed; as also where the head is to be strengthened,
and they are for the most part addicted only to the cold distempers of the
head and brain: they may also be prepared for other uses, as for outward
affections of the head, as tetters, dandruff, lice, filth; made of the sharpest
sort of cleansers, with urine and lie, always adding cephalical-herbs.

The lotion for the feet.
Is compounded of the decoction of simples, hot or cold, made either in water
or Lie, as is fittest for the purpose; the ingredients of the decoction should
be in the same dose, as for the cephalical lotion.

But note, that (as to the quality of the ingredients,) because this is usually
instituted to provoke sleep, the cooling cephalical simples are to be chosen,
and that the heads of white Poppy in number 4, may well be added.

Note also, that where you would dry, heat, and strengthen, and in the swelling
oedematous, or phlegmatic affections of the legs, Salt and Alum may be
profitably mingled with it to four ounces, and Quicksulfure to two ounces.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make a decoction for a lotion for the feet, morning or
evening, before meat, or before sleep, if it be to procure it.

The VTILITY is either to mend their own proper affections, trembling of them,
to call down the humors from the higher parts, if they are made of heating
cephalical medicines; also to ease weariness, or (which is most generally the
use of them) to provoke sleep in the raging heat of Fevers, and fervency of the
brain.

CHAP. III. Of a Fomentation.
IT is called a Fomentation because it does foment and cherish the parts to
which it is applied, by the heat it is applied withal, for all Fomentations
are in action hot, seldom any cold.

And it is twofold, moist, and dry.

The moist Fomentation.
The moist one is a Liquor fit to be applied to diverse parts by the help of
Limons, sisters, Sponges, serving to diverse intentions.

And this is again twofold, simple, and more compound.

The SIMPLE Liquor that is wont to be prescribed for a Fomentation, as to its
quality, is either hot or warm water, when we would relax in pains that come
from overmuch fullness; or Wine, when we would discuss and strengthen; or wine
and water together where we would do both at once, or either temperately; or
milk in great pains, or oil common, or other where we would mollify in
relation to the pain, and digest as to the scope; or water and oil, Vinegar
and water, or Vinegar of Roses in hot affections, or Lee of Vineashes in cold
affections, if we should digest and dry strongly.

As to the quantity, that is to be defined by the long continuance of the use
of it, and the bigness of the part to be fomented: so for the eye 4 ounces will
suffice; for the stomach one pint, or a pint and a half; for the short
rib-region and belly, as is usual in obstructions three pints.

The Compound is made of the decoction of various kinds of simples, parts of
plants, and a convenient Liquor, in which we must consider quality, and
quantity.

As to the quality of the matter, there are prescribed roots, leaves, fruits,
seeds, flowers, sometimes all together, where a greater quantity is to be
prepared, sometimes some few only.

As to the quantity, it is various according to the diversity of the parts. As
for example, for the eyes, it may be prescribed to the dose of a potion, or the
fourth part of the Apozem, for four ounces will suffice, or six at most; for the
stomach, half the proportion of an Apozem, or something more; for the whole
belly, the whole dose of the Apozem.

The Liquor in which the decoction is to be made, is simple water, or water and
wine together; sometimes milk where you would lenisie; Lie where you would
digest; Smiths water where bind, etc. according to the scope; as to the
quantity, it is prescribed q. s.

Note, that sometimes the decoction being made and strained, diverse things may
be added, as white wine in obstructions of the bowels, to one pint, or a pint
and a half; sometimes Vinegar, in affections of the spleen, to 6, 7, or 8
ounces for penetration sake; Aqua vitae for the stomach, to two or three
ounces, and to strengthen also, or appropriate oils to 4 ounces, half a pint,
etc. and it is generally the use in practice to prescribe them after the use of
the Apozem in obstructions of the bowels; as of the decoction prescribed for
the Apozem, three or four pints, add to it of wine, etc. make a somentation for
the belly.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make a decoction for a fomentation, with which let the
part affected be fomented with a doubled linen cloth, shreds, or a sponge wet
in it, and a little wrung out again; or else use a hoggs bladder half full of
the Liquor, morning and evening; so as it cools apply another by turns.

Note, that in the fomentation of the belly, under the short ribs, it is usually
said, let the short-ribregion be fomented in the morning, 2 or 3 hours before
dinner, or else before supper for three or four days, changing often the
fomentation, lest it cool too much: and it is usually prescribed after the
fomentation to be anointed with such an oil, liniment, or unguent hot. The Use
is after general purgations, otherwise when need requires.

The UTILITY is large, so that there is hardly any part, which as it may be
fomented, shall not receive very much benefit from it; it is used to the eyes
affected, both for the pain, and inflammation of them, etc. Also against
obstructions of the spleen and bowels, etc. against the pains of diverse parts,
to provoke the courses; for the choleric affections of the reins,
inflammations of the reins; it rarifies the skin, that the humors contained
may be the better digested, attenuated, dissolved when they are thin; and when
hard mollified; it turns things to vapors, and helps much by its gentle heat;
hence it is used, in pains, to relax, mollify, digest, dry, bind, strengthen,
heat, and also sometimes to cool, but then there is rather to be used an
Epithem, as in choleric inflammations,

The dry Fomentation.
So I call (from the effect) that fomentation, and baggs which are chiefly
prescribed to dissolve, from whence they are usually called discussing baggs,
of which hereafter.

CHAP. IV. Of the petty Bath.
THis is between a Bath and Fomentation, larger than this, lesser than that,
whose use it when a fomentation cannot cover the whole part from which it does
not differ; otherwise either in matter or utility; so that it is a half bath,
in which the sick set from their thighs, their knees and legs being lifted up;
Or else from the bottom of their feet, up to their Navel or stomach, from
whence the Greeks and Latins call it by names that signify a setting in; and
if the incession be in an open stool, they call it a Vaporary, which is chiefly
dedicated to the affections of the lower parts of the belly, and is called a
SEMIOVPE, or half bath, because it is not a whole Bath, but a bathing tub only
half full, and is COMPOVNDED of the same things a Fomentation is, to double the
quantity of the Apozem, or to half the quantity of a bath, so that there is
nothing else worth marking.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make a Decoction for a half bath, in which let the
sick set, from the feet to the Navel, morning and evening, long from meat,
having first had a stool to be continued three or four days, (according as
there is need,) warm without sweating: let him stay in it about two hours, the
moisture being wiped off, let him rest in his bed, the place affected being
anointed, (if you will) with a fit Liniment.

Note, that in the affections of the Anus, Womb and bladder, chiefly the matter
of the half bath may be applied to the part affected in a bagg, on which let
him set.

The UTILITY is the same with the Fomentation, but chiefly to be used in
affections of the parts contained in the belly, or lower region, when for
diverse reasons we dare not bath the whole body; and is most commonly to ease
pain, (which is most usual in nephritical affections, made of convenient
mollifiers,) to help the Hemorrhoids sweld with pain, the difficulty of Urine;
also for the pains of the legs and hips, of things that mollify, ease pain,
in affections of the bladder, and difficulty of making water, it is most
admirable; as also in mending, the affections, and distempers of the Womb,
either provoking, or stopping the courses; in all affections of the Anus, to
mollify the Belly, ease pains of the colic, etc.

A VAPORARY, which otherwise is called a setting over, is prepared when they
set not in the Liquor, but the VAPOVR (from whence it is called a Vaporary, or
suffumigation) is received through a hollow stool with a hole cut in the seat,
setting a pot full of the hot decoction underneath, which being cold, another is
set hot in the place.

The MATTER and dose of it for the decoction, is as in the fomentation, to be
prescribed in the quantity of a Clyster, or something greater.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make a decoction, the steam of which let him receive
through a hollow stool, a pot being set under of the hot decoction, etc.

The UTILITY: it is used only for affections of the Womb and Anus, for pain,
and diverse distempers, Hemorrhoids, to provoke the courses; they may also be
prescribed for diverse defects of the bladder; See the moist Suffumigation.

CHAP. V. Of a Bath.
IT was most usual of old among the Romans for pleasure, but now a days only
used for the recovery of health, and resisting of diseases; what it is is
manifest, but it is twofold; the Aerie Bath which they call a hot house, of
which hereafter; and the watrish Bath, when the parties setting in a tub are
washed, and this is called a Bath, viz. the washing of the whole body for the
most part for hot and dry distempers of the whole body, seldom for cold ones,
for which purpose the Stove is most convenient.

And it is twofold, simple and compound.

The simple is usually only water a little warmed, chiefly in Hecticks, where
there are lean and dry bodies, which this tempers by its gentle moisture, and
with it also alters the distemper; to this also is sometimes added Oil, Butter,
or Milk to moisten the more; as also in the pain of the Kidneys, and
Convulsion; or else of Milk only for the richer sort of people, to the same
purpose; or Milk and water; or oil alone in pains of the sinewy parts, and
Reins, convulsion through drought, pricking, and stitches, suppression of
Urine. etc. or water and Oil to the same end.

The Compound is made of a decoction, in which are to be considered the matter,
liquor, and sometimes the things to be dissolved in it.

The MATTER, in relation to its quality, and quantity, are Roots, from three
lib. to 5 or 6 at most; Herbs, in number 10 or 12, of each, M. 3, 4, or of 6,
7, or 8, of each a bundle; seeds, from 4 ounces to one pound; sometimes Fruits,
to a pound and a half; Flowers 4, etc. ana. P. 4, etc.

The Liquor, as to quality, and quantity, is sweet or fair water, q. s. for a
bath.

Sometimes there are dissolved, or added to the decoction, and that profitably
to the various scope of the indications, those things mentioned in the
Fomentation in a three or 4 fold proportion; so usually for the Hectical is
added oil and butter, ana, lib: 3. white Wine lib. 4. as also sometimes at the
latter end of the Dec^ction in cold affections, in which a bath is very rare.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make a Decoction for a bath, which let him enter into
morning and evening, when the meat is gone out of the stomach, (or else when
need requires as in pains,) (having first been at stool) warm without
sweating; let him continue in it from one to two hours, according to his
strength; then after his egress, from the Bath, wipe off the moisture, and
anoint the region of the Liver and Reins with a cooling Ointment, which is
usually prescribed.

The UTILITY is for outward affections of the skin, as the scabbiness, drought,
and (...) of it, etc. as also for internal affections, and especially a bath of
fair water, most convenient for the Hectical and lean people, because it
moisteneth, and withal mends the hot distemper; they are also convenient in the
diary Fevers, as was generally the practice of Galen; for it relaxeth and
opens the pores by which that which is offensive may be easily excluded; and
are also good for the heat of the Liver, and every distemper, but especially
the hot; only the moist one is usually remedied, and better by the hot house,
(as also the cold one) which fitly resists the morbifical cause. They are also
made to heat and strengthen, as generally to help Conception, of Hysterical
simples; to procure the menses, of opening mollifying simples, appropriated to
the Womb: against obstructions of the bowels, Dropsy, Cholick, Stone in the
Kidneys, weariness, of relax ingmollifying things. Lastly, in every affection
that wants cooling and moistening, or heating and moistening together.

CHAP. VI. Of a Stoveer Sudatory.
IT is otherwise called a Laconic, because the Laconians were wont to use it as
the Romans, to bath; others call it a vaporary: In this, the sick party is not
dipped in the Liquor, but only warmed with either a hot and dry, or a hot and
moist vapor, and caused to sweat.

Therefore a stove is twofold, a moist, and a dry. The moist
Is made by the vapor of some decoction, whereby the air under the Canopye
grows hot.

It is COMPOSED of a Canopy (with a Bath) erected and placed over the sick, on
which are laid sheets or blankets to keep in the vapor.

And this is heated diversely by the vapor.

1. Either by stoves fiery hot so placed underneath, that the Decoction to be
used being cast cast on them, the vapor ascends to the aforesaid purpose.

2. Or else the Decoction is first poured in (yet so that it touch not the
sick) and then into it the stones are dropped fiery hot.

3. Or (which is more commodious) the decoction is prepared in two Cauldrons,
which are heated by turns, and poured into the under tub, as each other cools.

This Decoction is prepared of proper Roots, Leaves, Flowers for the most part
hot, cephalical, well sented, of thin parts; and in quantity as the highest
proportion of the Apozems, and to be prescribed with water, q. s.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make a decoction, whose vapor let the sick receive
under a Canopy close shut, so let him sweat at his pleasure; let him use it
twice a day, long after meat, the belly being first emptied, and that for two
days: let his stay in it be according to his strength; when he comes forth
wipe off the sweat, and let him rest in his bed, etc. the use of this is most
convenient in the winter, and spring, as of the bath in summer.

The dry Stove.
That is so called which only is heated with the heat of the fire.

This is made

1. Either in the manner of an Oven, as in Ger. many, and is usually called a
hot house, or laconic.

2. Or else fiery flints are laid under the Canopy on plates of iron, and so
give a heat.

3. Or at this day for the French disease, it is made of a frame of wood like
the cover of a burial bear; and with this the sick are covered, and sheds laid
over it; and under it are placed little red hot stones, til the sweat follow
plentiful, the party having first drank a draught of the Decoction of Guajack,
or some other sudorifick.

The USE is as the other; the stay in them according to their strength, which
are thus much wasted, so that they can hardly endure one quarter, or half an
hour.

The UTILITY; it warms the matter of the disease spread over all the body, and
attenuates it; loosens the skin, and empties it; it is very effectual in cold
and moist affections, looseness of humors, the dropsy, Leucophlegmatia; for
it powerfully dissolves the humors, and consumes them by sweat, very
profitable for them that are fat, especially those who are cacochymical, if the
foulness of humors be either in the habit of the body, or in the veins. In the
French Pox it is generally used dry, and is not to be used at all unless the
body be first emptied, for then the relics are by this way easily quite rooted
out.

CHAP. VII. Of Embrocation.
IT is not properly a certain Form of Medicine, but only a manner of using it,
when we pour on any part some liquor or oil, and that either pouring it from
high, or only rubbing it gently in: for Practisers use the name of Embrocation
either way, and usually confound it with irrigation; for (...) signifies to
rain, water, or dip; but be it as it will, here for distinction sake we will
distribute it into Irrigation and Embrocation.

Irrigation.
It is a pouring of Liquor from high, like rain on any part (but chiefly the
head) making it distill out of a snowted vessel, and differs from a Fomentation
only in form of using it.

It is PREPARED diverse ways.

1. Either of the decoction of diverse parts of Plants, hot or cold, according
to the scope in the quantity as for a Lotion, made in water or wine, as your
indication requires, boiled to the consumption of the third part; in which
being strained to one pound, may be sometimes added vinegar, wine, aqua vitae
(according as the affections be cold or hot) two or three drams, etc.

2. Or of Oil only plentifully powered, but this is better applied as an
Embrocation with linen rags dipped in it, especially in convulsions, and
affections of the nerves.

3. Or of oil, distilled water, and vinegar in hot affections of the head; see
the Oxirrodinum.

The USE and FORM,, etc. of the decoctior, lib. one, two or three, make an
Irrigation from high with a stream on the part affected, etc. See the Lotions.

The VTILITY; it is chiefly dedicated to hot affections, especially of the head,
the inflammations of the brain and membranes of it, and that on the forepart of
the head; as also in provoking sleep, in hot affections and great watchings,
though of late the Lotions of the feet be used in its stead; it is very useful
in Fevers where there is a delirium; and for hot affections of the head, for
it cools much, because falling from high it pierces the deeper, and because
still a fresh Liquor comes on it; and the part so cooled, is thereby the more
tempered. It may also be used profitably to its cold affections, but most of
all to the hot, to which it chiefly belongs; and when we would most of all cool
in the beginning of inflammations, we do it either with a cooling decoction,
Oxirrodinum or Oxicratum in the Erisipelas. In cold affections (though these
may be used) we rather use the Fomentation, as also in dissolving an
inflammation: in Fractures and Luxations where it is not safe to unty the
Lig^tures, when pain is urgent, this may be used with oil of violets, or to
repel, oil of roses. [Oyls are suspected in Fractures and Luxations.]

Note that the dripping of bath waters may be referred to this place.

Embrocation.
It is not taken here for watring a thing from on high, but as it is at this
day used, or for a gentle rubbing of the part with oil, or for the applying of
wool or linen dipped in oil or other convenient liquor; for Embrecho in Greek
signifies both to dip; rain, or water a thing.

It is COMPOVNDED and prescribed, 1. Either of Wool, or Lints (which others
call bolstrings) dipped (from whence its name) in oil only, or in some other
convenient Liquor, applied to the part after the manner of an Epitheme, to be
often renewed.

This Liquor is either oil alone, or some juices only, or distilled waters
only, or else all together in this proportion, Oil, Juices, Water, ana four
ounces.

2. Or as at this day Embrocation is understood for a gentle rubbing with the
hand made with a convenient oil; afterward applying bolsters of hemp-hurds,
linen or cotton, either dipped or not dipped in the aforesaid.

It is also made of juice only, or of the others mixed with it, and then the
Dose of them together, or of each several is four or six ounces.

The USE and FORM,, etc. for an Embrocation; first let the part be gently
rubbed, with it; after apply boulsters of linen or cotton dipped, or not
dipped in the same oil.

Or according to the former manner,, etc. dip your hurds and bolsters in it,
and apply them renewing them often.

The VTILITY, the Embrocation of oils is most frequent after bathings; it is
also profitable to repel, in inflammations, erisipelas, phrensies, watchings,
pains of the head, to warm all parts of the body, they are usually after
bathing, the moisture being first wiped off; but evacuation should always
forego the use of them: but they are chiefly profitable in external affections.

CHAP. VIII. Of a Liniment.
ALiniment is a Liquid Form of Medicines, which is applied outwardly, in
consistence thicker than oil, but thinner than an ointment, whose basis is an
oil, prepared for diverse uses.

In it three things are to be considered, the Composition, Use, and Vtility.

As to the COMPOSITION, it is variously made of diverse things.

1. Either of oils and butter melted together without any wax (which some will
(very much mistaken) not have in a Liniment.)

And the quantity of the whole Liniment is four, six, or eight ounces,
according to the greatness of the part, and continuance of its use; let this be
the proportion of the Ingredients: viz. three or two parts of Oil to one of
batter, they are seldom equal.

Note, that if the scope of the cure require it, to these may be added fresh
Fats, old Marrows, Muscilages, one, two, or more together, which seeing they
are accounted of as Butter, should be in the same proportion prescribed.

Note also, that sometimes, though seldom, powders are added, viz. half a dram
of them to a dram of Oil.

2. Or else (contrary to the opinion of some which will not admit of wax, with
which it may commodiously be made,) it is made of convenient oils and wax; as
let an ounce of Oil have one dram of wax; or which is usually done, wax, q. s.
but generally the oils are prescribed to 4 or 6 ounces; wax, q. s. make a
Liniment, to which as is said, you may add a powder, which is usual.

3. Or else some officinal unguent is prescribed double to the oil, to which
may also be added the powder if you will.

Generally a Liniment does not exceed four, 6, or 8 ounces.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make a Liniment; with which anoint the part affected,
either after fomentation, if that has preceded, or otherwise.

The VTILITY: they are for the most part paregorical, to ease pain coming from
distemper, either hot or cold, to relax parts condensed, to soften them that
are hardened, to help tumors, weariness (for which they were of old called
(...)) the hardness of the Spleen, Liver; to relax the parts, as the womb in
hard birth, in the stone, and to digest and discuss in, flammations; they are
also made to heat, moisten, or dry, though unguents are more effectual; and to
cool, the Embrocation is better.

CHAP. IX. Of Ointments.
THe Arabians called Cerecloth and Ointment by the same name, and now adays
they usually confound unguents with Liniments, though an ointment properly be a
topical Medicine, of a mean consistence between a Liniment and a Cerecloth,
much like hard Honey, made of Oils, Powders, and Wax for diverse uses.

In it three things are to be considered, Composition, Use, and Vtility.

As to the COMPOSITION in general, they will have it made of three several
substances, Oil, Wax, and powder, in this proportion, that the whole mass may
contain 4 ounces, half ^apint, or a pint, according to the greatness of the
part, and length of the use; and this proportion of each in general is used; to
oil an ounce, wax two drams; powder one dram; but in special it is thus made
diversely.

1. Either without fire and wax against the common opinion, by that way which
they call nutrition, and is prepared by beating things together, as Ointment of
Litharge, and de Bolo, which they call Nutritum.

But this sort of Nutritum is made of an Oil, a fit Liquor, and a Powder.

Oil is taken either alone variously according to the scope; or else with it
are joined either other things equivalent: one, two, or more; the powder is for
the most part mineral, burnt, and washed, etc. of which afterward.

The Liquor is the juice of Leaves, or vinegar, if the intention bears it.

Of these three consists nutritum, whose propertion is often recited, but
usually only the quantity of the powder is set down; as for example, to one or
two ounces of powder, of the Oil and Liquor, q. s. viz. as much as the powder
can drink up.

And this is the FORM of Nutritum,. etc. viz. the powder with the Oil, or those
things that are equivalent, one or two, etc. q.s. let them be beaten strongly
in a marble mortar with a leaden pestle against Ulcers, leisurely pouring to
your convenient Liquor by little and little, so make an ointment.

2. Or with fire, which is most usual in practice, which manner is most
received and plainest; and is prepared of oil, (or its like) and wax; the oil
being defined for its quantity to two, three, or four ounces, but the Wax, q.
s. yet its proportion appears as above.

3. Or (which is more compound, and also received in use, and at the first
mentioned) of oil, Wax, and Powder in proportion aforesaid, which is to be
observed in hot Ointments, in which sometimes you may prescribe a dram and a
half of powder to one ounce of Oil; but in cold ointments as Unguent. de tutia,
and de siccativum rubrum, you may see to one ounce; of oil, half an ounce of
powder, contrary to the rule.

But be it as it will, in hot ointments ye may prescribe to one ounce of oil,
one dram, or a dram and a half of powder, and the wax indefinitely, q.s.

Note that also officinal Ointments are sometimes mixed to one ounce, and one
ounce and a half, etc.

4. Or which is very usual and effectual, of Juices and oils, which must boil
to the consumption of the Juices, near this proportion of oil, four, six or
eight ounces, according to the use and part, as often aforesaid, and as much of
the juices, or something less, to which afterward is added either wax alone,
q.s. or together with that a proper powder in the aforesaid proportion to the
oils, or sometimes over and above; some officinal ointment to two ounces, may
also be joined with them.

5. Or (which also is usual) of an officinal unguent, a powder, oil, wax,
unguent to two, three or four ounces; powder to half an ounce, or six drams,
oil and wax is said, q.s.

6. Or sometimes without any other addition, an unguent of the shops is alone
prescribed to four ounces, and six drams, etc.

The USE and FORM, is as the liniment, as to the manner either warm, hot, or
cold as the intention requires; and it is often prescribed, let there be added
at the time of using it a little vinegar, especially in cooling ones, to help
it to penetrate; so also in heating unguents, you may add Aqua vitae.

The Time of using it is various according to the several indications.

The VTILITY is large, and extends it self to all parts, and affections which
do not easily bear other remedies, or when we would deal more effectually than
can be done by oil; it is used to alter diversely in the first and second
qualities, to mollify, digest, and cleanse, etc.

Animadversions.
Note, concerning that common rule, by which for one ounce of Oil two drams of
Wax are taken, and one dram of powder, as Galen also appointed, it is valid in
heating Ointments, in which the powders nevertheless reach to a dram and a
half, but in cold Ointments it is not observed in dispensatories, which few
make; nor in Ointments which are to cleanse, dry, replenish, and cicatrize
Ulcers, which for the most part consist of Minerals, and are weighty, in which
you shall (if you examine) observe that to one ounce of powder, there is of oil
two ounces; wax, half an ounce, five or six drams. And of this sort Mineral
powders are, red Lead, Tutty, Lead, terra sigillata, Bole, lap. Calaminaris,
Cerusse, Litharge, which two last for the most part make the basis, and are
prescribed three times as much as the others.

But in the composition of an Ointment these things are to be esteemed for Oil,
and are equivalent with it, as diverse Fatts, Grease, Marrow, Butter, oesipus,
Muscilage, Honey, Turpentine, and such like; all which are accounted of as Oil,
and therefore the quantity of other things is to be proportioned to them as to
Oils, but if you prescribe both oy land other things equivalent, they are
usually added alike, or more or less as you see occasion.

Concerning wax, in hot Ointments choose yellow; in cooling, the white;
equivalent to it are gums, as Ammoniack, Bdellium, Myrrh, etc. and therefore
the consideration of them is to be had in the Composition; and mark this, that
in winter less, in summer more Wax is to be prescribed than the rule allows of.

As to the powders, they may be of all kind of things, but commonly they are
taken out of vegetables, as Roots, Woods, Herbs dried, Juices thickened, Raisins
and gums that may be powdered; seldom of Minerals, unless in cooling Ointments,
where we must dry, cleanse, etc. and chiefly in external uses; etc. as Ulcers,
etc. in hot Ointments never, and very seldom of animals, because they are
scarce powderable; for those things taken from them are rather to be melted, as
grease, marrow, etc.

CHAP. X. Of a Cerecloth,
IT has its name from Cera Wax, and is also called Ceroneum, though now adays
Chyrurgeons call Plasters by that name; at first it was made of Oil and Wax
only, but now adays they commonly confound the name with Unguents, as Ceratum
album, Resrigerans, or the white cooling Cerecloth: and Ceratum santalinum, or
Cerecloth of Saunders, which are Unguents, and are now called Cerecloths.

But properly it is a Medicine of a mean consistency between an ointment and a
plaster, harder than that, softer then this.

It Is COMPOVNDED in general of an Oil, a powder, and wax, in this proportion;
Oil one ounce, powder one dram, or a dram and half; wax half an ounce.

But in special,

1. Either properly, as of old, of wax, oil, (from whence the name) in the
aforesaid proportion; but because Galen in his cooling ointment to one ounce of
oil puts but two drams of wax, it makes it merely au ointment: and that which
he sets down ten of Method; where for one ounce of oil he puts three ounces,
and calls his solid cearcloth, is absolutely a plaster, perhaps he more
regarded the matter of the Medicine then the form: but the order should be as
aforesaid, for one ounce of oil, half a ounce or 6 drams of wax.

As to the quantity; the proportion of the whole mass of a cerecloth is to be
defined by the bigness of the part, and the continnance of the use, and is
usually to eight ounces, or lib. 1. etc. and for private use three ounces will
serve for a large cerecloth; two ounces for a moderate one; or one ounce for a
less.

2. Or more improperly, besides wax and oil, (of which the cerecloth of the
Ancients) is added, 1. Things equivalent to wax only, oil only, or of both,
with the same caution, and in the same quantities there mentioned. 2. Or
powders only, of which we have said the cerecloth is usually made, in this
proportion; oil one ounce; powder, one dram, one dram and a half, sometimes two
or three drams, but then so much of the wax is to be abated. 3. Or of the
aforesaid equivalent things and powders together.

3. Or of officinal plasters melted in oil, viz. when the part grieved cannot
otherwise suffer it, then of the plaster, two, three, or four ounces, oil q.
s. make a cerecloth.

4. It may be made of all those things of which an ointment is made; only
observe the due consistencie, and the porportion now set down.

The USE and FORM is as of Plasters, to be spreadon a Leather, or cloth.

The VTILITY is diverse in general, lest they should drain off without benefit,
or the virtues of it be dissipated, or when the grieved parts will not suffer
the hardness of a plaster which they require, as usually in Fractures, or when
soft parts in regard of their bending cannot admit a plaster, as in affections
of the Liver, Stomach, Spleen, for which they are usually made in obstructions
of the Spleen, for the womb, bones broken or out of joint, hardness of the
bowels, burstness, etc. They are also made where we would heat, moisten, relax,
molline, concoct, digest, ripen; they may also be made to dry and bind, seldom
to cool; for the cooling cerecloth of Galen is an ointment.

CHAP. XI Of a Plaster.
O Intments, Cerecloths, and Plasters, as they agree in virtues, so they
differ as much in consistence. A Plaster therefore is a topical Medicine,
thicker in consistence than the others, but clammy, so that spread on a Linen,
or Leather, it may stick fast to the skin. The Arabians for the most part call
them Cereclothes; the ancient Greeks called them Plasters, from (...) to shape
or mould, or from their Emplastick or sticking quality.

And it is twofold, Officinal and Magisterial, of which at present.

The Magisterial is Compounded (to be brief) of the same things of which an
Ointment is; of oil, wax, things equivalent, a powder, or some or more or all
of them, near this proportion, which is very doubtful amongst Authors, who for
one ounce of Oil take near three drams of powders, four ounces of wax, in which
you will find no firm example; therefore take it thus.

For a plaster less hard, take of oil one ounce, powder half an ounce, wax one
ounce.

For a harder plaster, take oil one ounce, powder six drams, wax an ounce and
a half, which is generally used.

For the hardest plaster, oil one ounce, powder six drams, or one ounce, wax
two ounces; for when they treble the wax to the oil, you must understand it is
when there is none, or little powders; and they that appoint the wax fourfold
to the oil, have no example in the dispensatories for it.

But in special it is made of oil, wax, and powder, as is said in an unguent,
those things being added (if the scope permit) which are clammy, as Rosin,
Turpentine, Pitch, Gums; in defining the proportion of which we must consider
whether they be equivalent to the Wax or Oils, so shall you easily judge them:
but whatsoever they are, where Turpentine can be admitted, let it be
prescribed, because it is clammy, which is required in a plaster, as also gums,
if the scope require it.

2. Or of Oils, Juice, Powders, Wax, and things equivalent if need be: see the
Ointment.

3. Or of an officinal plaster, powders, wax, and oil, and generally
Turpentine near this proportion; of the plaster an ounce and a half, or two
ounces of the powder, half an ounce or six drams; wax and oil q. s. adding a
little Turpentine, or omitting them, prescribe it to be incorporated with
Turpentine, q. s.

4. Or else an officinal plaster is prescribed alone in a fit proportion for
the part, etc.

5. Or sometimes gums only are melted with a hot pestle, and spread on a
Leather, to 6 drams, or one ounce, as usually in the suffocation of the mother;
there may also be added powders and oils.

6. Or sometimes powders of appropriat things may be prescribed to 6 drams to
be made up with ship-pitch to an ounce and half, or Turpentine. q. s. to which
may be added gums to one ounce.

The USE and FORM,. etc. with, etc. make a plaster, which spread on Leather,
and apply, being first anointed with oil, or sprinkled with powder if you would
not have them cleave too fast. But the figure of the plaster is prescribed in
relation to the part, as for ^he head like a T; for the stomach like a
Scutcheon; for the spleen, longish; for the Womb round; for the reins square.

The VTILITY: it was invented that the virtues of the medicine might stick to
the longer, and not vanish: they are profitable to heat, strengthen, dry,
concoct, ripen, for they increase heat by stopping the pores of the skin; they
also digest well, and draw out things fixed in the body, by a drawing quality;
they are also usefulto mollify hardnesses, to strengthen, heal and cleanse
Ulcers, to dry and cicatrize, for fractures also, seldom to cool, unless they
be sometimes prescribed of binders and repellers to stop fluxes

CHAP. XII. Of a Spanadrap.
THey call that so, when the cloth is plaistry on both sides; usually they are
called tela Gaalteri, perhaps from the inventor; but it is nothing else than
linen worn soft with age, in the form of a swath, or otherwise, dipped into a
liquid sort of plaster, then taken out, and spread at the full breadth,
afterward when it is cold made smooth.

It Is Compounded,

1. Either of a fit plaster, adding (if you will) a little oil, if it be hard,
in which old cloth is dipped, etc.

2. Or according to the indication it is prescribed fresh, and that for the most
part to stop rheums, and dry; of binders, as Bole, terra sigillata, sanguis
draconis, balaustines, Roses, Mastick; astringent oil, as of Mirtles, etc. and
Wax. Or if it be to cleanse Ulcers, incarnate, cicatrize, or for fractures, of
fit powders, oil, wax, or things equivalent, of which this plaster consists.
And the proportion of them is answerable to the proportion in the fofter sort
of plasters; for the most part of oil, 8 ounces; powders, 4 ounces; wax, 8
ounces; and if you admit of the equivalent things, it is easy to define their
quantity; let the cloth that is to be dipped be prepared in pieces 3 or 4
fingers broad, and of a fit length.

The USE and FORM,. etc. and make a Spanadrap for the arms, thighs, Ieggs, for
they are fittest for those parts; they may also bs applied to other parts, as
Ulcers, but then a plain form will serve, whereas for the others they must be
like an expulsive ligature.

The UTILITY: they are fit for the knitting of broken bones, to strengthen the
parts, cleanse Ulcers, heal and cicatrize them, to hinder the courses of the
humors to the Legs, especially those that breed or feed Ulcers, in which
respect they may properly be called intercepting Medicines, and be used for
expulsive Ligatures; they are chiefly dedicated to the arms, Legs, Thighs, and
also other parts afflicted either with Ulcers, or flux of Rhume: Hither may
also be referred those Cere-cloths, that are for beautifying either of hands or
face, to get the favor of Girls, made of fit things; thus is made an excellent
one; of Chalk finely ground, one ounce, oil of white poppy three ounces,
Camphire one dram, Borax one dram and a half; Virgins Wax often washed, three
ounces, or q.s. make a Cere-cloth for cleansing the face, against the redness
and paleness of it.

CHAP. XIII. Of a Cataplasme.
IT is the Malagma of the Ancients, a Topical soft medicine, almost of the
consistency of a Poultis, prepared for diverse uses.

It is COMPOVNDED diverse ways.

1. Either (which is most usual) of the muscilage of diverse parts of plants, to
which are after added either oils alone, or with Powders usually, and that to
this proportion: Let there be of Muscilage, or that matter that is driven
through the strainer, ten drams, or lib. 1. of powders one, two, three, or four
ounces; oil or things equivalent, three ounces or four ounces; or else you may
express only the quantity of the equivalent things, and set down of oil, q.s.
so that the whole Cataplasme do not exceed, lib. one and a half; it may be much
less, according to the bigness of the part, and use.

As to the Muscilage, it is made in respect of the quality, of boiled roots,
especially those that be fatty, as Marshmallows, Lillies, etc. leaves, seeds,
fruits, especially; to be prescribed in a quantity as for the fomentation, then
to be boiled in a fit Liquor, after stamping all thoroughly, and driving them
through a hair strainer; or particularly because a Cataplasme is commonly used
after a Fomentation, the residency of the decoction that is made is prescribed
to be beaten in a Mortar, and to lib. 1. of that pulp those things aforesaid
are to be added.

The Powders in relation to their quality are pulse, as the flower of barley,
beans, linseed, fenegreek seed, and these alone; or also the powders of other
things, as to discuss, Ireas, Cummin, Camomil flowers, etc. and these either
alone, or both sorts together, in the aforesaid proportion.

2. Or sometimes of fruits, ripe or unripe, as Apples, Prunes, Quinces, etc.
roasted under the embers, or boiled in a fit liquor, and bruised, adding fit
powders in the quantity aforesaid, as in the flux of the belly, and dysentery;
it is made with the pulp of Quinces, and astringent powders: so for the eyes
made of apples. See Collirium.

3. Or sometimes, in fluxes of the belly, vomiting, and to strengthen the
stomach a slice of bread steeped in wine, and toasted hot, is prescribed, which
being sprinkled with one ounce or two ounces of an astringent strengthening
powder, let it be applied to the stomach.

Hither belongs the crumbs of white bread steeped in milk to half a pint, to
which is added two yolks of eggs, half an ounce of Saffron, and q. s. of oil
fit for the purpose, and is applied for a Cataplasm in pains.

4. Or (as Chyrurgions do) of astringent powders to one ounce or two ounces,
made up with the white of an egg, which they lay on locks of hemp or bolsters
of linen rags, and apply to parts wounded, and Physicians also apply it to the
belly in Fluxes.

The USE and FORM,, etc. make a Cataplasm, let it be spread in a folded linen
cloth, and applied.

And note this, that it is convenient to soment the part first with the
decoction, in which the Cataplasme was boiled; it uses to be applied once or
twice a day.

The VTILITY: they are applied chiefly to ease pain in parts inflamed or
others, to soften hardnesses, to ripen humors and turn them to matter, to
digest and dissolve the cause of inflammations, to discuss windiness; they heat
rather than cool; yet they are usually prescribed of astringent things to stop
Fluxes: and are profitably made to provoke urine, of Pellitory of the wall, and
oil of Scorpions, applied to the bottom of the belly, for they relax,
mollify, and empty powerfully.

To Cataplasmes may be referred that which is usually called a Pultis.
It differs from a Cataplasm in nothing else, saving that that is prepared of
the muscilage of things boiled to pap, and this is usually made of the flowery
part of things boiled to the consistence of a Pultis, from whence its name.

And it is COMPOVNDED,

1. Either of the Flower of Pulse to four ounces boiled in a convenient liquor
to which afterward are added oils, or if the scope requires grease or some
other thing equivalent to oil to three ouncess or four ounces.

2. Or of the crumbs of white bread as before for an easer of pain, as in the
cataplasme, and to ripen.

3. Or of a convenient muscilage and powders, and oils, but this is rather a
cataplasme; see before.

The USE and FORM as in a cataplasme, The VTILITY is chiefly for pains, to
digest and dissolve; see the Cataplasme.

CHAP. XIV. Of Rubifiers.
THese couched under the several names of Dropax, Sinapismus, Vesicatories, and
Phaenigmus, differ little or nothing in form from Cere-cloths, Plasters, and
Cataplasmes; they only differ in their effect, and in general may be called
Rubifiers, though this name properly belong to that called Phaenigmus; of all
which briefly thus.

Dropax.
Dropax, properly called Pication or Pitching by the Ausients to whom it was
usual, is a topicall medicine in form of a plaster; seldom of a Cataplasme,
prepared to fetch nourishment and life into the parts, or to draw forth old
pains and infirmities that are hard to be cured. This is Compounded,

1. Either more simply of pitch to an ounce, or an ounce and a half, and oil
half an ounce, or six drams melted together, and spread on a a Leather.

2 Or more compound, powders that are hot in the first, second, or third
degree, being added to the simple, as Pepper, Pellitory of Spain, Ginger the
dungs of living creatures, etc. to half an ounce, or six drams.

3. Or as it is at this day made both for the attraction and discussion of
humors, two several ways, 1. Of the powder of hot things, spices, and things
of thin parts, to six drams. Mustardseed, and Pidgeonsdung to one ounce, are
made up with pitch and turpentine, q. s. make a plaster for the mould of the
Head. 2. To the same purpose it is made of Emplastrum de Mnscalaginibus 3
ounces, with one ounce of the aforesaid powders, oil of Ireos, q. s. make a
plaster like the letter T for the mould of the head, or let them be
incorporate with Turpentine, and make a plaster, etc. they commonly (but
amiss) call them vesicatories or blistring Medicines, for they operate without
blisters: and it is to be done for the most part before the blistering
Medicines, and sometimes after them, in contumacious affections of the head, to
draw the morbifical causes from within, digest and empty them, which said use
of the Dropax is now most frequent, and also most profitable.

The USE of the Dropax of the Ancients was to apply it hot to any part, the
hairs being shaved off, and pull it off again before twere quite cold, and this
was done often till the part were become red, which is usually the bounds of
applying the Dropax; then is it to be left off, and that being removed, if it
be to draw nonrishment or heat to the part, least either should breath forth,
the part is to be anointed with oil of Camomil, that the pores may be shut.

The USE of our Dropax, is chiefly for stubborn affections of the head, and it is
spread on a leather like a plaster, and cut in the shape of the letter T, and
applied to the mould of the head, the hair being first shaved off, from which
you may easily conceive the FORM of prescribing it. It may also be applied to
other parts in another convenient form

The VTILITY of the Dropax of the Ancients, is to nourish and revive parts
extennated and languishing; nourishment, heat, and spirits being by this means
called forth; and now adays also we imitate them profitably in parts
overcool'd and paralyticall. They used them also for other things; to dry moist
bodies, help cold and rebellious affections; it draws forth humors, that lie
deep, and discusseth them; it is profitable in the Palsy, Catharrs, and
affections arising from thence, Phthisis, etc. Failing sickness, Headache, and
in other affections of like sort where there is need of drawing forth
powerfully, and therefore they were called of old (...) or drawing discussers.

The VTILITY of our Dropax does correspond with the latter of these, and is
chiefly used in cold and di^turnal affections of the head or neither parts
flowing from thence; for it discusseth and draws powerfully those morbifical
causes that lurk in the brain.

A Vesicatory.
The Ancients had in use a Sinapisme, usually in form of a Cataplasme, made of
Sinapi, viz. Mustardseed (from whence its name) which if it were milder, so
that it would only make the skin red, 'twas properly called Phaenigmus; but the
stronger sort that raised blisters is called a Vesicatory.

A Sinapisme was anciently made of the pulp of figgs steeped til they were
soft, and the powder of Mustard, near this proportion: for a strongone, one
part of figgs, two parts of Mustard seed; for a moderate one, ana, of each like
quantities; for a weak one, two parts of figgs, and one part of Mustard Seed;
it was applied to the part til it were red, from whence comes the name of a
Phaenigme, as the name of a Sinapisme from the composition.

But now instead of those Sinapismes Vesicatories are used, so called from
their raising blisters, which are also by some called Phaenigmes.

The Vesicatory now in use is COMPOUNDED,

1. Either in the form of a plaster, and that two ways, 1. Of an officinal
blistring plaster, if it be extant, to an ounce, or an ounce and a half,
according to the largeness of the part. 2. Or else taken 2 or three ounces of
Emplastrum de Muscilaginibus, and two or three drams of Cantharides; let them
be incorporated with Turpentine and spread on a leather, to make a blistring
plaster.

2. Or in the form of a Cataplasme, which is most usual, of two ounces of old
leavens, and two drams of Cantharides, with Aqua vitae or Vinegar make a paste
for a Vesicatory.

But this proportion will serve for a reasonable large place, which otherwise
is to be lessened; for if it be (for example) to be applied behind the ears,
one ounce of stuff will suffice.

Note that sometimes there are added of the sharper sort of powders, as pepper,
ginger, Enphorbium, to one ounce, or one ounce and a half, Mustard seed to half
an ounce.

The USE and Form,, etc. make a Vesicatory of a fit bigness, let it be applied,
etc. till it raise blisters, which are to be pricked through with a needle, and
suffered to run as long as you see fit, and a Colewort leaf a little scalded at
the fire, daubed with oil is to be applied, so suffer it to remain open till
the whole humor be evacuated.

The VTILITY, they are generally used to empty, withdraw by revulsion, and
derive diverse humors; they are also profitable for humors that are fixed and
clammy, so that they cannot be discussed either by mollisiers, or attenuators;
for being thus melted, they are easily drawn forth, and dissolved; they also
help in the Dropsy, Sciatica, the lasting pains of the head and joints, all
cold stubborn affections, and as it were deplorable; it is an admirable
revulsive Medicin^, famous in Catarrhs, falling on diverse parts; useful in
stirring up those that be over-sleepy, or lethargical, they also help all
poisonous stingings, carbuncles, buboes, etc. and are rather a remedy for
phlegmatic diseases than the choleric.

CHAP. XV. Of Sacculets, or little Baggs.
FRom their effect they may be counted diverse, viz. discussive or dissolving,
strengthening, Anodine or pain easing, mollifying, etc.

Whatsoever it be, three things are to be considered in it, Composition, Use,
and Vtility.

In the COMPOSITION is to be considered the matter of which these Sacculets are
usually prepared, and that which contains the matter.

The MATTER, as to its quality, are diverse simples convenient for the present
scope, shred small and bruised, as Roots, Barks, Woods, Leaves, Flowers, Seeds,
Spices, Gums; one, two, or more, according to your scope.

In relation to their quantity, the bigness and proportion of the part to which
it is to be applied, should define the measure and weight of them, as for
example, for the heart, an ounce, or an ounce and a half will suffice, for the
stomach two or three ounces; for the whole belly a greater quantity is
required; therefore the several quantities of each simple are to be contrived
that the whole composition exceed not that quantity that is convenient for the
part it is to be applied to.

That which is to CONTAIN this matter, is a Linen cloth, or silken one,
especially for the more noble parts; of which are made Sacculets of diverse
shapes, square, Oval, or of some other figure, according to the form of the
part; they which are to be applied to the head, ought to be of the shape of a
Cap; they for the stomach scutcheon fashioned; for the Liver like a half moon;
for the Spleen like an ox tongue.

Note, that first sometimes the matter is to be terrified in a Drying Pan,
before it be put into the bagg, and be generally renewed with Wine, or Aqua
vitae, q. s. especially where we would discuss.

2. The more precious or finer powders, or they which are prescribed for the
more noble parts, should be sprinkled among sleive silk, or cotton, that they
may lie the softer to the body.

3. Lest the matter should clod, and fall in lumps or to one place, it should be
stitched through, and quilted in diverse places.

The USE, as to the manner, sometimes these Sacculets are applied dry to the
part, as they which are applied to the head and heart. And sometimes they are
wet with some liquor, and that after two sorts; for either they are sprinkled
with Wine, Vinegar, or some other Liquor to accelerate their operation; and
then are laid on a hot stone or tile, til they are warmed, and then applied. Or
else they are boiled a little in some fit Liquor, after pressed out, and
applied to the place; therefore they are commonly provided by pairs, that so
they may be still applied hot by turns.

As to the time when, and how long they are to be worn, or used, the condition
of the affection must teach that.

The Form appears by what is aforesaid.

The UTILITY: in general they are good to heat, dry, attenuate, discuss, draw
and strengthen, to ease pains, call forth and consume humors and windiness.

But in special, your Cephalical Sacculets are used to diverse affections of the
head, especially the cold, long lasting and flatuous, and to prevent
distillations etc: those for the breast are applied in the Pleurisy that is
spurious and proceeds from windiness, and other pains of the breast; to the
short rib-region in obstructions and swellings of the Liver and Spleen; and to
the region of the reins in the pain of them to the belly; in the cholick and
iliack passion, etc. Lastly Sacculets are applied to any parts for Schirrous,
phlegmaticks, windy swellings, to ease pain as in the gout.

THE SECOND BOOK.
The Second SECTION. Of the proper Remedies of certain parts.
CHAP. I. Of a Frontall.
IN general it may be called any form of Medicine applied outwardly to the
forehead, but in particular it now signifies a topical cooling, or appeasing,
or restbringing Medicine, made of cooling cephalical things, bruised and
included in a linen bagg four or five fingers breadth: this the Greeks call
(...); though that word signify properly a Medicine made of sticking things,
as the finest flower, and binding things as bole, Sanguis Draconis, Acacia,
mixed with Vinegar and the white of an Egg, and applied to the forehead
against bleeding at nose, or to stop the course of humors flowing to the eyes.

In our usual Frontal we consider three things, Composition, Use, and Vtility.

It Is COMPOUNDED 1. in a dry form, which is properly a Frontal; as to its
quality, it is usually of the flowers of Violets, Roses, water Lillies, white
Poppy seed, and Lettice seed.

As to their quantity, the flowers use to be prescribed to 3 or 4 pug. the
seeds to half an ounce.

Note, that sometimes to these are added to strengthen and discuss flowers of
Cammomil, and Melilot, ana, p. half; the seeds of Coriander and Dil, ana, half
a dram.

Note also, that sometimes these Frontals are made only of the leaves of
Lettice and Henbane, to 2 or 3 handfuls bruised, and sprinkled with oil of
Violets and Vinegar, or sometimes one handful of these are added to the former.

2. Or else in a moister form, and that 1. in the form of a Liniment of
Vnguentum Populeon, or of Roses, to 6 drams, oils of Violets, etc. half an
ounce, or of Unguentum Populeon only, 2. In the form of a Cataplasm, of Leaves,
Flowers, Seeds, as aforesaid, adding a little oil and Vinegar to it.

The USE and Form of the dryer sort is,. etc. bruise them, and fold them up in
a thin linen cloth; make a Frontal, which either moistened with the vapor of
Vinegar, and sprinkled with it, is to be applied to the forehead and temples at
the hour of sleep.

That of the Liniment is, c. Let them be anointed on the forehead and temples
at the hour of sleep, and after four or five hours let it be wiped off, and
renewed.

That of the Cataplasm,. etc. Make it like a Cataplasm, which foulded between a
doubled Linen cloth, let it be applied to the forehead and temples.

The UTILITY is chiefly to cool, against the burnings of the head, as in Fevers
and the Frenzy, to procure sleep in long wakefulness; which in those
affections do much prey on the strength, and trouble the mind; also to repress
vapors in Fevers, sometimes to repel, and for pains of the head, etc.

CHAP. II. Of an Oxirrhodine.
SOme refer this to the Epithemes, some to the Embrocations, taking its name
from Vinegar, and Oil of Roses; yet seeing it is a form of Medicine which seems
wholly dedicated to the head, I will adjoyn it for the liquid Frontall.

It Is Compounded, 1. Either more simply of four parts of Oil of Roses, and one
of Vinegar, beaten well together, so that the whole composition do not exceed 8
ounces, or lib: 1. at most.

2. Or more compound of oil of Roses, and other cephalical oils, with Rose
vinegar, and cooling cephalical waters to this proportion, of oils 4 or 6
ounces; Vinegar, 2 or 3 ounces; Waters, 4 ounces: let them be beaten well
together.

3. Or instead of waters with Juyces of the same things, prescribed in the same
quantity.

The Use and Form, etc. beat all well together, let Linen clothes dipped and
wet with this mixture be applied to the head, forehead, and temples, changing
them often.

The VTILITY: It Is excellent in the frenzy, and diliniums, or ilness of head,
to repel thin humors, and vapors from the head; and in burning Fevers where
you fear an alienation of the mind.

CHAP. III. Of a quilt Cap.
THis is dedicated to the cold and moist affections of the head.

It Is Compounded in relation to its quality, of cephalical simples well sented,
either roots, dried leaves, flowers, woods, spices, (as Cloves and Cinnamon,
etc.) seldom of seeds; and of gums (as Benzoin,) and sometimes Styrax, because
easily powdered, Musk and Ambergreese may be added for the richer sort.

And this is their usual proportion, of roots one ounce, dried Leaves two or
three handfuls, which may also be prescribed by weight to half an ounce, 6
drams; flowers, to p. 2, 3, which may also be appointed by weight, to two or
three drams, or half an ounce; gums to one: or two drams; Musk half a scruple,
or a scruple, etc. so that the whole composition do not exceed three or four
ounces.

Note, that some will add those sweet powders which we call Violet powder and
Cyprus powder to half an ounce.

The USE and FORM,, etc. Make a powder, which mix with fine cotton, or
sleivesilk, so bast it, and quilt it between two silks, and make a quilt to be
worn on the head, or sewed to the inside of the Cap; sometimes two are
prescribed, and then the quantity of the powder is to be doubled, and it is
said, make two Caps, of which let him wear one in the night, and the other
sowed to his cap for the day, and when they grow fatty with sweat, etc. let
them be left off, and new ones made.

The VTILITY: is famous in cold affections of the brain, and moist ones also,
from whence spring diverse diseases of the nether parts; but they are chiefly
prescribed after general purgings to draw a way the relics of the morbifical
matter for cold and lasting affections of the head it self, for Catarrhs, to
retain, consume, and stop all defluxions, to cherish the animal spirits, and to
strengthen the head and brain, (therefore they ought to be medicaments of thin
parts, that they may the easier penetrate the skul;) least it should either
receive or engender new impurities, etc.

CHAP. IV. Of a Collyrium.
IT is a topical eye-Medicine, addicted particularly to the affections of the
eyes, called a Collyrium by the Greeks from its virtue to stop rhewmes.

And it is twofold; the moist which is now only called a Collyrium; and the
dry, properly called Seife by the Arabians.

The moist Collyrium.
This is twofold, the Liquid, which in form of a Liquor is dropped into the
eyes; and the grosser which is anointed on, of the consistency of honey or a
Liniment.

But vapors are not said to be any of the sorts of a Collyrium; which seeing
they are nevertheless prescribed in affections of the eyes, I will first speak
of them: so that I shall aecount a moist Collyrium threefold: one like vapors,
another as liquor, the last like honey.

The vaporous is not so much a form of a Collyrium, as of a Medicine preparing
the humors and eyes, that the virtues of other things may be received to the
better purpose; as in suffusions, spots, etc. It is also prescribed by it self
to discuss, which is altogether the best way, as also when the sight is to be
cleared, etc.

It Is COMPOSED or made, 1. of the breath of ones self, or another, as of a boy
having washed his mouth, and chewed fennel seed, etc. breathed into the eyes,
which is often to be done, and continued sometime, as need requires. 2 Or else
may be prescribed a decoction, to the quantity of a Clister, made of leaves,
seeds, flowers, sharpening the sight, discussing and rarifying, and that in
white wine, often in water, sometimes the urine of a boy Child being added to
two ounces.

The USE and FORM of the decoction,, etc. make a decoction in, etc. for a
suffumigation, let him receive the vapor or fume of this to his eye, either
through a narrow-mouthed Pot, or a Tunnel (other vents being closed) morning
and night, long from meat, for so many days as there is need; afterward let
the eyes be fomented with a sponge, dipped in the decoction, or with little
bags filled with the ingredients, which let be applied warm by turns, for a
quarter or half an hour.

The VTILITY is expressed: it may also be made to bind, as in the dilation of
the apple or pupil of the eye, of convenient things, and in the running of the
tears; but the first use is most frequent.

These for a vaporous Collyrium.

The LIQVID one is absolutely called a Collyrium, though anciently Collyriums
were properly dry, in the forms of Troschischs which they dissolved in a fit
liquor at the time of using them.

But it is COMPOVNDED diversely. 1. Either of a distilled water alone, simple, or
compound.

The simple may be prescribed, either one, two or more to four ounces, make a
Collyrium.

The Compound which is magisterial, and chiefly addicted to digest, discuss,
cleanse, sharpen the sight, and take away suffusions, and is to be prescribed
by the Physicians, and is made in relation to its quality, of things that
sharpen the sight, leaves, seeds, as also Cephalical heating things, as leaves,
seeds, spices, as Ginger, Pepper, sometimes adding Gall, the Urine of a Young
Boy, White Wine, Honey, etc.

As to the quantity, let there be of sight sharpning leaves, M. six or M.
eight; seeds one ounce and a half, or 2. ounc. Cephalical leaves, M. 2. spices
half an ounce, six drams, Gall two ounces, Urine lib. half, or lib. 1, 2. Honey
lib. half, Wine lib. 2.

The FORM,. etc. Let them steep eight days in a glass vessel, in a warm place,
or horse dung: afterward distill them in Balneo Mariae; put the distilled water
in a glass bottle, and keep it for your use; which is as that of others.

2. Of Juices only, and chiefly of Leaves clarified and infused into the eyes,
or applied with linen rags wet in them.

3. Or of a Decoction only, of Leaves, Seeds, Flowers, fit for the purpose to
be prescribed in the quantity of a potion; for four ounces will suffice for a
Collyrium.

4: Or of an infusion only, of metalline things, as of Antimony 1 dram, in 4
ounces of water, which is admirable to clarify the sight, so also gr. 1.2.3.
of Vitriol in Rose or Fennel water is admirable against the redness and pain of
the eyes. Or else made of proper vegetables infused either in a distilled
water, Juices, or a decoction, etc. to 4. or 6 ounces, the Liquor afterward
being strained, and filtrated, is to be kept in a glass for use.

5. Or of a distilled water, Juice, Infusion, Decoction, 2, 3, or all of these
together, mixed according to your intention, to 3 or 4 ounces.

6. Or other liquors are used alone according to your scope, as Wine, Water,
whites of Eggs, in pains, etc.

7. Or some convenient powder made of proper eye medicines added to the
aforesaid Liquor, several or mixed.

As to the quantity of the powder, 1.2 or 3 drams is to be the most; those that
are strong should not exceed 1 dram so with 4, 5, or 6 oun: of Liquor make a
Collyr um.

Note also it is best to strain a Collyrium for the roughness of the powders,
unless it be to scour.

The USE and FORM;. etc. make a Collyrium, a few drops of which, 2 or 3 is to
be dropped into the greater corner of the eye, or and besides (which seems best
to me) apply a Linen cloth dipped in the same Liquor to the eyes, and change
them often, so let it be as it were a fomentation, or an Epitheme. Or when the
Liquors are gentler, let the Patient lie forward, and apply the Collyrium in a
cup fitted to the eye, so that it may as it were bath the whole eye.

The VTILITY, of the liquid moist one chiefly is to cool and quench the
burnings of the eyes, to drive away pains and inflammations in the beginning;
afterward to discuss them; also to repel and stay rhewms, to dry and consume
tears, to cleanse off any filth from them to sharpen the sight, and discuss
gross humors. Thus much for the liquid Collyrium. Here follows

The COLLYRIUM like Honey, it is so called because it is of the consistence of
Honey, and that threefold, in the form of a Liniment, a Pultis, and a
Cataplasme.

The Liniment fashion Collyrium is made, 1. Either of the powder of some fit
things made into an Alcohol, and a fit thing to embody it withal, which is
various according to the scope, as a fit Muscilage, honey, butter, ointment of
Roses, etc. according to your indications.

As to the quantity, let the whole composition be an ounce, viz. of powders, 2
or 3 drams, and half a ounce, or six drams of that with which they are imbodied.

2. Or without a powder of the muscilage of fit seeds, as of Quinces, etc. but
the former way is the more usual.

The Cataplasm and Pultis is for the most part made only to ease pains, and
that of two ounces of the crumbs of white bread soaked in q. s. of milk, to
which is added sometimes the muscilage of Fleawort, to half an ounce, Opium,
gr. 2 etc. 2. Or of only the pulp of a Pippin softened at the fire, or boiled
in Milk, to two ounces. 3. Or of both together, 4. Or to repel, of the pulp of
Quinces boiled to two ounces. 5. Orchiefly to discuss, after the manner of
cataplasmes, of the muscilage made of the residence of the sight-sharpening
decoction bruised and driven through the strainer; see the vaporous Collyrium.

The USE and FORM of the Liniment,. etc. Make it like a Liniment, with which
anoint the corners of the eyes, that it may leisurely penetrate to the inward
parts. Or else it may be applied with a pencil to the eyelids at the place
affected.

Of the Cataplasm,, make it like a Pultis, or a Cataplasme, lay it on a fit
linen cloth, wet in a fit liquor and apply it.

The VTILITY of the Liniment is special where we would help the affection of
the eyelids, or cleanse, to which purpose it is most useful, and also to dry;
it may profitably be used to discuss, and for pains, but then it is better in
the form of a Pultis: Collyriums are made in this form that by this means the
powders sticking the longer, may work more effectually on the part; and if
there be any sharp medicines, they are thus allayd. The Cataplasm and Pultis
are used only to ease pain; they may nevertheless be applied to discuss, and
repel, as aforesaid.

Thus far of the moist Collyrium: here follows the dry.

The dry Collyrium.
This uses to be prepared two ways, in the form of powder, and of a
Troschisck.

The POWDER is made of simples, levigated into a very sine powder, aad is
properly called by the Arabians Seife.

It is COMPOVNDED of Ohpthalmical simples reduced to a very subtle powder,
called Alcool, to be prescribed to half an ounce, or one ounce at most.

The USE and FORM,, etc. Grind it on a stone with some convenient liquor, to a
most subtle Alcool; after dry it, of which let gr. two or three be blown into
the eye through a small quill, after it let the eyelid be gently rubbed for
some space: or else that Alcool may be mixed with some convenient Liquor, and
so made into a Collyrium, or of it may be made a Liniment as aforesaid.

The VTILITY is great, and chiefly to cleanse off spots, suffusions, etc. if
powder only be blown in; as also to cicatrize or heal: or if it be dissolved in
Liquor, as is said, it may be for diverse uses, though this be less usual.

TROSCHISHS, are usually made without saying in Troschischs, of the Alcohool,
of diverse powders, to six drams, or one ounce at most, which are made up with a
convenient Liquor. See Troschischs.

The USE and FORM,, etc, with, etc. make Troschischs as big as Lupines, or
Pastills to the weight of one dram, dry them in the shade, grind one of them,
dissolve it with the aforesaid things, to make a Collyrium or Liniment.

The VTILITY: they may be for any intention, seeing that these Troschischs are
only a convenient form for preserving the virtues of the medicines, but they
are generally used to dry and cleanse, etc. and for the inflammation of the
eyes, with Opium, as trosch. albi Rhafis, which also are prevalent for the
redness, to digest inflammations, diminish scars, and other intentions of like
sort: In this form fit powders may be kept, which are ready at hand for use
either in a Linniment or Collyrium, or a powder according to the variety of the
scope, of which before.

CHAP. V. Of a Gargarism
It Is a Liquid Medicine dedicated to the affections of the Mouth, Gums, Jaws,
Larinx, and sometimes of the head, by gargarizing as they call it, washing of
the Jaws, and top of the throat, without swallowing it down.

It Is Compounded of WATERS, and things to be dissolved.

The waters are distilled in quantity to a pint, or a pint and a half.

The things to be dissolved, are always some fit syrup to three or four
ounces, sometimes according to the scope, Diamoron, Dianucum, Honey, to one
ounce and a half, or two ounces; also sometimes some juice convenient for the
affection, as Vinegar, Verjuice, in repellers to 2 or 3 ounces.

2. Or of waters and Juices chiefly cooling, of the first sort 8 ounces, of the
latter 4, with the aforesaid things that are to be dissolved.

3. Or (which is usual) of the decoction of diverse parts of plants, according
to your scope, more or fewer, near the proportion of a Clister, made in a fit
liquor, in lib. 1. or lib. 1 and a half, in which let the aforesaid things be
dissolved.

The USE and FORM,. etc. make a Gargarisme, with which wash the mouth often an
hour before dinner and supper, or else at any time if need be, cold if to
repel, warm if to digest.

The VTILITY, is various according to the variety of the affections, to repel
in the beginning of inflammations, for every hot distemper of the mouth, for
defluxions, to cleanse, to digest in inflammations, for the il savor of the
mouth, for diverse affections of the Jaws and mouth. Sometimes though seldom
it is made to draw phlegm out of the head, of the decoction of cutting,
cleansing, cephalical things, of thin parts; but mastcatories are better for
this.

CHAP. VI. Of an Apophlegmatisme.
IT is a sort of the Caput-purgiums, or head-purgers, as also is the Errhinum,
dedicated to the phlegmatic affections of the brain, to draw forth forth
phlegm from it, from whence it has its name: as for that which some do in
calling them Masticatories, it is abusively, for there are liquid
Apophlegmatismes, yet it is of late received for a practical use, because the
solid form of an Apophlegmatisme is the the more usual, so that by the word
Apophlegmatisme they simply understand a Masticatory, as you may easily
perceive.

But be it as it will, it is two fold dry and liquid.

This Form of Head-purging Medicines is properly called a Masticatory, but
commonly called also an Apophlegmatisme.

It Is COMPOUNDED or prescribed, 1. Of fit phlegm-purging simples; (see the
matter) as usually (Pellitory of Spain, etc.) steeped a night in an ounce or
two of Vinegar, which let him chew in the morning.

2. Or else of the powder of the aforesaid sharp things of thin parts, to 3
drams, or half an ounce, which is mixed with wax, q. s. Or else with only
Mastick; others do otherwise, but wax is most convenient, for so the powder
holds the firmer together.

3 Or the aforesaid powder is included in a thin, but strong linen cloth, and
is tied in a knot, for which usually one ounce of Mastick is taken for a basis,
and 2 or 3 drams of other sharper things, these are prescribed, make them into
little knots, etc.

The USE and FORM of the second manner,. etc. with etc. make pellets, or
spetting balls, or globulets like great pills, or troschischs in the form of
Lupines, hazzle Nuts, etc. of the weight of 2 scruples, one dram, etc. Make
chewable cakes, of which let him chew one, and roll it up and down his mouth
every morning, when his stomach is empty: and that for half an hour holding
down his head, often spitting out that that dissolves from the pellet; after
let him wash his mouth with warm water, wine, etc. that the relics remaining
may be washed often away; it may also be reiterated two hours before supper.

The VTILITY: it is singular after general evacuations for the particular
purging of the brain; it draws away the relics of phlegmatic humors,
especially from the brain, and chiefly from the center and foremost ventricles
of it, as also from the adjoining parts to it, it also purges the parts near
the mouth as gums, jaws, teeth, (in the ach of which it is usual) mouth, throat,
and whethersoever the heat of it it can diffuse it self. Lastly, it melts,
cuts, and draws forth plegm, and is excellent in cold and inveterate affections
of the brain.

The liquid Apophlegmatisme.
It is like the Gargarisme, which may be called the purging gargarisme.

It Is Compounded of the Decoction of Cephalical things that attenuate and cut,
whether roots, leaves, seeds, flowers, near the quantity of a gargarisme,
adding also things that draw forth phlegm; to an ounce, an ounce and a half,
or two ounces, made in wine or Mead.

Note, that it may be made more purgative by adding in the decoction Senna,
Carthamum, and sometimes Turbith, to half an ounce, or 6 drams.

The quantity of it, and of the things to be dissolved is as in a Gargarisme.

The USE and FORM is the same; for it is really a purging gargarisme.

The VTILITY is the same as of the masticatory; yet because when gargarized, it
enters farther into the Throat, and it also draws farther from the almons of
the ears, and ousle, and it is also thought to draw more powerfully from the
brain.

CHAP. VII Of Dentifrices.
THis Remedy though it seem only beautifying, yet it is often prescribed by
Physicians for other affections.

It Is Composed, 1. Either in the form of water, with which either the teeth are
washed, or else they are rubbed with a linen with it; hither belong the
spirits of Vitriol, and Sulfure in a small quantity diluted in the water, with
which the teeth may be rubbed. It marvelously cleanses and whiteneth them, and
preserves them from rotting: yet it must be done warily, for it makes them apt
to break.

2. Or else in the form of a liniment of six drams, or 1 ounce of powder with
a s. q. of honey of Roses; so make it of the consistency of an Opiate or a
Liniment.

3. Or in the form of Troschischs like a suppository, with which being dried
and hardened, let the teeth be rubbed; These are made of an ounce and a half,
or two ounces of powder with the muscilage of gum dragant, q. s. make
Troschischs like suppositories, and dry them.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make etc. with which either let the mouth be washed,
etc. or anointed, or let the teeth be rubbed afterward, let the the mouth be
washed with a convenient liquor, water, wine, etc.

The UTILITY; it is prescribed chiefly to whiten the teeth, cleanse and fasten
them, also to remedy the scates and rottenness of them, to strengthen and
incarnate the gums, and defend them from defluxions:

Note, that as to the matter of them there is usually and profitably to
cleanse, Tartar, Coral, crust of bread burnt, Salt, Scuttle-bone, Pumicestone,
etc. to which for the richer sort sweet smelling things, as Musk, Ambergreece,
should be added.

CHAP. VIII. Of Errhines, or sneezing Medicines.
It Is a Medicine in general which is drawn up in the nose, (from whence its
name) either for affections of the head or the proper affections of the
nostrils, to purge the first, to alter the others diversely, so that I may
rightly esteem it twofold, purging and altering.

The purging Errhine.
It Is dedicated to purge the brain of diverse vicious humors, which it does
either without sneezing, and then is called absolutely an Errhine, which they
otherwise call a he adpurge, or with sneezing, and then is called a Sternutatory
or sneezing Medicine.

Of that which is called absolutely an Errhine.
It emptieth the brain without sneezing, and in relation to its form is
threefold, Liquid, soft, and solid.

The Liquid is compounded 1. Either of Juices only of head-purgers, which is
pressed out of 4 handfuls of the leaves bruised, and strained with four ounces
of white Wine; this Liquor is kept in a glass bottle for use; this is otherwise
prescribed thus more briefly.. of the Juices newly drawn out of the leaves of
green Herbs with white wine, etc, four ounces, eight ounces, seldom it is
prescribed to lib: 1. unless for a continual use, and in diets.

Note, that sometimes to make it the more cephalical, Betony, etc. may be
joined with it, or a little of some cephalical decoction, and that it may the
more penetrate, one ounce of Aqua vitae may be added.

2. Or altogether of a decoction of cephalical things, as the Apophlegmatisme
is, the leaves of head-purgers being joined, of which strained, take 6 or 8
ounces, in which either nothing is dissolved, or sometimes fit juyces to 2 or 3
ounces, Aqua vitae, etc.

Note that some to purge the more wil-dissolve purging opiates in it, but it is
better to boil some fit purger with the rest of the things.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make an Errhine, or a head purge, keep it in a glass
bottle; let it be used warm in the morning, two hours before dinner, or also
before supper; snuff it up out of the palm of the hand; the mouth being full of
water, continue this 3 or 4 days, 3, or 4 times at once, or if a diet be
appointed, let it be continued the whole time of the diet.

The SOFT Errhine is compounded 1: In the form of a Liniment of diverse juyces,
and oil of Iroes, ana, two ounces, boil them to the consumption of the juyces,
add wax, q. s. make a Liniment, to which may be added a dram and a half of
sharp powders; or which is best, half a scruple, or a scruple of Elaterium.

2. Or in the consistence of an Opiate, of two ounces of the aforesaid Juyces,
Wine an ounce and a half, Honey, q. s. boil it gently to the consistence of an
opiate, N B, that besides sharp or or purging powders, as Elaterium,
Colocinthis may be added to one scruple.

Note also that the Opiate may be made without Juices of two drams, or 3 drams
of powder, honey, q. s.

The USE and FORM,, etc. make etc. and with your finger or a feather, anoint
the inside of your nostrils, and holding forwards your head, let the humors be
drawn forth; it is best after it to wash the nostrils. See Errhinum.

The SOLID is compounded, 1. either in the form of a powder, of fit things to
two drams, 3. drams, half an ounce. 2. or in a solid form, and is properly
called a Nasal, of the powder of such like things, two or three drams; make it
up with a fit muscilage, or turpentine, q, s. and wax, make a Nasal in the
shape of a Pyramid.

The USE and FORM of the Powder,, etc. blow up a little (as for example) half a
scruple, or a scruple with a quil into the Nostril^. Of the Nasal thu^,, etc.
make it in the figure of a Piramid, which being anointed with oil, put it up in
the Nostrils.

The VTILITY is after general purges, in a^fections of the head, especially the
cold and lasting ones: and also in them that proceed from choler, and watrish
humors, from whence often spring very sharp pains; and for all affections
arising from the foulness of the brain; therefore in diets it is most usual and
most profitable; it purges the foremost ventricles of the brain, and the
meminges or coverings of it; but it is warily to be prescribed in affections of
the eyes.

The sneezing medicine.
It Is COMPOUNDED of the Powder of sneezing simples, to one dram and a half, or
2. drams, for they are strong.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make a fine powder, whose steam is either to be drawn
into the Nostrils, or especially when cephalical things are mixed with it in
equal quantity, a little, as gr. 1, 2, 3, by the help of a quil may be snuffed
up in the morning, or at other times, when the brain is benumbed, or when the
birth is to be provoked.

The UTILITY is remarkable to empty the brain of gross vapors, and slime from
the foreparts of it; and is profitable in lasting and sleepy affections, to
expel the birth, having first taken medicines to that purpose; it powerfully
draws from the tunicles of the brain, and is profitable in affections of them,
proceeding from choleric humors.

The altering Errhine.
I call that so which is used to cure diverse affections of the nostrils, and
this is also threefold, liquid, soft, solid.

It Is Compounded, 1. Either of convenient Juices drawn out of Leaves with water,
or some fit Liquor, to 6 or 7 ounces, in which afterward is dissolved Honey,
or some convenient syrup, to an ounce and a half, or two ounces, and sometimes
a powder to half an ounce.

Or of some fit decoction to the quantity of a Clyster; in which also is
dissolved honey, or some proper syrup to two or three ounces.

2. Or in the form of a Liniment of fit things as above.

3. Or in a solid form, viz. of a Turund as they call it, of a powder chiefly of
binders and dryers, to three drams ( viz. for one) and the white of an egg,
some fit juice, or honey to make them up withal; make them up into a Turund or
Pyramidfashioned Tent (adding if you will the hairs of an Hare) and put it up
in the nostrils.

The USE and FORM is as that of the purging Errhine; yet the use of this may be
at any time; and particularly, when they go to bed, let them put in one; in the
morning another.

The VTILITY is great, in particular affections of the Nose, as in the Ozena,
Polipus, Ulcers, stench, bleeding, to which Turunds are used, in the form of a
Liniment.

CHAP. IX. Of Suffiments or Fumes.
SVffiments differ from Adoraments or sweet-scented perfumes, in this, because
the last cast their scent without fire; but Suffiments do not part with theirs
without the touch of fire:

And this is twofold, one for pleasure, another for health sake; and either of
these may be dry or moist; that is called a Fume or suffiment, this is rather
to he called a vapor.

The Suffiment for pleasure.
This is chiefly dedicated to grace the Court, and for pleasures, consisting of
sweet-scented things, and is either dry or moist.

The dry is COMPOUNDED, 1. Either in the form of a Powder, the matter of which
is either well-scented Gums, as Stirax and Benzoine chiefly, and also roots, as
Acorns, etc. Barks as of Citrons, Orenges; Woods, as Lignum Aloes; Leaves, as
Margerom, etc. Cephalical flowers and spices, as Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, etc.
Also Camphire, Musk, Ambergris, Civet, etc. Of these more or fewer.

As to the quantity, the Dose of the whole may be from one ounce to two ounces,
according as the things are costly (but if it be for the perfuming the
head-cloathes, it may be prescribed to four ounces, of the cheaper sort^)
Therefore of this quantity, viz. one ounce, two ounces: let there be of gums,
half an ounce, or four drams, of powders three drams, etc. or of each, alike
parts; Ambergreese, Musk, Civet; as you think fit.

2. Or in the Form of Troschischs, the aforesaid powder being made up with
gum-fragrant dissolved in a fit water, make Troschischs, etc. of the weight of
one dram: so let them be dried.

3. Or in the form of Cypress Birds, as they call them, of sweet Gums, three
ounces, the aforesaid powders, half an ounce, or six drams, Charcoal of
Willow-wood two ounces, or three ounces with Gum-tragant dissolved, or Labdunum
melted q. s. make Cypress birds, Caldles for Fumes, etc. Musk and Amber-greese
may be added at your pleasure.

The USE and Form of the Powder,. etc. Make a powder, to be cast on bright
Charcoals to perfume Chambers or clothes. Of the Troschischs this,, etc. make
etc. cast one, or two on the coals; so for the birdlets,. etc. light one of
them for a fume for the chamber.

The VTILITY: though they seem only intended for pleasure, yet seeing they
consist of precious cephalical and cordial simples, they cannot but cherish the
brain, heart, and spirits of them, and drive away malignity.

The moist is at this day usually prepared, and they call it a Cassolete.

It Is COMPOVNDED best of Gums, as Storax, Benzoin, to two ounces, and if you
will of some of the powders to two or three drams; these are all dissolved in
some sweet water, as of Roses; and then Cassolets made for a long use like
paste, and dried; at the time of using them a Cassolete is sprinkled with some
sweet water, and then heated over the fire it breaths forth a very fragrant
perfume: and to make it the more delightful, you may add gr. 3 or 4 of Musk.

The Vtility is the same with that of the dry one.

Suffiment for Health.
That Fume that is addicted to the conservation of health is from its effect
twofold; one strengthening the principal parts, and refreshing the spirits,
almost of the same things as that for pleasure; The other altering, as drying
the brain, cleansing the Lungs, moving the courses, helping suffocation, etc.

From the form it is also twofold, dry and moist.

The DRY in general is made of things which breathe forth a Fume, and that
wel-sented, as Ladanum, Storax, Benzoin, etc. as aforesaid, and sometimes
ill-sented, as Galbanum, assa Foetida, Castoreum, etc. the use of which is from
beneath; in affections of the Womb it is also made of the powders of things
serving to the scope, as of Roots, Woods, etc. therefore in general it is made
of gums and powders.

But in special it is compounded first in the form of a powder of the aforesaid
things, from one to two ounces, according as the use is, to continue long or
short; and particularly let there be of gums, 2 ounces, of powders half an
ounce etc. sometimes more, sometimes less, as you think fit.

Note, that in the affections of the Womb are usually taken among the powders
Gallia, and Alipta Moscata, and sometimes the powders of strengthening
electuaries to one dram.

And sometimes a Fumigation or Suffiment is made only of Tobacco cast on coals,
or else of the smoke taken by a pipe or tunnel; it purges the head and brain
wonderfully from choleric and phlegmatic excrements.

2. Else in the form of Troschischs, see before.

The USE and FORM of the Powder,. etc. Make a powder, of which cast etc. on
bright coals, (and if it be for the head) receive the smoke at the mouth; or
else smoke the headclothes with it if it be for the diseases of other parts
springing from thence, as the Phthisis, etc. if it be for the breast receive it
with open mouth, if it be for the Womb, and other cavities, receive the smoke
by a tunnel, as also through a hollow stool; if it be for pains of the joints,
fume well cotton, etc. and apply it. But of the Troschischs. etc. Make
Troschischs; see before,

The VTILITY is, as is said, either to strengthen, or alter diversely, usually
to dry the brain, and consume Catarrhs, and strengthen, for Phlegm contained in
the breast, in diverse affections; to dry the ulcers of the lungs, of Tobacco,
Coltsfoot, Brimstone, etc. to provoke, or stop the courses, of fit things, as
also to stay the Fluxes of the belly, as the dysentery, against fits of the
mother, of ill-scented things to the superior, and sweet scented things to the
inferior parts; to dry and strengthen the womb, and help conception: for Ulcers
of the ears, nose, mouth, lungs, womb, etc. for the French Pox of Cinnaber, as
is usual (whose fume received in a close place, cures that filthy disease by a
spetting Flux) and all affections depending thereon, as Ulcers, pains. And it is
usually made in the form of a powder or Troschisch; as Cinnaber, one ounce and
a half, Gum, balf an ounce, four dram of a strengthening powder, two drams,
three drams, make a powder, or else with turpentine make Troschischs.

The MOIST Suffiment is otherwise properly called a vapor, and is made of a
liquor fit for the purpose, sending forth a vapor by the help of boiling it.

It Is COMPOSED, 1. Either of a simple liquor, as vinegar, wine, Aqua vitae, or
Rose water, etc. Note that sometimes red hot flints, are quenched in the
vinegar, for the discussing of hard Oedematous swellings; as also red hot tyles
to be quenched in vinegar, and the vapor received, as is usual in the time of
the pestilence.

2. Or of the decoction of fit simples to be prescribed in the quantity of the
fomentation, or according to the ampleness of the part. Therefore in affections
of the ears, a third part of that will suffice.

The USE and FORM,, etc. make a decoction, whose vapor let them receive in
affections of the womb, and others also through a hollow stool, and a leaden
Pipe, or Tunnel; see the Insession: in affections of the ears, by a Pipe or
Tunnel, which they vulgarly call an EMBOIE.

The UTILITY is great, especially in affections of the Womb, in staying or
provoking the courses, of mollifiers and attenuators; in the dysentery of
binders, in diverse affections of the Anus, or Fundament, in stopping and easing
the Hemorrhoids; they are also prescribed for affections of the ears and eyes.
In general they may be used to dry, bind, relax, mollify, discuss, open, etc.

CHAP. X. Of Odoraments, or Perfumes.
THey are prescribed partly for delight, partly for health, but chiefly to
alter the brain, refresh the animal spirits, to put away ill sents, and
infectious air; for the increasing the vigor and spirits of the heart also,
the sent of them being attracted with the breath into the Lungs, and thence to
the heart.

They are made of sweet smelling things, and are either dry or moist.

Dry Perfumes.
These are Compounded, 1 In the form of a powder: see the suffiments: but the
quantity of this is to be limited according to the manner of using it; if it be
for the greater baggs, it is best to use the Violet or Cipreos powder: but for
the lesser sort two or three ounces will serve, yet so that the quantity of the
gums be diminished; see above: which in a box bored full of holes, or otherwise
you may hold to the nose in a little knot, or bagg of silk.

2. Or in the form of a Pomander, of the powder aforesaid in Suffiment for
pleasure, to one ounce, an ounce and a half, or two ounces, adding Musk:
Ambergreese, Civet, to grains 6. half a scruple, or a scruple, as you please;
And it is made up either with Gum tragant dissolved in Rose water, so make two
Pomanders to be carried in the hands, or which is better, let them be
incorporated with Ladanum dissolved: so make a Pomander, which anoint with some
sweet oil. Note also, that it is better for your Musk; Ambergreese, Civet, not to
go into the Composition, but to wipe the outside of it over with them
dissolved, as also with oil of Cinnamom, Cloves, etc. alone or mixed, and to
renew them often.

3. Or in the form of Globulets or beads, made of the same mass as the powders
are; but the proportion of it must be according to the quantity you intend to
make; to which the Apothecaries to increase the quantity of them add willow
charcole finely powdered.

4. Or in the form of a perfumed soap, for the washing of the hands and head,
of Venice soap, or other white soap to 4 ounces; sweet powder six drams, and if
you will, Musk or Ambergreece gr. 3, 4 etc. with a sufficient quantity of Rose
water incorporate, and make bals great or little.

The USE: let the sent of them be often snuffed up, but the scope is only to
cleanse the hands and head from filthiness, etc.

The VTILITY is expressed at first.

Moist Perfumes.
They are Compounded, 1. in the form of sweet water; and this is either simple,
as Orange-flower water to 3 ounces, of which you may add of Musk, or
Ambergreese gr. 2 or 3, The Compound is made of Odoriferous things liquid, as
Rosewater, Orange-flower water, etc. 4 ounces, Cinnamon water one ounce, and
dry things, as of sweet powders to 2, 3, or 4 drams, and if you will, some few
grains of Musk and Ambergreese.

2. Or in the Form of a Liniment, which now adays they call sweet balsam, of
white wax often washed and melted, one ounce, of some convenient chemical oils
one dram, and if you will, Musk, Civet, Ambergreese, some few grains, or more
coursly, of half an ounce of sweet powder, wax 3 drams. oil of Ben, or of sweet
Almonds, q. s. so maken Liniment, adding Musk, Ambergreese, etc. to some few
grains.

The USE of the water is to wash the hands, beard, and hair of the head
chiefly: The use of the Balsam and its utility is the same as that of the dry
perfume; the hand also may be lightly smeared, and the inside of the nostrils
to avoid stenches; to comfort the brain and heart, and the spirits of both.

CHAP. XI. Of the Scute.
IT is in general a topical Medicine for the stomach, made in the form of a
Scutcheon, which seeing it is usually made both of plasters, and baggs;
custom has so far prevailed, the strengthening bagg is often used for the
Scute.

It Is COMPOVNDED therefore 1. in the form of a bagg, of the powders of heating
stomachical stomachical things, observing these rules in every thing that are
set down for your Quilt Caps, from whose Form it only differs in the use, so
that (...) the proportion of the powder be also two ounces.

2. Or in the form of a Plaster, of the mass of some stomachical plaster, as
Empl. de Mastiche, 2 ounces, and of some stomachical powder, to half an ounce;
to which also are sometimes added well sented gums to 2 drams, and are all made
up with Turpentine, q. s.

The USE and FORM of the bagg,. etc. make a gross powder, which is to be taken
in perfumed cotton, or in the wool of a scarlet die, and with a silken fold,
make a bagg scutcheon fashioned to be quilted all over, which being hung about
the neck, let it be always kept to the region of the stomach, let it be
sprinkled sometimes if you think fit with a little Aqua vitae.

Of the Plaster,. etc. make a scutcheon-fashioned plaster, spread on Leather;
let it be applied to the stomach a little smeated with some fit oil, or
sprinkle it with powder. lest it stick too fast.

The UTILITY is great to strengthen the stomach after purging: to correct a
cold distemper, help concoction, strengthen it, and stay vomiting.

CHAP. XII. Of a Pessary, and Nascall.
IT is a Medicine to be put into the secret parts for helping diverse affections
of the Womb, and from its various form was diversely called of old.

It Is now called a Pessary, and is in shape the length of the forefinger, the
thickness of a thumb, and is otherwise called a Pesse, and those which are made
like knots or nodes, are called Nascals,

They are from their effects twofold, purging and altering.

The purging Pesse
Is COMPOUNDED, 1 either of a purging Opiate alone, to an ounce and a half, or
two ounces, viz. for 2 (for two are always to be prescribed, that when one is
taken forth, another may be put in) let it be incorporated with some juice, as
of Mercury, etc.

Note, that sometimes powders may be added to the Opiate, either sharp
hysterical opening powders to a dram and a half, or two drams, or else the
powder of purgers, simple or compound, to two drams; let them be incorporated
with juice; also instead of them gums, as Ammoniack, Mirrh, etc. are often
added to two drams.

2. Or of the powder of Catharticks, and of compound Electuaries, as Hiera
picra, to 6 drams, or one ounce, together with a dram and a half, or two drams
of hysterical altering things; so with honey, or a juice, or both q. s. let
them be incorporated.

3. Or of juyces and honey boiled to the consistence of an Opiate, adding
purging powders to this proportion, of Juyces two or three ounces, honey an
ounce and a half, powder half an ounce.

The USE and FORM,. etc. with red Saunders, or a silken fold, make a pesse. or
else mix it with a little cotton, and wrap it in a silken fold, and make a
pesse of the fit bigness, which is to be put in, which being tied to the thigh
with a thread that it may be drawn forth again at pleasure, which is usually
done after 4 or 6 hours, the dregs may be cleansed from it, afterward that or
another is put in again, therefore they use to have two at evening when you go
to sleep.

Note, that before it be put in, that or the interior parts of the Wombs
entrance is to be anointed with some fit oil, the use is to continue three or 4
days

The UTILITY is after purgations, and chiefly in cold distempers: in which are
heaped Phlegmatic excrements and dreggs; from whence often proceeds barrenness
etc. also sometimes when a diet is prescribed, then they are to be continued as
long as that is appointed* And it is the best course to compound them of purgers
and strengtheners, of each equal parts. They are also useful to provoke the
Terms, for they draw much, especially if you add Musk or Civet to them; it is
most profitable and usual to make it of purgers and strengtheners as aforesaid,
to help conception, one of which let be worn in some time before the Woman
accompanies with her Husband, and afterward let her put in another of only
strengtheners and binders.

Of the altering and strengthening Pessary.
Pessaries which do not purge are prescribed two ways, either to strengthen
the Womb, or to alter diversely.

It Is COMPOVNDED, 1. in the form of an Opiate, a powder made of fit hysterical
^oors, leaves, spices, etc. which are to be incorporated with fit things.

The quantity of powders is six drams, or one ounce, sometimes an ounce and a
half, and that which makes them up, either honey or some juice, q. s. and then
usually cotton is daubed with that mixture, and rolled round for a pessary; but
when it is made with honey because it is of a thicker consistence, there is no
need of Cotton, and the pesse is made with silken covering, etc. it may also be
made up with a fit syrup.

Note also, that it may be profitably made with juyces boiled up with honey to
the form of an Opiate.

Note also, that sometimes an officinal Opiate may be prescribed, as Triphera
Persica sine opio to half an ounce, and powders to two drams, or half an ounce
after the manner of Opiates.

2. Or in the form of a Liniment of six dram^, or an ounce of powder with Oil
of Spikenard, and wax, q. s. make it a Liniment with which a cotton is daubed,
or carded wool, and is formed like a Pesse, to be covered over with a thin
silken fold.

3. Or in the form of a Suppository, of honey an ounce and a half, or two
ounces, boiled with a convenient juice to 2 or 3 ounces, adding if you will half
a dram of powder.

4. Or of only ointments fit for the purpose, mixed with a cotton, or
otherwise; where you would bin de, of Vnguentum Connitissae, and a fit powder,
ana, an ounce.

5. Or of a handful of green herbs bruised and incorporated with a juice or
honey, adding if you will half an ounce, or six drams of powder.

6. Or of Cotton only, especially in the fits of the Mother, rubbed with half a
dram of Civet, or Musk dissolved, and with other Odoriferous things suddenly
put up.

Also a cotton may profitably be used for a Pessary to other scopes, imbued
with fit juyces to 2 or 3 ounces, which is effectual where we would bind, to
which may usually be added powders to half an ounce, 6 drams as above, or other
convenient things, as buster, grease, fat to mollify, etc.

The USE and FORM: see the purging Pess; the solid pessary should always be
wrapped in a thin silken sold, that it may the easier be drawn forth, for else
'twil dissolve; also when you would bind and dry, it ought to be renewed often.

The VTILITY is to strengthen the womb, as is said, also to alter diversely, as
for its inflammations, to mollify its hardness, and for diverse distempers; for
all fluxes from the Womb, the falling of it forth, fits of the Mother, to
expel the Birth, and afterbirth, to provoke the Courses; but those are for the
most part also purgers, which must not be used unless after universal
purgations; also for Ulcers of the passage or neck of the Womb, and for
suffiments for the Womb.

This of a PESSARY: Here follow, a NASCAL.
Some will have them the same thing that a Pessary is; others will have it
signify a node or pencil, it is invented for Virgins sake, who for shame or
modesty refuse a Pessary; or for Women who cannot admit them, as when they have
Ulcers.

Whatsoever is the reason, they are COMPOVNDED in the manner of a Node, or
Pencil, and are very soft, of fine locks of cotton or wool moistened, either
with some fit juice, or ointment, or other things aforesaid, the quantity of
which is scarce limited; generally a flock of Wool is prescribed to be imbued
with q. s. of such a thing.

Such are made for fits of the Mother, a flock of cotton being slightly rubbed
with Givet, or Musk dissolved in nard oil, as above.

The USE is as of Pessaries.

The VTILITT in Virgins is the same as of the other in Women; they are made
for Ulcers in the neck of the womb, and pains of it.

CHAP. XIII. Of a Suppository.
It Is a topical Medicine used to the fundament, or anus, three or four inches in
length, slender and round like a small candle; of old in the form of an acorn,
from whence they were called of the Greeks Balanoi; at this day it is commonly
called a Suppository, chiefly to move the belly to stool, and for some other
afsections.

And it is either simple, or compound.

The Simple.
This is made either of the stalk or root of Beets, Colewort or Marshmallows,
the outward rind peeled of, to which is added sometimes salt (to augment the
provocative virtue) rubbed on the outside, so smoothed over with oil they are
put up; also of the stalk of a Leek anointed with butter, or white soap
sharpened like a suppository; also honey alone boiled to a hard consistence, for
so it becomes more sharp.

The Compound.
This is made of Honey as the basis, boiled til it will not stick to the
fingers, then adding powders to it near this proportion, as to one ounce you
may add one dram, or 4 scruples of powder at the most, according as the powder
is lighter in weight, or stronger in operation; which quantity will serve for
two or three suppositories.

But the Honey is boiled by it self, or with fit juyces to irritate, or for
other purposes, of which let there be an ounce, or an ounce and a half.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make suppositories, one of which let be put up, first
being anointed with oil, or butter when need requires; so that if they be
purgative, once or twice a day will suffice; if only to alter, they may be used
oftener; if they consist of Narcoticks for pains, let them not stay too long
lest they induce a Palsy, (and therefore thy use to be fastened to a thread,
that they may be drawn forth at pleasure,) neither ought they often to be used.

The UTILITY in general is twofold, either to provoke the expulsive Faculty to
stool, o^ else for the proper affections of the Anus, and straight gut.

The Belly is to be moved with a suppository, either when the age of the
Patient will not receive a clyster, as in sucking children, or in humorous
people, whose custom and waywardness will not admit of one, as usually in
Virgins; also when clysters put up work not, as in the cholick is seen; or when
purging Medicines taken down do not move as they should, or when the dung
stays in the belly only for want of irritating; or when it is so hardened in
the straight gut that you cannot put up a clyster. And lastly, when the
expulsive Faculty is unmindful of his office, and sluggish.

Also to revel or withdraw when humors tend wholly up to the head and midrise;
or otherwise, when for revulsion sake they are to be drawn down, or purged
forth, as generally in cold and sleepy affections of the head, in which the
expulsive faculty benumbed, is by this means excited, or also when Clysters
offend the sick, etc.

And bsides this scope of purging, they are made for the proper affections of
anus, and straight gut, of honey as the basis, and other matter serving to the
intention, after the manner aforesaid: so to open the hemorrhoids, with sharp
things, to stop them with other fit things: also for Tenesmus, Ascarides,
Ulcers, the Relaxation and Palsy of the Sphincter, and pains, with
appropriated powders, mixed with honey in the aforesaid proportion.

And mark that concerning the matter of laxative Suppositories, some are
gentler, as the simples before recited, for infants; others stronger, which
consist of Salt, Mouse-dung, purging powders; simple as Aloes, Agarick, Senna;
or compound, as usually Hiera Piera, and also other strong things, the use of
which is chiefly in the sleepy affections, as Sal Gem, Sal Ammoniack, Salt
Peeter; and Purgers, simple as Coloquintis, or compound as Hiera
diacoloquintida, to half a scruple, or one scruple: also if for pains, opium be
admitted, it is to be done warily, for fear of a Palsy, and you should scarce
ascend to half a scruple.

CHAP. XIV. Of a Clister.
IT signifies a washing from the Greek word Elyzo, and in Greek is called
Clyster, and from its being injected, Enema, from Eniemi to inject; in general
it signifies any Lotion or Injection into any part, but particularly, that
which is injected by the fundament.

And this may be accounted threefold, purging, altering, and strengthening.

A Purging Clister.
Is COMPOVNDED, of a fit liquor, in which together with honey, sugar, and oil
are dissolved diverse purgers; and therefore so many things are to be considered
in the composition, but chiefly two; the liquor of which it is made, and the
things to be dissolved in it.

The Liquor as to its quality is either the common decoction for Clisters usual
in the shops, or a Magisterial decoction prescribed, according to the urgent
occasion and intention of the Physician, of convenient things: and is either
Altering or Purging.

The Altering which is most usual, is composed of fit mollifying things,
heating or cooling, according to the intention, of roots, leaves, seeds,
fruits, flowers, near this proportion, as of roots, two or three ounces, leaves
four handfuls, seeds six drams, or one oune, or an ounce and a half at most,
fruits pa. eight, flowers pugil. three.

If you would make it purgative, you may do it by adding for phlegm, of
Carthamus seed bruised 6 drams, or one ounce, Agarick tied up like a node in a
ragg, 3 drams, Elect-Turbith 2 drams, for Melancholy 1 ounce, or 6 drams of
Senna, Polipody an ounce, which is very rare, all which are to be added after
the roots, and are prescribed to be boiled after the seeds also; all these are
boiled in a convenient liquor, or in water only. (But this is rare to boil in
purgers, because purgers are afterward dissolved in it, which will be
sufficient.)

As to the quantity of the Liquor, it varies according to the age of the party
very much; for 3 ounces will serve for a child of 4 or 5 months old; if one
bigger, 5 or 6 drams; for people of ripe age usually lib. 1. for great men lib.
one and a half.

But here we must observe in them which are with child, or Hydropical, troubled
with wind, and in old Folks we should rather take less, so that the whole
Clyster exceed not 12 ounces; also when we would have it kept long in the body.

The things to be DISSOLVED, in relation to their quality, are either alterers
or purgers; the Alterers which are generally dissolved, are Honey and Sugar,
and always oil, yet it may be left out when the expulsive faculty is to be
sharply provoked, or where we would draw powerfully. To these are sometimes
added Salt, usually sal gem. where it should be more provokative, as in sleepy
affections.

But the purgers are officinal electuaries, either only lenifying or purging,
according to the variety of the humor to be purged, and the diverse
constitution of the body.

Sometimes instead of them are dissolved pills in the drowsy affections.

As to the quantity, Honey and Sugar are dissolved to two or 3 ounces at most;
in them of ripe age, in children a fourth part will suffice, and less in
infants. Oil, in those ripe of age 3 ounces, salt to half a dram, or a dram.
Electuaries to double the dose in which they are given by the mouth; but
usually they are proportioned to an ounce and a half, unless they are very
gentle, or you would have it work very strongly, then you may add 2 ounces; in
Infants you may prescribe a quarter of that proportion; but if you prescribe
pills (which is seldom) do it to two or three drams.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make a Decoction, take of the strained liquor, etc. in
which dissolve, etc. make a Clyster to be injected long after meat when the
stomach is empty; yet it may be prescribed at any hour when need requires, as
in the sleepy affections.

The VTILITY. 1. To purge forth the excrements of the belly, and draw forth
diverse excrementitious humors, from whence soever then are accumulated. 2. To
evacuate the adjacent parts, as Reins, Bladder, Mesentery, and Stomach from
them; also to empty the more remote parts as the head and breast, etc. for the
nether parts, being cleared and emptied by a certain consecution of the
humors, the uppermost are also disburthened: and for this cause they are
esteemed as revulsive Medicines.

The altering Clyster.
This is also COMPOVNDED of a fit Liquor, and proper things to be dissolved in
it.

The LIQVOR, as to its quality is various, according to the scope, and is
either simple or Compound.

The simple is sometimes Milk, or the broth of a sheeps-head, and appurtenance,
for a fit Liquor, as in the dysentery, Cholick, etc.

Sometimes of Oil only, as in windiness, and the cholick, and of strong
Wine, or Hippocras in the same affections.

Sometimes of chalibiated Milk for an astringent, and sometimes otherwise of
the decoction of the decoction of Barley, or with it of bran, Roses for a
cleanser, which is usually done: those 3 being prescribed, ana, p. 1.

The Compound Liquor which is generally in use for these sorts of clysters, is
the decoction of diverse parts of plants as aforesaid, more or fewer, which
respect both the part affected, and the affection, in the same proportion as is
said in the purging clyster.

As to the quantity of the liquor, see there also.

Things to be dissolved in the altering Clyster, in relation to their quality,
are very various according to the variety of indications; though they be seldom
altering without purging, unless the indications do wholly dissuade, as in the
pain-easing, and nourishing Clyster, etc.

Usually there are dissolved Honey, Sugar, Oil, in the dose aforesaid:
sometimes there must not be oil, but only sugar and honey, as in the cleansing
Clyster; and on the contrary in the Emollient Clyster oil is to be preferred:
as also Butter, if you will, and such like fat things.

Besides these, or sometimes without them according to the urgency of the
indications, juices are dissolved, as in the astringent Clyster, made of leaves
(which are also profitable in purgative Clysters, of drawing medicines) also
astringent powders, as is generally used in the fluxes of the belly, and
dysentery: sometimes Goats suet in the dysentery and pains, to daub as it were
the inside of the entrails, least the sharp humors in their passage should more
ulcerate.

Note also that the yolk of an egg is to be dissolved, else it will soon
harden; sometimes urine as in the dropsy Ascites, so also Philonium in a
Narcotick Clyster.

But for a nourishing Clyster, fit Conserves are convenient, white Sugar,
Consumption broths, also confection Alchermes, when you would strengthen
powerfully; and Tracle also, of which must be well noted, that in the
overworking of Physic, and in the Epidemical dysentery, it works miraculously
and suddenly.

As to the quantity, it is also diverse according to the diversity of the things
that are to be dissolved.

Honey and Sugar to 2. or 3 ounces.

Butter and other fat things to 3. ounces.

Juices to 2. or 3. ounces.

Powders to six dram, or one ounce, more or less, according to their efficacy.

Suet to half an oun. or 1. oun. in whose place also you may use an ordinary
candle, by the anointing of which, we see execriations presently healed.

Urine to 2 or 3 ounces.

Philonium to two drams from one.

Conserves, from half an ounce to an ounce.

White Sugar, two or three ounces, as also nourishing compositions.

Confections, from 1 dram to 2 for the richer sort.

New Treacle, from half a dram to a dram, or somewhat more.

Yolks of Eggs, in number 1. 2 in a Clyster, to ease pain, gently cleansing and
nourishing:

The USE and FORM see before, but it may be injected at any convenient hour
when need requires.

Note, That nourishing Clyste^s ought to be prescribed in a greater quantity,
and often to be repeated, and to be kept longer than ordinary, in others
observe the contrary.

The UTILITY appears diverse in the affections of the gutss especially in the
greater; next in the affections of the neighboring parts; they are made also
to alter the intestines diversely, and the whole body, as to cool in diverse
affections, and temper the heat of the adjacent parts, to mollify the
excrements, lenifie the acrimony of humors, to ease the pains of the guts,
Reins, Bladder, Womb: to discuss windiness, and cleanse both excrementitious
humors, and the Ulcers of them which have the dysentery, and to heal them: to
bind and stay fluxes of the belly, draw forth, and kill Worms, and to nourish:
so that there is almost no affection, or part of the body which may not receive
benefit by a Clyster, especially by that which purges the belly, and therefore
they are profitably prescribed to precede every purgation, that the succeeding
purge might work the easier and quicker, without either griping or vomiting;
when otherwise many impurities may be left behind, which either may return to
diverse parts, or at lest offend them with the putrid vapors that proceed from
them, contaminating the good juyces and spirits, and clowding and oppressing
the natural heat.

CHAP. XV. Of diverse Injections.
BEsides those Injections that are made into the fundament, others also are
prescribed for diverse parts of the body; as into the Ears, Womb, Bladder, Yard,
Vlcerous cavities, especially Fistuloes, and are by a general name also called
Clisters.

Of that into the Ears.
They are COMPOUNDED 1. Either of oils only, or juyces, waters decoction fit
for the purpose, according to the variety of the affections.

2. Or of 2 or 3, or more of the aforesaid mixed together, in which sometimes
things serving to a diverse scope are dissolved; but in a small quantity, and
these which are almost liquid themselves.

As to the quantity of liquid things,

Of Oils, half an ounce, an ounce, or six drams will suffice, according to its
efficacy, and the continuance of its use.

Juices, Waters, Decoctions, one or two ounces, either several, or mixed,
according also to their efficacy, and the use, will be enough.

As to the quantity of things to be dissolved, it must be small because of the
exquisite sense, and smalnesse of the part; if they be powders, half a scruple,
or a scruple; if fat things, two drams; Honey, half an ounce, etc. will be
sufficient at most.

The USE and FORM,, etc. drop into the ear two or three drops, according to the
faculty of the Medicine, and sometimes the ear is to be filled with the Liquor:
but a little after holding down the head, it is to be cleansed, as chiefly when
we use the Decoction; If it be Oil only, some few drops are poured in, after
the ear is stopped with perfumed cotton, especially if it be a cold affection.

The UTILITY: it is chiefly used for inflammations, Ulcers, noyses, deafness,
Worms, and other particular affections of the Ears; See the Magazeen Physical.

Of that into the Womb.
They are otherwise called hysterical Clysters; and the pipe by which they are
injected into the Womb, is by the Greeks called a Metrenchite, and the
medicines from that Metrenchiticks.

They are COMPOUNDED 1. In relation to their quality, as of the decoction of
roots, leaves etc. in the quantity, as for a Clyster, of which liquorstrained,
take 3 or 4 ounces, make an Injection; yet they reserve one pint for many
Injectons.

Note, that thus is made the Injection simply; but sometimes, and that usually,
other things are added diversely; according to the scope, as is said in an
altering Clyster, and that to half, or a third part of the quantity of that.

2. Or of the juice of Herbs clarified.

3. Or of distilled waters.

4. Or of some other simple Liquor; See the Clyster.

5. Or of those mixed together, so that 3 or 4 ounces may suffice for an
injection, in which if any things serve to the same intention: you may dissolve
them in the aforesaid proportion.

The USE and FORM,. etc. Make an injection into the Womb by a Metrenchite, or
Womb Clysterpipe.

The VTILITY may be for diverse affections of the Womb, as inflammations,
ulcers, pains, windiness, to heat, cool, to provoke the courses, or stay them,
bring down the afterbirth, for the falling out of the Womb, and to cleanse it
from diverse impurities; see for matter among the hysterical things in the
following physical Magazeen, or other tables.

Of those for the Yard and Bladder.
These are Compounded of a convenient liquor, as has been often said, simple
or compound; See the altering Clyster; they are also made of Emulsions, as in
the running of the Reins, sharpness of the Urine, etc.

As to the quantity, three ounces or four ounces will suffice.

Note, that in this sometimes nothing, sometimes honey chiefly, or some fit
syrup is to be dissolved to an ounce, and sometimes the powders of diverse
things, but ground to an exact Alchool, to a dram, a dram and a half, or two
drams.

The USE;. etc. Make an injection by a syringe; sometimes when the way to the
bladder is stopped, it is prescribed to be done by a Catheter.

The VTILITY, it is chiefly to cleanse, both slime sticking to the orifice of
the bladder, and also filth from Ulcers, for pains, exulcerations,
excrescences of the flesh, etc. for heat and inflammation, as usually in the
virulent Gonorrhea, and dry Ulces, etc

Of those for Vlcerous Cavities, and Fistula's.
They are COMPOVNDED of a fit Liquor, proportioned to the largeness of the
Fistula, in which are dissolved fit things, and that somewhat plentifully,
where we must imitate other particular Injections, viz. to the quantity of the
Liquor. and things to be dissolved.

The USE: make an injection by a Syring.

The VTILITY: for the lessening of the callous, or hardness of Fistulaes, but
chiefly for cleansing them, to breed flesh, and cicatrize matter, for which you
may see in his proper place.

God be praised.
FINIS.
An Appendix of the doses of Purgers given in substance, of which there is
frequent use in the treatise of the Composition of Medicines.
Cholagogues, or Medicines purging Choler.
The gentler sort.
Cassia, from half an ounce, to an ounce and a half, and two ounces. Manna, 1
ounce, 2 ounces, 3 ounces. Tamarinds, 1 ounce, 2 ounces, 3 ounces. Juice of
Roses, one ounce, one ounce and a half, two ounces.
Moderate Purgers.
Aloes, one dram, two drams, two drams and a half. Rheubarb, one dram, one dram
and a half, two drams. Citrine Myrobolanes, two drams, three drams, half an
ounce, five drams.
The vehement sort.
Scammony, gr. six, fifteen, one scruple. Paulus and Etius, to one dram,
Mesues, gr. 12.
Melanagogues, or Medicines purging Melancholy.
The gentler sort.
Senna, 2 scruples, 1 dram, 2 drams, some to three drams. Polipody of Oak, 2, 3
drams, half an ounce. Epithimum, 2, 3 drams, half an ounce.
The more violent sort.
Black Hellebore, gr. 15. half a dram, two scruples. Mes. one dram. Lapis
Armenius lotus, half a dram, a dram, a dram and a half; unwasht a dram only:
Lap. Lazuli lotus, half a dram, a dram and half. Mesues, from two drams, to two
drams and a half.
Phlegmagogue^, or purgers of Phlegm.
Gentle.
Carthamus soed, a dram, half an ounce, six drams. Moderate. Agarick, 2
scruples, 1, 2 drams.
Violent.
Turbith, 2 scauples, 1 dram, 4 scruples. Mesues 3 handfuls, from one dram to
two. Hermodactils, 2 scruples, a dram, a dram and half. Mes. a dram and half to
three drams. Mechoacan, 2 scruples, a dram, a dram and half, or two drams at
most. Jalap, 2 scruples, 1 dram, 4 scruples at most. Coloquintis, gr. 6.15. one
scruple. Dioscorides to two scruples. Opopanax, to half dram, and a dram.
Sagapene, half a dram, and a dram. Euphorbium, gr. 3, 8, 12.
Hydragogues, or purgers of Watrish humors.
Gentle, as of dwarf Elder, or Danewort, The Seed, one dram. The Bark two
drams. The Juice, half an ounce, six drams. So Elder in the same manner.


Vehement.
Soldanella, a dram, a dram and a half, two drams. Juice of Ireos, half an
ounce, 6 drams, 1 ounce. Elaterium, gr. 6. half a scruple, gr. 15. Esula
prepared, the same. Mechencan and Jalap, Of these see in the Phlegmagogues.
FINIS.
THE PHYSICAL MAGAZEEN OR A Systeme of the Matter of PHYSIC, CONTAINING A
Series, or Scrol of Medicaments, Universal, and Particular, Simple, and
Compound;

Fitted to the method of Physic, and forms of prescribing Remedies.

By Doctor JACOB A BRUNN. Phil. ac Med. Doctore, and in the University of
Basil both Practicer and public Professor of Physic.

In good will to the new Students of Physic

LONDON: Printed for Nath, Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1657.

The PREFACE to the Students of Physic.
AS an Artificer can bring nothing to perfection being destitute of a fit
matter to workon, although he be skilful in the manner of effecting: so a
Physician can do nothing for the health of the sick Patients, nor prescribe any
forms without a plenteous furniture of Medicaments fit for this purpose, though
he be never so well skilled in the way of compounding them. Hence appears the
necessity and Vtility of the Physical Matter, of which you may find plenty in
this ensuing systeme, taken out of diverse parts of Plants, (viz. Roots, Barks,
VVoods, Leaves, flowers, Seeds, Fruits, Spices,) and humors of them, (viz.
Juyces, Raisins, Gums;) Also out of living creatures whole, as well as the parts
and humors of them (Fatts, Suets, Marrows;) as also out of their excrements; as
also out of things growing bothin sea and land, as metalline things earths,
diverse serts of stones, and things belonging to the sea: alsocompound things of
the shops contracted together, and digested into certain classes, according to
the series of directions for curing. So that from hence as out of a most
plentiful Magazeene, and a most subtle matrix, (having the method of Physic
for your guide) a numerous store of Remedies may be had in readiness; so make
that Polydaedalian heap of compound Medicines. You therefore ye disciples of
A^ollo receive this our Labor in good part, as a thing undertaken merely for
your sake.

THE PROOEMIUM, OR PROLOGVE Concerning the Name, Definition, and distribution
of the Materia Medica, or matter of PHYSIC:
THe word Matter of Physic is an ambiguous term, signifying chiefly two
things, 1. The subject of Physic, or the Matter on which the Physician works,
and this is the Pas. five matter. 2. The Active matter, which comprehends under
it the instruments of healing that are in being separate from the
understanding; amongst the natural things, or the Matter of Medicinal helps:
which matter I shall rightly with Galen, 1. Alim. fac. chap. 1, distinguish from
the help or remedy it self, which is the image or representation of the
aforesaid matter remaining in the mind of the Physician, representing the very
same thing to the life. In this latter signification it is used either
generally, for all things yt may be instruments of health, with which it is
preserved or restored; whose engines are threefold, Aliments or Food, Medicine,
and manual operations; or more specially, because the cure of diseases is most
usually perfected by the help of Medicaments, therefore Physicians by the name
of Matter of Physic understand the whole series of medicinal things, either
simple or compound; thus much briefly for the name.

Therefore the Medicinal Matter, or matter of Physic is the orderly series of
Medicaments simple or compound, fitted to the method of Physic, and to the
prescribing forms of Medicines.

As to the distribution of this Physical Matter, I first distinguish it thus;
either it is uniuersal, respecting no certain part, or particular, regarding
some certain part; or affection of the body.

The Universal is subdivided into 3 other parts; the first respects the
Morbifical cause where ever it be; the second the chief heads of diseases; the
third the common symptoms, and those that are most urgent, which require
sometimes the help of the Physician, distinct from that of the cause, or the
disease.

The Particular shall consist of four Sections; the 1. Of the remedies
belonging to the Head. 2. Of remedies for the Breast. 3. Of remedies belonging
to the belly, or inferior cavity. 4. Of remedies of the limbs.

THE FIRST BOOK. OF THE Universal Matter of PHYSIC.
PART 1. Of Remedies respecting the Morbifical cause.
THis part consists of Four SECTIONS; The first contains Medicaments,
respecting the morbifical cause as it offends in quality. 2. Such Medicines as
respect the Mo^^ifical cause offending in quantity and substance. The 3.
contains such Medicines as respect the cause offending in motion. 4. Those
medicaments that respect the cause offending in quietness.

SECT. I: OF ME DICAMENTS That respect the Causes offending in quality.
A Type of this Section.
Medicaments that respect the cause offending in quality, are referred to the
cause offending, either in the Manifest qualities, and thateither in the First
qualities, as Alterers. or second qualities viz. Grosness, as Attenuators of
the hum. Grosness, as Cutters of the hum. Thinness, as those which thieken the
humors. Hardness, as Softeners. Hither also belong they which dissolve clotted
blood. Clamminess, as Cleansers. Sliminess, as Cleansers. Acrimony, as
Mitigaters, or Lenifiers.
Occult qualities, as Alexipharmacal Medicines.

Alterers, called in Greek (...). Latin Alterantia.

Although Alterers generally taken be a term for all those Medicaments that
work on us, not only by the first and second qualities, but also those that
change us by their substantial or occult qualities, yet have (for eminency
sake) being specially taken, signify such a Medicament, that by his quality
corrects and amends the excess of the first qualities of the morbifical cause,
whether it consist in the humors, or other contents, or in the parts of the
body themselves.

There are so many kinds of Alterers as there are several distempers, that
every distemper might be opposed by its peculiar contrary Altere^. There are
four degrees of contrary qualities in every altering medicine; and so many
several mansions in each degree. I here set down no matter for Alterers, as well
because it seems superfluous; for whether the humors are to be altered, or the
parts, we never use alterers so general and underterminate, but such as respect
the determinate humor and part; as also because it is not so necessary for
this method of composing Medicines, according to their external forms, as that
wherein there is no such matter made of the several degrees and mansions, as is
in the other method of compounding them, which considers them according to
their internal form, and teaches the manner of composing a Medicine, such or
such in a certain degree; as for example, hot in the second degree of diverse
simples, both hot and cold in the first, second, and third degree, so
proportionably mixed together, that the degree desired may bear the dominion in
the composition.

Attenuaters, in Latin Attenuantia, Graece (...).
These are those Medicines which attenuate, and separate thick and compacted
humors, that in the same weight they extend to fill a greater space; these in
general should be all of them of thin substance, that they might thereby the
easier penetrate, and mix themselves with the substance of the humor.

But in special, some of the attenuaters are cold, as juice of Limons, Vinegar,
Oxymel, but of very thin parts; some things, and indeed most are hot and dry in
the second and third degree, such as are all sharp and biting-tasted things,
especially spices.

The use of these is as well internal, to open diverse obstructions of the
bowels, to purge phlegm out of the breast, provoke the courses, break the
stone, etc. as also external to melt cold humors impacted in the skin by their
heat, and to make them separable, and extenuate them by its dryness and
thinness of substance, that afterward either of their own accord, or by the
use of discussing or attracting Medicines they may be wholly dissipated.

The Matter of these is either internal for internal uses; or external. For the
internal matter there is no need of any particular table, seeing they may be
collected out of diverse, according to the scope and intention of the Physician,
viz. of the Diuereticks, Sudorificks, provokers of the courses, and others that
are endued with an attenuating faculty, as may appear in the several
descriptions; but of the external matter for external uses this is the table.

Roots, of Smallage, Birthwort, Elecampane, Ireos.

Leaves, of Dil, Southernwood, Wormwood, Calamint, Centuary the less, ground
Pine, S. John's wort, Hysop, Bays, Marjoram, Mints, wild Marjoram, Penyroyal,
Rosemary, Rue, Succory, Time.

Flowers, of Dil, Chamomil, St. Johnswort.

Seeds, of Annise, Smallage, Cummin, Fennel, Rue, mustard:

Fruits, Juniper herries, Barberies.

Fats and greases, the elder sort, especially of Foxes, Bears.

Oils, of bitter Almonds, Dil, St. Johnswort, Ireos, Bays, Nuts, Rue,
Scorpions, Turpentine, and Foxes.

Ointments, Agrippae, Aragon.

Out of which diverse external forms may be made, Fomentations, Embrochatians,
Ointments etc.

Of Cutters, in Latin Incidentia, Graece (...).
THese cutting Medicines differ not from the Attenuaters really and in their
faculty, but only in their object, and manner of operating; for Attenuators
are for thick humors, but cutters for them that are tough and clammy. Now thick
and clammy humors may be separated by the same faculty, unless that the
cutters be stornger then the Attenuaters; for that which is clammy and
glutinous is more difficultly divided then that which is simply thick or gross;
therefore the matter of the Cutters is the same with that of the stronger sort
of Attenuators.

Of Mollifiers, Latin Emollientia, Graece (...).
THese are those which soften those things which are hard; but seeing that a
hardness may be caused three several ways, by dryness, repletion, or
over-filling, either with a humor or wind, and by concretion either from the
proper distemper of the part, or the nature of the humor flowing into it; that
cannot properly be called a a mollifying Medicine that moistens those things
which are dry, or that empties those things that are over-filed, but that which
heats, dissolves, and melts those things which are hardened.

Such in general are things that are hot, as in the active qualities (because
concretion comes from cold,) and in the passive either moderatly dry or
temperate, because drought is the mother of hardness; and therefore those which
are usually reckoned amongst the mollifiers (as gumm Ammoniack, Galbanum,
Opoponax,) which also dry much, that they may be perfectly mollifying are to be
temperd with oil of sweet Almonds, oil of Violets, etc. which are contraries,
and manifestly moisten; in special the degree of heat must not be the same in
all, but proportionably answering to the humor that is hardened. For if it be
contumacious, as in Scirrhus tumors, then is required a heat to the second or
third degree, that the coldness of the concrete humor may be masterd; but if
the affection be milder, a moderate heat will serve. That we may observe the
sentence of Galen, 5. Simpl. c. 7, 8. where he appoints temperate mollifiers,
viz: in respect of the affection to which they are used. The USE of mollifiers
is for the most part external in any Scrirhous disposition of the Belly,
Spleen, Liver, etc. in mollifying Clysters. The matter is this following.

Roots, of Marshnmallows, Bryony, Onions roasted, wild Cowcumbers, Ireos, white
Lillies, Liquorice.

Leaves, of Orach, Beets, holy Oak, Borage, Bears breech, Bugloss, Mallows,
Pellitory of the wall, Elder, Violets.

Seeds, of flax called Linseed, Fenergreek, Mallows.

Flowers, of Chamomil, Violets, Mallows, Melilot, Saffron:

Fruits, sweet Almonds, fat Figgs, Raisins of the Sun, Jujubes.

Liquors, The vapor of sharp Vinegar caused by being thrown on bricks or flints
made red hot, and so received on the part; nothing can breath out, but the part
must first be a little mollified with convenient Plasters, Oils, or
Fomentations: the decoction a sheeps head or feet.

Rozins, of the Pine, Turpentine.

Gums, ammoniack which is most usual, Bdelium, Galbanum, Opopanax, Styrax.

Fatts. Of a hogg, a man, a calf, hens, capons, ducks, of a Heart, a Cow, a Sow,
a Badger.

Suets. Of a he or she Goat, of a Bull.

Excrements of living creatures. As Butter, oesipus, fat wax, Propolis or
Bee-glew cowdung, honey comb, the first washing of wool.

Oils. Olive, Linseed oil, oils of white Lillies, Violets, sweet Almonds,
Earthworms, Dil, Chamomil, Ireos, rock oil or Petroleum.

Ointments. Dialthea, Resumptivum.

Plasters. de Mucilaginibus, Diachilum simple, and with gums, of Melilote, de
Ammoniaco, Empl. de Succocicutae oum ammoniaco.

Note that old gums do rather discuss them mollify, unless they are tempered
by the mixture of other moistening things.

Fats and grease do more mollify than oils, and those which are new more than
those which are old (which by age become hotter, sharper, and salter,) and the
fats of young creatures more than those of old ones.

Fats that are sharp and salt are to be often washed in water, that they may be
altered from their drying quality.

Of mollifiers these are the strongest, Briony root, the roots of wild
Cowcumber Ireos, also Rosins and Gums.

Of such things as dissolve clotted Blood, or curdled Milk.
THese in respect of their use may be referrd to the Mollifiers, because they
are convenient for dissolving either blood or milk that is clotted and
hardened; yet in respect of their faculty they might better be accounted among
the strongest sort of Attenuaters: for it is with such that clots of blood and
curdlings of milk are dissolved, as you may see in the following table:

Roots, of round Birthwort, Swallowwort.

Leaves, of Garden and mountain Parsley, Garden Rue, Mugwort, Wormwood,
Southernwood, Savory. Time.

Seeds, of Cummin-seed bruised with Vinegar, Radish seed.

Juices, of mountain Calamint, Vinegar of Squils, Lie of Juniper ashes, and
Vine ashes with Vinegar or Honey.

Syrups, Oxymel simple of Squils, Mead.

Parts and Excrements of living creatures, Mummy, the curd of a Leveret, Kidd,
the ashes of a Crawfish burned.

Gum Ammoniack dissolved in Vinegar.

The charcoles of a Lintree quenched in Vinegar.

Chemical salt, (see the Diuretics) spirits of Salt, Turpentine.

With all which Mollifiers are to be mixed; chiefly Marsh mallows, Mallows,
Butter.

Of Cleansers, Graece (...). Latin, Detergentia.
IN general they are so called, which by their joining with humors that are
either tough and clammy, sticking to the body, or fixed as it were in it, do
scour them away, and in their passage take them with them; they may be in
nature hot, or else cold in the actives, but the hot are the most effectual; in
the passives they are dry, and something of thick parts, by which means they
make some stay, and consequently by tugging, and as it were shaving off the
tough humors til they yield, they afterward take them with them, and carry
them forth. But in special, according to Galen 5 Simpl. 12, these cleansers are
twofold, cleansers or scoures, and unstoppers; the first cleanse the parts of
the skin, and are of a certain kind of nitrous, and thin substance; the last
free the internal cavities from stoppages, and (as shall be said in its proper
place) do not differ from the preparers of humors, in which place also they
are to be sought for. Here therefore I will only propound the matter of the
cleansers; the use of which is to purge and cleanse the superficies, both of
the skin and cavities, and also Ulcers from filth that is apt to grow in them.

Roots, of Smallage, both sorts of Birthworts, Cuckoopits, wild Cowcumbers,
Dragons, Ireos, Gentian, Plantain, Solomon's seal.

Leaves, Of Wormwood, Smallage, Pimpernel male and female, Agrimony, Germander,
Centaury the less, Celandine, Beets, Horehound, Plantaine.

Seeds, Of Nettle, Plantane, Smalage, Orach.

Flower, Of Linseed, Fenugreek seed, red Vetches, Lupines, Barley, bitter
Vetches, Beans, hither also may be referd Bran.

Juices, Sugar, Aloes, Wine, Tartar, all Lies, and Lac Virginis.

Excrements of Animals, Urine, Gal, whey of Milk, Honey.

Rosins, Turpentine, Frankincense, Myrrh.

Minerals, Alom, Vitriol, Verdegrease, white Vitriol, Tutty, salt Peter,
Orpment, brass burnt, Spodium of the Greeks, Borax both natural and factitious.

Oils, Of bitter Almonds, Turpentine, Tartar.

Ointments, Ung. Apostolorum, Egyptiacum, soap, especially the black.

Of Allayers of Acrimony, Grae. (...). Latin, acrimoniam retundentia.
These are those which abate the acrimony of the humors, and the exasperated
sense of the part, either by their emplastick quality, or by their temperate
moisture; of the Emplasticks in their proper place; the Epicerasticks or
Allayers simply spoken are these.

Roots, Of Marshmallows, Mallows, Licorice.

Leaves Of Mallows, water Lillies, Housleek. Purslane, Lettice.

Seeds, Of Barley huld, white Henbane, Lettice, Flax, white Poppy, Rice.

Fruits, Jujubes, Raistns, sweet Apples, sweet Prunes, Sebestens, sweet
Almonds, Pine nuts.

Juices and Liquors, Almond milk, Starch, Barley water, fat broth, Milk of
Sowthistles, Cream of Barley, juices of the leaves of Nightshade, and winter
Cherries.

Excrements of Animals, Whites of Eggs, Butter, all Milk, whey of Milk; Parts
of Animals, Calves head and foot, also Lambs head and the broth.

Muscilages, Of the seed of Fleawort, Quince kernels, of the seeds and roots of
Marshmallows, of Linseed, Mallows seed and of the roots of Borage.

Oils, Of Olives, violets, sweet Almonds, of the seeds of gourds by expression,
of white Henbane, and white Poppy seed, oil of Lead.

Ointments, of Roses, Album camphoratum.

Syrups, Of Violets, of Apples, of Marshmallows, according to Fernel. Sir. of
Liquorice, Jujubes, Poppyes. Purslane.

Diverse officinal things, Pulp of Cassia, Diacodium, Diapenidium, sugar candy
of Violets, Julep of Violets, Honey of Violets.

Of Alexipharmacal Medicaments. Grae. (...), Lat. Venenis Resistentia.
Of these some are common, which resist all poisons generally; others proper,
which only oppose some peculiar sort of poison: of the common sort in this
place, to which for the most part we have recourse, especially if the sort of
poison taken be unknown: of which (in respect of the diversity of the poison,
not of their use) some are internal, which have a peculiar use in the plague,
malignant Fevers, and poisons taken inwardly. Others external, which cure the
bitings and stingings of venomous creatures.

Internal.
Roots, Angelica, Anthora, Snakeweed, Cresswort, or Gentian the less; white
Dittany, Elecampane, both sorts of Eringoes, viz. common and sea; greater
Gentian, Masterwort, Lovage, Burnet, Saxifrage, Vipers grass, Sentinel or
Tormentil, Swallow-wort.

Barks and woods, Lignum aloes, all the Saunders, Barks of Citrons.

Leaves, Of Wormwood. Dittany, Cinquefoil, ( viz. the greater creeping
Cinquefoil,) garden Rue, Goats rue, Scabious, Scordium, or water Germander,
greater Valerian, Mede sweet, Paul's bettony.

Seeds, Of Annise, Sorrel, Carduus Benedictus, Citrons, Corianders, Juniper
berries, Grains of Chermes, seeds of St. Johnswort, Turnips, Basil, Pimpernel,
Saxifrage, Purslane.

Flowers. Of Borage, Bugloss, Clove-July flowers, the flowers and tufts of
heath, Diascorid. flowers of Marigolds, Cetaury the less, St. John's wort, water
Lillies, Rosemary, red Roses, Violets.

Fruits, Oak Acorns, Walnuts, Citrons, Oranges.

Spices, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeggs, Cardomomes, all sorts of Pepper,
especially the long, Zedoary.

Juices, Citrons, Oranges.

Rosins and Gums, Myrrh, Camphire, Benzoin.

Parts and excrements of Animals, Flesh of Pheasants, Castor, curd in the read
of a young Hare, Mummy, Musk, Unicorns horn, Ivory, bone of a Staggs heart, new
budding Harts-horns, Bezarstone

Earths, True bole Armonack, true terra sigillata.

Precious stones, Corals, Pearls, Rubies, Emeralds, Jacinths, Saphires, Topaz.

Things of the sea, Ambergreese, Amber.

Confections, Treacle, Mithridate, Confect. de Hyacintho, Alchermes, Elect. de
ovo. Lon. Treacle, Compound waters, Water of Angelica the greater composition,
Bezoar water, cold cordial water of Saxony, Gilberts water, water of Petasitis
compound, aq. Protheriacalis, water of Scordium compound, Treacle water, both
that distild, and that by infusion:

Condited things, Barks of Citrons, Myrobalans. Insuper, the roots and stalks
of Angelica, the roots of Burnet, and Zedoary walnuts green, Nutmeggs,
Eringo-roots.

Conserves, Of the flowers of Borage, Bugloss, Violets, red Roses, water
Lillies, Rosemary, Marigolds of the flowers of Oranges, Clovegilly flowers,
Sage flowers, Scabious flowers, of the tops of Carduus benedicius, Balm, leaves
of Rue, etc.

Species or powders, Aromaticum Rosatum, de Gemmis, Diambrae, Triasentalinum,
Dianthos, Diamoscum, Diascordium, red Pannonick powder of Saxony, Powder of
Crabs claws compound, Magisterial cordial powder; Magisterial Bezar powder,
Species of Confectio liberantis, temperate cordial powder, Troschischs, Trosch,
alexiterii, etc.

Out of which may be prepared diverse magisterial antidotes, waters, extracts,
candied Confections, Tablets, powders, etc.

READER,
TAke notice that these additions where you see these two Commaes (") at the
head of the line, were not in the Latin; wherefore seeing it defective most in
this head where it should have been most large, I added them, but shall not
exceed the limit of the Latin book hereafter.

External.
As those which are used for venomous bitings, etc. and are either given
inwardly, 1. The aforesaid Alexipharmacal things mixed with Cordials. 2. The
powder of Vipers which is prepared of the flesh of the Viper, (the heart and
liver being left out) washed in white wine, and dried gently in an oven til it
may be powdered, then mixing it with other alexiterial things; the dose is half
a dram, or thereabouts in fragrant wine. 3. For the biting of a mad dog: the
Antidote of Galen, of one part of Frankinsense, 5 parts of Gentian, and 10
parts of the ashes ofa Crawfish; the dosefs from half a dram to a dram, or two
drams in wine.

Or else outwardly, 1. The Alexipharmacal things mixed with things that draw to
the skin. 2. The flesh of any venomous creature, applied to the sting or the
bite.

The Second SECTION, OF THE FIRST PART OF The First Book. OF MEDICINES
respecting the Causes offending in quantity.
A Type of this Section.
Medicaments respecting the morbifical cause offending in quantity, are either
Preparers, Of the humors, otherwise called Digestives. Of the body, called
otherwise Openers.
Or Universal Evacuaters, as Purgers, viz. those tha^ are properly so called.
Vomitories, Diuretics, Sudorificks.



Preparers of the Humors, or Digestives:
THese are those digestives that correct the fullness of the humors either in
first or second qualities, that any way hinder concoction by contrary
qualities, and by this means do as it were prepare them, partly to help nature
in the concoction, partly to procure the more commodious evacuation by the
succeeding purge; and of this preparation is meant that Aphorism 22. Sect. 1.

These are threefold: for some prepare Choler, some Phlegm, others Melancholy.

Preparers of Choler.
CHoler, in respect of the first qualities, because it is hot and dry, requires
those things that are cold and moist; but in relation to the second qualities,
because some is very thin, as that which is yellow, other of it thick and
gross, either by adustion, or by mixing with gross humors, as the Vitelline,
Leek-colourd, Aeruginous, and azure colored; the first sort is to be thickened,
this last to be attenuated; therefore alterers of Choler are twofold, some
thickeners, others attenuaters. Concerning which note this, that although all
of them are not moist, yet because they are cooling, they abate the heat, and
prevent any farther dryness, and so by accident do moisten.

Thickners of Choler.
The Roots, of Bugloss, Plantain.

Leaves, of Purslane, Plantain, Lettice, Garden Nightshade, great Housleek.

Seeds, of Quinces, Lettice, Mallows, white Poppies, Plantain, Fleawort.

Flowers, of water Lillies, Violets, red Poppies, Roses, Mallows.

Fruits, Jujubes, Quinces, Pomgranates, Pears, sweet Apples, Sebestens.

Gums, Tragant, Arabic.

Juices, of the leaves and fruits before rehearsed in this table, starch.

Waters, of the leaves and flowers aforesaid.

Syrups, of the leaves, flowers, and fruits aforesaid, usual in the shops; as
also the syrup of white Poppy seed.

Conserves, of the flowers of water Lillies, violets, red Roses, Mallows.

Species or Powders, of Diatragacanthum Frigidum, Diamargaritum Frigidum,
Diapenidium, Pulvis Haly.

Elect. Diacidonium without spices.

Rob. As of English Corans, Cherries, Sloes, etc.

Attenuators of Choler.
Roots, of Sparagus, Sorrel, Succory, Grass.

Leaves, of Sorrel, all the capillary herbs, (viz. black or common Maydeehair,
yellow Maydenhaire, wall Rue, or white Maydenhair, Cetrach,) Endive, Succory,
Sowthistle, wild Endive, Dandelion, gum Succory, Liverwort, wood Sorrel,
Hart's-tongue.

Seeds, Of Sorrel, Endive, Barley, the four great cold seeds.

Flowers, Of Succory, Endive.

Fruits, Oranges, Limons, Citrons, Melons, Pompions, sour Prunes, sour
Cherries, Corans, Barberries.

Gums, Camphere.

Clarified juyces, of the Leaves and fruits before rehearsed, also verjuyce.

Waters, Of the Herbs aforesaid whatsoever you can have.

Syrups, Also of the Leaves and Fruits aforesaid, which are extant in the shops.

Conserves, Of Succory, Sorrel, Citron.

Species, Diatrion-Santalon.

Preparers of Phlegm.
PHlegm, in relation to its first qualities, is either cold and moist, as the
insipid, sour, and glassie; and these are to be corrected with heaters and
dryers; or is heating and drying, as the salt phlegm, and that is prepared as
choler, mixing with the others those things also which respect phlegm; but in
relation to the second qualities, all phlegm is gross, rough, and glutinous;
therefore to be corrected by attenuaters, cutters, and cleansers.

Roots, The five opening roots, ( viz. the roots of Sparagus, Parsley, Fennel,
Smallage, Kneeholm,) Acorus, Angelica, Birthwort, Ciperas or English Galangale,
Calamus Aromaticus, Elecampane, China, Galingale, blew Flower de luce,
Masterwort, Liquorice, Piony, Salsaparilla, Valerian, Zedoary.

Leaves, of Wormwood, Agrimony, Betony, Calamint, Germander field Cipres,
Fennel, Hysop, St. Johnswort, Bays, Marjoram, white Horehound, Mints, Balm,
wild Marjoram. Penniroyal, Rosemary, Rue, Sage, Savory, mother of Time, Time.

Seeds, the four greater and lesser hot seeds, and of Carduus benedictus,
Corianders, Citrons, Lovage, Pyony, Silver-mountain, Nettles, Mustard.

Fruits, Barberies, Juniper berries, Nutmeggs, Figgs.

Flowers, of Rosemary, Lavender, Centaury the less, St. Johnswort, Lavender,
Lilly of the valleys, Sage, French Lavender.

Barks and woods, of Guajacum, Sassafras, barks of Citrons, Oranges.

Spices, all in general.

Rosins, Myrrh, Mastick, Storax, Frankinsense.

Things taken from animals, Honey, Musk, Castor.

Things of the sea. Ambergreese, Amber.

Waters, of the aforesaid things which you can find ready at the shops, Aqua
vitae, Aqua coelestis, Imperialis, Theriacalis or Treacle-water.

Syrups, of Wormwood, Byzantinus, Maydenhair, syrup of the preserving of the
roots Acorus, and Citron peels condited, and of Condite Ginger, syrup of Hysop,
Mints, Honey of Roses, Oxymel simple, and of Squils, syrup of Horehound, of the
two or five opening roots, syrup of Lavender cotton.

Preserves, and Condites, the Roots of Acorus, Elecampane, Ginger, Emblick
Myrobolanes, Nutmeggs, Walnuts, barks of Citrons, Oranges, Olives pickled.

Conserves, of the flowers of Rosemary, Lavender cotton, Sage, Wormwood.

Powders, Aromaticum Rosatum, Caryophillatum, Dianthos, Diambrae, Diamoscam
dulce, Diarrhodon abbatis.

Confections, Aurea Alexandrina, Treacle, Mithridate.

Troschischs, of Wormwood, Gallia, and Alipta moschata, of Maudlim.

Distilled oils, of Anniseed, Cinnamon, Cummins, Cloves, Orange peels,
Fennel-seed, Nutmeggs, Rosemary, Marjoram, Amber.

Preparers of Melancholy.
MElancholy is twofold, either adust, which because it is very hot, dry, and
gross, requires coolers, moisteners, and attenuaters; therefore we must here
have recourse to the table of the attenuaters of choler; but chiefly the juice
of fragrant apples (as Pippins and Pearmains, etc.) incommended, of which may
be made a syrup; or else not adust, and is called the melancholy juice, which
by nature is cold, dry, and gross, and therefore is to be prepared with things
that moderately heat, moisten, and attenuate. The matter of these follows,
where note, that if any among them be dryer then is fitting, such things are to
be tempered with moisteners.

Roots, of Coocoo-pits prepared, Bugloss, Elecampane, Fern, Polipody of the
Oak, Satyrions, the 5 opening roots, Liquorish which is always to be prescribed
to temper the dryness of others.

Barks, of Citrons, the roots of Capers, the middle barks of Ash, Tamarisk,
Elder.

Leaves, of Borage, Bugloss, Brooklime, Dodder, Centaury the less, Maydenhair,
Fumitory, Hops, Balm, Cresses, Hearts tongue, Time.

Seeds, the four greater hot seeds, of Smallage, Agnus Castus, Basil, Carduus
Benedictus, Citrons, Dodder, Cresses, Parsley.

Flowers, the four Cordial Flowers, (see the premonitions) flowers of water
Lillies, to temper the dryer medicines, of Marigolds, Broom, Walflowers,
Tamarisk, Elder, Saffron.

Fruits, Capers, Raisins of the Sun, Corans.

Gums, Ammoniack, Lack.

From Animals, the shel blatta, bone of a Staggs heart, Honey, Silk.

Waters, of the leaves and flowers aforesaid that are used in the shops.

Syrups, of Fumitory, Bugloss, barks of Citrons, the 5 opening roots,
Maydenhair, Byzantinus.

Confections, Alchermes, Treacle.

Conserves, of the flowers of Bugloss, Borage, Elecampane, Maydenhair.

Condites or preserves, Citron-peels, condite Myrobolanes, green Ginger.

Spices, or powders, Diamoscu dulcis, Diambre degemmis, Laetificans Galen.

Troschischs, of Wormwood, of Capers, Gallia Moscata, of gum lack, of Maudlins.

Distilled oils, of Aniseed, Fennel seed.

Salts, of Wormwood, Ash, Tamarisk.

Preparers of the Body.
PReparers and Openers of the body, are those things which remove any thing
that may hinder in easy purgation, viz. the grossness of the humors, or
obstructions of the passages, of which it is to be understood, Aphor. 9. Sect.
2. Such are Attenuaters, Cutters, and Cleansers. They are in general called
Anastomaticks, (which word may signify any thing that opens any passage
whatsoever.) And Openers, also Ecphracticks, or unstoppers, because they open
the passages, and free them from obstructions. Neither do they in substance
differ from Preparers of the humors, but only in the subject they work on; for
sometimes it happens that humors yt are not crude, or are already prepared,
cannot be expeld because other gross humors are in the way, stopping the
passages, by which the peccant humor is to pass; hence appears the necessity
of this preparation; which Galen 1 Aph. Com. 24. requires also in acute
diseases, when the causes are turgent or moving, if there be any quantity of
clammy crude humors. But in special, Openers are twofold; hot, fitted for
phlegmatic humors, and natural melancholy, or cold, dedicated to prepare
gross choler, and adust melancholy; the hot are to be sought in the Table of
the preparers of Phlegm and natural melancholy, and the cold out of the Table
of the preparers of gross choler, and adust melancholy.

Of those that are properly called Purgers.
PUrging Medicines are so called, either properly or improperly; these are
called (...). Lenientia, Lenitives, the others specially Catharticks. The
Lenitives are of a fourfold difference; some loosen the belly by making it
slippery, as whatsoever by its own fat moistening substance does smooth the
inside of the guts, which otherwise is perhaps dryer and rougher then it should
be, so that by this means the excrements cannot stick to them; such are oil of
sweet Almonds, Butter, fat broth of flesh. Others are called Washers, or
Cleansers, which by their abundance of moisture dissolve the dung, and cleanse
the internal superficies of the intrals; such are fair water, Whey, Milk,
Beets, Pellitory of the wall, Coleworts, Spinach, and the broths of these.
Others may be termed Compressers, which by contracting together the intrals,
press forth that which is below them, and by this reason Quinces taken last at
meat loosen the belly; so also uncleansed Wines, and things very sour purge
some folks, which can be by no other quality then their binding faculty.
Lastly, others are Fretters, which stir up the expulsive faculty by their
biting quality, of which sort are all hot and sharp things, and besides, they
are of thin parts, and some of them salt. And in this manner a certain Carter
cured diverse people troubled with a lasting Fever by giving them a draught of
wine, in which was dissolved a handful of Salt: for they which took it were
immediately purged both by vomit and stool very violently. In this manner also
meats much salted or aromatized, loosen the belly by stimulating nature; and by
the same reason also happen those purgings which sometimes nature moves of her
self; also those things which purge being applied to the Navil: as the Ointment
of Sowbread commonly called Vnguentum de Arihanita. And all these are
improperly called Purgers which purge any humor that comes in this way,
without a peculiar choice. But those which are properly called Purgers are
those which by choice purge some particular humor, of which I now intend to
treat.

There are four several Classes of those properly called Purgers, Cholagogues,
Phlegmagogues, Hydragogues, and Melanagogues. The Cholagogues, or purgers of
Choler are, Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, Juice of Roses, Aloes, Reubarb,
Myrobolanes, Scammony. The Phlegmagogues are, Carthamus, Agarick Turbith,
Hermodactils, Mechoacan, Jalap, Coloquintis, Opopanax, Sagapenum, Euphorbium.
The Melanagogues are these following, Senna, Polipody of the Oak, Epithymum,
black Hellebore, Lapis armenius washed, Lapis lazuli. And lastly, the
Hydragogues, or purgers of watrish humors are the seed, bark, and juice both
of Danewort and Elder, Soldanella, or sea Colewort, the juice of Ireos,
Elaterium, Spurge called Esula prepared, Mechoacan, ^h^ root Jalap, and of late
the berries of blackthorn or Khamnus; to which may be numbered diverse others
quite out of use, rather to be referred to those improperly called purgers or
preparers of humors; also compounds, as Syrups, Electuaaries, purging pills,
etc. which are all mentioned in the foregoing treatise of prescribing the forms
of remedies; And in all these aforesaid purgers severally, I shall consider
these six heads. 1. The Kind. 2. The Election, or the marks how to know the
true from the adulterated purger. 3. The Qualities, as well the first, viz.
their temperature, as the second and third, in which I comprehend the parts for
whom they are good, and the affections which they oppose; also the sex and age
for which they are most convenient. 4. Correctors. 5. The Dose, both least,
mean, and greatest. 6. The Form, in which they are most conveniently given,
although this last rather belong to the method of compounding.

The First Classis of PURGERS, In which are handled the Cholagogues, or purgers
of CHOLER.
CASSIA.
The Kind.
CAssia meant here, is the fruit of a certain Indian tree of the bigness of a
Pear Tree, having leaves like the Peach-tree, flowers like broom, yellow,
smelling like Cloves; this Fruit is a long Codd, round, somewhat black
outwardly, inwardly replenisht with much black pulp, and many seeds, round,
plain, and flat, resembling the form of a heart, divided from one another by
certain woodish membranes set tranverse or cross the Cane, and is called
Cassia of the Arabians from the Inventor, by Actuarius, Cassia nigra, or the
black; by others, Cassia of the Canes; also Lenitive Cassia, to make a
difference from the Cassia of the Greeks, and the Cassia of the Poets. For the
Cassia of the Greeks is nothing else but the Cinnamon of the shops, commonly
called Canea, and for difference sake, woody Cassia, and sweet smelling Cassia.

The Cassia of the Poets is a certain coronary herb which The ophrastus calls
Cneoron, whose sigure is set forth by Matthiolus. The pulp only of our Cassia
is in use, which they call Flower, or pulp of Cassia, and Cassia newly drawn;
although Fallopius and Manardus affirm that the cane and seeds powdered have
also a purging quality, and that greater then the pulp, which sentence of
theirs is not approved by Anton. Musa, nor Garcias ab Horto.

The Election.
The greatest canes are rather to be chosen, and those which are new, weighty,
and full, which if it be shaken does not rattle or sound, shining without, and
full of fat pulp within. Neither is it to be drawn til to be used, for after
it is kept in, it grows sour.

The Qualities.
As to the first qualities, Cassia is very near temperate; for Avicen lib. 2.
chapter 197. writes that it is temperate in the active qualities, but that in the
passive it does somewhat moisten. Serapio lib. Simp. ch 12. makes it altogether
temperate; Mesues cap. 6. Simpl. writes, that it a little inclines to heat.
Ant. Musa in exam. simpl. says it is hot and moist in the first, or beginning
of the second degree.

As to the second qualities, it lenifies, mollifies, and loosens, purges
choler and phlegm, and makes the blood pure. As to the parts and affections,
it is dedicated to the Breast, Lungs, Liver, Reins and bladder, and is therefore
profitably used in the Pleurisy, burning Fevers, hot distemper of the Liver,
heat of the Reins and bladder; and also in the stone, in the running of the
Reins or Gonorrhea, proceeding from a sharp matter, or choleric sperme. As to
the age and Sex it is safe for all ages, and very profitable for Women with
child.

Correction of it.
Besides the aforesaid commodities, Cassia has this discommodity, that it is
very windy, makes so slippery, and is of slow operation; hence it is hurtful
for them that are troubled with windiness, and that have a weak moist stomach;
and less commodious for them that are of a loose belly, and is hurtful for the
Ulcers of the Reins and bladder; and little helps them that are of a costive
nature, unless these defects of it be correrected. But it is corrected as to
its windiness with halfadram or a dram of the seeds of Annise, Fennel, and
Citrons, as it over-moistens or relaxeth, with the powder of the bark of
Myrobolanes, Reubarb, Ci^amon, Mastick, but chiefly Coriander seed prepared,
and as to its sloth in working, it is to be quickened with two drams, or half an
ounce of some purging Electuaries, or Tablets.

The Dose.
It Is given for the most part to children from three drams to half an ounce; to
those of ripe age an ounce, an ounce and a half, two ounces; to those that are
with child, or weak, one ounce; if Cassia with the cane be taken, the dose is
the same. But the most usual dose of Cassia is from half an ounce to an ounce.

The manner of giving it.
Cassia is taken either in the form of a bole, or a potion; if it it be taken
in the form of a bole, the basis is Cassia to an ounce, or an ounce and a half,
as need requires, correctors being added, or things respecting the part
affected, to half a dram or a dram, or things that quicken it to two or three
drams, more or less, and so with q. s. of Sugar is made a bole: as for
example, in affections of the breast,. of Cassia newly drawn one ounce, more or
less, Flower of brimstone, or some other pectoral powder, to a scruple, or
half an dram, the seed of Annise or some other corrector two scruples, with
sugar make a bole. In burning Fevers,, etc. of Cassia one ounce, the seeds of
Citrons powdered, one dram; with sugar make a bole. In affections of the Reins
and Bladder it is prescribed, of Cassia six drams, Turpentine washed in
Pellitory-water, two drams, with powder of Liquorish, sugar q. s. make a bole,
so according to the indication may be adjoined those things that suppress the
effluvium of the seed, as Coral, Mastick, Oriental bole, Troschisch of Amber,
to half a dram, or two scruples, and so with sugar make a bole; it is a most
excellent Medicine if the faculty of Cassia is to be acuated, of Cassia six
drams, or half an ounce; some purging Tablets or Electuaries, as Diaprun.
solutive, or Electuar. de succco Rosar. two or three drams, Coriander seed
prepared, 2 scruples, with sugar make a a bole. In those that are of a loose
constitution other purgers are added that are endued with a strengthening and
binding faculty, as to 1 ounce of Cassia take an ounce of Reubarb, or the barks
of Myrobolanes, and half a dram of some of the correctors, so with Sugar make a
bole. But if it be taken in the form of a potion, some Liquor is to betaken, in
which the Cassia is to be dissolved.

This Liquor is either a distilled water, as of Sorrel, Endive, Succory, or
some decoction of fit plants; as for example, take of Cassia, an ounce and a
half, which dissolve in q. s. of Liquor, make a potion. Of late at Paris they
have began to use Cassia in infusion, which way is of all the best, because
Cassia in the form of a bole is ungrateful through its extreme quantity: and if
it be dissolved in a fit Liquor, it renders the potions too gross; therefore
it is much better if Cassia be infused in some conveniet Liquor, in some hot
place, and a q. s. of the in fusion strained be dissolved in other things, etc.
or if need be some other may be joined, and so given; as for example, in
burning Fevers,. Sorrel. water as much as you will, in which infuse of Cassia
newly drawn an ounce and a half or less, in q. s. of the strained Liquor,
dissolve two drams of Electuary of the juice of Roses more or less; make a
potion.

MANNA.
The Kind.
THe word Manna is a doubtful word, for sometimes it is taken for the Manna of
Frank-insence, which is nothing else then the small corns of frankincense broken
off in carriage; or else it is meant of a dew condensed; in this latter sense I
here understand it.

Of this there are diverse differences taken from the Provinces, but that which
is usual in the shops is that which is brought out of Calabria, which is
gathered in Calabria by the Inhabitants about the dogg-dayes upon the leaves of
the Ash, and the wild Ash; which is twofold, Manna in grains, which is as it
were in small grains; and the Masticine Manna, which consists of the greater
grains like Mastick. The first is called Manna of the leaves, because it is
gathered from the leaves; the other is called Manna of the body, because it is
taken off from the greater boughs. And this Manna is altogether celestial, i.
e. falling from the very region, does settle on the leaves, and does not
proceed like Gum out of the tree, as Altimarus and the Monks (that have
commented on Mesues) have written; for it falls not only on the leaves of
trees, but also on the Meadows, so that the mowers cannot untangle easily their
sickles from the grass by reason of the Manna dissolved on them with the heat
of the Sun; but the reason why it is only gathered from the Ash and wild ash
called Ornus, is because the Ash has some occult quality, whereby it does
thicken and coagulate the Manna, which from other trees drops off like Honey on
the grass benerth.

The Election.
That is to be chosen that is white, new, not more then a year old, (for that
which is red or brown is too old) round, whose grains being broken are not
spnngy, nor ash'coloured, but solid and white.

The Qualities.
According to Avicen and Mesue, it is temperate, to Averrhoes it is hot and
moist, it opens mollifiers, smooths gently, moves the belly, draws forth
choler, and purges watrish humors, chiefly dedicated to the windpipe and
breast; hence it is profitably used in hectical Fevers, and to quench thirst:
it is less useful in burning Fevers for its sweetness, for which reason it
easily turns into choler; it is safely given both to Women with child, and
children.

The Correctors.
Because it is flatulent it is corrected with a little Cinnamon, Ginger, or
Aniseed; and because it is slow of operation, it is usually quickened with syrup
of Roses solutive, or some gently purging decoction; some add two, three, or
four grains of Diagridium.

The Dose.
Is from an ounce to two or three ounces, but commonly to an ounce and a half,
and to children one ounce; Mesues appoints from six drams to fifteen, but
perhaps he meant the best sort of Masticine Manna.

The form of giving it.
It Is given i^ the form of a potion dissolved in the broth of a Chicken, in
which it is scarcely perceived, or in VVhey, or in some decoction, or in a
convenient water. In the Cholick with oil of sweet Almonds, to which a little
Malmsey should be added; sometimes it is prescribed to be eaten down.

TAMARINDS. The Kind.
It Is a fruit of a certain kind of Indian tree which the Arabians have referred to
the kind of dates, as if it were the fruit of a wild Datetree, because it is
called the Indian date; for Tamar in their language signifies Date. But they
have not properly called this fruit Dates, as if the tree were of the kinds of
Dates, or like a Date tree, but more respecting the similitude of the fruit,
which also contain little stones in them, as Dates do, then which they had
found no fitter name; but the pulp of this Fruit only is in use, the stones
being to be cast away.

The Election.
Those Tamarinds are the best that are fat and pulpy, brown, sharp, and soft,
from whence they were called Oxyphaenica.

The Qualities.
They are cold and dry in the second degree, as Mesues writes, and that to the
height, as Brassavolus, and as Avicen says in the third; they mitigate humors
too much burnt, especially choler; they move the belly, and purge choler,
therefore are profitably used in vomitings, to quench thirst in madness, and
for those that are obstructed, hydropical, sick of the Jaundies, and
Spleen-sick; they also prevent all exulcerations of the skin happening through
too much torrifying of the blood, as the Scabs, Leprosy, Fr^ckles, and
Ring-worms.

The Correction.
They hurt by their coldness a cold stomach, and are of slow operation, and are
therefore corrected with Mace, Mastick Cinnamon, and Spi^enard, and are
quickened with whey of Goats milk, Juice of Fumitory, or Hops, Manna, or Cassia.

The Dose:
Is from one ounce to two and three ounces, which varies according to the
manner of giving them.

The manner of giving them:
They are given either in the form of a bole or potion; if in the form of a
bole, then the mass of them is first to be washed with a pestle, after driven
through a hair sieve, placed over steeming hot water, and afterward adding
correctors (to the proportion as is said in the Cassia) with Sugar, make a
bole. But for the most part Tamarinds are not given alone, but to half an ounce
of the pulp of Tamarinds is added one ounce of Cassia, then adding Correctors
as is said in Cassia, make a bole; the form of a potion is used either in an
infusion, or a decoction.

The infusion is made thus; they are steeped in Endive water three hours,
afterward make an expression, and give the strained Liquor with Sugar. The
decoction is made thus,. of Tamarinds one ounce, boil in it ten ounces of
VVhey, or some other broth, altered with Hops or Fumitory, til two ounces be
wasted, strain them through a thick cloth; take of the strained Liquor two,
five, or six ounces; with Sugar make a potion.

The Dose of the decoction and infusion is the same, viz. from ii. to v. or vi.

JUICE of ROSES.
Roses used in the Shops, are white. red. damask.
either common or musked.

The Kind.
This is the juice drawn forth of the damask Roses, or else from the musked
white ones, not the common ones, wherewith rose Gardens abound, but either of
the damask or musked.

Election.
The juice of the musked Roses and damask Roses is to be preferred before the
juice of other pale Roses; and the juice of Roses full blown is better then
that of the buds.

The Qualities.
This juice is hot and dry in the first degree, though Roses themselves be cold
in the first, and dry in the second degree; the reason according to Mesues, is
because the juice is here separated from the earthy and cold substance; It
discusseth, cleanses, opens, purges choler and yellow watrish humors, and
moves the courses gently; therefore not to be given to women with child; It Is
good for the liver and heart, and is used in obstructions of the liver, and
pantings of the heart; as also in choleric Fevers, for it purges humors
that cause these diseases; it strengthens the bowels by purging them, and there
is no malignity in it.

The Dose and manner of giving it.
It Is given from i. to ii. with sugared water, or according to Mesues, with whey
or honey, giving i. of the juice of Roses with ii. or iii. of whey; but now
with us is prepared an infusion of damask Roses, and of that is made syrup of
Roses solutive, simple (called Muchard) and compound, also honey of Roses
solutive, and out of the juice is prepared Electuary of the juice of Roses, but
this is of red Roses.

RUBARB.
The Kind.
It Is called Rubarb by an Antonomasia figuratively, and is a famous root of a
barbarous people in the East Indies, or of some Province of Barbary, called the
Trogloditick, but very ill so esteemed; For as Garcias ab horte, Lib. 1. c. 37.
and Linscot Par. 4. Ind. Orient. Cap. 29. there is no Rubarb in India, but
only in China where it grows, from whence it is carried to Ormur through
Tartary, and thence into India, and again by the Western Tartars into Turkey,
and so to Venice, from whence the other Kingdoms of Europe are stored with it.
This Root was unknown to Galen, and Dioscorides, and therefore diverse think
amiss, that this is the Rhapontick of Dioscorides and Galen, and so confound
that with our Rubarb; For the Rheum of Dioscorides has no purging quality, and
besides wants the marks of the true Rubarb; for Rubarb is in substance
compact, weighty and brittle, bitter in taste, and sharp in smell, of a reddish
brown color without, within of a yellowish red color, somewhat near the
color of the inside of a Nutmeg, and when it is either steeped or chewed, it
gives a yellow die; Rhapontick on the contrary is not solid or compact, but
porous, not weighty, but light, not brittle, but tough, not bitter, but sharp
to taste, neither sented nor colored like Rubarb; Neither ought the Monks
Rubarb, or horse dock of Dioscorides to be confounded with ours, for this has
not the faculties of the genuine Rubarb.

The Election.
That Rubarb is to be chosen which comes nearest the aforesaid marks.

The Qualities.
It Is hot and dry in the second degree, as Mesues writes, which cannot be
understood simply and without distinction; for according to the same Mesues,
Rubarb consists of a twofold substance, one grosser and binding, which is
watrish and earthy; another thinner, which is aerie and fiery; and for this
duplicity of substance, it has a mixed temperature, and per consequence, mixed
faculties, for by reason of its thin substance, it has a faculty of purging
choler and phlegm, and of opening obstructions; but by reason of its gross
substance, it also by purging, binds; If you respect the parts, it is chiefly
addicted as a remedy for the liver, which it very much comforts, from whence it
is by some called the treacle of the liver; as to affections, it is convenient
for all that rise from obstructions, as Jaundise, Dropsy, swelling of the
Spleen, longlasting putrid Fevers, stichy pains of the sides, by reason of
its thin substance; but by reason of its gross and binding substance, it is
good for the lientery, dysentery, spetting of blood, and to stay bleeding
wheresoever it be, also for any part broken or bruised, and inward bruises; but
it is hurtful for them that are troubled with the sharpness of Urine, which
this increases, because it is diureticall, and soon seeks the bladder; It may
be given safely at any time, even to them that are recovering out of diseases.

The Correction.
Its slownesse is corrected with Cinnamon or Squinanth, to s. or i. or
spikenard, to gr. iii. iv. for i. of Rubarb; but you must abstain from this
last, in people that are with child, and in Fevers, and in those which easily
vomit; Some correct it with mastick, but it is better first to sprinkle it with
aq. vitae, afterward to infuse it in convenient liquors.

The Dose.
In substance Mesues gives it from i. to iv. in infusion from i. s. to iii. and
now a days, none give it in substance beyond i. or iv. In infusion we very
seldom give beyond ii. never beyond iii.

The manner of giving it.
It Is given either in substance, or infusion, or in a decoction; In substance,
when the indication is to bind after it, and when it should bind more forcibly,
it ought also to be torrified; But in an infusion or a decoction, when our mind
is more to purge; for by steeping, the purgative faculty being in the thinner
substance is transplanted into the liquor, but the binding and earthy substance
remains.

The substance of it is given diverse ways; 1 In form of Pills, so there are
diverse officinall Pills that have Rubarb in them, as pillulae aggregativae,
pill. de tribus, pill. sine quibus, pill. de rhabarb, of Mesues. 2 In form of
a potion, dissolving the powder of rubard in a fit liquor, a broth, whey of
Goats milk, some convenient distilled water, as of Plantain, Smallage, Endive,
white wine, adding correctors, and sometimes syrrup of roses solutive: as for
example. of the liquor ij. more or less, of Rubarb i. or iv. of correcters s.
or i. syrrup of roses solutive i. Make a potion. 3 In form of a bole, by
mingling the powder of it with Cassia, Raisins, Figs, sugar of Roses, etc. or
with the juice of Roses, or syrrup of Roses solutive; so with a little Cinnamon
and Sugar, make it into the consistence of a bole, which we suffer to
fermentate a little in the heat of the Sun. 4 In the form of lozenges, for
children; of Rubarb i. and with Sugar, q. s. dissolved in a convenient water,
with which make lozenges, which children will easily eat. 5 In the form of
little cakes also for children, kneading it up, the honey boiled to a
consistencie for cakes. 6 In the form of a marmelade, mingling the powder of
Rubarb with marmelade in the boiling of it up; Or else take a Quince, slit it
in halves, take out the coare, and fill up the cavities with the powder of
Rubarb, Senna, Carthamus or Agarick, then join them together, wrap them up in a
wet paper, and roast it in an oven or chimney till it be pap, then loosen or
open it, throw away the medicine, and eat the pulpe.

The infusion of Rubarb is also diversely given. 1 and that commonly, Rubarb
with its correctors is infused in s. q. of a convenient liquor, as ii. or iij.
which after is strained from it, and this strained liquor is taken; or else in
it is also dissolved syrrup of Roses solutive to i. or electuary of the juice
of roses, i. i s. and so make a potion.

2 In the form of Cakes for children, by taking the infusion, and adding fine
flower or crumbs of bread, with which mixed together, make a past, of the which
are made Cakes; 3 Or else after this manner, for those that are more delicate,
of rubarb powdered q. v. infuse it in aq. vitae enough to lie above it four
fingers breadth, in B. M. four days, then pour of this colored liquor, and
pour in another new one, as before; thus do till the liquor will be no more
colored, then distill all those infusions mixed together, till the extract
remain in the bottom as thick as honey, and to every i. will suffice,. of the
juice or extract that remains; add ij. of the oil of Cinnamon. For infants and
women with child, it is a precious and harmless medicine, the Dose is i. with
a spoonful of wine.

The Decoction of Rubarb is made by boiling Rubarb out of hand, with its
correcters, in s. q. of some fit liquor; afterward pressing it out with
strained liquor is taken, or else over, etc. above may be dissolved in it
syrrup of Roses or electuary of the juice of Roses, as aforesaid.

A LOES.
The Kind.
Aloes is a thickened juice of a certain Plant, which Dioscorides describes,
lib. 3. cap. 21. which in the shape of its leaves, resembles the greater
Housleek, and because of its long lasting green, it is by diverse called
sempervivum marinum, i.e. sea liveever, but commonly sea sengreen; there are
two kinds of it, one Aloes Caballina, or horse Aloes, so called, because it is
used by Farriers to purge horses, asses, and mules; the other is Aloes Hepatica
or liver-coloured Aloes, because it is condensed and colored like a liver, the
best fort of which is that that is usually called Succotrine, so called, not
from the citrine colored juice, as Fuchsius (l. 1. de comp. Medic. c. de
aloe.) will have it, but from its native place, viz. the Island Succotra.
Therefore some make the Succotrine a particular difference of it self,
distinct from the hepatick, but they differ only in the degree of goodness.

The Election.
Aloes Succotrine is rather to be chosen; for the Caballine is only the dregs
and sedement of Aloes, and the Hepatick is not so good as the Succotrine; but
the marks of the best Aloes are taken from the substance, weight, color,
smell, taste, in all which severally some conditions are to be required; the
substance of it ought to be solid and firm as the liver is, yet easy to be
broken or melted, if it be put into water, not sandy, but fatty and smooth; in
weight it should be light; and by how much the lighter, so much the better it
is; for the lightness shows that sand is not mixed with it; of color it
should be brown, somewhat yellowish and redish, also something transparent;
for that which is thick and dark is older then the rest; the smell should be
good, inclining a little to the sent of myrrh; the taste according to Galen,
should be somewhat astringent, but extremely bitter.

The Qualities.
It is hot in the second degree remisly, or the first intensly, and dry in the
third according to Galen, though according to the same Author, it is not of a
simple, but a mixed nature; for it does a little bind, though it be very
bitter; As to the second qualities inwardly taken, it has a faculty to open
the orifices of the veins, and cleanse the parts it passes through; Therefore
it is to be avoided by them that are apt to bleed, either at mouth, belly or
womb; therefore hurtful for them with child; it purges choler and gross
phlegm; choler by a similitude of substance, but phlegmatic and gross humors
by its cleansing quality; but its purging quality reaches not beyond the
liver, it empties only from the first veins, Galen 8. comp. med. local. in
mentioning Hiera; As to the parts, it is chiefly addicted to the stomach, if
any thing else be, as Galen says, and Mesues gives it the prerogative above
all other purgers. Cardan in con-medic. affirms the contrary, in strengthening
the stomach; It is profitable also for the head that is affected by sympathy
from the stomach, and for the eyes and liver; As to the affections and
diseases, it is profitably used in nauseousnesse, crudities, worms, jaundise,
ill habit or cachexia, soreness of the eyes, troublesome sleeps, so they be
without a Fever.

As to the temperatures, it is best for cold and moist ones; but for the dry,
as choleric young people, old folks, or those that are lean or hecticall, it
is hurtful, unless it be when there is a great collection of moist excrements
in them; therefore also it is hurtful for either stomach or liver that is hot
and dry, or cold and dry; and it is very cantiously to be used to them that are
Feverish.

The Correction.
There are three things in Aloes which want correction. 1 because it is slow of
operation. 2 It is anastomaticall, or opening of the orifices of the veins too
much. 3 It is but weak in operation. The first inconvenience is corrected by
adding spices that are of thin and sharp essence, as Mace, Nutmegs, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Spikenard, Calamu^ aromaticus, Cubebs, Squinant, Saffron. The
weakness of operation is corrected by Ruffus, by adding Turpentine, or some
other sharp rosin, but Mesues mingles other purgers with it, as Coloquintis,
Turbith, etc. And modern Writers wash it in the decoction of Rubarb, or the
infusion of roses, and thus make it the stronger. The second fault of it is
corrected by mingling with it Mastick Gumtragant, Bdellium, and such like, or
else by washing it in Endive or Succory water, because these simply being cold
and moist, take away a great part of the medicinal substance from it by that
washing. The modern Physicians take away all offense from it by these
following preparations. 1 Some prepare it thus, Aloes lib. i. rose vinegar, 2
parts, rose water part 1. of both these s. q. boil all three or four boyles
together, then strain it, and press it forth; let that which is strained be
boiled over a gentle fire, always stirring it till it come to the former
consistence of the Aloes, then keep it for use. 2 Others infuse Aloes
Succotrine in certain juyces, as of Borage, B^glosse, Violets, red Roses,
Carduus benedictus, Fluellen, field Cipress, Chamomell, either single or mixed
together, taking to lib. s. of Aloes lib. j. s. of the juyces, or more,
afterward straining them and boiling them to the due thickness. 3 Others
imbibe the powder of Aloes with Whey, juice of Roses, Endive, and so dry it
again in the sun, or in an Oven, or B.M. when it is d^yed, they put to it a new
juice and dry it as before; thus they proceed also a third and fourth time or
oftener. Lastly, they pour the same juice anew to it, and bring it to a
convenient consistence, or else dry it altogether, and lay it up for use. 4
Lastly, others prepare it in form of an extract.. of Aloes Succotrin^, q. v.
pour to it spirit of Wine, or Endive, or Sorrel water, q. s. let them steep in
B.M. till the liquor be colored, then separate it by gently, pouring it off,
and pour a new liquor to it; iterate this so often till the liquor that is put
to it will be no more colored, then strain or filtrate all these liquors
together, and reduce them to the consistencie of an extract either by
exhalation, or distillation; then keep it for your use.

The Dose
Is from i to ij. Mes. infused from i to iii. to wit when you intend it to
purge; but if it be only to loosen the belly, it is given from i to i. due
consideration being had.

The Form.
It is given first in the Form of a potion, steeped in the decoction of some
of the aforesaid spices, and strained out; but this form is usually refused
for its extreme bitterness, unless it be in sleepy affections to stir up the
nummed faculties. 2 In form of an electuary as hiera picra Galen. taking Aloes
with its correcters, and with honey, boiling it to the consistency of an
electuary; let there be of Aloes three parts, of the correcters one part, honey
three times so much as of all the powders. 3 In the form of Pills, and that
most usually so; all Pills of the Shops almost have Aloes in them, but Pills are
diversely made of Aloes according to the various preparation of the Aloes. But
if it be corrected, and prepared after the manner of the Antionts, there are
taken of it two parts, of correcters one part, so with a fit juice or liquor
make a^masse of Pills; so are made the Pills of washed Aloes of an unknown
Author, of Aloes washed in the juice of roses, i. of agarick troschisated, iii.
Mastich ii. of the species of diamoscum dulce, s. with Malmsey wine, s.q. make
a mass; But if it be of the la^^ preparations, then Pills may be made either of
that alone, or with some liquor if need require; so out of i of Aloes rosata
with wine may be made as many Pills as you see fit: or else over and above may
be added some juice thickened, or other liquor, with correcters or directers;
and Pills may be made whose dose is from i going forwards to i o^ more; so are
prepared the Pills called the angelical Pills.

MYROBALANS.
The Kind.
Myrobalanes are a certain kind of Plums, which the interpreter of Avicen and
Serapio without any reason translated Myrobalans; for Myrobalanus signifies a
nut or fatty Acorne, out of which oil is pressed for precious ointments, of
which Dioscorides lib. 4. cap. 254. but our Myrobalanes neither bear the shape
of an Acorne, nor smell like a precious ointment. There are of them in the
shops five kinds, produced by diverse Trees, viz. Citrine or yellow, Chebules,
Indian or black, Emblicks, Bellericks, whose bark only is in use. The Citrine
are so called from their citron color; they have a small and thin bark, and a
great stone. Chebules are the greatest and longest of all, rugged, full of
corners, having a small stone; the Indian are small but very black; the
Emblicks are rather pieces then whole plums; the Bellericks are round like
gals, having both a thick bark and stone.

The Election.
Those Citrine Myrobalanes are commended, which are of color between green and
yellow, which are heavy, as being well replenished with a firm, and much of
their fleshy part, which are gummy, and if broken, have a little stone: those
Chebules are the best which are the biggest, of a dark somewhat purplish
color, and which being cast into water, suddenly sink to the bottom. The
Indian Myrobalanes are the best which are the blackest, most weighty, and have
no stone within, and which when they are broken seem all as one thing: Those
Emblicks excel which are in the greatest, thickest, firmest and most weighty
pieces, and which have less of the stone than of the pulpye part: The
Bellericks are to be chosen which are great, and by reason of their thick
fleshy part, weighty, and which have a thick bark.

The Qualities.
All Myrobalanes are cold in the first, and dry in the second degree, except
the Emblicks; which Mesues says are cold and dry in the first degree only, but
understand it in the height: Therefore as to the second qualities, all of them
together with their purging bind, therefore are they used in all fluxes, and
help the hemorrhoids; they are addicted to the stomach, heart and liver; but in
particular the citrine purge choler, the Indians melancholy, and make men
merry: the Chebuls and Emblicks purge phlegm, the Bellericks effect all that
the others can.

The Correction.
The astriction of them is corrected by adding those things which open and
provoke Urine, as any sweet seeds, or else if while they be broken and powdered,
they be anointed with oil of sweet Almonds or butter.

The Dose.
In powder. ii. in infusion or decoction from s. to vi, etc.

The manner of giving them.
They are given either condited, or else in infusion or decoction; The condited
are given when you would strengthen, giving one of them every day after meat,
diverse days together; But in infusion or decoction when you would evacuate,
they are boiled or infused in water, broth, whey or wine, to vi. by
themselves, or to s. with other things, adding correcters; Then in the strained
liquor other things are added, as is said in Rubarb.

SCAMMONY.
The Kind.
It is a thickened juice of a Plant of the same name, which is gathered from the
root being cut, which is full of a milky juice, of which there are diverse
differences according to their native places, as Dioscorides, Pliny and Mesues
write, yet that of Antioch is the best.

The Election.
The marks of the best Scammony are taken from the substance, weight, color,
smell and taste; in substance it is smooth, porous, like a sponge, friable and
tender, easy to be powdered, and soon melting; In weight it should be very
light, as Pliny will have it; In color it should be glistening and shining,
like gum transparent, like glue when it is broken, yellow, iubbed on the
tongue, or melted in water, of a milky color; In smell not loathsome, though
not pleasant; In taste insipid, nor much heating the tongue, which if it do, it
is a sign of the mixture of Spurge with it.

The Qualities.
Scammony is of temperature hot and dry, and that in the third degree, as
M^sues says; and therefore hurtful for them of a bot and dry nature;
nevertheless I must dissent from this opinion; for if it be true Scammony not
adulterated with the juice of Spurge, it is rather to be accounted hot and dry
moderately; for it is neither sharp in taste, nor bitter, as Mesues has
mistaken, but rather insipid; it purges from the remote parts thin choler, and
yellow watrish humors; for it has a strong drawing faculty, and therefore if
it be taken in too great a quantity, the thin sharp humors being too much
drawn into the intrals, do cause most violent symptoms; for by their acrimony
they corrode the guts, from whence comes gripings, the dysentery, and tenesmus;
they also open the orifices of the veins immoderately, from whence come fluxes
of the belly, sometimes with blood; besides they send forth certain sharp
fumes, whereby the heart, liver, and rest of the intrals are disturbed, and the
stomach is so tired and hurt with it, that it breeds nauseousnesse to them that
take it, and lastly by their acrimony they inflame the spirits of the body, and
so easily occasion fevers; all which things both Mesues and others ascribe to
the proper nature of Scammony, when they rather proceed from the corroding
humors which by a proper quality it attracts to it: for pure and legitimate
Scammony has no such nature as they attribute to it.

The Correction.
Scammony is corrected (because it was thought to occasion those symptoms by
its own nature) with binders, coolers, lenifiers, and things that strengthen
the heart, liver and stomach; of which there are diverse ways of preparing
Scammony, as you may see in Mesues; But the most usual, is that correction
that is done with the juice of Quinces, Barks of Citrone, Myrobalanes, and
Mastich, of which according to art are made troschisks; as to lib. i. of choice
Scammony are taken of the Barks of Myrobalanes and Mastick ana s. of the juice
of Quinces l. s. and s. Make troschiscks: or else Scammony powdered is put into
a Quince, made hollow, and wrapped in past, and so is roasted either in an Oven
or under the Embers; then is the Scammony taken out of the Quince being first
cold and kept for use: But the true preparation of Scammony is done with the
juice of Limons clarified, in which it is dissolved in B. M. and whilst it is
yet hot, it is strained through a linen, by which means the gross and impure
substance that does nothing but hurt, is separated; Scammony thus prepared and
corrected, is called Diagridium.

The Dose.
The Dose of prepared Scammony, i.e. of Diagridium, is from gr. vi. to xii. and
i. Mesues from gr. v. to xii. Dioscorides and Ruffus to i. Paulus, and Aelius
to ii. But perhaps the Scammony of the Greeks was gentler then ours, not
adulterated as now a days with the juice of Spurge; therefore it is better to
follow the dose appointed by Mesues then that of the Greeks, so that the lowest
Dose be to gr. v. vi. the middle Dose to gr. xii. and the highest to gr. xv. or
i.

The manner of using it.
Diagridium is used in the form of a potion, bole, electuary, pills, powder.
Dioscorides gave it in form of a potion, with fair water, or water and honey.
But now a days it is neater used with oil of sweet Almonds or syrup of Roses
solutive, and some convenient distilled water; as for example, of syrrup of
roses solutive, i. Diagridium, gr. vii. more or less with succory water. s. q.
make a potion. The Bole is made of gr. x. or xii. of Diagridium with conserves
of roses to ii. and the chymicall oil of cloves three or four drops, a most
pleasant purge; It is used in form of an Electuary, in the Electuary of the
juice of roses, and transparent diacidonium purgative, the Dose of both which
is iii. yet the Electuary of the juice of roses is never given by it self, but
dissolved in some convenient distilled water, in the form of a potion. There
is also made a pleasant electuary of the jelly of apples to twice the weight of
the sugar, to which boiled up to a just consistence, there is added the
infusion of Scammony in this proportion, that i. of the electuary may receive
i. of the infusion, then boiling it up to the consistence, and make an
electuary like clear Marmelade; the dose is iii. And this infusion of Scammony
is made in aq. vitae, which afterward is filtrated through a gray paper. It Is
used in the form of Pills, in many masses of Pills of the shops; also it may be
made into magisteriall Pills, of a certain proportion of diagridium, as gr.
viij. ix. xii. with a fit juice or syrrup. Lastly the powder is thus composed
out of Diagridium, of creme of tartar ij or i. of Diagridium gr. vii. or more
according to your indications; mix it, and make a powder to be taken in broth.

THE SECOND CLASSIS OF PURGERS, IN WHICH ARE CITED THE PHLEGMAGOGVES OR PURGERS
OF PHLEGM.
CARTHAMUS.
The Kind.
IT is the seed of wild or bastard Saffron, whose kernel is only used to
purge withal, and therefore in prescriptions it is commonly set down the
kernel part or middle of Carthamus bruised.

The Election.
That seed is best that is white, plain, thick and full, whose kernel is fat
and unctuous, and husk thin.

The Qualities.
Mesues says it is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree, Galen and
Paulus say it heats in the third degree; if it be used outwardly) it purges
phlegm, and watrish humors, it wonderfully discusseth windiness, and
therefore is profitable in the cholick and dropsy; it is addicted to the breast
and lungs, but is naught for the stomach.

The Correcters.
It is corrected for its hurting the stomach, with stomachicall things, as
Anniseed, Cinnamon, Galingale, Mastich, and the like, but as to its slow
operation, by adding sharp things, as Cardamomes, Ginger, Sal gem.

The Dose.
Is from s. to vi. and i. in infusion.

The manner of using.
It is seldom given, unless in composition, especially the Diacarthamum of
the shops, either in a liquid or solid consistence; But by Mesues, both by his
own and others judgment. 1 In the form of Pills, making a mass of x. of the
kernelly part of Carthamus, and i. of Cardamomes, of which make Pills like
pease, and give v for one dose. 2 In the form of a honyed syrrup, viz. of an
oxymel; The kernelly part of Carthamus being tied up in a thin cloth, and
soaked in oxymel of squils, whilst it is a boiling, by which means it is made
solutive. 3 In the form of a bole. of the Medulla or kernelly part of Carthamus
xii. pinidies, iv. Cardamomes and Ginger, ana i. with honey make pills like
wall-nuts, of which let him take one or two at a time. 4 In form of a potion,
the same Medulla being boiled in cock broth to s. or thereabouts, and
afterward the broth drank down.

A GARICK.
The Kind and Election.
It is a Fungus or excrescence growing to the trunck of the Larch tree, taking
its name from Agaria, a country of Sarmatia, in which the best did grow; yet
now the best is had from the Dolphiny in France, and from the mountains about
Trent, as also in Rhetia, Vindelitia and Noricum, Countyes of Germany.

The marks of the best Agarick are included in the distick following.

Agarick's best that is soon broke, shining, white

If much goes to a pound, for then it is light.

That which is black, weighty or wormeaten, is discommended, and that part of
it that grows next the Tree.

The Qualities.
It is hot in the first, dry in the second degree: it cuts, attenuates,
cleanses, opens, and discusseth; it purges phlegm, especially that which
is gross and tough, and both the sorts of choler, from the brain, nerves,
muscles, organes of the senses, backbone, breast, lungs, stomach, liver, spleen,
reins, womb, joints, it also resists poisons; And therefore perhaps it is
called by Democritus the medicine for the family, because it has some
influence on all the parts of the body, and takes away their obstructions, and
any disease thence arising; and is safe for all ages; but let women with child
avoid it, for it provokes the courses, and is apt to cause abortion.

The Correction.
Two faults are to be corrected in Agarick; 1 The slowth in working; 2 The
lightness or levity of it, whereby it floates in the stomach, and provokes
vomiting and sticking to the intrals, it moves defluxions, and as it were
pricking and fretting them, breeds gripings; which fauls of it are diversely
corrected by Mesues; but the best way is to make it into troschiscks, with s.
q. of white wine or Malmsey, wherein Ginger has been steeped.

The Dose and manner of taking it.
The powder both of that in troschiscks, and the other is given from ii to i
and ii; but in decoction or infusion, from ii to s. v; It is given both in the
form of a potion, pills and bole; In the form of a potion, if the powder of
Agarick, especially the troschiscated be dissolved in a convenient liquor, and
so given; or else it may be boiled or infused in it, and then the strained
liquor given to drink, in the form of Pills both officinall and also
magisteriall, by making the Pills of a certain Dose of the Agarick, (adding if
you see fit such things as may convey it to the part,) with honey or some fit
syrrup; Lastly in the form of a bole, by taking a convenient quantity of
Agarick, and making it into a bole, with diaphaenicon or conserves of Roses.

TURBITH.
The Kind.
Turbith is a root of some of those Plants that yield a milky juice; but what
it is, is a doubtful controversy, and therefore so many men, so many opinions.
Actuarius sometimes takes it to be the root of the spurge Pityusa, sometimes of
the Alipus of Dioscorides; Serapio and Avicen think it the root of Tripolium of
Dioscorides: Brasavolus thinks it the root of the spurge Mysinitis; Others,
among whom Fuchsius think it the root of Thapsia, others of scammony, whereupon
Clusius upon Garzias, tells us that in many parts of Spain they use the roots
of Thapsia for Turbith, and in other places of Europe the roots of Scammony.

The Election.
That is most praiseworthy, that is weighty, somewhat white or ashcoloured,
new, easy to be broken, gummy within side; for that which is adulterated, is
only gummy at the ends.

The Qualities.
It is hot in the third degree, and hot in the second to the height; it purges
gross and clammy phlegm, and that which is putrid, from the breast, remote
parts and joints; Therefore it is good for them that have the gout, phlegmatic
Fevers; it preserves from the scab, Leprosy and other phlegmatic vices of
the skin, as Mesues writes. It hurts the stomach, bringing nauscousnesse and
provoking vomit, and is not fit to be given to children, old folks, or women
with child.

The Correction.
It is corrected for its slownesse in operation with sharp things, as Ginger;
for its offending the stomach with stomachicall things, as Mastich, pepper, and
spices; and for its extenuating the body with mitigators, as oil of sweet
Almons, whey, syrrup of violets, raisins of the sun, sugar.

The Dose.
The Dose of it in powder is from ii. to i. and iv. Mesues gives from i to ii.
but in decoction you may give twice so much.

The manner of using it.
It is given first in the form of Pills, as i of this in powder, adding a third
part of correctors, may be made into pills with a fit syrrup, as of violets,
etc. Secondly in the form of a powder. of Turbith i. of correctors i. sugar,
twice the weight of the powder, mix it and make a powder to be taken in broth.
Thirdly in the form of Tablets taking the powder of it, and making it into
Tablets with sugar melted according to art. Fourthly in the form of a bole,
mixing the powder with conserves of roses, N B. It is very profitable to give
the powder with Rubarb in the worms. Fifthly in the form of a decoction or
potion, as of Turbith ii or iii with its correctors boil it in a s. q. of some
fit liquor, and give the strained liquor; or else dissolve in it besides other
things, syrrup of violets, etc.

HERMODACTILS.
The Kind.
It is the root or bulbus of the bunchy rooted Ireos of Lobell, which being
dried is brought to us, and is accounted the true Hermodactil of Paulus.
Instead of which as before, so now is used in many places to the great damage
of the sick, the common Hermodactil, which is the root of meadow saffron, which
is either poison as that which grows in Colchis, and therefore not to be taken
inwardly; or else does not purge, as that of our Country; or else does purge
but not like the Hermodactil of Paulus, as the Syrian meadow saffron.

The Election.
The notes of good Hermodactils are contained in this distick, Hermodactils
hard and white,
If solid too, be sure they are right.


This solidnesse is opposite to porousness, looseness or flagginess, and
friability. And the roots of meddow saffron are little correspondent with the
aforesaid marks; for this when it is dried, is riveled, and looks black both
within and without, or somewhat of a reddish brown.

The Qualities.
It is hot and dry in the beginning of the second degree; yet as Mesues has
it, joined with an excrementitious humidity, both flatulent and nauseous
wherewith it offends the stomach; It effectually draws tough phlegm, and
clammy humors from the joints, and therefore according to Paulus it is
dedicated to the gowty affections.

The Correction.
It is corrected with attenuaters, as Cummin-seed, Ginger, Spikenard, Cinnamon,
and such like stomachicall and arthriticall things that may conveigh its
faculty to the joints.

The Dose and manner of using it.
Mesues appoints it from i. to ii. it is used. 1 In the form of a powder, i of
Hermodactils with the powder of Ginger and Pepper, make, etc. 2 Of a decoction,
of Hermodactils ii. some of the correctors ana i. bruise them grossly, and boil
them in a convenient liquor. 3 Of Pills, as in the greater Pills of Hermodactils
of Mesues, whose description may be had in the Pharmacopeia Augustana. 4 Of
troschiscks, according to Mesues, taking Hermodactils with their correctors,
and making them into troschiscks with the juice of radish or squils.

MECHOACAN.
The Kind.
It is the root of a foreign sort of Briony brought from Mechoaca an Island in
new Spain, and it is twofold; the white or common Mechoacan, and the black
Mechoacan, which the Massilians from the place where it grows, call Jalap and
Gelap.

The Election or Marks of either.
The common Mechoacan is to be chosen whitish and new; that is to be rejected
which is either very white or black, or wormeaten or moldy. It is adulterated
with the roots of Briony cut in slices and dried after the manner of Mechoacan.
The deceit may be perceived by the tenderness of Mechoacan in respect of the
Briony which is of a gross substance. Black Mechoacan or Jalap is like the
former, only the outward bark is somewhat black; inwardly it looks reddish,
which is cut in round slices, in quantity and figure like tablemen; it is of a
gummy and not unpleasant taste, and by reason of its great gumminesse if it be
held to the fire it takes flame quickly.

The Qualities.
It is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree, and almost quite without
taste, nor does it partake of any acrimony, otherwise then our wild Briony,
which is very sharp and hot; it purges phlegm and watrish humors, and in
purging it strengthens the parts; it is very good in an old cough, the
cholick, and in the French Pox, useful for any age; Besides it is given to
purge phlegmatic slime from the stomach and intrals of children, and both to
prevent, and kill and drive forth worms.

But Jalap surpasses the common Mechoacan in faculties; for by reason of its
gumminesse it draws down watrish humors much more powerfully; This works
very violently in respect of the former; it purges phlegm and watrish
humors, and that from the outermost parts, as from the skin in scabbinesse,
and inclinations to the Leprosy; and from the whole body, as in the Dropsy; and
from the joints, as in the Gout and nocturnall pains of the French Pox; It is
only to be given to strong bodies, and such as are repleat with humors for it
to work on; it is not safe for children, old folks, or women with child, or for
young folks of a dry constitution, or that have any malignity lurking about
them; for it inflames adust choler, stirs up malignant vapors and humors if
any be extant, and much weakens the strength of the body where it has not
plenty of humors to prey on; and therefore in such bodies it is apt to make a
fever.

The Dose and Correction.
Mechoacan is corrected with Cinnamon, Anniseed and Mastich, to a third part;
the Dose is from s. to i. and to ii. only in them that are hydropicall, else it
is too much. Jalap is corrected with Nutmeg, Lemmon pills, and liquorish infused
in the liquor wherein it is given; for so its incensive quality for inflaming
the humors is abated by the liquorish, its malignity by the Lemmon Bills, and
its nauseous quality by the Nutmeg, which is not of so thin parts as other
spices, yet strengthens the stomach as much; But the London Physicians do
usually prescribe with it either London Treacle or Mithridate for the aforesaid
reasons; The dose of it is from i. to s. and ii. to i. says the Author, but it
must be only in hydropicall strong bodies.

The manner of taking them.
They are both taken for the most part only in substance, with some fit liquor,
especially with wine, yet they may also be taken with broth; they are never
given in decoction; for it is found by experience that their purging quality
does vanish, or at least abate in boiling; And when they are prescribed in
infusion, the liquor is not to be given alone, but the powder also.

COLOQUINTIS.
The Kind.
It is the fruit of the wild Goard, whose pulp being white and light, is
chiefly in use, being first cleansed from the seeds.

The Qualities.
It Is hot and dry in the third degree; it purges phlegm and other gross and
clammy humors from the deepest and most remote parts of the body, as Brain,
Nerves, Muscles, Joints, Lungs, Breast and Womb especially, for which cause it
is used for the inveterate pains of the head and hemicranies, Apoplexy,
Falling Sickness, Megrim, or swimming of the head, Asthma, Coughs, difficulty
of breathing, cold diseases of the joints, and wind Colic, to scour glassy
plilegme from the intrals; it hurts the stomach and guts much by sticking to
the filmes of them, and is hurtful for children, old folks, and women with
child.

The Correction.
It is corrected either in the form of troschiscks, which are called
Troschiscks of Alhandale, and are nothing else but Coloquintis prepared, which
goes into all compositions that have Coloquintis in them; Or else by adding
Cordials, hepatical, stomachical, and lenifying things, as Gum Tragant, oil of
sweet Almonds.

The Dose.
Is from gr. vi to xv. and i. Dioscorides gives it to ii.

The manner of using it.
It is used most profitably in Pills, though sometimes also in Electuaries, as
hiera diacolocinthidos; pills of it may be thus formed, of the pulp of
Coloquintis, gr. x. Cinnamon and Ginger ana gr. vi. musk gr. i. with a fit
syrrup make pills. It may also be made in the form of an extract in this
manner; Pour to the powder of it spirit of wine, to the eminency of six fingers
breadth; let them steep twenty days or more, then gently pour off the clear,
lastly reduce it to the thickness of honey, and to i of this extract, add i of
oil of Cinnamon; the dose is s. and i. in syrrup of roses.

OPOPANAX.
The Kind.
It is the juice of Hercules, all-heal, according to Dioscorides, Galen, and
almost all, except Mesues, who says it is made of a fennel fashiond, all-heal,
called Asclepium, and some few others that will have it made of the all-heal,
called Chironium.

The Election.
That is approved that is very bitter, inwardly white or yellowish, fat,
tender, friable, soon dissolving, and of a strong smell.

The Qualities.
It is hot and dry in the third, as Mesues writes, but Galen says, dry in the
second; It draws forth gross and clammy phlegm from the most remote parts and
joints, although neither Galen nor Dioscorides attribute any purging quality to
it.

The Correction.
It hurts the stomach, and is of slow operation, and for that reason is
corrected with a third part of Mastich, Spikenard, Ginger, Cinnamon and
Elecampane.

The Dose.
Is from s. to i. as Mesues says, from i to ii. Brassavolus to iii. It is used
in Pills, as Pills of Opopanax of Mesues, or of Opopanax i quicken it with gr.
iv. of Diagridium etc. and with a syrrup make Pills.

SAGAPENE.
The Kind.
It is the juice of a certain Plant which it self is called Sagapene, Galen.
8. simpl. and is brought out of Media.

The Election.
That is most commendable that is transparent, without of a yellowish color,
within whitish, sharp in taste, strong in smell, of a gross substance, yet easy
to be dissolved in wine.

The Qualities.
It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second; it purges gross
phlegm, and other tough humors, according to Mesues, for the Greeks pass by
the purgative quality in silence.

The Correcters
Are as in Opopanax.

The Dose.
From s. to i. it is used in Pills. of Sagapene. i. Mastick, Cinnamon, Ginger,
ana gr. iii. make pills with some convenient syrrup.

EUPHORBIUM,
The Kind.
It is the juice of a Libian Tree, taking its name from Euphorbus Physician to
Juba the King of Mauritania.

The Election.
Choose that which is transparent, of a pale redgathered into little corns,
which being but gently touched with the tongue, leaves the mouth burning for a
long time after.

The Qualities.
It is hot and dry in the fourth degree; It purges gross tough phlegm, and
watrish humors; and therefore is a most powerful medicine in affections
arising from it; as the Gout, Colic and Dropsy; but it is a vehement medicine,
and causes a troublednesse of spirit.

The Correctors.
Therefore it is to be corrected with medicaments that mitigate its fretting
quality, as oil of sweet Almonds, juice of Citrons; and besides these, with
cordial and stomachicall things, as Mastick, Saffron; The best way of
preparing it is with distilled Vinegar, juice of Lemons clarified, or the
distilled liquor of vitrioll, called the phlegma impregnated with its own
spirit; in some of which Euphorbium is to be dissolved in. B.M. and whilst it
is yet hot, it is to be strained through a linen cloth.

The Dose.
Is from gr. iii. to viii. and xii.

The manner of using it.
It is used either in Pills, as of Euphorbium gr. vi. mitigaters, as of the
seeds of Lettice, Purslane, Endive, flowers of Roses, ana gr. iij with juice of
Lemons make Pills; Or else it may be dissolved in the juice, or water of Endive,
like a potion; Or made into the form of a bole, with Cassia, as of Cassia iij.
Euphorbium prepared gr. iij. with sugar make a bole.

THE THIRD CLASSIS OF PURGERS, WHEREIN ARE TREATED THE MELANAGOGVES OR PURGERS
OF MELANCHOLY.
SENA.
The Kind.
IT is a codded Plant, first brought to us out of the Eastern Countries, very
like to Collutea, which we call bastard Senna; we use chiefly the leaves,
though Mesues says the cods are the more effectual, which is to be understood
of the cods that are gathered whilst they be green and juycy, and suddenly
dried, but not of those that are fading and dried on the Plant.

The Election.
But seeing the cods are seldom brought to us, we are to take those leaves of
Senna which are green, thoroughly dried, not spotted or worm-eaten, but cleansed
from their stalks.

The Qualities.
The leaves are hot and dry in the first degree, they purge melancholy, burnt
choler and phlegm from the brain, lungs, liver, spleen, stomach, and mesentery;
and therefore heal diseases of the aforesaid parts, arising from such like
humors, safely to be given to all ages, and to them which are with child a
most profitable purge.

The Correction.
It is corrected for its windiness, and the offending of the stomach, that is
imputed to it, with Ginger, Cinnamon, Anniseed, Cloves.

The Dose.
In substance is from i to i s. ii. some will give iii. but in infusion or
decoction, from iii. to s. vi. and in the stronger sort, to i. if there be no
other purgers.

The manner.
It is given either in substance, or infusion, or decoction,; In substance it
is given diversely. 1 In the form of Pills, as of the powder of Sena, i. Ginger,
Cinnamon, ana s. salt peter gr. v. make them into pills with some convenient
syrup, which may either be taken all at once, or else some only as the usual
pills. 2 In form of a potion, dissolving the powder of Senna with the correctors
in some fit liquor, especially whey. 3 In the form of Lozonges for children, as
is said in Rubarb.

The infusion.
The infusion of Senna is also diversely used. 1 The leaves of Senna are infused
(to a double proportion to that they may be given in substance) in s. q. of
white wine, afterward the liquor is strained forth, which may either be given
of it self, or other things may over and above be dissolved in it, as is said
in Rubarb. 2 In form of an extract, prepared according to art, with the water
of hops, hart's-tongue, borrage, fumitory, adding to it a proportion of Cloves,
Ginger, Fennelseed, etc. 3 In form of a sennated spirit, as of the leaves of
Senna cleansed, iii. creme of Tartar ii. Cinnamon i. Mace s. spices of
Diagalangal i s. Ginger s. infuse them three days in spirit of wine, either
common or of Malmsey, afterward filtrate it, and keep for your use.

The Dose is from s, to vi. in phlegmatic fat people only for its heat.

The Decoction of Senna is made after the same manner as the decoction of
Rubarb, only changing Rubarb for Senna.

POLIPODY.
The Kind.
It Is a herb like Fern, growing on mossy walls, and the old bark of Trees,
whose root (which is only in use) has many knots and tufts of sprigs, like the
fish Polipus, from whence the name; it is also called tree-Ferne.

The Election.
That is to be elected that grows on the Oak, and is new and knotty; for that
which is old, binds.

The Qualities.
As to the Qualities, it purges burnt choler and phlegm, helps the colic,
and is peculiarly appropriated to the Spleen, and is most effectual in
hypochondriacall affections.

The Correction.
But because it dries very much, it is to be corrected with liquorish; and to
quicken it in the working, add a third part of Anniseed, Fennel or Ginger, etc.

The Dose.
Is from ii to iii. and s.

The manner.
It is given either in decoction or infusion, made in some fit liquor, i. e.
that is appropriated both to the part and affection, as whey for scabbinesse
and burnt choler; in Barley water for Quartane Agues, adding fit correctors to a
third part.

EPITHIMUM.
The Kind.
It is a herb that grows upon thin hyssop, savory, mother of Time, and other
Plants like D^dder, from which it differs in figure, native place, and
qualities; although some use Epithimum and Dodder promiscuously. But these
medicines should rather be referred to the openers then purgers; and it is
better to use them with others, then them alone, and therefore they should have
been referred to the alterers, for which place also I reserve them. Though this
purges but gently, yet it does move the belly, and might claim a place among
the purgers, as Polipody, which also more opens then purges; but the best
use of Epithimum is with others purgers of melancholy, for it does specifically
direct their faculties to the humor, opens obstructions, and makes that humor
yield and be obedient.

It Is hot and dry in the end of the second degree, and of thin parts; it is
best corrected with liquorish, and raisins of the sun stoned, and is most used
in infusions or decoctions. i or ii. of this at most will be enough to put into
any other purging potion; it is chiefly used for them that have stiches in
their sides, through obstructions, coming of gross cold humors, and after
Quartane agues.

Black HELLEBORE.
The Kind.
Black Hellebore is of two sorts; the false, and the true; The false is either
the Garden false Hellebore, which Fuchsius calls Eristwarken, or the wild, which
is called Helleboraster; The true black Hellebore is by some thought to be that
which Mathiolus calls the purple flowred; by others to be the Sanicula femina of
Fu^hsius; by others to be that which Mathiolus calls Psendohellebor, which has
flowers like them of Ox eye.

The Election.
For use we must choose the true black hellebor, viz. that with the purple
flower, or for want of it the false or adulterine Garden black hellebore. The
roots only are in use, the small pith being cast away, which is to be steeped
in wine of Quinces in a warm place, and after dried and laid up for use.

The Qualities.
As to the Qualities, it is hot and dry in the third degree, it purges the dry
sort of me lancholy, and other burnt humors, that are hardly loosned; therefore
it is profitable for all melancholy diseases, as madness, melancholy,
leprofie, quartane agues, etc. Where note, that black hellebore rightly used is
a hurtlesse medicine, and may safely be given to children; have a care of women
with child, and other weak bodies.

The Correction.
It is corrected with cordial and stomachicall things, as Cinnamon, Aniseed,
Fennel seed, etc.

The Dose.
In substance is from gr. xv. to s. ii. Mesues gives to i. In infusion it is
given from ii to ii s. Some give it to s. but then they ascend by degrees, from
i first; so likewise in the decoction.

The manner.
It is given either in substance, infusion or decoction; The substance is given
1 in form of powder, taking black Hellebore to ii. Ginger, Mastick, red Roses,
Cinnamon, Aniseed, ana gr. iv. mingle it and use it in broth; for children, take
but i. 2 In the form of pills, making pills of the aforesaid powder with a
convenient syrrup. 3 In the form of Lozonges, as is said in Senna and Rubarb. 4
In form of a Marmelade, as is said in Rubarb.

The infusion.
The infusion of Hellebore is made, 1 The common way, with some fit liquor,
decoction, meade or barley water, etc. as has been often said; 2 In form of an
extract, where is to be noted, that for the Menstruum, (or liquor for
extraction) some will take Aniseed water, adding the due correctors; some will
take only rain water without correctors, because they have found that its
purging quality is acuated and made stronger by the admixtion of them.

The Dose of this extract is from i to s.

The Decoction is also made two ways. 1 And commonly in a convenient liquor,
as other purgers. 2 In a Helleborated apple; an apple is stuck full with the
sprigs of the root of black Hellebore and some cloves, then wrap it up in a
paper wet with cold water, and so it is roasted under the ashes, then drawing
forth the hellebore and cloves, the apple it self is to be eaten with suga^.

LAPIS ARMENUS.
The Kind.
This is not only brought out of Armenia, but is also found plentifully in the
silver mines of Germany; of which is made the co^ou^ for Painters.

The Election.
That is best which is between sky color and green, not sandy, yet friable.

The Qualities.
It is hot and dry in the second degree, it purges melancholy, and cures the
same affections that black Hellebore does,

The Correction.
It is corrected, being finely powdered, by often washing in cordial waters, as
borage, roses, buglosse, etc. iterated so often, that the water, thence
receives no more either color or taste.

The Dose.
Of that which is washed, is from s. to i. and i s. of the unwashed to i. It Is
taken all the same ways that Lapis Lazuli is.

LAPIS LAZULI.
The Kind.
Lapis Lazuli, Lyaneus or Cerulcus, which we call azure, has so great an
affinity with the Armenian aforesaid, both in their original and faculties,
that one may easily be used for the other.

The Election.
That Lapis Lazuli is chiefly to be chosen, which is distinguished by its
golden spots, or in the breakings and flaws of which appear little glitterings
of gold, and therefore it was called by Mesues Lapis Stellatus or the starry
stone.

The Qualities.
It is hot in the second, and dry in the third degree, and has the same
virtues as the Armenian stone, but something weaker.

It is Corrected as that also.

The Dose
Is from s. to i and i s. Mesues says from ii to ii s.

The manner of using it.
It Is Used 1 In the form of Pills, as ii or i of Lopis Lazuli prepared, and with
Cinnamon, Ginger, Camphere ana gr. vi. with some convenient juice or syrrup make
P^^s. 2 In form of a powder, by taking the powder of this finely ground, and
with some certain spices, give it either in broth or other liquor. 3 In form
of a bole mixing the aforesaid powder with conserves of Borage. 4 In the form
of Cakes and Lozonges, but then the stone is to be ground to an alcool, least
the powder being coarse grate in the teeth. 5 In form of a potion, taking the
powder in sweet wine. 6 In any convenient breakfast meat.

Note it is always to be reduced to a very fine powder.

THE FOVRTH CLASSIS OF PURGERS, IN WHICH ARE HANDLED THE HYDRAGOGVES OR PURGERS
of WATRISH HUMORS.
ELDER and DANEWORT.
The Kind.
DAnewort and Elder are alike in the leaf, flower, and fruit of the plant, and
differ according to Dioscorides only in the bigness of it; for Danewort is a
smaler elder or chameacle, i.e. field elder, commonly dwarse elder, but Elder
it self is a Tree; of either of these, the middle bark, and seed, and the
juice of the roots and leaves are in use to purge watrish humors.

The Dose.
Of the seeds of their berries is i. of the bark, ii. of the juice, s. or vi.
they are corrected with Cinnamon.

The Use.
The seed is used in powder, given in strong wine or wormwood wine, or in the
decoction of Chamepitis or field Cipres in gouty affections; the bark is
steeped or boiled in wine to iii, but its purging quality decays in the
boiling; according to Dioscorides, the juice is taken to i. in broth altered
with wormwood, as also the juice thickened with honey, fometimes Cinnamon water is
added; but for the most part it is not given by Practicians alone, but mixed
with other things.

SOLDANELLA.
This is the Sea Colewort, Dioscorid. whose leaves and juice are in use.

The Qualities.
It Is hot and dry in the second degree, some say the third; it is an admirable
remedy to purge watrish humors, yet so that there be always some choler mixed
with it.

But because it is offensive to the stomach, it is to be corrected with
Cinnamon, Ginger, etc.

The Dose is from i to i s. ii. of the juice (...).

The leaves are Used. 1 In a pickle of vinegar and salt, six mouthfuls or bits
of which do wonderfully purge waters in the Dropsy; sometimes also it is
boiled in broth, like garden Cabbage. 2 In powder, adding if you think fit
Rubarb and Cubebs, which is given either in broth, or some other breakfast, or
else is made into Lozenges for hydropicall children; 3 In decoction, as other
things, adding fit correctors; 4 In Pills but then a less quantity of this is
to be taken, and other quickeners added, least through the lightness of the
powder, the Pills be too many in number.

But the juice is given with Rubarb, in form of an infusion, which purges
watrish humors profi^ably.

The Juice of IREOS.
This juice is pressed out of the root of the Ireos or Flowrdeluce of our
climate, but most usually out of that which bears the blew or purple flowr,
and it is hot and dry in the third degree, and purges yellowish waters
powerfully, but is not safe for children, old folks or women with child; for in
these it moves the courses, for the others it is too strong.

It Is corrected with Cinnamon.

The Dose is from s. to vi. and i.

It Is used to be taken, first in a little wine with some Cinnamon, or else in
broth, in which has been boiled raisins, Cinnamon and Spikenard. 2 In form of
a syrrup; if the juice clarified be boiled up with sugar, the Dose of it is ii.

ELATERIUM.
It is the juice of the wild Cowcumber thickened, and made into troschiscks.

The Election.
The oldest is the best, which being held near the candles, puts out the light,
and before it put it ou^, makes it sparkle upwards and downwards.

The Qualities.
It Is hot and dry in the third degree, it purges waters or any thing else, and
as other gentler things purge water out of the veins, this draws it forth from
the cavity of the belly beyond the veins.

The Correction.
It Is corrected, because it is fretting, and anastomaticall, and hurts the
principal parts, with milk, gum tragant, and bdellium, and fit strengtheners,
as Cinnamon, species diar^hodon abbutis, and other cordials.

The Dose
Is gr. vi. ss. to gr. xv at most, diverse will not easily give above gr. v.

It Is u^ed first in pi's, as of some easy gentle pills, such as pills de tribus,
with Rubarb, Aloephanginae, of hiera, etc. ss. or ii. of Elater um gr. v. or x.
make pills, for thus the unbridled violence of the Elaterium is restrained. 2 In
form of an extract, extracting its essence according to art with spirit of wine
that has had saunders steeped in it, or diam argariton frigidum, and to every
ounce of this essence thus extracted, add of the chymicall oils of Cinnamon
and Nutmeg, and i.

The Dose
Is ss. with some convenient liquor, or else it may be made up in the form of
Pills.

ESULA or SPURCE.
The shops comprehend all the sorts of the tithymals under the name of Esula,
because it is manifest that all of them purge watrish humors; But as there are
diverse Authors, some take one thing, some another, some use the spurge called
Ciparissia, others the sweet Spurge of Tragus, others that called Platyphyllon
or broad leafed Spurge, others leafed Spurge, called Peplus, others the greater
Spurge or Pityusa of Dioscorid. which is now out of use.

The Qualities.
It is hot and dry in the third degree; it purges phlegm and choler, but most
especially watrish humors, and that from the remote parts.

It Is corrected with Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Tragant, Muscilage of Fleawort, but it is
the best way to steep it four and twenty hours in vinegar, juice of Purslane,
or juice of Lemons.

The Dose.
Of the bark of the root is from gr. vi. to ss. gr. xv. of the juice or milk of
it from gr. iii. to vi. or vii.

It Is used all those ways that any purge hitherto mentioned is or can be used,
but chiefly there is prepared of it an extract according to art, whose dose is
to gr. xv.

And thus far of Purgers properly so called, now follow the Vomitories.

VOMITORIES.
Those Medicaments are so called, which do evacuate, derive or revell all
hurtful things from the stomach, and surfettings of meat, and excrementitious
humors of other parts, and expel them by force and violence at the mouth; And
this they do either by a manifest quality, as relaxing the superior mouth of
the stomach, whereby the retentive faculty being weakened, the expulsive faculty
of the stomach being irritated either by the abundance or acrimony of the
humors, expels whatsoever is contained within its verge upwards, the nether
parts contracting themselves to forward that motion; and these we use when
there is nauseousnesse and desire of vomiting, together with a bitterness of
the mouth, and a pain or oppression about the short ribs; such are sallet oil,
fair water warmed, butter, and all fat and oily things; Or else they do it by
an occult quality, by which they rather purge upwards, then downwards; the
Matter of all these to be reduced to a practical use, are usually divided into
gentle, moderate and violent vomitories.

The Gentle.
Simples. Fair water or Barley water warmed, drank plentifully to a quart or
more; broth of flesh that is fatty, drunk in a good quantity; oil Olive
warmed, given to iv. or vi. butter melted and hot. Compounds. Meade largely
taken, water and oil, called Hydraeleon, to viii. or x. simple Oxymell with
warm water, syrrup of Vinegar with warm water; new figs eaten, drinking after
them a draught of warm water.

The Moderate.
Roots of Orach, Asarum from i. to iv. in infusion from i ss. to iii. and ss.
of Betony made into a potion with Meade, as Dioscorid. the roots of Garden
Cowcumbers, Maudlins, Avicen. Gesner. lib. 2. epist. 11 fol. 63. of Melons,
bulbes of Narcissus or Daffodils roots of Pompions powdered from ii to i. in
infusion from i to iii. and radish roots.

Barks. The middle bark of Wal-nut trees, to i. in infusion to iii. and ss.
but chiefly the catlings of the Tree, called Juli, dried in an oven.

Seeds of Dill, Orach, garden Cowcumbers, Rocket, Radish from iii. to ss. of
Nettles from ss. to i. in infusion from i. to ss.

Flowers of Dill, of Walnuts, viz. Catlings, as is aforesaid, in the Barks,
given to i. in wine to them that have the cholick or stone.

Juice of Radish to ounce two.

The shavings of ones own nails drank in wine.

E'ectuaryes, Diasarum, Fernel. lib. 7. Meth. whose dose is iii. in Barley
water, honied water or whey.

The Violent.
Roots of Spurge, Sowbread, Danewort, hedge hysop to i. but in infusion from i.
to i ss. or ii. white Hellebore infused in broth chiesly to ss. i. or i ss. at
most, adding cordial things to i. but it is to be given very warily, the roots
of Cresses.

Barks of the roots of Danewort and Elder.

Seeds of Spurge, Cataputia, ten or twelve cleansed from their husks, bruised
and given in a rear egg; these are profitably given to them that have drank
poisons or love potions; the seeds of broom from ii to ss. of Cresses of Palma
Christi.

Flowers, of Danewort, Broom.

Fruits Nux Vomica.

Juyces of sowbread, vinegar distilled with the crumbs of rye bread, to iii. it
is a most strong medicine in agues.

Chymicall things. Vitrum antimonii of any sort infused to i. rather gr. vi. or
vii, etc. in a fat liquor. Mercurius vitae prepared, to gr. v. at most with i.
of some fit pills. Antimony prepared, which if it be rightly used, is a famous
and safe vomitory. Concerning whose preparation and manner of using it, because
there are diverse opinions of the chymicks extant, I shall give my opinion for
that which they call Crocus Metallorum, which is the best of all. i. of which
infused in Malmsey fourteen days in a warm place, stirring the wine every day,
afterward keep it for your use; The Dose of this wine is from i. to i ss.
taken out of a spoon. It is a famous remedy both in Fevers and other diseases
that have been deeply rooted in the body. You may safely give of that infusion
ss. or vi. nay, in a strong body you may give the whole ounce prescribed, so
the liquor be cleared from the powder.

Compounds. are stibiated tablets, eaten to i. or dissolved in a fit liquor, as
baume water, etc. also this following infusion. the roots of Briony and
Sowbread ana iii. of white Hellebore vi. diligently cleansed, powdered and dried
in the air, pour to them aq. vitae to the eminency of two fingers breadth
above the powder; let them infuse some few days in B.M. then distill them, and
let that which remains in the bottom be again dried and powdered, pouring to
it again the former water; do this three times, dip the tip of a feather in
this liquor, and then slice it about in a glass of wine, and give it to drink,
it provokes vomit suddenly.

DIURETICS.
Those are called Diuretics which evacuate the watrish humors of the body by
Urines, and they are two fold, some properly so called, others improperly.

Those which are properly Diuretics are for the most part hot and dry in the
third degree, of thin parts, and which easily penetrate to the veins, and
there melt and dissolve the blood, and separate the watrish part from the
thicker, much like the turning of milk, when it curdleth; from whence that
which is grosser, returns to it self with the rest of the blood, but that
which is serous, is drawn by the proper faculty of the reins. Such are

Roots of Smallage, Asarum, Calamus aromaticus, all the thistles of Ciperus or
English Galangal, of Dancus, of town cress, sennel, cammock, parsley, radish,
madder, kneeholm, saxifrage, valerian.

Leaves of Wormwood, Smallage, Betony, Mountain Calamint, Dittany of Creet,
Bays, Cresses, Parsley, Penny royal, Savory, mother of Time.

Flowers of Chamomill and broom.

Barks. the middle bark of broom, bays, radishes.

Seeds of Anise, Smallage, Cardamomes, Chervill, red Cicers, or Italian pease,
Cubebs, Daucus, Fennel, Juniper berryes, of Lovage, Groomwell, Parsley,
Paliurus, of some called Christ's thorn, silver mountain seed, and nettle seed.

Fruits. bitter almonds, figs.

Spices. Cassia Lignea, Cinnamon.

Rozins. Turpentine both, of Fur, and Larch, that is both Venice Turpentine,
and common.

Liquors, White Wine.

Animals. Cantharides, to gr. ii. or iii. but with these conditions, that they
be given. 1 after all other things have been tried. 2 they are to be given
whole, ex 11 simplic. 3 never to be given alone, but with some fat broth,
altered with mallows, Marsh-mallowes.

Locusts or Grasshoppers, given to ii. Goatesblood.

Officinall waters. as of fennel, smallage, and the herbs aforesaid.

Syrrups. of the five roots, of the two roots, of radishes compound.

Species. as Lithontribon of Nicolaus.

Conserves. of the flowers of broom, bettony, wormwood.

Those are called improperly Diuretics, not which melt the blood, but those
which by a certain tenuity of parts, drive the wheyish part of it to the ways
of the Urine, and so provoke it, and have either a remiss temperate heat, or
else incline to cooling, and these we use in hot affections, where we may fear
least the hot Diuretics by too much drying the blood, should rather stay the
Urine; or else are such as only lenify the passages of the Urine, as Marsh
mallows, mallows, liquerish, and such like lenifiers, which are very
improperly called Diuretics.

Of the former sort are the Roots of Sparagus, Sorrel, Eringo, strawberries,
grass, narrow docks.

Leaves. of Sorrel, tops of Sparagus, Maidenhaire, Rupturewort, Pellitory of
the wall.

Seeds. The four greater cold seeds, seeds of sorrel, Alkekengie or winter
cherries, barley.

Fruits. Strawberries, Cherry kernels, Medler stones, Lemons, Pompions,
Cowcumbers, Goards.

Juyces. Of Lemons, Pellitory,

Gums. Camphere. This may better be referred to those, properly called
Diuretics before.

Officinall things. as

Waters. Of Sorrel, grass, barley, pellitory.

Syrups. Of the juice of Sorrel, Maiden hair, Lemons.

Troschiscks. Of Camphere. of Alkekengie, of Saunders.

Chymicall things. Sal prunellae, from ss. to i. with water, adding some
pleasant syrrup, as of violets.

Out of those Diuretics, diverse forms of remedies, both inward and outward
may be composed.

SUDORIFICKS.
They are so called which evacuate the whole body by sweating, of the Greeks
they are called Hydroticks, the nature of these is very agreeable with the
Diuretics; for heat being thin and subtle, insinuates it self far into the
body and humors, which it attenuates and dissolves into evaporations, but they
also open the pores of the body, from whence the vapors of their own accord
breath out, and are condensed into a sweat; The same matter does after move
both sweat and Urine; Urine if the raines be hot, and the skin thick, sweat if
the raines be cold, and the skin thin, such are these.

Roots. Of Smallage, Angelica, Burdock, China, Fennel, Hops, Parsley, Burnet,
Cinquefoyle, Salsa parilla, Tormentill or Setwell, Zedoary.

Woods. Box, Guaicum, Ginger, Sasafras.

Leaves. Carduus benedictus, Maiden hair, Germander, Celandine the greater,
Chervill, Fumitary, Burnet, Scabiosse, Damesviolet.

Flowers. Of Camomell.

Seeds. Barley, Millet, Lentiles.

Juyces. Rob. of Elder berryes, and Danewort.

Earths. Terra sigillata, especially in the plague and infectious diseases.

Parts of animals. Hearts horn, Bezar stone.

Chymicall things. Salt of Wormwood, Ash, Scabiosse, to gr. x. xii. rather to
i. with water of Carduus benedictus, and Scabiosse, Antimonium diaphoreticum.
to gr. iv. or vi. with a fit conserve.

Compounds. Out of those diverse things may be composed, but potions especially;
those made of decoctions are preferred before all, or else of infusions, or of
sudorificall things dissolved in a fit liquor; and although they should be
taken in a bole or other form, yet it is best to drink down a potion after
it; hither is referred the syrrup called of St. Ambrose, which consists of
millet boiled in two parts of water, and one of wine.

Officinall things are the waters of Carduus benedictus, Chervill, Fumitory,
Elder flowers, also Treacle, Mithridate, and others, as electuary de ovo and
such like.

THE FIRST BOOK. THE FIRST PART. THE THIRD SECTION. Of Medicaments respecting
the cause that offends in motion.
The Type of the Section.
Medicaments respecting the morbificall cause offending in motion, are in
regard of the matter that is flowing. Thickeners. of the part receiving,
Repellers. to which you may add Emplasticks. of the ways by which it flows.
Intercepters. of the ways by which it flows. Binders.


Thickeners, by the Latins Incrassantia, by the Greeks (...).
THey are so called which render thin and fluxible humors thicker, and so less
apt to flow; such as are those which in the active qualities are cooling or
temperate, without any acrimony; of a gross and earthy substance, by the
commixture of which, the thinner sort of humors acquire a thicker substance,
by much; as water, by the mixture of dirt becomes clay as to the matter of
Thickners, because they agree in quality with the Repellers, Binders,
Emplasticks, gluing and scar breeding, or wound closing medicines, and with the
thickeners of choler before mentioned, therefore they are to be sought in
those Tables.

Repellers by the Latins Repellentia, by the Greeks (...).
THey are those which prohibit the flux of a humor into any part, or else do
repress and drive back that which is already fallen into the part, so it be
not yet fixed in it; They are of a cold nature, and some of them are moreover
dry and of an earthy substance, which are most powerful, and are properly
such; Others are watrish and moist, and these are more gentle, for by howmuch
the thicker substance and more condensed, any of the first qualities are
inherent in, by so much the more effectually it operates; The prime use of them
is to prohibit both the beginnings and increase of inflammations; The secondary
use is, in any sort of flux of humors, proceeding either from Plethora or
Cacochymia; yet note that those things which are the more powerful, may easily
be known by their harsh and austere taste.

The Roots. Of Slooe tree, of Cinquefoyle, of Snakeweed and Tormentill.

Barks. Of the root of Mandrake, of an Oak near the root, rinds of
Pomegranates.

Leaves. Of Mastick, Cipresse, Brambles, nightshade, plantain, mirtles,
vine-twists, sumach, oake-leaves, prinet, hen-bane, housleek, Venus navelwort,
purslane, lettice, endive, cichory, knotgrass, mouse ear, ducks meat,
horstaile, pear tree leaves.

Seeds. Of Fleawort, Plantaigne, Mirtles, Roses.

Flowers. Of red Roses, Balaustines, or the flowr of wild Pomegranates;
Cytines, or the flower of the manured Pomegranate.

Fruits. Quinces, Services, Berberryes, Cornelians, Cypress nuts, Mirtles,
Green gals, Medlers, wild pears.

Juyces. Acacia, Hypocistis, Verjuyce, Vinegar, juice of Pomegranates, Lemons,
and unripe Mulberries.

Excrements of animals. Whites of eggs.

Minerals. Alum, Vitriol, Cerusse, Lead, Salt, Tutty.

Earthes. Bole armeniack, Terra sigillata.

Gums. Sanguis draconis.

Waters. Of the leaves before recited, which soever of them are in use in the
shops, rose water.

Oils. Of roses, mirtles, quinces, sower grapes, of mastick wood, of mastick.

Ointments. Unguent Comitissae, Galens. cooling ointment; ointment of Populeon,
of bole armenack.

Playsters, against the rupture, of mastick.

Emplasticks, the same name is kept both in Greek, Latin and English.
THey are so called, which being spread on the poares of the body, cleave very
fast to them. i.e. they daube, fill, and stop the poares; As to the Qualities
of them, they are hot in the actives, without any acrimony or corroding; but in
the passive qualities, some of them have altogether a gross and earthy
consistence, drying without biting, and some of them have over and above, an
aerie or watrish humor, by which means they cleave too, and are clammy. The
Use of these is in stopping all manner of defluxions and bleedings, especially
at the nose, and in drying moist wounds and Ulcers that are fomented by the
defluxion: Secondarily, also to ripen or suppurate, for they fill the pores of
the skin, and keep in the heat, by which means, swellings are the easier
ripened; Such are these following, which are prescribed, chiefly in the form of
a Plaster, Cataplasme or Pultis.

Roots Of Marsh mallows, Lillyes, Mallows, Cumfrey.

The Leaves Of Vervain-Mallowes, Mallows, Purslane.

Seeds Of Fenegreek, Lupines, Sesamum.

Fruits. Raisins of the Sun, Figs, Pine nuts steeped in water.

Gums. Arabic, Tragant, Sanguis, Draconis, Mastick, Frankinsense, and its
bark.

Parts and excrements of animals. Mummy, Wax, whites of eggs, new fats, marrow
of fourfooted beasts, new butter, new cheese, Oesipus, lambshead, hogs feet,
calves head and feet, Spodium made of Ivory.

Earthes. Bole armenack, terra sigillata.

Fl^wry parts of seeds, or meal, of wheat, starch, fine flowr, bean flower.

Muscilages. Of all sorts.

Minerals and metalline things. Alum, Litharge, cerusse, stibium or antimony,
burnt lead, cadmia, or the condensed fuligo in the boiling of brass, tutty,
lime.

Stones. Blood stone, plaster of Paris, lapis calaminaris.

Rosins. All of them, pitch.

Sea things. As Coral, snailes, amber.

Oils. All that are temperate.

Ointments. Album Rhasis, ung. nutritum: diapompholigos, the red drying
ointment.

Intercepters or Defensives.
They are commonly called defensives, which by their cold binding faculty, stop
the passage of the humors, so that they cannot fall into the part. They differ
from the Repellers only in respect of the place to which they are applied; for
the repellers are applied to the part affected, but the intercepters are
applied to the ways or passages by which the humor falls to it. Therefore the
matter of the intercepters is the same with that of the Repellers.

Binders, by the Latins Obstruentia, by the Greeks (...). and (...).
AND commonly Binders, under the general signification, comprehend under that
word Repellers, Condensers, Thickeners, and strengtheners of the parts; But
more strictly in this place, it signifies such medicines as strengthen the
larger passages of the body, and that as it were, bind them round about, to set
a difference betwixt them and the condensers, which only strengthen and bind up
the small pores of the skin, and other parts, and as it were make them solider;
Binders are according to Galen 5 simpl. facult. c. 14. cold and dry, and of a
gross substance; The Use of these are in stopping the fluxes of the belly,
dysentery, catarrhes, and in staying the force of any humor, or any sensible
way of excretion, as the veins of the womb, and all other fluxes; Such are
these following, with which you should always mingle things something heating
and strengthening the parts.

Roots of Snakeweed or bistort, the greater cumfrey, tormentill, rubarb
torrified.

Barks Of myrobalanes, pomegranates, frankin sense, acorne cups.

Woods. As Saunders.

Leaves Of Plantaines, the greater knot grass, horsetaile, shepherds purse,
mouseare, myrtle.

Flowers. Of balaustines, roses.

Seeds. Of sorrel, purslane, mirtles, plantaine, white poppy, roses, stones of
raysins of the sun, rice.

Fruits. Quinces, pears, services, cornelians, medlars, pomegranats, English
Corans, berberries, unripe mulberries, cipress nuts, gals.

Juyces and liquors. Starch, acacia, hypocistis, juice of quinces, verjuyce,
sour wine, chalibeated milk, and ironed milk.

Animal things. Hartshorn burnt, Ivory, Mummy.

Gums. Tragant, Mastick to i. sanguis draconis.

Stones and Earthes. Blood stone, terra figillata, bole armenack.

Metalline things. Alum, Iron, Crocus Martis.

Sea things. Coral, Amber, Pearls.

Waters. Of Roses, Plantane, Purslane, knotgrasse, sorrel.

Syrrups. Of quinces, dried roses, pomegranats, mirtles, conserve of quinces.

Condites. Preserved Quinces, and cornelians.

Conserves and Confections. Old conserves of roses, diacodion, philonium, new
treacle.

Troschiscks Of rubarb, spodium, and Amber.

THE FIRST BOOK. THE FIRST PART. THE FOVRTH SECTION.
Of Medicines respecting the cause offending in rest or quietness.
The Type of the Section.
The matter fixed in a part is emptied by medicines, which relax. Insensibly as
discussers. Insensibly as consumers. Insensibly as drawers either by a quality
manifest or occult as those that extract peculiar things. or sensibly under the
form of thin water as the blisterers. or sensibly under the form of natter or
corruption as suppurators. or sensibly under the form of natter or corruption
as openers or breakers of impostems.


Relaxers, by the Latins Laxantia, by the Latins (...).
THey are properly called Relaxers, which evacuate the matter that is collected
and fixed in any part, either senfibly or insensibly; Those things evacuate
insensibly which attenuate, mollify, rarifie, discuss, and sometimes they
which draw, consume, and sometimes (in the beginning of inflammations) they
which repel; but those things do it sensibly which (when the matter impacted
can neither be repelled nor discussed,) convert it into purulent matter, and
after open a way for it to be emptied; All which, according to the diversity
and manner of the affection, may be used either several or mixed, of which
circumstances there has been partly spoken already, and partly shall be said
hereafter in its proper place, so that it is needless to allow a proper
Classis of Relaxers by themselves, because they make up the same matter with
some or other of the aforesaid divisions.

Discussers.
Those medicaments are commonly called Discussers, Diaphoreticks, digesters,
dissolvers, which by turning the humors into exhalations, empty the
morbificall cause by insensible transpiration, of which some are more gentle,
digesting but weakly, and are therefore called Rarifiers, of which hereafter in
the second part of this Book; others are more forcible, digesting more
strongly, and are simply called Diaphoreticks, which are hot and dry, and of
thin parts; for such by their penetrating, attenuate gross and clammy humors
that are inherent in any part, and turn them into vapors, that afterward
what remains may easily be discussed and dissipated; they are of a near
nature with those that discuss windiness, or rather the same with them; The
matter therefore of these is to be sought in the Tables, of the more powerful
attenuaters and mollifiers, as also in the Table of them that discuss
windiness, which you may see in its proper place.

Consumers.
Those medicaments which feed upon and consume a humor, (mollified and
attenuated) by their strong attenuating, drying quality, are called usually in
Latin absorbentia, that is consuming medicines. The Use of which is chiefly in
phlegmatic tumors, sometimes in schirrous swellings; but it must be after the
use of mollifiers and attenuaters; Such are these following, which may be used
either in the form of a vapor, fomentation with a sponge, an Ointment or a
Plaster.

Liquors. Vinegar, brine, sea water, lie of vine ashes, etc. also that lie made
of the quenching of lime.

Ashes. All sorts, especially that of the fig tree, of vine branches, of Ilex
or dwarf oak, of coleworts and other nitrose herbs.

Minerals. Alum, salt, saltpeeter, lime, brimstone.

Oils. Of Tiles, of peeter or rock oil, of Euphorbium, of Castor, of Costus.

Drawers, by the Latins Attrahentia, by the Greeks (...).
THese are those which draw forth humors seated deep in the body, to the
superficies of the skin, and that either by an occult quality, of which next,
or els^ by a manifest quality, and that either inherent, as in Thapsia, or else
acquisite by putrefaction, as pigeons dung; And these are such that are hot and
dry, and of thin parts; for it is the part of heat to attract; dryness is as
it were the file to heat, to make it more forcible; and tenuity of parts to
accelerate the action. As to the degree, some are gentler drawers, hot and dry
in the second degree, others stronger, which also discuss, and are hot and dry
in the third degree; The use of them is in drawing humors, spirits or
flatuousnesse that lie deep in the body up to the skin; as for example, in
critical abscessus's or separations of humors, also in buboes, sciatica,
dropsy, poisons, and in withered members to draw the nourishment to them.

This is the Matter.

Roots of Thapsia, Elecampane, Ireos, round birthwort, sowbread, pellitory of
Spain, of reeds, daffadils, onions, garlic.

Herbs and Leaves, Of Ladies smock, Calamint, treacle mustard, blew flowred
Pimpernel, Ivy, Tithimal, and all the sorts of spurge, flammula or strong
Clematis, pepperwort or lepidium: cuckoopit, sopewort, dictamny of Creet:
Crowfoots (especially the wild) nettles, water-pepper or arsmart, widdowaile,
spurge, laurel.

Seeds of Mustard, nettles, cresses, treacle, mustard, staves-achre, mullen,
cardamomes, ginny pepper.

Gums, Ammoniack, Euphorbium, Galbanum, Sagapene, Bdellium, Opopanax.

(Which that I may note once for all, I have here inserted, both in this and
other Tables among the gums, for custom sake, least young students in the
reading of the matter of physic or receipts, should be pusled, otherwise
Bdellium is properly a rosin, the rest thickened juyces.)

Rosins. Dry pitch, common rosin, burgundy pitch.

Excrements, Honey, Goats dung, pigeons dung, asses dung, and all dungs.

Animals, Cantharides, Scorpions, Castor.

Stones and minerals. Loadestone, Brimstone.

Sea things, Amber.

Plasters. Oxicroceum, of Mellilat, sour levens, plastrum Epispasticum.

Drawers forth or Extracters.
Under the Attracters or drawers are comprehended, those which by an occult
quality, draw out poisons, splinters and other things fastened in wounds. Of
which because there is an indefinite number, and it is not certainly known what
medicament is the proper extracter of each peculiar body, therefore we must be
content with the gegenerall and undeterminate collection of them, such as help
to the drawing out of any thing infixed, such are these following.

Roots of round birthwort, of Ireos, with the purple flowr, reeds, wild
parsnep, cuccoopits, all, the bulbe, the roots of Eringo beaten with honey.

Leaves, Dictamny of Creet, Tobacco, (which two draw forth poison) both the
pimpernels, common mullen.

Barks. The middle bark of tile tree.

Seeds. Of Mullen, Mustard.

Gums. Ammoniack, Galbanum, Opopanax.

Animals. Land snailes beaten with their shells, the head of a lizard powdered, a
fox tongue prepared, as its lungs are moystned with red wine, or decoction of
round birthwort serves to draw out lead.

Excrements. Propolis or Be glue.

Stones. Loadstone prepared draws forth Iron, Lapis Lincis, which draws out
straws or the stalks of herbs.

Sea things. Amber also draws straws.

Emplasters. Apostolicum, Levans.

Unguents. as Unguentum nigrum, sen fuscum Nicholai.

Blisterers, by the Latins Vesicantia, by the Greeks (...).
THey take their name from the effect of them, and those which do only make the
part red, are called Phaenigmi; but those which also besides that raise
blisters, are called Vesicantia. They are of temperature hot in the fourth
degree, but of thin substance, by which means they penetrate the superficies
of the part; The use of these is when the matter cannot be discussed either by
attenuaters, mollifiers, or attracters; for they draw violently, dissolve and
melt, and raise up the skin, like a bladder full of water, in which all the
humidity that is attracted is gathered; As to the matter, many things use to be
referred hither, out of the Table of the attracters, conducing to the operation
of the blisterers, for they are but few, which of themselves are reduced to
this Division or Classis. as

Cantharides beaten up with strong vinegar, and a little leven.

Thapsia. viz. the root and the flowr.

The root of the lesser Crowfoot. i. e. 5th. of Matthiolus, and the third of
Fuchsius, which is called by Gesner Flammula.

Burned Levens: Emplast. Epispasticum.

Ripeners, by the Latins Suppurantia, by the Greeks (...).
THose are so called which help nature in converting the moibificall cause into
pus, or matter; The use of which is when the malady will not yield to
discussing medicines in sanguine tumors, or in those of other humors, so they
be mixed with blood, because that only is capable of suppuration; for in tumors
proceeding from choler, or melancholy, suppurating medicines are not to be
safely administered, for they easily turn to a Cancer, or such like malignant
ulcers; they ought to be according to Galen, 5 simpl. cap. 8.9. of a temper
most agreeable to the body and part to which they are to be applied, (both in
heat and moisture,) that they may both increase and cherish the natural heat,
which is author of this concoction; they should also be emplastickall, that by
their daubing quality they may stop the pores of the skin, that they may keep
in both the heat and spirits, which being thus augmented, do the more easily
ripen the humor, such are these of which if any seem too moist or too dry,
they are to be temperd by the mixture of others.

Roots of Marsh-mallowes, white Lillies, Colts foot, new briony, wild
Cowcumber new gathered, Onions roasted.

Leaves of Marsh-mallowes, mallows, sorrel, bears breech, miscle toe.

Seeds of Flax, fenegreek, barley, wheat.

Flower of barley, wheat, vetches called ^robus, wheat bread.

Fruits. Fat figs, raysins, fat dates.

Gums. Ammoniack, Bdellium.

Resins. Larch, Turpentine, Frankincense, liquid styrax, pitch, common rosin.

Animals. The sat of hens, geese, hogs, marrow of a calfe, butter, oesipus,
yeolkes of eggs, yellow wax, be glue, milk.

Suets of all sorts.

Juyces and liquors, soap, hot water powered on, water and oil, ladanum.

Oils. Sweet oil olive, oil of sweet almonds, of linseed, of white lilly roots.

Unguents. of Marsh-mallowes, resumptivum Basilicon, Agrippae, Aureum.

Plasters, Diachilon, simple and compound, and that with gums, levens.

Openers of Imposthumes.
There are diverse things that let out water, among which, pigeons dung,
Crowfoot, Cantharides, Figmilk; but it is more usual to open tumors when they
are ripened, either with Iron, or some cautery, either actual or potentiall.

THE FIRST BOOK. THE SECOND PART.
Of Remedies, respecting the general heads of diseases.
The Division of this part.
THere are three general heads of diseases, viz. Distemper, Vitiated
Composition, and separation of the continuity.

Distemper is either simple, which is helped by alterers, or else it is joined
with matter, and then we are to have regard to the cause, for it requires
remedies to oppose the cause, of which already in the first part.

Vitiated composition of the parts, such as may be remedied by medicines are, 1
Too much straightness of the invisible passages of the body, which is called
condensednesse, to which we oppose rarefiers. 2 Too much dilatation of the said
passages, to which are used Condensers; and if it be in the visible passages,
we oppose it by Binders. 3 There are some diseases arise from overgrowing of
the flesh, as the constipation or shutting up of any cavity by such
excrescence, or else the greatness or number of the parts exceeding what is
natural, and these require Catereticks or eating medicines, of which where I
shall speak of the Pyroticks in general. Other remedies of the diseases of ill
composition, are either preservative, opposing the causes, with which they are
together removed, and therefore not to be repeated here, or Chyrurgicall, and
so not pertaining to this place.

Separation or Division of the continuity of the parts, requires gluing or
joining medicines; hither also belong vulnerary things, or else they are joined
with the loss of the substance of the part, to which belong Sarcaticks,
Epuleticks, ingenderers of a callous or hardness; of each severally.

Rarefiers, by the Latins Rarefacientia, by the Greeks (...).
THey are so called, which open the pores of the skin, to procure a free
transpiration; such are hot, but moderately, very near our natural heat, and
moist, that they may relax; for drying things streighten; of thin parts that
they may penetrate. The Use is chiefly external, to prevent internal
putrefaction, by exhalation of the fuliginous vapors of the blood, also in
external tumors, where the matter is over hot, and the part wherein it is, is
soft and thin, that the humor contained in the part, causing the swelling and
pain, being dissolved, may the better evaporate in fumes; such are these
following.

Roots of Marsh-mallowes, white Lillies.

Leaves of Dill, Mallows, Violets, Elder, Danewort, Bears breech, Mercury.

Flowers of Chamomill, Mellilote, Elder.

Seeds of Flax, Fenugreek.

Fruits. Dried Figs.

Fats and Greases of Hogs, Calves, Hens, Men, and Geese.

Excrements. New Butter, Oesipus.

Waters of Chamomill, white Lillies, warmed water, especially a bath of it.

Oils of Olives, white Lillies, Violets, sweet Almonds, earth worms,
Chamomill, Dill, Linseed, of Ireos, of Jasmine.

Oymments. Ung: Resumptivum, and Dialthee.

Condensers, by the Latins Condensantia, by the Greeks (...).
THey are so called, which contract the pores of the skin, and repress or
hinder transpiration; they are of a more watrish nature then the binders before
mentioned. The use of which is to hinder too much sweat, and the dissolution of
the spirits; the matter follows.

The Leaves of Sengreen great, and little, Lettice, Purslaine, Maiden hair,
Endive, Sow-thistle, Dandelion, Fleawort, water Lillies, Ducks meat.

Cold water, and generally whatsoever cooles without binding, contract the
smaller pores, but they cannot bind the whole part effectually.

Corrosives, by the Latins Adurentia, by the Greeks Pyrotica and Caustica.
THey are so called, which by their extreme heat, do burn the skin to diverse
purposes, no less then fire or scalding water, and therefore it is necessary
that they be of a fiery nature; yet they differ both in degrees of heat, and
manner of their matter. Of the first rank are the rubifiers, and blisterers,
which are the gentlest of all, of which is spoken before; of the second rank
are the Cathereticks or corrosive medicines, eating and consuming, opposite to
the sarcoticks, yet these only work on the superficies, (without corrupting the
adjacent parts) and corrode, extenuate, consume and wear away that very
gently. They are hot and dry in the third and fourth degree, and of thin
substance, that they may insinuate into the matter that is to be taken away,
and be dissipated or made invalid before they penetrate far; Of the third sort
are those called Septicks or putrifiers, sharper then the Cathereticks,
penetrate deeper, and dissolve, putrify, and corrupt the thinner part of the
flesh, and this they do, not so much by the benefit of the intensenesse of
their heat, as by a malignant quality, wherefore they are most irksome to
nature, and destroy the sabrick of it, and therefore there follows them the
dissolution of the radical moisture, and a carcass like putrefaction; they are
of much a grosser substance then the former, (but moderatly, for they are
otherwise of thin parts) for that which is too thin is easily dissipated by our
heat; Of the fourth sort are those which burn to a crust, commonly called
Escaroticks, or potentiall Causticks, (though some make an other distinction
between Escaroticks and Causticks, and induce the first as the milder, the
other as the more forcible) which penetrate deeply, and do not only burn the
cuticle, but the whole skin, like fire, and that suddenly, causing a very hard
crust, which they usually call an Eschare; They are most hot in the fourth
degree, of substance absolutely gross and earthy, for which reason their
extreme heat is not easily dissipated, but holding firm together, burns and
gnawes violently. The use of the Cathereticks is in the excrescence of flesh,
affections arising from proud flesh, as in the hypersarcosis of wounds, Polipus
of the nostrils, caruncles, warts and other hardnesses that are to be taken
away. The use of the Septicks is also in taking away diverse tumors, Polipus,
ozenas, (ulcers of the nostrils) hard excrescences, putrid, eating and
malignant Ulcers, and corrupted parts of the body; but these because they leave
behind them an incorrigible inconveniency, should be quite driven out of
chyrurgical use, and instead of them, if need were, may be used cleansers,
cathereticks, and escareticks. The use of Escareticks and Causticks is when the
skin for some cause or other is to be opened, and the sick cannot well endure
the opening of it by section, or burning, then are we forced to use Causticks;
also when we would suppress blood, breaking forth from some corrosion of the
veins, we are feign to cause a crust or escare to cover the part from whence
the blood breaks forth; to these pyroticks may be numbered the Psylotres, or
medicines that take away hair, i. e. such as make the part they are applied to
bald, for these have also a corroding and burning quality.

The matter of the Cathereticks or the Consumers of proud flesh.
Roots of round birth-wort dried in an oven, asphodell or kingspeare, wild
cowcumbers, which are milder, black hellebor, which is stronger.

Ashes of Muscle shells, of Tithimales or Spurges, of Gals burnt.

Stones. Pumice stone burnt to a powder, Lapis Laznli unwashed, these are
gentle.

Minerals. Vitriol calcined, Lead burnt, Alum burnt, Mercury precipitate,
Verdigreece, Mercury sublimat, peclings of brass, lime, white vitrioll, mysy,
sorry, antimony calcined, especially for cancers, fall ammoniack, vermilion.

Oils of vitriol, brimstone, aq. fortis.

Unguents. Apostolorum, Aegyptiacum, Isid.

Troschiscks of Musa, Passionis, Andromis, self de Plumbo, Troschiscks
Poliydae, Andromachi.

The matter of the Septicks or Putrifiers.
Arsenick pure. Arsenick sublimat. Orpment. Gedar liquor. Borax. Sandarache, of
the Greeks. Wolfes bane, Osmund royal. Pithyocampe.
(This is ill inserted here for it is usually given inwardly in the rickets.

The matter of the Causticks or Esearoticks, i. e. crust causing-Medicines.
The common matter is the lie of which soap is made, of which only it may be
made, and this Heurnius prefers before all others, lib. 1. Method. prax. of
whom, see the place quoted; but the particular matter is of diverse kinds, so
that there is scarce a Chyrurge on which will not boast of some secret way of
his own in this particular; some to this lie will add vitrioll, some mercury
sublimate, orpment, salt ammoniack, salt peeter, sandever, cinis clavellatus,
or ashes of vines or tartar, etc. of which they compose their diverse cauteryes.

Psilotres or Medicines that take off hair.
To make bald any part, some use those things that actually burn, especially
gold mode red hot, others, such things as work potentially, as Strong lie,
Unquenched line. Emets eggs, Sanderake, Arsenick, Orpment, Oil of brimstone.
Oil of vitriol.


Agglutinaters or Closers, or joining Medicaments, by the Latins Glutinantia,
by the Greeks (...).
THey are so called which conjoyne the lips of new made wounds; such are in
heat temperate, lest they should hurt by their acrimony in the other qualities;
they dry with astriction and grossness of substance, for so they hinder any
other humor, either from falling or growing between the lips of the wound.
The Use of them is in bleeding wounds, and also in Ulcers, so they be well
cleansed; the matter follows.

Roots of Cinquefoyle, Tormentill, Cumfrey.

Leaves of Sanicle, Winter-green, Mouseare, Rupturewort, hounds tongue,
plantaine, St. John's Wort, Vervain, Willow, Scabiosse, Carduus benedictus,
Woade, Field Cipresse, Centaury the less, Yarrow, Bettony, Bugle, Tutsan,
Goldenrod.

Gums, Sarcocoll, Sanguis draconis.

Rosins, Frankincense, Myrrh, Pitch, Turpentine.

Juyces, Aloes, Hypocistis.

Animals, Mummy, Earthwormes, Hares hair burnt.

Minerals, Litharge, Lead, Lapis Cadmia, and Calaminaris.

Unguents, de Lythargiro, Betonica, Vng. aureum, of gum elemi.

Emplasters, Catagmaticum primum and secundum, diaphaenicum. de gum elemi, de
minio compound. stipticum, or Paracelsus Plaster.

Wound Medicines or Vulneraries, by the Lalines Vulneraria, by the Greeks
(...).
THey are so called, of which wound drinks are made, whose virtues are singular
in purifying the blood, and cleansing it from all dreggy humors, that flesh or
any other substance that is lost, may be laudably and speedily restored and
engendered from it, and thereby the part be restored to its former unity; see
Pareus lib. 15. cap. 28.

The Roots of Tormentill, both sorts of Cumfry, Zedoary, Galengal, Angelica,
Snakeweed, round Birthwort, Liquerish, Avers.

Herbs and Leaves. Sea-lavender, Sanicle, winter green, Vervain, Ladies
mantle, arsesmart, periwincle, Agrimony, Adders tongue, Sowbread, golden rod,
horsetaile, bettony, burnet, cetrach, mugwort, lilly of the valley, centaury the
less, Paul's bettony, knotgrasse, plantain, savine, carduus benedictus,
mouseare, St John's wort, tansy's rupturewort, scordium, snakeweed.

Fruits. Red vetches or cicers, juniper berries, bruised, walnuts.

Animals. Crawfish, Mummy, Crabs eyes.

Sea things. Sperma ceti.

Stones and Earthes. Coral red and white, bole armenack.

Waters. Those distilled out of the aforesaid herbs.

Sarcoticks or breeders of flesh, by the Latins carnem generantia, by the
Greeks (...).
THey are so called which remove those things that hinder nature in the
breeding of flesh, viz. that twofold excrement that is always engendered in the
repairing the flesh; one thin, which the Latins call Ichor and Sa^ies, as it
were a weeping mattery watrishnesse, by which it is apt to prodnce a moist
ulcer; the other gross, as dregginesse and filth, which breeds foul filthy
ulcers; The first is to be dried, the other to be cleansed; therefore
Sarcoticks are of nature moderatly hot and dr^, within the limits of the second
degree, and cleansing without biting; for that which is hotter dissolves the
flesh; that which is colder binds it, and repels the blood from ingendring
flesh; that which is dryer consumes that which does flow to the part: that
which cleanses with binding does not only suffer the flesh to grow, but also
by its biting is apt to procure defluxions. The Use of these is in filling up
hollow wounds and ulcers. As to the Matter, those which are rehearsed as
Sarcoticks, are not to be thought so simply, but are withal either glutinative
or closing, or else cleansing, or procuring suppuration, and therefore are to
be temperd by the mixture of others; But these following are properly called
such, of which note that the dryer sort are to be used to dry bodies, and those
that are least drying are to be applied to moist bodies.

Roots of Cumfrey, Ireos, Birthwort.

Leaves of St. John's wort.

Juyces. Aloes.

Flowrye parts of barley, vetches, orobus, and ervus, and of senugreek.

^osins. Frankinsense, Burgundy pitch, Mastick, rosin of the pine, and of the
sir tree, pitch, turpentine, myrrh.

Gums. Tragant, Sanguis draconis, Sacrocall.

Minera's As Cadmia, Cerusse, Tutty, both white and gray called Pompholix,
Lytharge, lead burnt and washed.

Unguents. Aureum, rubrum desuccativum.

Emplasters. de betonica, de gratia dei.

Epuloticks or skinning medicines, but more properly Cicatrizers, by the
Latins Cicatrizantia, by the Greeks (...).
THey are so called, that skin an Ulcer or wound after it is filled with flesh;
they should be in the passive qualities very drying, that they may not only
consume the moisture, that flows to the part, but also that that remains in
the flesh of the Ulcer; they are also of a gross substance, that they may bind
and contract or draw together; In the active qualities they should rather be
cooling then heating, and altogether without biting; though there be many
things numbered amongst the Cicafrizers that dry with biting, yet such are
convenient only for the hardest sort of bodies; The Use is plain; The Matter
follows.

Roots of round Birthwort, Tormentill.

Leaves of Plantaine, Myrtle, Pomegranates, horse tail, money wort.

Barks of Pomegranates, Acorne cups.

Ashes and things burnt, as wool, linen or cotton burnt, spunges burnt, a
hares hair burnt, tiles burnt to dust.

Gums and juyces. Sanguis draconis, Acacia.

Fruits of the Cipresse tree, unripe gals.

Flowers. Balaustines, red roses.

Earths. Terra Iemnia, bole armenack, chalk.

Stones. Blood stone, calaminaris, plaster of Paris.

Metalline things. Scalings of Iron, burnt Alum, lead burnt and washed, powder
of lead, of which see Fernelius lib. 6. M.M. cap. 16. brass burnt, ceruse
litharge, Calcitis or white vitrioll, Cadmia washed, pompholix or white tutty,
brimstone, aurpment, vitriol; pompholix and spodia are both sorts of tutty; why
he sets tutty here by it self, I know not, see Screderus in his pharmacopia,
lib. 3. cap. xix. tutty burnt and washed, antimony burnt, lime washed, spodium
or gray tutty.

Animals. Hearts horn burnt, scutle bone, Ivory burnt, oyster shells burnt.

Sea things. Coral.

Ointments. Ung. album Rhazis. Nutritum, or ointment of Litharge, ointment of
Cerusse, of tutty or red lead, and rubrum desiccativum.

Things that take away Sears, which for brevity sake may be called Scar Curers.
Fats and marrowes of men, asses, hearts, the fat of the fish Thymallus.

Oils of Myrrh, yeolkes of eggs, campher, oriental balsame.

Flower of beans, Juice, of Ivy.

Seeds of rocket, mustard.

Minerals. borax, salt peeter.

Waters of Lilly flowers, bean flowers, out of which things are made diverse
compositions, ointments and liniments.

Things breeding a Calleus or hardness in joining broken bones, may properly
be called Call-breeders, by the Latins callum generantia, be the Greeks (...).
THey are so called, not because they properly breed a Calleus, for that is the
work of nature, but because they assist nature in that work, such are in the
active qualities moderatly hot, (lest they should dissolve and consume that
juice of which the Calleus is engendered,) in the passives they should be
drying; as to the second qualities they thicken, harden and bind, and are either

Internal, as the juice of primroses, the roots, juice or powder of Agrimony,
and especially the stone Osteocalla or bone glue given to i. in cumfrey water.

External things, as Aloes, Acacia, bole armenack, Mill dust, Osteocalla or
bone glue, nuts of Cipresse, Frank in sense, Gum tragant.

THE THIRD PART OF THE FIRST BOOK. Of Medicaments respecting the most common
and most urgent Symptoms.
The Type.
Symptoms that are the most frequent are these following, together with their
opposite remedies. Pain to which are opposite anodine things and Narcoticks.
watching Hypnoticks. flux of blood. stenchers of blood. swounding. refreshers
of the spirits


Anodynes, by the Latins dolorem mitigantia, by the Greeks (...).
THey are so called which ease pain without stupisying the senses, though the
cause of it remain; such medicines should be temperate in the active qualities,
much agreeable to our natural heat; but in the passives moist, either watrish
or ayery, of thin substance void of all astriction, for these by their mild and
gentle heat, foster the heat of the part, and by their tenuity of substance,
penetrate into the parts, and by their gentle moisture relax them, by which
means the cause contained in the part by transpiration, may be the easier
discussed, and evacuated. The Matter is this, which is for the most part
external, and topicall or applyable to the very place.

Roots of Marsh-mallowes, mallows, lillyes.

Leaves of Elder, mallows, violets, dill.

Seeds of Flax, fenugreek, wheat, barley, and the meal.

Flowers of Chamomill, mellilot, mullen, saffron.

Animals, their parts and excrements, Warm milk, new butter unsalted, Oesipus,
yeolkes of eggs, flesh of animals whilst it is warm, lungs of animals new
killed, the kell of animals also.

Marrowes. All that are kept in the shops.

Fats and greases. Hogs fat, gooses, hens, man's.

Oils. Sweet oil Olive, of earthworms, chamon ill, sweet almonds, sillies,
linseed, yeolks of eggs, of dill, jasimine, wall flowers, of sesamus, water
and oil mixed together.

Wheat bread new baked whilst it is yet hot.

Crumbs of white bread.

Mucilages of the seeds of Mallows, fleawort, marsh-mallowes, fenugreek.

Suets of a Heart, of Goats.

Ointments. Pectoral ointments, Dialthea, unguent. anodynum, resumptivum,
ointment of the opening juyces.

Narcoticks by the Latins Stupefacientia, by the Greeks (...).
THey are Medicines which take away or stupifie the sense of the part, that it
cannot be sensible of that which manes the pain. The Use of these is in the
most vehement pains, and they are all extremely cold, but do not stupifie so
much by their coldness, as by an occult quality they possess.

Roots of Mandrake, Henbane.

Leaves of Henbane, Mandrake, Poppies, sleepy nightshade, Tobacco, Hemlock.

Flowers of Henbane, Poppy.

Seeds of white and black Poppy, Henbane, Darnell.

Thickened juyces of Mandrake, Henbane, Opium.

Syrups of white and red poppy, diacodium.

Oils of Mandrake, white poppy seed.

Opiates, New Treacle, requies Nicholai, Philonium romanum, persicum, Philon
Magistrale.

Pills of Cynoglosse, of Styrax, Laudanum and nepenthes opiatum, to gr. iii. iv.
v.

Sleeping Medicines by the Latins Somnifera, by the Greeks (...).
THey are so called that procure sleep, by sending mild vapors up to the head,
to temper the hot, dry and sharp fumes that are in the brain, whose Use is
chiefly when overwatchings are caused by sharp fumes, such are these following.

Leaves of Lettice, Sengreen, Dill.

Seeds of Lettice, the four greater cold seeds, white Poppy seeds.

Fruits. Sweet Almonds, Peach kernels.

Waters of Violets, water Lillies, Lettice, Purslane, Nightshade, Roses.

Syrups of Violets, water Lillies, Poppies, Cowslips.

Conserv^s of Violets, water Lillies, Cowslips.

Candied things, Stalks of Italian Lettice, Candid.

Juyces of Lettice, iii. of the juice of Lettice is a deadly draught, therefore
be wary, water Lillies, night shade.

Species. Diamargariton frigidum, powder of Haly, diatrion santalon. Tro
chiscks, Gordonii.

Oils. To anoint the forehead, remples and soles of the feet, oil of violets,
water Lillies, sweet Almonds, Dill, Willowes, Mandrake Frogs, Poppyes, Roses.

Marrowes of the thigh bones of calves, hearts.

Unguents. Populeon, out of all which diverse remedies to procure sleep, both
internal and external may be prepared.

Stoppers of Blood by the Latins Sanguinem sistentia, by the Greeks (...).
THey are so called that stay or stanch blood flowing out of the veins or
arteries, whether opened by relaxation of the orificies, or by corrosion, or
violent breaking, or cut as in a wound; and this other medicament can perform
besides caustic medicines (which stop it by inducing a crust or escara instead
(as it were) of a stopple) and that diverse ways, viz. i. by an emplastick
quality; for such as are of a gross and clammy substance, they stop and fill
up the orifices of the veins; Secondly by a cooling, binding, drying virtue,
or lastly by some other propriety or occult quality; The Matter of all which is
this following.

Roots of Cumfrey, Cinquefoyle, Rubarb torrefied, nettles.

Barks of Pomegranates, Pine trees.

Leaves of Plantain, knot grass, horsetaile, periwinkle, burnet, both sorts,
^ursan, nettles, willowes, ducks meat, lettice, purslain, night shade, both the
sengreens, bramble buds.

Flowers. Balaustines, Citrines.

Fruits. Quinces, sour pears, services, medlars, bramble berries, mulberries
unripe, of sumach, unripe gals, burnt gals that are suddenly quenched in
vinegar or sour wine.

Juyces and liquors. Acacia, Hypocistis, Aloes, vinegar, vinegar with water,
called Posca, verjuyce, cold water, juice of gourds, purslain, sour wine.

Rosins. Frankincense, myrrh, mastick, rosin rubbed, Fernel. 5. M. M. 3.

Gums. Sanguis draconis.

Sea things. Coral, Amber, Sponge burnt.

Animals, their parts and excrements. Glue, Mummy both inward and outward,
white of an egg, spicers web, especially it it be such as is full of the fine
flowr of mils or bakehouses, clots of blood dried, Spodium mode of Ivory, hens
feathers burnt hair of horses and men burnt, bones burnt to a fine powder.

Stones. Bloodstone, Schistus, Jasper, plaster of paris washed.

Earthes. Common earth. 8 Simpl. bole, terra sigillata.

Flower of wheat, beans, starch.

Sootes. Soot scraped from the oven mouth or off a brass pot, foot of
Frankincense or Mastick.

Minerals. Litharge, Cerusse, white Tutty, Vitriol, Alum.

Refreshers of the spirits, by the Latins spiritus reficientic, by the Greeks
(...).
I intend not to speak here of such things as remove the causes, that oppress
the spirits, or of them that by accident restore them, nor of those which
strengthen the heat of the heart, for they are to be referd to the Cordials;
but only of such as with their grateful sent, or vapors suddenly restore the
spirits, whose Use is in swounding and faintings; such are the

Roots of the true Acorns, Angelica, Avens, Ciperus, blew flower deluce of
Florence.

Barks and Woods of Citrons, Oranges, lignum Aloes, Saunders, especially the
yellow.

Leaves of mountain Calamint, Hysop, Lavender, marjerome, baume, mints, bazill
rosemary, penyroyall, mother of time, time.

Flowers of Oranges, clove gilleflowers, Citrons, Jasimine, Lilly of the valley,
limons, all sorts of spike, roses, purple violets.

Berries of Juniper, Bays.

Fruits. ripe Quinces, fragrant apples.

Spices. Cloves, Cinnamon, Mace.

Rosins and Gums. Styrax, Camphere.

Excrements. Musk, Civet.

Waters and Vinegars. Water of Cinnamon, Citron and Orange, and Limon flowers,
of Lavender, Jasemine, and roses, vinegar of strong wines, of clove
gilleflowers, of roses.

Sweet Oils. as of Cinnamon, Costus, Nutmegs, Spike, Camphere, Jasemine,
Cloves, oil of Balsome, of Citron peeles, and such like.

Note that in women, such fragrant things are not to be held to the nose, least
it should cause fits of the mother, but rather ill sented things, as Caster,
Rue, etc.

THE SECOND BOOK Of the particular matter of Physic.
SECTION. I. Of Remedies belonging to the head.
The Type of the Section.
Remedies dedicated to the head, are either dedicated to the brain, as
Cephalicall things. purgers of the head, as Errhines. Sternutatories.
Apophelegmatismes.

Eyes, as opthalmicall things which are either sharpeners of the sight.
anodines, or easers of pain. repellers. digesters. cleansers.
Ears, as Oticks, to ear medicines. Teeth, as teethish medicines.


Cephalicall medicines, by the Latins Capitalia, by the Greeks (...).
THey are properly called cephalicall medicines, that have a virtue to preserve
or restore the natural heat and vigor of the brain, and which strengthen it,
being first cleansed from the anoying filth that molests it. The Use of which
(as also of all other strengthening medicines that have their denomination from
the part) is both before diseases beginning, and in them, and also after they
are removed; but most usually after, general purgations, to restore strength
to the parts, (from whence they have their name of strengtheners) least they
should again heap more vicious humors, and by that means occasion new
affections, or conduce to the return of the old; And although the faculty of
these strengtheners seem something occult, yet has it either heat or
coldness joined with it, by whose help the relics of a cold or hot distemper
are removed, together with the other operation, so that in special cephalicall
things are twofold; hot in cold affections of the brain, cold in hot affections
of the brain, and also the dry, as those things that are proper for mitigating
deliriums.

The hot are these.

Internal.
Roots of Birthwort, which is famous in the falling sickness that proceeds
from the womb, calamus aromaticus, Acorus and Galingale, for winedinesse, of
Male pyony against the falling sickness, and vain fears, also misle of the
oak, florentine ^reos, English Galingale, Zedoary.

Leaves of Betony, Marjerome, for windiness, narrow leaved sage, Centaury the
less to strengthen the nerves, rosemary for the trembling and palsy, bays,
mirtles, for catarrhes, mountain calamint, lavender, primrose, bazill, savory,
hyssop, baume, wild marjerome.

Barks and Woods, Barks of Citrons, guiacum, ^asaphras, lignum. Aloes.

Seeds of Coriande^^ Fennel, silvermontan.

Berries of Juniper, bays, mirtles, grains of kermes, seeds of Piony and
Nigella.

Flowers of S^aechas of Arabia, which are as it were the life of the brain and
nerves, most sefull in the swimming of the head, falling sickness, and
melancholy, lillies of the valley, cowslips, line tree, spikenard, centaury the
less, betony, of rosemary, mellilote, chamomill.

Fruits. Anacardines, but warily, because they burn the blood.

Spices. Nutmegs, Cubebs, gr. v. swallowed every day, Cardamomes, Mace, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Ginger and Pepper for a moist brain.

Rosins. Frankincense against forgetfulness, Mastick, Styrax Benzoin.

Animal things. Castor which is famous, Musk, ashes of Swallows, dung of
Peacocks, in the falling sickness.

Sea things. Amber, Ambergreece.

Distilled waters of the aforesaid leaves. aq. vitae with Castor, treacle,
water with the juice of Betony, imperial water, aq. caelestis, cinnamon water.
water of Piony compound, spirit and water of lavender compound of Dr. Matthias,
spirit of castor.

Oils Chymicall. of Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, marjerome, amber, rosemary.

Syrups of slaechados, of bettony, chamepitios, of Piony compound, syrup of the
infusion of Piony flowers, of the juice of sage.

Conserves of the slowres of rosemary, betony, sage, french lavender, and of
the lintree flowers.

Candied things and preserved things. Citron peels, roots of Acorus,
Myrobalanes, Nutmegs, Walnuts, Coriander candyed.

Confections. Treacle, old Methridate, the confection aurea alexandrina, and of
anacardines, but warily; diacorum, diacinnamomum.

Powders. Those mentioned in the preparers of phlegm.

Treschiscks. de carabe, gallia moscata.

External heating things.
The Seeds of Nigella or Gith, of Cummins torrified, put in a bag, and applied
to the mould of the head.

Oils of these are rather cooling.
mirtles, these are rather cooling.
roses, bays, spikenard, nutmeg by expression.

Plasters, de betonica, de baccis lauri, and in the long lasting pains,
Emplaister de Ranis, or Plaster of Frogs of Vigo, with Mercury.

Rue and wild Time for pains, idle headednesse, disturbance of mind, and
over-watchings; and Vervain the same way.

Cold things internal.
Herbs. Sorrel, Lettuce, Purslain, Violets, Cowcumbers, twinings of Vines
called Capreoli.

Woods. All the Saunders.

Flowers. Roses, Violets for sleep, water Lillies.

Seeds. The four greater cold seeds, of Lettuce, Fleawort, white Poppy.

Juices. Of Citrons, Pomegranats, Currants, Vinegar, Verjuice, Opium, have a
care.

Gums. Camphier.

Distilled Waters. Of the Flowers and Leaves aforesaid, black Cherry water.

Conserves. Of the Flowers aforesaid.

Candied and Preserved things. Lettuce stalks, and the flesh of Gourds
preserved.

Powders or Species. Diamargariton frigidum, Diatrium santalon, Diatragacanthi
frigidi.

Troschischs of Camphier, of Saunders.

Cooling external things.
The aforesaid simples; to which add the

Leaves of Henbane, Nightshade, great Housleek, Mandrake, Willow, Vine branches.

Oils. Of the the aforesaid Flowers, and the seed of white Poppy, Oil of unripe
Olives, Oil of the flowers of Willow, for anointing of the Nostrils and Temples.

Unguents. As Ointment of Roses, Refrigerans Galeni, Populeon, Searcloth of
Saunders.

Opposite to these Cephalical things are those which hurt the Head: such are
these following, taken from Galen, lib. 2. compos. med. sec. loc. cap. 1. near
the end. The seed of Agnus castus, juice of Wormwood, Olives that are black and
ripe, the fruit of Arbutus, or Strawberry tree, Myrrh, or Frankincense, if it
be drank when one is healthy, as Diascorides will have it: For according to
Avicen, they are good for the Memory; the tops of Ivy, also the berries of it,
Saffron, Sulpherwort, Sowbread dried, and drank in Wine; much Storax makes
troublesome dreams, but a little drives away sadness. Lastly, all things that
are oderiserous induce troublesome sleeps, and the Hag-riding or Nightmare,
because they fill the Head with vapors, especially in those that are
plethorick. To these he might have numbered Coleworts, Beans, and all sort of
pulse, which cause troublesem, heavy sleepiness, and fearful Dreams.

Erthines, or, Snifting Medicines; by the Latins, Nasalia: by the Greeks,
(...).
THey are Medicines that are to be snifted up into the Nose, to draw forth the
Phlegm that lurks about the Brain and tunicles of it; either without any
agitation of the Brain, when the excrements come down of themselves, or else
with sneezing; and then they are properly called Sternutatories: they should be
hot, thin, sharp, and cleansing. Among which, some are to be chosen that are
also Cephalical: the Matter of these is either Simple or Compound.

The simple ones are either dry or moist.

Dry Ones.
Powder of Acorns, Castor, Saffron, Cloves, Elaterium, (but warily, and
dissolved with other liquid things) Hellebore white and black, Nutmeg, white
Pepper, Pellitory of Spain, Ginger.

Roots of Sow-bread, and Beets cut like tents, and put up into the Nose.

Leaves of Tobacco dried and put into the Nose: this is the best Errhine.

Fumes of Marjoram, Hysop, Time, Tobacco, all taken through a pipe.

Moist Ones.
Juices of purple-flowred Pimpernel, Beets, Coleworts, Bettony, Celendine the
greater, Sowbread, wild Cowcumber, roots of Ireos, of Tree-Ivie, Hysop,
Marjoram, Horehound, Tobacco, Nigella, wild Marjoram, Pennyryal, Sage, Savory,
Elder, Ground-Ivie, or Alehoof.

New Butter put up in the Nostrils.

Compounds. Honey of Roses, of Rosemary, Oximel. simple, and Oximel of squils:
Syrup of Hysop. Confections: as Mustard, Aurea Alexandrina, Anacardina, old
Treacle and Methridate. Oils: of Pepper, Ireos.

Sternutatories, or, Sneezing things: by the Latins Sternutatoria: by the
Greeks (...).
THese are the stronger, thinner, sharper sort of Errhines, or snifting
Medicines, which stimulate the Expulsive faculty very strongly; of which these
following are the most usual.

The Roots of Ireos, white Hellebore, Euphorbium; then which nothing is
quicker, if you mix a little Castor with it: Pellitory of Spain, powder of
Tobacco blown up; out of which, with other sharp Errhines finely powdered, are
made sneezing Powders: to i. s. or ii. mixing Cephalical things with it, in
equal proportion with the rest; of which gr. i. or ii. blown up into the
Nostrils with a quill, or, if they be vehement, let them be put in a brazen
box, and the box only held to the Nose: or let a Nodulus, or Knot be prepared
of Pellitory of Spain s. of black Hellebore, i. Cresses, s. all powdered, and
tied up in a Lawn rag, for a Nodulus; which being steeped in Rose Water, and
held to the Nose, provokes sneezing without trouble.

To these add Ptarmica or Sneeswort, and Stavesacre.

Apophlegmatisms, or Spitting Medicines: by the Latins Pitissantia: by the
Greeks (...).
THose Medicines are so called, which either chewed, gargarized, or daubed on
the Pallat like a liniment, procure much spetting, by drawing out a great deal
of phlegm from the Head, either by their heat or acrimony, whereby they
attenuate the matter contained in the Head, and melt it (as it were,) and
withal irritate the Expulsive faculty of the Brain, to cast it forth: Such are
these following.

Roots. Of Acorns, Angelica, Ireos, Costus, English Galingale, Gentian,
Galingale, Masterwort, Pellitory of Spain, Valerian, Ginger.

Barks. Of the roots of Capers, Oranges.

Spices. Cubebs, Nutmegs, Cloves, Pepper, grains of Paradise.

Leaves. Of Hysop, Bays, Pepperwort, Arsmart, Marjoram, Cresses, Tobacco.
para; The Leaves of Tobacho (the stalks taken out) being tied up, as it were,
in a round pellet as big as a Nutmeg, is an excellent one held in the mouth in
the morning once or twice a month, and is before all other. It should be held
half an hour: let not the juice go down; and if you can be early enough, take a
sleep after it.

Seeds. Anniseed, Fennel, Mustard Seed, of Stavesacre, Treacle-mustard, Sesely,
Silvermontan.

Fruits. Figs, Raisins, bitter Almonds, Juniper berries, Bay Berries.

Gums. Mastick, Ammoniack, Myrrh.

Animal things. Castor.

These Simples, as to their use, are either chewed, as is usually the roots of
Pellitory of Spain, steeped all night in Vinegar, to i. or else a powder made
of the aforesaid things to iii. or s. is taken with s. q. of wax, and made up
into Troschischs, as big as Lupines; one of which is chewed in the mouth, and
so rolled up and down a reasonable while.

Opthalmicks, or, Eye-Medicines: called by by the Latins and Greeks Opthalmica.
THey are called so in general which are used to heal diverse affections of the
Eyes, and are divided chiefly into three Classes: The first contains the
Oxidorcicks, or Medicines that sharpen the sight. The second contains those
Medicaments that are for the infla^mation of them, either in the beginning, as
Repellers, and Anodynes, or easers of pain: or else in the state and
declination, as Digesters or Discussers: the third includes the Cleansers, that
are used in the Ulcers, Spots, Suffusions, and such like affections of the Eyes.

Oxidorcicks, or, Sharpners of the Sight.
Internal.
Roots. Of Fennel, Celendine the greater, Avens, Valerian.

Leaves. Of Eyebright, Celendine, Fumitory, Fennel, Vervain, Rue, Clary.

Seeds. Silvermountain seed, Rape seed, Radish seed, Fennel, Carraway seed.

Clarified Juices. Of Fennel, Vervain, Eyebright, Marjoram, Rue.

Distilled Waters. Of Eyebright, Vervain, Celandine, Fennel, Rue.

Wine. Of Eyebright.

On the contrary, these hurt the Sight: Radishes, Garlic, Onions, Mustard and
Cresses.

External Oxidorcicks, or Quickeners of Sight.
Water of Honey, if the dimnesse proceed from the thickness of the tunicles,
distilled Waters of the aforesaid sight-sharpning simples mixed together, adding
Gall, and the Urine of a Boy under age, white Wine and Honey.

Antimony to i. infused in iv. of Water.

The Juices aforesaid dropped into the Eye: the Juice of Rocket, and of
flowring Willow, that which drops out at a cut in the Bark.

Anodynes, or Easers of Pain.
Mucilages. Of the seed of Fleawort, of white Poppy seeds, where you would also
Lenifie: of Quince seed where you would also bind.

Waters. Of Roses, of pickings of Roses, of Plantain, Nightshade, Housleek,
Purslain.

Women's milk, white of an Egg beaten with water.

Sweet Apples roasted under the Embers, or boiled in Milk, juice of Apples.

Crumbs of Bread steeped and boiled in Milk, adding a little Saffron to gr. iv.
or v.

White Troschises of Rhazis, where there is great pain.

And in vehement pain Opium to gr. ii. in liquid Colliriums.

Repellers.
Waters. Of Roses, Mirtles, Plantains, Violets, Purslain, Nightshade.

Juices. O^ Quinces, sour Apples, Pomegranates, white of an Egg.

Muscilage. Of Quince seed, pulp of Quinces boiled in some binding Water, as in
the Water of stalks or pickings of Roses.

Discussers.
Decoctions. Of Fenngreek, Camomile, Melilot.

Fomentations and Vapors. Of the same things, together with the Oxidorcicks
before named.

Waters. Of Eyebright, Aqua vitae. Of Fennel, Celendine, Rue, with a little
white Vitriol, or salt peeter in it.

Animals, their parts and Excrements. Woman's milk, the blood of Pigeons and
turtle Doves, the feathers of young Pigeons that are full of blood, drawn forth
and pressed into the Eyes, the gall of Fishes.

Gums. Sarcocal fed with milk.

Rosins. Myrrh and Frankincense.

Juices, Aloes, Verjuice, where there is also a burning joined with the others.

And lastly, Saffron.

Cleansers.
Some are gentle without biting, the use of which is in the declination of
Inflammations, as Sugar Candy, Honey, juice of red Roses, Antimony washed,
Cadmia, Pompholix, or white Tutty, gray Tutty, Skuttle-bone, Pumice-stone, Lead
burnt and washed. Others are stronger, and joined with a biting; the Use of
which is chiefly in Suffusions, Skins, and sometimes in Ulcers; as gals of
Fishes, which are the gentler, of four-footed Beasts which are moderate, and of
Birds which are the strongest, to which add the gall of Vipers and Serpents; (
Note, that the gall of Partridges is the strongest of all, and that of Hens is
the gentlest.)

Juices. Of Fennel, Quinces, Celendine, blew flowred Pimpernel, Urine, water of
Honey compounded with the Oxidorcicks. Others are the strongest of all; as
Vitriol burnt, Verdigrease, white Vitriol; a liquor of which made with the
whites of Eggs, is excellent in the inflammation, Itch, and redness of the
Eyes, crude Antimony.

Oticks, or Ear-Medicines: by the Latins Auricularia: by the Greeks (...), and
(...).
THese are Remedies that help the Hearing, and are twofold; Internal and
External: The Internal are the Cephalical Medicines before rehearsed, which
alter, consume or discuss the Humor contained in the inward cavity of the Ear;
whether they be hot, if the Malady come from cold and gross Humors: or cold,
if the cause of the Deafness proceeds from hot Humors; which uses to happen
in acute Diseases, after the Crisis, the matter of the Disease being sent to
the Ears. External also are twofold; Hot and Cold.

The Hot are these following.
Waters. Aqua vitae simple, or compounded with some of the other Cephalical
things, made in white Wine; this cuts, cleanses, digests any slimy Humor: And
to this purpose, there are infused the roots of Radish, Leeks, Onions,
Sowbread, white Hellebore, Castor, Saffron, salt Peeter, Cows gall; besides the
Cephalical things. Crato commends Carduus benedictus, infused in Spirit of
Wine, and then distilled, for a singular Experiment. See Crato, Ep. 59.

Decoctions made of the same things in Aqua vitae, simple Vinegar, or Vinegar
of squils.

Juices. Of Onions, Leeks, Radishes, Rue, Ash.

Common Oils. As of bitter Almonds, Spikenard.

Distilled Oils. These following (besides the Cephalical Oils aforesaid) of
Sage, Rue, Cummin seed, Carraways, Fennel seed, Bay berries, Spike.

Animols. The fat of an Eele that drops from it whilst it is roasting, dropped
into the Ear, for is mollifies and relaxeth, by reason of its fat substance,
attenuates and discusseth, partly by the quality it obtains from the fire, but
chiefly by that it gets from Bay leaves, wherewith it should be stuck full when
it is laid down. To these may be added the fat of an Hedgehog, prepared after
the same manner; and Woodlice, which some call Monks pease, others Cheeslogs,
powdered and mixed with somu auricular Oil, and dropped into the Ear.

Suffumigations made of the like things as are before spoken of.

Musk wrapped up in wool or cotton, and put into the Ear. Civet is much more
forcible, especially if you add to it a drop or two of Oil of Cinnamon or Cloves.

The Cold are these.
Oils. Of Water Lillies, Roses, Violets; Women's milk warm from the breast.
Juice, or liquor of Vines which distills from the branches, cut in the Spring.

Decoctions of Cooling things, as Roses, Mallows, Violets, Willow, Lettuce,
Water Lillies. Plantain, Endive, Straw-berries, Purslain.

Odonticks, or Teeth-Medicines.
THey are so called that strengthen the Teeth, and by cleansing them from the
filth, whiten them: these are a fit matter for Dentifrices; and they are these
following.

Of Plants, the stalks of Burnet, Pellitory of the wall, Beets, Maidenhair:
Leaves of Mirtles, Mastick tree, wild Olives, Penniryall, wild Marjoram, Hysop,
Mints, Sage, Rosemary, either several, or many of them mixed, burnt and reduced
to ashes.

Of Animals. Skuttle bone, Crabs eyes, all sorts of shells, and the shells of
Land snails, Hearts horn.

Of Stones. Pumice stone, Sponge stone, Alablaster, Chalk, all of these most
exactly powdered; or if that cannot hand somly be, let them be first burnt, and
then powdered.

Stones of Dates, Mirobalanes, Olives, Cypres nuts, Medlars, burnt.

Sea things. Coral, Sea froth, Amber.

Earthy juices. Common salt, salt Gemme, Alum, salt Peeter, melted on a
Tile-shard, and burnt: sal Alkali, or the salt they make Glass of, and the
fattinesse that swimmeth on the top, when it is dissolved in water, called
Glass grease: Tartar of white Wine, crusts of Bread burnt.

To these are to be added, the powders of Spices, as of Lignum aloes, and other
odoriferous Plants, the root of Ireos, Musk, Amber greece; and for the
strengthening of the Gums, Mastick Frankincense, Mirrh. And to those that will
resolve to endure the taste, there is no better thing then Aloes dissolved in
Claret wine.

THE SECOND BOOK. SECTION II. Of Remedies of the BREAST.
The type of the Section.
Remedies of the Breast respect either the Heart, as Cordials. Lungs, as
Bechical, or Expectorating Medicines. Pneumonical, or Medicines that alter the
distemper of the Lungs.
Breast, as Breeders of Milk. Driers of Milk.



Cordials: by the Latins Cordialia: by the Greeks (...).
THey are so called that are either proper for strengthening the Heart,
resisting malignity, or increasing the Spirits: such are all the Alexipharmacal
internal medicines before rehearsed, except that there the hot are confusedly
mixed with the cold, which in the use of them are to be distinguished: but
besides those, these following are profitable, which are not there cited.

The Hot Cordials.
Roots. Of Doronicum, or wholesome Wolfsbane, Zedoary, Cinquefoil, Avens,
Butterbur.

Barks. Of Oranges and Citrons.

Leaves. Of Carduus benedictus, Sage, mountain Calamint, Motherworts, ground
Ivy, Mints, Bazil, Rosemary.

Flowers. Of Sage, Lilly of the valley, Spikenard.

Rozins. Frankincense, Storax, Benzoin.

Animals. Mummy, Silk.

Sea things. Amber.

Waters. Of Carduus benedictus, Balm, scabiosse, Sage, Cinnamon, Treacle water.
Angelica water the greater composition, Aqua Petasitis, or water of Butterbur
compound, Bezoar water, Gilberts water, Scordium water compound, Aqua
Imperialis. Aqua Mariae.

Oils. Of Cloves, Cinnamon, Saffron.

Condited things. Citron barks, roots of Scorzonera, or Spanish Vipers grass.

Troschischs. Of Gallia Moscata, Alipta Moscara, Trosch. Alexiterii.

Species or Powders. Bezoardicus Magistralis, Cardiacus Magistralis; temperate,
cordial Species, Powder of Crabs claws compound, Diamoscum, Species of the
Electuary Rosatae Novellae. See the Alexipharmacal Medicines before.

Cooling Cordials.
Roots. Of Sorrel, Buglosse.

Leaves. Of Sorrel, wood Sorrel, Borage, Buglosse, water Lillies, Mirtles.

Seeds. Of Quinces, Plantain.

Fruits. Sour Cherries, fragrant Apples, Quinces, sour Pomegranats.

Flowers. Of Willow. The four cordial Flowers, Clove Gilly flowers.

Juices. Of Sorrel, Roses, and the Fruits aforesaid.

Stones. Garnets, Rubies.

Minerals and Sea things. Gold, Silver, Coral, Pearls, mother of Pearls
prepared.

Waters. Of Roses, Violets, Buglosse, water Lillies, Sorrel, Cheries.

Syrups. Of Vinegar, Pomegranats, Limons, Verjuice, of the juice of Sorrel,
Violets, Roses, Quinces, water Lillies, Apples, Currants, Oxisaccarum.

Conserves. Of Roses. Borage and Buglosse flowers, Clove Gilly flowers, of wood
Sorrel.

Condites. Lemons preserved, Barbaries, Currants, sour Cherries preserved.
Quinces, Pippins, Oranges without the peels, Borage roots.

Species. Diamargariton frigidum.

Treschischs. Of Spodium, Camphier.

Unguents. Of Roses, of Sanders.

Expectoraters: by the Latins Expectorantia: by the Greeks (...).
THey are such Medicines as render those things or Excrements contained in the
Lungs, fit to be purged out by coughing, and are called Bechicks, from their
manner of evacuating by coughing; for the Greek word Bex signifies a Cough,
from whence comes Bechicus. They are otherwise called procurers of spetting,
and Anacatharticks; as also from the part that is to be evacuated, they are
called Thoracicals, and Expectoraters: and they are of two sorts, according to
the variety of Excrements, viz. attenuaters, and thickeners: the first
expectorate by attenuating, cutting and cleansing the gross Humors: the others
by thickening, and also lenifying. Where is to be noted, that if any thing
among the attenuaters seems too sharp, it is to be tempered with the lenifiers,
least the Cough be too much irritated, or least the gross Humor by too much
using them, be hardened.

The matter of the Attenuaters.
Roots. Of both the Birthworts, marsh Mallows, Angelica, Cuckoo-pits,
Enulacampain, Ireos, Squils, Onions, Ginger.

Leaves. Of Maidenhair, Calamint, ground Ivy, Hysop, Tobacco, both for a Syrup
and suffumigation, wild Marjoram, Penniryal, Jerusalem Cowslips, Horehound,
Catsfoot, or mountain Cudweed, Scabiosse, Sundew or Ros folis, Coltsfoot.

Seeds. Of Annise, Coleworts, Carthamus, Fennel, Cresses, Massilian Seseli,
Silvermountain, of Nettles.

Berries. Of Bays, Juniper.

Flowers. Of Rosemary, Camomile, Scabiosse, Saffron from s. to Never exceed s.
for it causes faintness by over mollifying.
i.

Fruits. Bitter Almonds, dried Figs, Capers.

Rosins. Myrrh, Turpentine.

Animals. Honey, Fox-lungs prepared to s. i.

Chemical things. Flowers of Brimstone made either into a Loach or Tablets; oil
of Brimstone, a few drops of which use to be mixed with the Lohochs.

Waters. Of Carduus benedictus, Hysop, Coltsfoot, Scabiosse.

Syrup of Maidenhair, Hysop, Horehound, Coltsfoot, of Catsfoot, simple Oximel,
Oximel of squils. Syrup. de Erisimo, botruos.

Conserves. Of Enulacampain, Maidenhair, Rosemary Flowers, of Coltsfoot Flowers.

Powders. Dia Ireos Solomonis, and simple Diacalamintha.

Lohochs. Of Fox lungs. Sanum and expert. Lohoch de Farfara, or Coltsfoot, de
Passulis.

External things.
Oils. Of bitter Almonds, Ireos, Camomile.

Ointments. Resumtivum, Dialthea, Pectoral Plasters, Filii Zachariae.

The matter of the thickning lenifying things.
Roots. Of Liquorice, Holihocks.

Seeds. The four greater cold feeds, white Poppy, Lettuce, Mallows, Barley, Rice.

Flowers. Of water Lillies, Violets, red Poppy.

Fruits. Sweet Almonds, Dates, Jujubes, Pine kernels, Phistick nuts, sweet
Prunes, Raisins, Sebestens.

Juices. Of Liquorice, Starch, Penidies, Opium with caution.

Animals. Butter, Marrows new drawn.

Waters. Of Violets, red Poppy, water Lillies.

Syrups. Of Liquorice, Jujubes, water Lillies, red Poppies, Violets, white
Poppies, Honey of Violets. Diacodium simple and compound, Syrup of the
Muscilages.

Conserves. Of Violets, water Lillies.

Powders. Of Diatragacanthum frigidum, and Diapenidium.

Pneumonicks, or altering Medicines for the Lungs.
THey are those that are used to correct the distemper of the Lungs; the matter
of which is the same with that of the Expectoraters: among which, to heat the
Breast, the most excellent is flower of Brimstone, given to Rather to i.
i. in a soft dressed Egg: also ii. of Turpentine dissolved in ii. of Oximel.
Outwardly, the Sulpherous natural Baths.

But to cool the Breast, the use of sour things, of Milk, red Saunders in the
beginning of a Consumption, and to prevent the spetting of Blood, will suffice.
Also Conserves of Roses, made sour with a little oil of Vitriol, used often
morning and evening at going to bed. See for others amongst the Expectoraters.

Encreasers or Breeders of Milk.
THey are so called properly or unproperly; they properly breed Milk that cause
much and good Blood: such are Meats of much and good nourishment, and temperate
Medicines: for of such things Milk is the material effect. They improperly
breed Milk, which are endued with a moderate cutting quality, whereby they
render the Blood fluid, and move it to the Dugs, that it may there be converted
into Milk; of which this present Discourse is. Where note, that some certain of
them do force the Blood, as it were, to the Dugs. Some are external, some
internal.

The Internal.
The Leaves of the true Macedonian Parsley, of Dill, Smallage, water Parsnips,
Polley; all of them must be green: Poligalaor, Milkwort, Lettuce in hot
tempers, for in cold ones it diminishes milk.

Green Seeds. Of Annise, Fennel, Rocket, Nigella.

Juices. Of Gourd, Dandelion, blew Goatsbeard, Ptisane, or thick Barley broth.

Powder. Of Crystal made very fine, and given to i. in a fit Liquor, Lac Lunae
given to the weight of i.

External things.
Mollifying simples; as the Roots of marsh mallows, the Leaves of Dill, mallows.

Seed of Flax, flowers of Camomile mixed with the aforesaid Leaves and Seeds
for a Fomentation: Also Rubifiers, if other things will not avail. See
Rubifiers.

Things drying Milk.
THose things diminish Milk, that either by their vehement coldness thicken
the Blood, or by their too much heat discuss and dry it up; or else by a
propriety of substance, hinder the breeding it. Such are either Internal, and
those either Hot, as Bazil, Rue, Calamint, Sage, Agnus Castus: or cold, as
Purslain, Housleek, Gourds, This should rather have been referred to the
heaters, for it resists Milk by drying and consuming, and is withal hot, as
appears by its aerimony and small.
Camphier: or external, as a Cataplasm of the hot things aforesaid, boiled in
Oil. 2. Linnens dipped in Verjuice, and applied. 3. Smallage stamped with
Vinegar, and applied. 4. A sponge dipped in the Decoction of Cummin, or
Coriander seed, made with sharp Vinegar and applied: it is the secret of some
people. I have seen this very succesfully and speedily done by a Midwife, only
first fomenting the Dug with Vinegar, and afterward applying a Plaster of
Diachilon simple, which was suffered to lie on two or three days; this
prevented any hardness that otherwise might have happened.

THE SECOND BOOK. SECTION III. Of Remedies of the inferior Cavity, viz. The
BELLY.
The Type of the Section.
Remedies of the inferior Cavity, or Belly, are properly these, viz. for the
Stomach, Stomachical things. Intrals chiefly above other parts are used
Discussers of windiness. Killers of Worms.
Liver, Hepatical. things. Spleen, Splenetical things. Kidneys or reins,
Nephritical-things, and those either lenifiers, cleansers, brekers of the Stone.
Bladder, cistical things. Testicles, encreasers of Seed. diminishers of Seed.
Womb: Histerical things, and those either strengthening the Womb. or moving
staying
the courses.


Stomachical Medicines.
THey are called Stomachicals, which by a peculiar faculty alter those humors
that are contained in the stomach, and also help together with it the
Concoction, and other functions of the stomach, and strengthen it; of which
some are hot, some cold; and both these must not be too much opening or
diuretical, but somewhat astringent.

The Hot.
Roots. Of Calamus aromaticus, Cvpresse, Galingale, greater Gentian or Felwort,
Zedoary.

Barks. Of Oranges, Citrons.

Woods. As Lignum Aloes.

Leaves. Wormwood, Betony, Mint, wild Marjoram, Rosemary, Sage.

Seeds. Of Annise, Citrons, Cummin, Fennel, seeds of Chermes.

Flowers. Of Bettony, Sage.

Fruits. Bitter Almonds, Peach kernels.

Gums. Mastick s. given with a little Ginger or Zedoary in a rear Egg.

All Spices, especially Ginger and Pepper, swallowed whole.

Sea things. Ambergreece, Amber.

Waters. Of the Leaves aforesaid, of Cinnamon, Aqua vitae, spirit of Anniseed.
Spirit and water of Wormwood, the greater composition, Aqua Mirabilis,
Imperialis, Mint water distilled with Wine, D. Steevens his Water.

Distilled Oils. Of Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, mace, Cummin seed, Amber.
Especially Oil of citron, and Orange Barks.

Syrups. Of Wormwood, mint, Bettony. Of citron peels, of cinnamon.

Conserves of the Flowers of Wormwood, Bettony, sage. Of the tops of Mint and
Balm, of Roses with Mithridate.

Condites. Citron peels; Acorus Condite, Nutmegs, Walnuts, Ginger condited.

Confections. Alcherms, mithridate, Treacle. Diacorum, Diacinnamomum, Electuary
of Bayberries, Electuary of Sasafras.

Species, or Powders. Aromaticum Rosatum, Diagalanga, Diacidonii cum speciebus.
This last had been fit among the confections, not here. To these add Aromat.
cariophillatum, Species Elect. Rosatae novellae, Diatrion Piperion,
Diaspoliticum, Dianisum, powder of the roots of Cuckoopits compound.

Troschischs. Of Wormwood, Rubarb, Gallia moscata.

External are
Oils. Of Wormwood, mint, mastick, Nutmegs by expression, of Nard. Distilled
Oils of Wormwood, Amber, Nutmegs, Mace.

Emplasters. Of Bay berries, stomachale Galeni, stomachicum magistrale.

Cold things for the stomach.
Roots. Of sorrel, s^cc^ry, Plantain.

Leav^s. Of sorrel, Endive, sowthistle, succory, the five capillary Herbs,
Dandelion, and the Leaves of mirtles.

Seeds. The four greater and the four lesser cold seeds, mirtleberries, Barley.

Flowers. Of succory, red Roses, Cytines, or flowers of Pomegranats.

Woods. All the saunders.

Fruits. Barberries, Quinces, Pomegranats, Cherries, medlars, services,
strawberries, Citrons, all the mirabolans especially. Prunelles, currants,
Raspes.

Juices. Of the Leaves and Fruits aforesaid; also Acacia, Hypocistis.

Gums. Camphier, adding Binders with it. Camphier taken in any considerable
quantity offends the Stomach and Head, especially if nothing be joined with it,
Faculties of Camphier.
to allay that fumous acrimony wherewith it is fraught, which is so searching
and fiery, that it rather dissolves Nature with the heat, then cools otherwise
then by accident being outwardly applied.

Sea things. Coral.

Waters. Of Roses, Plantain. Of Quinces, Brambleberries, Succory.

Syrups. Of Verjuice, of the juice of sorrel, of Quinces, Pomeg^anats, mirtles,
rob of Quinces, juice of O^anges.

Preserves. Cherries, Quinces, Currants, Barberries, sour Grapes preserved.
Oranges and Lemons preserved without their peels, Goos-berries, Raspes.

Species. Diatrion sanralon, Diarrhodon abbatis, Diamargariton frigidum.

Troschischs. Of Camphier, Spodium, Maudlins. Trosch. of Saunders, Barbaries.

External Coolers.
Oil of Mastick wood, of Quinces, of Mirtles, of Roses, omphacine.

Ointments. Unguentum Rosatum, Orange flower ointment, Unguentum sumach.

KILLERS of WORMS.
Called by the Latins Vermes necantia, by the Greeks (...).
THose are called Killers of Worms, which the Worms abhor, either for some
manifest quality; as sharpness, bitterness, sowrnesse, which tastes are
loathsome to them: or else such as by an occult quality are destructive to them.
Where note, that without a Fever we may use the hotter sort, but in a Fever,
them that are less hot, i. e. sour ones; or else things mixed with such.

Roots. Of Birthwort, Swallow-wort, Alkanet, Snakeweed, white Dittany, Gentian
the greater, Crosswort, Fearn male and female, Carline Thistle; Enulacampain,
Devilsbit, Tormentil, Zedoary, Rubarb, Madder, Burdock, Butterbur.

Barks. Of the roots of Mulberries, Capers.

Leaves. Of Wormwood, (Pontic and sea wormwood) Time, Mints, Rue, Dandelion,
Polly, Asarina of Matthiolus, Savine, Horehound, Calamint, Tansie, Arsmart,
Peach leaves, Carduus benedictus, Goats rue.

Flowers. Of Century the less, Hops, Hysop.

Seeds. Wormseed, Lupines, of Coleworts, Corianders prepared, Purslane,
Citrons, Oranges, Grach, Dill, Hedisarum or French Honysuckle,
Pseudomelanthium, or St Katherine flower, Nigella or Fennel flower, Cresses,
garden and wild Rocket, of Turnips, Lovage, Hops, Sorrel, Hemp, Leeks,
Barberries.

Gums. Of Juniper or Vernish, Myrrh, which is a Rosin.

Animals. Shavings of Hearts horn and Ivory, powder of earth Worms, the cochal
bone of an Ox, Unicorns horn.

Earths. Bole armoniack, Terra sigillata.

Minerals. Brimstone, salt Peeter, Quicksilver given to s. Pewter filed small.

Sea things. Coralline, red Coral. Amber.

Juices. Of the aforesaid things, of Limons, Purslane, Verjuice.

Waters. Of Wormwood, Gentian, Grass, Purslane, sea Radish, Perwinkle, Rue,
Mints, of the flowers of Sloe tree, Endive, Succory.

Condites. Orange and Citron peels.

Syrups. Of Wormwood, Endive, Succory, of the juices of Citrons, Oranges,
Barberries, Currants, Sorrel, Bizantinus. Syrup of Succory with Rubarb, Syrup of
Peach flowers, of the juice of St. John's wort, of wood Sorrel, Syrup of Rubarb
augustan, Syrup of Reses solutive with Hellebore, Syrup of the juice of
Scordium.

Conserves. Of Peach flowers, Clovegilly flowers, Orange and Citron flowers.

Oils. Of Olives, bitter Almonds, Peach kernels, of Vitriol, one, two, or three
drops.

Confections. Treacle, Mithridate. Treaclediatessaron, London Treacle,
Diascordium, confect. de Hyacinth, Elect. Amarum, Magistrale utrumque.

Powders. Diaspoliticum, Diacalaminth compound, Dialacca, Purging powders,
Diaturbith cum Rhabarbaro, Warwick powder, Mercurius dulcis: Salts of Wormwood,
Centory, Broom, etc.

External things.
Oils. Of Wormwood, Rue, Coloquintis, i. e. of Coloquitis infused in Oil, and
boiled; Oil of Bayberries. Oil of Myrrh, Savine, Sicionium.

Ointments. Unguentum de Arthanita, Ointment for the Worms of the Augustan
Physicians; Gall applied to the Navil, or anointed on the Belly. The Ointment
called in the London shops Vnguentum amarum, or the bitter Ointment, is worth
them all.

Note, that the chemical Oils of any of the aforesaid simples, are used both
inward and outward, if there be no Fever.

DISCUSSERS of WIND.
Called by the Latins Dicutientia, and Sarminativa: by the Greeks (...).
THose simples are so called which are of the like nature with the
Diaphoreticks before mentioned: they differ not in faculty, but in the
intention and use. The Use of these is in pains of the Chollick, and griefs of
the Womb.

Roots. Of Angelica, Galingale, Masterwort, Indian spikenard.

Barks. Of Oranges, special in curing and preserving from the Chollick.

Leaves. Of Bays, Calamint, wild Marjoram, Dill, Majoram, savory, Rue,
Pennyrial, Hysop, mint, Bazil, Time, wild Time.

Seeds. Of Annise, Fennel, Carraways, Cunimin, Daucus, Bishopsweed, Parsley,
Agnus castus, Angelica, Oranges, Citrons.

Flowers. Of Camomile, Centory the less; for Wind in the short Ribs Region.

Fruits. Bayberries appropriated to pains of the Cholick and Womb, Junipe^
berries.

Spices. Mace, saffron, Cloves, Ginger, Cinnamon, Pepper.

Animals. Castor. Wolf, guts dried.

Waters. Of Cinnamon, Aqua vitae, and Waters of the Leaves aforesaid.

Distilled Oils. Of Anniseed, F^nnel seed, Carraways, and Camomile, which is
the best.

Electuaries. Of Bayberries, Treacle, Treaclediatessaron to i. in white Wine.

Species. Diacumini, Diagalingal, of Rosata novella.

External things.
Oils. Of Wormwood, Dill, Rue, Mints, Bays, oil made by infusion of the seeds
and flowers of Agnus castus; this is admirable in the Colic.

Plaster of Mellilate, Cataplasms and Bags made of the aforesaid Leaves,
seeds, flowers, are most profitable in the Colic.

A great Cupping glass with much flame set upon the tumisied place, and in the
Colic applied to the Navil, it eases pain as it were an enchantment, as
Galen affirms.

Hepaticks, or Medicines for the Liver: called by the Latins and Greeks
Hepatica.
THey are so called, which correct the distemper of the Liver, and hinder its
obstructions, to which it is very apt; or else which help it when it is come to
pass, and withal do a little bind its substance, that the spirit and heat of
the Liver, as of a principal part, may be preserved. Such are those that cut
and cleanse without vehement heat, and that are withal somewhat binding. These
also are either hot or cold; internal or external.

The hot internal.
Roots. Of Cypress, Enulacampain, Calamus aromaticus, Rubarb, sulpherwort.
Sharpdock Roots.

Leaves. Of Wormwood, Agrimony, Germander, field Cypress, Fumitory, Hops,
white Horehound, Mints, Bettony, squinant, Rosemary.

Seeds. The four greater hot seeds.

Flowers. Of Rosemary, Century the less, Spikenard.

Spices. Cloves, Ginger, Nutmegs.

Fruits. Fistick nuts, Raisins.

Waters distilled of the aforesaid-Leaves and flowers.

Syrups. Of Wormwood, Agrimony, Bettony, Byzantinus, of Fumitory, Mints, of the
2. and 5. Roots.

Condites. Acorus, Walnuts, Nutmegs. Eringo Roots, stalks of Burdocks.

Confections. Treacle, Methridate, Diacrocuma.

Conserves. Of the flowers of Rosemary, Sage, Wormwood, Enulacampain.

Species and Powders. Aromaticum rosatum, Diarrhodon abbatis, Laetificans
Galeni. Dialacca.

Troschischs. Of Wormwood, Maudlins, Dialacca, rubarb.

External hot things.
Oils. Of Wormwood, Spikenard, Mastick, Mints, Nutmegs by expression. Of Myrrh
per deliquium, of bitter Almonds.

Ointments. Dialthea, Martiatum, and of Mostick; Cataplasms of the aforesaid
Herbs and Seeds, with Wine.

Cooling Hepatical Medicines.
All those things that are contained in the Table of the cooling stomachical
things, may also be reckoned of this number amongst the coolers of the Liver;
to which add these following, which are less agreeable to the stomach, but
very profitable for the Liver.

Roots. Of Kneeholm, Sparagrasse.

Leaves. Of Agrimony, Strawberries, Ducks meat, Grass.

Seeds. Of winter Cherries.

Flowers. Violets.

Waters. Of Agrimony.

Syrups. Byzantinus, of the 2. and 5. opening Roots, where there be lasting
Obstructions.

External.
Oils. Of Roses, Omphacine, or of unripe Olives, of water Lillies.

Ointments. Unguentum Rosatum, Refrigerans Galeni, Ceratum santalinum.

Epithemes of the distilled Waters and Spices is most usual.

Splenetick things: by the Latins Splenetica: by the Greeks (...).
THese are of the same kind as the hepaticall medicines, according to Galen;
only they are more powerfully attenuating and opening, and less binding, by
reason of the grosenesse of the excrements of the spleen; They are two fold,
hot, for natural melancholy, and cold, for the correcting of burnt choler.

The Hot.
See the Table of the preparers of natural melancholy, to which add these
following.

Roots of both one thing, see Seroderus.
Calamus Aromaticus, Birthwort, asarum, bryony, radishes, the true both one
thing, see Seroderus.
Acorus these are two several plants.
, or these are two several plants.
galangall the greater, Ireos, squils, hops.

Leaves of betony, calamint, St. John's wort, Germander, Rue, Pennyroyall.

Seeds of Madder, Ash keys.

Fruits. Ivv berrynes.

Spices. Saffron, Cinnamon.

Minerals. Steel prepared. Chymicals. Tartar vitriolated, cream of Tartar,
Tartarus chalibeatus, Crocus martis,.

Liquors. Vinegar of squils, spirit of wine tartarisated, lie of the ashes of
tamariske and broom,.

Syrups. Oxymel simple, and of squils, syrup of ammoniack, of epithimum,.

Conserves of the flowers of tamarisk, of broom.

Condites. The roots of Acorus condited.

Species. Diacurcuma, Dialacca.

Distilled oils of Cummin, Cinnamon, Vitriol, of the barks of citrons, of
tartar by deliquium.

The External are
Oils of Capers, tamarisk, wall flowers, rue, bitter almons.

Unguents. de Althea. Vng. splanchnicum, and Vng. splanchnicum magistrale,
ointment of the juyces, commonly called vng. e succis.

Emplasters. de mucilaginibus, Diachilon cum gummis, de ammoniaco, and the
compound plaster of Melilot,. And other magisteriall ointments, wherein gum
ammoniack, bdellium, and the powders of Ireos, Asarabeck and sowbread, should
be prescribed, and diverse other forms, made for present use of the aforesaid
things, especially rue, cresses, nettles, mustard, centaury the less, asarum
and sowbread.

Cold splenetick things.
These are to be sought out of the Table of the attenuaters of choler, which
also are convenient for burnt choler gathered in the spleen, to which add
narrow leaved docks, and these external, topicall things.

Oils of violets, water lillies, Unguents refrigerans Galeni. ointment of
roses, cerecloath of saunders, sharp vinegar, juice of hemlock, vinegar of
hemlock.

Animadversion.
Sweet things by themselves are hurtful to the spleen, but added with other
things are good conveighers: Pythagoras when he was scandald by a certain
fellow, recited this metaphorically, sharp and bitter things help them that are
splenetick, but sweet things hurt them. And this is now become a practical
rule.

Nephriticall things i. e. Medicines appropriated to the reins or kidneys: by
the Latins Nephritica: id in etiam Gre^e, ut etiam (...).
NEphriticall medicines are three fold, divided according to the structure,
office, and peculiar affections of the reins to which they are subject. 1
Lenifiers, the use of which in the scalinesse and roughness of the reins, as
also in the heat and sharpness of the Urine. 2 Cleansers, the use of which is
in the obstruction or suppression of the Urine, either by the stone,
mucilaginons matter, or sand, these are comprehended under the Diuretics. 3
Lithontripticks or breakers of the stone, the use of which is in crumbling, and
diminishing the stone, that it may the more easily be expelled. The cleansers
are to be sought in the Table of the Diuretics, with which they agree, only
there they have a more general use, here a particular one, wherefore I shall
here only recite, the lenifiers and the Lithontripticks.

The Lenifiers.
Roots of marshmallows, liquerish, grass, sparagus; eringoes.

Leaves of Plantain, common maiden hair, Pellitory, sorrel, lettice, mallows,
water lillies, purslain, sowthistle.

Seeds of marsh-mallowes, cotton, mallows, flax, fenugreek, four greater and
four lesser cold seeds, of plantain, fleawort, white poppy.

^lowers of violets, chamomill, water lillies, red poppyes.

Fruits. Sweet almons, jujubes, sebestens, fistick nuts, raysins, sweet
prunes, dry figs, apples.

Gums. Tragant, of the bitter almon tree, cherry tree, camphere.

Animals. Butter, Milk, Whey.

Juyces of Licorice, almon milk, barley cream.

Chymicall things. Sure these are not lenifiers.
spirit of vitriol, sal Sure these are not lenifiers.
prunellae.

Waters of the leaves in the table aforesaid.

Syrups of violets, jujubes, water lillies, apples, of marsh-mallowes, by
Fernelius. sir. de mucilaginibus, of water lillies compound.

Conserves of violets, water lillies, mallow flowers,.

Condited things. Lettice stalks condited, the flesh of goards and melons
condited.

Species of diatragacanthum frigidum, dia penidi^m, pulvis hali. troschisch.
gordonii, trosch. of saunders, trosch. of camphere, bechicinigri, alkekengy:
Electuaries somewhat purging, Diacatholicon, Lenitive elect. passularum, pulp
of Cassia: altering Electuaries, Diaspermaton, antidotus analeptica,.

Oils of sweet almons, camphere, Vnguentum potabile.

External Lenifiers.
Oils. Violets, water lillies, of poplars, oil of wall flowers, chamomill,
^asmine,.

Unguents. Ointment of roses, refrigerans Galeni, of orange flowers, anodynum,
dialthea, resumptivum,.

Lython tripticks, o^ breakers of the stone.
SOme medicines that break the stone, do it by a manifest quality, of cutting
and cleansing without any extraordinary heat, as Galen, lib. 5. simpl. c. 13.
does affirm; for such medicines do easily pass through narrow exile passages
very far, and so by insinuating it self, and peircing all the parts dissolve
its continuity; but too much beat does the more concoct and harden the stone
that is already gathered together; Others do by their asperity, as it were
shave and scale the superficies, and by that means diminish the stone: Others
are thought to do the same by an occult property, to which the Author of that
treatise of the knowing and curing the affections of the reins, gives little
confidence; but be they as they will I will here propound the matter of them
all that are used by authors in breaking the stone, except only those that are
to be found among the Diuretics, which are to be joined with these following,
as the use of them shall require, where note that those that are marked with a
star are the most excellent.

Roots of Birthwort, By Pliny's description it is teasels, by others it is
englished corn marigold, or chrysanthemum.
damasonium, elecampain, dropwort, galingale, acorus, bastard rubard, Ireos,
lovage, saxifrage, burnet, pyony, sea radish, brambles, nettles, squils.

Leaves of southernwood, hares ear, the capillary herbs, germander, field
cipres, coleworts, celtick, hard Roman chamomil, ground Ivy, wild marjerome,
polly, hyssop, fluellen, oak and willow leaves, scordium, all seed, teasel,
golden rod, dead nettle of Fuchsius, for the stone in the bladder.

Barks of Acorns, the middle bark of hazell.

Flowers of larkespare.

Seeds of dill, ca^away, cummins, silver montan, bishops weed, macedonian
parsley, corianders, sampier; I think he means that by tretamarina, kneeholm,
bazill, radish, St. John's wort, ladies thistle, ash, nigella, cresses, burnet,
lupines, broom, small burdock.

Fruits. bay berryes, peach kernels, Ivy berries, the spongy, dog or wild
rose. Juniper berries.

Spices. Ginger, lignum, aloes, red saunders, nutmegs, mace, cloves, p^^pe,
carpobalsamum or balsam berries, cubebs, spike, squinant, saffron, which also
add a graceful relish to the medicines.

Gums of cherry-trees, plum-trees, wallnuts, vinces, arabic, tragant, elemi,
Olibanum, bdellium.

Rosins of the Larch Tree, Fur Tree, true Turpentine.

Animals. blood of a Goat prepared, taken to i. in wine, hares blood.

Ashes of earthworms, of hedge hogs, of an asses liver, feathers of wild
pigeons, of a whole hare burnt, with the skin, flesh and hair, or else the
skin of it daubed with its blood burnt, reed sparrowes burnt, ashes of
scorpions, cheese logges or wood-lice, or monks pease, beetles, hares kidnyes,
powders of a Man's skull, of the warts and hoofes of horses, of the cocall
bones of a hare, Ivory, pikes jaw, craw fish, the stoppings of snailes shells in
the winter,, egg shells, crabs eyes, mouse dung, stones voyded by Urine from a
man, kings fishers burnt, 3 Dioscorid. the stones found in the gall of an Ox.

Stones. Lincis, Nephriticus, of sponges, judaicus, cristall prepared. Irish
clat.

Sea things. Amber. Earths. Ochre.

Minerals. the ashes of glass burnt.

Juyces. Vinegar allayed with water, natural vitriolated waters, juice of sour
oranges, and lemons, winter cherryes, of yarrow, of fennel.

Distilled waters. Pellitory, Mallows, marshmallowes, broom flowers, bean
stalks, restharrow or chammock, saxifrage, sparagus, parsley, fennel, toad flax,
then which these following are more effectual, water parsnep of Cratena,
sampier, radishes, Ivy berries, winter cherries, chamomill, vervain, peach
kernels, larch turpentine.

Oils of ^eech kernels, cherry kernels, of bitter almons by expression, given
to i. oil of vitriol.

Alimentary things.
Radishes eaten with vinegar, sea radish bruised with almons for a confection,
roots of parsley boiled, the tops of sparowgusse and hops, water, parsnep,
ladismocks, and watercresses eaten in a sallet with vinegar, sampler pickled,
lemons, hips, boiled with wine, and made into a confection or conserve, hairs
flesh, red sparrowes, especially the wagging rump.

Cystick medicines, called by the Latins vesicae appropriata, by the Greeks
(...).
THese are such medicines as are appropriated to the bladder; now the same
things that are good in the affections of the reins, are also profitable for
the bladder; only the situation of the blader (as being more distant) requires
the stronger sort of them, least their virtues should be dissipated before they
could penetrate so far; But more especially in its hot distemper, or the heat
of the urine, see for those things which cool the liver and lenifie the reins;
because the Urine is made sharp either by the hot distemper of the liver or the
reins.

INCREASERS of SEED: called by the Latins Semen generantia, by the Greeks
(...).
THose things increase seed properly that are either nourishments of good
juice, or medicines temperate in heat and moisture, and those improperly, which
affect it by stimulating the seed, or exciting venerall thoughts (of which in
its place) such are those things that are sharp and flatulent.

Roots of Eringoes, slatirions, turnips, all eatable bulbous roots, of
sparagus, rocket, potatoes, galingall, green ginger, navew, Parsneps, Skirrets.

Leaves of rocket, clary, cresses, crowgarlick, The sprouts of Sparagus,.

Seeds of red vetches, beans, rocket, navew, nettles, kidney bean, ash seed,
linseed.

Fruits. Pine nuts, fistick nuts, kernels of Indian or Coconuts, Artichoakes,
both the bottom and stalks.

Animals. The pisle of a bull or red dear, scincis, musk, civ^t, cocks stones,
sparrows b^ines, oysters. Eggs, especially those of the goose, pheasant and
partridg, emets or pismires, especially made into aqua magnanimitatis distilled
with honey, spice and wine.

Spices. Saffron, pepper, nutmeg, cloves.

Sea things. Amber greece taken in a rear egg.

Condites. the roots of satirions, eringoe^, meats condited, the confection
diasatirion taken to i. or ii. in muskadine after supper.

Note that many things that are hot may be referred to this Classis, as also
salt things, which provoke lust by making the seed the thinner, not by
increasing it; hither may be referred the use of cantharides, which provoke it
even to decoction of blood and exulceration.

Extinguishers of seed or allayers of blood: called by the Latins Semen
extinguentia, by the Greeks (...).
THey are either very cooling, or discussing; of the first sort are water
Lillies, Lettice, Camphere, but this may better be referred to the latter, as
has been before hinted at, for it heats, dryes, attenuates, rarifies and
discusseth. purslane, hemlock, etc. the latter sort are agnus castus, rue,
mints, dill-seed, and the seed of agnus castus, frankincense, syrrup of
Nimphea. of agnus castus, the troschisck of agnus castus, externally, oil of
rue, water lillies, anointed outwardly on perineum, allay the too much turgency
of the instrument.

Histericall medicines: called by the Latins Histerica: by the Greeks idem,
usually Womb medicines.
THese Medicines so called, from the intention or end they are directed to,
some are emptiers of the womb, viz. those which move the courses, expel the
birth and afterbith, and cleanse the womb from all dreggy humors: Others are
binders staying the immoderate flux of the courses; and lastly others are
strengthners, which preserve its own proper temper and natural heat; The use
of which is in helping the actions of the womb, viz. conception, or the child,
(from whence they are called helpers of conception, and preservers of the
child, hither also are reduced those which bind) or else in curing the
symptoms, which disturb the actions of the womb, or of the whole body, viz. in
appeasing fits of the mother.

Movers of the Courses: called by the Latins Menses moventia, by the Greeks
(...).
THey are called Movers of the Courses, either properly or improperly, they are
properly movers of the courses, which open the obstruction of the veins of the
womb, and bring blood to it, they are hot either in the second or third degree,
and dry in the first or second, almost (...) height, not absolutely of a thin
substance, but moderatly gross, least their virtue should be dissipated in the
passage; among which sort those are the most effectual which have a
bitterness mixed with sharpness: Those that improperly move the courses, are
the Diuretics, which attenuate and melt a gross blood, that at the time of
the courses, it may flow the more plentifully; but these ought not to be used
alone, (because by the drawing away of the watrishnesse of the blood, the blood
afterward becomes grosser, by which means the courses stop,) but used with
the appropriated things: This following discourse shall be only of them that
properly move the courses, the stronger of which do a so expel the birth and
after birth: the matter of them is this following.

Roots of Cocco pits, Birthwort, Asarum, Briony, Bilinguis, Ciperus, Sowbread,
Centanry the less, Dittany, Gentian, of yellow flags, Ireos, Bays, Lillies,
Pionies, siivermontan Valeri.

Leaves of Mugwort, Souchernwood, I fear it rather stays them, Garden Daysies,
Maiden hair, Motherwort, a spoonful of the powder provokes the birth,
Lillies, Feaverfew, Wood bine, Marjerome, baume, Wild mints, Mercury, Bazill,
wild Marjerome, mountan polly, horehound, yellow Maiden hair, Savin, Clary,
Scordium, water-parsnep; for the birth, Sage, Rue, sweet trefoile.

Seeds of Agnus Castus, Amomum, Bishopsweed, Bazill, Nigella, Pyony, Rue.

Flowers of Southernwood, Marygolds, Centaury the less, St. John's wort, wall
flowers dried, Saffron, for the afterbirth, Cadings of a walnut-Tree ( viz the
long flowery tassels, of the wallnut-Tree, given in powder to i. is a famous
remedy for the fits of the mother) of Feaverfew, Spikenard. Chamomill.

Gums. Assa fetida, Bdellium, Galbanum, myrh, Opopanax, Sagapene, Storax
calamita.

All Spices. Especially Saffron and Cinnamon.

Animals. Hawks or Faulkons dung given to i. with wine, powder of horse
stones, cut in slices, washed in wine and dried, given to i. in hippocrasse, a
turtle dove roasted, the belly stuffed with Cinnamon, bay and juniper berries,
eaten every other day before the time of lying in, the afterbirth of an Ewe
dried and given in powder.

Juice of Scordium given to ss. with Saffron, to provoke the birth.

Minerals. Native Borax is excellent to provoke the birth, given to i. in
liquor.

Waters of the aforesaid herbs, which are usual in the shops, Briony water
compound.

Syrups of Mugwort, horehound, Bettony, Of the juice of St. John's wort, of
Mercury, of the juice of Scordium.

Distilled oils of Castor, Savin, Cinnamon, myrrh. Amb^r, Mugwort, Rue,
Turpentine, Sulphur.

Trosc^iscks of Myrrh, to i. in the form of pills. Troschischi Hysterici.

External things.
Oils of Lillies, Chamomill, Wall flowers.

Stones. The stone Aetites tied to the thigh, provokes the birth, so does a
Loadstone held in the left hand.

The Gall of an Ox, pulp or powder of a wild Cowcumber, and Coloquintis, in
Pessaries.

Animals. Thee hoof of an Ass, fumed, provokes the birth and afterbirth.

Stoppers of the Courses.
BEcause these are very near the same, with the binders, expounded above in the
first Book, Part. 1. Sect. 3. therefore the matter for such medicines is to be
sought in the Table of Astringents or Binders.

Strengtheners of the Womb.
Roots of Snakeweed, Calamus Aromaticus, Costus, Cyperus, Galingall.

Leaves of Bettony, Marjerome, Sage, which two are eminent, Rosemary, Baume,
Nigella.

Flowers of Marjerome, Rosemary, Sage.

Fruits. Juniper Berries, Bay Berries.

Animal excrements. Musk, Civet, Ivory.

Sea things. Amber, Coral, Ambergreece, Mother of pearl.

Rosins. Storax, Benzoin, Frankincense, Mastick.

Spices. Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Spikenard, lignum Aloes.

Waters of Bettony, Marjerom, Baume, Sage.

Syrups of Bettony, Baulme.

Oils of Amber, Cloves, Mace, Nutmeg.

Condites. Acorus condited, Walnuts and Nutmegs preserved, Myrobalans, and
Satirion roots condited.

Opiates. Triphera magna, both with and without Opium, Treacle, Methridate:
Diascordium, Alchermes, Diacinnomomum, Tripheia masor.

Species. Aromaticum rosatum, Diambra, Diamoscum: Species diacurcuma, Dialacca,
Diagalanga, Diacalaminth, Dianisum.

External things.
Oils of Nutmeg by expression, of Nard, of myrtles: Oil of Costus, Mints,
Mastick, Quinces, Castor, of St. John's wort, Moschaeleum.

Ointments. Vnguentum comitissae, Martiatum, Mastichinum, Sumach.

Plasters. Promatrice, ad herniam, of mastick, Cerecloath of Galbanum, Emplast.
Caesaris. de crusta panis, Diaphaenicum utrumque Metropropiolicon. Note that to
the best of these, some add the more strengthening provokers of the courses.

THE SECOND BOOK. THE FOVRTH SECTION. Of the Remedies of the LIMBS.
Arthriticall things, or things appropriated to the joints, Latin and Greek
called Arthritica.
THey are called Arthriticall medicines which are destined to the strengthening
of the sinewey and membranous parts, of which the joints are composed. The Use
of which is both to prevent and cure the several sorts of the Gout.

They are twofold, Internal and External; the matter of the internal things
is the same with the cephalicall things, whether you understand this of the hot
cephalicks in a cold defluxion, or of the cold ones where it proceeds from a
hot cause; for there is the same reason for the sinews as for the head; but
particularly these following are appropriated to the joints.

External or topicall medicines for the joints are useful either in the
beginning of the Gout as to mitigate both the heat and pain; or else in the end
to dissipate the relics of the impacted matter, least it turn to a stony
indissoluble hardness. The matter of each particular is this.

The chief Arthritical internal Medicines.
Roots. Of Achorus, Elecampain, Ireos, Cinquefoil.

Leaves. Of Mullen, Cowslips, field Cypress, Calamint, Gentory the less, St
John's wort, Bettony, Sage.

Woods. Sassaphras, which is excellent.

Flowers. Of red Roses. Sage, Rosemary, Stechados.

Animals. Castor, ashes of Hearts horn, a Man's skull.

Sea things. red Coral burnt.

Spices. Indian Spikenard.

Rosins. Of all sorts, especially Turpentine.

Juices. Opopanax.

Conserves. Of field Cypress, in a cold Cause; of red Roses in a hot Cause.

External things mitigating the heat and pain.
Leaves. Of Nightshade, Plantain, marsh Mallows, Henbane, both sorts of
Housleek, Mallows, Pellitory, Danewort, Elder, Ducks meat.

Flowers. Of Roses.

Juices. Vinegar, Phlegma, or insipid water of Vitriol, whites of Eggs, Vinegar
with water, Sal Prunellae dissolved in red Poppy water.

Gums. Camphier.

Mucilages. Of the seed of Fleawort and Quinces. of marsh Mallow roots, Pulp of
Cassia.

Waters. Of Roses, Nightshade, Plantain, red Poppy.

Oils. Of Violets, water Lillies, Roses, Oil of Man's blood, called the Elixar
of Man.

Ointments. Unguent of Roses, Populeon.

External things dissipating the relicts of the Humors and pain.
Roots. Of Elecampain, Sowbread, Briony, Coloquintis.

Leaves. Of Mullen, Cowslips, field Cypress, Calamint, Cresses, Centory the
less, Nepe, Pennyroial, Danewort, St John's wort.

Rosins. Mastick, Bdellium, Turpentine.

Rather Roots.
Fruits. Hermodactils.

Thickened Juices. Ammoniack, Opopanax, Fuphorbium.

Animals. Castor.

Fats. Of a Cat, Badger, Fox, Bear, Serpent.

Ointments. Martiatum, Dialthea.

Oils. Of Tiles, Castor, Turpentine, St John's wort, Honey, Wax, Ireos, Foxes,
Euphorbium, (which is to be used warily) and of Elder.

Plasters. Of Frogs of Vigo, of the Mucilages, Mellilote, Oxicrocum.

To these are numbered those which strengthen the Sinews; called by the Latins
Nervos Roborantia, by the Greeks (...).
Roots. Of Acorns, Eringo, Masterwort, Sulpherwort, or Hogs Fennel,
Rhaphontick, Costus.

Woods. Sassaphras, Misle of the Oak.

Leaves. Of field Cypress, Hysop, Lavender, Marjoram, Cowslips, Rosemary,
Sage, the three sorts of Spike, viz. Indian nard, Celtick and Italian, wild
Time, Goats marjoram.

Fruits. Anacardines, Pine nuts.

Berries. Of Juniper, Kermes. Bays.

Spices. Cinnamon, all the Peppers, Ginger, Mace, Nutmegs, Cloves, Cardamomes.

Rosins and Gums. Myrrh, Venice Turpentine, with the Powder of field Cypress,
Opopanax, Sagapene.

Animals. The Brain of a Hare roasted, Castor given to i. in Pills.

Conserves. Of Rosemary, Cowslips, Sage, Eringo, Bettony.

Confections. Treacle, Methridate, Confectio Anacardina. Diacorum.

Powders. Diagalanga Pleresarconticon. Dianthos, Diamoscum dulce, Pulvis
Antilyssus.

Waters. Of Lavender, Sage, Marjoram, Treacle water. Sp. of Lavender compound
of Matthias, Piony water compound, Aqua Imperialis, Spirit of Castor.

Syrups. Of Bettony compound, of Chamepitis, or field Cypress, of Staechados.

External strengthners of the Sinews.
Fats. Of Vipers, Foxes, Stags, Men.

Oils. Of Tiles, Wax, Camomile, St John's wort, earth Worms, Nutmeg by
expression, Turpentine, Foxes, Vipers, Costus, oil of Peeter, Dill, Ricininum,
of Rue. Of Mace by expression, oil of Amber chemical.

Baths. Those which are sulpherous, nitrose, bituminous, aluminous; and let the
drippings of these fall on the beginning of the Back bone: also the mud or
slime extracted from them, may be applied profitably to the part affected.

Grease. Of a Goose that drips from it whilst it is roasted, being filled with
Frankincense, Myrrh, Bdellium, Mummy, etc.

Aqua vitae poured on the part, helps much.

Fomentations and Bathings. Of Mugwort, Fleabane, Calamint, Rue, Camomile,
Sage, Dill, field Cypres, wild Marjoram, St John's wort, salt Peeter, common
Salt.

Cataplasms. Of the same.

Cold strengthners of the Sinews.
They are the same with the cold Cephalicks, or Head Medicines. To which add

Among the Seeds, Barley; among the Species, Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diatrion
santalon; and among the external things, Mucilage of Fleawort, Vine leaves,
Vinegar, Rose water, chalibeated water, and natural Iron Baths.

An APPENDIX of Remedies for BVRNINGS.
REmedies for Burnings, according to Fernelius, l. 6. M. M. cap. 20. are three
fold: Some ease the inflammation, and draw forth the fire: Others hinder the
rising of Pustles, and ease the pain: Others mitigate the ulcerated and
painful parts, and by moderately drying heal the sore.

Of the first sort are,
1. All things that are cold in the first degree, which extinguish the
inflammation, as are those Juices and Liquors, Water, Vinegar, Water with
Vinegar, white of an Egg, juice of Housleek, Lettuce, Nightshade, Endive,
Plantain, Purslane.

Distilled Waters of the aforesaid Herbs.

Earths. Any that is next hand, but chiefly the Cimolian, Bole armoniack
dissolved in any convenient juice, water, or oxycrat. i. e. water with vinegar,
and anointed on the place.

Minerals. Ceruse, Alum dissolved in water, or with the white of an Egg;
Dioscoride, used to anoint the place with writing Ink dissolved in water.

Gums. Camphier.

2. Some certain hot things that call out the fire; as,

Leaves of Cookoopits, Leeks rubbed on the place, Elder and Danewort applied in
the same manner.

Roots. Onions bruised with Salt, and laid on the Burn, the Root of Kingspear
boiled in Oil, and the juice anointed, helps both Chilblains and Burnings.

Of the second sort are these Remedies following.
Leaves. Of Privet, Sage, Mirtles, made into a Searcloth, or Salve, with Hogs
fat, and applied: also the same green stamped up with Hogs grease, and only
laid on; the leaves of Mallows and horned Poppy used the same way.

Glue mollified in warm water, Dioscord.

The Leaves of mircles burnt, and the ashes mixed with the white of an Egg.

Salt Peeter with oil of Roses, or oil of Eggs.

Waters. Of mullen, Plantain, Nightshade, Roses, adding sometimes red Saunders,
and a little Camphier.

The juice of Fennel and white Wine with cold water poured on the part that is
burnt.

Of the third sort are these.
Ointment of Lime washed, which is compounded, of Lime washed, and oil of
Roses, or Butter; adding other things as you please, as Ceruse, Camphier,
mucilages.

Oil of St John's wort with washed Lime, is effectual in any Burn, though of
Gunpowder.

Vnguentum album, of Rhasis, or of Ceruse. See more in Fernelius in the
aforesaid place, I have only added these as a finishing Complement to fill up
the empty pages.

Note, that without this methodical proceeding, I will undertake a Burn or
Scald may be healed only with the Ointment of Stramonium, or Thorn-apple,
described in Gerard's Herbal, in the Chapter of Stramonium; make two sorts of
that Ointment: one only of the Leaves and Apples bruised, boiled up with Hogs
grease: and another by adding a little Turpentine and Wax, as he there shows.
When the Burn or Scald is now made, apply the first for two days, till the
fire and inflammation be fetched out; then apply the other twice a day, till it
be whole: and if you see it fit to skin the sore, take Vnguentum rubeum
Desiccativum, or de Cerussa, and heal it up. With these any curable Burn will
be healed speedily and safely. Gerard healed one burned with Lightning. See his
own words in the aforesaid place.

GOD be Praised.
The Treatise or Tract of prescribing the forms of Remedies, contains two
Books: one of Internal Medicines Liquid: Apozemes. Juleps. Potions. Syrups.
Vomitories. Medicinal Wines. Emulsions. Almond Cream. Barley Cream Milk and
Whey. Mead. Sugared water and (...) Diet Drinks, Cock broth. Distilled
Restoratives. Broths.
Soft: Boles. Opiates. Lohochs. Preserves.
Solid: Paste royal or Morsels. Pandalcon. Marchpane and Pineolate. Tablets.
Pills. Troschischs. Powders.

another of External Medicines Common to many parts: Epithemes. Lotions.
Fomentations. Half Baths. Baths. Stoves. Embrochations. Liniments. Unguents,
Ointments. Searcloaths. Plasters. Spanadrape. Cataplasm. Rubifiers Deopax.
Vesicatory,
Sacculets.
Proper to certain parts: Frontals. Oxit redinum. Caps quilted. Collyriums.
Gargarisms. Apophlegmatisms. Dentifrices. Snifting Medicines. Suffumigations.
Perfumes. Scutes. Pessary. Nascale. Suppos^tory. Clister.




The Matter of PHYSIC is either Universal, respecting The Morbificall cause
offending in Qualityes, manifest, As in the first, Alterers. Second, as if in
Grosnesse, Attenuaters. Cutters.
Thinness, Thickners. Hardness, Mollifiers, Dissolvers of clotted things.
Clamminesse, Cleansers. Sharpness, Mitigaters.
Occult, are Alexipharmacals, or Resisters of Poison.

Quantity, are either Preparers of the Humors, as Digestives. of the Body, as
Openers.
Universal Evacuaters, as Purgers, Vomitories, Diuretics, Diaphoreticks.

Motion, and are in respect of the matter flowing; Thickners. part receiving;
Repellers and Emplaisticks. ways, by which it flows Intercepters, Binders.

Rest, which is to be evacuated either insensibly, by Discussers, Consumers.
Attracters by quality. manifest, occult, as extracters.

Watrishnes, by Blisterers. matter by Ripeners, Breakers of Imposthumes.



The chief heads of Discases which are either similar, as Distemper, which if
simple, it is cured by alterers. material, by emptiers and alterers.
Organical, which are either in the Streightness of the in sensible passages,
which requires Rarefiers; but in the insensible requires Openers.
Too much dilation of the Pores. insensible, requires Condensers or Thickners.
sensible, requires Binders.
Over-growing of the parts, as Stopping of the Cavities, by excrescence of
flesh, and are cured by Cathereticks. Exuberancy of the parts, either in
greatness or number, and are cured by Chyrurgery.

Continuity dissolved, and is either simple, and requires Agglutinaters, and
vulnerary things. Or Continuity dissolved, and is either with loss of the
substance of the part, and requires Sarcoticks and Epuloticks.
Symptoms that are most common, and most urgent, as Pain, to which we use
Anodynes, if not great. Narcoticks, if violent.
Over-watching, to which Hypnoticks, or sleepy Medicines. Bleeding, to which
stoppers of Blood. Swouning, to which Restorers of the spirits.

or particular, respecting Medicines dedicated to Head, which are either Brain:
To strengthen it, as Cephalicks. Purge it, as Errhines, Sneezing Powders,
Apophlegmatisms.

Eyes, as Opthalmicks, which are either Sharpners of Sight. Anodynes.
Repellers. Digesters. Cleansers.
Ears, as Oticks, or Ear Medicines. Teeth, as Odonticks, or Medicines for any
affection of the Teeth.
Breast, either for the Heart, as Cordials. Lungs, as Expectoraters. Alterers of
the Lungs.
Dugs, as encreasers of Milk. dryers up of Milk.

Belly, either to the Stomach, as Stomachical things. Intrals or Guts, as
Discussers of Wind. Killers of Worms.
Liver, as Hepatical Medicines. Spleen, as Spleneticall. Kidneys, as
Nephritical Medicines, which are either Lenifiers, Cleansers, or Breakers of
the Stone.
Bladder, as Cystical Medicines. Stones, as encreasers of Seed. diminishers of
Seed.
Womb, as Hysterical Medicines, which are either Strengthners, Purgers, as
movers of the Courses. stayers of the Courses.


Limbs and Joints, as Arthritical Medicines, internal, Hot, as the Cephalicks.
Cold, as the Cephalicks.
external, in the beginning as mitigaters of heat and pain. end of the Gout,
dissipaters of the relicts of the Humors imparted in the parts.






Place this Table at the end of the Book before the Index.

Here follows an Expository INDEX of such Words as I was fain to use in the
translating, for which our Language has not so fit Expressions that are
Intelligible as some might wish; so that to satisfy them that might think I
strove to speak strange Words, as some Novices use, to show themselves more
then they are: I have given an Exposition to make every word that is innovated
by Me (and somewhat more) intelligible, if they have recourse to this TABLE, as
they read and find words not facile to them.
A
ABbreviation, A shortning.

Abscessus, a parting away of an Humor after a disease; converted into a
Swelling, or such like, into some other place:

Absolete, out of use.

Accumulated, gathered together, or heaped up.

Acquisite, obtained by use, or otherwise, not natural.

Active qualities. See Qualities.

Acuated, made sharp, or more violent in working.

Alchol, a fine Powder.

Alexipharmacal,

Alexiterial, both signify Medicines resisting the Plague and Poisons.

Ana, of each alike.

Alluminous, having Alium in it.

Analepticks, Restoratives.

Anastomaticks, openers of the Orifices of the Veins.

Anodynes, casing pain.

Antidote, a Medicine against Poison.

Anus, the Fundament.

Appropriate, convenient and particularly fit for.

Apozem. See the other Index of the Leaves.

Aromatizing, spicing, or seasoning with spices.

Arthritical, belonging to the Joints.

Ascarides, Worms in the Fundament gut.

Asthma, a difficulty of Breathing

Astringent, binding.

B
B. M. Balnco Mariae, or a distilling by setting the Still in water boiling.

Balaustines, Flowers of the wild Pomegranate.

Basis, a fundamental, or chief thing in the composition; that that gives the
ruling quality.

Bechical, purging the breast by coughing.

Bituminous's having Bitumen in it, which is a fat sulpherous substance arising
out of the earth.

Bulbous, knobby, as any knobby Roots, as Turnips, Onions, etc. are buibaus
Roots.

C
Cacochymical, full of ill Humors.

Carthamus. See in the other Index.

Caruncles, excrescences of flesh in sore parts.

Cathartick, purging, or a purger.

Chalibealed, properly that has steel quenched in it.

Cholagogne, that purges Choler.

Chranical, lasting long.

Citines, the Flowers of manured Pomegranats.

Concrete, grown together, or hardened.

Concretion, such a hardening.

Corroborate, strengthen.

Coronary, used in garlands.

Costice, bound in belly.

Crust causing Medicines: See the other Index in Escaroticks.

Cute, Wine boiled to the thickness of Honey.

D
Decocted, boiled.

Digestives, Medicines that reduce Humors or parts to a good condition, either
by concocting or discussing that which is noxious.

Diuretics, provokers of Urine.

E
Eminency. in this book it signifies the height of liquor above the matter it is
poured to.

Emplasticks. See the other Index.

Energy, vigor, virtue, force.

Epicerasticks, mitigaters of Acrimony.

Epicrasis, it is a sort of gentle purging, often repeated in weak bodies, and
that are full of Humors, yet cannot suffer them to be purged out strongly.

Epuloticks, Medicines that close and skin a Wound, or join the scar.

Equivalent, here it is often used for such things as may serve turn in stead
of others that are harder to be gotten. Any thing of like virtues and substance.

Eradicate, to root out.

Erisipelas, a fiery hot inflammation called S. Anthonies fire.

Expectorate, to cough up any thing out of the Lungs.

F
Factitious, made by art.

Ferment, any thing that sets other mixtures a working together, as Yest
does Beer.

Fermentation, such a working together.

Fe^id, stinking, ill sented.

Fra^ulent, windy, breeding windiness.

Friability, an aptness to break or beat to powder:

Function, the same that Faculties.

G
Gonorrhea, a disease called the running of the Reins.

H
Hectical, inclining to, or sick of a Hectic Fever.

Hepatical, appropriated or belonging to the Liver.

Hydragogue, a purger of wartish Humors.

I
i. e. that is to say.

Impregnated, fraught with the virtues of any thing.

Imbibing, drawing forth, or drinking in the virtues of any Medicine.

Imminent, near at hand, ready to happen.

Incorp^rate, to mix thoroughly those things that are to be mixed, that they may
seem as one body.

Indication, that reason of the mind in the Physician that persuades him what
is to be done in the curing of the sick: You may call it a direct on taken
either from the cause, the Disease, symptoms, or circumstances about the sick.

Insipid, without taste.

Ironed, having Iron quenched or steeped in it, or otherwise naturally infected
with Iron.

L
Lenifie, sometimes it is taken for to make smooth, soft or gentle, a part that
is rough, hard or stubborn: sometimes to mitigate the sharpness of Humors,
and ease pains.

M
Macerated, steeped.

Magisterial, a prescription of the Physician, invented peculiarly for his
present purpose: any Composition that is not usually sold in the shops.

Materia Medica, the latter of these Books so called: sometimes also named in
the first Book by the name of the Magazeen Physical.

Me^d, a drink of Honey and water. See the Index.

Melanugogue, a purger of Melancholy.

Minorative, those purges that are given before preparation of the Body, are
usually called a Minorative, because it is given to diminish the Humors, least
being copious, when attenuated by preparation, they should be apt to move to
some ill purpose, or stir up an Hyper catharsis, or excess of the working of
the Physic that is after prescribed.

Modern, of late times.

Mollisie, to soften or make gentle.

Morbifical, increasing or breeding the Disease.

Mucilage, a Jelly stuff, as it were, drawn out of some Seeds and Roots by
much boiling, but it should be such as are only of a slimy nature. Also the
dissolving of Gum Tragant and Arabic is usually called a Muc^lag^.

Mucilaginous, of such a slimy substance as a Macil^ge is: or full of Mucilage.

Must, new Wine before it is purged, at the time of Vintage.

N
Narcoticks, Medicines that have a stupifying, benumming quality, forcing
violent sleep, driving away pain, not by mitigating the cause, but by dulling
the sense.

Nitrous, full of salt Peeter, or of such a like quality.

O
Odont^cks, Medicines appropriated to the Teeth.

Officinal, belonging to the shops, or usual in the Apothecaries shops.

Opthalmical, appropriated to the Eye.

Otick, things appropriated to the Ears.

P
Panchimagogue, a Medicine that purges all Humors together

Passive Qualities. See Qualities.

Pectoral, appropriated to the Breast.

Perincum, the distance ketween the Fundament and sitting place.

Phlegmagogue, a purger of Elegm.

Phtisick, the Consumption that comes with Ulceration of the Lungs.

Phtisical, inclining to, or sick of such a Disease.

Pincolate, a March^ane made of the kernels of Pine Nuts.

Premonitions, admonitions or directions, set at the beginning of any thing.

Pulse, usually taken for any kind of Grain that grows in cods, as Pease,
Beans, Vetches, etc.

Q
q. s. or s. q. a sufficient quantity of any thing.

q. v. as much as you will.

Qualities are either First, Second, or Third: Manifest, or O cult: Active, or
Passive
Mention of all these is diverse times used.

The first Qualities are counted those obvious ones that we call Heat,
Coldness, Moisture, Dryness.

The second are Qualities arising from the former, through a peculiar mixture
of substances, as softness, hardness, thickness, thinness, saltness,
sweetness, cleansing, daubing: cutting, making clammy; attenuating making
gross; opening, stopping; making slippery and rough; loosening, binding, etc.

The third Qualities are the proprieties of things to this or that part: as to
purge this or that Humor, strengthen this or that part; as Head, Breast, Heart,
Stomach, etc. or to be good for this or that Disease. These are occult
Qualities.

Manifest Qualities are usually meant of some of the aforesaid, viz. Qualities
for whose operation Reason can give it self a (...), at least, if not a plenary
satisfaction.

Occult Qualities are the same with the third Qualities; only of late by a new
distinction some distinguish those Medicines that resist Poison, Plague,
Infection, etc and call them Qualities arising from the form or whole substance
of the thing, and will have these only to be occult, and poisons their
opposites.

Active Qualities, are heat and cold.

Passive Qualities, are moisture and dryness.

R
, these two marks are the usual notes by which Physicians begin their Receipt,
and stand for Recipe, i.e. take.

S
s. q. or q. s. as much as is sufficient.

Sape. See Cute, it is the same.

Scope, the course that the Physician is to take in his applying of Remedies,
the way of martialing his Indications. See Indication.

Schirrus, a hard swelling of the Liver or Spleen, or any other place.

Schirrous, hard like such a swelling.

Septicks, corroding, poisonous Medicines. See the other Index.

Series, a scroll or roll, or numberless company of things, yet orderly.

Sincere, without mixture.

Somniferous, provoking sleep.

Splenetick, if it signify Medicines, it is such as are good for the Spleen:
if Persons, such as are troubled with the Spleen.

Splenetical, the same.

Stibiated, fraught with the virtue or strength of Stibium, i. e. usually
understood of the Vitrum Antimonii.

Stomachical, appropriated to the Stomach.

Sudorifick, a Medicine procuring Sweat.

Sudorifical, that has such a virtue.

Sulphur, it is usually spoken of Brimstone, and also very often taken for any
fatty, strong sented substance, either in the Earth, or in any Vegetable.

T
Tenesmus, a vain desire of going to stool, wherein the party voids little or
nothing.

Testudimate, a Marchpane made of Torto^se flesh and Almonds, etc.

Thoracical, appropriated to the Breast.

Torrified, that is, scorchingly dried by the fire, but not burnt.

Turund, a kind of a tent made of pith of Elder or Gentian root; sometimes of a
sponge dipped in any melted Plaster, and put into any very deep sore, that is
like to harden round about, or turn to a Fistula: also if any proud flesh arise
in any hollow sore, or in the Nostrils.

V
Vomitory, a Medicine to provoke vomit.

Vomitive, having such a quality.

BOOKS sold by Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in CORNHIL.
Wits Interpreter, the English Pernassus, or a sure Guide to those admirable
accomplishments, that complete English Gentry in the most acceptable
qualifications of Discourse or Writing: also the whole Mystery of those
pleasing Witchcrafts of Eloquence and Love are made easy, in the Art of
Reasoning, Theater of Courtship, Laborinth of Fancies, Love-Songs, Drollery,
The perfect Inditer of Letters, A la mode, by J. C.

The floating Island, a Tragi-Com^dy, acted before the King by the Students of
Christ Church, by Dr Stroud.

Paracelsus Occult Philosophy of the Mysteries of Nature, and his Secret of
Alchimy.

Illustrious Shepherdess, Imperious Brother: translated out of Spanish: A
famed Romance.

Short-hand-Writing mad^ most plain and easiest that ever was, newly published
by J: Rich, in short-writing.

Tectonicon, showing the exact measuring all manner of land, squares, timber,
stone-s^eeples, pillars, globes: also the making and use of the Carpenters
Rule, etc. fit to be known by all Surveyors, Land-meaters, Joynets, Carpenters
and Masons: by I: Diggs.

Heaven and Earth shaken, a Trearise showing how Kings and Princes, and their
Governments are turned and changed: by J: Davis Minister in Dover.

The tears of the Indies, being an Historical Relation of the cruelties of the
Spaniards in the Islands of Hish mela, Cuba, Iamaica, etc. in the West Indies;
by Casus Bishop in Spain, an eye witness.

Themis Aurea, the Laws of the Fraternity of the Rossie Cross, written by
Count Mayerus, and now Englished for to inform that honorable Society of wise
Philosophers, by T:H

Complete Midwifes practice, in the high and weighty concernments of the birth
of Mankind: or perfect Rules derived from the Experiences and Writings, not
only of our English, but the most accomplished and absolute Practice of many
French, Spanish, Italians, and other Nations, fitted for the weakest
Capacities, in a short time to attain the knowledge of the whole Art: by T: C:
and others.

I: Tradescon's Rarities, published by himself.

Art of Simpling, an Introduction to the knowledge and gathering of Plants,
wherein the Definitions, Divisions, Places, Descriptions, Differences, Names,
Virtues, times of flourishing and gathering, Uses, Temperatures, Signatures of
Plants: To which is added, a Discovery of the Lesser World, by W: Coals:

Wilsford's Arithmetic, made plain to the easiest capacity, in two Books, viz.
Natural and Decimal, being most useful for all Gentlemen, Merchants,
Shopkeepers, and all others, by Tho: Wilsford, Gent: An excellent piece.

Adam in Eden, the Paradise of Plants, a Description of all our English Plants,
wild or otherwise, with their Signatures applied to the parts of the body of
Man, with their Physical use, that a man may be his own Physician, the
Ingredients being to be had in every Field and Garden; made public by W:
Coals, D: for the benefit of all English men: A piece of worth.

The perfect Cook, a right method of the Art of Cookery, restoring the whole
practice to a more refined way then ever was before extant.

A Dictionary explaining all the terms both in Physic, Anatomy, Chyrurgery and
Chym^stry, by I: D:

Medicina Magica, Tamen Physica, the method of curing Diseases by Sympathy and
Antipathy, a work fit to be known by all, S. Bolton:

Timothies vade mecum, or a pocket companion for the sons of the Prophets,
wherein are treated of matters appertaining to Ministers, and such as intend
for the Ministry, by T: Crave

The treasury of the Soul.

History of Metors, by Thomas Wilsford, Gent:

The Queens Closet opened: Incomparable Secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery;
Preserving, Candying and Cooking, as they were presented to the Qu^en,
transcribed from the true Copies of her Majesty's own Receipt-books, by W: M:
one of her late Servants.


