England's GRATULATION FOR THE KING and his SUBJECTS HAPPY UNION.

FIRST PREACHED On the Day of Public Thanksgiving, appointed by the Parliament
May the 10th. 1660.

SINCE PUBLISHED As a Common Tribute to Caesar, at his so much longed for
Arrival.

By R. MOSSOM, Preacher of Gods Word at S. Pet. P. Wh. London.

London, Printed by Tho: Newcomb, for William Grantham, at the Black Bear in
St. Paul's Churchyard near the little North Door, 1660.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty CHARLES the II. King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
May it please your MAJESTY.
THE God of all Mercy's, who gives salvation unto Kings; having answered our
Prayers, and Crowned our joy's, in graciously restoring your Sovereign Power,
and safely returning your Sacred Person; This, England's Gratulation, made
first an offering of Thankfulness unto God, is now made a Tribute of Allegiance
unto your Majesty; humbly presented from that Heart and Hand, which in all the
variety of State-commotions, has still owned, and publicly owned, the duty
and devotion of Loyalty and Love.

Indeed, under our heavyest weight of oppressions, beholding your Sacred
Majesty bearing the Cross, when your Royal Head should have worn the Crown;
Your Christian Patience, became our Princely Pattern for Constancy; Your
Majesty constant in your faith to God, we constant in our faithfulness to your
Majesty; so that, the Tribute we pay (dread Sovereign) is that of your own
coin, and stamped with your own Image.

Now, I pray God grant your Majesty, such an holy and happy improvement of that
Disciplinary Providence, wherewith your Majesty has been so long exercised; as
to the Devotions of piety, the compassions of Charity, the zeal of Justice, the
love of Learning, the exercise of Arms, the transaction of Affairs, and in all
the Accomplishments of Princely Wisdom, made solid and firm by long
Experience. That, all the Loyal Subjects of your Majesty's three Kingdoms,
joyfully beholding these, the Jewels of your Crown, the perfections of your
Royalty, may clearly see, that, had not your Majesty the indubitable Right of
Heir Apparent to your Father's For which, together with the Churches Rights,
and his Subjects Liberties, He died a Royal Martyr, of Blessed Memory; now
Crowned with an everlasting glory.
Crowns; yet, there is not, amongst the best of Princes or Men, so fit a
subject of their Choice, to make the Sovereign of their Hearts, as King Charles
the Second.

Indeed, My Liege, This is your Sovereignty (and may it be as happily
continued, as it is miraculously recovered,) Over the Hearts of your People:
who are now so devoted in their Loyalty, that your Majesty reigns in their
Love. And thus reigning, Your Majesty will be the Ornament of your Throne, in
your Royal Virtues: more then, the Throne your Majesty's ornament, in all it is
Glory's. Which yet, that the King of Kings would make transplendently glorious;
And so, the progress of your Majesty's Life, like the increase of our holy
Faith, may be from glory to glory, Is the hearty prayer, of him, who knows
nothing in his heart, next the Love to his Savior, more dear then this duty,
of being

(Dread Sovereign) Your Majesty's most humbly Loyal and Obedient Subject R.
MOSSOM.

England's Gratulation FOR THE KING and his SUBJECTS HAPPY UNION.
PSALM. 75. verse. 1. Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give
thanks; For, that thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare.


Introduction.
THIS sacred Psalm was then composed, when the Cum omnia sub Saul corrupta
fuissent, Muscul. l'Estat est^t tout ^un e par factions, etc. Diod.
State of Israel was most discomposed; Yea, then did David make this song for
the Sanctuary, when there was no harmony, but all discord in the Church. And
this he purposely did, as a fit instruction to the then present and all future
Generations; that, if the King did accord with his People, and the People with
their King, the both with God; then, amidst all the harshest discords in Church
or State, the sweet harmony of peace should be renewed, and their prosperity
re-established; And therefore, sure, did David entitle this Psalm with a (...)
Septuag. ne disperdas, Hieron.
ne perdas in the front of it; to intimate, that the curse of State-consumption
should never invade this happy Union.

Know then, the State of Israel, was indeed much like the State of England,
when this Psalm was composed; for, David, anointed of the Lord to be King, he
was owned and received by the Royal Party, the Tribe of Judah; and amidst the
dissentions of the other Tribes 2 Samuel 3.17, 18.
Abner the General of the Host, was bringing about all Israel to him; And the
Generals prudent managing of the matter in so turbulent a State, does prepare
the Hearts of the Elders, and of the People; for the owning David their King
whom God had set over them.

And when as yet, he was not settled in his Throne, nor adorned with the Crown,
but in expectation of both; (the present condition of our Sovereign Lord;) even
then he makes this Psalm, to testify his thankfulness to God, and declare his
integrity to his People, to testify his thankfulness to God, for his
dispensations of Providence, disposing his Throne toward an establishment, and
to declare his Integrity to his People, in his ministrations of Justice, when
God by his power should have established his Throne.

Think we then David's person to be the King's, and Isreal's condition to be
Englands. And because, what God did to them in a gracious measure, that he has
done unto us in a more abundant Grace; therefore, look what David and Israel
did to God in a thankful and gratulatory Devotion, that do we in a like devout
thankfulness and Gratulation; even Psa. 100.4.
come into his Courts, and offer unto him an oblation of Praise. And for this,
our gracious Sovereign, though absent in person, yet as present in Spirit, yea
as present now in his Regal Authority, he thus seems to Lead the Chorus of
this day's festivity; and to say with David, in the name of himself and of his
people, Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks; for,
that thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare.

Before I give you the Division of the Text, let me present you an Exposition
of the Psalm; which will be, if rightly observed, a seasonable service to this
day's solemnity. The Exposition then Intended receive paraphrastic^s, by way of
paraphrase; thus, as if David the King had said.

O God, who art the King of Kings, Unto thee, O God, who have redoubled thy
mercyes, do we, both King and Subjects redouble our praises; we, we give thee
thanks; I their King give thee thanks for their Loyalty; and they my Subjects
give thee thanks for my Sovereignty; and all of us together give thee thanks
for our happy Union and Accord, so full of thy goodness and mercy. For that, it
is thy Name so near which brings us together; thy power and presence so
gracious, which works our Salvation and declares our Deliverance so wonderful
and Glorious.

when I receive the congregation; when coming to Jerusalem the Metropolis, and
Royal City of my Kingdom, I shall their sit with my Great Council, to consult
the peace and settlement of the Nation, I will then Judge according unto
right; making Law my rule, Council my guide, and mercy my moderatress.

the Earth and all the Inhabitants thereof are dissolved, though the whole Land
melts in Division, distraction, and distress; and the whole Fabric of the
Church and State is tottering, and ready to fall to ruin, thrown down by
heresy, schism, and profaness; Yet I bear up the Pillars of it, my Sovereign
Authority shall bring a Sovereign remedy; my Royal power shall bear up both
Magistracy and Ministry, the two supporting Pillars of the whole building,
without which it would certainly fall away to Anarchy.

Truth is, I said, and that often too, unto the fools, such as through
simplicity were seduced into sedition and Disloyalty; to them I said, Deal not
so foolishly; think not, that you shall keep your Religion, your Laws, your
Liberties, your Goods, your Lives, and cast off your Sovereign; who is
appointed of God to be the Father and Defender of them all. Yea, I said unto
the wicked, even such as sinned of malicious wickedness, to them I said, lift
not up your Horn, advance not your power to resist your Sovereign.

lift not up your Horn on high, take not Sovereignty it self upon you, usurp
not the Throne; or if you do so presumptuously, yet speak not with a stiff
neck; do not proudly impose your bloody edicts to destroy my Subjects persons;
let not your High Courts of Arbitrary power violate the Laws, yea raze the
foundations of all Civil government, whereby my people shall become as sheep
prepared to the slaughter.

aspire to that excess of Dominion, as if your selves should never be brought
to Judgment? Whereas the Dignity of the Throne, and the Sovereignty os the
Scepter, is no Boon of Fortune, or thing of chance; for Promotion comes
neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South; neither by
confederacy of designs, nor fortuitousness of events.

But, Government is God's Ordinance, sub Jove Imperium; God is the Judge, he
puts down one and sets up another; And when he does it by Divine
Ordination, it is in a regular providence, putting a Period to the Royal Line
of one family, and by transferring the right of power to another.

in the Hand of the Lord there is a Cup, a cup of wrath, whose wine is red and
full of mixture; that is, whose judgments are grievous and full of Horror.
And where he finds a disobedience to just Authority, there he poures forth of
this cup of fury; The top whereof, the simple and seduced shall drink to their
chastisement and correction, but the maliciously wicked shall drink up, nay,
suck out the dregs thereof to their temporal ruin and eternal destruction.

Zerviah, no hot spirited men shall ever engage me in Severity toward my
bitterest Enemies, if now at length they become my Loyal Subjects. No, but I
sensible of God's mercy in preserving me and converting them, will declare for
ever the wonders of that mercy, singing praises to the God of Jacob, for my
preservation and their conversion.

True it is, if, notwithstanding all all the horns of such maliciously wicked I
will cut off; I will change my clemency into severity, and execute the rigor
of the Law, to quell the violence of their Rage. But as for the righteous ones,
the true Converts of Sion, who become Loyal Subjects to me their lawful
Sovereign, their Horns shall be exalted; The Honors, Dignities, Profits, and
Employments of my Court Royal, Camp Martial, and Courts Judicial, they shall be
all, the rewards of their dutiful Obedience, and the Testimonies of my princely
Bounties.

Thus (Beloved) in this Psalm's Exposition, Ye have the Kings Declaration. How!
I say it again, we have truly and exactly as to substance and matter, the Kings
Declaration; even the Declaration of King Charles, comprised in this Psalm,
which I may call the Declaration of King David, when he was in the like, the
very like State and Condition with our present Sovereign. And as the Two Kings
then, David and our Charles the II. agree in the same Spirit and Declaration;
so, I pray God, Israel and England too may agree in the same heart and
affection; only this, 2. Sam. 20.1.
To your Tents, O Israel, the voice of the Sons of Belial, far be it, and for
ever be it far from our Sovereign and Sion; that so we may have still cause to
bless God for our King, and our King cause to bless God for us; as David and
Israel do here one for another; saying, Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks,
unto thee do we give thanks; for, that thy name is near, thy wondrous works
declare.

The words are a Laudatory gratulation; Division.
in which observe 3. particulars, the Altar, the Offering, and the Reason of
that offering brought unto the Altar. 1. The Altar, God's; 2. The Offering,
Thanks; 3. The Reason of that offering brought unto the Altar, the nearness of
God's name declared in the wonder of his works; Unto thee, O God, do we give
thanks, etc.

Method, Explication, and Application.
Wherein the 1. particular; the Altar, Explication.
Gods; Unto thee, O God. If the King does rejoice for his people, or the people
for their King, it is, Psalm. 21.1.
in thy strength, O Lord; In thy strength, not their power; in thy wisdom, not
their policy; in thy goodness, not their greatness; The strength of the Lord,
that brings salvation, salvation permanent and perpetual; A salvation divine,
exceeding good; and this begets an exultation devout, exceeding great;
therefore, as it is said, the King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord; so
the Psalmist further adds, Ibid.
Exceeding glad shall he be off thy salvation.

And certainly, if ever King might rejoice in God's strength, and be exceeding
glad of his Salvation, our King much more, and we with him. The life of the
whole Nation is bound up in the Kings life; for, sad experience tells us, we
felt the stroke of his Royal Fathers Death, when this Kingdom's glory fell with
his body, and was cut off with his Head. And sure, we cannot but be sensible,
how we have continued ever since, so enslaved, as not to know any other
freedom, save that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 88.5.
free among the Dead. For, have we not walked as so many Ghosts? lived indeed,
but as in the infernal shades; and heartless as well as headless; nay, and such
should we still continue, On the Tuesday after Easter week, the Parliament with
all loyal acknowledgments received his Majesty's gracious Letters and
Declaration.
did not the salvation of our God, give us a right Easter Deliverance, a
resurrection from the dead; putting a new life into us, by the restoring of our
gracious Sovereign.

Such is the Salvation of our King, as none could give it but God, the King of
Kings; so that the Title of Honor assumed of old by several Emperors, after
great preservations, may now be properly our Sovereign's, even (...), Preserved
of God. And observe, as God does hereby the more engage the King unto himself
in devotion, so does he the more endear the King unto his people in affection.
For, who so considers his deliverances Especially when he past from Holland
into Scotland,
by Sea, and his escapes by especially after Worster fight.
Land: who so considers his dangers in his Native Country, and his distresses
in foraign Nations; will easily discern, how God has set forth our Sovereign
as a Mirror of his Mercy; that the eyes of all his People beholding him the
more Dear unto God, their hearts should esteem him the more endeared to
themselves; the Divine protection and favor recommending him to their greater
Loyalty and Love.

Yea this Salvation of God; presents our King not only the more to be beloved
at home, but also the more to be feared abroad; Be it so then, that other Kings
now shine in the full Meridian of their glory, as do the Crowns of Spain and
France; yet we know, even at noon day our Charles's Star appears; At the birth
of his Majesty, a Star appeared at noon.
and it is not others more radiant Splendor of this Earth's Greatness, that can
take away the light of his virtues luster in Heavens salvation. Wherefore,
there must David and Israel, the King and his People offer their oblation of
praise, where they receive their blessings of goodness, and that is at the
Altar of the Lord; non nobis Domine, Psalm. 115.1.
non nobis, not unto us O Lord, not unto us; but, Unto thee, O God, do we give
thanks, unto thee do we give thanks; for, that thy name is near, thy wondrous
works declare.

2. Particular. The offering, Thanks; Unto thee do we give thanks. Which
offering is made by fire; for the words of Gemination, show there was an heat
of Devotion. Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, were a Gratulation sincere;
but to repeat it, and say it over again, unto thee do we give thanks, speaks
that Gratulation fervent. But alas, in our Thanksgiving, what is it that we
give worthy of Thanks? why, truly very little, as to any real worth in it self;
yet very much as to the Devotion of faith, and hope, and love, and humility,
etc. in the Divine acceptance through Christ.

Thus to Thank God, is to Bless God, but not to bless him as he blesses us;
His Benedixit is a benefecit; when God blesses man he does speak the word and
it is done; Psalm. 33.9.
but, when man blesses God, all that he can do is but to speak the word; even
to declare the Glory, and set forth the praises of God's blessings: So that,
God's blessing descends upon man as an heavenly Dew, in a quickening and
refreshing Vigor: man's blessing ascends unto God, only as an holy Incense, in
an acceptable and well-pleasing savor. Wherefore, when we view the blessings
of this day's solemnity, and see how abundant God is in his mercy, do we let
him see how enlarged we are in our thankfulness; making our hearts and our
mouths, as so many altars of Incense, to breath forth the sweet savor of his
goodness.

Herein to encourage our Devotion, and quicken our zeal; know, the receipt of
blessings is not more comfortable to Man, then the returning of thanks is
acceptable to God; yea, a devout Heart is not more truly joy'd in receiving
mercyes, then in returning thanks.

Hence it is, that Psalms of Thanksgiving, they have in them the life and
vigor of all holy Devotion; yea, songs of praise, they are the very Types of
the joys of heaven; Whereby it is, that the Church becomes even Triumphant on
Earth. Psalm. 106.47.
Thus the Psalmist; save us, O Lord our God, to give thanks unto thy Name, and
to triumph in thy Praise; This then is the offering David and Israel bring to
God's altar, an oblation of thankfulness; Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks,
unto thee do we give thanks. this the altar and the offering.

3. Particul. The reason of bringing this offering to the Altar; and that is,
the nearness of God's name, declared in the wonder of his Works; for, that thy
name is near, thy wondrous works declare. It is good that we can give a
Rationale of Gods worship, that it may be known we serve God with a reasonable
service, Romans 12.1
which is the thing he so much requires. Now then, see we the glory of his Name
in the wonder of his works, as especially relating 1. To the King; 2. To his
People; 3. To their Enemies.

1. Relating to the King. That notwithstanding all the dangers of sickness and
of Seas, of Treacheryes and of Violence; notwithstanding all the hazards of
temptations, provocations, yea necessityes and wants; Necessityes and Wants so
great, that though his Kingdom was of this World, yea in this World he had
three potent Kingdoms, yet had he not where to lay his head; not where to lay
it to rest; For such and so many were his flittings, if not his flyings from
the West of England to the Isle of Scilly; from that Island into Holland, and
from Holland into France, from France into Holland again, from Holland into
Scotland, from Scotland into England; where, what entertainment he had at
Worster, you may sadly remember; being forced to fly for his life, take
sanctuary in a Wood, and make an hollow Oak his Royal Palace: from thence
shadowed with the Divine protection (as -- Multo nebulae circum dea fudit
amictu, Virg. Aen. 1.
Aeneas with the vayl-like cloud) he passes through a throng of dangers, before
he attains the Seacoast of Sussex; from whence he hast's into France, and from
thence (upon a dishonorable Treaty of that Crown, with this Nations Tyranny)
he passes into Germany, and from Germany into Flanders; from whence the God of
all mercy's bring him safe into his own Dominions, and seat him to rest in his
Royal Palace Here the Auditories zeal of ^^yal Devotion did make the Church to
echo their loud Amen.
. Thus, thus (I say) such and so many were our Sovereign's flittings, if not
his flyings when driven from his own Kingdoms, he was forced from others; that
seldom could he find a pillow to rest his head, or if he did find a pillow,
such were his Thorns of Cares, that his head could find but little rest.

Yet notwithstanding all hardships and hazards, difficulties and dangers, The
King trusted in the Lord, Psalm. 2
and through the mercy of the most high he has not miscarried; not miscarried
in Person, not miscarried in Religion, not miscarried in the Protestant Faith,
nor in his Royal love. And see the high accent of all this mercy; that, Verse. 3.
the Lord has prevented him with the blessings of goodness. Prevented Him: His
Fathers Throne, the Nation's deliverance, the Churches restoring, and his
Peoples peace, no doubt, they were the desire of his Heart, which God has
satisfied; they were the request of his lips which God has granted.

But that a North wind should so suddenly and so fully drive away the tempest;
that, all which his heart desired and his lips requested, should be so
successfully attained, without a Sea, nay without a shower, I had almost said
without one drop of blood: Yea that it should be with so general an
acclamation, and so hearty an affection from Nobles and Gentry, Ministers,
Citizens and Country; this is such a preventing with the blessings of goodness,
as is not to be expressed with the Tongue of Angels. O miracle of mercy! O wonder
of Compassion! to the maze and astonishment of the Nations! amongst whom, as
well as amongst our selves, Psalm. 21.5.
God has made the honor of our King to be great in his Salvation. Certainly,
him shall men greatly Honor, whom God so graciously saves.

2. Relating to his People. Psa. 126.1.
When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Sion (say the Jews) then were we
like unto them that Dream. Sions Captivity, it was that in Babylon; and such a
captivity had we, not in Babylon as to place and situation; but in Babylon
directly as to sense and signification; For, what is Babylon but confusion? the
captivity then which we had under our so many confusions, what was it, but
indeed a captivity under the worst of Babylons? Now when the Lord turned again
the captivity of Sion, the faithful tell us, they were like unto them that
dream; so amazed at the thoughts of their astonishing deliverance, that they
could not believe their eyes, not think themselves awake.

But me thinks, we, as we were under a greater Babel of confusion, so are we
under a greater maze of astonishment; having such a deliverance, as we did not
so much as dream off; and this makes it for the suddenness and the strangness,
Psalm. 118.23.
the more mavelous in our eyes. As our captivity and Sion's was much alike,
only with this difference, that our confusion was the worse Babylon; so our
deliverance and Sion's are much alike, only with this difference, that our
return is the more difficult work; Sion's deliverance was wrought (...).
of God, by turning the heart of Cyrus the King toward Israel; Ezra. 1.1.
But alas our Kings heart was ever turned toward his People; whereas then
Sion's deliverance was wrought of God, by turning the heart of Cyrus the King
toward Israel; ours was by turning the hearts of all Israel toward Charles
their King; A work of far greater difficulty, and so, a wonder of far greater
mercy; a work of far greater difficulty, considering the malice of the
seducers, and the madness of the seduced; and a wonder of far greater mercy,
considering the facillnes of attaining, and the fullnes of accomplishing our
deliverance.

3. Relating to their Enemies. Who convinced by the strange events of
Providence, they cannot but acknowledge God in it; and therefore say, that the
Lord has done great thing for them; Psa. 126.2.
ay, and made them great too by the things that he has done. They (who not
long before Sion's deliverance, had called her an outcast, Jer. 30.17.
and taunted at her, with a where is now thy God?) They have their Argument
from Providence, in the Jews so miserable captivity, quite confuted by
Providence, in their so wonderful return.

But now, when Sion's Enemies say, The Lord has done great things for them,
what says Sion of her self? Why, the same confession, but not the same
affection; Her Enemies say it with wonder and enyy, but Sion her self with
Devotion and joy, Ps. 126.3.
The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice; And this their
Gratulation is presently seconded with a further supplication; Their captivity
was turned, but their return not perfected; therefore they would have all
obstacles either removed, or born down, like as by a Southern stream from the
snowy Mountains, carrying all before it; accordingly they pray amidst all their
joy, Turn our captivity as the Rivers in the South. Verse. 4.


And let their Devotion have our Imitation; that we pray God, to perfect a
turning again the Captivity of our Sion, as the Rivers of the Southern Climate
by the Summer's Sun; even by melting the hearts of the People of this Nation,
if there be yet any thing of an Arabia deserta in our Land, any persons of so
wild, hard, and unrelenting a temper amongst us, as not to cry in so general
acclamations, Vivat Rex, God save the King.

Surely this effect of Grace upon the Hearts of Men to melt them to Loyalty and
Allegiance, would be as joyfully welcome to every conscientious Royalist, as
are the refreshing streams to the thirsting Traveller in the dry and parched
desert. For that, (Beloved) God has tutored us by affliction to melt in
sympathies of compassion; and we have learnt this Lesson of Christian
experience, that there is no greater joy then the Souls conversion, no truer
honor then errors retractation, and no firmer tie then loves communion.

O let this then speak our Loyalty and Love, our this day's communion of
thankfulness and praise; joyfully conjoyning in this Laudatory Gratulation of
David and Israel, the King and his People; Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks,
unto thee do we give thanks; for, that thy name is near, thy wondrous works
declare.

The Application we make is in a twofold Admonition, Applicat
and a twofold Exhortation.
1. ADmonition. When the Salvation of Israel is come out of Sion, then is it a
fit time for Jacob to rejoice, Psalm. 53.6.
and Israel to be right glad; to be right glad! Ay, that is good indeed; but how
are we glad aright? Why, when we rejoice in the Lord with thankfulness, and
rejoice in the Spirit with cheerfulness; which is right, so to rejoice in the
Salvation, that we rejoice in God our Savior. Thus the Blessed Virgin rejoiced
of old, Luke 1.41.
and thus do we rejoice for blessings now: Let our joy be that of the Virgins,
pure in Devotion and thankfulness, not ravished, not defiled with Gluttony and
Drunkenness.

Praise and Rejoicing do as properly become the celebration of a Feast, as
Mourning and Weeping do become the solemnity of a Fast: But now, if this
rejoicing be only that of Mirth and Jollity; then strange Children will
dissemble with me, Psa. 18.44.
says David; Men given to changes, they know how to change their countenance,
and put on a show and semblance of joy; but the Children of Sion, Ps. 149.2.
they will be truly joyful with their King; and how truly joyful? why rejoicing
in Heart and in Spirit. The joy then of the countenance and of the voice, may
be that of the profane persons or the Hypocrites; but that of the Heart and of
the Spirit, is that of the good Christians, and the Loyal Subjects.

Not, but that a (...), a sour or sad countenance does argue a disgust of
malevolence; he certainly having no good will to this time's Salvation, who
has no good mind to this day's Exultation. Wherefore let the Springhead of our
joy be in the inward Man, the heart and spirit; and then let the streams flow
into the outward man, the voice and the countenance; ay, and the plentiful, but
not inordinate use of temporal Blessings; For so, Nehemiah instructs the Jews,
for the solemnity of their festival; Eat the fat, Nehem. 8.10.
and drink the sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared,
and this do freely, so it be done soberly; because, as in the close of that
Verse, the joy of the Lord is our strength; and that is, when the strength of
the Lord is our joy.

2. Admonition. That, having seen the salvation of God exceeding great; it will
be allowed us, Psalm. 21.1.
to be exceeding glad of his salvation; An excess of gladness, is allowed, but
not of drunkenness; O let that be abhorred. Wine in a drunken excess, it
inflames the heart, intoxicates the brain, and turns all fanatic. You must,
you will say, drink the Kings health: But tell me, is it congruous in cups of
excess to drink the Kings health, when he preserves his health by little
drinking? Again, beware of execrations and oaths, lest their sinful
provocations outcry your Loudest Acclamations.

Rejoice with temperance and devotion, as well, as with cheerfulness and
exultation: as good Christians, as well, as good Subjects; and indeed we are no
longer good Subjects, then we are good Christians. Offer we, then, our
oblations of praise in the Church, and in the closet; and after that, let the
Earth ring and the Heavens resound with acclamations in the streets; Let the
Bells, and the Trumpets, and the Canons; let your feasts, and fires, and other
Insignia Jubilationis, the ensigns of Joy and Jubilation; let them all heighten
the joyful Number. 23.21.
shout of a King among us. But still let me mind you to preserve your Moral
Temperance, the better to perform your Loyal Exultations; that rejoicing for
your King, you may do it in the Lord; And then I Am sure, it will be very much
your Kings joy, to hear that you have so rejoyc't.

1. Exhortation. To join Prayer with our Praises; Hosannas with our
Hallelujahs; say, Luke 19.38.
Blessed be the King that comes in the Name of the Lord; Blessed from the King
of Kings; with health of body, length of days, and increase of honors; Blessed
with the love of his Subjects, the dread of his Enemies, and the friendship of
his Allies; Blessed with a gracious life, an happy reign, and an everlasting
glory. Let this, this be the incense we burn, the sacrifice we offer, the
Devotion we perform in Gods House, and at Gods Altar.

Yea (Beloved) as we love the Kings life, pray we for the consummation of our
joys, the Kings Crown; For observe, in Psalm. 21. v. 3.4. it is there the right
order of Gods Spirit, (and indeed so it is esteemed by Kings, who have any thing
of the Spirit of God) that the Crown is set before life; to intimate, that
although, they who preserve the Kings life merit much, yet they more, who
restore the Kings Crown; and again, they who take away the Kings Crown, incur
not only great guilt, but greater, then they who take away the Kings life. Our
Sovereigns Royal Father, of blessed Memory, therefore lost his life, because he
would not part with his Crown; no, nor part the Crown with others, though it
were to save his life. It was done like a Royal Martyr indeed; one who knew
well how happily to change his Crown, but not utterly to part with it; even,
change that Crown which bears a cross on Earth, for that which is all Crown,
and knows no cross in Heaven.

As we love then (I say) the Kings life, pray we for the consummation of our
joys, the Kings Crown: And therefore, Lord, set thou a Crown of pure Gold upon
his Head; Let our eyes see him crowned, and that will crown our joys. Yea, the
Lord grant, it may be in the continuance of our present calm, and as an earnest
of our future peace; that we may further know, that all this is Gods hand,
Psalm. 109.27.
and that thou Lord have done it. And what the hand of Heaven has set up, let
not the hand of violence throw down; what God has put on, let not man put
away: the King on his Throne, and the Crown on the King. And having obtained
the Crown, may he obtain life, and that a long life, even for ever and ever,
Amen, Amen.

Psalm. 21.4.
2. Exhortation. To observe Nehemiah's order and instruction, To send Portions
to them for whom nothing is prepared. Nehem. 8.10.
Whereby we see that our days of Exultation must have their Acts of
compassion; Otherwise, to eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of
the Stall; to drink wine in Bowls, Amos 6.6.
and not to regard the afflictions of Joseph, the necessities of the
distressed; but to suffer them to mourn whilst we rejoice; This is so provoking
a guilt of unmercifulness, as will turn our joy into mourning. God requires a
cheerful giver; 1 Cor. 9.7.
it is good then that we give, especially, upon our day's of cheerfulness.
Otherwise, if our rejoicing gives no relief to the Poor, our Thanksgiving shall
receive no reward from God; for indeed, how can we be thought to receive so
great blessings from God thankfully; when we are not willing to bestow a
little, of what He has bless't us with, charitably?

To close then. In paying a Tribute unto Caesar, we do well to make an offering
unto God. Indeed these words of (...)


