THE SOULS Own evidence, for its own IMMORTALITY.

In a very pleasant and learned discourse, Selected out of that excellent
Treatise entitled, The trunesse of Christian Religion, against Atheists,
Epicures, etc.

First compiled in French by Famous Phillip Mornay, Lord of Plessie Marlie,
afterward turned into English by Eloquent Sir Phillip Sydney, and his
assistant, Master Arthur Golden, Anno Domini MDLXXXVIII.

And now re-published.

By John Bachiler Master of Arts, sometimes of Emanuell College in Cambridge.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton in Pope's Head Ally, 1646.

To the Reader.
Judicious Reader, the iniquity of the times, having so far corrupted the minds
of some, that the very innate and inbred principles of Nature (especially about
a Deity, the sovereigne welfare and the Immortality of the Soul) seem in a
manner to be quite obliterated and extinct in them; I thought it would not be
unseasonable, to recommend to thy most serious Meditations, that excellent
Treatise mentioned in the Frontispiece, as an Antidote against the Atheistical
and dangerous Tenets now abroad.

The Noble Author of it thou will soon find was a man of no mean parts, and
of no common Learning. Delicacy of Wit, strength of Reason, streams of
Eloquence, with varieties both of solid and curious notions, come all flowing
from him. He will tell thee more, even from the Ancient doctrine of the very
Heathen, than happily thou ever heard'st of, or (at leastwise) evertookest much
notice of, though borne and bred in so bright an Age, and among such too, as
pass for no mean Proficients in Christianity. Those Mysterious (though
glorious) Truths, which like Mines of Gold under ground, run along more
hiddenly, through the letter of the Scriptures, thou may there meet with
discussed at large, with as much sobriety as cleernesse.

Do thou desire to know by what arguments, even of reason, thou may prove a
Deity? that Deity to be but one only? and yet distinguished by a Trinity of
Beings, that which we call a Trinity of persons, viz. Father, Son, and Spirit?
if thou will take the pains, (I might say, the pleasure rather) to gain the
knowledge of such high (yet necessary) points: In the first six Chapters of the
said Treatise, thou may (more fully than thou art aware) instruct thy self.

Do thou enquire after the highest and most sovereigne Good? wherein it
lies, and wherein it lies not? in the 18 and 19 Chapters thou find that
also very sweetly and fully resolved.

Lastly, next unto the knowledge of God what he is in Himself, and what to His
creatures, do thou seek to understand thy Self, what once thou were, and what
still thou art; Read but this ensuing Paragraph, peculiarly selected out for
thy present use, and thou shall easily perceive what Divine Igniculi
scintillantes. Onuphr. de Anima.
sparks lie raked up under ashes, within thine own bosom, sparks which (when
(...). Homer. Odys. 5.
once stirred up) do but blow a little, and thou shall know farther, as well
what the duration as the excellency of thy being is, And that thou art a
creature bearing in thee, besides a plurality (...) Genesis 2 7.
of present lives, the very seed of Immortality.

In all which several enquiries whilst thou read and considerest, thou
may expect that, the reasonable part (dark and cloudy, notwithstanding as it
may be) shall quickly receive an Irradiation, and that not only from the
intrinsecall operations of thine own mind, but also from the consent of the
wisest men among all Nations. Zoroastres the Chaldean, Trismegistus the
Egyptian, Orpheus the Greek, Pherecides the Syrian, after them, Pythagoras,
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Plotinus, Porphyrius, Amelius, etc, all teach thee
in their several ages. And if that be not sufficient, Thou have the confession
of the very Devils; viz. that there is a God, and but one God, with Trinity of
persons in unity of Essence. That the Soul is an Immortal substance, and the
aforesaid Deity, The sovereigne welfare of it, according to what thou believe
from the only true sacred Oracle.

Let not then that Treatise, rare and singular, as it is be neglected by thee,
for though it has a long time layn obscurely, as a Diamond in the dark, little
known and less looked after, yet I dare say, by that time thou have well
examined it, and shall have tasted the sublime Heavenly matter contained in it,
thou will estimate it at a very great value, even worthy (many passages of it)
to be written in characters of gold.

Buy it therefore and read it, that from the very light of nature, thou may
be enabled to confute blasphemers: Judge the whole by this little piece, which
if thou read thorough, and with diligent attention, thou may benefit thy
self, and therein answer the desire of him, who heartily wishes the true good
of

Thine Immortal soul: JOHN BACHILER.

CHAP. I.
That the Soul of Man is immortal, or dies not.
HItherto I have treated of the world that is to be conceived in understanding,
and of the sensible World (as the Platonists term them) that is to say, of God
and of this World. Now follows the examining of the little World (as they
term it) that is to say, of man. Concerning God, we have acknowledged him to
be a Spirit: and as touching the world we have found it to be a body. In man we
have an abridgement of both, namely of God in respect of spirit, Man is both
Soul and body.
and of the world in composition of body as though the Creator of purpose to
set forth a mirror of his works, intended to bring into one little compass
both the infiniteness of his own nature, and also the hugeness of the whole
world together. We see in man's body a wonderful mixture of the four Elements,
the veyns spreading forth like Rivers to the uttermost members; as many
instruments of sense, as there be sensible natures in the world, a great number
of sinews, flesh-strings and knitters; a head by special privilege directed
up to Heavenward, and hands serving to all manner of services. Whatsoever he is
that shall consider no more but only this instrument, without life, without
sense and without moving; cannot but think verily that it is made to very
great purpose; and he must needs cry out as Hermes or as the Sarzin Ab^ala
does, that man is a miracle which far surmounteth, not only these lower
Elements, but also the very Heaven and all the ornaments thereof. But if he
could (as it were out of himself) behold this body receiving life, and
entering into the use of all his motions with such forwardness, hands
bestirring themselves so nimbly, and after so sundry fashions, and the Senses
uttering their force so far off, without stirring out of their place: think
you not that he would be wonderfully ravished, and so much more wonder at the
said life, moving and sense, than at the body, as he wondered before at the
body, to behold the excellency of the proportion thereof above the mass of
some stone? For what comparison is there between a Lute and a Lute-player, or
between a dumb instrument, and him that makes it to sound? What would he say
then if he could afterward see how the same man being now quickened attaineth in
one moment from the one side of the earth to the other, without shifting of
place; descending down to the center, of the world, and mounting up above the
outtermost circle of it both at once; present in a thousand places at one
instant, embracing the whole without touching it; keeping upon the earth, and
yet containing it; beholding the Heavens from beneath, and being above the
Heaven of Heavens, both at once? Should he not be compelled to say, that in
this silly body there dwells a greater thing then the body, greater then the
earth, yea greater then the whole world together? Then let us say with Plato,
that man is double, outward, and inward. The outward man is that which we see
with our eyes, which forgoeth not his shape when it is dead, no more then a Lute
forgoeth his shape when the Lute-player cease from making it to sound howbeit
that both life, moving, sense, and reason be out of it. The inward man is the
Soul, and that is properly the very man, which uses the body as an
instrument; whereunto though it be united by the power of God, yet does it not
remove when the body runs. It sees when the eyes be shut, and sometimes
sees not when the eyes be wide open: It travelleth while the body rests, and
rests when the body travelleth, that is to say, it is able of it self to
perform his own actions, without the help of the outward man, whereas on the
contrary part the outward without the help of the inward, that is to wit, the
body without the presence of the Soul, has neither sense, moving, life, no,
nor continuance of being. In the outward man we have a Counterfeit of the whole
world, and if you rip them both up by piecemeale, ye shall find a wonderful
agreement betwixt them. But my purpose in this book is not to treat of the
things that pertain peculiarly to the body.

In the inward man we have a sum of whatsoever life sense and moving is in
all creatures, and moreover an Image or rather a shadow (for the Image is
defaced by our sin) of the Godhead it self. And that is the thing which we
have to examine in this Chapter. In Plants, we perceive that besides their
bodies which we see, there is also an inward virtue which we see not, whereby
they live, grow, bud, and bear fruit: which virtue we call the quickening
Soul, and it makes them to differ from Stones and Metalls, which have it not.
In sensitive living things, we find the selfsame virtue, which works while
they sleep and are after a sort as the Plants; and there withal we find
another certain virtue* or power which sees, hears, smells, tastes, and
feels; which also in many of them does hoord up the things brought in by the
senses; which manner of power the Plants are void of. This do we term the
sensitive Soul, because the effects thereof are discerved and executed by the
Senses. In Man are three abilities of Soul.
In man we have both the quickening and the Sensitive, the former uttering it
self in the nourishing and increasing of him, and the latter in the subtility
of sense and imagination, where through he is both Plant and Beast together.
But yet moreover we see also a Mind which considers and beholds, which
reapeth profit of the things that are brought in by the Senses, which by his
seeing conceives that which it sees not; which of that which is not,
gathers that which is; and finally which pulls a man away both from earth
and from all sensible things, yea and (after a sort) from himself too. This do
we call the reasonable Soul, and it is the thing that makes man to be man,
(and not a Plant or a brute Beast as the other two do,) and also to be the
Image or rather a shadow of the Godhead, in that (as we shall say hereafter) it
is a Spirit that may have continuance of being alone by it self without the
body. And by the way, whereas I say that the inward man has a quickening
power as a Plant has, a sensitive power as a Beast has, and a power of
understanding whereby he is a man: my meaning is not that he has three Souls
but only one Soul; that is to wit, that like as in the brute Beast the
sensitive Soul comprehends the quickening Soul; so in man the reasonable
Soul comprehends both the sensitive and the quickening, and executes the
offices of them all three, so as it both lives, feels, and reasons even as
well and after the same manner, as the mind of a man may intend to his own
household-matters, to the affairs of the Commonweal, and to heavenly things
all at once. Or to speak more fitly, these three degrees of Souls are three
degrees of life, whereof the second exceeds and contains the first, and the
third exceeds and contains both the other two. The one, without the which
the body cannot live, is the Soul or life of the Plant, and is so tied to the
body, that it shows not it self in any wise out of it. The second, which
cannot live without the body, is the Soul or life of the Beast, which does
well utter forth his power and force abroad, but yet not otherwise then by the
members and instruments of the body whereunto it is tied. The third, which can
of it self live and continue without the body, but not the body without it,
is the soul of man which gives life inwardly to all his parts, shows forth
his life abroad in the perceiving of all things subject to sense, and retains
still his force (as shall be said hereafter) yea and increases it, even when
the strength of the body and the very liveliness of the senses fail. And in
very deed, you shall see a man forgo all his senses one after another as the
instruments of them decay, and yet have still both life and reason unappaired.
The cause whereof is, that some of the instruments of life and sense do fail,
but the life it self which quickneth them fails not. And therefore the
Beast forgoeth not life in losing sense, but he utterly forgoeth sense in
forgoing life. And that is because life is the ground of the abilities of
sense, and the sensitive life is a more excellent life than the quickening life,
as wherein those powers and abilities are as in their ^oot. To be short, he
that bereaveth man or beast of the use of senses, or man of the right use of
reason, does not thereby bereave him of life* but he that bereaveth the beast*
or the outward man of their life, does therewithal bereave them of sense and
reason. Therefore it is a most sure argument, that the soul which causes a
beast to live, and the soul that causes it to have sense, are both one, that
is to wit, one certain kind of life more lively and more excellent than the
life that is in Plants. And likewise that the soul which causes man to live,
to have sense, and to reason, is but one, that is to wit, one certain kind of
life more excellent, more lively, and of further reach, than the life of the
Beast. But like as sense is as it were the form or Selfebeing (if I may so
term it) of the life of a beast; so is reason or understanding the very form
and Selfebeing of the soul of man; and (to speak properly) it is the soul or
life of the soul, life as the apple of our eye is the very eye of our eye. And
in very deed, when the mind is earnestly occupied, the senses are at a stay;
and when the senses are overbusied, the nourishment and digestion is hindered,
and contrariwise: which thing could not come to pass if the soul were any
more than one substance, which by reason that it is but one, cannot utter his
force alike in all places at once, but yields the less care one where so
long as it is earnestly occupied anotherwhere. In this soul of man (which yet
notwithstanding is but one) the diversity of the powers and abilities is very
apparent. The quickening power does nourish, increase and mayntaine us; and
Reason and Sense meddle not therewith, neither have they power to impeach the
working thereof. The truth whereof appears in this, that those things are
best done when our mind is at rest, and our senses are asleep; insomuch that
oftentimes we forged the sense and moving of some parts by some Rheum or some
Palsy, and yet the same parts cease not to be nourished still. Also, the
sensitive life sees and perceives a far off, yea oftentimes without setting
of the mind thereupon, or without considering what the Sense conceives. Some
men which have but weak Senses, have very quick understanding; and likewise on
the contrary part. Again, some fall into a Consumption, which want not the
perfect use of their Senses. Sometime the reasonable part is so earnestly bent
and occupied about the things that it likes of, that by the increasing of it
self, it hurts and diminishes the part that quickneth. Also it stands in
argument against the Senses, and reproves them of falsehood, and concludes
contrary to their information. And it may be that the man which has his
digestion perfect and his Senses sound, has not his wit or reason sound in
like case. Now, were the Soul but only one ability, it could not be so. But
now is the same divided manifestly into wit or understanding, and will; the one
serving to devise, and the other to execute. For we understand diverse things
which we will not, and we will diverse things which we understand not: which
contrary operations cannot be attributed both to one power. Nevertheless, the
uniting of all these powers together is with such distinctnesse, and the
distinguishing of them is with such union, that ordinarily they meet altogether
in one self-same action, the one of them as readily (by all likelihood) as the
other, howbeit that every of them does his own work severally by himself, and
one before another as in respect of their objects.

Thus have we three sorts of men, according to the three powers or abilities of
the inward man. Namely, the earthly man, which like the Plant minds nothing
but sleeping and feeding, making all his senses and all his reason to serve to
that purpose, as in whom the care of this present life only, has devoured and
swallowed up his senses and understanding. The Sensual man (as S. Paul
himself terms him) who is given wholly to these sensible things imbacing and
casting down his reason so far, as to make it a bond-slave to his senses and
the pleasures and delights thereof: And the reasonable man, who lives properly
in spirit and mind, who intereth into himself to know himself, and goes out
of himself to behold God; making this life to serve to the attainment of a
better, and using his Senses but as instruments and servants of his reason.
After as any of these three powers do reign and bear sway in man, that is to
wit, after as a man yields himself more to one than to another of them; so
becomes he like unto the Spirits, the brute Beasts, or Plants, yea and the
very Blocks and Stones. But it is our disposition even by kind, to be carried
away by our corrupt nature, and by the objects which hemme us in on all sides;
but as for against our nature yea or beyond our nature, our nature is not able
to do any thing at all.

Now, it is not enough for us to know that we have a soul whereby we live,
feel, and understand, and which being but one has in it self alone so many
sundry powers or abilities: for it will be demanded of us by and by what this
soul properly is. And soothly if I should say, I cannot tell what it is, I
should not belie my self a whit; for I should but confess mine own ignorance,
as many great learned men have done before me. And I should do no wrong at all
to the Soul it self; for since we cannot deny the effects thereof, the less
that we be able to declare the nature and being thereof, the more does the
excellency thereof shine forth. Again, it is a plain case, that no thing can
comprehend the thing that is greater than it self. Now, our Soul is after a
sort less than it self, in as much as it is wrapped up in this body, in
likewise as the man that has gyves and fetters on his feet, is after a sort
weaker than himself. Nevertheless, let us assay to satisfy such demands as
well as we can. And for as much as it is the Image of God, not only in respect
of the government and mayntenance of the whole World, but also even in the very
nature thereof: as we said heretofore when we spoke of the nature of God, if we
cannot express or conceive what it is, let us at leastwise be certified what
it is not. First of all, The body and the soul be not one self-same thing.
that the Soul and the Body be not both one thing, but two very far differing
things, and also that the soul is no part of the body, it appears of it
self without further proof. For if the soul were the body, or a part of the
body, it should grow with the body, as the other parts of the body do, and the
greater that the body were,, the greater also should the soul be. Nay,
contrary wise, the body increases to a certain age and then stays; after
which age is commonly the time that the Soul does most grow, and those that
are strongest of mind are commonly weakest of body, and the Soul is seen to
be full of liveliness in a languishing body, and to grow the more in force, by
the decay of the body. The Soul then grows not with the body, and therefore
it is not the body, nor any part of the body. And whereas I speak of growing in
the soul, by growing I mean the profiting thereof in power and virtue, as the
body grows in greatness by further enlarging. Again, if the Soul were the
body it should lose her strength and soundness with the body so as the maimed
in body should therewith feel also a mayme in his understanding, as well as in
his members: whosoever were sick of any disease, should also be sick in his
reason; he that limpeth or halteth, should therewith halt in soul also: the
blind man's soul should be blind, and the lame man's soul should be lame.
But we see contrariwise, that the maimed and the sick, the cripples and the
blind, have their souls whole and sound, and their understanding perfect and
cleer-sighted in itself. To be short, many a man dies whose body is sound,
and differs not a whit in any part from that it was when it was alive, and
yet notwithstanding, both life, moving, sense, and understanding are out of it.
Let us say then that in the body there was a thing which was not of the body,
but was a far other thing than the body.

Some wilful person will object here, that the force and strength of the soul
grows with the body, as appears in this that a man grown will remove that
which a child cannot, and that a child of two years old will go, which thing a
babe of two months old cannot do. But he should consider also, that if the
selfsame man or the selfsame child should have a mischance in his leg or in
his arm, he should thereby forgo the strength and moving thereof, whereas yet
notwithstanding his soul should have her former force and power still to move
the other as she did before. Therefore it is to be said, not that the child's
soul is grown or strengthened by time; but rather that his sinews are dried and
hardened which the soul uses as strings and instruments to move withal and
therefore when age has loosened and weakened them, a man has need of a staff
to help them with, although he have as good a will to run as he had when he was
young. The soul then which moves them all at one beck, has the selfsame
power in infancy which it has in age, and the same in age which it has in
the prime of youth: and the fault is only in the instrument, which is unable
to execute the operations thereof: like as the cunning of a Lute-player is not
diminished by the moistness or slacknesse of the Lutestrings, nor increased by
the over high straining and tight standing of them; but indeed in the one he
cannot show his cunning at all, and in the other he may show it more or less.
Likewise the speech of children comes with their teeth, howbeit that the
speech do manifestly utter it self first, in that they prattle many things
which they cannot pronounce: and in old men it goes away again with their
teeth, and yet their eloquence is not abated thereby. As for Demosthenes,
although he surmounted all the Orators of his time, yet were there some
letters which he could not pronounce. Give unto old age or unto infancy the
same sinews and teeth, and as able and lusty limbs and members as youth has;
and the actions which the soul does with the body and by the body, I mean so
far forth as concern the abilities of sense and livelynes, shall be
performed as well in one age as in another. But had thou as great
indifferency in judging of the force and power of thine own soul, as of the
cunning of a Lute-player, (I say not by the nimblenes of his fingers which are
perchance knotted with the gout, but by the plain and sweet Harmony of his
Tabulatorie as they term it, which makes thee to deem him to have cunning in
his head, although he can no more utter it with his hands,) so as thou
would consider how thou have in thy self a desire to go, though thy feet be
not able to bear thee; a discretion to judge of things that are spoken; though
thine eyes cannot convey it unto thee; a sound eloquence, though for want of
thy teech thou cannot well express it; and which is above all the rest, a
substantial quick and heavenly reason, even when thy body is most earthly
and drooping. Thou would soon conclude that the force and power of
quickening* moving, and perceiving, is whole and sound in thy soul, and that
the default is altogether in thy body. Insomuch that if she had a new body and
new instruments given unto her, she would be as lusty and cheerely as ever
she was, and that the more she perceives the body to decay, the more she
labors to retire into her self which is a plain proof of that she is not
the body nor any part of the body, but the very life and in worker of the body.

And since it is so, That the Soul is a substance.
there needs no long scanning whether the soul be a substance or a quality.
For, seeing that qualities have no being but in another thing than themselves;
the life which causes another thing to be, cannot be a quality. Forasmuch
then as the Soul makes a man to be a man; who otherwise should be but a
carcass or carrion: doubtless (unless we will say that the only difference
which is betwixt a man and a dead carcass, is but in accidents) we must needs
grant that the soul is a forming substance and a substantial form, yea and a
most excellent substance infinitely passing the outward man, as which by the
power and virtue thereof causes another thing to have being, and perfecteth
the bodily substance which seems outwardly to have so many perfections.

But hereupon inseweth another controversy, whether this substance be a bodily
or an unbodily substance: which cause requires somewhat longer examination.
Soothly, if we consider the nature of a body, it has certain measurings, and
comprehends not any thing which is not proportioned according to the
greatness and capacity thereof. For, like as it self must be fain to have a
place in another thing; so must other things occupy some certain place in it,
by reason whereof it comes to pass, that things can have no place therein if
they be greater then it, without annoying the one the other. To be short, if
the thing be less than the body that contains it, the whole body shall not
contain it, but only some part thereof: And if it be greater, then must some
part thereof needs be out of it: Bodilesse.
for there is no measuring of bodies but by quantity. Now we see how our soul
comprehends heaven and earth, without annoying either other; and likewise,
time past, present, and to come, without troubling one annother; and finally
innumerable places, persons and towns, without cumbering of our understanding.
The great things are there in their full greatness, and the small things in
their uttermost smallness, both of them whole and sound, in the soul whole
and sound, and not by piecemeale or only but in part of it. Moreover, the
fuller it is, the more it is able to receive, the more things that are couched
in it, the more it still coveteth; and the greater the things be, the fitter is
she to receive them even when they be at the greatest. It follows therefore
that the soul (which after a sort is infinite) cannot be a body. And so much
the less can it so be, for that whereas it harboreth so many and so great
things in it, it self is lodged in so small a body. Again, as a thousand
diverse places are in the soul or mind without occupying any place; so is the
mind in a thousand places without changing of place; and that ere whiles not
by succession of time, nor by turns, but oftentimes altogether at one instant.
Bid thy Soul or Mind go to Constantinople, and forthwith to turn back
again to Rome, and straight way to be at Paris or Lions: Bid it pass through
Amercia, or to go about Affricke; and it dispatcheth all these iourneys at a
trice: look whether soever thou directest it, there it is; and or ever thou
call it back, it is at home again. Now, is there a body that can be in
diverse places at once, or that can pass without removing, or that can move
otherwise than in time, yea and in such time as (within a little under or over)
is proportioned both to his pace, and to the lenght of the way which it has to
go: Then is it certain that our Soul is not a bodily substance; which thing
appears so much the more plainly, in that being lodged in this body which is
so movable, it removes not with the body. Also it is a sure ground, that two
bodies connot mutually enter either into other, nor contain either other: but
the greater must always needs contain, and the lesser must needs be
contained. But by our Souls, we enter, not only either into others bodies, but
also either into others minds, so as we comprehend either other by mutual
understanding, and embrace either other by mutual loving. It follows then
that this substance which is able to receive a bodilesse thing, can be no body;
and that so much the rather, for that the body which seems to hold it,
contains it not. Nay verily, this Soul of ours is so far of from being a
bodily substance, and is so manifestly a Spirit; that to lodge all things in it
self, it makes them all after a sort spiritual, and bereveth them of their
bodies; and if there were any bodylinesse in it, it were unable to enter into
the knowledge of a body. So in a Glass a thousand shapes are seen: but if
the clear of the Glass had any peculiar shape of it own, the Glass could
yield none of those shapes at all. Also all visible things are imprinted in the
eye; but if the sight of the eye had any peculiar color of it own, it would
be a blemish to the sight, so as it should either not see at all, or else all
things should seem like to that blemish. Likewise, whereas the Tongue is the
discerner of all tastes; if it be not clear but cumbered with humors, all
things are of taste like to the humor, so as if it be bitter, they also be
bitter; and if it be waterish, they be waterish to; yea and if it be bitter, it
can not judge of bitterness it self. That a thing may receive all shapes all
colors, and all tastes; it behooves the same to be clear from all shapes, from
all color, and from all savor of it own. And that a thing may in
understanding know and conceive all bodies, as our soul does, it behooves the
same to be altogether bodilesse it self* for had it any bodilinesse at all, it
could not receive any body into it. If we look yet more nearly into the nature
of a body, we shall find that no body receives into it the substantial form
of another body, without losing or altering his own, ne passes from one form
into another, without the marring of the first; as is to be seen in wood when
it receives fire, in seeds when they spring forth into bud, and so in other
things. What is to be said then of man's soul, which receives and conceives
the forms and shapes of all things without corrupting his own, and moreover
becomes the perfecter by the more receiving? For the more it receives, the
more it understands; and the more it understands, the more perfect it is.

If it be a bodily substance, from whence is it and of what mixture? If it be
of the four Elements, how can they give life, having no life of themselves? Or
how can they give understanding, having no sense? If it be of the mixture of
them, how may it be said that of diverse things which have no being of
themselves, should be made a thing that has being? Or that of diverse outsides
should be made one body? or of diverse bodies, one Soul? or of diverse deaths,
one life? or of diverse darknesses, one light? Nay rather, why say we not that
he which beyond nature has made the mixture of these bodies, has for the
perfecting of our body, breathed a Soul also into the body? To be short, the
property of a body is to suffer, and the property of our Soul is to do. And
if the body be not put forth by some other thing than it self, it is a very
block; whereas the mind that is in our Soul cease not to stir up and down in
it self, though it have nothing to move it from without. Therefore it is to be
concluded by these reasons and by the like, that our Soul is a bodilesse
substance, notwithstanding that it is united to our body.

And hereupon it follows also, Vnmateriall.
that our Soul is not any material thing, for as much as matter receives not
any form or shape but according to his own quantity, and but only one form
at once, whereas our Soul receives all forms without quantity, come there
never so many at once or so great. Again, no matter admits two contrary
forms at once; but our Soul contrariwise comprehends and receives them
together, as fire and water, heat and cold, white and black; and not only
together, but also the better by the matching and laying of them together. To
be short, seeing that the more we depart from matter, the more we understand:
surely nothing is more contrary to the substance of our Soul, than is the
nature of matter. Furthermore, if this reasonable soul of ours is neither a
bodily nor a material thing, nor depending upon matter in the best actions
thereof: then must it needs be of it self, and not proceed either from body or
from matter. For what does a body bring forth but a body; and matter but
matter; and material but materials: And therefore it is an unmateriall
substance, which has being of it self.

But let us see whether the same be corruptible and mortal on no. The Soul
has being of it self. Plutarch in his Treatise why God deferreth the
punishment of the wicked. Incorruptible
Soothly, if Plutarch be to be believed, it is in vain to dispute thereof. For
he teaches, that the doctrine of Gods providence, and the immortality of our
Souls are so linked together, that the one is as an appendant to the other.
And in very deed, to what purpose were the World created, if there were no body
to behold it: Or to what end behold we the Creator in the world, but to serve
him* And why should we serve him upon no hope: And to what purpose has he
indewed us with these rare gifts of his, which for the most part do but put us
to pain and trouble in this life: if we perish like the brute Beast or the
Herbs, which know him not* Howbeit, for the better satisfying of the silly
Souls which go on still like witless Beasts, without taking so much leisure
in all their life, as once to enter into themselves; let us endeavor here by
lively reasons to paint out unto them again their true shape, which they
labor to deface with so much filthiness. The Soul of man (as I have said
before) is not a body, neither does it increase or decrease with the body: but
contrary wise the more the body decays, the more does the understanding
increase; and the nearer that the body draws unto death, the more freely does
the mind understand; and the more that the body abateth in flesh, the more
workfull is the mind. And why then should we think, that the thing which
becomes the stronger by the weakness of the body, and which is advanced by
the decay of the body, should return to dust with the body: A man's Senses
fail because his eyes fail, and his eyes fail because the Spirits of them
fail: but the blind man's understanding increases, because his eyes are not
buside: and the old man's reason becomes the more perfect by the loss of his
sight. Therefore why say we not that the body fails the Soul, and not the
Soul the body; and that the Glasses are out of the Spectacles but the eysight
is still good: Why should we deem the Soul to be forgone with the Senses: If
the eye be the thing that sees, and the care the thing that hears; why do
we not see things double, and hear sounds double, seeing we have two eyes and
two ears? It is the soul then that sees and hears; and these which we take
to be our senses, are but the instruments of our senses. And if when our eyes
be shut or picked out, we then behold a thousand things in our mind; yea, and
that our understanding ir then most quick-sighted, when the quickest of our
eysight is as good as quenched or stark dead: how is it possible that the
reasonable soul should be tied and bound to the senses? What a reason is it to
say that the soul dies with the senses, seeing that the true senses do then
grow and increase, when the instruments of sense do die? And what a thing were
it, to say that beast is dead, because he has lost his eyes, when we our
selves see, that it lives after it has forgone the eyes? Also I have proved
that the soul is neither the body, nor an appertenance of the body. Since it is
so, why measure we that thing by the body, which measures all bodies; or make
that to die with the body, whereby the bodies that die, yea many hundred years
ago, do after a certain manner live still? Or what can hurt that thing, whom
nothing hurts or hinders in the body? Though a man lose an arm, yet does
his soul abide whole still. Let him forgo the one half of his body, yet is
his soul as sound as before: for it is whole in it self* and whole in every
part of it self, united in it self and in the own substance, and by the force
and power thereof it sheadeth it self into all parts of the body. Though the
body rot away by piecemeal, yet abides the Soul all one and undiminished. Let
the blood dreyn out, the moving wax weak, the senses fail, and the strength
perish; and yet abides the mind nevertheless sound and lively even to the
end. Her house must be pierced through on all sides, ere she be discouraged;
her walls must be battered down ere she fall to fleeting; and she never
forsakes her lodging, till no room be left her to lodge in. True it is, that
the brute beasts forgo both life and action with their blood. But as for our
soul (if we consider the matter well) it is then gathered home into it self,
and when our senses are quenched, then does it most of all labor to surmount
it self: working as goodly actions at the time that the body is at a point to
fail it, yea and often times far goodlier also, than ever it did during the
whole life time thereof. As for example, it takes order for it self, for our
household, for the Commonweal, and for a whole Kingdom; and that with more
uprightness, godliness, wisdom; and moderation, than ever it did before, yea
and perchance in a body so far spent, so bare, so consumed, so withered
without, and so putrified within, that whosoever looks upon him sees nothing
but earth, and yet to hear him speak would ravish a man up to heaven, yea,
and above heaven. Now when a man sees so lively a soul in so weak and
wretched a body, may he not say as is said of the hatching of chickens, that
the shell is broken, but there comes forth a chicken.

Also let us see what is the ordinary cause that things perish. Fire does
either go out for want of nourishment, or is quenched by his contrary which is
water. Water is resolved into air by fire, which is his contrary. The cause
why the Plant dies, is extremity of cold or drought, or unseasonable cutting,
or violent plucking up. Also the living wight dies through contrariety of
humors, or for want of food, or by feeding upon some thing that is against the
nature of it, or by outward violence. Of all these causes, which can we choose
to have any power against our Soul: I say against the Soul of man which
(notwithstanding that it be united to matter and to a body) is it self a
substance unbodily, unmateriall, and only conceivable in understanding: The
contrariety of things: Nay, what can be contrary to that which lodges the
contraries alike equally in himself: which understands the one of them by
the other: which coucheth them all under one skill? and (to be short) in whom
the contrarieties themselves abandon their contrarieties, so as they do not
any more pursue but ensue one another: Fire is hot, and water cold. Our bodies
mislike these contraries, and are grieved by them; but our mind linketh them
together without eithet burning or cooling it self; and it sets the one of
them against the other to know them the better. The things which destroy one
another through the whole world, do maintain one another in our minds. Again,
nothing is more contrary to peace then war is; and yet man's mind can skill to
make or maintain peace in preparing for war, and to lay earnestly for war
in seeking or inioying of peace. Even death it self (which dispatcheth our
life) cannot be contrary to the life of our Soul: for it seeks life by
death, and death by life. And what can that thing meet withal in the whole
world, that may be able to overthrow it, which can inioyne obedience to things
most contrary? What then Want of food: How can that want food in the world,
which can skill to feed on the whole world: Or how should that forsake food,
which the fuller it is, so much the hungryer it is; and the more it has
digested, the better able it is to digest: The bodily wight feeds upon some
certain things, but our mind feeds upon all things. Take from it the sensible
things, and the things of und^rstanding abide with it still: bereave it of
earthly things, and the heavenly remain abundantly. To be short, abridge it of
all worldly things, yea and of the world it self, and even then does it feed
at greatest ease, and makes best cheer agreeable to his owue nature. Also the
bodily wight fills it self to a certain measure, and delights in some
certain things. But what can fill our mind? Fill it as full as ye can with the
knowledge of things, and it is still eager and sharp set to receive more. The
more it takes in, the more it still craveth: and yet for all that, it never
feels any rawnesse or lack of digestion. What shall I say more: discharge our
understanding from the minding of it self, and then does it live in him and of
him in whom all things doelive. Again, fill it with the knowledge of it self,
and then does it feel it self most empty, and sharpest set upon desire of the
other. Now then, can that die or decay for want of food, which cannot be
glutted with any thing, which is nourished and maintained with all things, and
which lives in very deed upon him by whom all the things which we wonder at
here beneath are upheld*

And what else is violence, but a iustling of two bodies together: and how can
there be any such between a body and a spiritual substance: yea or of two
spirits one against another, seeing that oftentimes when they would destroy one
another, they uphold one another: And if the Soul cannot be pushed at, neither
inwardly nor outwardly: is there any thing in nature that can naturally hurt
it* No: but it may perchance be weakened by the very force of his encounter, as
we see it does befall to our senses. For the more excellent and the more
sensible the thing is in his kind which the sense receives, so much the more
also is the sense it self offended or grieved therewith. As for example, the
feeling, by fire; the taste, by harshnesse; the smelling, by savours; the
hearing, by the hideousness of noise, whether it be of Thunderclap or of the
falling of a River; and the sight, by looking upon the Sun, upon Fire, and
upon all things that have a glistering brightness. I omit, that in the most of
these things, it is not properly the sense it self, but the outward instrument
of sense only that is offended or hurt. But let us see if there be the like
in our reasonable soul. Nay, contrariwise the more of understanding and
excellency that the thing is, the more does it refresh and comfort our mind.
If it be dark so as we understand it but by halves, it hurts us not, but
yet does it not delight us. Nay, as we increase in understanding it, so does it
like us the better, and the higher it is, the more does it stir up the power of
our understanding, and (as you would say) reach us the hand to draw us to the
attainment thereof. As for them that are dimsighted, we forbid them to behold
the things that are over-bright. But as for them that are of rawest capacity,
we offer them the things that are most understandable. When the sense
begins to perceive most sharply, then it is fain to give over, as if it felt
the very death of it self. Contrariwise, when the mind begins to
understand, then is it most desirous to hold on still. And whereof comes
that, but that our senses work by bodily instruments, but our mind works by a
bodilesse substance which needs not the help of the body. And seeing that the
nature, the nourishment and the actions of our soul, are so far differing,
both from the nature, nourishment, and actions of the body, and from all that
ever is done or wrought by the body, can there be any thing more childish than
to deem our soul to be mortal by the abating and decaying of our senses, or by
the mortallity of our bodies? Nay contrariwise it may be most soundly and
substantially concluded thereupon that man's soul is of its own nature
immortal, seeing that all death as well violent as natural comes of the
body and by the body.

Let us see further what death or corruption is. What is death*
It is (say they) a separating of the matter from his form. And forasmuch as
in man the soul is considered to be the form, and the body to be as the
matter, the separation of the soul from the body is commonly called death. Now
then, what death can there be of the soul. since it is unmateriall, as I have
said before, and a form that abides of it self? For (as one says) a man may
take away the roundnesse or squarenesse from a table of copper, because they
have no abiding but in the matter: but had they such a round or square form, as
might have an abiding without matter or stuff wherein to be, out of doubt,
such form or shape should continue for ever. Nay (which more is) how can that
be the corrupter of a thing, which is the perfection thereof: The less
corsinesse a man has, the more has he of reason and understanding. The less
our minds be tied to these bodily things, the more lively and cheerful be
they. At a word, the full and perfect life thereof, is the full and utter
withdrawing thereof from the body and whatsoever the body is made of. All
these things are so clear as they need no proof. Now, we know that every
thing works according to the proper being thereof and that the same which
perfecteth the operations of a thing, perfecteth the being thereof also. It
follows therefore, that since the separation of the body from the Soul, and
of the form from the matter, perfecteth the operation or working of the soul
(as I have said before) it does also make perfect and strengthen the very being
thereof, and therefore cannot in any wise corrupt it. And what else is dying
but to be corrupted? And what else is corrupting but suffering: And what else is
suffering, but receiving: And how can that which receives all things without
suffering, receive corruption by any thing? Fire corrupts or marreth our
bodies, and we suffer in receiving it. So does also extreme cold: but if we
suffered nothing by it, it could not freese us. Our senses likewise are marred
by the excessive force of the things which they light upon. And that is because
they receive and perceive the thing that grieveth them, and for that the manner
of their behaving of themselves toward their objects, is subject to suffering.
But as for the reasonable Soul; which receives all things after one manner,
that is to wit, by way of understanding, where through it always works and is
never wrought into, how is it possible for it to corrupt or mar it self:

For what is the thing whereat our Soul suffers ought in the substance
thereof, I mean whereby the substance of our Soul is any whit impaired or
hurt by minding or conceiving the same in understanding: As little does the
fire hurt it as the air, and the air as the fire. As little hurt receives it
by the frozen ice of Norwey, as by the scorching sands of Affricke. As little
also does vice annoy it as virtue. For vice and virtue are so far of from
incombering the substance of the soul, that our mind does never conceive or
understand them better, than by setting them together one against another. That
thing therefore which does no whit appaire it self, but takes the ground of
perfecting it self by all things, cannot be marred or hurt by any thing.

Again, what is death: The uttermost point of moving, and the uttermost bound
of this life. For even in living we dye, and in dying we live, and there is not
that step which we set down in this life, which does not continually step
forward unto death, after the manner of a Diallor a Clock, which mounting up by
certain degrees forgoeth his moving in moving from Minute to Minute. Take away
moving from a body, and it does no more live. Now let us see if the soul also
be carried with the same moving. If it be carried with the same moving, then
does it undoubtedly move therewithal. Nay contrariwise, whether the mind rest,
or whether it be buzyed about the proper operations thereof, it is not
perceived either by any panting of heart, or by any beating of pulses, or by any
breathing of Lungs. It is then as a Ship that carries us away with it, whether
we walk or sit still; the sticking fast whereof or the tying thereof to a
post, hinders not our going up and down in it still. Again, if the soul
be subject to the sfin corruption of the body, then is it subject to the
alterations thereof also; and if it be subject to the alterations, it is
subject to time also. For alterations or changes, are spices, or rather
consequents of moving, and movings are not made but in time. Now man in respect
of the body has certain full points or stops, at the which he receives
manifest changes, and thereafter grows or decays. But commonly where the
decay of the body begins, there begins the chief strength of the mind*
Howbeit that in some men, not only their chinnes are covered with down, but
also their beards become gray, whose minds for want of exercise, show no sign
at all either of ripeness or growing. Moreover, time (as in respect of the
body) cannot be called again, but in respect of the mind it is always
present. Yea and time perfecteth, accomplisheth, and increases our mind, and
after a sort renews and fresheth it from day to day, whereas contrariwise it
forweareth, washes away and quight consumes, both it self, and the body with
the life thereof. It follows then that the reasonable Soul is not subject to
time, nor consequently to any of the changes and corruption that accompany
time. Nay we may say thus much more; That nothing in the whole world is
nourished with things better than it self; neither does any of them contain
greater things than it self; But the things that are corruptible do live of
corruptible things, and cannot live without corrupting them: as for example,
beasts live by herbs, men by beasts, and so forth. And therefore things which
live by uncorruptible things, and can so receive and digest them, as to turn
them into the nourishment of their nature, and yet not corrupt them; are
uncorruptible themselves to. Now the Soul of man, I mean the reasonable soul
or mind, conceives reason and truth, and is fed and strengthened with them.
And reason and truth are things unchangeable, not subject to time, place or
alteration, but steady, unchaungeable, and everlasting. For that twice two be
four, and that there is the same reason in the proportion of eight unto six
that is of four unto three, or that in a Triangle, the three inner angles are
equal with the too right angles; and such like; are truths, which neither
years, nor thousands of years can change; as true at this day, as they were
when Euclide first spoke them. And so forth of other things. It follows then
that the Soul comprehending reason and truth, which are things free from
corruption, cannot in any wise be subject to corruption.

Again, Who is he of all men that desires not to be immort all? And how could
any man desire it, if he understood not what it is? Or how could he be able to
understand it, unless it were possible for him to attain unto it? Surely none
of us coveteth to be beginninglesse, for none of us is so; neither can any of
us be so. And as we cannot so be, so also can we not comprehend what it is. For
who is he that it not at his wits end, but only to think upon eternity
without beginning? On the contrary part there is not so base a mind which
coveteth not to live for ever, insomuch that whereas we look not for it by
nature, we seek to obtain it by skill and policy, some by books, some by
Images, and some by other devices; and even the grossest sort can well imagine
in themselves what immortality is, and are able both to conceive it, and to
believe it. Whence comes this, but that our souls being created cannot
conceive an everlastingnesse without beginning, and yet nevertheless, that
forasmuch as they be created immortal, they do well conceive an immortality
or everlastingnesse without end? And whereto serves this universal desire, if
it be not natural? or how is it natural if it be in vain? and not only in
vain, but also to bring us to hell and to torment? Let us wade yet deeper. Who
can dispute, or once so much as doubt whether the soul be immortal or no, but
he that is capable of Immortality, And who can understand what difference is
betwixt mortal and Immortal, but he that is Immortal? Man is able to
discern the difference between that which is reason, and that which is not,
and thereupon we term him reasonable. Whosoever would hold opinion that a man
is not reasonable, should need none other disproof than his own disputing
thereof; for he would go about to prove it by reason. Man can skill to discern
the mortal natures from the immortal, and therefore we may well say he is
immortal. For he that should dispute to the contrary, shall be driven to bring
such reasons, as shall of themselves make him to prove himself immortal. Thou
say the soul cannot be immortal: and why? Because (say thou) that to be
so, it would behove it to work severally by it self from the body. When thou
think that in thy mind, consider what thy body does at the same time. Nay,
yet further, who has taught thee so much of the immortal nature, if thou thy
self be not immortal? Or what worldly wight can say what the inworking of a
reasonable wight is, but the wight which in it self has the use of reason.

Yet say thou still* if the soul be immortal, it is free from such and
such passions. How enterest thou so far into the Nature that is so far above
thee, if thou thy self be mortal? All the reasons which thou alleadgest
against the immortality of the soul do fight directly to the proof of it.
For if thy reason mounted no higher than to the things that are mortal, thou
should know neither mortal nor immortal. Now it is not some one covetous
man above all other, that desires immortality, nor some one man excelling all
others in wisdom, that comprehends it, but all mankind without exception. It
is not then some one several skill or some one natural property, that makes
such difference between man and man as we see to be between many, but rather
one selfsame nature common to all men, whereby they be all made to differ from
other living wights, which by no deed do show any desire to over live
themselves, ne know how to live, and therefore their lives do vanish away with
their blood, and is extinguished with their bodies. If ever thou have looked to
die, consider what discourse thou made then in thy mind, thou never could
persuade thy conscience, nor make thy reason to conceive, that the soul should
dye with the body; but even in the selfsame time when it disputes against it
self, it shifteth it self I wot not how from all thy conclusions, and fails
to consider in what state it shall be, and where it shall become when it is out
of the body. The Epicure that has disputed of it all his life long, when he
comes to death, bequeatheth a yearly pension for the keeping of a yearly
feast on the day of his birth. I pray you to what purpose serve feastings for
the birth of a Swine, seeing he esteems himself to be no better than so?
Nay, what else is this, than a crying out of his nature against him, which with
one word confuteth all his vain arguments? Another labors by all means
possible, to blot out in himself the opinion of immortallity; and because he
has lived wickedly in this world, he will needs bear himself on hand, that
there is no Justice in the world to come. But then is the time that his own
nature waketh and starteth up, as it were out of the bottom of a water, and at
that instant painteth again before his eyes, the selfsame thing which he
took so much pains to deface. And in good sooth, what a number have we seen,
which having been despisers of all Religion, have at the hour of death been
glad to vow their souls to any Saint for relief; so clear was then the
presence of the life to come before their eyes. Clevi. lib. 1.
I had lever (said Zeno) to see an Indian burn himself cheerfully, than to
hear all the Philosophers of the World discoursing of the immortality of the
soul; and in very deed it is a much stronger and better concluded argument.
Nay then, let us rather say, I had lever see an Atheist or an Epicure witness
the immortallity of the soul, and willingly taking an honorable farewell of
nature upon a scaffold, then to hear all the Doctors of the world discoursing
of it in their pulpits. For whatsoever the Epicures say there, they speak it
advisedly and (as ye would say) fresh and fasting; whereas all that ever they
have spoken all their life before, is to be accounted but as the words of
Drunkards, that is to wit, of men besotted and fallen asleep in the delights
and pleasures of this world, where the wine and the excess of meat, and the
vapors that fumed up of them did speak, and not the men themselves. Three
lives in man.
What shall I say more? I have told you already, that in the inward man there
are (as ye would say) three men, the living, the sensitive, and the reasonable.
Let us say therefore that in the same person there are three lives continued
from one to another: namely, the life of the Plant, the life of the Beast, and
the life of the Man or of the Soul. So long as a man is in his mothers womb,
he does not only live and grow; his spirit seems to sleep, and his senses
seem to be in a slumber, so as he seems to be nothing else then a plant.
Nevertheless, if ye consider his eyes, his ears, his tongue, his senses, and
his movings, you will easily judge that he is not made to be for ever in that
prison, where he neither sees nor hears, nor has any room to walk in, but
rather that he is made to come forth into an opener place, where he may have
what to see and behold, and wherewith to occupy all the powers which we see to
be in him. As soon as he is come out, he begins to see, to feel, and to
move, and by little and little falls to the perfect using of his limbs, and
finds in this world a peculiar object for every of them, as visible things
for the eye, sounds for his hearing bodily things for his feeling and so forth.
But besides all this, we find there a mind; which by the eyes as by windows
beholds the world, and yet in all the world finding not any one thing worthy
to rest wholly upon, mounteth up to him that made it; which mind like an
Empress lodges in the whole world, and not alonely in this body; which by the
senses (and oftentimes also without the senses) mounteth above the senses, and
streyneth it self to go out of it self, as a child does to get out of his
mothers womb. And therefore we ought surely to say, that this Mind or Reason
ought not to be ever in prison. That one day it shall see clearly, and not by
these dim and cloudy spectacles: That it shall come in place where it shall
have the true object of understanding: and that he shall have his life free
from these fetters and from all the affections of the body. To be short, that
as man is prepared in his mothers womb to be brought forth into the world; so
is he also after a sort prepared in this body and in this world, to live in
another world. We then understand it, when by nature it behooves us to depart
out of the world. And what child is there which (if nature did not by her
cunning drive him out,) would of himself come out of his Covert, or that comes
not out as good as forlorn and half dead; or that if he had at that time
knowledge and speech, would not call that death, which we call birth; and that
a departure out of life, which we call the entrance into it? As long as we be
there, we see nothing though our eyes be open. Many also do not so much as stir,
except it be at some sudden scaring or some other like chance; and as for those
that stir, they know not that they have either sense or moving. Why then should
we think it strange, that in this life our understanding sees so little,
that many men do never mind the immortal nature, until they be at the last
cast, yea, and some think not themselves to have any such thing, howbeit that
even by so thinking they show themselves to have part thereof? And imagine we
that the unborn babe has not as much ado by nature to leave the poor skin
that he is wrapped in, as we have hinderance in our senses and in our
imprisoned reason, when we be at the point to leave the goods and pleasures of
this world, and the very flesh it self which holds us as in a grave? Or had
the babe some little knowledge; would he not say that no life were comparable
to the life where he then is, as we say there is no life to the life of this
world wherein we be? Or would he not account the stage of our senses for a
fable, as a great sort of us account the stage that is prepared for our Souls?
Yes surely: and therefore let us conclude where we began, namely that man is
both inward and outward. In the outward man, which is the body, he resembles
the being and the proportion of all the parts of the world. And in the inner
man he resembles whatsoever kind of life is in all things, or in any thing
that bears life in the world. In this mothers womb he lives the life of a
plant, howbeit with this further, that he has a certain commencement of sense
and moving which exceed the Plant, and do put him in a readiness to be
endowed with Senses as a Beast is. In this life he has Sense and moving in
their perfection, which is the property of a sensitive wight; but yet besides
these, he has also a beginning to reason and understand, which are a beginning
of another life, such as the sensitive wight has not, and this life is to be
perfected in another place. In the life to come he has his actions free and
full perfected, a large ground to work upon, able to suffice him to the full,
and a light to his understanding in stead of a light to the eye. And like as in
coming into the world, he came as it were out of another world; so in going
yet into another world, he must also go out of this world. He comes out of
the first world into the second, as it were failing in nourishment, but growing
in strength unto moving and sense: and he goes out of the second into the
third, failing in senses and moving, but growing in reason and understanding.
Now seeing we call the passage out of the first world into the second a birth,
what reason is it that we should call the passage out of the second into the
third a death? To be short, he that considers how all the actions of man's
mind tend to the time to come, without possibility of staying upon the present
time, how pleasant and delightful soever it be: we may well discern by them
all, that his being (which in every thing (as says Aristotle) follows the
working thereof) is also wholly bent toward the time to come; as who would say
this present life were unto it but as a narrow grindle, on the further side
whereof (as i^ were on the bank of some stream or running water,) he were to
find his true dwelling place and very home in deed.

But now is it time to see what is said to the contrary: Objections.
wherein we have to consider eftsoons that which we spoke of before; namely that
if all that ever is in us were transitoric and mortal, we should not be so
witty to examine the Immortallitie as we be: for of contraries the skill is all
one. If a man were not mortal, that is to say, if he had no life, he could not
dispute of the mortal life; neither could he speak of the immortal, if he
himself also were not immortal. Therefore let us go back retrive. Some man
will say, that the soul dies with the body, because the soul and the body
are but one thing, and he believes that they be both but one, because he sees
no more but the body. This argument is all one with theirs, which denied that
there is any God, because they saw him not. But yet by his doings thou may
perceive that there is a God: discern likewise by the doings of thy soul,
that thou have a soul. For in a dead body thou see the same parts remain,
but thou see not the same doings that were in it before. When a man is dead,
his eye sees nothing at all, and yet is there nothing changed of his eye: but
while he is alive he sees infinite things that are diverse. The power then
which sees is not of the body. Yet notwithstanding, how lively and
quick-sighted soever the eye be; it sees not it self. Wonder not therefore
though thou have a soul, and that the same soul see not it self. For if
thine eysight saw it self, it were not a power or ability of seeing, but
avisible thing: likewise, if thy soul saw it self, it were no more a Soul,
that is to say the worker and quickner of the body, but a very body, unable to
do any thing of it self, and a massy substance subject to suffering. For we
see nothing but the body and bodily substances. But in this thou perceivest
somewhat else than a body (as I have said before) that if thine eye had any
peculiar color of it own, it could not discern any other color than that.
Seeing then that thou conceivest so many diverse bodies at once in imagination:
needs must thou have a power in thee which is not a body. Be it (say they) that
we have a power of sense; yet have we not a power of reason; for that which we
call the power of reason or understanding, is nothing but an excellency or
rather a consequence offense, insomuch that when sense dies, the residue dies
therewith with also. Soothly in this which thou have said, thou have surmounted
sense; which thing thou had not done, if thou had nothing in thee
beyond sense. For whereas thou say, if the sense dye, the rest dies also;
it is a reason that proceeds from one term to another, and it is a gathering
of reasons which conclude one thing by another. Now the senses do indeed
perceive their objects, but yet how lively so ever they be, they reason not.
We see a Smoke; so far extends the sense. But if we infer, therefore
there must needs be fire, and thereupon seek who was the kindler thereof: that
surmounteth the ability of sense. We hear a piece of Music; that may any
beast do as well as we. But his hearing of it is but as of a bare sound;
whereas our hearing thereof is as of an harmony, and we discern the cause of
the concords and discords, which either delight or offend our sense. The thing
that hears the sound is the sense; but the thing that judges of that which
the sense conceives, is another thing than the sense. The like is to be said
of Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling. Our smelling of sents, our tasting of
savours, and our feeling of substances, is in deed the work of our senses. But
as for our judging of the inward virtue of the thing by the outward sent
thereof, or of the wholsomnesse or unwholsomnesse of food by the taste thereof,
or of the hotnesse or vehemence of a Fever by feeling the Pulse; yea and our
proceeding even into the very bowels of a man, whether the eye being the
quickest of all senses is not able to attain; surely it is the work of a more
mighty power than the Sense is. And in very deed there are Beasts which do
hear, see, smell, taste, and feel much better and quicklier than man does. Yet
notwithstanding none of them conferreth the contraries of colors, sounds,
sents and savours, none sorteth them out to the serving one of another, or to
the serving of themselves. Whereby it appears, that man excels the beasts
by another power than the senses, and that whereas a man is a Painter, a
Musician, or a Phisician, he has it from elsewhere then from his senses. Nay,
I say farther, that oftentimes we conclude clean contrary to the report of our
senses. One eye perchance tells us that a Tower which we see afar off is
round, whereas our reason deemeth it to be square: or that a thing is small,
which our reason tells us is great: or that the ends of lines in a long walk
do meet in a point, whereas our reason certifieth us that they run right forth
with equal distance one from another. For want of this discretion, certain
Elephants (says Vitellio) which were passing over a long bridge, turned back
being deceived; and yet they wanted not sight no more then we do. But they
that lead them were not deceived. Their leaders then besides their eysight, had
in them annother virtue or power which corrected their sight, and therefore
ought to be of higher estimation. In like case is it with the rest of the other
senses. For our hearing tells us, that the thunderclap is after the
lightning; but skill assures us that they be both together, for there is a
certain power in us, which can skill to discern what proportion is between
hearing and seeing. Also the tongue of him that has an ague, bears him on
hand that even sugar is bitter, which thing he knows by his reason to be
untrue. To be short, those which have their senses most quick and lively, be
not of the greatest wisdom and understanding, A man therefore differs from a
beast, and excels man by some other power than sense. For whereas it is
commonly said, that such as have seen most are commonly of greatest skill, we
see that many have travailed far both by Sea and land, which have come home as
wise as they went forth. A horse has as good eyes as he that rides upon him,
and yet for all his travailing, neither he, nor peradventure his rider whom he
bears become any whit the wiser by that which they have seen: whereby it
appears that it is not enough to see things unless a man do also mind them
to his benefit.

Now there is great difference between the livelynesse of the Sense, and the
power that governs the Sense; like as the report of a Spy is one thing, and
the Spy himself is another, and the wisdom of the Captain that receives the
report of the Spy is a third. Nay, who can deny, that sense and reason are
diverse things; or rather: who will not grant, that in many things they be clean
contrary? Sense bids us shun and eshew grief; whereas reason wills us to
proffer our leg sometime to the Surgeon to be cut off. Sense plucketh our hand
out of the fire, and yet we our selves put fire to our bare skin. He that
should see a Scevola burn off his own hand, without so much as once gnashing
his teeth at it, would think he were utterly senseless: so mightily does
reason overruled sense. To be short, Sense has his peculiar inclination, which
is appetite, and reason likewise has his, which is will. And like as reason
does often times over rule sense, and is contrary to it, so will corrects the
sensual appetite or lust that is in us, and warreth against it. For in an Ague
we covet to drink, and in an Apoplexy we covet to sleep, and in hunger we
covet to eat, and yet from all those things does our will restrain us. The
more a man follows his lust, the less is he led by will: and the more he
stands upon the pleasing of his senses, the less reason uses he ordinarily.

Again, let us consider the brute beasts which have the sensitive part as well
as we. If we have no more than that, how comes it to pass that a little
child drives whole flocks and herds of them whether he lists, and sometimes
whether they would not? Whereof comes it that every of them in their kind,
do all live, nestle, and sing after one sort, whereas men have their Laws,
Commonweales, manners of building, and forms of reasoning, not only diverse,
but also commonly contrary? Now what can harbor these contrarieties together,
but only that which has not any thing contrary unto it, and wherein all
contrary things, do lay away their contrariety? Surely it is not the sense
that can do it, whose proper or peculiar object is most contrary to the sense.
Besides this (as I have said before) whereas we conceive wisdom, skill, virtue,
and such other things which are all bodilesse, our senses have none other thing
to work upon, than the qualities of bodily substances. And whereas we make
universal rules of particular things, the senses attain no farther than to the
particular things themselves. And whereas we conclude of the causes by their
effects, our senses perceive no more but the bare effects: And whereas
concerning the things that belong to understanding, the more understandable
they be, the more they refresh us; contrariwise, the stronger that the sensible
things are, the more do they offend the sense: To be short, the selfsame
thing which we speak in behalf of the senses, proceeds from elsewhere than
from the Senses. And we will easily discern, that he which denies that
besides the common sense, there is in man a reason or understanding, distinct
and severed from the sense, is void both of understanding and of sense.

But see here a gross reason of theirs. This reason or power of understanding
(say they) which is in man, is corruptible as well as the power of perceiving
by the Senses. I think I have proved the contrary already, nevertheless, let
us examine their reasons yet further. The form or shape of every thing (say
they) does perish with the matter. Now the soul is as you would say the form
or shape of the body therefore it corrupts with the body. This argument were
rightly concluded, if it were meant of the material form. But I have proved
that the soul is unmateriall, and has a continuance of ir self. And indeed
the more it is discharged of matter, the more it retains his own peculiar
form. Therefore the corruption of the matter touches not the foul at all.
Again, if men's souls live (say they) after their bodies, then are they
infinite, for the world is without beginning and without ending, and (as we
know) nature can away with no infinite thing: therefore they live not after
their bodies. Yes, say I, for I have proved that the world has a beginning,
and that with so substantial reasons* as thou art not able to disprove.
Therefore it follows that the inconvenience which thou alledgest can have no
place. Another says, If dead men's souls live still, why come they not to tell
us so? And he thinks he has stumbled upon a wonderful subtle device. But
how does this follow in reason? There has not come any man unto us from the
Indies a long time: ergo there be no Indies. May not the same argument serve as
well to prove that we our selves are not, because we never went thither? Again,
what intercourse is there between things that have bodies, and things that have
no bodies, or between heaven and earth, considering that there is so small
intercourse even between men which live under one selfsame Sun? He that is
made a Magistrate in his own Country, does not willingly return to the place
of his banishment. Likewise the Soul that is lodged in the lap of his God, and
come home into his native soil, forgoeth the desire of these lower things,
which to his sight beholding them from above, and less then the point of a
needle. On the other side, he that is put in close prison* (how desirous soever
he be) cannot go out; so that soul which is in the Jarle of his sovereign
Lord God, has no respit or sporting time to come tell us what is done there.
Unto the one, the beholding of the everlasting God is as a Paradise wherein he
is willing to remain; and unto the other his own condemnation is an
imprisonment of his will. But we would have God to send both the one and the
other unto us to make us to believe. As who would say, it stood him greatly on
hand to have us to believe, and not rather us that we should believe. And in
effect what else is all this, but a desiring that some man might return into
his mothers womb again, to encourage young babes against the pinches and pains
which they abide in their birth, whereof they would be as shie as we be of
death, if they had the like knowledge of them? But let us let such vanities
pass, and come to the ground.

Ye bear us on hand (say they) that the soul of man is but one, though it
have diverse powers. Whereof we see the sensitive, and the growing powers to be
corrupted and to perish: therefore it should seem that the understanding or
reasonable power also should do the like. At a word, this is all one as if a
man should say, you tell me that this man, is both a good man, a good
Sword-player, and a good luteplayer altogether, and that because his sword
falls out of his hand, or his hand it self becomes lame, therefore he cannot
be a good or honest man still as you reported him to be. Nay though he lose
those instruments, yet cease he not therefore to be an honest man, yea, and
both a Sword-player, and a Lute-player too, as in respect of skill. Likewise
when our souls have forgone these exercises, yet cease they not to be the same
they were before. To inlighten this point yet more; of the powers of our Soul,
some are exercised by the instruments of the body, and othersome without any
help or furtherance of the body at all. Those which are exercised by the body,
are the senses and the powers of the senses, and the powers of the growing,
which may carry the sime likeness that is between a Luter and a Lute. Break
the Luters Lute, and his cunning remains still, but his putting of it in
practice fails. Give him another Lute and he falls to playing new again. Put
out a man's eye, and yet the ability of seeing abides still with him, though
the very act of seeing be disappointed. But give unto the oldest Hag that is,
the same eyes that he had when he was young, and he shall see as well as ever
he did. After the same manner is it with the growing or thriving power. Restore
unto it a good stomach, a sound liver, and a perfect heart; and it shall
execute his functions as well as ever it did before* The power that works of
it self and without the body, is the power of reason or understanding, which
if we will we may call the mind. And if thou yet still doubt thereof, consider
when thou mindest a thing earnestly what thy body furthereth thy mind therein,
and thou shall perceive that the more fixedly thou think upon it, the less
thou see the things before thee, and the more thy mind wandereth the more
thy body rests: as who would say that the workings of the body, are the
greatest hinderance and impediment that can be to the peculiar doings of the
mind. And this ability of understanding may be likened to a man, which though
he have lost both his hand and his lute; cease not therefore to be a man
still, and to do the true deeds of a man, that is to wit, to discourse of
things, to mind them, to use reason and such like; yea, and to be both a Luter
and a man as he was before, notwithstanding that he cannot put his Lute-playing
in exercise for want of instruments. Nay, (which more is) this understanding
part grows so much the stronger and greater, as it is less occupied and
busied about these base and corruptible things, and is altogether drawn home
wholly to it self, as is to be seen in those which want their eyes, whose
minds are commonly most apt to understand, and most firm to remember. Do we
debate of a thing in our selves? Neither our body nor out senses are busied
about it. Do we will the same? As little do they stir for that too. To
understand and to will (which are the operations of the mind.) the soul has
no need of the body, and as for working and being, they accompany one another
says Aristotle. Therefore to continue still in being, the soul has not to
do with the body, nor any need of the body: but rather to work well and to be
well, the soul ought either to be without the body, or at leastwise to be
utterly unsubject to the body.

Yea (say they) but yet we see men forgo their reason, as fools and
melancholy persons: and seeing it is forgon, it may also be corrupted* and if
corrupted, it may also die; for what is death but an utter and full
corruptnesse? Nay, thou should say rather; I have seen diverse, which having
seemed to have lost their right wits, have recovered them again by good diet
and medicinable drinks. But had they been utterly lost and forgone, no physic
could have restored them again: and had they been utterly perished, the parties
themselves should have had neither sense nor life remaining. Therefore of
necessity the soul of them was as sound as before. But our souls we see not
otherwise than by the body and by the instruments of the body as it were by
Spectacles, and our mind which beholds and sees through his imaginations as
it were through a cloud, is after a sort troubled by the dimming of the
spectacles, and by the smoakienesse of the imaginations. After that manner the
Sun seems to be dimmed and eclipsed; and that is but by the coming of the
moon or of some clouds between him and us, for in his light there is no
abatement at all. Likewise our eysight conceives things according to the
spectacles wherethough it looks or according to the color that over
thwarteth the things which it looks upon. Take away the impediments, and our
eyes shall see clear, purge away the humors, and our imagination shall be
pure: and so our understand shall see as bright as it did before, even as the
Sun shines after the putting away of the Clouds. And it fares not with our
Souls as it does with our bodies, which after a long sickness retain still
either a hardness of the Spleen* or a shortness of breath, or a falling of
the Rhewme upon the Lungs, or a skarre of some great wound that cannot be worn
out because of the break that was made in the whole. For neither in their
understanding, neither in their wills do our Souls feel any abatement,
saving that there abides some maime or blemish in the instruments; to wit (as
I will declare hereafter) so far forth as it pleases GOD for a just
punishment, to put the Soul in subjection to the body whose sovereign it was
created to have been, because it has neglected the will of the Creator, to
follow the lusts and likings of the body. This appears in Lunaticke folks
and such others, which have their wits troubled at times and by fitts. For
they be not vexed but at the stirring of their humors, being at other times
sober and well enough stayed in their wits, The like is seen in them that
have the falling sickness. For their understanding seems to be eclipsed, and
as it were stricken with a Thunderclap, during the time of their fitts; but
afterward they be as discreet as though they ailed nothing. To be short, the
body is subject to a thousand diseases, wherewith we see the understanding to
be no whit altered, because they touch not the instruments of the Sense and of
the Imaginations, which move the understanding. Troubled it is in deed by
those few things only, which infect the Sense and the Imagination, which by
that means report the things unfaithfully whereon the mind debateth. Therefore
ye shall never see any body out of his wits or out of his right mind, in whom
the Physicians may not manifestly perceive, either some default of the
instruments, as a misshapen and misportioned head; or else an overabounding of
some melancholic humor, that troubled and marred his body before it troubled
or impaired his mind. And like as the wisest men being deceived by false Spies,
do make wrong deliberations, howbeit yet grounded upon good reason, which thing
they could not do unless they were wise in deed: So the reason that is in
our mind makes false discourses, and gathers wrong conclusions, upon the
false reports of the imagination; which it could not do, if it were either
diminished or impaired, or done away way. Whereunto accords this ancient
saying, That there be certain follyes which none but wise men can commit, and
certain Errors which none but learned men can fall into: because that in some
cases, discretion and wisdom are requisite in the party that is to be
deceived, even to the intent he may be deceived; and learning is required in a
man that he may conceive and hold a wrong opinion. As for example, to beguiled
by a doubledealing Spy or by the surprising of a cosening letter, belongs to
none but to a wise man. For a grosheaded fool never breaks his brain about
such matters as might bring him to the making of false conclusions by mistaking
likelyhoods in stead of truth. Likewise to fall into Heresy by misconceiving
some high and deep point, befalls not to an ignorant person; for he is not
of capacity, neither does his understanding mount so high. To be short,
Whosoever says that man's Soul perishes with the body, because it is troubled
by the distemperature or misproportionatenesse of the body; may as well uphold
that the Child in the mothers womb dies with his mother, because he moves
with her, and is partaker with her of her harms and throws, by reason of the
streit conjunction that is between them; howbeit that many children have lived
safe and sound, notwithstanding that their mothers have dyed; yea and some have
come into the World even by the death of their mothers.

And whereas some say, that because our mind conceives not any thing here, but
by help of Imagination; therefore when the Imagination is gone with the
instruments whereunto it is tied, the Soul cannot work alone by it self, nor
consequently be alone by it self: surely it is alone as if they should say,
that because the Child being in his mothers womb takes nourishment of her
blood by his navill; therefore he cannot live when he is come out her womb, if
his navillstrings be cut off. Nay contrariwise, then is the time that the
mouth, the tongue, and the other parts of the Child do their duty, which
served erst to no purpose, saving that they were prepared for the time to come.
After the same manner also do we cherish our mind by Imagination in this
second life; which in the third life being (as ye would say) escaped out of
prison, shall begin to utter his operations by himself, and that so much the
more certainly, for that it shall not be subject to false reports, nor to the
senses either inward or outward, but to the very things themselves which it
shall have seen and learned. To be short, it shall live, but not in prison; it
shall see but not through spectacles; it shall understand, but not by reports;
it shall list, but not by way of lusting: the infirmity which the body casts
upon it as now shall then be away: the force which it brings now to the body,
shall then be more fresh and lively than before. Now then notwithstanding these
vain reasons of theirs, let us conclude, That our soul is an understanding or
reasonable power; over the which neither death nor corruption have naturally
any power, although it be fitted to the body to govern it. And if any man doubt
hereof, let him but examine himself, for even his own doubts will prove it
unto him. Or if he will stand in contention still, let him fall to reasoning
with himself: for by concluding his arguments to prove his soul mortal, he
shall give judgment himself that it is immortal. And if I have left any
thing unalleadged which might make to this purpose, (for why may I not* seeing
that even the selfsame things which I have been able to allege on the
behalf of mine adversaries, do drive them thereunto?) let us think also that
he which feels himself convicted in himself, and for whose behoof and
benefit it were greatly, both to believe it and to confess it, needs no more
diligent proof than has been made already. But if any man will yet of spite
stand wilfully still against himself, let him try how he can make answer to my
foresaid arguments: and in the mean while let us see what the said opinion of
the wisest men, yea, and of the whole world has been upon this matter.

CHAP. II.
That the immortality of the Soul has been taught by the Philosophers of old
time, and believed by all people and Nations.
SOothly it had been a very hard case, if this mind of ours which searches so
many things in nature, had not taken some leisure to search it self and the
nature thereof, and by searching attained to some point in that behalf. And
therefore as there have at all times been men, so shall we see also that men
have at all times believed and admitted the immortality of the soul, I say not
some one man, or some one Nation, but the whole world with general consent,
because all men universally and particularly have learned it in one school,
and at the mouth of one Teacher, namely even their own knowledge in themselves.
The holy Scripture which teaches us our salvation, uses no school arguments
to make us believe that there is a God: and that is because we cannot step out
of our selves never so little, but we must needs find him present to all our
senses. And it seems to speak unto us the less expressly of the
immortality of our souls, specially in the first books thereof, because we
cannot enter into our selves be it never so little, but we must needs perceive
it. But in as much as from the one end thereof to the other* it declares unto
us the will of God: in so doing, it does us to understand, that it is a thing,
whereof it is not lawful for us to doubt. And whereas it sets forth so
precisely from age to age; The opinion of the Men of old time.
the great and manifold troubles and pains which good and godly men have
suffered in endeavoring to follow that will, it shows infalibly that their
so doing was in another respect than for this present wretched life. For who is
he that would depart with any piece of his own liking in this life, but in hope
of better things? and what were it for him to lose his life, if there were not
another life after this? This serves to answer in one word to such as demand
express texts of Scripture, and are loath to find that thing in the Bible,
which is contained there, not only in every leaf, but almost in every line.
For whereas God created man after the world was fully finished and perfected:
it was as much as if he had brought him into a Theater prepared for him,
howbeit after another sort than all the other living things which were to do
him service. As for beasts, birds, plants, and such other things, the elements
brought them forth, but man received his soul by inspiration from God. Also
the brute beasts are put in subjection to man, but man is in subjection only
unto God. And the conveying of that good man Henocke out of this life for his
godliness, was to none other end, but to set him in another life void of all
evil, The belief of the Patriarks, etc.
and full of all good. But when we read the persecutions of Noe; the
overthwartings of Abraham, the banishment and wayfarings of Jacob, and the
distresses of Joseph, Moses, and all the residew of the Fathers; they be all of
them demonstrations, that they did certainly trust and believe that the soul
is immortal, that there is another life after this, and that there is a
judgment to come. For had they been of opinion that there is none other life
after this; the flesh would have persuaded them to have held themselves in
quiet here, and they would have liked nothing better than to have followed
sweetly the common trade of the world, Noe among his friends, Abeaham among the
Chaldees, Moses in Pharoahs Court, and so forth. So then, although the
Scripture seem to conceal it; yet does it speak very loud thereof in deed,
considering that all the cries of the good and godly, and all the despayres of
the wicked which it describes unto us, do sound none other things unto us, if
we have cares to hear it. And it may be, that in the same respect, this
article of the Immortality of the Soul was not put into the ancient Creed of
the Jews, nor also peculiarly into the Creed of us Christians, because we
believe beyond reason, and this is within the bounds of reason; and whosoever
treats of Religion must needs presuppose God eternal and man immortal,
without the which two, all Religion were in vain. Also, when we see that
Godliness, Justice, and virtue were commended among the Heathen of all ages:
it is all one as if we should hear them preach in express words the
Immortality of the Soul. For their so doing is builded every whit upon that,
as upon a foundation without the which those things could not stand. I will
spend my goods or my life for the maintenance of Justice. What is this Justice
but a vain name, or to what end have I so many respects, if I look for
nothing out of this present world here: I will (said a man of old time) rather
lose even the reputation of an honest man, thau behave myself otherwise than
honestly. But why should I do so, if I look for no good in another world,
seeing I have nothing but evil here: Surely if there be none other thing than
this life, The wise Men of Egypt.
then is virtue to be used no further, than profit and commeditie may grow
upon it; and so should it become a Chaffer and Merchandise, and not virtue in
deed. Yet notwithstanding, those are the ordinary speeches, even of such as
speak doutfully of the Immortality of the Soul. Therefore they do but deny
the ground and yet grant the consequence; which is all one as if a man having
first bin burned should fall to disputing whether fire be hot or no. But now
(which is better for us) I will here gather together their own speeches one
after another.

Hermes declares in his Poemander, Hermes in his Poemander, (...).
how at the voice of the everlasting, the Elements yielded forth all
reasonlesse living wights as it had bin out of their bosoms. But when he
comes to man, he says, He made him like unto himself, he linked himself to
him as to his Son, (for he was beautiful and made after his own Image) and
gave him all his works to use at his pleasure. Again, he exhorts him to
forsake his body, (notwithstanding that he wonder greatly at the cunning
workmanship thereof) as the very cause of his death, and to manure his soul
which is capable of immortality, and to consider the original root from whence
it sprang, which is not earthly but heavenly, and to withdraw himself even
from his senses, and from their traiterous allurements to gather himself wholly
into that mind of his which he has from God, and by the which, he following
Gods word, may become as God. Discharge thy self (says he) of this body which
thou bear about thee, for it is but a cloak of ignorance, a foundation of
infection, a place of corruption, a living death, a sensible carryon, a
portable grave, and a household thief. It flattereth thee because it hates
thee, and it hates thee because it envieth thee. As long as that lives it
bereaveth thee of life, and thou have not a greater enemy than that. Now, to
what purpose were it for him to forsake this light, this dwelling place, and
this life, if he were not sure of a better in another world (as he himself
says more largely afterward.) On the other side, what is the soul?) Hermes in
his Poemander, cap. 10.
The soul (says he) is the garment of the mind, and the garment of the soul
is a certain spirit, whereby it is united to the body. And this mind is the
thing which we call properly the man, that is to say, a heavenly wight which is
not to be compared with beasts, but rather with the Gods of heaven, if he be
not yet more than they. The heavenly cannot come down to the earth without
leaving the heaven, but man measures the heaven without removing from the
earth. (...).
The earthly man then is as a mortal God, and the heavenly God is as an
immortal man. To be short, his conclusion is, That man is double, mortal as
touching his body, and immortal as touching his soul, Hermes in his
Esculapius. Aenaeas Gaz. concerning the immortality of the Soul. Chaldeans.
which soul, is the substantial man, and the very man created immediately of
God (says he) as the light is bred immediately of the Sun. And Chalcidius
says, that at his death he spoke these words. I go home again into mine own
country, where my better forefathers and kinsfolk be.

Of Zoroastres who is yet of more antiquity than Hermes, we have nothing but
fragments. Nevertheless, many report this argument to be one of his, That men's
souls are immortal, and that one day there shall be a general rising again of
their bodies; and the answers of the wise men of Chaldye (who are the heirs of
his Doctrine) do answer sufficiently for him. There is one that exhorts men
to return with speed to their heavenly father, who has sent them from above, a
soul endowed with much understanding, and another that exhorts them to seek
paradise, as the peculiar dwelling place of the soul. A third says that the
soul of man has God as it were shut up in it, and that it has not any
mortality therein. For (says he) the soul is as it were drunken with God, and
shows forth his wonders in the harmony of this mortal body. And again,
another says, It is a clear fire proceeding from the power of the heavenly
father, an uncorruptible substance, and the maintainer of life, containing
almost all the whole world with the full plenty thereof in his besom. But one
of them proceeds yet further, affirming that he which seteth his mind upon
godliness, shall save his body, frail though it be. And by those words he
acknowledges the very glorifying of the body.

Now, The Greeks.
all these sayings are reported by the Platonists, and namely by Psellus; and
they refuse not to be acknowne that Pythagoras and Plato learned them of the
Chaldees; insomuch that some think, that the foresaid Hermes and Zoroastres,
and the residue aforementioned, are the same of whom Plato speaks in his
second Epistle, and in his eleventh Book of Laws, when he says that the
ancient and holy Oracles are to be believed, which affirm men's Souls to be
Immortal, and that in another life they must come before a Judge that will
require an account of all their doings: The effect whereof comes to this,
That the Soul of man proceeds immediately from God, that is to say, that the
father of the body is one, and the Father of the Soul is another: That the Soul
is not a bodily substance, but a Spirit and a Light: That at the departure
thereof from hence, it is to go into a Paradise, and therefore ought to make
haste unto death: And that it is so far from mortality, that it makes even the
body Immortal. What can we say more at this day, even in the time of light
wherein we be? Pherecydes.
Pherecydes the Syrian, the first that was known among the Greeks to have
written prose, taught the fame. Assyrium vulgo nascetur Amonium.
And that which Virgill says in his second Eglog concerning the Drug or Spice
of Assyria, and the growing thereof every whereis interpreted of some men to be
meant of the Immortality of the Soul, the doctrine whereof Pherecydes brought
from thence into Greece; namely, that it should be understood everywhere
throughout the whole world. Phocylides.
Also Phocylides who was at the same time, speaks thereof in these words,
(...). That is to say: The Soul of man immortal is, and never wears away
With any age or length of time, but lives fresh for aye.


And again: (...),
(...).
The Remnants which remayn of men unburied in the grave,
Become as Gods, and in the Heavens a life most blessed have.
For though their bodies turn to dust, as daily we do see,
Their Souls live still for evermore from all corruption free.


And in another place he says again: (...).
We hope that we shall come again
Out of the earth to light more plain.


And if ye ask him the cause of all this: he will answer you in another verse
thus. (...).
Because the Soul, Gods Instrument and Image also is.


Which saying he seems to have taken out of this verse of Sibil^. Sybill.
(...).
In very reason Man should be
The Image and the shape of me.


Of the same opinion also are Orpheus, Pindar in the second song of his
Olympiads. Homer in the Funerals of his Iliads.
Theognis, Homer, Hesiodus, Pindar, and all the Poets of old time; which may
answer both for themselves and their own Countries, and for the residue of
their ages. Likewise Pythagoras a disciple of Pherecides, held opinion that the
Soul is a bodylesse and immortal substance, put into this body as into a
Prison for sinning. And whereas the fleeting of souls out of one body into
another, is fathered upon him; although the opinion be not directly against the
immortality of the soul, yet do many men think that he has wrong done unto
him. And his Disciple Timaeus of Locres reports otherwise of him. For what
punishment were it to a voluptuous man, to have his Soul put into a beast,
that he might become the more voluptuous without remorse of sin? Soothly it
is all one as if in punishment of murder or theft, ye would make the
murderer to cut the throats of his own father and mother, or the thief to
commit treachery against God. Howsoever the case stand, he teaches in his
verses, that man is, of heavenly race, and that (as Jamblichus reports) he is
set in this world to behold God. And his Disciple Arckitas says, Pythagor^s.
that God breaths reason and understanding into him. Likewise Philolaus
affirms that the Divines and Prophets of old time bear record, Heraclitus as
he is reported by Philo. Epicharmus as he is reported by Clement of Alexandria.
that the soul was coupled with the body for her sins, and buried in the same
as in a grave. Of Epicharmus we have this saying. If thou be a good man in
thy heart; death can do thee no harm, for thy soul shall live happily in
heaven, etc. Also of Heraclides we have this saying. We live the death of them
(that is to say of the blessed) his meaning is that we be not buried with our
bodies, and we dye their life, that is to say, we be still after this body of
ours is dead. Thales, Anaxagoras, Diogenes and Zeno.
Of the like opinion are Thales, Anaxagoras, and Diogenes concerning this
point; yea and so is Zeno too, howbeit that he thought the soul to be begotten
of man, wherein he was contrary to himself. To be short, scarcely were there
any to be found among the men of old time, Epicurus.
save only Democritus and Epicurus, that held the contrary way; whom the Poet
Lucre imitated afterward in his Verses. Yet notwithstanding when Epicurus
should dye, he commanded an Anniversary or Yeerminde to be kept in remembrance
of him by his Disciples: so greatly delighted he in a vain shadow of
immortality, having shaken off the very thing itself. Lucretius.
And Lucrece (as it is written of him) made his book being mad, at such times;
as the fits of his madness were off him, surely more mad when he thought
himself wisest, than when the fits of his frenzy were strongest upon him.
Whosoever reads the goodly discourses of Socrates upon his drinking of
poison, Socrates, Plato and Xenophon.
as they be reported by Plato and Xenophon himself; cannot doubt of his
opinion in this case. For he not only believed it himself, but also persuaded
many men to it with lively reasons, yea and by his own death much more then by
all his life. And so ye see we be come unto Plato and Aristotle, with consent
of all the wise men of old time, ungainsaid of any, saving of a two or three
malapart wretches, whom the ungraciousnesse of our days would esteem but as
drunken sots and disards. Plato in his Timaeus.
Certesse Plato (who might peradventure have heard speak of the Books of
Moses) does in his Timaeus bring in God giving commandment to the under-gods
whom he created, that they should make man both of mortal and of immortal
substances. Wherein it may be that he alluded to this saying in Genesis, Let us
make man after our own image and likeness. In which case the Jews say that GOD
directed his speech to his Angels; but our Divines say he spoke to himself.
But anon after, both in the same book, and in many other places, Plato (as it
were commming to himself again,) teaches that GOD created Man by himself,
Plato in his Timaeus, and in his third Book of a Commonweal.
yea, and even his Liver and his Brain and all his Senses; that is to say, the
Soul of him, not only endued with reason and understanding, but also with
sense and ability of growing and increasing; and also the instruments whereby
the same do work. Moreover, he makes such a manifest difference between the
Soul and the Body; as that he matcheth them not together as matter and form,
as Aristotle does: but as a Pilot and a Ship, a Commonweal and a Magistrate,
an Image and him that bears it upon him. What greater thing can there be than
to be like God? Plato in his Phoedon, in his matter of State, in his
Alcibiades, and in the tenth Book of his Commonweal.
Now (says Plato in his Phoedon) The Soul of Man is very like the Godhead;
Immortal, Reasonable, Uniforme, Undissoluble, and evermore of one sort, which
are conditions (says he, in his matters of State) that cannot agree but to
things most divine. And therefore at his departing out of the World, he willed
his Soul to return home too her kindred and to her first original, that is to
wit, (as he himself says there) to the wise and Immortal Godhead the Fountain
of all goodness, as called home from banishment into her own native Country. He
terms it ordinarily (...), that is to say, of Kyn unto God, and consequently
(...), that is to say, Plato in his fifth Book of Laws.
Everlasting, and of one self-same name with the immortal ones, a Heavenly
Plant and not a Earthly, rooted in and Heaven not in Earth, begotten from above
and not here beneath, and finally such as cannot dye here for as much as it
lives still in another place. To be short, seeing (says he) that it
comprehends the things that are Divine and Immortal, that is to wit, the
Godhead, and the things that are unchangeable and uncorruptible, as truth is:
it cannot be accounted to be of any other nature than they. The same opinion
does Plutarch also attribute unto him, which appears almost in every leaf of
his Writings. As touching the ancienter sort of Platonists, they agree all with
one accord in the Immortality of the Soul, saving that some of them derive it
from God, and some from the Soul of the World, some make but the Reason or
Mind only to be Immortal, and some the whole Soul: which disagreement may
well be salved, if we say that the Soul all whole together is Immortal in
power or ability, though the execution and performance of the actions which are
to be done by the body* be forgone with the instruments or members of the body.

The disagreement concerning this point among such as a man may vouchsafe to
call by the name of Philosophers, seems to have begun at Aristotle, howbeit
that his Disciples count it a commendation to him, that he has given occasion
to doubt of his opinion in that behalf. For it is certain that his new found
Doctrine of the eternity or everlastingnesse of the world, has distroubled his
brain in many other things, as commonly it falls out, that one error breeds
many other. Aristotl^ in his second book of living things.
Because nature (says he) could not make every man particularly to continue
for ever by himself, therefore she continues him in the kind by matching
male and female together. This is spoken either grosely or doubtfully. But
whereas he says that if the mind have any inworking of it own without any
help of the Senses or of the body, it may also continue of it self, concluding
thereupon, that then it may also be separated from the body, as an immortal
thing from a thing that is transitory and mortal: It follows consequently
also, that the soul may have continuance of it self, as whereof he utters
these words, Aristotle in the third book of the Soul.
namely, That the soul comes from without, and not of the seed of man, as
the body does, and that the Soul is the only part in us that is Divine. Now,
to be Divine and to be Humane, to be of seed and to be from without, that is
to say, from GOD; are things flat contrary, whereof the one sort is subject to
corruption, Aristotle in his 10. book of Moralls.
and the other not. In the tenth book of his Moralls he acknowledges two sorts
of life in man; the one as in respect that he is composed of body and soul,
the other as in respect of mind only, the one occupied in the powers which
are called humane and bodily, which is also accompanied with a felicity in this
life, and the other occupied in the virtues of the mind, which is accompanied
also with a felicity in another life, This which consists in contemplation,
is better than the other; and the felicity thereto belonging, is peculiarly
described by him in his books of Heaven above Time, as which consists in the
frank and free working of the mind, and in beholding the soverain God. And in
good sooth, Michael of Ephesus upon Aristotle's Moralls.
fulwell does Michael of Ephesus upon this saying of his conclude, that the
soul is immortal; and so must all his moralls also needs do, considering
that to live well, whether it be to a man's self or toward other men, were
else a vain thing and to no purpose, but to vex our minds in this life. In his
books of the soul, he not only separateth the body from the soul, but also
puts a difference betwixt the soul it self and the mind, termining the
soul the inworking of the body, (...). In his second book of the Soul.
and of the bodily instruments, and the mind that reasonable substance which
is in us, whereof the doings have no fellowship with the doings of the body,
and whereof the soul is (as Plato says) but the garment. This mind (says
he) may be severed from the body, it is not in any wise mingled with it, it is
of such substance as cannot be hurt or wrought upon, it has being and
continnance actually and of it self, and even when it is separated from the
body, then is it immortal and everlasting. To be short, it has not any thing
like unto the body. For it is not any of all those things which have being
before it understand them. And therefore which of all bodily things can it be?
And in another place he says thus: As concerning the mind, and the
contemplative power, it is not yet sufficiently apparent what it is,
Nevertheless, it seems to be another kind of soul, and it is that only
which can be separated from the corruptible, as the which is Ayeverlasting. To
be short, when as he puts this question, whether a Natural Philosopher is
to dispute of all manner of Souls, or but only of that Soul which is
immortal: it follows that he grants that there is such a one. And again,
when as he makes this argument, Look what God is everlastingly, that are we
in possibility, according to our measure; but he is everlastingly separated
from bodily things, therefore the time will come that we shall be so too. He
takes it that there is an image of God in us, yea even of the Divine nature
which has continuance of it self. Very well and rightly therefore does
Simplicius gather thereof, the immortality of the soul. In the last book of
the parts of beasts. In the tenth of his Supernaturalls. In his first book of
matters of State.
For it depends upon this separation, and upon continuance of being of it
self. Besides this he says also, that hunting of beasts is granted to man by
the law of nature, because that thereby man challenges nothing but that which
naturally is his own. But what right I pray you, if there be no more in
himself than in them? And what is there more in him than in them; if they have
a soul equal unto his? Hereunto make all his commendations of godliness, of
Religion, of blessedness, and of contemplation. For to what end serve all
these, which do but cumber us here below? Therefore surely it is to be
concluded, that as he spoke doubtfully in some one place, so he both termed and
also taught to speak better in many other places, as appears by his Disciple
Theophrastus, who speaks yet more evidently thereof than he.

The Latins (as I have said before) fell to Philosophy somewhat later then
the Greeks. The opinion of the Latin Writers.
And as touching their common opinion, the exercises of superstition that were
among them, the manner of speeches which we mark in their Histories, their
contempt of death, and their hope of another life; can give ne sufficient
warrant thereof, Cicero speaks unto us in these words. The original of our
souls and minds, Cicero in his first book of his Tusculane Questions, and in
his book of Comfort.
cannot be found in this low earth, for there is not any mixture in them, or
any compounding that may seem to be bred or made of the earth. Neither is
there any moisture, any windiness, or any fiery matter in them. For no such
thing could have in it the power of memory, understanding, and conceit, to
bear in mind things past to foresee things to come, and to consider things
present, which are matters altogether divine. And his conclusion is, that
therefore they be derived from the mind of God, that is to say, not bred or
begotten of man, but created of God: not bodily, but unbodily; whereupon it
follows that the soul cannot be corrupted by these transitory things. Cicero
in his second book of the nature of the Gods* and in his first book of Laws.
The same Cicero in another place says that between God and man there is a
kindred of reason, as there is between man and man a kindred of blood. That the
fellowship between man and man comes of the mortal body, but the fellowship
between God and man, comes of God himself, who created the soul in us. By
reason whereof (says he) we may say we have alyance with the heavenly sort, as
folk that are descended of the same race and root, whereof that we may ever
more be mindful, we must look up to heaven as to the place of our birth,
whether we must one day return. And therefore yet once again he concludes
thus of himself. In Scipio's dream.
Think not (says he) that thou thy self art mortal, it is but thy body that
is so. For thou art not that which this outward shape pretends to be, the
mind of man is the man indeed, and not this lump which may be pointed at with
ones finger. Assure thy self therefore that thou art a God; For needs must
that be a God, which lives, perceives, remembers, foreseeth, and finally
raineth in thy body as the great God the maker of all things does in the
universal world. For as the eternal God rules and moves this transitory
world, so does the immortal spirit of our soul move and rule our frail body.
Hereunto consent all the writers of his time, as Ovid, Virgill and others,
whose verses are in every man's remembrance. There wanted yet the wight that
should all other wights exceed
In lofty reach of stately mind, Ovid in his first book of Metamorphosis.
who like a Lord indeed
Should over all the res'due reign, Then shortly came forth man,
Whom either he that made the World, and all things else began.
Created out of seed divine, or else the earth yet young
And lately parted from the Sky, the seed thereof uncloong
Retained still in fruitful womb: which Japets son did take
And tempering it with water pure, a wight thereof did make,
Which should resemble even the Gods which soverein state do hold.
And where all other things the ground with grovelling eye behold*
He gave to man a stately look and full of Majesty.
Commanding him with steadfast look, to face the starry sky,


Here a man might bring in almost all Senecaes writings, Seneca writing to
Gallio and to Lucillus.
but I will content my self with a few sayings of his. Our Souls (says he)
are a part of Gods Spirit, and sparks of holy things shineing upon the earth.
They come from another place then this low one. Whereas they seem to be
conversant in the body, yet is the better part of them in heaven, always near
unto him which sent them hither. And how is it possible that they should be
from beneath, or from any where else than from above, seeing they overpasse all
these lower things as nothing, and hold scorn of all that ever we can hope or
fear? Thus ye see how he teaches that our souls come into our bodies from
above. But whether go they again, when they depart hence: Seneca concerning
the Lady Martiaes Son, and the shortness of this life. In his Questions and in
his book of comfort
Let us here him what he says of the Lady Martiaes Son that was dead. He is
now everlasting (says he) and in the best state, bereft of this earthly
baggage which was none of his, and set free to himself. For these bones, these
sinews, this coat of skin, this face, and these serviceable hands, are but
fetters and prisons of the soul. By them the soul is overwhelmed, beaten
down, and chased away. It has not a greater battle, than with that mass of
flesh. For fear of being torn in pieces, it labors to return from whence it
came, where it has ready for it an happy and everlasting rest. And again:
This soul cannot be made an Outlaw: for it is a kin to the Gods, equal to the
whole world, and to all time; and the thought or conceit thereof goes about
the whole Heaven, extending it self from the beginning of all time to the
uttermost point of that which is to come. The wretched course being the Iayle
and fetters of the soul, is tossed to and fro. Upon that are torments,
murders, and diseases executed. As for the soul, it is holy and everlasting,
and cannot be laid hand on. When it is out of this body, it is at liberty and
set free from all bondage, and is conversant in that beautiful place
(wheresoever it be) which receives men's souls into the blessed rest thereof
as soon as they be delivered from hence. To be short, he seems to prick
very nere to the rising again of the dead. For in a certain Epistle to
Lucillus, his words are these. Death, whereof we be so much afraid, does not
bereve us of life, but only discontinew it for a time; and a day will come that
shall bring us to light again. This may suffice to give us knowledge of the
opinion of that great personage, in whom we see that the more he grew in age,
the nerer he came still to the true birth. For in his latest books he treats
always both more assuredly and more evidently thereof.

Also the saying of Phavorinus is notable. Phavorinus.
There is nothing great in earth, (says he) but Man; and nothing great in Man,
but his soul if thou mount up thither, thou mountest above Heaven. And if thou
stoop down again to the body, and compare it with the Heaven; it is less
than a Fly, or rather a thing of nothing. At one word, this is as much to say,
as that in this clod of clay, there dwells a divine and uncorruptible nature:
for how could it else be greater than the whole world?

As touching the Nations of old time, The common opinion of all Nations.
we read of them all, that they had certain Religions and divine Services, so
as they believed that there is a Hell* and certain fields which they call the
Elysian fields, as we see in the Poets Pindarus, Diphilus, Sophocles Euripides
and others. Porphyrius, in his 4 book of Abstinence,
The more superstitious that they were, the more sufficiently do they witness
unto us what was in their Conscience. For true Religion and Superstition have
both one ground, namely the soul of man; and there could be no Religion at
all, Which with their own hands made the fire to burn their bodies in: and saw
alive the kindled flame that should consume their skin.
if the soul lived not when it is gone hence. We read of the Indians, that
they burned themselves before they came to extreme oldage, terming it the
letting of men loose, and the freeing of the soul from the body: and the
sooner that a man did it, the wiser was he esteemed. Which custom is observed
still at this day among the people that dwell by the River Niger otherwise
called the people of Senega in Affricke, who offer themselves willingly to be
buried quick with their Masters. All the demonstrations of Logic and
Mathematicke (says Zeno) have not so much force to prove the immortality of
the soul, as this only doing of theirs has. Also great Alexander having taken
prisoners ten of their Philosophers, (whom they call Gimnosophists) asked of
one of them to try their wisdom, whether there were more men alive or dead.
The Philosopher answered, that there were more alive: Because (said he) there
are none dead. Ye may well think they gave a dry mock to all the arguments of
Aristotle and Callisthenes, which with all their Philosophy had taught their
scholar Alexander so evil. Of the Thracians, we read that they sorrowed at
the brith of men and rejoiced at the death of them, yea even of their own
childen. And that was because they thought that which we call death, not to be
a death in deed, but rather a very happy birth. And these be the people whom
Herodotus reports to have been called the Neverdying Getes, and whom the
Greeks called the Neverdying Getes or Thracians. Gebeleizie, that is to say,
Register or giver of ease and rest.
Who were of opinion that at their departing out of this world, they went to
Zamolxis or Gebeleizie, that is to say (after the interpretation of the Getish
or Gotish tongue) to him that gave them health, salvation or welfare, and
gathered them together. The like is said of the Galls, chiefly of the
inhabiters about Marsilles and of their Druydes; of the Hetruscians and their
Bishops; and of the Scythians and their Sages; of whom all the learning and
wisdom was grounded upon this point. For look how men did spread abroad, so
also did this doctrine, which is so deeply printed in man, that he cannot but
carry it continually with him. Which thing is to be seen yet more in that
which we read concerning the hearers of Hegesias the Cyrenian, who dyed
willingly after they had heard him discourse of the state of men's souls after
this life; and likewise concerning Cleombrotus the Ambraciot, who slew himself
when he had read a certain treatise of the immortality of the soul. For had
it not been a doctrine most evident to man's wit, they would never have bin
carried so far by it, as to the hurting of their bodies. And if among so many
people, there be perchance some few wretched caytifes, that have borne
themselves on hand the contrary; which thing nevertheless they could never
yet fully persuade themselves to be out of all doubt or question: surely we may
believe that they had very much ado and were utterly besotted like Drunkards,
before they could come to that point: so as we may well say of them as Hierocle
the Pythagorist said: Herocles in his 10. Chap.
namely, That the wicked would not have their souls to be immortal, to the
intent they might not be punished for their faults. But yet that they prevent
the sentence of their Judge, by condemning themselves unto death before hand.
But if they will neither hear God, nor the whole world, nor themselves: let
them at leastwise hearken to the Devil as well as they do in other things;
Plutarke in his treatise of the slow punishing of the wicked.
who (as says Plutark) made this answer to Corax of Naxus and others in these
verses. It were a great wickedness for thee to say
The Soul to be mortal or for to decay.
And unto Polytes he answered thus As long as the Soul to the body is tide,
Though loath yet all sorrows it needs must abide.
But when fro the body Death does it remove,
To heaven by and by then it flies up above.
And there ever youthful in bliss it does rest,
As God by his wisdom has set for the best.


Not that any saying of the Devils own is to be alleged in witness of the
truth; further forth than to show that he speaks it by compulsion of Gods
mighty power, as wicked men diverse times do when they be upon the Rack. Now
we be come to the time or nere to the time that the heavenly doctrine of Jesus
Christ was spread over the whole world, unto which time I have proved the
continual succession of that doctrine, which could not but be unseparably
joined with the succession of men. The opinion of the later Philosophers.
But from this time forth it came so to light among all Nations and all
persons; that Saint Austin after a short tryumphing over ungodliness, cries
out in diverse places, saying: Who is now so very a fool or so wicked, as to
doubt still of the immortality of the Soul? Epictetus a Stoikphilosopher, who
was had in very great reputation among all the men of his time, is full of
goodly sayings to the same purpose. May we not be ashamed (says he) to lead
an unhonest life, Epictetus. (...).
and to suffer our selves to be vanquished by adversity? we be alyed unto God,
we came from thence, and we have leave to return thither from whence we came.
One while, as in respect of the soul, he terms man the offspring of GOD, or
as it were a branch of the Godhead; and another while he calls him a divine
Impe or a spark of God: by all which words (howbeit that they be somewhat
unproper) (for what words can a man find to fit that matter:) he shows the
uncorruptiblenesse of the substance of man's soul. Simplicius.
And whereas the Philosopher Simplicius has so diligently commented upon his
books, it does sufficiently answer for his opinion in that case, without
expressing his words here. Plotinus the excellentest of all the Platonists,
Plotinus. Plotin. lib. 1. Aenead 4. concerning the being of the Soul, and lib.
2. cap. 1. and lib. 3. cap. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22* 23. lib. 4. cap. 11. and the
seventh book throughout.
has made nine treatises expressly concerning the nature of the soul,
besides the things which he has written dispersedly here and there in other
places. His chief conclusions are these. That men's soul proceed not of their
bodies, nor of the seed of the Parent, but come from above, and are as ye
would say grafted into our bodies by the hand of God: That the soul is partly
tied to the body and to the instruments thereof, and partly frank, free,
workfull, and continuing of it self; and yet notwithstanding that it is
neither a body nor the harmony of the body, but (if we consider the life and
operation which it gives to the body) it is after a sort the perfection [or
rather the perfector] of the body; and if we have an eye to the understanding
whereby it guydeth the movings and doings of the body; it is as a Governor of
the body: That the further it is withdrawn from the Senses, the better it
discourses of things; insomuch that when it is utterly separated from them, it
understands things without discoursing, reasoning or debating, yea even in a
moment; because this debating is but a certain lightening or brightness of the
mind, which now takes advisement in matter whereof it doubts, and it
doubts wheresoever the body yields any impedements unto it; but it shall
neither doubt nor seek advisement any more when it is once out of the body, but
shall conceive the truth without wavering: That the soul in the body is not
properly there as in a place, or as in a ground, because it is not contained or
comprehended therein, and may also be separated from it; but rather if a man
had eyes to see it withal, he should see that the body is in the soul, as an
accessory is in a principal, or as a thing contained in a container, or a
sheding or liquid thing in a thing that is not liquid, because the Soul
imbraceth the body, and quickneth it, and moves it equally and alike in all
parts. That every ability thereof is in every part of the body, as much in
one part as in another, as a whole soul in every part; notwithstanding that
every several ability thereof seem to be severally in some particular member
or part, because the instruments thereof are there; as the sensitive ability
seems to rest in the head, the irefull in the heart, and the quickening in the
liver, because the sinews, heart strings, and veins come from those parts:
Whereas the reasonable power is not in any part, saving so far forth as it
works and has his operation there, neither has it any need of place or
instrument for the executing of it self. And to be short, that the soul is a
life by it self, a life all in one, unpaitable, which causes to grow, and
grows not it self; which goes through the body, and yet is not contained
of the body; which uniteth the senses, and is not divided by the Senses, and
therefore that it is a bodilesse substance, which cannot be touched, neither
from within nor from without, having no need of the body either outwardly or
inwardly, and consequently is immortal, divine, yea and almost a very God:
Which things he proves by many reasons, which were too long to be rehearsed
here. Plotinus in his Book of the Senses, and of Memory. En. 4. lib. 3. and in
his Book of doubts concerning the Soul, cap. 26, 27
Yea. he proceeds so far as to say, that they which are passed into another
world, have their memory still, notwithstanding that to some men's seeming, it
go away with the senses as the treasury of the senses. Howbeit he affirms it
to be the more excellent kind of memory, not that which calls things again
to mind as already past, but that which holds and beholds them still as
always present. Of which two sorts this latter he calls Mindfulnesse. and the
other he calls Remembrance. I will add but only one sentence more of his for
a full president of his Doctrine. The soul (says he) has had company with
the Gods, and is immortal, and so would we say of it (as Plato affirms) if
we saw it fair and clear. But for as much as we see it commonly troubled, we
think it not to be either divine or immortal, howbeit that he which will
discern the nature of a thing perfectly, must consider it in the very own
substance or being, utterly unmingled with any other thing. For whatsoever else
is added unto it, does hinder the perfect discerning of the same. Therefore let
everyman behold himself naked, without any thing save himself, so as he look
upon nothing else than his bare soul: and surely when he has viewed himself
in his own nature, merely as in respect of his mind, he shall believe himself
to be immortal. For he shall see that his mind aymeth not properly at the
sensible and mortal things, but that by a certain everlasting power, it takes
hold of the things that are everlasting, and of whatsoever is possible to be
conceived in understanding: insomuch that even it self becomes after a sort
a very world of understanding and light. This is against those which pretend a
weakness of the soul, by reason of the inconveniences which it indureth very
often in the body.

Of the same opinion are Numenius, Jamblichus, Porphirius, and Proclus,
notwithstanding that now and then they pass their bounds, suffering their wits
to run riot. For in their Philosophy they had none other rule, than only the
drift of their own reason. It was commonly thought that Alexander of Aphrodise
believed not the immortality of the soul, Alexander of Aphrodise in his Books
of the Soul.
because he defined it to be the form of the body, proceeding of the mixture
and temperature of the Elements. Surely these words of his do us to
understand, either that he meant to defiue but the sensitive life only (as
many others do) and not the reasonable soul, or else that he varieth from
himself in other places. And in very deed he says immediately afterward, that
he speaks of the things which are subject to generation and corruption. But
speaking of the soul he says it is separable, unmateriall, unmixed, and void
of passions, unless, perchance we may think as some do, that by this soul
he mean but only God, and not also the soul that is in us; for the which
thing he is sharply rebuked by Themistius, who notwithstanding spoke never a
whit better thereof himself. Howsoever he deal elsewhere, these words of his
following are without any doubtfulnesse at all. In his second Book of Problemes.
That the Soul (says he) which is in us, comes from without, and is
uncorruptible. I say uncorruptible because the nature thereof is such, and it
is the very same that Aristotle affirms to come from without. And in his
second Book of Problems, searching the cause why the abilities of the soul
are oftentimes impeached: If a man's brain be hurt (says he) the reasonable
soul does not well execute the actions that depend thereon. But yet for all
that, It abides still in it self, unchangeable of nature, ability, and power,
through the immortality thereof. And if it recover a sound instrument, it
puts her abilities in execution as well as it did before. But I will reason
more at large hereafter against the opinion that is fathered upon him.

What shall we say of Galen, Galen in his Book of the Manners of the Soul.
(who fathereth the causes of all things as much as he can, upon the Elements,
and the mixture and agreeable concord of them) if after his disputing against
his own soul, he be constrained to yield that it is immortal? Surely in his
book concerning the manners of the soul, he does the worst that he can against
Plato: and in another place he doubts whether it be immortal, and whether it
have continuance of it self or no. Yet notwithstanding in his book of the
doctrine of Hippocrates and Plato, In his Book of the doctrine of Hippocrates
and Plato.
It must needs be granted (says he) that the Soul is either a sheare body,
and of the nature of the sky, (as the Stoics and Aristotle himself, are
enforced to confess) or else a bodilesse substance, whereof the body is, as it
were, the Chariot, and whereby it has fellowship with other bodies. In his
Book of Conception.
And it appears that he inclines to this latter part. For he makes the
vital spirit to be the excellentest of all bodily things, and yet he grants
the soul to be a far more excellent thing than that. What shall we then do?
Let us wey his words set down in his book of the conception of a child in the
mothers womb. The Soul of man (says he) is an influence of the universal
Soul that discendeth from the heavenly Region, a substance that is capable of
knowledge, which aspireth always to one substance like unto it self, which
leaves all these lower things to seek the things that are above, which is
partaker of the heavenly Godhead, and which by mounttng up to the beholding of
things that are above the heavens, putting it self into the presence of him
that rules all things. Were it reason then that such a substance coming from
else where than of the body, and mounting so far above the body, The universal
consent.
should in the end die with the body, because it uses the service of the body?

Now hereunto I could add infinite other sayings of the ancient Authors both
Greek and Latin Philosophers, Poets, and Orators from age to age, wherein
they treat of the judgment to come, of the reward of good men. of the
punishment of evil men, of Paradise and of Hell, which are appendants to the
immortality of the Soul: but as now I will but put the reader in mind of them
by the way, reserving them to their peculiar places. To be short, let us run at
this day from East to West, In the Alcoran, Azo. 25. and 42.
and from North to South, I say not among the Turks, Arabians or Persians, (for
their Alcoran teaches them that man's soul was breathed into him of God, It
appears by the stories of the East and West Indies.
and consequently that it is uncorruptible) but even a mong the most barbarous,
ignorant, and beastly people of the World, I mean the very Caribies and
Canniballs, and we shall find this belief received and embraced of them all.
Which gives us to understand, that it is not a doctrine invented by
speculations of some Philosophers, conveyed from Country to Country by their
Disciples, persuaded by likelyhoods of reasons, or (to be short) entered into
man's wit by his ears: but a native knowledge, which every man finds and
reads in himself which he carries everywhere about with himself, and which
is as easy to be persuaded unto all such as view themselves in themselves, as
it is easy to persuade a man that never saw his own face, to believe that he
has a face, by causing him to behold himself in a glass.

There remain yet two opinions to be confuted. Against Averrhoes.
The one is the opinion of Averrhoes, and the other is the opinion of Alexander
of Aphrodise, who affirm themselves to hold both of Aristotle; namely in that
they uphold that there is but one universal reasonable soul or mind, which
works all our discourses in us, howbeit diversely in every several person.
And this thing (if we believe Averrhoes) is done according to the diversity of
the Fantasies or imaginations wherewith the mind is served as with
instruments. But if we believe Alexander, Let the Reader bear these terms and
their significations in Mind, for all the discourse here ensuing.
it is done according to the diversities of the capable mind, as they term
it, that is to say, of the ability or capability that is in men to understand
things, by receiving the impression of the universal mind that works into
every of them which in respect thereof is called of them the worker. Soothly
these opinions are such as may be disproved in one word. For this only one
mind, whether in possibility or in action, could not have received or
imprinted in every man one selfsame common belief and conceit of the
immortality of the Soul, in so great diversity of imaginations, and in so many
Nations, as we see do believe it, considering that the very same conceit is
directly repugnant against it. Nay, it may well be said that Averrhoes and
Alexander had very diverse conceits and imaginations one from another, and very
contrary to all other men's, seeing they had so diverse and contrary opinions
imprinted either in their mind or in their imagination. Howbeit for as much as
there may be some, that will make a doubt of it; let us examine them severally
yet more advisedly. Averrhoes upon Aristotle's third Book of the Soul.
First, Averrhoes will needs bear Aristotle on hand, that Aristotle is of that
opinion. Let us see how this furnise of his can agree with the propositions
which Aristotle has left us. Aristotle tells us that the soul is knit to
the body as the form or shape to the matter; that the soul has three chief
powers, namely, of life* of sense, and of understanding; and that the
understanding part contains in his power both the other two powers, as a five
square contains both a foresquare and a Triangle. Whereupon it follows,
Aristotle in his second Book of the Soul.
that if any one of the three powers of the soul be joined to the body as a
form to the matter; all the three be joined so to, as which are all in one
soul as in their root. Now Averrhoes neither can nor will deny that the powers
of growing and of perceiving by the senses are joined after that manner to the
body; and therefore it follows that the understanding power is so joined
also, and consequently that according to Aristotle, as every body has his
form, Aristotle in his first Book of the Soul.
so every body has his soul. The same Aristotle finds fault with the former
Philosophers for holding opinion that a soul might pass out of one man into
another: because (says he) that every certain soul must needs be apportioned
and appointed to some one certain body. Now look by what soul a man lives,
by the same soul does he understand: for it is but one soul indewed with
three diverse abilities, as he himself teaches openly. One understanding or
mind therefore, must (according to Aristotle) work but in one several body,
and not in many bodies. Also according to Aristotle, a man and a beast agree in
this, that both of them have one sensitive power, and one selfsame imagination
of things perceived by the senses, and that they differ in this, that man has
yet further a mind and reason above the beast, which thing the beast has not.
Now if this understanding or mind be without the man* as the sun is without
the chamber, that it shines into and inlighteneth, then cannot he be called
reasonable, or endowed with understanding, neither does he consequently differ
from a beast. For the difference must be in nature, and not in accident. And so
should it ensue that Aristotle's foresaid definition of a man is false, as if he
should define a chamber by the shining of the sun into it: Or say that a dog
differs not from a man in kind; yea, and that beasts are capable of
understanding, for as much as they have imagination ready aforehand to receive
the influence thereof as well as we. But Aristotle is always one in his
defining both of beast and of man; and Averrhoes also holds himself to it,
without doubting thereof at all. This conclusion therefore cannot in any wise
be upheld by such grounds.

Again, if there be not in every several man a several mind, but only one
universal mind common to all men, which becomes diverse by the only
diversity of our imaginations: Then in respect that we have sundry
imaginations, we shall by sundry living wights; and in respect that we have all
but one mind, we shall be all but one man. For man is not man in respect of
the sensitive power, but in respect of the reasonable part which is the mind.
But Aristotle grants that we be not only diverse living wights, but also
diverse men. And therefore he must needs mean also, that we have not only
diverse imaginations, but also diverse minds. Now besides many other reasons that
might be aleadged, ye might add this also, That otherwise Aristotle's Moralls
and his discourses concerning Justice, Freewill, the Immortality of the soul,
the happy bliss, the reward of the good, and the pains of the wicked, were
utterly fruitless and to no purpose: For as our fancies or imaginations did
come and go, so would all those things come and go likewise, and so should
they have no continuance of themselves, but only be as a shadow and vain
fantasy. But let Aristotle alone, (for he has wrong) and let us come to the
matter it self. The Philosophers do ordinarily make a double mind; the one
which they call possible or impossible, which is capable and of ^bility to
understand things; and this they liken to a smooth table; the other they call
working on workefull, which brings the ability into act, whereas
notwithstanding they be not two minds, but two several abilities of only one
mind. Now, as for this ability or possibility of understanding, we affirm it
to be in the soul of every man. Contrariwise, Averrhoes affirmed only one
universal capable mind to be shed abroad every where throughout all men; and
that the same is diversely perfected and brought into act in every several man,
according to the diversity of the imaginations which the man conceives, even
by the help or influence of the said universal workfull mind, which he says
is also a substance severed, from man, and (in respect of the understanding in
possibility) is as the sun is to the sight of our eyes, and the understanding
in possibility is to the imaginations as the sight is unto colors. Now, I
demand first of all, whether these uniuersall minds of his, be substances
created or uncreated. If they be created, where becomes then his conclusion,
That the world is without beginning, and without ending, seeing that he will
have them to be continued everlastingly in all men that have been, are, or
shall be? If they be uncreated, how can so excellent substances be made
subject to our fond imaginations, to yield influence into them at their
pleasures? Or rather how happens it that they correct them not? How happens
it that they leave them in such errors, yea even in the knowledge of
themselves, seeing that by the erring of the imaginations, the very
understanding and reason themselves must also needs be so often beguiled?
Again, as concerning these substances, which extend into so many places; are
they Bodies or Spirits? How can they be bodies, seeing they be in infinite
places at one instant, and do infinite things, yea, and flat contraries? And
if they be Spirits, does it not follow thereupon, that they be wholly in all men
and wholly in every man; that is to say, that every man has them wholly to
himself? And therefore that if they be deceived by the fantasy of any one
man, they be consequently deceived in all men? And whereof comes it then, that
one man overcommeth his imaginations, and another man not? Or that one man
resists them, and another suffers himself to be carried away by them?
Moreover, who can deny that a man wills things, whereof he has
understanding; and likewise that he wills some things which he understands
not: and that he understands some things which he wills not? And also that
he wills things even contrary to his appetites, and concludes oftentimes
contrary to his imaginations, as comes to pass in dreams and in
looking-glasses; which thing the brute beasts do not? When a man wills
contrary to his appetites, wills he not contrary to his senses, yea, and
contrary to his imaginations too: for what else is fantasy or imagination, than
the rebounding back of the fences: And if this workfull understanding be the
only worker in his possible understanding by mean of imagination; how comes
it to pass that a man wills contrary to his imagination: Again, when either
in dreaming or in debating, reason concludes clean contrary to that which
fancy or imagination offers; whereof comes it that a man is contrary to
himself, or that the deed is contrary both to that which imprinted it, and to
that wherein it is imprinted? Also what else is imagaination (according to the
opinion of Averrhoes,) than a certain operation annexed to the body, steaming
up from the Heart to the Brain: And on the contrary part who can say nay, but
that the Will and Understanding are able to perform their operations without
the instruments of the body, Aristotle in his tenth Book of Supernaturals
seeing that a man does both will and debate things that are most repugnant to
the body: Yea and that (as Aristotle says) those be not actions which pass
into the outward man, but those which abide within and make perfect the inner
man* And who can make Will and Understanding to be things depending upon
imagination, seeing that both waking and sleeping and all manner of ways else,
they daily utter infinite judgments and determinations against it: Now, if we
have nothing in us above Imagination: then considering that we do both will
and understand, it must needs be that this power or ability to will and
understand is shed into us from without. And if it but only one universally in
all men; then seeing that the actions thereof are executed without the
imagination, without the senses, and without the instruments of the body, yea
and against them: it follows that it wills and understands in us
whatsoever it likes and lists* even in despite of all impediments and lets
of the body; and that as it is but one, so it shall will but one selfsame
thing, and likewise also understand but one selfsame thing in all men. For if
(as Aristotle confesses) our imaginations make not our will and reason subject
unto them; much less do they make the foresaid universal mind subject to
them as Averrhoes pretends. But now contrariwise we see therebe as many
Wills as men, yea even in one matter; and that the understandings of men are
not only diverse, but also contrary. It follows then that every particular
person has in that behalf a particular substance, which wills and
understands, frank and free from all imaginations whenever it lists to
retire into it self; and not that there is but one universal mind which
wills and understands all things in all men. Besides this; by the judgment
of Aristotle as I said before, this universal mind could not work will and
understanding inus: for to will and understand (says he) are operations that
pass not into the matter nor into the outward thing, but abide still in the
worker, that is to say in the mind, as actions and perfections thereof.

Let us yet again take of that which has bin said before. If the said
universal only one working mind, have wrought from everlasting in the said
universal only one capable mind, by the Imaginations of men: then has the
knowledge of all things bin evermore imprinted in the said capable mind; for it
shall evermore have brought the ability into act: And therwithall, the working
and perfection of the thing that is everlasting, shall have depended upon a
thing that is temporal; which is unpossible. And although Averrhoes supposed
not the World to be everlasting: yet notwithstanding the said capable mind
which has been set awotke so many hundred years, by so many imaginations of
men, and in so many sundry Nations, could not now meet with any new thing
whereof it had not the knowledge before. For this capable mind (says Averrhoes)
is a certain spiritual substance, which spreads it self forth into all men
and into all ages, and the nature of such sort of substances is to be all in
the whole, and all in every part thereof. For they be not tied to any one
place, but are wheresoever they work, and their working is in respect of the
whole, and not in respect of any one part, forasmuch as they be undividable.
Therefore it should follow by his opinion (as I have said before) that the one
universal capable mind is and works whole and unparted in every man. And if
it be so, then is that being of it there, not in way of mere ability or
possibility only, but in way of operation and perfect inworking, as a wicked
spirit is in a witch, in a Pythonesse or in a possessed person: which spirit
(were he possessed of the man as he himself possesses the man, (after which
manner Averrhoes affirms us to possess the understanding in possibility, by
our imaginations;) would make the man capable of all that ever the Spirit
himself knows or is. Whereupon it will follow, that this understanding in
possibility, shall everlastingly in all men from their very birth, actually
understand and know all things that all men understand, as well in the old as
the young, and in the ignorant as the skillful; so as we shall have no more
need of senses; nor of imagination to understand withal. To be short, although
Averrhoes, admits not the World to be without beginning: yet at leastwise he
will not deny, but that [by his reckoning] they which come into the world at
this day, should come far more skillful then all their predecessors, and the
children of them more skillful then their fathers, and the offspring of those
children more skillful then those children themselves, and so forth on, because
they should succeed in the knowledge continued throughout all ages. Whereupon
it will also ensue, that all Sciences shall be equal in all men that make
profession of them. As for example, we will speak here, but of some one
special Science, as Grammar and Arithmetic, Now if there be any diversity in
the skill thereof, that diversity cannot come but of the diversity of the
subject or ground wherein the skill is. Now the ground of the skill is the
capacity of the mind or understanding, (which Averrhoes supposes to be but
only one, common to all men) and not the Imagination, which is but a reflection
or rebounding back of the Sense. And so forasmuch as there is (by his saying)
but one ground in all men; it follows that the knowledge or skill of this or
that Science must needs be equal and alike in all men: or else that if it be
not equal, but do vary, as we see it does in diverse degrees; then the same
varying or diversity happens through the diversity of the ground wherein
the skill is, and consequently that there is one particular understanding or
one peculiar mind in every man, and not one universal mind common to all men.
Also it is a general rule, that the receiver of a thing has not the thing
before he receive it. Aristotle in his third book of the Soul.
For (as Aristotle says) that which is to receive a thing, must needs be
first utterly void of the thing which it receives. Now before that our Sense
and Imagination had any being at all, this universal common mind had received
and possessed all things aforehand; and not only received them, but also kept
them together. For as Aristotle himself says, that manner of mind is the
place of all under kinds and sorts of things, and thereto has no less power
than the Imagination, to retain whatsoever the Senses receive. In vain
therefore should that universal mind understand by our Imaginations,
considering that it understands by it self: in vain likewise should the
Imaginations imprint those things in it, which were imprinted in it so long
before: and in vain is Aristotle's settingdowne of a workfull understanding,
which should bring our understanding in ability, from possibility into
action; if the said only one universal mind or understanding be perfect of it
self from everlasting, as it follows to be upon the opinion of Averrhoes.
Neither is it to said, that although the conceivable underkinds of things have
been imprinted everlastingly in the said universal mind; yet notwithstanding
there needed and Imagination for the understanding of them, as there needs
now whenever we will use the things that we have seen or learned before. For
by that reckoning, to learn all manner of Sciences, we needed no more but to
bethink us by imagination, of the things that were already aforehand in the
said only universal one mind, as we do the things that have been printed
sometime in our memories, and are somewhat slipped out of our remembrance; and
so might we our selves learn all sciences without a teacher, because that in
the said universal mind of ours, we should have all the skill that ever any
man had attained to, in like manner as the person that has once had the skill
of Arithmetic or Cosmographie thoroughly settled in his mind, needs no
teacher to teach it him again, but only to overturn his own imagination, and
to search his memory for the finding again of that which he had laid up
there. Now we know that whosoever learneth nothing, knows nothig, and that
ordinarily he which most studyeth, most learneth: and that all the tossing and
turmoyling of a man's own imagination that can be all his life long, will never
make him to attain of himself to so much as the very principles of the least
science that is. By reason whereof it follows, That we have not the skill of
any science in us, until we either be taught it or find it out by beating our
wits about it: and that our imagination serves not to revive the Sciences in
us, but to bring them into us, and to plant them in us, And forasmuch as all
the Sciences should be in all men from the beginning, if there were but one
universal mind in all men, [which is not so] it follows that there is in
every particular person a particular and peculiar mind, and not any one
universal mind common to all men. Moreover, our mind attaineth after a sort to
the understanding of it self: which thing it could not do in very deed, if
there were but one universal mind common to all men. For too understand it
self, it must needs work upon it self. But if we believe Averrhoes, our
mind shall but only be wrought upon and receive into it from the Imagination,
as a Window receives light from the Sun. Again, the capacity of the
universal understanding in possibility, could not do that. For it behoved it
to have some other thing besides itself, to bring it self into action. And
surely Imagination could not help it, for it does but offer up the sensible
things unto it, and attaineth not so far as to the things that are to be
discerned by drift of reason. Yet notwithstanding we understand that we
understand, and we reason and judge both of our Imagination, and also of our
reasoning and understanding itself. The thing then which does so enter and
pearce into itself, is another manner of power than an Imagination, or that an
universal understanding in possibility. What is to be said to this, that of
one selfsame Imagination, one selfsame person concludes now after one sort,
and by-and-by after in another sort; and thereout of draws both contrary
arguments and contrary determinations: or that diverse person by diverse
imaginations do close together in one will and one mind? Is it possible that
this should proceed of an everlasting substance in one self same person,
seeing that everlastingnesse is not subject to any change of time or place? Or
that it should proceed of any one selfsame substance in many men, seeing that
the imaginations of them be so diverse one from another? at least wise if the
said substance work not but by such instruments?

As touching the opinion of Alexander of Aphrodise, Against Alexander of
Aphrodise.
who upholdeth a certain universal working mind that imprinteth things in the
understanding in possibility, that is to say, in every man's several capacity,
and brings it forth into action: the most part of the reasons alleged before
against Averrhoes, will also serve against him. Howbeit for as much as by this
workfull mind, he seems to mean God himself, there is thus much more to be
added unto it. That God who is altogether good, and altogether wise, would not
imprint in our mind the fond and wicked conceits which we find there, nor
leave so great ignorance and darkness as we feel there, but would in all men
overcome the infection which the body brings: and although he inspired not
all men alike with his gracious gifts, according to the diversity of their
capacities after the manner of a planed Table, yet would he not at leastwise
print the World with so many false Portratures and Trains, as every one of us
may perceive to be in our selves. Again, were there any such inspiration or
influence, it should be either continual or but by times. If continual or
everlasting, we should without labor and without cunning understand all that
ever our imagination offers unto us. And if it be but at times, then should
it not lie in us to list or to understand any thing at all, though we would
never so fain. For contrariwise, we have much ado to understand some things,
so as we must be fain to win them from our ignorance by piecemeale, and there
be some other things, which we understand by and by as soon as they be put unto
us, and when we list our selves, There is then in us a power of Understanding,
though very feeble; but yet never the later obedient to our will: which thing
cannot be fathered upon God. Also if there be but only one mind working in
all men, there shall be but one selfsame understanding in all men, I mean
naturally, notwithstanding that it differ in degrees. For into what place
soever the Sun does shead his beams, he does both inlighten it and heat it,
howbeit diversely according to the nature and condition of the places and things
that receive him, some more, and some less, some brighter, and some dimlyer.
But howsoever the case stand, his light yields no darkness, nor his heat any
cold. So then if the diversities of men's imaginations do cause diversities of
effects in the inspiration or influence that flows into the capacity of our
understanding; surely it must needs be after this manner, namely that one man
shall understand one selfsame thing more, and another man less; but not in
that any man shall take untruth for truth, unright for right, or one thing for
another. Now we see unto how many errors we be subject, I mean not in such
things as this namely, that one man sees better a far off, and another better
at hand; but that one man sees white and another sees black (which are things
contrary) in one selfsame ground and at one selfsame time. It follows
therefore that diverse and sundry minds do work in diverse persons, and not
one selfsame mind in all persons. By force of which reasons and of such
others, I say that every man shall find in himself and of himself, that
every man has a particular soul by himself, that is to say, a spiritual
substance united to his body, which in respect of giving life to the body is as
the form thereof, and in respect of giving reason, is as the guide of our
actions: That in every man there is a certain Sunbeam of reason, whereby they
conceive things and debate upon them; wherethrough it comes to pass, that
often times they agree both in the reason it self which is one, and in the
manifest grounds thereof* and in whatsoever depends evidently upon the same:
That every man has also a peculiar body by himself, and likewise peculiar
complexion, humors, imaginations, education, custom and trade of life:
whereof it comes that every man takes a diverse way, yea, and that one
selfsame person swarveth diversely from the unity of reason whereof the path is
but one, and the ways to stray from it are infinite: That this Sunbeam of
reason which shines and sheadeth it self from our mind, is properly that
understanding which is termed, The understanding in ability or possibility,
which is increased and augmented by all the things which it sees, hears, or
lights upon, like fire, which gathers increase of strength by the abundance
of the fuel that is put upon it, and becomes after a sort infinite by
spreading it self abroad: Also it is the same which otherwise we call the
Memory of understanding, or mindful Memory, and it is nothing else but an
abundance of Reason, and as it were a hoorder up of the continual influence of
the Mind: That the Mind from whence this flows as from his spring, is
properly that which they the said Averrhoes and Alexander do term the working
or workfull Mind, which is a certain power or force that can skill to extend
reason from one thing to another, and to proceed from things sensible to
things unsensible, from things movable to things unmovable, from bodily to
spiritual, from effects to causes, and from beginnings to ends by the mean
cause. This Mind is in respect of Reason, as cunning is in respect of an
Instrument or tool; and Reason, as in respect of imagination and of the things
that are sensible, is as an Instrument or tool in respect of the matter or
stuff that it works upon: Or to speak more fitly, this Mind is unto Reason,
as the mover of a thing is to the thing that is movable, and Reason is to her
objects, as the movable thing is to the thing whereunto it is moved. For to
reason or debate, is nothing else but to proceed from a thing that is
understoode, to a thing that is not understoode, of purpose to understand it:
and the understanding thereof is a resting that inseweth upon it, as a staying
or resting after moving: That both of them as well the one as the other, are
but only one selfsame substance, and like as a man, both when he moves, and
when he rests is all one and the same man, or as the power that moves the
sinews is one selfsame still, both when it stirs them, and when it holds
them still, so the reasonable or understanding soul that is in every man, is
but only one selfsame substance bodilesse and immortal, executing his powers
partly of it self, and partly by our bodies. And seeing that Averrhoes and
Alexander, make so great estimation and account of the effects which are
wrought in us, that they be enforced to attribute them to some uncorruptible
and everlasting mind; let us take of them, that in very truth the thing which
works so great wonders in the body, can be neither sense, nor body, nor
imagination, but a divine, uncorruptible and immortal mind, as they
themselves say.

But let us learn the thing of more then them, which all wise men teach us, and
which every of us can learn of himself; namely that this understanding or
mind is not one universal thing as the sun is that shines into all the
windows of a City, but rather, a particular substance in every several man,
as a light to lead him in the darkness of this life; for surely it was no more
difficulty to the everlasting GOD, to create many sundry souls, that every
man might have one severally alone by himself, than to have created but only
one soul for all men together. But it was far more for his glory, to be known,
praised, and exalted of many souls* yea and more for our welfare to praise,
exalt, and know him, yea, and to live of our selves both in this life, and in
the life to come: then if any other universal spirit, soul or mind
whatsoever, should have lived and understood either in us or after us. Now then
for this matter let us conclude, both by reason and by antiquity, and by the
knowledge that every of us has of himself; That the soul and the body be
things diverse: that the soul is a spirit and not a body: That this spirit has
in man three abilities or powers, whereof two be exercised by the body, and the
third works of it self without the body: That these three abilities are in
the one only soul as in their root: whereof two do cease whenever the body
fails them, and yet notwithstanding the soul abides whole without a
batement of any of her powers, as a craftsman continues a craftsman though he
want tools to work withal: And finally, that this soul is a substance that
continues of it self, and is unmateriall and spiritual, over the which
neither death nor corruption can naturally have any power.

And for a conclusion of all that ever I have treated of hitherto in this book,
let us maintain, That there is but only one God, who by his own goodness and
wisdom is the Creator and Governor of the world and of all that is therein:
That in the world he created Man after his own image as in respect of mind,
and after the image of his other creatures as in respect of life, sense, and
moving, mortal so far forth as he holds the likeness of a creaturn, and
immortal so far forth as he bears the image of the Creator: That is to wit,
in his soul: That he which goes out of himself to see the world, does
forthwith see that there is a God, for his works declare him every where: That
he which will yet still doubt thereof, needs but to enter into himself, and
he shall meet him there, for he shall find there a power which he sees not:
That he which believes there is one God, believes himself to be immortal;
for such consideration could not light into a mortal nature: and that he which
believes himself to be immortal, believes that there is a God, for without
the unutterable power of the one God, the mortal and immortal could never
join together: That he which sees the order of the world, the proportion of
man, and the harmony that is in either of them compounded of so many
contraries, cannot doubt that there is a Providence for the nature which has
furnished them therewith* cannot be unfurnished thereof it self; but as it once
had a care of them, so can it not shake off the same care from them. Thus have
we three Articles which follow interchangeably one another. Insomuch that he
which proves any one of them, does prove them all three, notwithstanding that
I have treated of every of them severally by it self. Now let us pray the
everlasting God, that we may glorisie him in his works in this world, and he
voutsafe of his mercy to glorify us one day in the World to come. (*)

AMEN.

