TWO LETTERS SENT To the Honorable W* Lenthall Esquire Speaker to the Honorable
House of Commons; Concerning the taking of Hereford On the 18. of this instant
December. 1645.

BY Colonel MORGAN Governor of Gloucester, AND Colonel JOHN BIRCH:

Wherein was taken, One hundred and twenty Lords, Knights* and Officers in
Commission, Eleven pieces of Ordnance, and great store of Ammunition.

London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Golden Dragon in Fleetstreet,
near the Inner Temple, December 22. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker OF THE Honorable House OF
COMMONS.
SIR,
I Desire you to acquaint the Honorable House of Parliament of my proceedings;
Being commanded by the Committee of both Kingdoms, to make an Attempt upon
Hereford: In which Design it pleased God exceedingly to bless us, and the
Soldiers going on with undaunted resolution, made our entrance with small
loss; diverse of the Enemy making resistance in the street, were slain, and the
rest taken prisoners: We have already in custody, One hundred and twenty
Lords, Knights and Officers in Commission, which are to be sent to Gloucester,
most of them being Papists; the number of common Soldiers I cannot yet give
you a right account of, in regard that many are brought in to the Marshals
hourly, which hid themselves when they saw we were Masters of the Town. My
Forces were Eleven hundred Horse and Foot, and Col: Birch Nine hundred Foot:
We found in the Town, Eleven pieces of Ordnance, and a reasonable proportion
of Ammunition; for other Arms I cannot give you an account of as yet, but hope
by the next to give you an exact account of them, and of the prisoners also;
which is all for present, but that I shall at all times be ready to show my
self,

SIR, Your humble Servant, THO: MORGAN.
Hereford, the 18. of December. 1645. 12. at night.
To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons: AND Mr. PRIDEAUX.
Truly Honorable Sir,
I Conceived it my duty, to give you notice of that great Blessing the Lord
has been pleased to give to that small party that Colonel Morgan and my self
made up of Foot and Horse, being about Two thousand, with which, when they were
got together, I was very desirous, with Colonel Morgan, to try what we could
do upon Hereford; it being so deep a Snow, that they could not possibly imagine
we could march: which endeavor the Lord was pleased so to bless, that we
forcibly entered the Town with a small loss, wherein we have prisoners* near
Thirty Knights, and so many Gentlemen, besides the like number of Officers in
Commission, and many Soldiers, Eleven pieces of Ordnance, and many Arms: I
desire the Lord may have all the honor, whose work it was, and I shall study
to set up the Lord Christ here, whilst it shall continue under the command of

Your Honors most faithful Servant, John Birch.
Hereford, 18. December. 1645.
FINIS.

