A TRVE RELATION By Colonel Morgan, In a Letter of the total Routing of the
Lord Ashley, by him and Sir William Brereton at STOW. With the Names of all
the Prisoners by them taken.

These being true Copies and examined, are Printed and published according to
Order of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbanck at Grays-Inne Gate. March. 24 1645.

A True Relation by Colonel Morgan in a Letter of the total routing the Lord
Ashley by him and Sir William Brereton at Stow.
Gentlemen,
HAving received a Command from the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms to
take the charge of a brigade of Horse and foot drawn out of the Garrisons of
Gloucester, Hereford, and Evishalm, to prevent the Lord Ashley's conjunction
with the Kings forces at Oxford, and to effect that design, I drew forth and
randevoused seasonably near Evishalme and Warwick, notwithstanding the Lord
Ashley endeavored by all means to get by me, which much foiled my brigade to
prevent, in marching from place to place, to secure the place upon River Avon.
Yet after some considerations, I perceived that he was unwilling to pass over
so long as I lay near the River. Resolved upon Thursday last to quarter and
camp in the most convenient place (wheresoever he made his passage) to fall
upon him, and that night had intelligence of his march from Droit with near
100. horse toward Bedford 3. miles from Evishalm, whereof I presently
advertised Colonel Whaly and Colonel Fleetwood, and sent post to Sir Will.
Brereton for the assistance of his horse, which was accordingly granted: but
upon Friday the Lord Ashley still continuing his march, and Sir William
Brereton not come up, was forced to hold him in action for the space of 4.
hours, skirmishing with by parties, and keeping my body drawn up in a most
advantageous place for pursuit, in case he should pass by me before sir Will.
Brereton came up, which about nine a clock that night he did, whereupon I
resolved to pursue, thinking it more advantageous to fall upon his rear, then
at that time to draw out to meet him in the field, and in my pursuit Sir
William Brereton came up with 800 horse (of whom I desired to receive orders,
but he referred the whole command of the field unto me, then being equal in
number to the Lord Ashley's forces, consisting of 3000. I commanded 400. horse
and 200 Firelocks to charge his rear guard, to put him to a stand before he
should pass through Stow upon the Would, and as my intelligence informed me,
the King was to have joined with him within 7 mile of that place, where he
made choice of his ground, and had the wind with him, yet trusting in God, I
drew up and charged him, whom half an hour before day on Saturday morning I
put to a total route, killed many Gent. and Officers of quality, took prisoners
the L. Ashley and all his foot officers, whose names are in the enclosed list,
besides 1600. common soldiers, whereof many being wounded, I gave liberty to
go to their own homes, taking the oath of the 5th of April, the rest I have
sent to Gloucester: there is also taken 2000. arms and all their ammunition.
Sir Will. Brereton desired that the L. Ashley should be his prisoner, which I
willingly condiscended unto, not doubting but he will give a good account of
him to the Parliament; this good success (the glory thereof I desire may be
given unto God) will prevent the King from drawing an army into the field which
he expected: I am now marched toward Worcester, where I shall observe such
orders as I shall receive from the Parliament and the Committee of both
Kingdoms, and in the mean time shall endeavor to make use of all
opportunities to weaken the enemy, and to advance the public service, which
shall always be the desire of him who will ever subscribe himself to be

Gentlemen, Your faithful friend and servant, THO: MORGAN.
Cambdin the 22 of March 1645. at 6. a clock at night.
A List of the persons taken by Colonel Morgan, at Stow in the Would, March
21. 1645.
The Lord Ashley Colonel Corbet Colonel Gerard Colonel Mauldsworth Left.
Colon. Broughton Major Billinsley Major Hardnego Major Shaltonstone Cap. Edw.
Gray Cap. Tho. Gilbert Cap. Peacoke Cap. Silvanus Halsell Cap. Arding Cap. John
Bonner Caps. Heury bound Cap. Josuah Emy Cap. Hutton Cap. Harris Cap. Jewnger
Cap. Harison C. Jo. Mathews Reform. C. Devenport Reform. C. Georg Writ Reform.
C. Potts Reform. C. Smith Reform. Lief. Hill Lief. Hopson Lief. Edriswick Lief.
Warberton Lieut. George Faucot^e Lief. Hobman L. Banjamine Thrubury Lief.
Fletcher Lief. Kerke Lief. Powle Lief. Smith Reformado. Lief. Heart Reformado.
Lief. Kelby Reformado. L. Uaughan Reformado. C. Lief. Ashton Lief. Edw. Barker
Cornett Godfrey Preses Cornett Brooks Cornett Roberts Cornett Russoll Cornett
Francis Hesketh Ensign Blackbourne Ensign Horton Ensign Dethick Ensign
Ellis Ensign Farmor Ensign Airs Ensign Cliever Ensigrne Hopson Ensign
Colebrook Ensign Broughton Ensign Mason John de Ashfield Clarke Alexan.
Clogley Chaplain to Sir W. Uaughan Edw. Parker Marshall Genesis Quartermaster M.
Stone Quarterm. Watts Quarterm. Gardener Robert Neale Chyrurgion Richard Ashton
General servant to the L. Ashton Master Williams
On our side two Lieften. slain. Colonel Rous Governor of Eversham wounded.

FINIS.

