A MOTION Humbly presented To the Consideration of the High Court of PARLIAMENT
CONSISTING Of Twenty Quaeres concerning the setlement of the CHVRCH December, 2.
1641.

As also a grave SPEECH Made by Sir JAMES PARROT.

London Printed, for Richard Smithers. 1641.

A MOTION Humbly presented to the High Court of Parliament.
FIrst, whether that such Bishops as ours be, ought to govern the Church,
according to the Institution of the primitive Church, and whether their calling
be truly Iure Divino: so that in no case it ought to be removed, but must of
necessity abide in the Church of Christ for ever?

2. Whether such an Institution to be Iure divino, not being possible to be
proved, and those Bishops who have governed our church, have (especially of
late) bin a scandal to the church, and dealt deceitfully with us, and are
become so odious to all Protestant Churches; as they have bin, and now are, it
be not a great scandal to our Church whilst they govern it.

3. Whether (all reformed Churches elsewhere, so far as they could, having
cast out their Bishops as an Antichristian government) our Church will not
remain unreformed in the greatest matter, whilst that function does remain
amongst us.

4 Whether that government by Bishops (first established by Papists, as
lineally discending from the Pope, and by papists still by Arguments so
maintained) be not a great heartning, and encouragement to all Papists, giving
them still hopes of bringing in popery by vvorking with them; for what better
or easier way can they have to bring in, or to increase Popery, as experience
has abundantly showed, then Agents for the Romish faction, being in every
Province of this Kingdom: there is no more to be done, but only to prevail
with the Prelate thereof, who for the most part not only are too ready to
hearken to any project for reward, but are too much in love with the
entertaining of popery: have not many good Ministers bin very painful in their
callings before, but after they have bin made Bishops have bin great Arminians,
if not entire Papists? May not the Prelate of Canterbury be a president herein,
in some respects, with many more hopeful Ministers first, but after the
superstitious consecration of them (as they call it) to be Bishops have bin
notoriously impious, wicked, and popishly affected.

5 Whether their abiding, being only by permission of the King and Parliament;
it being so that they who cry out most against them are the strongest
protestants, and such who labor for reformation for no private end, but labor
for such a reformation as comes nearest to the prescript of the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and for that pray often. Whether it would not be a great
grief, and discouragement to them, in case that the Bishops should not be
removed?

9 Whether it be not a great Argument to persuade the removeall of our Bishops
government, it being so that those who seek the same are such, who are not
only of godly and honest life, and conversation, but are such, for the most
part, as are ready with their goods, liberties, honors, yea their lives to
maintain the honor of the King?

7 Whether many of those who labor for their continuance still in the
government of the church, be such who do it out of Christianity, or any love
either to the King, or whether for the most part they be not men of an evil
life, and conversation, or evilly affected toward the Kings Majesty, or
toward his Majesty's liege people, or have not some relation toward popery,
or toward popishly affected people, or at the least, are familiarly the
companions of the Prelates, or their Adherents, or receive some way or other
profit by them?

8 Whether in such petitions as have bin put up against the Bishops, there has
bin any such underhand dealing in the getting of hands, as there has in those
petitions, or many of them, that have been put into the house for them?

9 Whether in case they should pass over all these brunts and exclamations,
under which they now lie, and should still abide and govern the church. It would
not be then of dangerous consequence, and embolden them ever hereafter to
attempt any thing what they please, and for ought we know ere long, fall upon
popery with great dexterity, and if possible, ingrosse such a power into their
hands, as will hardly ever permit them to be curbed again?

10 Whether in case they should be established by this great Parliament, they
who before did assume such power, and play such tyrannous parts, and were so
great a burden to the godly and faithful protestants, would not now, in case
they should be established by this great Assembly, whether they would not be
more cruel then ever they were, and the Church of England be then under a
greater bondage and slavery, then ever it was before, since O. Mary's days,

11 Whether they have not ever bin in all places of Christendom the greatest
enemies to the Country where they have lived, of any Subjects, and for the most
part, the only and sole movers, and causers both of foreign dangers, and
domesticke Calamities?

12. Whether they have not bin a great hinderance to the flourishing of the
Gospel in all parts and places, where they have governed, as not only
foreign parts, but our own land can testify: where have we one Prelate in
this land, that would labor to set up preaching, where it was wanting in his
Dioceses: tho moved in it, and for it: no, they thought there was too much
preaching already. Surely, did not our Prelates fear rather that in case the
people should be well acquainted with Gods word, they would be plainly
discerned to be of an Antichristian government.

13 Whether for them still to abide, be not dangerous to the Kings Majesty, to
the Queen, or toward their hopeful children: there being in so many
Histories, so many Relations of most dangerous consequence thereof to Princes:
that when they have bin about a Prince, and have bin curbed, or could not have
their will: then have the Prelates turned traitors, and bloudy-minded: then have
they labored by a thousand shifts to murder their Prince, as diverse stories
both of our own, and other can testify abundantly: whether therefore for his
Majesty's safety they ought not to be removed, especially, at this
Parliamentarie Reformation.

14 Whether a P^esbyteriall government does not come nearer to the practice of
the primitive church in the Apostles times, then the government of Prelates?
15. Whether the Bishops in Scotland being removed, and a Presbiteriall
government established: in which government, where ere it has bin established
has bin no such scandals or blemishes, as have continually bin amongst the
Bishops? whether it be not more probable that it will be more happy for us to
be so governed in England also, both Kingdoms being wholly governed by one,
and the same, our gracious King?

16. Whether in case our Bishops should still remain, theirs being removed: it
may not become of evil consequence, either to us, or them, one Religion being
established under one King in one and the same Island by diverse Government, and
Discipline: which being diverse one must needs go beyond, and before the other?

17. Whether in case their's being reformed, and ours not, diverse of our
brethren of England will not remove thither, if not to some other parts, and so
enrich them: but make our own Kingdom to be the poorer?

18. Whether they have not in Scotland attained to a better and more probable
way to root out popery by their Presbyteriall Government, then ever we are
likely to do by the Prelates?

19. Whether all Sects and Sectaries will not be more convinced and curbed,
more perfectly and truly discerned, and the spreading, and groth of all false
religion and heresies more fully and perfectly stopped?

20 Whether God will not hereby be more glorified, the Kings Majesty more
safely reign in Honor, the Church flourish in Religion, and the whole Land in
peace and safety? Amen.

SIR JAMES PARROT His Worthy Speech in Parliament.
IT is said the Bishops were before the King and his Counsel, and with tears
did disclaim in their opinions; but we see their fact. The Bishop of London
did entertain for his Chaplain in his house, one that did dispute the
Arminian points, who said, what Arminians write, J will maintain, and do
believe: this I will justify upon my Oath.

FINIS.

