A PLANT OF PARADISE, Being A Sermon Preached at St. Martin's in the Fields at
the Funeral of JOHN-GOODHAND HOLT, The young Son, only Child, and Hopeful
Heir of THOMAS HOLT of Gristlehurst in the County of Lancaster Esquire

March the 19th. 1659.

By R. M. Minister of S. Pet. P.W. Land.

Non amitti sed praemitti videntur, quos non absumptura mors sed aeternitas
receptura est.

S. Ambr. l. de excis. frut. LONDON, Printed by R. N. 1660.

To the much Honored THOMAS HOLT Esquire and Mrs. ANNE HOLT, The mournful Parents
of the deceased Heir.
Worthy Friends,
HE best administers words of Comfort, Ordo consolationis est moerendo prius
luclui concordare emolliri debet animus ut afflicto congruat, congruens
inhaereat, inhaerens trahat; nec ferrum ferro conjungitur, si non utrinque
^ccustione ign^s liquetur. Greg. Mor.
who first entertains a Sympathy of sorrow; there being much of Consolation in
Compassion. And therefore Rom 12 15. (...), O quam brevi sermunculo totius
religionis depinxit insigne! -- his uberibus matter Ecclesia loctat
proficientes, nutrit perfectos -- haec est mammilla compassionis, illa
congratulationis. Bern. Sermon. de B. Magd.
to weep with them that weep, is not to increase the Stream but cut the
Channel, and so not heighten, but lessen the floods of grief. What comforts
then are administered you from the Pulpit, accept them commixt with tears over
the Hearse; a sympathy in affliction being the surest testimony of affection.
And what affection I have for the surviving Parents, to say it, may seem
insinuation and flattery; but what affection I had for the deceased Son, not to
say it, were to wrong his merit and his memory. Indeed my just esteems of both,
have made me yield to your pressing importunity, for the Impression of these
Funeral Meditations; which I here Dedicate as a Memoriae sacrum, to perpetuate
the honor of his virtuous hopes, and your Parental loves.

Your Parental loves; not as to those indulgentiae blandimenta, those fond
blandishments of a softning indulgence, which degenerate the spirits and
effeminate the tempers of very many (otherwise) most generous plants; no, for
though I like not a Lucius Brutus's austere severity, of whom it is said, that
Valor Max. l. 5 c 8.
Exuit patrem ut consulem ageret, he put off the bowels of a Father, when he
put on the gown of a Consul, as if a good Patriote and a loving Father were
inconsistent. Though I like not this too austere severity, yet I cannot but
condemn that too Mollis illa educatio quam indulgentiam vocemus, nervos omnes
and meniis and corporis frangit. Quintil. Vna janua and aditus est ad omne
scelus. Lips ep. 7. Cent. 1.
soft indulgence, which has laid the first ground to this Ages debauchery and
dissoluteness, so infamously famous for those monstrous Births of Church and
State Apostacy's.

But this is the commendation of your parental love, that it was accompanied
with the desire and endeavor of adorning your son with what was most lovely,
the principles of a Christian, the Institutions of a Scholar, and the
Accomplishments of a Gentleman. Wherefore, this sprouting Branch being cropped in
the blossom of his age, it will remain, Cedro dignum, a record of Honorable
fame, that you were the careful Parents of so hopeful a son, and he the hopeful
son of so careful Parents. And to stop the current of your tears, look up to
Paradise, raise your devotion to the Mountain of Sion, and there behold
flourishing in life, what you bewail as cropped by death, even the blossoming
Branch planted in Heaven; who, by how much he was the better son to you by so
much he is the fitter soul for God; whose blessed communion of grace, and
blisful communion of glory, is the Divine object of his hearty prayers, whose
Devotions answer his affections, in which he is

Dear and Honored Your faithfully devoted servant in Christ R. MOSSOM.

A PLANT of PARADISE. A Sermon preached at St. Martins in the Fields; at the
Funeral of John-Goodhand Holt, the young Son, only Child, and hopeful Heir of
Thomas Holt, of Gristlehurst in the County of Lancaster, Esquire. March the 19.
1659.
Honorable and Beloved,
IN Conformity to that ancient practice of the Primitive Saints and the
continued custom of Christ's Church, we are here met in this present
Congregation to perform the Funeral Rites due to the Body and the Memory of a
Christian Brother viz. March 12. 1659.
lately deceased; even the young Heir and top-Branch of an Ancient Family,
cropped by death in the blossom of his age, not exceeding the number of 12. years.

Here, in a just Eulogy and Laudatory Commemoration of the Dead, I might speak
much to a virtuous Emulation of the Living; much of him who was but little, for
that indeed, little in him was much; even Scintillae gratiae, his sparks were
more then others flames; His seeds, then other's fruits; And therefore as
Valerius justifies the honor done by the Roman Senate to Aemilius Lepidus when
a boy, saying, Valor. Max. lib. 3. c. 1.
Injustum esset cum Honori nondum Tempestiuum videri, qui jam Virtuti maturus
fuisset; It had been unjust, if he who was ripe for Virtue, should have been
thought untimely for Honor; the like I may plead concerning the Deceased, it
were injustice done Him, should he not receive what is Honorable, having done
what is Virtuous.

True it is, Dignity of Birth with baseness of mind, is like (...); Epichar.
a Looking-glass to him who has lost his sight; the noble worth of Ancient
Progenitors is presented to Posterity as a pattern of imitation, but ignoble
minds do not see it, being sullied with their Demerit. Valor Max. l. 3. c. 5.
But this hopeful youth, was none of those Nobilia Portenta, those Monsters of
Nobility and Gentry; whose degenerate spirits disgrace their Families. No, he
was right of the number of those Prospera Parentum Vota Those happy pledges of
Parental loves, Quae efficient ut and genuisse juvet and generare libeat Id. l.
5. c. 4.
who make their birth a Joy, and their Number a delight.

Yet I must Remember, I am not here an Orator, but a Preacher, and my business
is not a Panegyric but a Sermon and I may not choose his Memory for my Text.
Only thus far then; that I may bring some flowers to adorn his Hearse, Let me
present you the Blossoms this Branch did bear; And know, the fair blossoms of
this hopeful branch, were from the Endowments of Nature, and the Gifts of
Grace; the endowments of Nature, in a pliable disposition, and a tractable
ingeny; fit Metal for good Molds, fit Wax for good Impressions. The gifts of
Grace, in a submissive observance and modest humility; not otherwise compatible
with his sprightly Genius, but as given him by the spirit of Grace. Which
spirit of Grace, I doubt not, has transplanted him from earth to heaven, from
the Valley of tears to the Mountain of Joy, the state and habitation of the
Blessed.

True it is, his active spirit did promise a longer life, and therefore his
Fever so sudden and so violent did rather crop then wither this sprouting
Branch. So that, it will be a fit Decorum, if in the choice of our Text, we
have respect to all these, his Fair Hopes, his Active Genius, his Violent
Sickness, and his Present Happiness; To this end, we will keep the Analogy of a
Blossoming branch, suddenly cropped in its full sap; yet not cropped eternally to
wither, but Transplanted everlastingly to Flourish, even to Flourish in the
Paradise of God, and Mountain of Sion. Now for this, attend unto those words of
the Prophet, so seasonable to the Occasion, and so suitable to our Design;
even those words in which God speaks concerning Zerubbabel the tender offspring
of Jehojachin, of him God speaks in an apt Allegory, which gives us our
intended Analogy, saying,

Ezekiel. c. 17. v. 22. Latter part. -- I will crop off from the top of his young
twiggs, a tender one; and will plant it upon an high mountain and eminent.


THe Sacred Scriptures of the Prophets, Introduction.
deliver us much of the Evangelical doctrine of Christ, sometimes more darkly
shadowed, sometimes more clearly illustrated, by Parables, Allegories, and the
like Symbolical expressions; yea, as the spirit of truth does Psalm. 78.2.
open the Mouth, so does he fill the Eye with Parables; witness the Prophet
Ezekiels so frequent Visions; in which we have right Ephesians. 3 10.
the manifold wisdom of God; the manifold wisdom, in being a wisdom (as I
may so say) of many folds, viz. the sense and meaning of the Prophecies,
sometimes in the Letter, and sometimes Moral; sometimes in the Allegory, and
sometimes Anagogical.

Yet still, Ezekiel. 1.16.
one Wheel is within another, the latter interpretation accords with the
former; And so, like the frame of the heavenly bodies, such is the
Interpretation of holy Scriptures; One involving, not opposing; One enfolding,
not thwarting another; A sweet Analogy and consent there is, beyond that of the
Caelestial Spears, to a setting forth a more then Pythagorical Harmony of
Divine Wisdom and Truth. Now, that we may the better interpret this portion of
scripture, it is requisite that we know what are the diverse
scripture-interpretations. And for this, observe, that the Learned Commentators
upon Sacred Writ (especially Lyranus in the Prologue to his Commentaries) they
give us a fourefold sense of sacred Scripture, Literal, Allegorical, Moral,
and Anagogicall; all which Lyranus thus distinguishes in a Distick more
agreeable to Theology then Poetry.

Littera Gesta docet, quid credas Allegoria,
Moralis quid agas, quid speres Anagogia.
The Letter declares matters of fact, the Allegory mysteries of faith, the
Moral doctrines of obedience, and the Anagogy objects of hope. Thus in Gal. c.
4. we have them expressly from S. Paul, where he tells of Abraham having Galat.
4.22.
two sons, the one by a bond-maid, the other by a free Woman, this is plain in
the Letter; which Literal sense says the Apostle has its Allegory, ver. 24.
namely, that the two Mothers are by figure and representation the two
Testaments; and to this Allegorical sense he adjoyns a Moral or Tropological
saying, ver. 29.
that as then, he who was born after the flesh persecuted him who was born
after the spirit, even so it is now; And lastly, to all these several senses,
the Literal, the Allegorical, and the Moral, the Apostle adds a fourth, which
is that we name Anagogicall, in matters Heavenly and Eternal; when he says,
but Jerusalem which is above is free, ver. 26.
which is the Mother of us all.

Yea, in the one word Jerusalem does Gorran give the example, Gorran. Comment.
in Gal. 4.
and that very aptly, of all four; for that, according to sacred Scripture,
Jerusalem, Historically and in the letter, it is, Civitas terrena, the Earthly
City; Tropologically and in the Moral it is Anima sancta, the holy soul; In
the Allegory it is Militans Ecclesia, the Militant Church; and in the Anagogy
it is Caelestis Patria, the Heavenly country. For any other instance or
example, we need go no farther then the words of the Text; where we have in one
and the same sentence, all those several senses Take we a full view of the
words, I will crop off from the top of his young twiggs a tender one, and will
plant it upon an high Mountain and eminent,

1. As for the Literal sense of these words it is plain and familiar, that
herein, we will give the Gardener leave to be an Interpreter; and every
Husbandman, with Amos, may be a Prophet.

2. From the Letter then pass we to the Allegory, which is this, That God would
take Zerubbabel a tender twig of the family of Jehojachin, Zerubabel was son to
Shealtiel, and so Grandchild to Jehojachin. Mat. 1.12.
who was himself a Branch of that Royal Cedar the House of David; and this
tender one, God will so tollere as that he will extollere, so crop him off, as
to raise him up; planting him in the high Mountain of Jerusalem, as an eminent
Restorer of Israel; being a Prime Leader of the Jews out of Captivity, Ez. 2.2.
conducting them from Babylon unto Sion.

Thirdly, upon this sense Allegorical, there is yet a further sense
Anagogicall, Heiron. Theodor. etc.
(unless we will have it, with many Expositours, another, and that the chief,
Allegory,) namely, that God would take Christ the Messiah, who is called the
Branch, Zech. 6.12.
and the top-branch too of David's Family; and him cropped off by Death, and that
a violent Death, Tenerum excindam. Ar. Mon. Excer. pam. Sir. Int. (...)
Septuag. Magnificabe infantem. Chal. paraph.
he promises so to preserve from corruption, and restore from the Grave, as to
plant him in the High Mountain of his Church, eminent in Grace and Glory, above
all the inhabitants and habitations of the World.

Now Lastly, what is spoken of Christ as the head, in the Allegorical or
Anagogicall sense, may be applied unto the faithful as the members, in a sense
Moral and Tropological; ay, and what is thus Genrally applied to all believing
Saints, may be more particularly applied to this deceased Heir, the Top-branch
of his Fathers house; cropped by Death in the Blossom of his age, whilst tender
and young; whom yet God in mercy, has but removed, from an earthly inheritance
to an Heavenly, transplanting him from this Lower valley of tears, the state of
the Church militant, to the higher mountain of Sion, the state of the Church
Triumphant; therein to enjoy that Bliss which is infinite, and inherit that
Life which is Eternal.

The Division.
Now, in the Words thus interpreted and applied, observe these 2 particulars; a
present Subject of Lamentation and mourning; and a firm ground of consolation
and rejoicing.

1. The present subject of lamentation and mourning; A cropping off the tender
top-branch of a Goodly Cedar; the taking away by death the hopeful young
Heir, of a worthy and ancient Family; so says God, by his Prophet in the
Moral, I will crop off from the top of his young twigs, a tender one.

2. The firm Ground of consolation and rejoicing, the happy transplanting this
tender Branch, into the Heavenly Paradise, the Mountain of Sion, high in
Eternity, and eminent in Glory, thus, I will crop off from the top of his young
twigs, a tender one; and will plant it upon an high mountain and eminent.

Method, Explication and Application.
1. Explication
The Present Subject of lamentation and mourning; I will crop off from the top
of his young twigs, a tender one. Here observe; we have a Branch, a top-Branch
of the tree, one, and a tender one, not withered or broken, de medulla Cedri.
Vulg. evertice Cordis. Arab. Interp.
but in its full sap cropped off, and taken away; this the ascent of degrees in
the letter of the Parable and Allegorical representation; which gives us this
accent of sorrow in the meaning of the Moral and Tropological interpretation,
viz. That a Son and Heir, the last born of the Family, and first born of his
Mother; a Child, and an only Child, in the blossom of his youth, and vigor
of his strength, not wasted with some lingering Consumption, nor lamed with some
dismal Disaster, but suddenly cut off by a most Acute disease; is taken away
by the hand of God, from the Land of the living. But what said I? taken away
from the land of the Living! Ay, as to an Earhly and Mortal life, and that is
our Grief; but yet with correction, not quite taken away, only transplanted
into a better Soil, that of an Heavenly and life-giving Immortality, which is
our Comfort.

Now, in Funeral Solemnities which receive their birth from our Death, and had
their rise from Man's fall, Pleading their Antiquity from Abels Burial. (For if
we will believe the Rabbis, Adam and Eve were chief Mourners for the Death of
Abel an 100. years; Ay, and his Panegyric too, that, still remains in the
lasting records of Sacred Scripture; where the Holy Ghost tells us in a
Ludatory Commemoration of his Sacrifice and Righteousness, that (...), though
he be dead he yet speaks. Heb. 11.4.
) Now (I say) in these Funeral Solemnities, whether attending the eastern Pyle,
or the western Coffin, the dolfullest mourning is in the obsequies of a
deceased Son, such a Son as is the Fathers hope and the Mothers joy,
primogenitus and unigenitus, the first born and the only born.

Thus, thus the Prophet Zachary to set forth more lively, the sorrows
Poenitential, he does it most Pathetically most Emphatically by the sorrows of
a Funeral, when the humbled sinner shall mourn, Zech. 12.10.
as one mourns for her only Son; and shall be in bitterness of Soul, as one
that is in bitterness of sorrow for his first born; and here then retreat we
into our own bosoms, and let Conscience speak how much, or rather, how little,
we have been acquainted with true Penitence; seeing the moanes of Penitence
must be like the mournings for a Son, even a Funeral sorrow, yea like the
mournings for an only Son, and first born, which is the saddest sorrow of all
Funerals. And hinc illae lacrymae, this, oh this is the black cloud of
mourning, which dissolves it self into so many showers of tears in the present
Exequies.

Whosoever they be then (Beloved) that either now do, or hereafter shall mourn
for the loss of a Son, let them consider what mournings may be sufficient for
the loss of a Soul; especially, seeing by the devout Tears of prayer and
Penitence the lost soul may be recovered; but the lost Son cannot be recalled,
Sophocles in Scyr.
(...)
(...) etc.
Says the Grecian Sophocles; If we could with cry's recall, or moans recover
the dead; O how precious were our tears! more rich then pearls, (...) Ibid.
more desirable then gold, more Soveraignly restorative then Elixar it self.

Wherefore let those Parents whom Gods hand has made Childless, especially in
the loss of a first born son, and hopeful Heir, let them make this holy use of
their heavy affliction, even a penitent Humiliation. So shall their sons death,
further their Souls life, and a spiritual Communion, repair the breach of a
temporal separation; and whom they have lost for a while as to an earthly
presence they shall enjoy for ever in an Heavenly fellowship; Father and Son,
Mother and Child, all through an Obedience of Faith being made joint heirs with
Christ of the everlasting inheritance; which Inheritance Christ has purchased
by his righteousness, promised in his Gospel, and gives full possession of it,
at his second coming in Glory.

Which is that very thing administers comfort here in sorrow, to dry up the
Tears of mourning; even the firm ground of consolation in the Text; that,
though God has cropped off the Top-branch of the Family, a Son and Heir, tender
and young; Yet he has planted him in Paradise, the mountain of Sion, high in
dignity, and eminent in glory; For so says God of Zerubbabel in the Allegory
applied by us to the deceased in the Moral, I will crop off from the top of his
young twigs, a tender one, and will plant it upon an high mountain and eminent.

This then our second particular, 2. Part.
The firm Ground of Consolation and Rejoicing, I will plant it upon an high
mountain and eminent. In which high mountain of Heavenly Sion, the transplanted
branch enjoys a perpetual Spring, without any return of Autumn's falling leaf,
or Winters nipping frost; Neither does the Moon's motion measure out its
months, or the Suns course determine its years, nor does the night press upon
the day, to mask its light; but, to keep this Plant fresh and flourishing, the
bright beams and sweet influence of the Sun of Righteousness are continually
upon it, Malach. 4.2.
in the souls Beatifical Vision of God in Christ.

It was of the earthly Sion that David said it, and therefore much more to be
said of the Heavenly; Psalm. 87.3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God! some of those Glorious
things are spoken by S. Augustine, S. Aug. de Civit. Dei.
that, in this City of Heavenly Sion, Rex est Veritas, Lex charitas, pax
felicitas, vita aeternitas; the King thereof is truth it self, the law thereof
is love it self, the Peace thereof is felicity it self, and the life thereof
is Aeternity it self. The whole blessedness and glory is such, as Eye (mortal
Eye) has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive.

In cor hominis non ascendit, so the Vulgar Latin, and that according to the
Original Greek, (...), it has not gone up into the heart of man to conceive;
The word is Emphaticall, to intimate, that they who have had the most lofty
conceptions, the most raised devotions, the most elevated affections, even
they, they have not been sufficient to comprise in their thoughts, or
comprehend in their desires, the good things; the heavenly and the happy, the
spiritual and eternal good things, which God has prepared for them that love
him.

(...) which he has prepared, this has its emphasis too; not only made in the
greatness of his power, or laid up in the riches of his grace, but even ordered
too in the Council of his will. So that the Bliss and Glory of Sion, is not to
be considered or conceived, such as befits pitiful and poor man to receive,
but such as becomes so great and glorious a God to give.

S. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 12.
And therefore, Fide non capitur, spe non attingitur, charitate non
apprehenditur, desideria and vota transgreditur; It is not to be contained by
faith, not comprised by hope, nor comprehended by love; its height transcends
our desires, and its fullness outvies our wishes; Acquiri potest, aestimari non
potest, it may be attained in its enjoyment, it cannot be aestimated in its
worth.

So that as S. Augustine divinely si in cor hominis non ascendit, cor hominis
illuc ascendat; If the Bliss of Sion, has not gone up into the heart of man in
his Comprehensions of knowledge; let the Heart of man go up unto it, in the
Contemplations of Faith. And such indeed is S. Bernards devotion when raised in
contemplation; Bern. Sermon.
O Beata Regio Deliciarum! ad quam suspiro de valle lachrymarum; O blessed
Region of delights! after which I breath in sighs, and long in desires, whilst
I walk in this valley of tears.

O Blessed Region! In which alone is found this blissfull condition; Wisdom
without ignorance, memory without forgetfulness, Truth without falsity, Reason
without obscurity, Fullness without scarcity, all joyous and glorious to
Eternity. O Blessed region! in which alone is found this blissfull condition;
Health without the least Qualme of sickness, Beauty without the least black
spot of ugliness, Plenty without the least pinch of want, Safety without the
least start of fear, Glory without the least foil of shame, and Immortality
without the least taint of corruption.

Here because it is the mutual courtesy of contraries, the one to illustrate
the other; It Will the better set off our contemplations of Heavens happiness,
if we give you one meditation of Hells misery. Imagine we then a black Abyss
of horrid darkness, in which black Abyss there is a burning Lake of scorching
flames, and a naked man chained in the midst of the burning Lake, with a Viper
in his bosom gnawing his heart, and stinging his soul. Again Imagine, he
still frightfully hears the Devils and damned Ghosts yelling and calling one
upon another, to strike, to rend, to lay on blows, to heap on coals, to pour on
brimstone. Do not these thoughts startle your souls? oh that they did awake
your consciences!

And yet this is not all, but further Imagine, that boiling brimstone being
poured upon his head, at once the heat scalds him, the smoke stifles him, and
the stench choaketh him. Yea, Imagine him weeping and wailing, wringing his
hands, gnashing his teeth, amazed with terrors, wearied with torments, and yet
is there not the least hope of ease or end. Dolores torquent animam, non
extorquent, puniunt Corpus, non finiunt, says Prosper right, the tormentors do
not faint, the tormented does not fail; they are implacable in their malice,
and he is immortal in his misery He is always in Death and yet cannot dye, he
is still perishing and yet without all Period. O miserable immortality! O
immortal misery!

This, this is something, and but something of the doleful and direful estate
of an impenitent wretch in infernal torments: This, this is something, and but
something of that dreadful doom of the withered Branch, John 15.9. Heb. 6, 8.
whose end is, to be burned, even in the Abyss of Hell. Which does the better
set off the joyful bliss of our Cropped Branch, whose end is to be planted even
in the Paradise of Heaven; that mountain of Sion, high in dignity, and eminent
in Glory; According to the moral of the Prophets Allegory; I will crop off from
the top of his young twigs, a tender one, and will plant it upon an high
mountain and eminent.

1. A twofold admonition, 1. Application.
That in the Exequies of our Deceased friends we still turn the stream into the
right channel, our Funeral sorrows, into Penitential mournings; and with our
contrition of heart join we reformation of life Vitam Aeternam speras? vitam
temporalem corrigas, Petrarch. Dialog. 122.
is a good hint which Petrarch gives us; Do thou, O man! hope for eternal
Life? Why, then amend thy life Temporal; for what! Luke 16.8.
art thou not so wise in thy generation? as therein to choose to thy self what
is good? Good wine, good cheer, good cloths, good house, good lands, good air
etc. and what! all good but thy self? not considering, that thy self being
evil, all these in the end shall do thee no good. Think then where is thy good
heart, thy good Conscience, thy good life, which alone will do thee good, when
cropped off by Death; as preserving in thee that Spiritual Sap, and quickening
Grace from Christ, which shall fit thee for a Planting in the Paradise of God.

Philip. 4.5.
2. That of the Apostle; Let your moderation be known unto all men, by the
restraining and regulating your passions, as in Temporal affairs, so in your
Funeral sorrows; and this upon the Apostles argument, (...) the Lord is at
hand; at hand, if patient to reward you, if unpatient to punish you; if humbly
patient and truly Penitent, the Lord is at hand, to bring you to your
children, ay, and your children to you, in a blissful Communion of a blessed
Resurrection; but if repiningly impatient and carelessly impenitent, your
children may come into your sight but not into your enjoyment; you may indeed
in the day of judgment behold them in joy, which yet will not be to your
comfort, but to the increase of your Torment because you shall not enjoy them;
this being the main part of Hells misery, that the damned loose all the parts
of Heavens happiness.

Oh! consider this, whosoever thou art, that at any time here grievest for
losing an hopeful Heir; consider, what will be they grief to loose the Heavenly
inheritance; if shut out from the communion of thy Son, because thou have cast
off the Commands of thy Savior; there being then no enjoyment of Heavenly
bliss but in the communion of Holy Love.

True it is, as St. Hierome of his Dear and deceased Nepotian, Avulsa sunt
viscera mea, and non sentiam? my very bowels are rent from me and shall I not
feel it? Thus, not to be sensibly affected with the loss of a Son, and such a
son, as is here lost, it were to put off the bowels and love of a Parent; and
yet to be dejectedly afflicted with the loss, when so great is his Gain, is to
cast off the heart and faith of a Christian. Wherefore know, that Love is but
carnal, whose sorrow is immoderate at a Funeral; for, whom we loose in deaths
dissolution, we yet retain in the Churches Communion; and so the breach of
nature is repaired by Grace, and what grace repaires, Glory consummates. Let
not, oh! let not then your tears of immoderate grief, so blind the eyes of
your holy faith as not to see in the Comfort, what you believe in the Article
of your Creed, the Communion of Saints.

2. Exhortation. That, considering what we have heard of the Mountain of Sion,
and State of the blessed; what we have heard spoken in praise, Christ has
given in promise, and shall be hereafter made good in reward; St. Aug. de
civit. Dei.
considering this, Vilescant omnia quae habentur in terris, Let these earthly
things be the objects of our holy contempt, not our hearty delight; Center we
our souls upon Heaven, six we our aims upon what is everlasting, and will
outlive the triumphs of Death. See the Emperor Justinian's Funeral, and that
will tutour us to this instruction; see his Royal Pall a rare piece of Phrygian
Arras, Baron. ad Ann. Justin. 39.
richly wrought with the lively Representations of vanquished armies, conquered
Kings, Ruined Cities, captived people; all these the Tropheys of his Triumphs,
he delivers up as a Spoil to Death.

Wherefore, most certainly he has but a mean soul, who mounts no higher in his
affections then to what is mortal. Look we up then, Grovelling Mortals! look we
up in our desires and in our devotions, to Heaven our Country, Heb. 11.10.16.
to Jerusalem our abiding City; There, there is the society of Saints, the
Communion of the Blessed. Dull souls! why do we not hasten to that Home? Know
we not, that a glorious company of Patriarchs and Prophets, of Kings and
Priests, of Apostles and Evangelists; an whole army of valiant Martyrs,
constant Confessors and devoted Virgins; yea a numberless multitude of Parents
and Kindred, and Friends, and other holy Saints, all desire and long for our
coming? S. Cypr. tract de mortal.
de sua incolumitate securi, de nostra salute soliciti, secure as to their own
safety, but solicitous as to our salvation.

Why do we not then speed our pace, in a quickened zeal of Holy Devotions and
devout affections? Why do not we thus 1 Pet. 1.13.
gird up the Loins of our mind, and hasten, Ibid.
ad horum conspectum and complexum venire, to come into their sight and into
their society, their Presence and their Embraces? And this, to communicate in
those joys, and in that inheritance which is common to all. Here we are
troubled to get Heirs for our inheritances, and to get inheritances for our
Heirs; but in Heaven, there is one inheritance and all Heirs; and yet, non
minuitur copia Possessorum, S. Aug. in Psalm. 49.
nec fit angustior numerositate Cohaeredum; the number of Heirs does not lessen
the Inheritance, nor the multitude of Possessours straiten the bounds of our
Possession; Ibid.
No, Tanta est multis quanta est paucis, Colloss. 1.12. Genesis 3.24.
tanta singulis quanta omnibus; The Inheritance of life is an Inheritance of
light, and therefore, as is the light of the Sun, so is the life of Christ, as
great to many as to few, and as much to each one as to all. To close.

3. Consolation. O what comfort then must this needs be in the thoughts of the
deceased! That he has left us, but we have not lost him; unless we first lose
our selves, our Souls; For in the Mountain of Sion it is that we shall find
him, in the Paradise of God it is that we shall meet him; unless like guilty
Adam, Genesis 3.24.
the Cherubims flaming sword do keep us out; even Gods fiery wrath of avenging
Justice exclude us from the society of the blessed.

To shut up all then. This hopeful Branch, the deceased Heir was not cropped to
be withered away, but to be Planted anew; and planted in the Mountain of Sion,
high in dignity and eminent in Glory; and this, this is the great comfort in
his mournful Solemnity; which seasonable Consolation is administered from the
Text, in its Moral Interpretation, the Letter whereof is this, I will crop off
from the top of his young twiggs, a tender one; and will plant it upon an high
Mountain and eminent.

Hallelujah.
FINIS.

