Most Strange and Wonderful News from a place called the LEISTER, By
Castle-Street, in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields: Of a most Dreadful
Discovery of a Murder of a Man and a Child, made on Sunday Morning being the
11th instant, on a Dunghill there; of the finding the Skin, and Nails of a Man's
Hands, with his Privy-Members, Heart, Liver, Breast, and great Quantities of
the Flesh of his Buttocks, etc. also the Heart, Liver, Hand, etc. of a Child,
with the strange Manner of the Discovery by a Butcher, and one John Williams a
Laboring Man.
AS for the Hainousness of this Sin of Murder, I suppose none can be ignorant
that it is of the deepest Die, a most loud crying Sin. This we may see in the
first Act of this kind, that ever was committed, Abel's Blood cries from the
Earth, as God tells Cain, Genesis 4 10. And it is worth our Notice, what strange
and miraculous means it has often pleased God for to ufe for the ^^covery of
this Sin; the very Brute Creatures have often been made Instruments of it: Nay,
often the extreme horror of a man's own Conscience that will in spite of him
be privy to the Fact, and that very often proves a means of discovering of it
to the World. But to proceed to the Relation:

ON Sunday the 11th of March Instant, an honest Butcher coming over a place
called the Lester, a Heap of Dung-hills near Castle street, not far from St.
Giles's -Church, espied the Skins and Nails, etc. of a Christians Hands, which
taking up, and being Very curious, showed them to some of the Neighbors, upon
which great search was made, in order to a farther Discovery; and between
Eleven and Twelve at Noon, one John Williams, a Labouring-man, discovered
[about 30 yards from the Place where the Hands were found) the Privy-members,
Heart Liver and Skin of the Breast of a man; and at the same Time were fouund
great quantities of pieces of Flesh, supposed to be cut off from the Buttocks
and Thighs of the said Person, covered over with a little Bubbish only: also
there was then found the Skinny part of the Hand of a Child, with the Heart and
Liver, etc. as since upon the View of several able Chyrurgians, it does most
plainly and evidently appear; the Skin and Flesh was fresh and sweet; which
shows it was but newly done.

At This Instant further search is made in all parts thcre abouts, in hopes to
find the Heads, Legs, Arms and other Limbs belonging to these Bodies, that some
Light may be given as to the Murderers and murdered. But at present there is
not any person we hear of, that is so much as guessed at: It was observed, That
the Skin of the man's Hands were extraordinary White, so that it is thought they
belonged to no mean person: That this Horrid and most Barberous Murder may be
detected and the Anthours thereof brought to Condign Punishment, is and ought
to be the Prayers of all good Christians, to whom this Relation shall come.

Printed for T. M. in Fleet Street.


