AN APOLOGY In the behalf of the SEQVESTRED CLERGY;

Presented to the High Court of PARLIAMENT;

By R. MOSSOM, Preacher of Gods Word at S. Pet. P. Wh. London.

Lex Iustitiae, Iustitia Reipub. basis,

I. C. ax. June 17 LONDON, Printed for William Grantham, at the Black Bear in
S. Paul's Church yard near the little North-Door 1660.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Most Noble Lords, and Worthy Patriots,
GLorious is the day of our Sion's deliverance, in which the Sun has broken
through the clouds, Sovereignty dispelled the mists and storms too of
Disloyalty. Now, after our Hallelujah's to the King of Glory for the wonders of
his Providence; Fit it is, that we make oblations of Gratitude, for your
prudent Councels and exemplary Allegiance.

Whereby, whatever have been our turnings and rollings, all as Excentrick to
Righteousness as to Peace; we are now fixed upon our right Center, a Loyal
Subjection to our lawful Sovereign.

And O what joy is it! to see in the High Court of Parliament, Aristides and
Themistocles forget all injuries and animosities; changeing their private
Contention into this public Emulation, Herod. Hist.
Vter melius de Patria mereri possit, whether may deserve best of his Country.

This is that (Worthy Heroes) which gives confidence to this Address, by way
of Apology, so to represent the Sequestered Clergie's cause and condition, that,
in the common Joy, and public Exultation, they may not be the only Mourners
at If yet they have any Homes, since they were thrust out of their houses.
Home, in their deep distress of private affliction; which yet must needs be,
if when their Persecution is ceased, their Sufferings continue; if when their
Oppressors are removed, they remain still under their Oppressions. They have
had their part in the Fastings, and Prayers, and Tears, for obtaining the
blessing of Restoration; O let them have their Portion in the Comfort, and
Peace and Joy of the Church and State restored. They have, though sequestered,
threatened, and imprisoned, they have, very many of them (if not most of them)
from Press and Pulpit, Prayed and Preached, and earnestly contended for that
Liberty, wherein these Nations now stand; and O let them have at least this
Reward of their services, a Release from their sufferings.

Many of us have been Sequestered, before the late King of blessed memory was
murdered, and many of us since that black and dismal Treason; and for no other
Crime, but acting in our Callings, according to the Dictate of our Consciences,
discharging our Ministry according to the Rule of our Established Laws. (If
ignorance or scandal be truly and legally objected against any man's Ministry
or Person, Let them that will plead for Baal.) Not being conscious then of
violating either the Law of God or Man; If our Accusers, and their Accusations
be produced in Judgment, we are ready either clearly to justify our Innocence,
or humbly to submit unto our sentence. Besides, impossible it is, that all
notes of Discord and Parties (as his Majesty in his Declaration graciously
desires, and positively ordains) should be utterly abolished; whilst our
Sequestrations continue, and which is worse, if the unlawful Possession of
Intruders be confirmed.

We humbly conceive, that the Occasion of our Sequestrations is now removed,
and this not by any pretense of power or Party pleading conquest (a thing to be
for ever silenc't) but, by a wonderful work of God, upon the very hearts of
men; He and He alone has overcome us all, in his kindness and love; to teach
us to overcome one another, by all loving kindness.

Now, the occasion (I say) of our Sequestrations being thus, even thus removed,
shall a worse evil come upon us, (not only all loving kindness, but all common
Justice being forgotten) the unjust Possession of our Livings-confirm'd? What
could our greatest Enemies do more? Nay, they would have done much less, had
we submitted to their Usurpation and Tyranny. We doubt not but the Honorable
Court of Parliament, taking this one particular into their judicious and
Christian consideration, it will persuade a speedy removing, whatsoever may
obstruct our so just, so reasonable, so necessary readmission.

Sure we are, the Possessio jure consistens est civilis possessio, Cod. l. 7.
tit. 32.
Civil Law does not (nor any other) justify Possession without right; so that
Injusta possessio non est Titulus, and sine Titulo non est locus
praescriptioni, Ibid.
unjust Possession, though long, cannot give Title; and without Title, there is
no plea for Prescription; but the Law obliges to restitution. We are right in
the State of Reversus de Captivitate, etc. Cod. l. 7. t. 35.
Captives returned, to whom, by all rules of Equity, plenary Restitution is to
be made; which yet we remit of in our desires, as to the Summum Ius of a
plenary Restitution, referring our selves (Honored Patriots) to your Candor
and Moderation.

This Precedent we can Produce, (we will not take the Confidence to propose)
that when the Thirty Tyrants under Gallienus and Valerianus, had brought the
Roman Empire into much disorder and confusions; and that by Evagr. Hist. l. 2.
Basiliscus Tyrannizing in the East, that venerable Council of Chalcedon was
condemned, and the Holy Fathers of the Church, the Bishops, and other Pastors
were displac't and expulst; Zeno the Emperor subduing this usurpation and
Tyranny, with the advice of the Senate, makes a Decree for a restitution to the
Church, with a Cod. l. 1. Tit. 2.
Decernimus, in Integrum restituantur Vniversa, and ad suum ordinem revocentur,
We decree that all things be restored wholly, and reduced into their own Order.

And not only the Civil Law asserts our Cause, but also the Common Law has
done it is utmost to secure our Estates. For, besides the Articuli Cleri -- so
full and particularly express, we have our Interest in Magna Charta, as to
Privilege and Propriety, as clear and as full, as any whatsoever. It is
ordained in that Royal Charter, so often confirmed in Parliaments, that * if
any thing be procured by any Person, contrary to our Privilege and Propriety
(the Premises intended) it shall be holden of no force or effect. So that, Mag.
Chart. cap. 37.
without an open breach made to the Violation of all Men's Property, we cannot
be denied the asserting Ours.

Many Objections are strongly made, which here, (I humbly conceive) are fully
Answered.

1. Object. Many learned and Godly men will be unprovided, if the sequestered
Clergy be restored.

Ans. We give their learning it is just Esteem; but let me say (and it is beyond
any man's gainsaying) The Learned Clergy that ever England had, was that
sequestered; their works do witness it to the whole World. And as for their
Godliness, Matthew. 12.33.
if the Tree may be known by it is fruits, these, here pleaded for, have given
testimony beyond exception. Yet these so eminently Learned and Godly Ministers
have been (without all tenderness of compassion toward them) unprovided for,
almost twenty years; which (if the Objection have any Weight) may justly
require, and urge their speedy Readmission, having been out too long, to be
kept out any longer, when God himself has opened the way for their Return. And
Indeed, it is Gods Providence which Miraculously has opened the way; and shall
any Humane Power adventure to obstruct it? We desire no more but the benefit of
the Known Law, and should not have need of any Plea, Petition, or Apology to
recover our own, did not some endeavor to prevail with this Honorable Court,
to Interpose their Authority, to intercept our claim.

How then are they Godly? who will knowingly (and so, their Learning does
increase their Guilt) add sin unto sin, by usurping another right after
so many years unlawful Possession; and taking upon them the guiding of those
Flocks, the Chief shepherd never committed to them, as not Ioh. 10.1.2.
entering by the right Door. Besides, if this Parliament should enact (which God
forbid) that such Intruders should be confirmed in other men's Livings as to
Estate; and other men's charges, as to the Ministry; how great a Share would it
be to men's Consciences? (if at all Godly) which certainly would not hereby be
quieted, if truly Awakened.

For our Right being Indubitable by the Law of God and Man; a Law Post fact,
such as this desired from the Parliament, can no ways acquit those pretended
Godly Ministers, of Palpable Injustice; but in foro Conscientiae, they lie
under the known and wilful guilt of Injury and Wrong, which cannot, without
restitution, admit of repentance to receive Pardon; that Maxim among the
Casuists from S. Augustine being clear and certain, August. Epist. 54.
non dimittitur Peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum, there can be no remission
(because no true Repentance) without restitution, in repair of Injuries. I
beseech those Godly Ministers to consider, if they cannot answer this now, how
they will answer it at the dreadful day of Judgment.

2. Object. This of restoring Sequestered Ministers to their Livings will
disturb the calm of State.

Ans. Sure I am, the contrary will cloud the face of Heaven, and turn the calm
into a storm; and leave the Nation under a curse. The greatest 1 Kin. 18.17.
Troubler of Israel, is certainly oppression and injustice; and if the unjust
possession should be confirmed by the Parliament, (as some men would have it)
what were this but Psalm. 94.20.
to establish iniquity by a Law? For if we have right to possess, it is unjust
to keep us out of our Possession; unjust in them that usurp our right, but more
unjust in those who confirm that usurpation; especially when they have the
Power in their Hands, and Law on their sides, and are appealed to by us, as a
Court, and the highest Court of Justice, to have our Right asserted, and our
injury redrest.

Under favor; we may, and must plead, the Parliament will not (for it is a
Court of Justice) and it is an audacious boldness to think they will, or
petition they would, against Who yet are willing to sacrifice what is most
dear, to the peace of the Church; upon a Brotherly accord, for making up all
breaches.
our wills, give away our rights. If the Law take our Livings from us, we stand
to our Trial, and submit; if the Law does not, the Parliament sure will not: I
had lmost said, cannot; this I am sure, though they may confirm Men's present
Possession, yet they cannot make our Right to have been no Right, it implies a
contradiction; be it so then, that the Parliament should think fit to make
their possession firm, can they make it just? Just in foro Poli, whatsoever it
is in foro Soli? And what Convenience should prompt the Parliament to confirm
an unjust possession, I cannot imagine, nor dare to enquire. Reason of State is
a secret, which duty forbids my curiosity to pry into. I doubt not, but this
good service I shall do the Parliament by this Apology, to clear their Justice
and Honor against those men's insolence and clamor, who would engage them to
violate Magna Charta, the chiefest of Laws, and the Subjects property, the
chiefest of Rights.

3. Object. If the Ministers must restore their Livings, then the Purchasers
their Lands; and if so, the consequences will be, a new disturbance and
distraction.

Ans. As the Ministers invading other men's livings, became too much a President
for the Purchasers to possess other men's Lands; so, it were to be wished, that
a just Resignation in the Ministers might become (as in Godly Men and Ministers
it should become) Exemplary for a just Restitution in the Purchasers. But to
say truth, the Purchasers are generally far more the ingenuous; who have very
many of them been satisfied with this Proposal, that, upon their disbursments
being repayed, with consideration of improvement for the time, the Lands should
be restored

Now, if the Ministers had purchas't our Livings, as others did the
Church Lands, there might be Notwithstanding the sure Rule in Civil Law, that,
iniquis comparatoribus pretium reposcere non liceat, cod. l. 7. tit. 38.
some appearance of equity for satisfaction of charge; but yet still, no Plea
for Property.

4. Object. All must be content to be Loosers.

Ans. We think, after almost 20. years exclusion from our Livings, to the utter
undoing of so many numerous families, I speak not this as to my self, though I
have sometime tasted the bitterest of sufferings; for I acknowledge with
thankfulness, through a blessing of providence upon my unwearied Labors, I
have maintained my self and family in some plentiful subsistence.
forced too too many to beg their bread, and very often want bread, when they
have been begging of it; We think, after this, to tell us of being further
Loosers, when for so many years we have lost all, is but the part of miserable
Comforters.

Alas, many of us are so aged, that if not speedily restored, they shall not
probably live, to enjoy any part of what is their own, which in this so
miraculous a deliverance, is given unto them again of God. And indeed, this
adds a further difference from the case of the Purchasers; that as the
Possessours of our rights, never were at charge for our Livings; so nor are
their Heirs or Executours cut off from any after benefit, by their restoring of
them. Our Tenure is but for life, that, the Purchasers have paid for, is
perpetuity; so that, all the advantage we have by Restitution, is only to our
selves, for that Pittance of life which remains; whereas in the Restitution
from the Purchasers, there is a profit to Posterity.

5. Object. You of the Sequestered Clergy shall not be left without Provision;
the Fanatic, and not ordained Preachers being removed, and Livings as they
fall vacant reserved, there will be found Livings enough, equal in number and
value, to admit You all to your Ministerial employment, and a plentiful
Subsistence.

Ans. A good way, if rightly ordered, to preserve the Parliaments Honor, in
administering us Justice; and this, without the least of clamor, in not
providing for Learned and Godly Ministers. And it is thus; The sequestered Clergy
according to Law and Reason, Equity and Conscience, being restored; Those
vacated Livings mentioned, will be a present supply for the Godly Ministers
removed; and this, Honorable to the Parliament, and Just to us. But, that we
should be debarred our right against Law, and thus disposed of to other
Livings; However it might seem a way of relief to us, yet can it not (as we
conceive) be an act of Justice in the Parliament; and so, though it does
sustain our lives, yet it will not support their Honors.

For, if we are judged capable of other Livings, why not of our own? If we are
not criminous, how comes it to pass, that having Property we are kept out of
our old? and if we are criminous, how come we to have the Capacity of being
admitted into new? Besides, we know many, put into our Livings, have deserted
their first Principles, and have taken the late Engagement, and done (according
to that) what was dangerous and destructive to King and Parliament. Now, we
suppose, such persons without dispute, shall no^ be sheltered by any
Parliamentary Authority, from the Laws of the Land, by which they (and all
others too) are required to make Restitution.

These then being removed, (whether pretended Heads of Houses in the
Universities, or Ministers of several Churches, or the like) there will not be
found (considering how very many since their Sequestration have died in their
Loyalty) there will not be found so considerable a number of the Sequestered
Clergy, to return to their respective charges, as to make any apparent
disturbance in the State; and so, not so considerable a number of the foresaid
Godly Ministers, for whose sakes, the Parliament should be put upon so great an
act of dishonor, as that of injustice.

6. Obejct. The Ministers are now so well acquainted with their People, and the
People with their Ministers, that it will be a distraction to the several
Parishes to receive new Preachers.

Ans. How the several Parishes are affected toward their ancient Pastors, is
very evident; Many of them (I am sure) much desiring, and earnestly longing,
yea inviting their Return. Indeed, (I believe) if the Colleges were to
Petition for their Governors, and the Parishes for their Ministers, it would
soon appear, whether is most dissatisfactory and distracting to the Colleges
and Parishes, the Absence or Return of their Lawful Heads and Ministers.

Wherefore, it may be confidently averred, that it would be, not only a great
Contentment and Comfort, to the Aged Heads and Religious hearts, of many truly
Reverend for learning and Godliness, to be readmitted to the Exercise of
their Ministry in their respective Cures; but it would be also an abundant
satisfaction to their several Charges, who earnestly Pray and long for their
returns; being conscientiously sensible, how they have, like sheep, erred and
strayed, since they lost their Lawful Shepherds.

Now, if notwithstanding this Apology, and Plea, fortified with arguments of
Law and Equity, reason and Religion; if notwithstanding all this, the Judgment
of this so Honorable Parliament thinks fit (for causes best known unto
themselves) to wave our right, and determine against our Readmission; we have
discharged our Consciences, as to that 1 Timothy 5.8.
Natural Obligation of providing for our Families; that Political, of asserting
our just Titles; and that Religious, of attending our Ministerial Charges; all
which will acquit us in our Account at the last day. And having done this, we
will not Impatiently repine, nor uncharitably censure much less undutifully
resist, but, in our accustomed silence, sit down in submission to this High
Courts prudential Decree, and final Determination.

At present then, in the Face of the World, we plead for that, which so
Honorable a Parliament will not deny us; To our Cause, Justice; to our
Condition, Mercy; Mercy, for, we may not doubt, but at Westminster as well as
at Athens, amidst so many Noble Hearts, we shall find an Parca superstitio non
thurea flamma nec Alius- Accipitur sanguis, lachrymis Altaria sudant, etc.
Stat. lib. 12.
Altar dedicated to Mercy; whose Sacrifices are sighs and tears, of which we
can give a plentiful offering, from Parents and Children oppressed with
necessities and wants.

We know indeed, Compassion is pleaded, as to the Families of the present
Possessors; But what! may it not be more equally pleaded, as to those, the so
long dispossessed? The Sequestered Clergy have, generally, from plentiful Estates
been reduced to the deepest of necessities; but they who entered upon the
Sequestrations, were advanced from necessitous Estates to a plentiful
maintenance; and so are provided even with our Incomes, to bear the want of
profits (if it must be) better, then those of the Suffering Brethren quite
exhausted, and fainting under their Afflictions.

Whether indeed is more equal? that they be exposed to want, who have Right,
but no Possession; or they, who have Possession, but no Right.

Supposing, that many, very many possessed of our Livings, not being Ordained
Ministers (or but lately ordained in design to hold their Livings) should not
continue, but must give place to the lawful incumbents; supposing this,
consider I beseech you (Noble Worthies) how it clearly evinceth right of
possession to be on our side; but a respect of Party (a thing his Majesty would
have buried, and this Parliament has disclaimed) is made the grand stop to our
free return; for, that all others do not recede, to give us possession, cannot
be justified by Law, therefore do they seek to be countenanc't by favor.

If in this Apology, any error of Judgment, any heat of Zeal, any unfitness
of expression, imprudence of Address, or the like, be liable to Just Censure;
I humbly crave, that it may be wholly laid upon my self, acquitting the
Reverend Fathers, and the Ministerial Brethren, as not in the least culpable.
The have of this Address (lest it should be prevented by the Parliaments
proceeding to the Bill) not permitting a deliberate consultation with them, or
a particular approbation from them.

Now, the God of all Wisdom direct your Consultations (Most Noble Lords and
Honored Heroes) to the glory of his Name, the honor of the King, and the
Peace of our Sion, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen, Amen.

Thus Pray's Your Honors Suppliant R. MOSSOM, a Minister of the Gospel, and
one of the Sequestered CLERGY.


