PSYOSOPHA: OR, NATURAL and DIVINE CONTEMPLATIONS OF THE PASSIONS and FACULTIES
OF THE SOUL OF MAN.

In Three Books. By NICHOLAS MOSLEY, Esquire

1 PET. 2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims abstain
from fleshly lusts, which war against the Soul.

Ignat. Epist. ad Philip. (...).

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Mosley at the Prince's Arms St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1653.

TO My Honored Kinsman, ROBERT BOOTH, Esquire.
It Is not (dear Nephew) Blood, it is not Consanguinity, those several ties and
relations of Nature, more than a virtuous Mind and understanding Soul; those
Powers and Faculties of your Soul, which I have known from your Childhood
Active and Industrious, and now find crowned with Habits Intellectual, These
have laid an Obligation upon me, of a more sacred civil reverence and respect
unto your person; such Homage will I ever owe to the man where these are
seated; for though I my self fall very short of such perfection, yet is it not
the least of my comfort here, that I am a Philosopher, a Lover of Wisdom and
Learning where ever I find it; my hand and heart is for it; to no petition
against it, or the Nurseries thereof; for which cause I have entered my self a
Student in the School of Nature and of Christ, there to find out this noble
Science of the Soul; what I have met with here, and there dispersed, I have
endeavored to recollect and compile into this Volume; It is not therefore my
own, I am no discoverer of New Lights, no teacher of Strange Doctrines; I
challenge in this Piece nothing but the Composure, the Substance or Matter you
may find in the old and beaten path of Faith and Truth, which our Forefathers
have trod, and whose Footsteps we may securely follow. To you then (as no
affecter of Novelty, but a lover of Truth) do I dedicate these my labors as a
pledge of my Love, and part of that Debt owe you, accept then of these from
him, who shall ever remain,

Sir, Your obliged Uncle, to serve and honor you, NICH. MOSLEY.

The Epistle to the Reader.
EVery man naturally desires to know, (...) Aristotle.
it is the ground the Philosopher has laid and placed in the very frontispiece
of his Metaphysics; this innate desire to knowledge comes with the Soul of
man, even that which Forms him, and distinguishes him from beasts, and makes
him like unto God, which is the Reasonable soul, immortal and intelectual; for
when God said, Let Us make man in our own image after our own likeness, and let
them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the air, and
over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that
creeps upon the earth; man is not Gods Image in respect of his Body, but his
Soul, which is a spirit as God is, and the Image of God in man consists in that
wherein man excells and has dominion over other creatures; now man excells
not, nor rules over Beasts in the parts of his Body which are far stronger in
many beasts than in man, but in the faculties of his Soul, having a mind
endowed with reason, will, and understanding, which the soul of a beast is not
capable of.

This Intellectual faculty of the human soul has one property, viz. that it
is capable of all knowledge; and herein is the excellency of our souls again
manifested, that nothing is able to know all things, besides God, the Angels,
and humane Intellect; But forasmuch as human understanding is ignorant of many
things, and yet the Arch-philosopher says it understands all things, we must
distinguish twixt the power and act, and then there will be no contradiction;
the Understanding knows not all things actually that is proper to God, the
Understanding knows all things potentially, this is true of the humane
Intellect, and thus is Aristotle to be understood; This Soul of man has an
innate desire, an aptitude and ability of knowing all things, which kindles a
desire of knowing all things actually, and makes the Intellect practick, and to
be in action; Hence are found out so many arts and sciences of all sorts, the
arcana naturae, the very depth and secrets of nature comprehended within that
general division of Moral, Natural, and Metaphysical; as for that Theological
science, how has it been enlarged and exemplified by writers on all points
thereof, yea upon the deep mysteries of Divinity; of the Trinity in Unity, and
Unity in Trinity, of the two natures of Christ, of the incarnation of the Son
of God, and the like? all which shows that even to this day the Tree of
knowledge still works in all men as well Christians as Heathens; we still
account the attaining of knowledge a thing to be desired, and be it good or
evil we love to be knowing all the sort of us.

In this ensuing treatise thou have (Gentle Reader) for thy benefit intended
(what in my Meditations for my own behoof I had digested) a discourse upon the
Soul of man; a Science than which (of all that ever were or can be attained to
by the strictest disquisition of humane learning) none more necessary, as being
most excellent, most profitable, most pleasant, and therefore none more
desirable; if thou be inflamed with a desire of knowledge, learn to know thy
own Soul.

By the knowledge of the Soul we come to the knowledge of our selves, which how
necessary it is, the very Heathens may convince us Christians of by that
notable famous sentence which was engraven upon the door of the Temple of
Apollo at Delphos, and said to descend from Heaven (...), know thy self, for a
vain and foolish thing it is to understand other things, and to be ignorant of
our selves; to bend a man's studies to know the Heavens, Elements, and other
things, and not to know himself, is the part of a fool, and not of a wise man,
Zabarell de mente humana.
says the Philosopher: But we come not to the true knowledge of our selves but
by the knowledge of our Soul with its faculties and operations; for then we
are said to know our selves when we know our Soul more than our Body.

Especially the Intellectual faculty of our Soul, by which we are that we are,
by which we are distinguished from beasts, by which we are made like unto God.

In one part of this discourse is handled the state of the Soul in the body of
man, not so much before the fall of our first parents, as in his lowest and
weakest condition cloged and pressed down with the fetters of Original sin, and
depraved Nature, enclosed and intombed in these bodies of ours, which carry
about them a body of sin; And thus the Soul is considered as the Formal part of
a Man; Form and Matter making one Compositum; And this takes up the first Book,
being of the Physical Science of the Soul.

In another part is handled the state of the Soul of Man, not so much in its
essence and Form cloged with the weight of misery and body of corruption, as in
its Operations and Faculties abstracted from Matter and use of the body which
is a more Spiritual and Divine condition, and this is the subject of the second
Book; whether we consider the Soul abstracted from the body in those purer
workings of the Intellect, the Soul still quickening and remaining in the body;
or consider it as the body lying in the grave, and the Soul totally and really
separated from it.

In another is touched the state of the Soul after death in a body glorified,
when this corruption shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal have put
on Immortality; wherein as the Body so the Soul is in the highest pitch of
bliss and glory that ever it was, or can be capable of (which is infinite)
therein being restored to the likeness of his Maker, not only by that
Righteousness, Freedom of Will, and clearness of Understanding in which it was
first created, but in a far more eminent manner resembling his Maker in endless
glory, bliss, and happiness; we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he
is, not in a glass, darkly, but then face to face; And this Beatifical Vision
of God is also a full Fruition of him, who is our summum bonum, the final cause
of our Creation, and the Intrinsical end thereof (viz.) our perfection of state
which consists in the full Fruition of God, who only is our summum bonum. The
first Book then is Natural or Physical, the second is Metaphysical, the third
is Theological.

Consider we our Souls under the first Notion, and as by a ladder (whereof this
is the first or lower most step) we may raise up our selves in an orderly
ascent into Heaven, till we come to see God (not only as far as is possible to
behold him in this Vale of tears and Veil of Flesh, but) till we come to be
transformed into his Image, to enjoy and see God even as he is.

If thou desire Knowledge, the study of the Soul is most useful for thee, what
Science soever thou most affectest, or what manner of Person soever thou art;
Be thou a Philosopher, it is necessary for thee; for if thou addict thy
self to Natural Philosophy, and to know the causes of things, the Soul is a
subject for it, it is principium animalium, that which gives being to al living
creatures, so says Aristotle; is it the Mathematical Science which for
certainty and plain demonstration thou desire? this thou have in the Soul,
the Soul of Man gives this demonstration; is it Metaphysics thou affectest,
for the Nobleness of the subject therein handled, Spiritual and abstracted
from matter? the Soul of man is spiritual, immortal, impassible, and abstracta
a materia, says Aristotle, so a Metaphysical subject.

Nay higher yet, Art thou a Christian and would come to the knowledge and
fruition of God? the Soul of man runns through the whole body of divinity,
poynting and leading thee all along through the same.

Mistake me not, I do not judge it possible by any humane art and Science only
to attain to true wisdom, by any light of Nature to reach to saving grace, or
to that true light which lighteneth every man that comes into the world, by
the eye of sense to come to the eye of faith; I have not so learned Christ; yet
as Philosophy is said to be handmaid to Divinity, and the Law a Schoolmaster
to bring us to Christ, so must the Reasonable soul be judged a necessary
instrument toward the attainment of supernatural gifts, for as natural Reason
without Grace can never find the way to Heaven, so Grace is never placed but in
the Reasonable soul, and proves by the very seat which it has taken up, that
the end it has is to be spiritual eye-water to make Reason see what by Nature
it only cannot, but never to blemish Reason in that which it can apprehend;
Grace hinders not the work of Nature wherein it is able to work, nor faith
blemish the eye of Reason in that which it can see and comprehend, and
doubtless that is very far even to the eternal power and Godhead, which makes
the very heathens inexcusable; where Nature is weak and cannot see, Grace
affords an helper and instrument to the eye of Reason, to bring to its sight
those things which for want of due requisites, as convenient distance, etc. it
was not of it self able to discern, such are all the Mysteries of Divinity, as
the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, the Hypostatical Union, the
Incarnation of the Son of God, etc. all which are supra captum humanum, Man's
Reason cannot attain unto, here Faith comes in and supplies this defect;
through the prospect of Faith Reason looks, and without Reason Faith is
useless; here Faith perfects Reason, and where it is wrong sets it right, never
undermines it, may be above it, but not against it, nor without it. So then is
it Grace, is it Faith thou seek? thou find it in Humane Nature, in a
reasonable Soul; This is a gift of God proper to man only and to no other
creature; the mere Sensitive creatures have not this gift of Faith, their
nature is not capable of Faith, they are below it, this prospect of Faith would
nothing avail the eye of Sense.

The mere Intellectual creatures (as Saints and Angels in Heaven) they have not
need of Faith, they are above it, their Intuitive intellect needs no glass to
see him whom they behold face to face; only to Man this glass is given, this
glass of Faith to the eye of Reason to make the soul see what by nature it
cannot whilst it is veiled and imprisoned in this mortal and frail body; but
after death Faith cease; then whether in the body, or out of the body, viz.
before the Resurrection whilst the body sleeps, or after the Resurrection when
the body is raised to glory, and both are reconjoyned, we shall not need any
help of Faih, but shall see him even as he is, know him even as we are known,
and be as the Angels in Heaven.

Reader, being too conscious of my own weakness, the importunity of my friends
prevailed not with me, to make these papers public, till I had received
encouragement herein from some more knowing men, who took the pains to peruse
them and then to return use this account ensuing.

MOSLEIO suo generoso Pietatis and Philosophiae vindici YIPEIN.
MUlta voluptate (vir mihi charissime) scripta tua quae pridie hujus diei ad me
dederas, recensui; and ne dignitati tuae pro necessitudine nostra defuisse
viderer, quid de instituto tuo sentiam, Doctissimo viro, tuique amantissimo
RUTTERO nostro palam feci; omnia (...), gravia, arguta, and (...) ita mihi
apparent ut Sacramento (quod ait Orator) contenderim tua esse; nec vero
quicquam scriptione hac tua video, quod non utile sit antiquae and sobriae
pietatis Christianos videre, certo sciam. Eaes in philosophicis mente quam
ratio and veritas praescribit, ea in divinis, quam pietas, Ecclesia, and Deus
suaserit; tam amico foedere Ecclesiam and Scholam Sociasti, ut plane in
Philosophicis Theologum egeris, in Theologicis Philosophum; Aristotelem ipsum,
(...), Christianum autem bona mente Stagyritam. Consilio tuo quote usum scribis
facile cedo; tanta enim perturbatione and confusione rerum cum perculsa and
prostrata jacent omnia, nulla res alia levare animum molestiis potest, nisi Deo
animaeque vacare. Rectae voluntatis conscientia, constansque in Deum pietas,
maxima est rerum incommodarum consolatio; perditis rebus omnibus ipsa se
sustentat virtus, and ad been vivendum satis est recte facere atque animarum
saluti consulere. Quod reliquum est festination meae ignoscas velim; nec eos
qui te non admirentur invidos, nec qui laudent assentatores arbitrere; Macte
pietate tua, atque optimarum artium scientia, ut bono reipublicae statu,
meritam tibi reliquiae vitae dignitatem acquiras; Qualem me tibi semper fuisse
existimes velim futurum esse confidas,

Pietatis tuae and Eruditionis cultorem, R. BRIDE-OAKE.

Amico and literarum and meo NICHOLAO MOSLEYO Been audire Cum optime meruerit.
ITa precor animitus, and istis precibus opus esse nunc dierum, qui non norit,
similis tui, parum est: De fama tua (modo recte fama nuncupetur, quae abore
praesentis seculi pendet) periclitatus es valde; apud nostros enim, qui maxim
sapiunt, quam desipiant maxim, vident omnes qui quicquam vident; quo a veterum
sententia longius i ur, eo ad veritatem accedere proprius videntur hujusce
aetatis (...) (eo enim honor Blaterones istos Athenis dignati sunt) quasi
inventis vix dum triduanis nugari, id demum Philosophari sit: At tu ( MOSLEIE
mi) veritatis simul and vetustatis Cultor, Philosophiam omnem (quam peperit
Natura, perfecit Theologia) ita falebris suis exutam nobis reddidisti, ut a
vulgo certe metuerim, ne libris tuis evolvendis saperent nimis, ni probe scirem
vulgus esse cui sapere a querelis, a litibus nondum vacat: Quam male tibi
scriptisque tuis ominer, vides; at illud mihi semper solenne amicis integrum me
dare. Ita est (mi MOSLEIE) and Philosophiam tuam ex ipsis sapientiae
penetralibus depromptam ad gustum aegrotantis aevi fore si sentirem, nae ego
famae meae minus quam tuae consulerim; quare cum (quod olim Seneca) posterorum
negotium egeris, decus illud quod viventi tibi atque sentienti debetur,
persolvant posteri: Plura post BRIDE-OAKIUM meum ut quid ego? cujus tu judicio
fretus, and candore, popularis censurae quasi Syrtes praetervectus, enatare
poteris.

SA. RUTTER.

Natural and Divine CONTEMPLATIONS Of the Passions and Faculties of the Soul of
Man; In Three Books.
THE FIRST BOOK. The Physical part.
CHAP. I.
Of the Soul's original.

MAN is a creature specifically distinct from all others, and that which gives
him this difference is his Soul; both Man and Beast agree in their genus; for
(not to speak of that Soul which is in Plants and Trees, as well as other
creatures) a Beast is defined to be animal, so is man; yea animal sensibile, so
is man; yet that is the full and perfect Definition of all Brutes, and that
which gives them hoc esse; Chap. 1. Book 1.
and therein they fall short of the excellency of man's constitution, for that
form which constitutes a man, is his soul, not Vegitative, which denominates
him vivens, nor Sensitive, which denominates him animal; but that which makes
man to be man, and denominates him so, is his Reasonable soul; this gives the
specifical difference; anima rationalis est forma hominis, is the current
opinion of all Philosophers.

Since man is made so excellent a creature (so above the excellency of all
other terrestrial creatures, that the Psalmist in the deep consideration
thereof cries out, Psalm 8.
Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or the son of man that
thou should so regard him? thou have made him paulisper inferiorem Angelis,
something lower than the Angels; but all creatures else are brought into
subjection under man's feet) and that this excellency and dominion of man is not
in respect of his frail and mortal body (many brute beasts excelling man in
strength of body) but in the indowments of mind; It is a thing worthy our
greatest pains and industry seriously to search into the nature and quality of
this soul, this which is formae informantis hominem, whereby man is so
distinguished from other creatures.

We come to the knowledge of things two ways, by their Causes, or by their
Effects; the effects are nobis notiores, and therefore we many times judge of
things by the effects, which is a nearer knowledge as to us, but not so sure;
to judge by the cause is the surest (though more difficult to us, because more
remote) for scire est rem per causam cognoscere.

For a more Mathematical demonstration, and certain science of the soul, we
shall begin our examination of the soul from the souls beginning, from the
cause and Original of the soul, and so proceed to the effects.

Every soul has an external and caelestial productive principle; so says
Aristotle in his Book de generatione misti, Lib. 1.
which though it be true in one sense, of the vegetative and sensitive as well
as the Rational; for all living creatures which are begotten per propagationem,
and generated ex semine, have not only an elementary internal principle (for
such has the inanimate creatures) but an external and caelestial principle
also: Yet the humane soul has it in a far more eminent manner; the soul of
beasts is produced from a caelestial cause, yet so, as by, and from the power
of the matter; the soul of man is produced from above, without any power of the
matter concurring or intervening; the matter indeed is fitted and prepared to
receive the form, but does not at all produce it, that comes immediately from
God; therefore says Aristotle in the same place, sola men's humana est divina
(viz.) Lib. 2. Genesis anim. ca. 3. In another place, Restat ut men's sola
extrinsecus accedat, eaque sola divina sit; not comparatively in respect of
others only, but because it proceeds immediately from God, without the
concurrence of secondary causes, whereas others are drawn out of the power of
the matter, per media agentia naturalia, Fol. 975.
says Zabarella de mente humana.

Nor is it natural Philosophy that teaches this, but Reason and Religion
confirm and back it; Let me reason with thee my soul, as a learned Cardinal did
with his about this very point of the souls creation: I demand of thee (O my
soul) who gave thee thy being, since thou had it not from eternity; thou wast
created in time, and lately it was that thou had not a being; certainly it
could not be thy parents in the flesh, for what is sprung from flesh is flesh,
but thou art spirit; neither did Heaven, or Earth, or Sun, or Stars produce
thee, for these are corporeal, thou incorporeal; neither could Angels or
Archangels, or any other spiritual creature be the authors of thy being, for
thou of no matter but merely of nothing wast created, and none but a power
omnipotent can create a thing out of nothing, therefore God only without any
companion or helper, with his own hands, which are his Wisdom and his Will,
when it seemed him best, did create thee. Again a little after. "Besides the
conjunction of soul and body (which is a principal part in the making of the
humane nature) can be made by none but a workman of an infinite power; for by
what art except divine can the spirit be joined with the flesh in so close a
bond as to become one substance? for there is no likeness and proportion 'twixt
the flesh and spirit, therefore he only must do it, who only does great
wonders.

Consider then (O my soul) from whence, from whom, in what manner, and into
what thou art come.

First, From whence? From heaven thou art descended, a pilgrim and a stranger
here for a time, thou art not here to continue and dwell; thy country is above,
thither then aspire from whence thou came; mind not earthly things, but seek
those things which are above, that when this my earthly tabernacle shall be
dissolved, thou be not pressed down lower with the weight of carnal l sts into
the lowermost hell, but may have a building of God, a house not made with
hands eternal in the heavens.

Secondly, From whom? From God thou came, thou art the spirit and breath of
God in men; O then breath again out of man to God; whilst thou art in this
prison of flesh send out thy hot breathings to God, and draw in those cooler
breathings of the Spirit from God; thy hot sighs and zealous prayers to God,
his cool and gentle refreshments of love and pity from God; that when I shall
have paid all my rights of nature unto death, and am gone into my silence,
though my body lie in the dust for a time, my spirit may return to God that
gave it.

Thirdly, In what manner? Not per media naturalia, by any ordinary means, but
immediately, and modo extraordinario, without any companion, without any helper.

1 Learn then this (O my soul) that as God has used no natural means or
secundary causes in the work of thy Creation; so thou rely upon none in the
work of thy salvation; thou may safely and boldly approach the Throne of
grace without the mediation of Saints or Angels; there is but one Mediator unto
us, who is both God and man, Christ Jesus.

2 Since God has put nothing betwixt thee and him, beware that thou thy self
interpose nothing; sever not what God has not disjoined; let not thy sin be a
Wall of separation twixt thee and him; nor the mists and foggs of Carnal
concupisence eclipss the Sun of righteousness from thee; from whom thou
borrowest all thy light, and without whom thou art but Cimmerian darkness.

Fourthly, consider whither thou art come; into a Humane body, a Humane nature
fitted and prepared to receive thee; but how? not as a Subject, but as a
Prince; thou to rule as a Queen, it to obey as a Subject. Therefore know this (O
my soul) by the concurrent opinion of all Philosophers, man is of a middle
nature twixt mortal and immortal, twixt terrestrial and caelestial things; and
some way resembles both, participates of both; in that man is endued with
Vegetative and Sensitive faculties, he is like unto brutes and ignobler
creatures, but in regard of his Intellectual faculty, especially that which
consists in speculation, he is most like unto God; twixt these two the Humane
nature is s^ated, and in a kind participates of both; in this nature the soul
sits as Emp ess; if Sense rules here, man lives as a beast, degenerates into a
brute, if Reason and understanding rule, especially the speculative
Intellectual faculty, man lives as God; suffer not then, O suffer not (my soul)
thy vassals and slaves, Sense and Appetite, those ignobler faculties of thine,
to rule and reign over thee, and so to transform the whole man into the nature
of beasts, but rule and govern thou by those more noble and Diviner faculties
of thine, Reason and understanding, by which man resembles his Maker is made
like unto him.

L^stly consider (O my so^l) this mysterious conjunction of soul and body to
become one man, flesh and spirit one substance, which cannot be but by a power
Divine, and thou will cease (though not humbly to admire, yet) curiously to
search into that sacred Mystery, that Article of Christian faith, touching the
Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, he Hypostaticall Union of the two natures
in Christ; St. Athanasius proves it and explaines it from this Union of the
soul and body in one man, saying The right faith is this, that we believe and
confess that our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, is God and Man; God of the
substance of the Father begotten before the World, and Man of the substance of
his Mother born in the World:

Perfect God and perfect Man of a Reasonable soul and Humane flesh subsisting.

Equal to the Father, as touching his Godhead, and inferior to the Father
touching his Manhood.

Who although he be God and man, yet he is not two, but one Christ:

One, not by conversion of the Godhead into Nan, but by taking the Manhood
into God.

One altogether, not by confusion of substance, but by Unity of person.

For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so God and man is one Christ.

The conjunction of soul and body is a secret and hidden thing, but the
Incarnation of Christ, the Union of the Godhead and Manhood, far more secret;
for without doubt great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the
flesh; and if it be so difficult a matter for man to find out the hidden things
of this visible World, that none (as Solomon says) can comprehend the works
thereof from the beginning to the end, no not the workings of God within a man's
self, how shall man attempt to search out those invisible things of Heaven, the
hidden mysteries, the unsearchable things of God? therefore if thou be wise
(O my soul) seek saving knowledge, and embrace the wisdom of the Saints, which
is, to fear God, and keep his Commandments; delight more in supplication and
prayer, than in vain janglings and disputations; in charity that edifies, than
knowledge that puffs up; for this is the way that leads to life and the Kingdom
of Heaven, where shall be given to us little children humbly ignorant here an
equality of knowledge with the Angels which always behold the face of their
heavenly Father; therefore sing thou with the Psalmist, Lord I am not high
minded; I exercise not my self in things too high for me: Psalm. 131.
But I refrain my soul and keep it low, like as a child that is weaned from his
mother; Yea my soul is even as a weaned child.

CHAP. II.
Of the Attributes of the soul.

Chap. 2. Book 1.
AFter the Original of the soul, it will not be amiss, before we come to its
Definition, to treat of the Attributes of the soul, (viz.) the Immortality and
Eternity, the Indivisibility, impatibility, Separability and Impermixture of
the soul; not but that these are more properly touched in the second Book, the
Metaphysicall science of the soul as it is abstracted from bodily Organs; only
here to show (as I have already done the Divine principle of the soul) how far
these properties of the soul have been, or may be evidenced by the light of
Reason; by the truth of natural Philosophy: and first with the last, of the
souls Separability and impermixture from the body, and so in order upwards.

The Separability and immixture of the soul.
The soul of man is inorganical, and has its operations out of the body, and
therefore it is separable from the body; separable (I mean) not as it does
subsist after death without the body, as some of the ancient Plilosophers only
held; but even in this life also, whilst it is in the body, it is separated
from it, so the Modern and most of the ancients maintain; Lib. 3. de anima cap.
5. and 6.
Aristotle every where affirms it to be a property of the whole Intellect, as
well the patient as the agent; and from this property of the soul is gathered
arguments of the souls Immortality, by Scotus, Piccolomineus, Alexander
Aphrodiensis, Vicomeratus, Julius Pacius, and others.

Art thou married to this weak and frail body, (O my soul) seek not a divorce in
any unwarrantable, unnatural way; for though it be better to be dissolved and
to be with Christ, yet (but for the cause of Christ) thou may not put her
away; not kill her, or hate her, but love her as a Wife, cherish her as a
weaker Vessel; yet if she command, obey not, if she entice, consent not, let
not thy Affections overcome thy Reason to cap ivate thy love to her lust; in
this case separate thy self from her, not in affection, but action, let thy
Diviner faculties, Reason and understanding, be thy Counselors, and rule thou
in her, yet above her, and without her.

The Impatibility of the Soul.
The soul of man is Impatible, it suffers not, for the rule is quicquid
patitur corrumpitur; as the wood suffers by the fire till it be consumed of the
fire; the soul of man not so; it receives Objects and Species, yet no way
suffers or is hurt by what it receives. (viz) passione corruptiva; so does the
Sensitive also receive its forms and Objects, and is not hurt by them; and
therefore says Aristotle, sensus est impa^ibilis. To this I answer, that
though this property agree with the Sensitive as well as the Rational faculty,
yet with the Rational in a higher and much more eminent manner; the Sense is
not hurt by any Objects, nor suffers any detriment so long as the Objects are
presented in an orderly manner and due proportion; there the Sense in no sense
is patible, (viz. passione corruptiva) but if a due proportion of the Objects
be not observed, (for quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis) the
Sense is destroyed of its more vehement Object; for he that says, sensus est
impatibilis, meaning in the former sense, says also, vehemens sensibile
destruit sensum, and this, v^hemens Objectum corrumpit sensum; as, too great a
sound makes a man deaf; too great a light will make a man blind: But this
cannot be said of Humane intellect, since there is no such vehement Object
which can corrupt it, yea rather perfects it; for after we have understood the
highest and difficultest matters, we are not made incapable of understanding
easier (as with gazing upon the Sun, our sight will be so dazzled with the light
thereof, that we cannot presently see lesser lights) but much more capable to
understand them than before; and herein is an argument of the Divinity and
immortality of the soul.

For were it mortal, it would certainly be destroyed or wounded by its more
forcible Object, but vehemens in elligibile perficit intellectum, ergo
intellellectus non debilitatur in operando, so incorruptible, so immortal;
It Is Scotus his argument for the souls immortality.

Behold how sin overthrows as it were the whole Fabric of Heaven, God has
created the Humane soul of an impatible nature, not subject to pain or
punishment; sin enters the soul, and makes it liable to greater grief and
torment than is imaginable; evil of sin begets evil of pain, pain privative,
and pain positive, paenam sensus, and paenam damni, pain of loss, the privation
of eternal felicity, banishment from the heavenly Country, loss of the
inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven, absence of God and want of the vision of
him, and an utter exclusion from all good things for ever; this is the
privative pain, which is more bitter to me (says Saint Chrysostom) than the
positive torments of Hell; nor is it any wonder if this loss cannot be
expressed; for we have not yet known the beatitude of those things that are
reserved for us, how then shall we apprehend our misery in the loss of them?
but besides this pain of loss, there is a pain of sense, a worm that never
dies, a fire that never goes out; nor can any tongue express, or heart
conceive this pain, but such as know them experimentally; but a general torture
it is in all the parts of the body, in all the faculties of the soul, the soul
as well as the body is passive, a passion worst of all passions, a passion void
of corruption, void of consumption; the wood suffers in the fire till it be
totally consumed by the fire; and well were it with the damned had they such
pains which might at last consume them; but as the widows barrel of meal
should not waste, nor her cruse of oil be spent, so (though in a different
sense (hers in mercy, these in judgment) the worm shall continually gnaw and
eat, but they not wast; the bush shall burn in the fire, and the fire not
consume the bush for ever. These things are writ for thee (O soul) that thou
come not into this place of torment; that if thou can not patiently abide the
eternal fire of hell hereafter, thou may not so patiently suffer sin here,
but fly from it, as from a serpent; and if with any sin thou chance to be
overtaken, that thou may mourn and weep for them here, that so thou may
avoid this place of sorrow, where there is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of
teeth for ever: For he that says, Woe unto you that laugh and rejoice now, for
ye shall mourn, says also, Blessed are they that mourn now, for they shall be
comforted; and the Psalmist, They that sow in tears shall reap in joy: He that
now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed, shall doubtless come
again with joy and bring his sheaves with him.

The Indivisibility or impartibility of the soul.
The soul of man is a simple essence, and is not to be found (except p^r
accidens) in the Predicament of Quantity; Continuum non constat ex
indivisibilibus, sed in semper divisibil^a est divisibile; cum enim ex eis
constat in ea resolvetur. Sennert. lib. 1 cap. 4. Corpori suo modo coextenditur
quamvis ex part anima extensionem non habet. Suarez. disp. 15. sect. 3.11.
fol. 251.
therefore it admits not of fractions and parts; is not capable of division; If
it were corporeal, it would be quanta, and so divisible (as quantity is) in
semper divisibilia; but being a spirit, it is simple, incorporeal, immortal,
and so an indivisible substance. That souls Rational are multiplied according
to the multiplication of the Individuals, I shall not deny to stand with
Christian Religion as well as Philosophical verity; but that the soul is
divisible or extensible, ad extensionem corporis, I deny to stand with either;
the soul of Beasts and Plants is material and corporeal, extensible as the body
is extended; so as part of the soul is in part of the body, and the whole in
the whole body; but the Humane soul, which is a spirit indivisible, in a most
wonderful manner, is tota in toto and tota in qualibet part; so says
Philosophy.

And though it fill the whole body, Bellarm. de ascensione mentis in deum, etc.
grad. 8. fol. 179. and 180.
it takes up no room in the body; it increases not as the body increases;
only begins to be where before it was not; and if the body decrease, if any
member be cut off or wither, the soul is not diminished or dried up, only
cease to be in that member it was in before, and that without any hurt or
blemish to it self. Replet non occupat totum corporis locum, nec etsi corpus
hunc locum jam ante occupaverit impeditur quo minus and ipsa in omnibus
corporis partibus ad sit, and videmus eandem formam quae primo infantis corpus
replet, illud ipsum corpus, nihil auctam, ubi in vastam, aetate virili molem
excreverit, repleris. Sennertus, lib. 1. cap. 4.

And herein (O my soul) art thou a lively Character and Image of God, a
resemblance of thy Creator in his infinite being and omnipresence; for God is a
Spirit indivisible, filling all the World, and all the parts thereof, yet
taking up no room there; nor may it be so imagined that God so fills the World,
as part of God is in part of the World, and whole God in the whole World, for
God has no parts, cannot be divided, but as thou art in the little World Man,
so he in this great universe, whole in the whole, and whole in every part of
the World, and so is every where present with his omnipotency and wisdom; and
when any new creature is produced, God begins to be in that creature, though
the same from eternity, and when any creature is destroyed or dies, God dies
not, nor is destroyed, only cease to be there, yet without variation or
shadow of change; thus far the resemblance holds; though thou must ackowledge
(O my soul) Gods Indivisibility infinitely to surpass thine; 2 Chronicles. 6.
his omnipresence and illimi^ed greatness is such as Heaven and the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain; and truly; for if another World were created, God would
fill it, if more Worlds, yea infinite Worlds, God would fill them all, and
where he should not be, there should be nothing.

The Immortality and eternity of the soul.
Touching the Immortality of the soul, the Grand Philosopher not only sets it
down as of opinion, but with many reasons proves the same; I do not say all the
operations and faculties of the soul, or the soul according to all its
faculties and operations, Arist. de genesis anim. c. 3. (...) etc. i. e. restat,
ut men's sola extrinsecus accedat eaque sola divina fit, nihil enim cum ejus
action commmunicat actio corporalis; which cannot be spoken of the soul were
it mortal; and therefore I must needs be of Paulus Benius his opinion, who
says plainly, and proves it too, turpiter affixam a quibusdam Arist.
mortalitatis animae opinionem. Benius in Timaeum Platonis, Decad. 2. lib. 3.
See further Bishop Lawd against Fisher page 16. Number. 34. pun. 7. fol. 113. in
margin.
did Aristotle hold to be immortal; a Christian may doubt of that, and not be
counted Heterodox; since whether the operations of the Sensitive soul, as
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, remain in the body glorified, and
in what manner, has been, and is to this day a controversy in the Schools;
and as for the Vegetative faculty (since there is no accretion or diminution
in that state of glory) it is perished or altogether useless: But that all the
operations and faculties of the soul which are Essential, as to understand,
etc. are immortal, that he boldly affirms, saying, hoc solum est immortale, not
understanding (as Pacius observes) the word (immortal) in that large sense as
Plato did, to prove every soul to be immortal, the soul of Beasts as well as
the Humane soul, (because every soul is life, and no life can be the Subject of
death; therefore every soul is Immortal) which argument proves not the
Immortality of the soul and to remain after the body, only proves that the
soul is not the Subject of death, which is true, for when any brute beast
dies, it is not the soul but the animal or compositum that dies, but
Aristoile to show the Rational soul to be altogether Immortal, and to remain
after the death of the body, he adds the word aeternum, adds Eternity to
Immortality, saying, hoc solum est Immortale and aeternum, not but that the
soul had a beginning, not Eternal a part ante, but because it never shall have
end, so Eternal a part post.

But wherefore do I spend my time in proving that which has been so generally
received of all, of what Religion or Profession soever? not Christian Religion
only, but all the several Religions in the World have ever taught the
Immortality of the Soul; were it the Grecian, Chaldean, or Arabian of old, or
the Jews, the Turks, or other of the Gentiles in these later times; and
therefore they likewise hold there are rewards and punishments for souls
departed according as they have acted in the flesh, be it good or evil; Only
they have differed about the state of souls departed, in which some have held
ridiculous things.

Touching which we will proceed to show how far this verity is evidenced to us
by Philosophical principles, by the light of natural reason.

The Soul of man after this life remains and abides for ever whole and entire,
as to its essence (for that is simple and undivided, as has been said) though
not as to all its faculties and operations; all the faculties of the soul
remain not with the soul after the death of man (at least the operations) in
that condition as before, and therefore may be said to be perished.

The Intellectual faculty abides for ever with the soul, so is no way mortal;
but for as much as the Sensitive faculty is organical, and cannot work without
a body, when the body dies, that faculty is said to perish; but this in respect
of the body, not in respect of the soul, which faculty abides with the soul for
ever potentialiter, though not actualiter, but is idle and cannot work whilst
the body sleeps in the grave; and as Aristotle says, An old man, had he the
eyes of a young man, would see as well as a young man; so if after death the
soul should enter into a body, it would do all the operations which before it
did; now since all these faculties as to the soul remain, (though in respect of
the body they are said to perish) it is necessary (and that according to the
principles of Philosophy) that sometime the soul should reassume a body, or
else these faculties are reserved and kept in vain: But because no power or
faculty can be in vain, Vide Pacim in Arist. de anima lib. 3. c. 6. sect. 5. ^
Et lib. ^. c. 10. sect. 5.
yet that is in vain which is never reduced into act; and that Deus and natura
nihil frustra operantur, according to Aristotle, and the rule of Philosophy;
therefore it must needs be confessed that the soul shall sometime come into the
body again; which Conclusion is confirmed by very good reason; for the soul is
(according to its essence) a Form, and a Form naturally desires the Matter to
which it relates, and without the Matter it is but imperfect; for nothing is
perfect ex sola forma, not by Form alone, but Matter and form together; so that
Matter concurs to the perfection of all created compounded substances;
otherwise death would not be so terrible if all perfection and happiness
consisted in the soul.

Being thus seasoned with these Philosophical verities thou may more readily
assent to those Theological truths of the soul's eternity and immortality; thou
see (O my soul) how near nature rectified and rightly principled leads to
Christ; what Affinity there is 'twixt Reason and Faith, Nature and Grace; they
thwart not one the other; the Truth of Philosophy agrees with the Truth of
Divinity; and from this Philosocal Principle will I teach thee a Christian
Article of the Resurrection of the body, and life everlasting. For let me argue
with thee (O my soul) in thine own natural principles; if the soul be a Form
which naturally desires the Matter to which it is the Form, and without which
it is imperfect; if it have Faculties which it cannot exercise without a body,
and that God and Nature have made nothing in vain; therefore the soul must of
necessity reassume a body; it must either be the same numerical body, or
another different from what it had before; if another, then must thou grant a
(...), a Transmigration of souls, an error of the Pythagoreans; and is an
impossibility according to the principles of Philosophy; because (as Aristotle
every where affirms) a determinate Form requires a determinate Matter; a
specifical Form a specifical Matter, and a numerical Form requires the same
numerical Matter, so the same Individual Soul requires the same Individual
Body; and if the soul assume the same body, then must thou hold the
Resurrection of that body, which Christian Religion teaches also.

CHAP. III.
Of the Definition of the Soul.

Chap. 3. Book 1.
ONe and the same thing may be the subject of several Sciences, though diversely
handled and considered in every one of them; and as it is diversely considered,
so may it diversely be defined; Logic is not tied to certain matter, but runs
generally through all kind of things, not standing so much upon the matter;
Mathematics handles things abstracted from matter, non re, sedratione;
Metaphysics handles things altogether separated from matter, but Physics
handles things not separated from matter at all, nec re, nec ratione.

Thus are the Definitions of one and the same thing various, according to the
several Sciences which treat of it: Aristotle puts an example of Anger, that
being considered in the Physical Science, is defined to be A certain motion of
the body for some injury received, with desire of revenge; being in Logic
considered, its defined only A desire of revenge; the one expresses the
matter, he other not.

The Soul of man is a subject for all Sciences, Philosophical or Theological,
and therefore admits of several Definitions; but for as much as it is not our
purpose at present to treat of the soul of man, either Theologically, as the
Image of God in man; nor yet Metaphysically, as incorporeal, spiritual, and
abstracted from bodily organs in its diviner contemplative intellectual
faculties which resembles the nature divine; nor yet to handle it only in its
Sensitive parts, which resembles the nature of beasts; but as it has assumed
humane nature, and is the Form of man, and so a part of him who is compounded
of Matter and Form, who is in that respect of a middle nature 'twixt
Terrestrial and Celestial, 'twixt Mortal and Immortal creatures, and
participates of both; and this nature too we consider not as in the state of
integrity in which it was created, but in this lapsed and degenerate condition
it groaneth under since the fall of man, and is intombed in a body of weak and
sinful flesh, and operates not but by and with the body: The subject therefore
of this Book is Physical, material, and inseparable from the body, as well in
its Affections, which we here handle, as in its Essence, such then must our
Definition be; for quale est definitum, talis esse deb^s definitio.

The Definition of the soul.
The Soul is the act and perfection of the natural organical body, having life
in power. I shall not stay to coment upon the words of this Definition, to show
how the soul is an act and perfection, which words are Synonima, the Greek word
(...) comprehending both, and is the genus in this Definition; and how this
(...) is not the second act, to wit, the Operation and Motion which is the
souls accidens; but the first act of the body, not Artificial, nor
Mathematical, but of a Natural body, nor of every Natural, but that Natural
body which is Organical, and consists of many parts and members; and this body
Natural and Organical having life not actu, sed potentia; this is the
Definition given by Aristotle in his book De anima; where he also defines the
soul to be that beginning by which we have life, sense, Lib. 2. ca. 1. Another
Definition of the soul. Lib. 2. c. 2.
and understanding chiefly; the which as it is a full and perfect definition of
the Rational soul, so take it disjunctively in it several parts, and it will
agree with the soul of Plants and of Beasts; for the Soul of Plants is
principium quo primo vivunt, the soul of Beasts, quo primo vivunt ac sentiunt,
the soul of Men, quo vivunt, sentiunt, ac intelligunt primo; the Soul is the
beginning of life, and Vegetation chiefly; for when the soul is gone out of the
body it cease to live or grow any longer; the soul is the beginning of Sense
chiefly; for the soul being absent, the body is altogether insensible; and the
soul is the beginning of Understanding chiefly; for the carcass or cadaver is
void of understanding when the soul is departed out of the body.

And it is said (chiefly) because though the body Natural and Organical may be
said to be the beginning of life, sense, and reason, yet that is but
Organically, and Secondarily; the Soul is the beginning chiefly and primarily.
Totu^ compositu^ dicatur principium ut quod, cum sit illud quod agat, forma
vero principium ut quo, cum agat beneficio formae, instrumenta denique per
quod, cum per ipsa operetur. Sennert.

These are the Definitions given by Aristotle; the former being drawn from
those things which are notiora secundum naturam, though nobis ignotiora; the
latter from those things which are secundum nos notiora, though secundum
naturam ignotiora; and those are the Effects and Faculties of the soul, which
are called the second act of the soul, not the first act, and are the
companions and associates of the soul; neither of which do we reject, but make
use of both, since in the subsequent Chapters we shall consider the soul not
only as it is principium corporis animalis tanquam forma, or the act and
perfection of a Natural Organical body, which is according to the former
Definition; but as it is principium operationum tanquam eftrix, as it is
considered in the latter, so making of two one Definition, thus.

The Soul is the act, the perfection, and beginning of a Natural Organical
body, endued with life, sense, and understanding.

And now having traced thee (O my soul) from thy original, the place and person
a quo, to the place and person ad quem, from Heaven to Earth, from God to Man,
and find thee clothed in humane nature, I shall not raise a consideration from
that close conjunction, and mysterious union which is betwixt the soul and
body, flesh and spirit; that being formerly couched in the first Chapter of
this Book; but finding thee seated in humane nature, intombed, and imprisoned
in a body of flesh, consider (O my soul) into what a body thou art come, the
body (...) ( says Plato) is quasi (...), the soul's prison and sepulcher, a
dungeon foul and noysom in materia prima, even in its first and best matter of
which it is made, slime, and mud, red earth, and clay; For God made man (says
the Text) of the dust of the ground; And again, Dust thou art, and to dust
shall thou return; And again, Behold I have taken upon me to speak unto the
Lord which am but dust and ashes: And this first matter, if we look into its
original, it was of mere nothing, not of any other praeexistent matter; for
then it would not be materia prima: It Is true, in the beginning God created the
Heaven and the Earth, but as true, not out of another Heaven and Earth, but of
mere nothing; and thus much of the first matter of this body of flesh: But if
we look into the second matter, this body of sinful flesh contracted by the
fall of our first Parents, what is it but sanguis menstruus, worse than a
menstruous cloth, or polluted rag? which is a thing so vile and filthy as
cannot be expressed; the eyes refusing to b hold, and the hands to touch it,
and the mind abhorring to think of it; into to such a dungeon art thou cast (O
my soul) fettered and fast bound in the chains of carnal lusts and
concupiscence, having thy Understanding darkened, and thy Will and reason
captivated, and scarce the essence and definition of a soul remaining in thee,
thy act being turned into power, nay rather impotency and weakness, thy
perfection into much imperfection, thy beginning of life into a beginning of
death and misery. There was a time when the soul of man enjoyed more
immunities, and though a prisoner as it were in the body, yet as Joseph who was
made ruler and overseer of the whole house, and had the command of all in the
prison, and whatsoever was done there that did he: The soul was not a captive
to the flesh so long as man continued in his innocence, but contrariwise had
the care and command of all; the body was subject to the soul, the flesh unto
the spirit; the inhaerent justice in which man was created subjected the
inferior and Sensual parts to the superior Intellectual faculty, without the
least predominancy at any time; so long as the superior continued in obedience
and subjection to God, the body was obedient to the command of the soul; but
after that the soul had rebelled against God, the body took occasion to rebel
against the soul, so that to this day there has bin a continual civil war
within us, the law of our members warring against the law of our mind, and
bringing us captive to the law of sin which is in our members; this is the
miserable estate of mankind by nature, that in the deep sense thereof we may
all cry with Saint Paul, O wretched creature that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death? But stand thou still (O my soul) and see the salvation
of our God; see thou thy self in the state of nature, dead in trespasses and
sins, an heathen, an alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, without hope,
without God in the world? There is a law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus
has made thee free from the law of sin and death; this Christianity teaches,
to this Christian Religion, not Hea^henish superstition, leads: There is a
state of Grace which is Christian, as well as a state of Nature corrupt and hea
henish; Romans 6.14.
they that are under this law, sin has power on, but they that are under Grace
sin shall have no power over: Unto this state of Grace (O my soul) thou art
called, a state of righteousness and justification by Faith, which is the gift
of God; and say not thou with thy self, that this gift of God does not extend
to thee; for none are excluded that will lay hold on, and receive this gift
really tendered to all; for as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all
men to condemnation, so by the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon
all men unto justification of life. The righteousness that comes by Christ does
recompense the loss by Adams transgression, and the advantage that comes by
Christ is much every way; for not as the offense so is the gift; for judgment
is indeed by one offense unto condemnation; but the gift is of many offenses
unto justification.

Secondly, By this (O my soul) thou art loosened from thy fetters, released
from imprisonment; grave, and hell; by this thou art renewed in that image of
God wherein thou wast created, and restored to thy ancient right of rule and
dominion; by this thou come again to the true definition of a Soul, (viz.)
The very perfection and act of a Natural Organical, nay more, of a Supernatural
Organical Body, and the beginning of llfe, not a Natural only, but
Supernatural, not Temporal, but Eternal also.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Unity of the Soul.

Chap. 4. Book. 1.
THere be three distinct Effects and Operations of the Soul from which we have
drawn our Definition abovementioned (viz.) Life, Sense, and Understanding; and
these have their distinct Powers or Faculties (viz.) the Vegetative, the
Sensitive, and Intellectual; the Vegetative Faculty has the proper effects of
the Vegetative Soul to produce Life, the Sensitive has the property of
producing Sense, and the Intellectual Faculty the property of the Rational Soul
of begetting Understanding; of these we purpose to treat distinctly and apart
in the next ensuing Chapters; by the way we shall say something of the Soul's
Unity, to prevent some mistakes and errors which have arisen, and still may be,
touching the Soul in its Essence and Powers; for when we see and learn these
distinct Faculties and operations of the Soul, we are easily drawn to conceit
there are also three distinct Souls in Man; this was the Error of no mean
Philosophers, Plato of old, Averroes, Gandavensis, Zabarel, and others of later
days; and accordingly they held that these Souls had their peculiar and
distinct places of residence and abode in Man; the Vegetative they placed in
the Liver, the Sensitive in the Heart, and the Rational Soul in the Brain; but
this does Aristotle every where confute, so do the generality of Philosophers
after him; Scotus, Pacius, Faber Faventinus, and others.

For man is certainly One, and how comes a Trinity of souls in the Unity of a
person? What is it that unites man and makes him one? it must be his soul, or
his body; but not his body, that is clear, for first the body is united and
preserved by the soul, not the soul by the body; wherefore we see by
experience, that when the soul is departed out of the body, the body continues
not long after, but turns to putrefaction. Again, man is said to be one, not in
respect of his body, but his soul; the body which is materia is nothing but in
power, it is the Form which actuates and perfects; the Form gives being, and
since ens and bonum convertuntur, Forma ut dat esse, sic etiam dat unitatem.
Sennertus.
that which gives Being gives Unity, the soul of man gives him his being, dat
hoc esse, the soul of man gives him to be one; now if there were three Forms,
three distinct souls in man, every distinct Form must give him a distinct
being, so man would not be one but three, a Monster, a tergeminus Gerion; an
opinion exploded as well in Divinity as Philosophy. See Tertullian in lib. de
anima.

But man is but One, therefore but one soul in man, though distinct in its
powers and faculties; there is a Trinity of faculties in the Unity of a
Reasonable soul; the Vegetative is a faculty of the Vegetative soul, the
Sensitive of the Sensitive, and the Intellectual of the Rational soul; yet is
there not three souls in man, but one soul.

One Individual soul only in man according to Aristotle, which notwithstanding
has dividual and distinct powers and faculties; one simple essence which is
the Form of man distinguished into three faculties of Vegetative, Sensitive, and
Intellectual; one in respect of its essence, three in respect of its faculties.

Neither are these faculties one before or after another in time, but all are
Cotemporarie, there is no Priority or Posterity in time (only in order)
amongst them.

Object. Averroes and Zabarel who maintain three souls in man, are against this
position, and quote the words of Aristotle in his Book de gener. animal. cap.
3. which are these, Man first lives the life of Plants, then the life of
Beasts, and afterward the life of a Man; from whence they would infer, that
one faculty is in time before another, and one succeeds another, therefore
there are so many several and succeeding souls.

Ans. But to this it may be answered; That because the soul has need of Organs
and Instruments of the body to work withal, and that these Instruments are too
weak, and little fit to exercise the noblest Operations of the soul in the first
times, therefore does the soul exercise the Operations of Vegetation first,
because those Organs are first fitted and prepared, and afterward the
Operations of Sense and Reason; and in this sense is Aristotle to be
understood, where he says, A man first lives the life of Plants, then the life
of a Beast, and afterward the life of a Man; to wit, in the Operations of the
soul which are in time one before another, the Operations of the Vegetative
soul are first, then of the Sensitive, and lastly of the Rational; and that
will be granted by reason of the defect and inability in the other Organs,
which are not so soon fitted for the other faculties to operate; yet the
faculties of the soul are in one instant of time without any Priority one of
another in time, and so they continue after the dissolution of the soul and
body; though the Operations of some of the faculties are perished, because the
body whose Organs they require are perished; the faculties of the soul as well
the Sensitive as Intellectual remain and abide with the soul after the death of
man; although the Intellectual then is only operative, as has been elsewhere
said; and as we cannot say (and say truly) that the Sensitive faculty is
perished with the body, and the Intellectual only survives and abides with the
soul, because it only operates, no more truly can we affirm that the Vegetative
faculty in the first Generation is first in time, because it first operates;
therefore says Philosophy, There is no Priority or Posteriority in the
faculties of the soul; there are none before or after other in the Generation
of man; See Magirus his Comment in Physicam suam lib. 6. cap. 3.

By this Philosophical Verity of the Unity of the soul in the Trinity of
faculties, may thou more readily assent (O my soul) to that Christian and
Catholic article of that sacred Mystery of the Unity of the Godhead in the
Trinity of persons; thou art an Emblem of the trine-une-God, of one God in
essence, and three persons in operation; one simple essence in three distinct
persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; thou art one Soul, a simple and undivided
essence in three divided and distinct powers, Vegetative, Sensitive, and
Intellectual; and these are three, not confounded but so distinct powers, that
one may not be predicated of another, the Vegetative is not the Sensitive or
Rational; nor the Sensitive* the Vegetative or Intellectual faculties; nor the
Intellectual, either Vegetative or Sensual; so in the Trinity of persons in one
Godhead, they are all distinct, not confounded persons; we must not confound
the persons, nor yet divide the substance; so says Catholic faith; the Father
is not the Son, nor the Holy Ghost; St. Athanasius his Creed. Licet namque in
hac ineffabili and incomprehensibili deitatis essentia alter and alter id
quidem requirentibus proprietatibus personarum sobrie Catholiceque dicatur; non
tamen ibi est alterum and alterum, sed sim^ (...) ^um: ut nec prejudicium
faciat unitati trinitatis confessio, nec propri^ (...) ^it exclusio^, vera
assertio veritatis.

Bernardus Epist. 190. fol. 1581. K. and paul^ infra. Alius procul dubio pater,
alius filius, quamvis non aliud pater quam filius, nam per aliud and aliud
novit pietas fidei caute inter personarum proprietates and individuam essentiae
unitatem discernere, and medium iter tenens regia incedere via, ut nec declinat
ad dextram confundendo personas, nec respiciat ad sini tram substantiam
dividendo.


Its truly said (says Ursinus in his Catechism) the Father is alius, another
from the Son and Holy Ghost; the Son is alius, another from the Father and the
Holy Ghost; and the Holy Ghost is alius, from the Father and the Son; but not
truly said the Father is aliud, the Son aliud, the Holy Ghost aliud, for alium
esse denotes the diversity of persons, but aliud esse the diversity of essence;
now though the persons in the Trinity be dictinct, and the names of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost are proper names, and may not be predicated one of another,
yet God is a common name, because the essence of the deity is common to them
all, and may be predicated of any of them; therefore does holy Church
acknowledge; the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God; not
as a part of God or the Divine essence, for God is indivisible, and has no
parts, and there is no person in this Trinity but is perfect God and whole God;
Even so the Soul is a Common name, and may be predicated of any of the
faculties; not as a whole to its parts; for the soul is indivisible and has no
parts, and there is none of the faculties but is the full and whole soul.

For as the essence of the soul is indivisible, and is whole in the whole, and
whole in every part of the body; so are the powers and faculties of the soul of
the same nature; for since the powers and faculties of the soul are or at least
flow from the very substance of the soul, and the substance of the soul is in
all and every part of the body, it must needs follow, that the faculties of the
soul are also there entire. It is true, Anima quae est in toto corpore eadem,
eisdem quidem est ubique instructa facultatibus and in omnibus membris omnia
quae sibi propria sunt agendi potentiam habet, per certa tamen organa certas
actiones perficit, videt per oculum, audit per aures, olfacit per nares.
Sennartus lib. 6. cap. 1. Tom. 1.
the Operations of the soul are not in every part and place of the body;
because in every part there are not requisite Organs; and therefore its said,
The faculties of the soul are in every part of the body as to their essence,
though not as to their Operations. See Fab. Favent. theor. 82. in sine primi
capitis.

Again, in this Trinity of persons, none is before or after other, none is
greater or less than the other, but the whole three persons are Coeternal
together, and Coequal; so says Athanasius; And thus far may the Soul of man
with its faculties, in a sort (though in a weak and imperfect manner) hold the
resemblance of God and the blessed Trinity; yet may thou not (O my soul) but
conceive, that this sacred Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, in a far
more eminent manner excells that of thine; nor may thou with safety too
curiously search into this mystery, but what in Reason thou can not
apprehend, with the Catholic Church, adore and believe; and the Catholic
Faith is this, That we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity;
neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance; for there is one
perperson of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost. But
the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one; the
glory equal, the Majesty Coeternal; Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and
such is the Holy Ghost; The Father Uncreate, the Son Uncreate, and the Holy
Ghost Uncreate; The Father Incomprehensible, the Son Incomprehensible; and the
Holy Ghost Incomprehensible; The Father Eternal, the Son Eternal, and the Holy
Ghost Eternal, and yet they are not three Eternals, but one Eternal; as also
there are not three Incomprehensibles, nor three Uncreated, but one Uncreated,
and one Incomprehensible; so likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty,
and the Holy Ghost Almighty, and yet they are not three Almighties, but one
Almighty; so the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and
yet they are not three Gods, but one God; so likewise the Father is Lord, the
Son is Lord, and the Holy Ghost Lord, and yet not three Lords, but one Lord;
for like as we be compelled by Christian Verity to acknowledge every person by
himself to be God and Lord, so we are forbidden by the Catholic Religion to
say there be three Gods or three Lords; the Father is made of none, neither
created nor begotten; the Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor created,
but Begotten; the Holy Ghost is of the Father and the Son, neither made, nor
created, nor begotten, but Proceeding; so there is one Father, not three
Fathers, one Son, not three Sons, one Holy Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts; And
in this Trinity none is before or after other, none is greater or less than
another.

But the whole three persons be Coeternal together and Coequal; So that in all
things, as is aforesaid, the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, is to be
worshipped; He therefore that will be saved, must thus think of the Trinity.

CHAP. V.
Of the Vegetative faculty, with its operations and effects.

THE Vegetative is the meanest, but the most common of all the other faculties,
for this is the Nature of them that the Inferior may subsist without the
Superior, but the Superior cannot be without the Inferior faculties; therefore
where the Intellectual faculty is, there must needs be the Vegetative and
Sensitive, but where the Vegetative or Sensitive is, it does not necessarily
follow the Intellectual faculty should be; therefore is the Vegetative more
common than the Sensitive, and the Sensitive more common than the Rational
faculty; Vegetation is to Plants, Beasts, and Men common; Sense to Beasts and
Men, but not to Plants; Reason is only proper to Man, not to Plants and
Beasts. We will begin with the lowest and most common; so in order upwards, to
the highest and most special.

The Vegetative faculty is the beginning of life; so has it been defined,
principium quo primo vivimus; but here its also principium motus, and has
three Operations peculiar to it self, of Nourishment, Growth, Of Nourishment,
and Augmentation.
and Generation, which are the several kinds of Motion and Mutation; Nutrition
and Augmentation are indeed one and the same Operation, though diversely
considered; for that food which by Concoction is turned into blood, and that
blood into flesh, is both Nutrition and Augmentation; only is called Nutrition
as it preserves the Animal, who has a continual wast and consumption upon him,
and needs a new restoration and recovery by this nutriment, and new converson
of food into blood, and blood into flesh; and in as much as the Body or
compositum has regained by this operation of the Vegetative Faculty what it
had lost, it is called Nutrition; but in as much as more is gained than was
lost, it is called Augmentation; and as they are one in operation, so they are
in the end for which they operate, they both tend to one and the same end
(viz.) the perfecting of the creature so nourished, and augmented; which when
it is consummated, those operations cease, and the other motions of diminution
and alteration come in their room; and herein they differ from the Generative
operation which looks not to the conservation of the Individual in which it is
resident, so much as the begetting of another like Individual, by which
Propagation and continued series of succeeding Individuals, the Species and
forms of them may be preserved. Of Generation, or Precreation.


The Generative operation is more noble and divine than either of the other,
because thereby living creatures come nearest to Immortality and Eternity; for
thereby (though the Individuals perish, for quic quid oritur moritur, and quic
quid generatur corrumpitur, yet) are they in their forms preserved from
corruption, the Species remain and abide as it were in a surviving kind of
Immortality, amidst the diverse mortal and succeeding Individuals; for there is
an innate desire and appetite in every living creature to Eternity; a Deity
they all aim at, and since they cannot attain thereto in the singularity of
Individuals, for they are all subject to corruption, every Individual has in
it this faculty to procreate and beget another like it self, whereby the
Species is the same, and continued as it were unto Eternity; the end then of
this faculty is to beget an Individual like to it self, as the Generative
faculty in Man is to beget a Man, and one Horse begets another.

Hence may be noted three things.

(viz.) of Generation and Corruption, of Augmentation and Diminution, of
Altricion and Alteration are not in respect of the Soul, but the Body or
compositum; it is true the Soul is the cause and beginning of motion, and so may
be said to nourish, to increase, to diminish, to alter, or the like; but it is
the Body is nourished, augmented, and diminished, for that is only capable of
dimensions; the Soul not so, for that is a simple and incorporeal Essence, and
falls not within the predicament of Quantity (I speak of the Soul of man) as
has been elsewhere said.

Every thing procreated is by nature

Every like begets its like; this is a

There is a twofold Vegetative faculty in man, the one Temporal and caduce,
because in a body sinful, mortal, and corrupt; the other Spiritual and Eternal,
because in a body sanctified, and tending to a state of Glory and Immortality;
the one thou have (O my Soul) by Nature, that Philosophy teaches; the other
thou have by Grace, that Divinity: Yea and this faculty of the Soul in a
Spiritual estate has all the operations of Nourishment, Augmentation, and
Generation which are in the natural and carnal condition, and that in a more
eminent manner: In what stature and age Adam was created, whether in full age,
in a perfect natural condition, needing no accrescion being created in that
full augmentation of parts which God and Nature has prefixed unto man, and in
which whether he had continued without diminution or declination to old age,
but should have been supported by those supernatural abilities in which he was
created, had he continued in his integrity, I shall not here determine: But
certain it is (and Christian Religion so teaches) that since the Fall death
has passed upon all men, death natural as an effect of sin, and man comes
into this world, as by the course of nature he is to go out of the world, in a
weak and feeble estate; tender infancy brings us into the world, decrepid old
age leads us out, and during the time of our abode here we labor under those
various changes and counter-marched of Generation, Corruption, of Augmentation
and Diminution, of Altrition and Alteration, from our womb to our tomb; from
the day af our birth to the day of our death, toiling and spending our selves
in a circular motion till we are reduced to our first matter; Sir Walter
Raleigh his History of the World, lib. 1. c. 2. sect. 5
we pass over our Generation from Infancy to Youth, from Youth to Manhood, in
those purer motions of Nutrition and Augmentation, whose ends are to bring the
Body to that determinate perfection of Magnitude which Nature has allotted it.

From our vigorous estate of Manhood, we decline to Old age, then to Dotage,
this closes our eyes, and lays us asleep in death, and this sleep brings us
to our bed the grave; and this part of our life is attended with those impurer
motions of corrupt Nature Diminution and Alteration, whose ends are to bring us
again to our original, our first Parents, (viz.) Corruption our Father, and the
Worm our Mother and our Sister; and thus we tread the Maze, and run the round,
like the Suns yearly course in the Zodiac, ascending from the lower most House
in Capricorn through those two seasons of the year Spring and Summer, to the
highest House the Tropic of Cancer; and there is the Solstice, where the Sun is
got to that height that higher it cannot, but turns retrograde; and down it
descends through the other seasons of Autumn and Winter to its Vertigal point
the Tropic of Capricorn from whence it came, the four Ages of man, to wit,
Infancy, Youth, Manhood, Old age, being like the four seasons in the year (viz)
Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter; or like the Suns Diary course in the Firmament,
Psalm 19. which goes forth from the uttermost part of heaven, and runs
about unto the end of it again; or like the Winds, or like the Floods; to all
which the Wiseman compares the travels of man upon earth, saying, Eccles. 1.4,
5, 6, 7.
One generation passes away, another comes, but the earth abides still; the
Sun arises, the Sun goes down, and returns to his place, that he may there
rise up again: The Wind goes toward the South, and turns unto the North,
fetches his compass, whirleth about, goes forth, and returns again to his
circuits from whence he came: All Floods run into the Sea, and yet the Sea is
not filled; for look into what place the waters run, thence they come to flow
again. And this is the Felicity that miserable man labors for under the Sun,
and here is the fruit of all (viz. Death) for the end of all things is Death.
And thus much of the Vegetative faculty in the state of corrupt nature.

There is (to answer this sinful Generation and Procreation by our Parents in
the flesh, by which we are made corruptible; mortal, subject to a transitory,
short, and miserable life, but to an endless everlasting death (For all flesh
(says the Apostle) is as grass, Pet. 1.
and all the glory of man as the flower of the grass; the grass withers, and
the flower thereof sadeth away: So does the Psalmist compare the transitory
life of man to the grass, Psalm. 90.6.
which in the morning is green and grows up, but in the evening is cut down,
dried up, and withered) to answer this, I say, there is a Spiritual Generation,
a new Birth, and this is not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the
Word of God, which lives and abides for ever: But it is with the Christian as
it is with the Natural man in this, that none are generated and produced in
their full and perfect stature, but in the tender age of Infancy; there are
Babes in Grace as well as in Nature, which before they can attain to the
stature of a man require daily food and nourishment, and much growth and
augmentation of parts; much is required for the perfecting, Ephesians. 4.13
for the increase, and edifying of the body of Christ, before any Christian
come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; these
operations (after our Generation) then of Nutrition and Augmentation are
requisite to bring up a Christian from his Infancy, to his Youth and riper
years, and these continue with us to the day of our departure hence, because
none attains to full age here, our perfection is hereafter. But we now begin
our growth here (after our conversion and new birth) first in Childhood and
Infancy, and in this state we continue (so insinuates the Apostle calling us
children) as long as we are tossed to and fro, Ibid. ver. 14
and carried about with every wind of Doctrine; from Childhood we skip not
straight to perfect and full age, but by Youth and middle age; for after we are
born to Christ in Infancy, debemus adolescere, says Calvin upon the place, we
must not stay in Childhood, but Youth-out our time here, grow on to middle age,
and be no longer Children in understanding; and this stronger and riper age of
a Christian the Apostle seems to exhort to, where after his dehortation from
Childhood, Be no longer children, he adds, but speaking the truth in love, grow
up into him in all things which is the head, even Christ; and in this age we
pass the time of our sojourning here.

Hitherto this twofold Vegetative faculty by Nature and by Grace have been
examined, and agree in their operations; but now we shall show a difference
(and that a vast one) 'twixt the workings of the one, and the workings of the
other; and first in the first note of the natural operation in this Chapter
observed.

The Soul in the Natural state cannot be said to be subject to, The first
difference
or passive in those several motions of Generation, Corruption, Augmentation,
Diminution, etc. because it is impatible, incorruptible, indivisible; but the
body or compositum only properly is generated, corrupted, augmented,
diminished, and the like; but in this Spiritual condition the Soul as well as
the Body is capable of some of these motions, and may be said to be begotten,
nourished, increased, Necesse est animam cresci and dilatari ut sit capax dei,
porro latitudo ejus dilectio ejus; nam and anima minime (cum sit spiritus)
corpoream recipit quantitatem, tamen confert illi gratia, quod negatum est
natura, crescit quidem and extenditur, sed spiritualiter, crescit non in
substantia sed virtute, crescit and in gloria, crescit denique in virum
perfectum, in mensuram aetatis plenitudinis Christi, crescit etiam in templum
sanctum in domino, ergo quantitas cujusque animae aestimetur de mensura
charitatis quam habet, ut verbi gratia, quae multum habet charitatis magna est,
quae parum, parva est, quae vero nihil, nihil. Bernardus fol. 30 16. and 30 17.
F. G. Item super Cant. sermo. 27. fol. 647. l. and K.
to grow as well as the body grows in a spiritual and intellectual sense; for
here it is quanta, as all abstracted Essences and Intelligences (viz.) the
Angels and Heavens be quantae, for as much as they be finite, and so fall
within quantity, but not quantitatem praedicamentalem, sed intelligibilem,
only within an imaginary intellectual, not a predicamental; a metaphysical,
not a physical quantity, as has been said.

The second.
That compositum which is generated may be corrupted, and that which is
augmented may also be diminished, this in Nature, but otherways in Grace; we
are begotten and born not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, which
endures unto eternal life without corruption, without putrefaction: And
Augmented we are in a Christian state, we grow and increase until we come to
that measure of stature of the fullness of Christ, which we continue in without
diminution; we do not wax and wean with the Moon; we begin not senescere, to
wheel about to our first principles by the way of old age; but we continue
vigorous in that full and perfect age (supported by Gods grace) to perpetuity,
without the least diminution or alteration in soul or body, or declination to
old age, for quod senescit ( says Calvin upon Ephesians. 4.13. before quoted) ad
interitum declinat; and so the Apostle, Hebr. 8. That which decays and waxes
old is ready to vanish away; old age being Gentleman Usher to corruption; but
in this blisful estate, there is Gneration without Corruption, Augmentation
without Diminution, Altrition without Alteration.

Every like begets it like to preserve its Image in succeeding Individualls;
The third difference.
the noblest of all generated substances is man; and highest faculty he has,
is to beget one like himself; so Man is the likeness of Man: But by our new
Birth and Regeneration we are made like unto God; God has begotten us in his
own likeness, we are his offspring, and have this honor to be called the Sons
of God, and if Sons, then Heirs and Coheirs with Christ; Christ is the begotten
Son of God, so are we; he is the express Image of his Father, so are me; But
with this difference.

First, Christ is the begotten Son of God by Natural Generation, we are the
begotten Sons of God by grace and Adoption only.

Secondly, as it is the property of every living thing to beget it like, so God
in the Generation of Christ has surpassed all in begeting a Son, like (nay
most like) to himself, of the self same essence, an essence to subsist of
himself, for as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to his Son to
have life in himself, so says St. John, and as the life and being of God is
not severed no more than his essence and existence, for Gods essence is his
existence; so we may say, as the Father has being in himself, so has he give^
to his Son to have being in himself, but with this difference, God has life
and being in himself, because he is the Fountain of life and being, and has it
not elsewhere; and he has given to the Son to have this life and being in
himself, and by this is the Son a Fountain of being, but a Fountain of being
from the Fountain of being, as God of God and light of light; this is the
likeness that Christ has with his Father; which as it surpasses all that any
living creature can confer upon whom they begot; so does it far surpass the
likeness of God in any of us the Adopted Sons of God, though we bear the Image
of God in a far more Eminent manner than any generated nature can do their
Parents; for we shall be preserved to Immortality and Eternity, not only in a
series of succeeding Individualls, but also in our own Individual Souls and
Bodies; and we shall be like unto God, not only in that perfect Righteousness,
Freedom of Will, Clearness of Understanding, in which we were first created;
but surpassing all, we shall be like unto God in the fruition of endless Glory,
Bliss and Happiness. Chap. 6. Book 1.


CHAP. VI.
Of the Sensitive faculty, with its Operations External.

IN the Sensitive faculties are included the Motive to a place, and the
Appetitive, of which more hereafter; there are incident to this faculty (though
not Inseparably) eight Senses, five are External, as Seeing, Hearing, Smelling,
Tasting, Touching, and three Internal, as the common Sense, Fantasy, Memory;
of these in their order, but first of Sense in general, and of its properties,
whereby it is distinguished from the other two faculties of the Soul,
Vegetative, which has been handled, and Intellective, which hereafter comes to
be considered.

First, It differs from the Vegetatative, for, first the Vegetative has no
External Objects which it perceives or knows; its Objects are only
Internal, it discerns nothing out of it self: but but the Sensitive faculty
discerns and judges of diverse and various Objects which are all External and
not in the Sense.

Secondly, Again the Vegetative is Agent upon its Object, and not Patient, as
for example, the Nutritive faculty works upon its Object, (viz.) food, which
it receives, by turning food into it own likeness; but is not worked upon by
it, is not converted into its similitude: but the Sensitive faculty recipiendo
patitur, receives its Object, and in that Receipt is Patient, and converted to
that Actually which before it was not, but Potentially.

Again, it differs from the Intellectual, for that judges and discerns of
Internal Objects, and External also, the Sensitive only of External; the
Intellectual judges of things absent, and future, as well as of things past and
present, the Sensitive of things present, (or past happily) not of things
future; the Intellectual knows all things Material, and Immaterial, as well
Forms abstracted from matter as Form and matter together, the Sense severs not
Form from Matter; the Intellect knows Spiritual and Eternal, the Sense only
things Temporal and Corporeal.

So here, a twofold Judgment in Man, one by Sense, which is External, and of
things Material and Present; the other Internal by the Understanding of things
Immaterial, Spiritual, and Future.

The Judgment of Sense is very deceitful, being External, The judgment of
sense not internal; the senses have no knowledge of themselves.
and Judging of Objects merely External; for therefore are the Senses called
External, not only because their Organs are External, but also for that their
Objects are External, which they receive and Judge of without any inward
knowledge or Sense of themselves; for there is no Sense of the Senses, they do
not perceive themselves, nor perceive that they do perceive; the eye does not
see it self, or see it self to see; the ear does not hear it self, or hear that
it does hear; for of themselves the Senses are not any thing but in Power,
nothing of the Act or Operation is within them. It Is the Object without which
works upon them and brings the Act of Judging and discerning.

The sight of Sense or the Sense of Seeing then is outward to Judge of things
External, it has no inward principle, The judgment of sense is by external
objects.
no Internal Object to look into, but requires External Objects and principles;
and interjected mediums also, otherwise it is not Operative, it has not the
art of Judging at all; nor is every Object for every Sense, but every Sense
requires his proper Object, or else there will be a false Judgment given; for
the eye does not judge of sounds, nor the ear of colors, the palate Judges
not of smells, nor the nose of tastes; but the eye Judges of colors, those two
extremes white and black, and the colors intermediate; the ear Judges of
sounds, as shrill and sharp, or base and dull sounds, and their intermediums;
the nose and palate are near a kin, and have Objects alike of which they Judge,
the one of sweet or bitter smells, the other of sweet or bitter tastes, and
their mediums; the hand or Sense of feeling has its different Objects, of hot
and cold, moist and dry, soft and hard, and the like, of which it passes its
Judgment.

And by interjected means.
The Senses as they require their proper Objects, so also fit Mediums for the
conveyance of things sensible to the Senses; the Objects of the Sense work not
immediately upon the senses, but by intcrjected means; so the eye to discern
and judge of colors, needs light and a transparent perspicuous body, as Air,
Water, Glass, Ice, or some such diaphanous body, actually enlightened, to convey
the Object to the sight, without which interjection the eye could not discern
at all; and indeed many more things are required to make the Judgment that
comes of Sense perfect, which otherwise is very uncertain and deceitful; though
positis omnibus requisitis, all necessaries being premised, the rule holds
true, sensus est semper verus; and this, sensus non fallitur circa proprium
objectum; and in this sense and no other is Aristo^le to be understood.

The Senses by receiving things sensible are made one, or like to those Objects
they receive; for the Form and similitude of the Object presented to the sight
is in the eye, and made one with it, and so of the other Senses and their
Objects; the sight and thing seen, the ear and thing heard, the smell and taste,
and their Odors and savours are all alike, no difference twixt the Sense and
its Object, but talis est sensus, quale est objectum; such, potestate, in
power, not in Act; not in act the same with the Object which is a matter; for
the matter is not received by the Sense, the Form and similitude only is
received into the Sense, abstracted from Matter; And therefore does Aristotle
compare the Sense to Wax, and the Object to a Seal; Now as the Wax takes the
impress and Form of the Seal, whether it be Iron, Brass, Gold or Silver, but no
part of the Iron, Brass, Gold or Silver: So the sense receives the Form and
print of the Object or thing discerned, but no part of the matter of the Object.

Nor was there any being in the Sense before, but a bare faculty, a faculty to
receive sensible Forms; an aptitude and power of receiving colors is in the
sight of the eye, in that Instrument or Organ of sight which is called pupilla,
in English, the ball or apple of the eye, this has a faculty, a power of
receiving colors (as the Organs of the other Senses have of receiving theirs)
but is not actually colored, has no color in it, for then it could not
receive those that are without, nor have an aptitude thereunto, for says
Aristotle, intus existens prohibet alienum; the good man within doors keeps the
stranger forth; But that the Senses may more readily receive their Objects,
therefore are the Organs destitute and naked of the Nature of the Objects they
receive, as the eye is void of color, and the ear of sounds; for if the eye
had Actually in it either white or black, it could not receive another from
without; so when any savor or smell is actually in the Organs of those Senses,
it is an impediment to other savours and smells, that they either not at all,
or at least very weakly, are discerned; for intus existens prohibet alienum;
that which is within keeps all others out.

Lastly, these External Senses are the five Ports and Gates of the Intellectual
Soul, at least of that Intellectual faculty which is called Patient or
Practical; and there is nothing enters into this faculty, but is let in
thorough some of these doors, the Cinque Ports of the Soul, for so is the rule
in Philosophy, nihil est in intellectu, quod non prius fuit in sensu.

I need not tell thee (O my Soul) thou have a conscience within thee is in
stead of a thousand witnesses, showing thy miserable seduction and Perdition by
following the Judgment of Sense, and refusing the dictates of thy own
Understanding, judging according to the outward appearance of External Objects;
gilded apples and fruit of the tree, bona apparentia, only pleasant to the eye
and goood for food; bitter in thy belly, though sweet in thy mouth; gall in
digestion, though Honey in taste; nor need I to show thee the resemblance and
similitude twixt thee and thy Objects, which thou have contracted by receiving
and embrasing of them; such as thy Object is, such art thou; sin is thy Object,
therefore thou art such; such in Form and likeness; and since sin is a non-
entity, privatio boni, the Form of sin is mere deformity; this print and Form
have thou within thee as fully and plainly as the Wax retains the Form of the
Seal; through the Senses it is conveyed unto thee; the innumerable sins and
transgressions wherewith mankind is involved springs from hence, even from this
Sensitive faculty of the flesh; the Senses are the doors thorough which all
sins of all kind have entered into the Soul of man; the rule in Philosophy,
nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuit in sensu, holds true in sins of all
sorts, which come not to the Soul, but thorough these wider Gates which lead
unto destruction; thorough these the three Grand enemies of Man's Salvation,
shoot their poisonous darts at the heart of man.

Help, help me, O Lord my God, for my Enemies have compassed about my Soul, the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil; and the dangerousest Enemy is my own Flesh,
my bosom-friend is become my greatest adversary; they of my household are my
deadly foes, the Flesh which I cannot fly from, nor yet drive from me, I am
constrained to carry about me, it is so close conjoined to my Soul, d stroy it
I may not, though unwillingly I uphold it; feed it I must, though in feeding of
it I nourish my Enemy; an Enemy worst of all enemies, not an open enemy, for
against a professed Enemy one may make head, but thou my familiar, an intestine
secret Enemy, who slayest unawares as Joab did Abner, and Amasa; this is the
Enemy within, that betraies my Soul to its Eenemies without, and sets open
these Senses, the Soul's Cinque Ports, through which the World and Devil shoot
their poisonous arrows, and have grievously wounded me, and death through these
windows has entered my Soul.

I open my eyes, and the world presents me with beautiful Objects, a Dalila, a
Bethshaba; the Devil straight shoots his poisonous dars, lascivious thoughts,
unchaste desires, Carnal lusts, and concupisence, and fastens in my Soul; I open
my ears, and the World presents me with the various sounds of blasphemy toward
God, scandalous and reproachful speeches toward our Neighbors, perjuries,
lies, cursings from my own mouth, and from the mouths of others; straight the
Devil shoots his arrows, of Anger, Malice, Strife, Envy, Murder and the like;
I would please my palate, and behold I am presented with all the delicates the
World affords; the Devil shoots his darts of excess, of Gluttony, Drunkenness
and the like; to my feeling is presented the Worlds various Objects, of Warm
and Moist, and soft and Smooth; the Devils darts are Adultery, Fornication,
etc. Thus whether I See, Hear, or Speak, Taste, or Touch, I am assaulted on
every hand by these my Enemies who bear a Tyrannous hate against me, and which
way soever I turn me I find no safety; Perils and Dangers, Temptations and
Trialls, Snares and Ginnes, Bonds and Imprisonment whither soever I go do
attend me; darts are continually cast, close Siege is laid to my Soul;
sometimes they assault me vi and armis, in open field; sometimes by
underminings, sleights and Stratagems; sometimes overtly, sometimes covertly;
always maliciously.

To thee do I fly for help against these evils, (O my God) for vain is the
help of Man; unto thy Word have I recourse, where I find present cures and
remedies for all such as will faithfully apply them; and first of the remedy
against the evils of the eye, this I find set down by holy Job, and practiced
by himself; I have made (says he) a Covenant with my eyes, that I will not
think upon a maid; The words are not, I will not lock, but, I will not think,
for look I may, but not so long look, till that aspect does pierce to my heart,
and I begin to think of her beauty, and to lust after her embraces. St.
Augustines rule for chastity accordingly is, occuli vestri si jaciantur in
aliquem sigantur in neminem; we may cast our eyes on some, but fasten on none;
for simple aspect cannot be avoided; nor can that hardly hurt the Soul unless
it be continued; therefore says Augustine, not the beholding, but the
continuance in beholding is perilous.

The remedy against the evil of hearing, the Prophet David lays down, Psalm
the 39. I said, I will take heed unto my ways that I offend not in my tongue,
I will keep my mouth as it were with a bridle, whilst the ungodly is in my
sight.

Speak I may, that is not prohibited, but a caution given to take heed what I
speak; I may speak with discretion if I speak, with deliberation; warily and
wisely, rashly and foolishly; therefore, says David, I will take heed to my
way, that I offend not in my tongue; that is, I will ponder and consider
beforehand what to say, my words shall not be many, and ex tempore, but few,
and with premeditation; I will keep sil^nce awhile and muse, though it be pain
and grief to me, and whilst I am musing the fire kindle, and at last I speak
with my tongue. And this rule Saint James prescribes, Jam. 1.19
that every man be slow to speak; so Saint Bernard, Verba antequam proferantur
pensanda; we must stay to weigh our words before we utter them; and b cause we
many times receive hurt from others tongues as well as our own, Saint Bernard
's rule is for slow hearing as well as slow speaking; for the profane and
scandalous speeches of others do suddenly infect our souls, if we lend a
willing ear thereto; for words, says Democritus, are the shadow of deeds; for
what we do hear with delight, we will as readily act; and therefore (says he)
many lose the benefit that comes by refraining their tongue, because they
refrain not their ears from others tongues.

Now against Gluttony and Drunkenness the sins of the Palate, and against
Adulteand Fornication which come by the Sense of Feeling, the Remedies are such
as Physicians use to prescribe their Patients in their sick and weak condition
(viz) abstinency from much meat and drink, a spare and moderate diet, 1 Timothy 5.2
such as Paul prescribes Timothy, a little wine for his stomachs sake, and his
often infirmity; a little wine to strengthen him against his often infirmities,
and but a little wine, to avoid Luxury; In lib. de art been moriend.
for in wine is Luxury ( says Bellarmine.) Again, Physicians use Phlebotomie,
lanching and cutting of Veins, and prescribe bitter Pills and Potions, all which
are enemies to Nature and the body of man; such are all fastings, and
watchings, and humbling of the body, which though they turn to the
Mortification of the Flesh, yet tend to the Vivification of the Soul; and this
is the chastising of the body which St. Paul speaks of, Cor. 1.9.
saying, Castigo corpus, I chastise, I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection, lest that by any means when I have preached to others I my self
should be a castaway.

But for further remedy against such evils as come to the Soul by these Senses,
I will show how the Soul has five Senses by which it is cured, as the Body
has five by which it is wounded: As the Body has five Senses, so has the
Soul; there are five Organical Corporeal Senses; there are also five
Inorganical and Spiritual Senses; the Body has five, by which it is joined to
the Soul in life; the Soul has five, by which it is united to God in love. De
natura and dignitate amoris divini cap. 6. f. 1155. and sermon. 16. parvis sol.
481. c. Et de vita and quinque sensibus animae, fol. 374 a. Et in caena domini
sermon. 5. fol. 1360.
It Is Saint Bernard 's observation, his words are these, There are five
Corporeal Senses by which the Soul gives sense to the body, which are
(beginning with the lowermost, and so upwards to the noblest of them) Feeling,
Tasting, Smelling, Hearing, Seeing: There are also five Spiritual Senses, by
which Charity quickens and enlivens the Soul (viz.) Paternal Love, Social or
Conjugal Love, Natural Love, Spiritual Love, and Divine Love, or the Love of
God; and as the body by the means of life is joined to the soul by five
Organical Senses, so is the soul by the means of Charity joined to God by these
five Spiritual Senses; the Love of Parents is the meanest Spiritual Sense, and
answers the bodily sense of Feeling; the Love of God the highest and noblest
Sense, and answers the bodily sense of Seeing: So Love runs through the whole
Soul, and without this Love the Soul is dead to God, Love, I say not Lust; the
Soul's Love, Chap. 7. Book. 1.
not the Senses Lust; Love the action of Virtue, not the passion of Vice; Love
the fruit of the Spirit, not Lust the weed of the Flesh. Of which Love we shall
speak more in the Chapter of the Affection of the Soul.

CHAP. VII.
Of the three Internal Senses (viz.) Common Sense, Fantasy, Memory.

THus much of the External Senses which are seated in the body, whose Organs
are extra to judge of things out of themselves: Now come we to the Internal,
which are intra cranium seated in the Brain, not outward in the body; and have
their Organs in the Brain; the Brain is the seat of these Senses.

The Internal do differ much from the External in the power of operation; the
operation of the one is more general than the other; the External judge only of
things present, the Internal of things absent as well as present; the External
judge only of the differences of their own particular objects, the Internal of
the difference of every object belonging to every sense.

And as the Internal are thus distinguished from the External Senses, so are
they likewise amongst themselves, both in their Situation and Operation; and
first in their Situation.

1 Although they have all of them their Situation in the Brain, yet keep they
their distinct and several seats in the Brain; the Common Sense possesses the
nearest seat of the Brain, which lies in the fore part of the head called
Sinciput; the Memory keeps the remotest seat, which lies in the hindermost
part of the head called Occiput; the Fantasy keeps the middle part of the
Brain 'twixt them both: Thus is the Brain divided into three parts or
Ventricles (as the Anatomists observe) in which there be issues and passages
from one part to another, which are called Meats, through which the vital
spirits pass to and fro.

Of Common Sense.
2 They differ in their Operations; the Common Sense gives sense to the
External, that is it work; we have said heretofore, that there is no Sense of
the Senses, they do not perceive themselves; but here we must lay down a
contrary position, and all this out of the rules of Natural Philosophy,
quilibet sensus percipit se sentire, the Eye does perceive it self to see, the
Ear to hear, and the like; and so the Senses have sense of their objects; to
reconcile which seeming contradiction, we say the External Senses, virtute
propria, of themselves, and by their own operation, do not perceive themselves;
yet they do it by another power, and this is by the faculty and operation of
the Internal Common Sense, whose work alone is to give sense to the External.

Which Common Sense is all one with the other five, not diverse from them; one
and the same Sense divided into five conjoined in one; the five External being
as so many Rivulets arising from one Spring and Fountain (viz.) one Internal
Common Sense; and this Internal being like unto the center or point in the
Circle (it is Aristotle's comparison) from whence so many lines are drawn out to
the circumference, which lines are united in one individual point and center;
in the same manner are the five External Senses drawn from one, and again
united in one Internal Common Sense; the operation therefore of this Sense, is
to receive, perceive, distinguish, and discern the difference of the different
objects presented to the outward Senses, and to give sense to the Senses; and
therefore it is seated in the forepart of the Brain, which part is more moist,
and so aptest for reception, and is nearer to those outward senses, whose aid
and assistance they most require, and to whom they are nearer related than the
rest.

Of Fantasy.
The operation of Fantasy is more exactly to weigh, and diligently to examine
those forms and similitudes received in the Common Sense; and this is seated in
the middle part of the Brain, which is dryer, and so more apt for retention;
Fantasy is the highest faculty of the soul that any brute or irrational
creature is capable of, and it differs from Common Sense, for Fantasy
retains not only those things which are, or were the objects of the External
Senses, and by them presented to the Internal, but those things also which
never were, nor ever will be the objects of Sense, being entia rationis, non
entia rei, chimaeraes, figments of the Brain, having no existence in nature,
only a notionary, imaginary existence, but extra operationem intellectus nihil,
no longer any thing than they are in our mind, such are the representation of
Centaures and other Monsters which Poets and Painters have feigned and painted,
which are not, nor indeed have any existence in nature, but are a mere
imagination of the Brain; so Fantasy may be of such things as fall not within
Sense, are not subject thereto; but otherways it is of the Common Sense.

But this is by virtue of the Intellectual Fantasy, for there is an
Intellectual Fantasy, as there is an Intellectual Memory, which is proper to
Man, not common with Beasts, as hereafter shall be showed; for otherways
Fantasy is not without Sense, nor is in any but sensitive creatures, nor of
any objects but what are sensible and fall under sense; and therefore it is
that new born babes whose External Sensitive faculties in respect of their
Organs are too weak to operate at their first production, are destitute of
Fantasy, till such time as fit objects be presented, and the Senses made
capable to receive and discern them; and so be reduced into act, till such
time, I say, our Fantasy works not; therefore Fantasy presupposes Sense,
not only in power in its faculties, but in act in its operations; Sense then
leads the way, Imagination follows after; for those things we fancy which
we formerly have discerned; and what we never discerned severally or jointly,
we cannot fancy; but what we have discerned by Sense asunder we may join
together in our Fantasy; for so we fancy a Golden Mountain, a Flying-Horse,
a Centaure, which is part Man, part Horse, and the like, which notwithstanding
we never saw, nor ever were there such in nature; but this I say, by virtue of
our Intellectual fantasy (for such is not in beasts) by which we imagine
those things jointly which we never saw but severally and in parts; for a
Golden Mountain was never seen, but because we have seen both Gold and
Mountains severally, our Intellectual fantasy joins them together, and makes
us imagine that jointly which we never saw, nor could see but in sunder.

Of Memory.
The Operation of Memory is to lay up as it were in a storehouse all those
forms so presented, judged, and examined; it is the Storehouse and Treasury of
all Science; therefore Plato held, that scientia was nihil aliud quam
reminiscentia, all our knowledge was but a kind of remembrance; and the Poets
called Lady Mnemosyne, that is, Memory, the Mother of the Muses: This Sense
differs from the Common sense, because it retains the forms and similitude
of sensible things which are absent as well as present; the Common sense
retains only the forms of sensibles present; it differs likewise from
Fantasy; for though Fantasy retain the forms of things absent as well as
present, and in that regard is called Memoria imperfectior, yet Fantasy
retains them without any apprehension or knowledge of time; but Memory retains
them under the notion of time, but this only of time past, not present or to
come.

Not of time present; we cannot be said to remember things present, they fall
not under the object of Memory properly; things present fall under the External
senses, those things we hear or see without any use of our Memory; nor of time
future, that is not the notion of Memory, things future we remember not, they
fall not under Memory, but under Faith, Opinion, Hope, and Expectation; but the
object of Memory is the form of External objects conserved and kept under the
notion of time past only.

And of this there are two sorts in man, a Sensitive Memory which is common
with Beasts, and perishes with the Body, and an Intellectual Memory proper to
Man, which is Immortal, and remains with the Soul after death; this
Intellectual Memory is called Recordation, or Remembrance, and only found in
such creatures as can rationally discourse; and this is a Memory of such things
which were once in a manner clean forgotten, but brought again into our mind,
and re-imprinted in our Memory by reason and deliberation, and weighing of
repeated circumstances of time, place, person, or other like things.

We shall not insist upon that faculty which is called Common Sense, it being
the same with the five External, they as the Rivulets, it as their Spring; it
as the Point, they as the Lines drawn from the Point, of which we have raised
our consideration before.

Fantasy is the highest faculty that irrational creatures are capable of;
this sits as supreme Judge in the Sensitive Soul; yea and I may say too in the
Rational Soul, even since the Fall of man, by which his Understanding was
darkened, and captivated to the lusts of the f^esh, and whose operations are
slower, and more obstructed than the operations of our Fantasy; the
operations of Reason and Understanding are impedited many ways upon any
perturbation of mind, either by immoderate Love or Anger, Fear or Grief, or the
like; or else by some sickness and distemper of the body; or else by sleep; for
then the External Senses rest, neither does the Understanding that while work;
but in all these cases the Fantasy is working; and let a man sleep or wake
his Fantasy is seldom idle; but man is slothful, and loath to go to that
strict inquisition and painful search of things which the Understanding
stands upon, therefore he goes to Fantasy, which is more nimble, easy,
and ready at hand: This causes man to run into so many errors; for whilst
right reason was his guide, he continued upright; Intellectus est semper verus,
is a Maxim in Philosophy; for that judgment which Reason passes upon things,
as it is with deliberation, so it is void of error; but when man rejected the
judgment of his own Understanding, and followed the judgment of sensual
Fantasy (which was our first Parents case, and in them of us all) he runs
himself upon a thousand errors, and involves himself in a sea of miseries; for
the judgment of the Understanding is not so sure and true, but that of
Fantasy is as deceitful; for though Sense may give a true judgment in some
cases, pofitis omnibus requisitis, as a proper object, present and presented to
an Organ fitted and prepared to receive it by due mediums, convenient distance,
and the like, yet Fantasy sticks not to these rules but passes her sentence
on all objects that have been presented to her by the Senses, whether they be
present or absent, proper or common, near or far off; and who sees not upon
what weak principles, how rotten a foundation this judgment of Fantasy
stands? yet from hence all things are conveyed into our Memory, and there
registered as they are by our Fantasy apprehended; true or false, good or bad,
there they are reserved and kept.

And thus we descend to the consideration of our Memorative faculty, from
whence they pass into our Affections and Soul.

The Memorative faculty as it takes and retains the impression of all vain
objects presented by the Fantasy, so its operation is to think of them so
retained: Memory then is the Magazine and Nurserie of our thoughts; this is the
source of sin, and sink of all uncleanness, from whence springs every wicked
invention, every foolish imagination, every evil thought and cogitation, and
these are the beginnings of sorrow, hinc illae lachrymae; sin creeps first into
our thoughts, then into our words, then into our actions; in our Memory our
destruction is first hatched; Memory sends forth lusts, lust when it has
conceived brings forth sin, sin when it is finished brings forth death. Saint
Bernard makes three degrees of sin, one in thought, that is from our Memory;
another in affection, that is from our Will; the third in purpose and
resolution, that is from our Mind; the thought to sin defiles and stains the
soul, the affection to sin wounds the soul, but the resolution to sin kills the
soul; thoughts breed delight, delight consent, consent action, action custom,
custom necessity, necessity death.

Thus sin, like the cloud arising at the first in the compass of a hand, soon
overspreads the surface of Heaven; or like a Gangrene beginning in the Memory,
but quickly overrunning all the parts and faculties both of soul and body; this
is that Basili^k which must be crushed in the shell, lest it grow to a Dragon,
and drive the woman into the wilderness; and this is done by resisting the
beginnings, by driving all lustful thoughts out of our Memories: It may seem
(and really it is so) a difficult work to expel all those various thoughts and
imaginations of the heart which are evil, only evil, and that continually;
but when once the Memory is seasoned with other cogitations, the evil and
corrupt will not so easily find entertainment, vicious and virtuous thoughts
will not cohabit together, the love of the World and the love of God, the lust
of the Flesh and love of the Spirit cannot consist in one subject; If any man
love the World, the love of the Father is not in him; they are contrary, which
cannot be in one place at one and the same time; the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, and pride of life is not of the Father, but of the World.

The remedy against these is the same with that against the evils of the eye
set down by Job, I have made a covenant with my eyes, how then shall I think
upon a Maid? if I resolve to withdraw mine eyes from beholding vanity, much
more my mind from thoughts of vanity; wherefore that my Memory be seasoned with
purer meditations, I will call to remembrance the loving kindness of the Lord,
I will think of God, and in him will I rejoice; I will think upon my Redeemer
how and what he suffered for me; I will think on the hour of death, and day of
Judgment, of the joys of Heaven, and of the torments of Hell; the
consideration of these is of force to affright and drive away all the wicked
thoughts of the World, the Flesh, or the Devil, of what kind soever, whether
they be ambitious proud thoughts, or light and vain thoughts, or envious
malicious thoughts; or they be thoughts of gluttony and excess, or thoughts of
lust and carnal concupiscence, or the like.

Let the mind and Memory be replenished with such pious Meditations, and holy
Contemplations, the thoughts of the World will find no admittance; Intus
existens prohibet alienum; where the strong man armed keeps the house, the
enemy dares not enter; and whilst the soul is armed with the commemoration of
Gods blessing, it will not open the door to the temptations of Satan, or lust
of the Flesh, but say with Joseph, Behold my Master has committed all into my
hands, and there is none greater in this house than I, neither has he kept any
thing from me but thee; Genesis 39.8, 9.
how then shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God.

Praise then the Lord (O my Soul) and forget not all his benefits, which
forgiveth all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities; call to mind the
loving kindness of the Lord, and have them in everlasting remembrance; exercise
thy Memory with such heavenly meditations as may build thee up unto eternal
life; for this will be thy companion for ever, whether in weal or in woe; it
dies not with the body, but is immortal as thou thy self; the rest of the
faculties may sleep for a while with the body, but this survives to perpetuity:
This is that Intellectual Memory or Recordation which none but reasonable
creatures enjoy, which is not diminished by the bodies death, but infinitely
enlarged; when all the thoughts, words, and deeds done in the flesh shall
immediately in a wonderful manner come into remembrance, the secrets of all
hearts shall then be disclosed, and all such thoughts, words, and actions which
in life time were slipped out of mind shall come again into fresh remembrance
with a Conscience, Chap. 8. Book 1.
a Book which that day shall be opened, a Book of Man's life upon Earth, an
account of Man's works, where they that have done well shall go into life
everlasting, but they that have done evil into everlasting fire.

Which Recordation or Intellectual memory, if the Saints in Heaven (whose
bodies yet sleep in the grave) had not, how should they sing misericordias
domini in aeternum, the loving kindness of the Lord for ever, as the Prophet
David has it, which Psalm and Song says St. Augustine made for the glory of
the mercies of Christ, by whose blood we are redeemed, the Saints do joyfully
sing in Heaven. Of which Memorative facul y more shall be said hereafter.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Appetitive faculty, and the Motive to a place.

WE have done with those Sensitive faculties External and Internal which have
power of Judgment, Knowledge and Discerning; we come now to those which have
not this power in themselves, but are guided by the Counsel and advice of
others, being moved by the Object, good or evil, according as Fantasy or
Reason presents it; the Fantasy imagines it good, the Appetite is straight
moved to desire it; This faculty is twofold (viz.) Appetitive and Motive to a
place. The Local Motive Faculty is a power of the Soul moving the living
creature from place to place to follow that which the Appetite coveteth as
good; or to shun what it lottheth as hurtful; so that this Motive faculty is
but an effect of the Appetitive, and necessarily follows it as the Effect does
the Cause; for where the Appetitive faculty is to desire good or shun evil,
there must needs be this Motive also from place to place; otherwise the
Appetitive should be given us in vain, had we not this Motive faculty to seek
after that we desire, as good and pleasant, and to avoid what we conceive to
be hurtful unto us.

Aristotle (I grant) adds another cause of this Motion besides Appetite, to
wit, Intellect, (and under Intellect he comprehends Sense, to wit Fantasy)
for what ever is desired or shunned is under the notion of good or evil so
desired or lothed; now this knowledge must either be from Reason or Fantasy,
for there is no knowledge but is either Sensitive or Intellectual; therefore
must Intellect (which includes Fantasy) be another cause of Motion; Vide
Suarez. de metaphys disp. 35. Sect. 5. part. 15. fol. 172.
neither do I intend to exclude Fantasy and Reason from being a cause; for
when I mention Appetite only as the cause, I do it partly because Appetite is
the chief, Fantasy and Intellect are but subordinate causes; and partly
because I take Appetite here in the largest sense, as comprehending Fantasy
and Reason; for Appetite in general is both Sensitive and Intellectual, as
shall be said hereafter; so this Motive faculty being but an effect of
Appetite, we shall be the briefer in it, and insist more largely upon the
cause; the knowledge whereof will necessarily conduce to the knowledge of the
effect.

Appetite is a natural desire of the Soul, by which the living creature for
the cause of preservation is moved either to desire that which Sense judges as
good, or to loath that which it apprehends evil and hurtful; so that
Appetite is a necessary concomitant of Sense, and follows her close; for where
there is Sense, there is sorrow and pleasure, and where these are, there must
be Appetite. There is a twofold Operation of Sense; one whereby it perceives
its Object, as the eye beholds color; which is the first and simple Operation
of Sense; the other, whereby, upon the preception and apprehension of the
Object, the Sense is affected with sorrow or pleasure; this is the second, and
in a sort a mixed Operation, in as much as with the Object is joined sorrow or
pleasure, and to these are joined Appetite and flight, for things pleasant we
desire after, and things grievous we fly from; but this last Operation belongs
to Common Sense (not to any of the External) to perceive good under the notion
of good, or evil under the notion of evil, and accordingly to be affected
therewith is the Operation of the Internal, not External Senses; therefore it
is this Common Sense to which the Appetite is so nearly related, that Aristotle
says, they differ not re, nor yet in subjecto, but only ratione; not re, for
they have no distinct being, but one and the same essence; nor yet subjecto,
they have one and the same subject, for the seat of Appetite is where the
Internal Sense is seated, to wit, in the brain; this is to be understood of
that Appetite which is called Sensitive, and is common to man and brutes.

But there are three kinds of Appetite according to Arist. Appetite is divided
into Lust, Anger, and Will; Lust is in that faculty which is called
Concupiscible; Anger in that which is called Irascible, and Will in that is
called Intellectual; Lust and Anger follow the judgment of Sense, for what
Sense judges pleasant and good, Lust desires; and what Sense judges
grievous, the Irascible faculty rejects; and these are in brutes as well as
in man; but Will follows the judgment of Reason, for so says the rule in
Philosophy, voluntas sequitur dictamenintellectus, desiring and following that
which Reason Judges good and desirable; now this Appetitive faculty is proper
to Man, and is not to be found in any other creature, so there are but two
kinds of Appetite in brutes, yet three in Man.

Or there is a twofold Appetite in Man, and but one in Beasts; it is Aristotle
still, who divides Appetite into Sensitive, and Intellectual; the Apetite in
Beasts is altogether sensual, the Appetite in Man is sometimes governed by
Sense, sometimes by Reason; and therefore he distinguishes that in Man into
Concupiscence, and Will; it is called Concupiscence when the Appetite follows
the judgment of Sense, and not of Reason.

It is called Will when it follows the judgment of Reason, and not of Sense:
so there are two causes of the Motive faculty in Man, (viz.) Appetite and
Reason; Appetite, to wit, Sensitive, is the only cause of Local motion in
Irrational creatures, but in Rational creatures both Reason and Appetite; not
jointly, as if there were not this motion without the concurrence of both; but
severally, and a part, either of them has this principle of Motion, and
sometimes we are Moved by Appetite, sometimes by Reason, one while by Lust,
another while by Will; by Appetite, when Lust and concupiscence which is the
Sensitive Appetite overcomes the Will; by Reason, when the Will which is the
Intellectual Appetite, and follows the judgment, and command of the Intellect
overcomes the Concupiscence; for these are contrary the one to the other, and
so are their motions, and therefore there is a continual War in man twixt these
two faculties, sometimes the one, sometimes the other gets the victory,
sometimes Concupisence is the superior, and overcomes the Will, as in an
incontinent Man it falls out, who does contrary to that which his own
Understanding bids him do, according to that of the Poet -- video meliora
proboque, Deteriora sequor, sometimes the Will overcomes the Concupiscible
faculty; and that is when we do contrary to that which our Sensitive Appetite
bids us do, because our Understanding commands, and our consciences tell us we
ought not to do it, and so we chose to obey it rather than our Sense; Hereupon
Arist. observes three motions in Man, one whereby Will and Lust fight one with
another; the second motion is, that which proceeds from the victory of the
Will; the third proceeds from the victory of Lust; now the Reason of this
combat and contrary motion is this; the one follows the judgment of Sense,
the other the judgment of Reason and Uuderstanding; Now Sense and Reason are
for the most part of contrary Judgments; Sense judges of things as they
appear good or evil at present without any consideration of time to come, it
has not cognizance of things future; but Reason has knowledge of future
times, and therefore judges of things not only as they are at present, but as
they may be hereafter; hence it comes to pass, that Lust which only follows
the judgment of Sense desires a thing as good, because it is so at present,
regardless of the evil it brings afterward; but Will following Reason,
which looks forward at things to come, flies from that present good because
of that greater evil that does follow it; as for example, a sick man is a
thirst, he coveteth drink, for drink is pleasant and good to the thirsty, as
food to the hungry, and sleep and rest to them that are weary; but this drink
will prove hurtful to him afterward; this the Sensitive Appetite knows not,
bebecause it has no knowledge of time to come, but Reason knows this;
therefore Sense moves him to drink, but Reason bids him forbear; thus comes
there these two contrary Motions and Appetites in Man; one in respect of Sense
and of the time present, another in respect of Reason and of the time future.

Again, Appetite and Will do differ in their Object, for though Good be the
Object of both, yet the Object of appetite is good sub ratione jucundi, a
Delectable good only; the Object of Will is good sub ratione honesti, it
choseth things Honest as well as things pleasant; it preferres the good of
honesty, before the good of pleasure; the Object of Appetite is a good present,
particular, corporeal, Hooker Eccles. pol. lib. 1. Sect. 7. fol. 58.
fetched from the Objects of this Earth, the dureless pleasures of this
stage-play-VVorld by the eye of Sense; the Object of Will is good absent,
general and Spiritual, fetched from the highest Heavens by the eye of Faith and
Reason to behold our chiefest good, even God himself.

Again, they differ in the Manner of operation; the one works Necessarily, the
other Freely; the Appetite follows the judgment of Sense, and cannot but chose
the good it presents; Will follows the judgment of Reason, yet freely not
necessarily, it is a Voluntary Agent and free, not tied by any necessity to any
determinate act; the fire works necessarily and cannot but burn; so do
Sensitive creatures; otherwise it is of Man in respect of his Will, which is
not necessarily moved to any one simple action, but freely may do or not do,
may Will or not Will at his pleasure, for voluntas est libera libereque
movetur ad bonum, is the current opinion of Philosophers ancient and modern.

In this Intellectual Appetite (Will) which accompanies Reason, art thou a
resemblance of thy Maker, (O my Soul;) Man was made like unto God in freedom of
Will and clearness of Understanding; in these for for his Naturals; and he was
made like unto God in Righteousness and Holiness; in these for his supernatural
endowments; which supernaturals though he totally forfeited and lost by his
fall, Original sin coming in the room of Original Justice, as Privation does
the Habit, yet did not Man lose his Will and Understanding by the fall; wounded
indeed he was, not depraved in, not deprived of his naturals; his Understanding
became more darkened, and his Will more servile; but some light the
Understanding retained, some freedom the Will enjoyed after the fall; The
Reason and Will of Man remained entire since the fall, as to their nature and
essence, though not as to their Operations; the Operations of right Reason may
be impedited many ways, either through the imperiousness of evil affections
and carnal lusts which have got the rule, or through evil habits and customs
it has acquired, and the like, but yet Reason and Understanding in Man as to
its essence is perfect as well since as before the fall; homo est animal
rationale, is the definition of every man as truly now as then; Man is a
reasonable creature.

And as Man's Understanding is not taken away by his fall, no more is his Will
which is always a concomitant of Reason, the essence of the Will is as entire
as the essence of Reason; and the essence of Will is freedom, take away freedom
and the Will is destroyed, it is not Will longer than its free; for that is it
whereby it is distinguished from Appetite, and whereby Man is disstinguisht
from Sensitive and all other agents, and made like unto God, resembling him in
his manner of working; God works not necessarily, but freely; so we, what ever
we work as men, the same do we wittingly work and freely, says Mr. Hooker;
else our actions would neither he righteous nor sinful in themselves, nor
reward or punishment due unto us for the same; for these do always presuppose
some thing done well or ill, and that willingly and freely; and because of this
freedom of Will in Man, only Man's observation of the Law of his nature is
righteousness; only Man's transgression, sin, righteousness and sin is imputed
to none hut voluntary free Agents that might have done better or worse than
they do; Hence arises that conscience which is in every Man, and not to be
found in other Agents, a conscience either accusing or excusing every Man for
the good or evil he has done though never so secretly, for as much as he
might have chosen whether he would have done it or no; Every Man's heart and
conscience (says Mr. Hooker) does, in good or evil even secretly committed
and known to none but it self, either like or disalow it self, and accordingly
either rejoice, very nature exulting as it were in certain hope of reward, or
else grieve as it were in a Sense of future punishment.

And this arises from an innate freedom that is in all Rational creatures, a
freedom of willing and nilling those things which Reason judges good or evil;
This light of Reason and Understanding is in all men, in all Intellectual
creatures; the wickedest Man (that is wholly governed by the inferior Orbs, by
unruly passions which flow from Sense, and not by the dictates of a right
Understanding) has so much of this Intellectual power, which serves to
struggle, to combat, and to fight with those powers of Sense and Appetite; and
though it seldom prevail, yet it leaves a sting of conscience sticking like a
thorn in the flesh; because in doing evil he prefers (and that wilfully) a
lesser good before a greater; the greatness whereof is by reason investigable
and may be known.

Known by an unregenerate man by the light of Natural Reason, much more by a
regenerate man enlightened by the Spirit of God; which is an argument of the
freedom of Will in all men; the will is always, and in all men free, free in
it nature and essence, though in it operations an accidental servitude is
acquired by the Fall; Man was created with a posse standi, and posse cadendi,
without any servitude upon his Will; and though his choice was evil, and so he
fell, yet to will and to do that which was good was more natural to him; the
Moral Law was writ in his heart, and made connatural, more easy it was for him
to have kept than broke it; though since the Fall the course of nature is
changed from a posse standi, or posse non cadendi, to a non posse non cadendi,
from a liberty of standing to a necessity of sinning, and all this by nature,
not in massa pura, but in massa corrupta, by the vitiosity of Nature, an evil
servitude, and sad accident acquired by the Fall of man is more prone to evil
than to do good, we may not say so properly naturaliter as accidentaliter; the
Will being wounded in its operations, having an accidental servitude upon it;
so that now though to will be present with us, yet how to perform we know not;
there is in the best so much predominancy of Sense and Appetite over Reason,
through evil habits and customs accrewed, or the seeds of Original sin
derived to them, they many times do contrary to what their Wills desire, and
their Reason presents as good, according to that of the Apostle, The good I
would, that do I not, but the evil I would not, that do I.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Affections and Passions of the Soul.

Chap. 9. Book 1.
IT remains to treat of the Affections and Passions which are incident to the
Soul, and are but as it were the sundry fashions and forms of the Appetitive
soul, which Aristotle sometimes calls Accidents, sometimes Affections,
sometimes Passions of the Soul.

Affections as they are moderate, natural, and engendered with the soul and
body, are actions transient, not permanent, and so are neither vicious or evil
in themselves, nor ought nor can be removed from our nature, which was the
error of some Philosophers of the sect of the Stoics; Passions as they are
inordinate and predominant, and so are vicious, and dangerous to the soul, and
both may and ought to be expelled, such as fall not on a Philosopher, that is
to say, a wise and virtuous man, for virtus consistit in moderatione passionum;
therefore although to be angry is natural to every man, and cannot be expelled
the soul of any, yet to be inordinate and immoderate in anger is the part of a
fool, and not of a wise man, because where any inordinate Passions do bear
rule, they cloud the understanding, and obscure the light of truth, as thick
clouds the light of the sun; and therefore concludes Aristotle in the fourth of
his Ethics, Mansuetus vult imperturbatus esse, and non duci a passione, from a
wise man all unruly and disordered passions are to be driven away.

This is the exhortation given by Philosophy it self to Boethius -- -- tu quoque
si vis
Lumine claro cernere verum,
Tramite recto carpere coelum,
Gaudia pelle, pelle timorem,
Spemque fugato, nec dolor assit,
Nubila men's est vinctaque fraenis
Haec ubi regnant, --


And though there be several other Affections and Passions of the Soul which
are not here nominated, but are notwithstanding in themselves as vicious as
these, yet these of Joy, Fear, Hope, and Grief, are the four Cardinal and chief
Affections unto which all the rest may be reduced; for there is no Affection
but is in respect of some Good or Evil, and that a Good or Evil present, or
Good and Evil absent: Joy is an Affection of the Soul for a Good present; Hope
an Affection of the Soul for a Good absent and future; Grief is for an Evil
present; Fear for an Evil absent and future; which Affections as long as they
be but rightly, ordinate, and subject, nor may, nor can be expelled being
natural and good, but when they grow heady, sensual, fleshy, and terrene, set
upon the lusts and pleasures of this stage play world, are vicious, and
hurtful, which a wise man and a virtuous will keep under, and not suffer to
range and rule; for these are they which are properly called Passions, when
they grow exorbitant, according to the definition of Aquinas, Affectus est
vehemens animi passio animum torquens and verum judicium rationis impediens;
otherwise it is of these natural and ordinate Affections, for they do neither
animum torquere, nor verum rationis judicium impedire, so are not evil in
themselves, and of their own nature, but through error in man's judgment, from
whence the vitiosity passes upon the Affections: Other reasons may be given of
the evil and exorbitant Passions which doubtless are stronger or weaker
according to the temperature of the four elements in the body of man, from
whence the complexions have their denomination; if the complexion be Sanguine,
it commonly feeds the Affection of Joy, and Mirth, and Love, and the like; if
Choleric, expect Anger, Hatred, Malice, etc. if Melancholy, then Sorrow, Fear,
and Grief; and thus according to the temperature of the body are Passions for
the most part more or less predominant; the more temperate the complexion, the
more moderate the Passions, the better the constitution, the purer and nobler
the Affections are.

That all Affections of the Soul are vicious, and not only to be moderated,
but wholly to be extirpated and expelled from our nature, was an error broacht
in the School of the Stoics, condemned in Christianity, as well as by the
Peripatetick Philosophers of old.

Mr. Hooker.
It is not in our own power whether we will be stirred with Affections or no; It
is as possible to prevent them all as to go out of our selves, or to give our
selves a new nature; no more than we can refuse to wink with the eye when a
sudden blow is offered at it, or refuse to yawn when we see a yawning sleepy
fellow, though by frequent and habitual Mortification, and by continual
watchfulnes, Dr. Tailors life of Christ 2 part fol. 122.
and standing in readiness against all in advertencies we may lessen the
inclination, and account fewer sudden irreptions, says a devout and judicious
Doctor of our English Church.

Many ought to be corrected, few totally to be rejected; some Affections there
are which are virtuous and godly in themselves; some are wicked and
diabolical, some are in themselves neither godly nor wicked.

The good and virtuous are, Love, Pity, Joy, Charity, etc. the diabolical are,
Envy, Wrath, Malice, and especially that which your Greeks call (...), that is,
a rejoicing at other men's ill hap and misfortune; the indifferent Affections
are, Fear, Sorrow, Anger, and the like, which as they are not simply good, so
are they not morally evil, since our blessed Savior, who knew no sin, was
notwithstanding subject to like Passions of Sorrow, Fear, Grief, and the like;
such as accrewed to us by the Fall of our first Parents, and are infirmities
and defects of pure nature, effects or fruits of sin, and so an evil, to wit
of punishment, as well as other bodily defects, as hunger, thirst, sickness,
yea and death, which come unto us but by the Fall, all these our Savior was
subject to, in all things being made like unto us, sin only excepted.

The evil of sin he took not, though he took upon him the true nature of man,
so says Saint Augustine, As Christ took upon him a true humane nature, so he
took the true defects and evils of that nature, but not all; he took upon him
the defects or evils of punishment, but not the defects and evils of sin: Such
Passions and Infirmities of Fear, Grief, Anger, of Sickness, Death, and the
like, as are evils of punishment only, Christ was subject to as we are,
therefore such are not simply sinful, neither can they be simply good, since
they be effects and fruits of sin.

Nor was Christ subject to these Passions in the same manner and measure as we,
Christ only in the first motions, and sudden irresistible alterations, those
twincklings of the eye as the Philosopher calls them, those Propassions as the
Schoolmen term them, or Passions transient; but we not in Propassion only for
a flash and away, but in Passion also, in Passion permanent to entertain it,
and retain it, many times either without just cause, or longer than occasion
requires, or beyond due measure, by which the Affections come to be inordinate,
the Mind moved, perplexed and troubled, Reason blinded, Judgment perverted and
depraved.

These are the Diseases and Maladies of my Soul, far worse than any that can be
of my Body, whether it be Lethargy, Frenzy, Apoplexy, Epilepsie, burning
Fever, or the like, all which are the most dangerous diseases of the Body; for
though the outward Senses may be surprised by these, and my Body thereby made
insensible of pain, yet whilst my Soul remains un-distempered, my Reason is
able to discover and judge of these bodily distempers, either by its
inflammation, or beating of its pulse and arteries, or by some extraordinary
heat and lassitude; but when my Soul is diseased, my Reason is also wounded,
and being sick has no judgment at all of that which she suffers, for the
self same that should judge is diseased, being surprised with those unruly
Passions, which (like a tempestuous storm at Sea) carry this little Ship of my
Body into the deep, without Tacklings, Mast, or Rudder, or any to steer her
aright, whereby she is exposed to splittings, shipwracks, and all other
misfortunes of the Seas; But in the way of more strict Religion it is advised
that he that would cure his passions should pray often; Dr. Tailors life of
Christ par. 2. fol. 125. A Remedy against passions in general.
it is St. Augustines Counsel unto the Bishop Auxilius, that like the Apostles
in a storm, we should awaken Christ, and call to him for aid, lest we
shipwreck in so violent passions, and impetuous disturbances; Again, a
continual exercise, Vigilancie, and Circumspection of thy Reason is a Sovereign
Antidote for the Ejection of these poysonsom passions out of thy Soul; and
therefore one advertisement given by Fundanus in Plutarch, against such
inordinate passions is not here to be pretermitted; Whosoever (says he) will
live safe and in health, ought all their life time to look to themselves, and
be as it were in continual Physic; and not as the Herb Hellebore ( which we
English Neeswort) after it has wrought the cure in a sick man's body, is cast
up again together with the malady, so Reason also should be sent out after the
passion it has cured, but ought to remain still in thy mind to keep and
preserve the judgment; for Reason is to be compared to wholesome and nourishing
meats, and not to medicines and purgative drugs.

Of all those several affections and passions incident to the Soul, and are
either as Lenitives or Corrasives (viz.) pleasant and wholesome, or harsh and
noysom to the Soul, two only as principal, I shall insist on; upon which the
rest are founded, from whence they spring, (viz.) Love and Ire.

Anger though simply, and as it is in it self considered, to wit, in its first
motions and natural inclination, be neither good nor evil, yet is made good or
evil according to the circumstances of time, and adjuncts of manner, and
measure; all anger in all causes and in all degrees is not simply unlawful; to
be angry when we ought, as we ought, and as much as we ought, is not criminal
but praiseworthy; but when we have no just cause, if then we be angry with
our Brother, we are guilty of judgment, so says our Savior; yea though we
have just cause we may miss it in the measure or in the manner, as when our
anger exceeds the value of the cause or the proportion of other circumstances
and adjuncts; thus Moses anger (though for Gods cause and Religion) was
reproved, because it went forth into violent and troublesome expressions, and
showed the degree to be inordinate; other passions there are which arise out of
this, which are in themselves sinful and damnable; those are hatred and malice;
Anger persisted in turns to hatred and malice, and these are nothing but a
continued anger; odium est ira inveterata, Anger with deliberation, and purpose
of revenge, which is morally evil, and prohibited in the sixth Commandment;
Envy is another sprig of this root, and that which in Greek is called (...);
the one proceeds from Anger mixed with Sorrow, repining at the prosperity and
welfare of another; the other proceeds from Anger mixed with Joy, rejoicing at
the calamities and miseries of others; A remedy against Anger, with its effects
in particular.
the worst and dangerousest of all Passions; for prevention whereof propound to
thy self the example of meek and patient persons, remembering always, that
there is a Family of meek Saints, of which Moses is the President; a Family of
patient Saints under the conduct of Job; every one in the mountain of the Lord
shall be gathered to his Tribe, to his own Family, in the great day of Jubilee,
Dr. Tailor.
and the angry shall perish with the effects of anger, and peevish persons
shall be vexed with the disquietness of an eternal Worm, and sting of a
vexatious conscience, if they suffer here the transportations and sadest
effects of an unmortified, habitual and prevailing anger.

But love is the Queen of Virtues, the chief of all affections, and a duty
enjoined and commanded by God; upon this hang the Law and the Prophets; it
runs through the decalogue, it is the fulfilling of the Law: Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and thy neighbor as thy self, is the whole
duty of man; Love is an lnseparable affection of the soul, Faith and Hope may
cease, but Charity abides for ever, and joins our souls to God; as the Soul is
the life of the Body, so is Charity the life of the Soul, and as the Body by
the means of life is joined to the Soul, so is the Soul by the means of Love
conjoined to God; Love is the Soul's Sense and the love of God is the Soul's
eye; There is another love called (...) which is that natural affection which
Parents bear toward their Children, and the Children again to Parents, and the
like, which is one of the Soul's Senses, but not the noblest; for as the eye is
the noblest of the bodily Senses, so is Divine love the noblest of the Soul's
Senses, and is the Soul's eye by which we see God.

As the body has two eyes, so the Soul has its eyes, Reason and Love; these
are the eyes which the Spouse in the Canticle speaks of, saying, Thou have
wounded me my Spouse, my Sister, thou have wounded me with one of thy eyes; now
the eye of Love is the right eye, and sees further than the eye of Reason;
Ratio deum videre non potest nisi in eo quod non est, amor autem non adquiescit
requiescere nisi in eo quod est; ratio per id quod non est in id quod est
videtur proficere, amor postponens quod non est in eo quod est, gaudere
deficere; -- ratio majorem habet sobrietatem, amor beatitudinem, says St.
Bernard.

Again, there is a twofold love of beatitude; one of desire, the other of
enjoyment, est amor desiderii, and est amor fruitionis, it is St. Bernards
still; the love of desire is that natural Appetite or pondus natural, which is
in every creature toward their chief felicity; I mean not such a weight as
always tends downward, such as is the natural weight of Earth; whose
perfection lies below in its Center; but such as looks upward, as the natural
weight of fire; so man's love of desire looks up to God, who only is man's
summum bonum, his chiefest felicity, and so bea^itude,

Let the eyes of my Soul (O God) for ever look up toward thee, especially the
eye of my Love, which though in much weakness it behold thee here not in
fruition but in desire; Let this innate desire and love of my Soul toward thee
so quicken and stir up my elicite acts and abilities to pursue the means
tending to thee as thou have prescribed in thy Word; that at the last my
desires may reach to a Beatifical Vision and full fruition, and my love be
completed in the enjoyment of thee; that the panting desires of my Soul here
may be so taken up hereafter with the cool refreshments of thee the everliving
Water, that I may say (Lord) it is enough, That I may so behold thy face in
righteousness here, that when I awake I may be satisfied with it.

Amen, Amen.
TO My much honored Friend and Neighbor, HVMPHREY CHEETAM, ESQUIRE.
SIR,
IN the Garden and Paradise of God (not that Terrestrial which long since
perished, but the Heavenly which has not suffered by any Cataclysm) grows the
Tree of Life, and the Tree of Knowledge, which God as the chief Husbandman and
Gardener both planteth and waters, and causes to increase: Though it has
pleased Almighty God to plant and sow semina quaedam and frutices, some seeds
and shrubs of Knowledge and Life in this earthly Garden, and set Man therein to
dress and keep it, whose fruits (though in this life they come not to full
maturity and perfection, yet) serve us for a taste of those spiritual and never
fading fruits in Heaven; since by the pains and industry of some Laborers in
this Vineyard, and the blessing of God, the Sun of Righteousness shining upon
their labors, some fruits have been here gathered relishing much of the
Heavenly perfection. The Fruits ensuing are of this nature, which I as a
Gleaner have gathered from others, and dedicate as the choicest of my labors,
and as I hope the welcomest present unto you; the former Treatises adding
little benefit, but what you have formerly reaped from your own experience,
being ever the best School-mistris: The two parts of this Rational life, the
Practick and Speculative you may read in the History of your own life, who have
well nigh by the course of Nature finished both; the Clue of your thread being
almost spun out, and drawing on apace to the period set by the Prophet David,
Psalm 90. Wherefore leaving those things that are behind, looking not backward
at time past, you press forward to the things that are before, if by any means
you can attain to the Resurrection of the Just, to that state of life which
consists in Beatifical Vision to come, which this ensuing Treatise, though in
much weakness points unto; May it lay the way open before you, and give you
such a taste of the joys of Heaven, as may sharpen your stomach, and quicken
your appetite, but not hasten your progress thither; for serus in coelum
redeas, may you enjoy a long life here, and Heaven at the last, are the hearty
wishes, and daily prayers of,

Sir, Your most devoted friend, and servant, NICH. MOSLEY.

TO My loving Brother, EDWARD MOSLEY, Esquire, one of the Commissioners for
Administration of Justice in SCOTLAND.
Brother,
A Kingdom or Commonwealth is corpus politicum, consisting of many, and in
themselves disagreeing members, but mixed and united in one Civil society by the
rules of Morality; that which forms and unites this Body, is Government,
without which it would not be a Body, but a Chaos -- rudis indigestaque moles
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum.
But rules of Policy and Government are investigable by Reason, not by Sense;
therefore Man only, who is animal rationale, is properly termed (...); the
Reasonable Soul of Man runs through the whole Body of practick Philosophy,
teaching the duty of a good man in Ethics, of a good Master of a Family in
Oeconomicks, of a good Citizen and Magistrate in Politics; which Duties
consist in the exercise of all Moral Virtues, especially those four Cardinal
ones of Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, and above all (of a Magistrate) that
of Justice; Justice distributive, as well as commutative, without which no men
of old were linked together in a Civil society; nor at this day without it can
be preserved.

And though Solomon saw an Evil, and that a great one, under the Sun, an error
proceeding from the Rulers, who placed ignorance and mean persons in high
Thrones, when Wisdom and Nobility sat in ipsa abiectione, whereby happily
Magistracy was brought into contempt, and Justice perverted, through the
weakness or wilfulness of such Juridicials, who fall short of the perfection of
those Moral Virtues, those habits of the Mind, which do complete a Magistrate;
yet against such Evil our Laws have wisely provided, That none shall bear any
high Office of Magistracy, no not the Office of a Justice of Peace in the
Country, but Plus hault and meultz vailantz, men of the best rank and
quality, of the best reputation, and most substantial, as Lambert has it.

Such a one may you be in your place and calling, whose nurture and education
from your youth up, has been in the studies of the Law, and in the study of
Ethics, as well Ethicae Christianorum as Ethicae Ethnicorum; not that Natural,
only drawn from the rules of Heathenish Philosophy, but from the Fountain of
Christian Divinity, which will so furnish you with all Intellectual Habits, not
of Natural Virtues only, acquired ex crebris actionibus assuefactione and
consuetudine, but of Supernatural also, infused from above, as may render you
capable, and sufficiently meriting those high employments unto which you are
called.

Hence may you discover the necessity of this noble Science of the Soul, even
for you whose conversation amongst men is Practical, and the Operations of your
Soul such too, consisting in the exercise of Moral Virtues whose residence is
in the Soul; the Reasonable Soul is the subject and receptacle of all Virtuous
Habits acquired by Nature, or infused by Grace.

Yet is there another noble Science of the Soul, whose end is not Action, but
Contemplation, or Speculation of the divine Essence; this I presume is your
chief study and delight, in which you spend those spare hours of retirement
are gained from your State-employments; If these my poor and weak labors may
be any help and furtherance of your meditations in that kind, I freely and
heartily dedicate them to you, and rest

Your affectionate Brother, NICH. MOSLEY.

Natural and Divine CONTEMPLATIONS Of the Passions and Faculties Of the Soul of
Man; In Three Books.
THE SECOND BOOK. The Metaphysical part.
CHAP. I
Of the Intellectual faculties of the Soul.

AFter the discussion of the Vegetative and Sensitive it remains to treat of
the Intellectual faculties of the Soul, which are not Organical, Corporeal and
Inseparable, but have their Operations apart, and without, and so are separable
from the body; mere Operations of the Rational Soul which acts without bodily
Organs, Chap. 1. Book. 2.
and is of an Immaterial, Immortal Nature; There are incident to this Soul,
three powers or faculties (viz.) Will, Memory, and Understanding; Will is
distinguished from Appetite, (which is a concomitant of Sense and that
necessarily) being it self a concomitant of Reason and Intellect, sed tamen
libere, not tied by any necessity to any determinate act; Memory is another
branch of the Rational Soul, and perishes not with the body, remaining as an
inseparable companion to all separated substances, and abstracted Forms, of
which two faculties (viz.) Will and Memory sufficient has been formerly said.

The Intellectual faculty which is the highest and noblest of the Rational
Soul, is distinguished first into Agent and Patient; The Patient Intellect again
is threefold, in power, in Habit, and in Act; In Power only is the intellect
in it self, and of its own nature, for at the first it is nothing else but a
mere power or promptitude to receive intelligible Forms, and this is to be
found in new born babes, and Infants who have not yet acquired the act or habit
of Understanding but are capable, and receptible of Intelligible Forms; which
Intellect Aristotle compares to the first matter, materia prima, which is
nothing but in power; has no Form but is capable of any; And where Aristotle
says, intellectus cognoscit omnia, we must conceive it in this sense, to wit
in power; for although there be many things whereof we are ignorant, yet there
is not any thing which our Understanding may not reach unto; as for example,
we know not the number Stars, or the Sands of the Sea, but this ignorance is
accidental, not natural; for our intellect is capable of the knowledge of
these, if any one should but teach us the certain number of them.

The Intellect in Habit is that which has received Intelligible Forms, even
those which it had power to receive, but does not act, only has power to act;
and herein the Intellect in habit and Intellect in power do differ; for the
Intellect in power has power only quoad essentiam, non quoad operationem, but
the intelin habit has power tum quoad essentiam, tum quoad operationem; A
learned man though he be asleep, yet has this Intellect in habit, for as much
as he has received and retained those Intelligible Forms which gives him a
power to operate and contemplate; although he does not actually know and
contemplate; he has the habit, though not the act, whilst he sleeps.

The Intellect Patient in Act, is that which is reduced into act and exercise;
so that it does not not only actually receive what formerly was but in power,
but also operates and works about those things it receives, and actually
Understands them; which is done when the Phantasmes which are illustrated and
made Intelligible by the Intellect Agent are actually received of the Patient
Intellect, by which that knowledge which formerly it had not is acquired.

The property of the Patient is to receive Intelligible Forms from Phantasmes
illustrated by the Agent Intellect, and from this property and Office of
receiving Intelligible Forms, it is called Intellectus patiens.

For as Sense is said to suffer because it receives Sensible Forms; so the
Intellecct by receiving Intelligible Forms, recipiendo pa^itur, it suffers from
Intelligible Forms as Sense suffers by its Sensible Forms.

But the Intellect Agent is no way passive, being of it self perfect and needs
not an Object to supply its defects, being nothing in power, but as Aristotle
has it, essentialit r actus, a pure act, and receives not Intelligible Forms;
Its Office is to illustrate the Phantasm, and to make of sensible, Intelligible
Forms, and of Particulars, Universalls, and therefore the Intellect Agent is
said omnia facere, as the Patient is said omnia fieri.

Of these two Operations of the Agent Intellect (viz) to illustrate the
Phantasm, and to Understand, the latter is only Essential and remains after
death of the body, the other is less Essential and therefore remains not with
the Soul after this life; for although the Office of the Intellect Agent in
this life be to illustrate the Phantasmes, and to make that Actually
Intelligible, which was before but Potentially so, and to reduce the Intellect
Patient into Act, yet this is not the sole and Essential Office of this
Intellect, for as much as after this life it continues not with it; for after
this life there remains another manner of knowledge, Proper and Essential to
this Intellect, not per species impressas, by Intelligible Forms imprinted from
some Sensible Object, but per species in elligibiles congenitas and innatas, as
shall hereafter be demonstrated; And this is a part and faculty of that
Reasonable Soul which is forma informans hominem, and not an Extrinsecal
assisting Form, as a Mariner is of a Ship, as some would have it; it is that
part of the Soul, by which it does (...), Intelligere and sapere, vel
cognoscere and prudentis munere fungi, as Aristotle has it.

By which there arises another distinction of the Intellect, into Practick and
Speculative, for (...) intelligere is an Operation of the Intellect generally,
but (...) sapere seuprudentis munere fungi is the proper Operation of the
Practick Intellect, whose end is Action, and Object, such things as fall under
Action, and such Action as falls under Sense, and subject thereto; and whose
Science is Morality, being conversant about Manners, and Moral Virtues.

This Practick Intellect (for of the Speculative is our whole discourse in the
subsequent Chapters) is that faculty or Operation of the Soul whereby Man is
distinguished from Beasts, who live a Sensitive life, and Angels, who live a
Contemplative life; And that Beatitude, or summum bonum, which every man
naturally coveteth after consists in action (viz.) in the perfect state of
Moral virtues; this Happiness appertains to man as man, and without this Moral
virtue none in this life can be accounted happy. De perfecta possibilia
secundum naturam, non de perfecta absolute ^ut extraordinario dei munere.
Fors^ca lib. 2 Metaph. cap. 1. q. 2. Sect. 7 fol. 420.
I speak of man's Natural and Temporal happiness in this life, and not of that
Supernatural and Eternal in the world to come, in Heaven, which consists in the
sole intuitive Vision and knowledge of the divine Essence; Aristotle I grant
makes two parts of Natural and Temporal felicity, the one Practical, consisting
in the perfection of Moral virtues, the other Speculative, consisting in the
perfection of virtues Intellectual; and this Speculative and Intellectual part
of a man's life he esteems the nobler part, as a virtue of an higher order,
and sufficient in his kind to make a man happy.

But this Intellectual part does not necessarily make him good who is endowed
therewith, or bring him to that perfect state of felicity in this life, since
it is here commonly mixed with vices, and may be found in such, who though they
know God, yet do not glorify him as God.

Besides this part of Intellectual Contemplative Virtue (viz) that Intuitive
Vision of God, or the perfect knowledge of the divine Essence, is not natural
to Man; Man attains not thereto by any strength of Nature, it is the gift of
God; unto this light of Glory, unto these supernal Joys, no man attains by his
own strength; only that which is practical, and consists in well doing, in the
exercise of Moral virtues, is proper to man in his Natural estate, which is the
operation of the Practick Intellect, and therefore Aristotle in the tenth of
his Ethics says, The practick Beatitude agrees with man as man; that which
consists in Contemplation does not agree with man as man, sed quatenus in eo
est divinum quiddam and degit vitam quandam divinam.

And in this respect the Soul may be said mortal, because that part which
consists in the exercise of Moral virtues, whose end i^ Action, and such as is
taken from Sense and Fantasy, which is mortal and perishing, operates only in
this life by the help of Fantasy, and without Phantasms the Soul understands
not any thing; so says Aristotle, (...) this Soul, meaning this Practical
part, for the Speculative part of the Soul does not always and altogether work
by means of Sense and Fantasy, since it knows such things as are
immaterial, and not subject to Sense, as God, abstracted Forms and
Intelligences, and it own self, as elsewhere shall be showed: Though to speak
properly and truly, the Rational Soul is not mortal in any part of its Essence
or Faculties, though the operations may cease in defect of requisite Organs;
neither is there two several Intellects really distinguished, but one entire
Intellect belonging to this Soul, only in regard of its several ways of
knowledge, and manner of operation in this life, Practical and Speculative, the
Intellect has obtained its distinction of Practick and Speculative, which is
but one in r^, though diverse ratione.

But some have gone about to prove a real and essential difference 'twixt the
one and the other, making Reason or the Rational faculty of the Soul (which is
that part of the Intellect which is Practical, and acquires knowledge by
discourse, and that not without great labor, difficulty, and uncertainty,
running from the Causes to the Effects, and from Effects to the Causes, groaning
under the perplexity of framing demonstrations by wresting, deducing, infering,
and concluding one proposition from another) making Reason (I say) but
handmaid and subservient to the Speculative Intellect, no part at all of its
essence, nor adliged to it by the inseparability of Union or Identity -- but a
Caduce sparious faculty accidentally advenient upon the degradation of our
Nature; and is separable from the Soul at the instant of her emancipation from
her Prison of Clay, and wholly useless to her in her state of restitution to
the clarity of abstracted and intuitive Intellection.

Which opinion of the Mortality of the Reasonable Soul, I have heretofore
proved to thwart not only the general belief of Heathens, as well Philosophers
as others, be they Graecians, Caldeans, Arabians, Jews, Turks, or others, but
also the Catholic Faith of holy Church, and concurrent judgments of all the
Fathers.

Nor can I be of opinion, that Reason is a faculty accidentally advenient upon
the fall of our first Parents, and was not that Form which gave Adam his
specifical difference from all other creatures, ab origin, as well before as
since the fall; if Adam was not created a Reasonable creature, when God
breathed into his Nostrills the breath of Life, and he became a living Soul; if
that Soul was not a Rational Soul, and therefore liveing because Immortal;
either Adam was no Man, or every Man is not a Reasonable creature, and then
must we seek out a new Definition of Man; there being no truth in these
Reciprocal terms, or Convertible propositions (viz) No Man but is a Reasonable
creature, no Reasonable creature but is a Man; which never yet were
contradicted by any, since Rationality is as essential to Man as Risibility,
which is proprium quarto modo, quod omni, soli, semper, and convertibiliter
accidit subjecto.

But if you take Reason not as an Essence or faculty, but an Operation of the
Soul which is Practical in this life, and cannot Operate or come to the
knowledge of any thing but by discourse and arguments, running from Effects to
their Causes, or from causes to their Effects, and for discharge of its office
herein stands in need of Object, Form, Phantasm, and other bodily Organs, this
Operation of the Soul, (I grant) cease and perishes with the body; and after
this life the Soul has another manner of Operation, as heretofore in part, and
more fully hereafter is demonstrated. Otherwise Rationality is the very Essence
of the Humane Soul, and impossible it is to sever them, distinguished they may
be by suppositionality, not reality of essence; for the rule is, nulla res
potest distingui realiter a differentia per quam essentialiter constituitur.

In this Rational Soul is the glorious Image of the Almighty Jehova radicated
and equally proper to it with its very essence, neither separate nor separable
from this reasonable Soul; this is it which carries the Resemblance and
Portraiture of the Immense Godhead in the most simple Unity and indivible
Homogeneity of Spirit, being tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part; and
holds the Effigies of the sacred Trinity, not only in her Ternary of faculties
Vege^ative, Sensitive, and Intellectual, heretofore explicated, but also (as
the more learned number of Christians judge it) in these three faculties of
Intellect, Will, and Memory, in this Chapter handled.

Vide St. Aug. in 14 lib. de Trin. and lib. 10. de Trinitate.
St. Bernard proving the Soul of Man to be Gods Image, and therefore ought to be
more serviceable to him, thus speaks unto his own Soul. O my Soul, if thou
would be beloved of God, reform his Image in thee, and he will love thee,
renew his likeness in thee, and he shall desire thee; etc.

The Original thus.

O Anima mea, si vis amari a deo reforma in te imaginem suam and amabit te,
repara in te similitudinem suam and desiderabit te; consilio namque sanctae
Trinitatis ad imaginem and similitudinem suam creavit te Creator tuus; quod
nulli alteri ex creaturis donavit, ut tanto eum ardentius diligeres quanto
mirabilius ab eo te conditam intelligeres; considera ergo nobilitatem tuam,
quoniam sicut deus ubique est totus omnia vivificans, omnia movens and
gubernans, ita tu in corpore tuo ubique tota es, illud vivificans movens and
gubernans; and sicut deus est, vivit and sapit, ita tu secundum modum tuum es,
vivis and sapis; and sicut in deo tres sunt personae, pater, and filius, and
spiritus sanctus, fic and tu habes tres vires, scilicet intellectum memoriam
and voluntatem; and sicut ex patre generatur filius, and ex utroque procedit
spiritus sanctus, ita ex intellectu generatur voluntas, and ex his ambobus
procedit memoria; and sicut deus est pater, deus est filius, deus est spiritus
sanctus, non tamen tres dii, sed unus deus, and tres personae; ita anima est
intellectus, anima voluntas, anima memoria, non tamen tres animae, sed una
anima, and tres vires, ex quibus animae viribus quasi excellentioribus jubemur
deum diligere ut diligamus eum toto cord, tota anima, tota mente, id est, toto
intellectu, tota voluntate, and tota memoria, hoc est toto affectu sine defectu
cum discretionis intuitu; nec solus sufficit de deo intellectus ad beatitudinem
nisi sit in amore ejus voluntas; imo haec duo non sufficient nisi memoria
addatur, qua semper in mente intelligentis and volentis maneat deus; ut sicut
nullum potest esse momentum quo homo non u tatur vel fruatur dei bonitate vel
misericordia, ita nullum sit momentum quo eum praesentem non habeat in memoria.
And with him many of the Schoolmen; Vide Aquinatem lib. 1. dict. 3 g.
and Bellarmine also. Habet etiam anima hominis imaginem in se quamvis obscuram
divinissimae Trinitatis, tum quia habet memoriam faecundam, vim intelligendi,
and vim amandi, tum etiam quoniam men's ejus intelligendo format verbum quoddam
simile and a mente and a verbo procedit amor, quia id quod cognoscitur a mente
and repraesentatur a verbo ut bonum continuo a voluntate diligitur and
desideratur; sed tamen long altiore and diviniore modo pater deus generat
verbum deum, etc. Which is confessedly true, this Image of the Trinity is but a
most imperfect and obscure shadow of it, and does ill quadrate and respond with
its prototype and prime examplar.

Again, Man is made after the Image of God, in respect of his Immortal Soul and
invisible, for God is Immortal, so is the Soul of Man Immortal; and God is
Invisible, so is the Soul; God is Incorporeal and Immaterial, so is the Soul of
Man.

Moreover, Man is made after the I- of God, in respect of his Dominion which he
has, not only over the Fishes of the Sea, the Fouls of the Air, and the
Beasts of the Field; for that is in regard of that Rational Soul and endowments
of mind, in which Man as Man excells all other terrestrial creatures.

But also in respect of that dominion which one Man has over another; dominion
belongs not to all the Sons of Adam, God has appointed Kings to Govern them,
and thereby has imprinted a more lively Character of his own Image, upon
Kings, than any other.

But above all is Gods Image seen in the endowments of his mind, in the facu ty
of the Soul, even that whose Act and Opera ion is the perpetual contempla ion
of truth, and therefore is called intellectus divinus and contemplativus, a
divine Understanding and Contemplative mind; T^is is the power and faculty of
our Soul, the purest, the noblest, and supremest faculty, called lumen animae
rationalis, or anima animae; the Soul of the Soul, or the Eye of the Soul, and
receptacle of sapience and of knowledge divine; This is that Eye of our Soul
which by the bountiful grace of the Lord of all goodness, pierces through the
impurity of our flesh, and beholding the highest Heavens, thence brings
knowledge and Object to the Soul and mind, to con^emplate the ever durng glory
and termless joy prepared for such as preserve undefiled, Sir Walter Raleigh.
and unrent, the garment of the new Man, which after the Image of God is
created in righteousness and holiness, as says St. Paul.

CHAP. II.
Of the Speculative part of the Soul.

Chap. 2. Book 2.
THe Soul of Man as it is the Form of Man is notwithstanding an Immaterial,
independent, and abstracted substance, though not so complete and perfect as
the rest of the Spiritual and Immaterial substances be, it is of the Order
(though of the lowest Rank) of simple essences; whose Operations (in regard of
its imperfect and lowmost rank of Spiritual substances) are not so noble, so
complete and perfect as the Operations of other Intellectual spirits be; but
many times mixed with inferior Operations, and in some sense inseparable from
them, or thence sprung, since all the knowledge which the Reasonable Soul
attains to in this life by its natural strength, is, from Sense Mediately or
Immediately derived; this for the Science Practical properly, and the practick
Intellect, whose Operations are determinately Practical and not Speculative, as
chiefly conversant about Manners and Moral Virtues, whether Ethical,
Oeconomical, or Political; and whose end is Action ( viz. well doing) though
there is another Operation of the Soul whose end is not Action, to do, but to
understand, or contemplate; this diviner faculty of the Soul, this
Contemlpative Intellect, whose Operations are determinately Contemplative, not
Practical; as chiefly about Theorie, and whose end is knowledge or truth; its
principal end so, sui ipsius gratia for its own sake, for the love of truth,
for the cause of knowledge; This I say has its Operations more immixt and
separable from bodily Organs, or External Objects; and herein is a diversity
twixt the Reasonable and Sensitive Soul; for to bring Sense into Act, as the
Eye to see, etc. is required an External Object and bodily Organs; but to bring
the Reasonable Soul into Act (viz.) to Understand or contemplate, which is the
Operation of the Speculative Intellect, needs no External Objects at all, for
that which brings knowledge into Act, and makes the mind actually to
contemplate, is merely Interna, to wit, in the Soul; an Operation then there is
a Science Metaphysical abstracted from matter; a Science of things which fall
not under Sense, come not from External Objects, and of which no Phantasm or
sensible Form can be presented to the Understanding, of which we mean to treat
of in this Book; the knowledge of the Soul which it has of Immaterial
substances in this life, (viz.) of it self, of Angels, and of God, with the
different manner of Operation of the Soul in this Natural condition or body
corrupt, and in the state of Separation or body glorified.

Yet is our knowledge of all Immaterial substances in this life very confused
and imperfect, and agrees not with the state of the Soul conjoined to the
body, whose principal Operation is, to illustrate the Fantasy, and to make
those things Actually, which were but before Potentially Intelligible, and to
reduce the Intellect Patient into Act; This is the principal Operation of the
Intellect Agent in this life, though not its sole and proper, nor Essential
Operation, for then it would remain with the Soul after this life, which it
does not; for there is then another Operation and manner of knowledge, not per
corpus, sed per influxum superioris causae (as Suarez has it) proper and
essential to the Soul, as hereafter shall be showed.

Of the knowledge which the Soul has of it self.
The Operation of the Intellectual Soul is to know, yea to know it self, there
is that faculty and power in Man's Soul whereby he may know himself; know
himself, and be known by himself; for the Soul of Man is Immaterial, and so
Intelligible as other Intellectual creatures which are merely Immaterial; now
in those creatures who are Immaterial, idem est intelligens, and quod
in^elligitur, Lib. 3. cap. 5.
scientia seu intellectus contemplativus and scibile. So says Aristotle in his
Book de anima; the Intellectual Soul is it which understands, the Intellectual
Soul is it which is understood; it is not so with the Sensitive Soul, whose
Organs are External, and whose knowledge is fetched from Objects ab extra, and
therefore neither knows nor perceives it self, as has been elsewhere said;
But the Operation of the Intellectual Soul is Intrinsecal, it has Objects
Internal, it self is its own Object, always present, never absent from it
self; the Soul of Man is not only a straight line drawn forth to point at
other things, but a reflex and circular line pointing at it self; It knows it
self by inspection, or (if I may say with Plato in this Timaeus) by reflection;
for he compared the Soul that governs this World, and consequently the Soul
which governs this Microcosm Man, (which is but a particle of that Soul which
rules this Universe, both of them being Intellectual, and so may hold
proportion and resemblance) to a line wherein was Rectitude and Reflection; and
to number, which consists of Unity and Diversity.

The Right and straight line of that Soul which rules the World, he made to be
the Axle-tree and Diameter of the World (viz.) that imagined line reaching from
one Pole to another, on which the World turns about as a Wheel; the straight
line of the Humane Soul he made that right Operation and knowledge of the Soul,
procured by a certain progress from the essence (as it were by aline drawn out)
to the powers and faculties, and from them to the act and Operation of the
Soul, whereby the Soul looks and points forward, and by a straight aspect
contemplates things out of it self, External.

Again, this Rectitude or right line he bended into an Orb or Globe consisting
like numbers of Parity and Imparity, Indentity and Diversity; This reflex line
of the Worlds Soul, was in respect of its circular motion upon the Axle-tree of
the World; The reflex line of the Humane Soul, was that Operation whereby
reflecting upon it self, it knew it self; And this reflex line of the Soul of
the World, and of Man, had in her Indentity and Diversity. The Indentity of the
Worlds Soul was in respect of the Eighth Sphaer which the ancient Philosophers
called the primum mobile, for this Sphaer with one uniform motion is moved from
East to West; The Diversity consisted in the motion of the seven Planets in
their several Sphaers; So the Soul of Man had its Indentity and Diversity;
Indentity in respect of its Speculative Intellectual faculty which is divine,
Diversity in respect of its inferior faculties.

Furthermore this Circular and Caelestial line of the World he divided into
two Circles, (viz.) the Eighth Sphaer, which is by him, and the Ancients called
primum mobile, and moves from East to West; and the Sphaer of the Planets
which moves in a contrary motion to the Eighth Sphaer (viz) from West to East;
and these two Sphaers are said to be conjoined by two points (of the
Axle-tree) cuting through them (viz.) two Equinoctial points; Again, the other
Circle (viz) that which moves from West to East, he subdivided into seven
Circles of seven Planets, to all which he resembled the Soul of Man, which is
one essence, and as it were one Caelestial Sphaer, and is divided into the
Intellectual faculty answering in analogy to the primum mobile or Eighth
Sphaer; and the Irrational faculty answering in similitude to the Sphaer of the
Planets; for this faculty is opposite, and contrary to the Intellectual, and
moves contrary to it, as the Planets do in a Counter-motion to the Eighth
Sphaer; and as in the Heavens the second Circle is subdivided into seven
Planets; so does Plato, in his Timaeus, subdivide the Irrational faculty of the
Soul into seven faculties, (viz.) the particular or External Sense, Common
Sense, Fantasy, Memory the Cogitative, Concupiscible, and Irascible faculty.

As for example.

a, b. Is the Axle-tree of the World.

g, d. The Axle-tree of the Zodiak.



And thus would Timaeus prove the Soul of Man to know it self by Reflection or
Inspection into it self; which though it may be true in a sense, yet we are not
to imagine such an Inspection or Intuitive Vision of it self in-this life, as
the Angels and separated Souls have of themselves; for this knowledge agrees
not with the state of the Soul as long as it is joined with this Body, being
hindered of the free and perfect exercise of those Actions, (which are Common
and Essential to it and the separated Souls) whilst in this body of flesh, no
more than the knowledge which now it ordinarily exercises, agrees with the
state of the Soul departed and separated from the Body.

And though idem est intellectus and quod intelligitur, scientia and scibile;
yet are we not to conceit an Indentity of Essence betwixt the Understanding
and the Object Understood; there is not such a Conformity twixt them in
Essence, but in Representation. The Form and similitude is there, the Intellect
receives the species of things only, and therefore is it called forma formarum
intelligibilium, and so there comes an Identity, not of Essence, but of
Proportion and Form.

Thus the Soul knows it self in this life non per essentiona^, by its own
substance but per speciem, and without this species the Soul knows not it
self in this life; though it needs no Intelligible Forms to know its self by
after this life; but knows it self, (as other separated substances do
themselves) by their own substance, and not by Form.

Neither is this Intelligible Form innate and engendered ogether with the Nature
and Essence of the Soul; (as those Forms, whereby Angels and Souls departed
know one another, are, as hereafter we shall show) but Imprinted in the
Understanding from some Object Sensible conveid to the Fantasy, from the
Fantasy by the Operation of the intellectus agens, to our Patient Intellect,
where of Sensible they are made Intelligible Forms, so from Sensible Objects
are produced Intelligible Forms; and without Sense no Intelligence; this in the
ordinary way and manner of the Souls Operation in this life, we have no
knowledge, no not of Immaterial and Insensible Essences, as of God, or of our
own Souls, but is in a sort deduced from Sense; for although some things are
not sensible in themselves; yet they may be sensible in their parts, as a
Golden Mountain which we never saw but Fancy; or in their similitude and
Portraiture, as men absent, or dead, are known by their Pictures; or by their
opposites, as darkness by light, coldness by heat; or by their efects, as God,
our own Soul, and the Virtue and Operation of natural things which are all
hidden to Sense, but known unto us by their Effects; So God and our own Souls
are known to us by their Effects and Operations; whereby may be inferred, that
all our knowledge, yea our Metaphysical knowledge of abstracted and Immaterial
substances do spring from Sense, and so the Contemplative Intellect, neither
immixt nor inseparable from bodily Organs, but Organical and depending on
Sense, contradictory to what has before been affirmed.

To which I answer; although it may be said, that Immaterial and Intelligible
Forms are drawn in a sort from Sense; yet it is to be noted, that Immaterial
things do otherwise depend on Sense than things Material do; for although our
Intellect takes its principles from Sense, by which it is brought to the
knowledge of God, arguing from the Effect to the Cause, as Aristotle argues,
where from the Effect he proves the First mover to be Eternal, Immaterial,
Infinite, although I say our Intellect may know God to be insensible and
Immaterial even from Sensible and material Effects; which is its usual manner
and way whereby it attaineth to knowledge here whilst in the body; yet it
undoubtedly not only knows those principles and Effects which are subject to
Sense and Fantasy, but even God himself, without any help of Fantasy or
Sensible representation; Even so, although the Soul of Man does come to the
knowledge of it self by the Effects and Operations which it has found in it
self, and so of Sensible are produced Intelligible Forms; yet is not the Soul
dependent of the body, either in respect of Organ or Object, but these Forms
are illustrated and made Intelligible by Virtue of the Agent Intellect, and
though Fantasy be made Instrumental, yet not so necessarily, but that this
Intellectual faculty may operate without the concurrence of Sensible objects,
Intelligible Forms may be imprinted in the Understanding, though no Phantasm
appear, and many times through a vehement application of the Understanding to
Contemplation, the concourse of Fantasy is weakened, yea sometimes, though
rarely, altogether hindered, as those Holy Men who are given to deep and Divine
Contemplation of Immaterial and Spiritual Substances can witness, so says
Fonseca lib. 2 Metap. cap. 1. q. 2. sect. 6. and lib. 1. cap. 2. q. 3. sect. 6.

Alluding still to Plato's Imaginary lines of the Soul (viz.) the Direct and
Sphaerical, consider (O my Soul) the use of these with thy self; The direct
line points to the knowledge of all things here without and beneath thee; Phe
Sphaerical to all within and above thee; That knowledge which is acquired in
the direct line, is fetched from Objects External, and so has Sense for its
base; looking at things External, Corporeal, Mortal, which are all below the
Soul of Man; And though by the kno^ledge of these Externalls, we may come to
the notion of Internal things, by the knowledge of others to know our selves;
by sensible Objects to Intelligible Forms, whereby our Souls may be
represented; Yet that knowledge must needs be imperfect, confused, and very un-
ertain; no Quidditative knowledge of things Spiritual and Immaterial, as the
Schoolmen call it; which is fetched from effects, and not from the Cause, from
the direct line of External, Corporeal, and inferior bodies, and not from the
Sphaerical of Intellectual spirits.

A straight line is full of imperfection and deformity, whereas the Sphaerical
is the perfectest, fairest and capaciousest of all the rest; Sphaera which is
(...) in Greek signifies beauty, because of all other figures it is the
fairest; and as it is fairest, so it is the perfectest and most Capacious of
all the rest; and therefore it is, the Heavens are in a round and Sphaerical,
not in a long and straight figure; for if the heavens were in the Form and
figure of long or direct lines, there would be beyond them some place and body,
or else a Vacuity, which argues a deformity, an emptiness and imperfection; so
says Aristotle in his second Book de caelo, and his fourth Chapter.

Even so in the Soul of Man the Sphaerical line is the fairest, perfectest, and
the most capacious; the Circular line reflecting upon it self, that eye of the
Soul which contemplates it self, and has its Objects Internal, that Soul which
can see it self in it self, and commune with it own heart, is undoubtedly the
divinest and perfectest, and Beautiful of all others; For to fetch our
knowledge from outward Objects, and to bend our studies to know the Heavens,
Elements, and all other Material and Corporeal creatures, is that imperfect
line beyond which is something else, or a Vacuity; and though thou cast
discourse of the Nature of all things here below, though thy line of knowledge
be drawn from North to South, though it extend to all things from the Artick to
the Antartick Pole, though thou give thy heart to seek and search after
Wisdom (as the wise man says) of all things that are done under Heaven, of all
works under the Sun, and yet art ignorant of thy self; all is but labor and
travel, which God has given to the Children of Men to be exercised therein,
and without this Circumflex line, (viz.) the Souls self-Inspection and
knowledge of it self, the end is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit; In brief, this
Circular Sphaerical knowledge and Inspection of the Soul, is that Encyclopaedia
which comprehends all other Sciences within it.

Learn then this Platonic Idea, and Imaginary Circle (O my Soul) by which thou
may reflect upon thy self, and find thy self in thy self, by that Eye of
right Reason who fetches its knowledge from Internal Objects and Intelligible
Forms; whose base is Reason; lower it looks not, nor yet is hurried and tossed
about with the Counter-motions of inferior faculties; may soar aloft sometimes
in Contemplation of Caelum Empyreum, where those Divine, Immutable, and
Impa^ible Essences (which Aristotle speaks of) do inhabit; the highest Heavens
where is the Throne of the most high God, and Quire of Innumerable Saints and
Angels; may in a holy rapture sometimes with St. Paul, be caught up to the third
Heaven, and there learn the secrets of God, which is not lawful for Man to
reveal; may know things happily above Reason, above it self, but never
contrary or below it self; This is a Science Metaphysical properly so called,
which Grace not Nature teaches; a Science Theological, a truth not acquired by
Humane Art and Industry, but by Divine Revelation, taught us by the Spirit of
God in the Scriptures.

Stude cognoscere te, quia multo melior and laudabilior es, si te cognoscis,
quam te neglecto si cognosceres cursum siderum, vires herbarum, complectiones
hominum, naturas animalium, and haberes omnium caelestium and terrestrium
scientiam, St. Bernards Meditations, cap. 5. fol. 1054.

Frustra cordis oculum erigit ad videndum deum qui nondum idoneus ad videndum
seipsum, prius enim necesse est ut cognoscas invisibilia spiritus tui quam
possis esse idoneus ad cognoscenda invisibilia dei, and si non potes cognoscere
te, non praesumas apprehendere ea quae sunt supra te; praecipuum and principale
speculum ad videndum deum, est animus rationalis intuens seipsum. fol. 3131.


And doubtless this Inspection and knowledge of our selves, and our own Souls,
is a Metaphysical, Supernatural, and Theological Science; (...), nosce te ipsum
is a Divine Lesson; so accounted by the Heathens, when Graven upon the door of
Apollo's Temple, 'twas feigned to have descended from Jupiter; by the knowledge
of our Souls, we come to the knowledge of our selves, what we were, what we
are, and what we shall be; by the knowledge of ourselves we come to the Unity
of the Godhead, by it to the Trinity of Persons, by it to the Hypostatical
Union of the two Natures in Christ, by it we are confirmed in the most
Mysterious Articles of our Christian Faith; by it Gods Essence is represented
and lively Portraid; look we into our Souls, and God is our Object, whose Form
we are, whose similitude we retain; when no other created Form can be given
which may represent the Divine Nature as it is in it self, God is pleased to
Imprint an Intelligible Form of his own Essence upon the Reasonable Soul, by
which God is United and made known unto us; for this is certain, Et Suarez.
Metaphys. disp. 30. sect. 11. part. 27.
divina essentia unitur intellectui creato beatorum more speciei
intelligibilis, it is the general opinion of the Schoolmen, and other Divines;
See Fonseca lib. 1 Metaph. Gods Image we are the sacred Histories are express;
but principally in respect of our Souls; let us make man after our own
Likeness, says the Text, and again, God made Man in his own Image, in the
Image of God created he him.

Lift up now thy thoughts (O my Soul) to this thy Divine Exemplar; and think
how that every perfection of the Image is placed in the Resemblance it has
with its Pattern; for though the Pattern should be deformed (such as is usually
imagined of the Devil) yet the perfection of the picture is to be drawn like
to that Pattern; and therefore, though the deformity in the Pattern be truly
its deformity, yet the deformity in the Picture is its beauty.

But if the Pattern it self be beautiful, the Picture then is most exact and
perfect, if it imitate in its beauty, as near as may be, the beauty of its
Pattern; and if every Picture had understanding, it would desire nothing more
than continually to contemplate its Pattern to frame it self to its imitation,
and to be made conformato it.

God thy Pattern (O my Soul) is infinite beauty, a light in Which is no
^a^kness at all, whose brightness the Sun and Moon admire^ whose brightness
that thou may with ^ore ease imitate, his similitude desire, and by all means
endeavor, in which consists all thy perfection. Profit, Honor, Joy, Rest,
and all thy good^ Know that the beauty of God, thy Patter^, consists in
Wisdom and Holiness; for as the beauty of the Body arises from the due
proportion of the Members and pleasantness of Color; so in this spiritual
Essence the suavity of Color is in the light of Wisdom, the proportion of
Members, is in justice; But by justice is not meant any one particular Virtue,
but that general which contains in it all the rest, that spiritual substance is
the fairest, whose mind shines with the light of Wisdom, and whose Will is
replenisht with perfect justice.

Now God thy Pattern (O my Soul) is Wisdom it self, Justice itself, and
therefore is perfect beauty, and because these two are in Scripture expressed
by the name of Holiness, threfore do the Angels cry on, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord
God of Sabbath; Isaith. 6. Levit. 11. Math. 6.
and God himself cries out to us his Image and likeness, be ye holy, for I
your God am holy; and Christ in the Gospel, be you perfect, as your Heavenly
Father is perfect.

Therefore (O my Soul) if thou the Image of God desire to be made like thy
exemplar, thou must prefer Wisdom and Justice before all things; True Wisdom is
to judge of all things according to the highest Cause; the highest Cause I call
the Will of God, or the Law which reveals the same to men; therefore if thou
love Wisdom, thou must not regard what the Law of the flesh dictateth, what
Sense judges good, what the World allows, what kindred persuade, much less
what flatterers propound; but turn thy deaf ear to these, and only harken to
the Will of the Lord thy God, judging and esteeming that the most profitable,
most glorious, and most desirable good, which is most agreeable to the Will and
Law of God; This is the Wisdom of the Saints, of which the wise Man Writes,
Wisdom 7.10, 11.
I loved her before health and beauty, and chose to have her in stead of light;
for the light that comes from her never goes out; All good things together
came to me with her, and innumerable riches in her hands.

Furthermore, Justice, which is the other part of spiritual beauty, comprehends
all these Virtues which do adorn and perfect the Will, but principally Charity
which is the Mother and root of all Virtues, and of which Saint Augustine
says, De natura and gratia cap. 70.
Charity begun is Justice begun, Charirty continued is Justice continued,
Charity perfected is Justice perfected; for who so has loved has fulfilled
the Law; for love works no evil, Chap. 3. Book. 2.
therefore love is the fulfilling of Law, as the Apostle teaches; and
contrariwise, he that keeps Gods Word and Commandments, Romans 13.
the love of God is perfect in this says St. John; therefore whosoever would
be like unto this Divine pattern, must obey him, saying, be ye followers of God
as dear Children, and walk in love; for the Son is the Image of his Father; now
the whole beauty and perfection of the Image is (as we have formerly said) to
be most like the pattern. See Bellarm. de ascensione mentis in deum per scalas
rerum creaturarum, gradu primo.

CHAP. III.
Of the knowledge which the Soul has of Angels and Saints departed.

THE state and condition of the Humane Soul is twofold, and so has two several
ways of Operation, two ways of acquiring knowledge, one in the body Natural
in this life, another out of this body in another life; The Operation of the
Soul in this life is per corpus, which is an impediment and let unto it, that
it cannot exercise (as to all points) those other Actions and Operations which
are Common to it and separated substances, so fully and freely as it does out
of the body; So must the knowledge of the Soul in this life especially of
Immaterial substances be more imperfect and uncertain, by how much more it
uses the body; For Immateriality is the cause in knowledge, and according to
the degree of Immateriality is the degree to knowledge; therefore as God is
said in be sum Immaterialis, so is he sum cognoscitivus; whereas on the
contrary we see by common experience, by how much more any thing recedes from
Immateriality, the less does it partake of knowledge; as all Corporeal
Inanimate substances, for their overmuch Materiality, have no knowledge at all:
but your animalia sensitiva, Sensitive Souls, participate of a certain kind of
knowledge, because they have some power over their matter, and in some measure
are capable of Forms without matter; and this knowledge is called Sensitive;
now the Reasonable creatures higher than they have attained to a degree of
Intelligence; their knowledge is called Intellectual, because though their
Souls inform the matter, they may notwithstanding subsist without the matter;
so clear it is, by how much more the Reasonable Soul in this life stands in
need of the body, by so much is it less knowing; but by how much more freed
from the body, overcoming the imperfection of matter, by so much the more
Operative, by so much the more Knowing; But because the Soul of Man so long as
it is in this body, cannot exercise all its Operations out of the body,
therefore the Operation and knowledge of the Soul in this life (of Spiritual
and Immaterial substances especially) cannot be so full and perfect, as it is
out of the body in another life; First therefore of the knowledge we have of
Saints and Angels in this life.

We have no Quidditative knowledge (as the Schoolmen call it) of abstracted
forms and essences in this life; that is, such a knowledge as to define them
not only with their Common but their Proper names also, even to the last
specficial difference, which is the proper and positive knowledge of them; such
a knowledge we have not, (which was a question started by Aristotle, but not
assoiled) but a Quidditative knowledge improperly so called, to wit, a confused
knowledge of some Essential predicates, but not of all, and those too by
Imperfect notions, partly Common, partly Privative or Negative, not Proper or
Positive, such we have; Some Essential attributes we know, which are not Proper
to them, but Common with other things, as that they are essences entia realia
perse existentia, substances, not accidences, that they are Incorporeal,
Immaterial, Intellectual, Incorruptible spirits, of a finite power and
perfection, all this has been found out by the strength of natural Reason,
heathen Philosophers have taught it, and Aristotle writes a whole Book, de deo
and intellig^ntiis abstractis; wherein he acknowledges them to be entia
realia, for as much as he grants them a being in nature; and Substances, for as
much as they are per se existentes, not inhaering like accidences in any
Material or Immaterial entity; if then Substance not Material nor Inhaering,
they must be Incorporeal and Immaterial, and if Immaterial, then Intellectual,
as has been said, whence comes their name Intelligen^ae, which is attributed
to these spiritual essences by the heathen Philosophers, and that they are
finite in power and perfection, their creation is an argument, for no created
substance is infinite; but created they are, and all of them, though not all
alike, in a necessary and an Essential order among themselves depending one
upon another, and all upon one as head, which is God, whom Aristotle calls
intelligentia prima; And thus much of the Nature and Essences of Angels and
Separated Souls by the light of Nature, what they are; now of their Operations,
what they do.

The power of Angels and Souls abstracted, Of the power of Angels and Forms
abstracted in their unstanding*
is seen in three things (viz.) in their Understanding, in their Will, and in
their External Actions and Operations; as for the power of their Understanding,
for as much as we have proved them to be Intelligences Immaterial, and of an
Intellectual Nature, it must needs follow they have in them the Act and
Operation of knowledge, and this in a far more eminent manner than any Rational
Soul in this life by it Natural strength can attain unto; we shall first speak
of the Act and manner of knowing themselves, then of their Act and manner of
knowing others.

The faculty of knowing themselves.
Every created Intellectual spirit has this power to know it self, which is not
difficult to demonstrate by Natural Reason, since every Intellectual Spirit is
of it own nature Intelligible, yea of it self actually Intelligible, and a
proportionate Object to any Understanding, much more to it own; therefore does
e-Intellectual Spirit actually know it self, yea with an Intuitive,
Quidditative and Comprehensible knowledge, know it self and is known by it self.

And how.
The manner of knowledge which it has of it self, is not (as ours in this life)
per species impressas, by Intelligible Forms imprinted of some outward Object,
nor (as it knows other things) per species congenitas and innatas, but it knows
it self per propriam subst antiam, by its own substance; It needs no Accidental
Form to represent it self by, but every spiritual substance knows it self, by
its own substance, as an Adaequate and proportionate Intelligible Object
closely conjoined to it own Understanding; this is the way of knowing
themselves.

God is known by all Intellectual Spirits after the same manner; they know
themselves by their own Substance, Their power of knowing God, and how.
and God by it as their Cause, Principle and Author; no other Spiritual or
Corporeal substance is known this way save only God; yet is not this knowledge
God of a proper Quiditative adn Comprehensive, but an Improper, Imperfect and
confused Science, for God cannot properly be known, as he is in himself, of any
creature, either by his Substance or proper Form, who is Incomprehensible by
any finite Power, much less perfectly known by the proper substance of any
Intellectual creature which is but a very imperfect Analogical representation
of the Divine Nature: Therefore when it is said God is known by the proper
substance of any creature, it is not to be understood of such a Quidditative
knowledge, whereby he is known as he is in himself, but a knowledge of God per
substantiam tanqnam per effectum, as the Cause is known by the Effect, and thus
the Angelical Natures know God by their substance, yet as the Effect of such a
Cause, which stands with very good Reason; for if here we may attain to the
knowledge of God in this life by Effects, if the invisible things of him from
the creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead; much more, and in a more eminent
manner may Angelical Spirits and Separated substances know God by their own
Substances, as by Effects, for as they know their own substances, so must they
know them to be Effects necessarily, and Essentially depending upon God, and so
by their own Substance, as by the noblest Effect made after the Image and
likeness of God, may they Naturally attain to the knowledge of their Maker.

Of their knowing others and how.
But the knowledge which Angels and separated substances have one of another,
and of other inferior creatures, is after another manner; not per substantiam,
but per speciem; by Intelligible Forms; nor are these Forms imprinted by any
outward Object presented to the Senses, and so to the Fantasy; but are
Innate, Connatural and engendered together with their Nature, and altogether
Intelligible.

The difference twixt Sensitive, Rational, and mere intellectual knowledge.
True it is, the Sensitive knowledge is per speciem as well as the Intellectual,
but perfecter the Intellectual than the Sensitive, and the Angelical perfecter
than the Humane; the Sensitive creatures know nothing but per species, and
those of Objects singular, it knows nothing of Universals; the Intellectual
know per species too, but by those he understands Universals as well as
Singulars; all a genere generalissimo ad infimam speciem; as for example, when
we conceive in our mind Substance, which is the highest Genus in the Scale of
the Predicaments, and understand it aright, we understand also all its Species
under it, the whole with all its parts, so the Intellectual creatures know per
speciem, but such as represents some Universal Nature with all its Singulars,
the Genus with its Species, the whole with its parts; thus the Intellectual
creatures excel the Sensitive in the manner of knowing per speciem.

And as the Intellectual excel the Sensitive, so do they differ in excellency
among themselves, the Humane from the Angelical and abstracted Intelligences,
and these one from another, the Separated substances know that at once unico
intuitu, by one and the same Form, (which we cannot but by many several Forms)
running over the Cause with its Effects, the Universal Nature with its
Singulars, with one simple aspect and apprehension, which we cannot but under
many and diverse Conceptions and notions; And thus much touching the Operation
of the Angelical Intellect; Now of their Will and Freedom.

Where there is Knowledge there is Desire and Appetite, where there is no
Knowledge there can be no Appetite, (we speak not of that Natural propensity
which is given to every thing) whereby, without any previous knowledge, they
are inclined and are carried Naturally to their good, as the Earth Naturally
desires the lowermost place, the Matter desires the Form, and the like, which
is called appetitus naturalis, or pondus naturae, but of that which is given to
living creatures, and drawn out of the Power of the Soul, and is called
appetitus elicitus, even that Act and Operation of Natural Propensity, whereby
every Soul that is endowed with knowledge, (according to that knowledge it has
of any thing, is drawn to affect and desire it) so that desire or Appetite is a
Companion of Knowledge and concomitant; and according to the measure of
knowledge, desire attends in an answerable measure; Sensitive knowledge is
inferior to Intellectual, so is the desire; that which follows the Sensitive
knowledge is called Appetite, that which follows the Intellectual is called
Will; one follows necessarily, the other freely.

Will then and Freedom of Will belongs to Intellectual creatures, Of their
Will.
whether men or Angels, voluntas hominis est libera is a Philosophical rule,
much more truly may it be verified of the Will of Angels, which is far
perfecter; But how far this Freedom extends, whether unto all the Acts of
Angelical Will, or that some Acts are necessary, and which those are; and
whether this Freedom be to all honest and good Acts only, or it extend to
wicked also; or according to the question propounded by Divines, whether Angels
considered in their condition have posse peccandi, a liberty or Power to sin;
this cannot be so clearly evidenced by Natural Reason.

Though diverse of the ancient Philosophers have gone very far in this point, as
Plato and Socrates, and of your Poets not a few, who held that moral evil had
place in Angels, and that they might do wickedly as freely as men, whereupon
came the distinction amongst them of good and evil Angels; and the evil Angels
they called Daemones; so that from the Effect and delusions of ev^l Angels,
they were induced to believe that some Angels, were morally evil; and therefore
to do evilly was not repugnant to the Nature of Angels.

Of their External Opera^ions. 1 Negatively.
Now concerning the External Act and Operation of Angels, to wit, their Power
and strength in working; First Negatively with Aristotle against Plato, we
affirm the Angels can make no substance, nor yet any material alteration of
bodies; neither by Creation nor by Generation; not by Creation out of mere
nothing; nothing to produce something, all things to spring from nothing,
something to be the Effect of nothing, nothing the cause of something, Natural
Reason knows nothing of such Causes or Effects, nor is it in the Power of any
created substance to create any thing, it is only the work of an omnipotent
Power; Angels cannot do it, Philosophers were ignorant of it, nor does it stand
with the rules of our Faith and Christian Religion; And as Angels have not the
power of Creation; so neither have they the Virtue of Generation; herein other
animate creatures exceed Angelical Nature; they can beget their like, whereby
their Species is preserved in the succeding Individuals; Angels have not the
seed of Generation, not to beget their like, nor yet to make any Corporeal
substance either by Eduction of Form out of the power of the Matter, as
Sensitive or Vegetative creatures are produced, or by substantial Union and
Conjunction of Form with matter, as Rational creatures are produced; neither
can they alter any Matter and fit it for the Form, without which praevious
alteration of some Preexistent Matter there can be no Generation, no Mutation
or motion of matter a non esse ad esse, or ab esse ad non esse, nor yet in
Alteration of Quality in the Matter, no such Mutation or motion of substance is
ascribed to Angels, but an Accidental or Local motion of substances that they
have.

Then Affirmative power they have of moving of bodies by Local motion, 2.
Possitively. And power of assuming bodies by Condensating and Solidating of
air, when they have occasion, and laying it aside and resolving it into the
same matter when they please.
a truth in Divinity as well as Philophy; Philosophy teaches that Angels do
move Caelestial bodies; the Orbs are moved by them; Every Orb has its proper
Intelligence and Angel; the primum mobile has its Angel moving him from East
to West, the rest have theirs; and this Local motion of bodies (though never so
great) exceeds not the Angelical Power.

And though every Angel moves according to his Will, yet is this Motive
Angelical power finite and limited, it has its bounds which it cannot pass,
(though he would) being bound by Laws of Divine providence; he cannot cause a
Vacuum, for though he may remove one body from its place, he cannot prevent
another for coming in the room.

Thus much of Intellectual Agents is demonstrated by the light of Natural
Reason; some have endeavored also to show the number of these Agents, and this
from the motion of the Heavens; affirming that every Heaven or Orb had its
proper Intelligence, and so from the number of the Sphaers would gather the
number of Intellectual Spirits.

And that there are as many Angels as Sphaers is not difficult to demonstrate;
But that there are no more Angels than Sphaers, or if there be more, how many
more, cannot be showed by Natural Reason, nor are their certain number defined
by Divine Revelation; but that there are a multitude more than those which move
the Orbs, may easily be proved by the light of Reason. Aquinas brings many for
the proving thereof, nor were the Heathen Philosophers ignorant hereof, as
Aristotle, Plato, Heraclitus and others; And thus much of the Knowledge which
the Soul of Man has of Saints and Angels in this life.

As for that Knowledge we have of Saints and Angels, and of our selves in the
Separated estate of the Soul, it is not inferior to other abstracted Essences,
neither in the Power of knowing, nor Manner of Operation; Angels know
themselves and all below them, or equal to them, with an Essential Quidditative
and comprehensive knowledge, so shall we, not only by those general
predicates and attributes, of Immaterial, Intellectual, Impatible, Immixed,
Immortal, and the like; but with a full, perfect, Intuitive and Comprehensive
knowledge of our selves, our own Nature and Essence being actually
Intelligible, and an Adaequate Object to our own Understanding. Angels know
themselves by their own Substance, and God by the same, so shall we; the
Knowledge they have of all others, is per species, by Intelligible Forms,
Innate and Aongenite, not imprinted in the mind by any External Sensible
Object, such manner of Knowledge shall ours be, in nothing differing, in
nothing inferior unto the Angels.

And though sacred Writ has been more silent and sparing in the Revelation,
either of the Creation, or of the Nature and Essence, or yet of the Operations
of these Angels and Spirits Intellectual (as a Doctrine less useful and
necessary for Man's salvation) than of the Nature of Man or God; yet so much
has it imparted to her Disciples, as may evidence by necessary consequence the
truth of this Metaphysical Science of Natures Angelical; the Fathers and
Doctors of the Church having little varied in judgment from the Curiousest
Naturalist, and Philosopher in this point, all concurring in this particular,
the School of Christ and School of Nature teaching one and the same thing,
without any grand Variation and dissenting.

The Creation of Angels (though holy-Churches-creed) is no where plainly
pointed out in holy Writ, otherwise than in the first days Creation under that
General notion of Heaven and Earth, which may contain the whole host of Heaven,
so those words, Genesis 1.1. (In the beginning God created the Heaven and the
Earth) are by most understood (viz.) by Heaven, not only it, but all things
therein contained, as Angels, and the like, whose proper seat is Heaven, which
may seem to be thus also explicated by St. Paul. Col. 1.16. For by him are all
things created that are in Heaven and that are in Earth, Visible and Invisible,
whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, Principalities or Powers, (viz.) four of
the Orders of Angels; further also by God himself in the 38 Chapter of Job,
saying, where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the Earth -- when the
morning Stars sang together, and the Sons of God shouted for joy? that is to
say, the holy Angels who were created together with Heaven and Earth, even in
the beginning or morning of that first day, as some have hence gathered.

Of all created substances, some were created Visible, Material, Corporeal,
others were created Invisible, Incorporeal, Spiritual of their own Nature; that
the Angels are such created Invisible, Incorporeal, and Spiritual substances
may be gathered out of the word of God; David and Paul, Prophet and Appostle,
both terming them Spirits; and if Spirits, then Invisible by Mortal eye, and
then Incorporeal at least as unto Humane or other natural body of their own
Nature, for so our Savior has resolved it, saying, a Spirit has not flesh
and bone as I have.

And the Schoolmen have decreed and concluded, that Angels are merely Spiritual
and Incorporeal substances, and no bodies or Corporeal Natures, and with them
agree the Fathers, not a few, though Origin, and after him Saint Jerome would
seem to maintain, that Angels as often as they sinned and fell away, were thrust
into bodies, and there remained as a punishment unto them; which opinion is
exploded by all, both Ancient and Modern, as savouring of Platonism more than
Christianity; Yet may we not deny but that Angels have been in bodily shapes,
and so seen and appeared unto our Fathers of old; wherefore we must either
grant unto them real bodies, or that they did delude and deceive the
Patriarchs with Phantasms and mere Apparations, which is not to be conceived
of the holy Angels; and therefore St. Bernard put a kind of necessity in it,
that Angels should have bodies, otherwise how could they be ministering Spirits
sent out to minister unto them who shall be Heirs of Salvation? to men who yet
live in the body? how shall they perform this Ministerial Function of
discoursing, of walking and talking, of eating and drinking, and the like,
without a body? all which notwithstanding, Angels have done as sacred Writ
accords.

But it may be objected, if we do grant unto them true real Visible bodies,
then must we also grant them all motions, and mutations incident to such
Bodies, to wit, of Generation, Corruption, Augmentation, Diminution, Altricion
and alteration, then such as may be borne, fed and nourished, may die, may
suffer and the like as other corporeal Creatures do; how then are they merely
Spiritual and of an Incorporeall nature.

To which may be answered, First, 1 Negatively.
negatively; True humane bodies Angels have not, humane nature no spiritual
substance ever assumed except the Son of God the second Person in the ever
blessed Trinity, of whom it is said, He took not upon him the nature of Angels,
but the seed of Abraham, and by whom it is verified, A spirit has no flesh and
bone; so no humane or fleshly Bodies are ascribed to Angels.

2 Affirmatively.
Secondly, affirmatively; True real bodies they have (not newly generate,
created, or begotten, but) assumed of Air and other Elements, so condensate,
consolidate, and contract together, as that it may be seen, felt, touched, etc.
Beyond the very nature of Air; such a Body as is not essential, but
accidental, taken up for a time, as we do put on our Clothes, and may be
dissolved again at pleasure as soon as their Ministry is accomplished; now
such a Body is not subject to those Mutations of Generation, Corruption, and
the like, nor may it be said to die, to suffer, to feel, o feed, or the like,
as a humane Body may.

Thus is the nature of Angels Spiritual not carnal, Incorporeall not
corporeal, and surpasses the humane Nature in Understanding, freedom of Will,
and external Operations. First, in Understanding, in regard of that Intuitive
Vision they have of God per lumen Gloriae, ( besid^s those superexcellent
natural Endowments Intellectual of seeing God per lumen naturae) always
beholding his Face, Vid. Hockers Eccles. pol. 1. Sect. 4. fol. 53.
as the Text expresses, they are so acquainted with the Mind and Will of God,
that Irrepercussa mentis acie divinorum judiciorum abyssum intuentur, as St.
Bernard has it; in comparison of which knowledge Angelical, all ours is but
as that of Babes and Sucklings.

Out of whose Mouth notwithstanding God has perfected his praise, See Mr.
Hooker his first book of Eccles. pol. Sect. 6. fol. 56.
or ordained strength, as the Psalmist has it, here on Earth, till such time
as we grow up to perfect Manhood, to the measure of the fullness of the stature
of Christ, where shall be given to us little ones an equality of knowledge with
the Angels, to be like unto them who always behold the Face of their Heavenly
Father.

As touching their Freedom of Will and Power of working, the Angelical far
surpasses the Humane Nature; Bellarmine puts these differences betwixt them,
First, in the Power and Rule over Bodies. The humane Soul can only move his
own Body at his pleasure, it cannot move others after the same sort; Again, the
humane Soul moves its own Body upon the Earth in a slow motion step by step, it
has not power to bear it upon the Water, or elevate it above the Air, or carry
it whither it pleases: but the Angels by the Power and Freedom of Will, by the
mere force of their spirit, can lift up mighty Bodies, and carry them whither
they please; Thus did an Angel take up Habacuc, and in a short space brought
him to Babylon, with a Dinner for Daniel, and carried him back again into the
Land of Palestine.

Again, Man cannot fight with his enemies in Mind and Will only, but stands in
need of Hands, Weapons and the like; but an Angel by the sole power of his
Spirit, and Will, without either Hands or Arms, can both fight against, and
also overcome a whole Host of Armed-men; so an Angel in one night slew of the
Assyrians one hundred eighty and five thousand. Again, Man by the Art of
Painting and Engraving may make such an Image of Man, so lively represented,
that it may seem to live and breath, yet not without great pains and labor;
but an Angel without any pains, without Hands, without Instruments, can even
in an instant, as it were, so frame a Body of Elements that it shall be taken
for a true humane Body of very wise Men, such a Body as can Walk, Speak, Eat,
Drink, yea may be touched, handled, and washed.

Thus Abraham prepared Meat for Angels, and washed their Feet, as the Apostle
has it, entertaning Angels unawares, supposing they had been Men; the same
which happened to his Nephew Lot, when he received two Angels into his house
for Men as strangers and Travelers; so the Angel Raphael for many days
together dwelt, and was conversant with Tobia the younger, Walking, Talking, and
Eating, and Drinking, as if he were truly Man, and yet when he was to leave him
said, I seemed to Eat and Drink with you, but I use invisible Meat and Drink,
and so vanished suddenly out of their sight; a great power certainly, and an
admirable, so quickly to make a Body as shall not be discerned to differ from a
humane and living Body in any thing, and the same again to dissolve in a trice
as often as it pleases him. Again, the Soul of Man is so closely conjoined to
the Body, that without it the Soul cannot move from place to place, but God
has not so tied a Body to Angelical natures, but without a Body they may most
swiftly pass from Heaven to earth, from earth to Heaven again, or whither also
they please.

Thus as the Angelical Nature is next unto God in Dignity, so does it resemble
Gods Omnipresence in Subtilty and Agility. God is every where by the infinity
of of his being, and needs no local motion, since he is every where; Angels
also do pass in so easy and swift a motion, from place to place, and have
their Presence in all places, as in a sort they may be said to be ubiquitary.

The number of these Angels are uncertain, not revealed in the Word of God, but
without doubt so many as cannot well be comprised in the Art of Enumeration;
millions of millions ministering unto God, and ten thousand times ten thousand
standing before him; whereupon Dionysius, and with him Aquinas do conclude that
the number of Angels are more than are the number of all corporeal substances
whatsoever; and although their number be so infinite, yet they do every one
differ amongst themselves, not only in individual number, but also in
specificall form.

Yet for all this number almost infinite, they are reduced into nine Ranks and
Orders, under some of which every of them are comprehended. The first and
highest Order is that of the Seraphims; secondly, Cherubins; thirdly, Thrones;
fourthly, Dominions; fifthly, Principalities; sixthly, Powers; seventhly,
Virtues; eighthly, Archangels, and the ninth and last Angels, of all which Names
we read in the holy Scriptures, by which their several Offices, Degrees and
Orders are dignified and distinguished; Chap. 4. Book 2.
Wherefore else serve these different Names, if they signified nothing? but
sure there is a difference twixt Angels and Archangels in degree, then why not
twixt the rest? quid ergo sibi vult gradualis distinctio haec? says St.
Bernard upon the same subject.

But Dionysius makes but three Orders of all, (putting three in every Order, so
making a ternary of Trinities, alluding to the Sacred Trinity) viz. Three
Superior, three middle, and three inferior Orders; The highest Orders are the
Seraphim, Cherubin and Thrones; The midlemost Orders are the Dominions,
Principalities and Powers; The lowermost are the Virtues, Archangel and Angel;
but of this enough is said.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Knowledge we have of God, and his Attributes.

THat which may be known of God by the strength of natural reason, is drawn
from the Works of his Creation; for as the Cause is known by the Effects, so is
the Creator by the Creature, the Physical Science of Causes and Effects here
below brings us to a Metaphysical Knowledge of the cause of all causes, even
God above, whose Deity may be seen in every place, omnia sunt de^rum plena, was
the saying of Thales Milesius an ancient Philosopher thus cited by Aristotle,
Lib. 1. De anima.
and thus said the Poets of old, Jovis omnia plena -- paersentem que refert
quaelibet herba deu^; not the meanest of the Creatures, but manifest a
Godhead. The Philosophers therefore (excepting the Epicureans, who held that
this great and spacious universe was nothing else but Theatrum caeco atomorum
confluxu genitum) searching out the causes of things, and finding a
concatenation of them, in an orderly dependence one upon another, Simplicius
Philoponus, Ammonius, Averrores, aliique multi viri illustres, neque numero
pauciores, nec autoritate inferiores iis qui de sipere maluerint mundum a deo
ut causa efficiente pendere affirmant. Scaliger.
and a necessary conjunction of every of them with their Effects ( ne daretur
progressus in infinitum vel circulus committendus, an absurdity in Nature,
which otherwise they would run into) were forced to acknowledge one Supreme
cause of all things, which was God. Plato, Aristotle, Galen, and others from
hence do prove that there is a God.

The quod sit is thus proved, the quid sit may from thence also be concluded;
for when we look upon the Fabric of Heaven and Earth, we may see the
Greatness and Power of God; when we behold the Governance and Guidance of all
in so great a Beauty, Order and Distinction of all things, we may judge of the
Wisdom, and Knowledge of God; when we consider the commodity, profit and Use of
all things, we may experience the goodness and Love of God; and so we may come
to know God in his Predicates and Attributes, (viz.) that he is Ens, Actus,
Substantia, Vivens, Aeternus, Justus, Sapiens, etc. Yea, under such conceptions
and notions as are only proper and essential to God, not agreeing with any
other, may God be apprehended by us in this Metaphysical Science, (viz.) that
he is Ens infinitum simpliciter, that he is Actus purus, causa prima, primus
motor, immobilis, etc. And so we come to the knowledge of God, quodsit, and
quid sit, both that he is, and what he is.

Yet is not this knowledge comprehensive of him, these Motions of Gods
Essential Attributes (though Proper to him, and Communicative to none beside)
are not quidditative; an infinite Essence cannot so be comprehended within the
Sphaer of a Finite capacity; neither know we him hereby as he is in himself,
but as he is represented unto us in the Glass of his Creatures as in his
Effects, which representation is very imperfect, not able to set forth the
Divine Perfection; It is therefore a quidditative knowledge improperly so
called, to wit, a confused knowledge of some (but not of all) Essential
Predicates and Attributes proper to him.

And hence may we learn another of Gods Attributes (viz.) that he is
Incomprehensible, understanding this in reference to Created substances, no
created intelligence is able to comprehend him; otherwise of himself he is
Comprehensible as an adaequate Object of himself; for as God is said to behold
himself, or to see himself in himself, so may he most properly be said
Adaequately to see himself; for so we say the Soul of Man reflecting upon it
self sees it self in its self; and not only the Soul of Man, but all other
intellectual spirits are actually Intelligible of themselves, and a
proportionate Object to their own understanding, and therefore do know
themselves with an Intuitive, Quidditative, and Comprehensive Knowledge; and
shall we deny this Knowledge to God, cujus intellectio reflectiturin seipsam
seu in ipsum intelligentem, and qui non minus intellectivus quam
intelligibilis, says Suarez; so Comprehensive of himself, but Incomprehensible
unto us, that he is and must be granted, and under that notion known to us,
which is Negative Knowledge, no Quidditative or Positive Knowledge of him.

Our Knowledge of God and his Attributes, is threefold, Negative, Relative, or
Positive, our Negative conceptions of God are under these Attributes or
Predicates of Infinite, Incomprehensible, Immortal, Increate, Immutable,
Independent, and the like; our Relative notions are under the Predicates of
Creator, Governor, Maker, and Pattern, etc.

The Positive are under the Predicates of Being, Act, Substance, Eternal, Just,
Wise, etc.

Now our best Knowledge of God in this life is by Negation, and is preferred
before our Positive notion of God, both by Dionysius and St. Augustine, as
Suarez has observed, and he gives the Reason, Because (says he) if we desire
to know any proper and absolute Attribute of God, and not that which is common,
Analogical, or Relative, we understand it easilier and more distinctly by what
God is not, than by what he is; and that is by these Negations of Infinite,
Immortal, Incomprehensible, Immutable, Immense, and the like; that is to say,
God is not Finite, not Comprehensible, not Mutable, not Circumscriptive, etc.

For to know what God is not, suffices any one Negative Attribute which is
proper to him; as for example, God is Independent, that is to say, not
depending on any, by which very Attribute all created Substances whatsoever are
excluded, and God is known by this as Proper to him alone; and thus we come to
God easily by knowing first what he is not; whereas if we go about to know what
God is by Positive and Absolute Attributes, we must then run over all the
Attributes of God which are both infinite in number and perfection; upon which
consideration, Cicero in his first Book of the Nature of the Gods, has these
words; Do thou ask me (says he) what God is? I will answer with Symonides,
who being demanded the self same question by Hieron, a Tyrant, desired a day to
consider of it, and being demanded the next day, he craved two days longer,
and still as the question was pressed he doubled the time for his answer,
Hieron wondering, asked for what intent he did so, because (says he) the longer
I consider on it, the obscurer it is to me, recte autem dixit obscurior, says
Fonseca, for suppose you should know some Attributes of God, there remains an
infinite number more to be known, nor is there any one at all which may be
understood as it is proper to God, but as it is Analogically common to God and
the creatures.

Wherein Nature has been lame, and Reason blind, the Scriptures have afforded
us both staff and prospective, by which as it were setting us upon the Pinnacle
of the Temple, we may walk and view the Almighty, not only in his works, his
back parts, but even in his face, to wit, in his Nature and Essential being.

O how has it pleased God (O my Soul) to manifest himself unto thee in the
sacred Scriptures, that by knowing of him thou mighst learn to fear him, to
love him, to obey him, and to believe and trust in him for thy own healths sake
and Eternal felicity?

1. God reveals himself to be causa prima, the first of all Causes, and himself
without all causes, having both being and beginning from himself; I am Alpha
and Omega (says God of himself) the first and the last, even so to the
creatures as these two Letters are to the Greek Alphabet; Alpha is the first,
Omega the last of the Greek Letters, God is both to every creature, Alpha the
first, Omega the last of every Entity; Blasphemously impious then were those of
the Classical Consistory, who demanded why there was a God; since no cause can
be given, neither indeed can there be any; for could there be any Cause of him,
it must be before him and better than he, and consequently God, which is
impossible.

2. God reveals himself to be Infinite in Power, not limited, not bounded, he
is, an Almighty and omnipotent God, Genes. 2. Psalm. 132.
so Isaac in his blessing of his Son Jacob, styles him saying, God Almighty
bless thee, so David calls him, the Almighty God of Jacob; again, most high and
Almighty, Psalm. 91. the Scriptures are full of this Attribute of God, being
seaventy times therein expressed as some have observed, and being further
evidenced unto us, both by his Internal and External Actions, in his Operations
ad intra before all time, and his Operations ad extra in time; In holy
Scriptures is set forth unto us a Theological Science of Gods omnipotency, even
in his Operations ad intra, which are those of Begeting, Breathing, and
Proceeding, and this is a Science purely Theological, not acquired by Humane
Invention, not Investigable by Natural Reason, not Attainable by any rules of
Philosophy, only delivered us in a Mystery which we must look into with the
eye of Faith, not with an eye of Reason; it is a Science Supernatural, non
ratione probanda, sed fide tenenda; we must not go to prove it by Mathematical
demonstrations, but by Theological principles and rules of Faith; a curious
search is not so safe, as humble ignorance; we may not pry into the manner of
the Eternal Generation of the Son by the Father, or Procession of the Holy
Ghost from the Father and the Son, thus much only is necessary to be believed,
that there is a person begetting, a person begotten, and a person proceeding, a
Trini- of Persons in the Unity of a Godhead, distinct according to the several
relations of Father Son and Holy Ghost, which in a sense are included, and may
be gathered from this power and Internal Operation of God, Begetting and
Breathing.

And these Operations ad intra (viz.) generandi and spirandi, in such an
Ineffable Incomprehensible manner, argues an omnipotency Divine, and Power
infinite in all the branches of Infinity; but unwilling I am to wade too far
into this Mysterious point, this bottomless Ocean of Gods Internal Workings,
but rather to view it a far off as it is dispersed into Smaller and Shallower
Rivulets, and treat of Gods Power in his Works ad extra.

All things were made of God, and without him nothing, from the highest Angel
to the meanest Worm, from the highest Heavens to the profoundest Abyss; this
Work of Creation is Wonderful, and argues an infinite perfection of Power,
whether we respect the Magnitude, Multitude, or Variety of things created, the
Magnitude is seen in the greatness of the Earth, who has measured the breadth
of the Earth, and the depth of its Abyss? says Ecclesiasticus So great it is
that a great part of it lies yet undiscovered, yet this Vast Earth being
compared to Heaven, is but as a point or prick, (for so have Astrologers
observed) wherein so many thousand Stars do shine, the least whereof is bigger
than the Earth; the Multitude of things is seen, if we consider but the Sand
of the Sea, and drops of rain, the Multitude of Minerals lie buried in the
Earth, the several sorts of Grass, Herbs, Fruits and Plants upon the Earth, the
number of Men, Stars and Angels, besides the innumerable sorts, forms and
Individuals of living creatures, going, creeping, swiming, flying, and the
variety of things in this Multiplicity, even in every Individual of every kind
is wonderful, Man from Man differing in shape and feature, and one Star
differing from another in glory; yet all this great Universe with the Infinite
number and variety of things therein contained, to be made of nothing, of no
preexistent matter, yea and in nothing, and all this in an instant, in the
twinkling of an eye, to be created, and as speedily and easily to be
dissolved, argues an Almighty and omnipotent God; Nor are his works less
wonderful in that Mysterious but Fundamental point of our belief, the
Resurrection of the body, after so many Revolutions of days and years, being
turned to dust and ashes, this dust dispersed into the four quarters of the
World, or turned into other bodies, being eaten up of wild Beasts, or devoured
by men, such as Cannibals who feed on man's flesh; yet these same bodies,
Millions of Millions, however dispersed or transformed, in the twinkling of an
eye, at the sound of the Trumpet, to arise, the self-same Soul to be reunited
to the self-same body, the same Individual Form to reinform the same Numerical
matter, argues an Omnipotent hand and Almighty Power, which God both can and
will bring to pass, so does the Catholic Church profess.

Nor is Gods Almighty Power manifested only in these created beings which have
or shall have a being in Nature, real Existencies do not Adaequate Gods
Omnipotency, but it extends to all kind of beings whatsoever, to all Negative
and Privative beings, as Darkness, Blindness, and the like, quae inhaerent
entibus realibus, without which they subsist not; and so have a being in Nature
Formally, yet not a Positive, but Privative being; to all Imaginable beings,
mere entia rationis, which have no being in Nature in any sense, but only in
the Intellect; to all possible things, entia possibilia, though never Future,
all things whatsoever are absolutely, simply, and generally possible to be
done, In his Book of Gods om^^potency.
says Doctor Preston, under which those things which never shall come into
real being, those things which may be, but never shall be, Contingents
possible, though never Future are comprehended, those things which are
impossible with Man, are notwithstanding possible with God so says our
Savior, for with God nothing is impossible, so said the Angel, non erit
impossible a pud deum ullum verbum, so is the Original, where by (verbum)
significatur id quod mente concipi potest ut factibile says a Schoolman, all
that is imaginably possible to be done, Non potest facere praeterita, ut non
fuerint, necres dum est ut non fit. Suar. Disp. 30.
and implies not a Contradiction, falls with the Omnipotency of God, and though
God cannot do contradictions, though something there is that is impossible for
God to do, as to lie, to deny himself, to call back yesterday, that is to say,
things that are past, that they should not be, nor any thing that is whilst it
is make it otherwise than it is, he cannot make truth fashood, and the like;
yet this is not through a weakness and defect of his Power, Lib. 6. Episto. 39.
for so has Saint Ambrose resolved it; istud impossible non infirmitatis est,
sed virtutis ac majestatis, it argues the greater perfection of Power, even as
Infallibity is not the imperfection, but perfection of Knowledge, and to have
no freedom to sin, is not an imperfection, but perfection of freedom of Will.

3. Gods Eternity.
Gods Eternity and Immortality also is clearly set forth in holy Writ, so Saint
Paul, to the King Eternal, Immortal, and only wise God, etc. But thou will
happily reply, (O my Soul) that this Attribute appertains to thee, and
therefore not appropriate to God alone, who art also of an Immortal, Invisible,
Immaterial Nature, as has been elsewhere proved, a simple Essence void of
Composition, or such matter which is subject to Dissolution, Death and
Destruction; and true it is, Patet hic quomodo avum differat a tempore and
aeternitate, a tempore quidem ratione finis quaem tempus habet avum non habet;
ab aternitate ratione principii quod avum habet aepernitas vero non habet.
yet know thou a difference twixt Eternity simply so called, and that which is
improperly so called, or betwixt Duration Increate, and that which is Create,
or inter aevum and aeternitatem, age and eternity; there was a time when thou
wast not, and when thou wast thou came to that being by the pleasure and will
of God, who can as easily (when it pleases him) reduce thee to nothing again,
though thou had no principles of corruption in thee; but God was from
everlasting Immortal, and remains Immortal to perpetuity, and this of Necessity
and Intrinscical Nature; for it is impossible for him who is the cause of all
causes, life and being it self, and the Fountain both of being and life, by any
means whatsoever to come to nothing, but as he was from Eternity, so to
continue to Eternity. For this Attribute of Gods Eternity is a duration
Increate, which implies a Negation of all such Created Durations and
Permanencies, as consist of a continual Succession and flux of time, for in
Gods duration is no Succession, so has Boethius defined it, interminabilis
vitae tota simul and perfecta possessio, where by (tota simul) is excluded all
Succession, which though it have a Totality of being, yet is not altogether or
all at once, there is no such differences of time past and time future in
Eternity, all is present with God, no time past or any time to come, but all in
the present tense, my Father works hitherto, and I work, and again, this day
have I begotten thee, though it was from Eternity, before all times, years, and
days, for Eternity with God is no more than this instant with us; wherefore,
although our Souls may in a sense be called Eternal, Immortal, etc. yet it is
said of God by way of Eminency, which is not appropriate to any other, who
only has Immortality, etc.

And though God be Eternal both in Essence and in his Operations, yet we, Etsi
enim aeternitati dies and annos attribuimus id tamen facimus nostri melioris
intellectus causa. Sennertus.
who are compact of Succession, and are not perfect all at once, neither in
being nor in working, but stand in need of time coming to supply what was
Wanting in time past, cannot speak nor think of Gods Eternal being and workings
as they are in themselves, but according to our capacity, comparing time with
time, so conceipting a real or at least an Imaginable Succession of time, so we
say God was, because we conceive him Coexisting with time past, God is, because
Existing with time present, and is to come, because of his being with all
times, and beyond all times to come, whereas in God, is, neither was, no will
be nor flux of time, but all present, yea Eternally present both God in his
being and in his Operations, God is from Eterntiy, and all the Acts and
Operations of God are from Eternity

And though God is said (and truly so) to have done many things in time, as to
have created Man in the beginning of time, so have sent his Son in the fullness
of time, etc. which implies a Succession, and no simple duration of God, as to
his Operations, yet are these works ad extra, which are manifested to us in
time, no breach of true Eternity, though they admit of Succession and
Variation, Gods Eternal workings in time manifested to us, hinder not Gods
Internal workings before all time; the World and every thing therein were from
Eternity, as unto God to whom all things are present, and were Eternally so,
though manifested to us by the creation, which is ad extra, to be in the
beginning of time.

Gods immutability.
4. Which brings us to another Attribute of God, whereby he is pleased to make
himself known unto us, to wit, his Immutability, I am God (says he of himself)
and change not, yesterday and to day, and the same for ever, with whom is no
Variation nor shadow of change, neither Substantial nor Accidental; no
Substantial, for God is a necessary, being and impossible for him to be
otherwise than he is, therefore cannot admit of any Substantial change; nor yet
any Local change, since God by the Infinity of presence, and Immensity, is in
every where, and there is no place where God is not, so cannot be said to move
or change from place to place; nor yet is he changable in his Acts and
qualities, those mutations which may seem to happen in respect of his Divine
workings ad extra, when God makes any thing which was not formerly made, argues
no more Mutability in God, than the making them in time, argues a Temporal
Succession and no simple Eternity in God, as has been said before, for this
Mutation a non esse ad esse is not in God but in the Creature, not in the Agent
but Patient, for an Action Transient and External as this is, makes a Mutation
or change in the Creature, but not in God, and though there are no External
workings or Actions Transient, but flow ab intra, from Immanent Actions of God,
yet argue they no Mutation in God, since as they proceed from some Immanent Act
of God, so are they Eternal and Immutable in him.

Again, some Acts of Gods are necessary, as those whereby he loves himself,
some are free, as those whereby he loves the Creatures, those things which God
knows and Wills necessarily those he knows and loves Immutably; of such Acts of
God there can be no dispute, but they may stand with Gods Immutability, but how
the free Acts of God, as his freedom of loving or not loving his Creatures, can
stand with Divine Immutability is the grand question, which here we will omit
to resolve, intending briefly to assoil this doubt in the Metaphysical part of
the Subsequent Chapter.

Gods Immensity or Infinity of presence.
5. Immensity is another Attribute whereby God is made known unto us in the
Scriptures; Great is our God above all Gods, who made Heaven and Earth, and
fills Heaven and Earth, and yet Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens is not able
to contain him, God is every where present, yet is contained no where, but is
above all, and in all, and through all, as the Apostle speaks; in every place
God is present, not Virtually only, but Really and Substantially, the very
Essence of God is diffused into all parts of the World, as the Soul is in the
body Indivisible, and wholly, not only in an Indivisible point, but a
Divisible and Expatiated Circumference, for if we grant this manner of real
presence to Inferior and Imperfecter Substances, as to the Soul of Man, we may
not deny it to more Noble and Superior Natures, as to Angels, much less to the
Divine Nature, to be whole in the whole, and whole in every part of the whole,
in all places real or Imaginary whole, for where God is not, there is nothing,
and where there is nothing he is in himself.

For suppose we more Worlds and more Heavens, yea imagine we infinite numbers
of them more, (all which fall within the compass of Gods infinite Power) there
could not be any Imaginable place throughout them all which Gods presence did
not fill; for if his Power extend to the making, his presence will extend to
the filling of all, otherwise God would be less Infinite in being than in
working, existendo quam agendo, which is impossible, since all the Attributes
of God are Infinite, and in infinitis non datur magis and minus; this serves to
show the Immensity of Gods Essence, the Infinity of his presence, which is not
limited to any place Real nor Immaginary space, is incapable of Terms, can
neither be Circumscribed nor defined in the Predicament of ubi, for as the
Spirit of God witnesses, There is no end of his greatness, magnitudinis ejus
non est numerus; so the Latin renders it, so all the Fathers Unanimously
teach, Nazianzen, Athanasius, Hilary, Damascen, Hieron, Ambrose, and lastly St.
Bernard, de consideratione lib. 5. speaks of the length and breadth, the height
and depth, which is in God, who is incomprehensible, since no place can contain
him, and yet there is no place but where he is, nusquam est qui non clauditur
loco, and nusquam non est qui non excluditur loco; God is no where, because
concluded in no place, and God is every where because excluded from none.

6. God is ens simplex and actus purus, and this simplicity is sufficiently
manifested in holy Writ; I am that I am says God to Moses, and again, I am
has sent me unto you, that is (as Doctor Preston has it) a pure Act, all
being, whole, entire, a simple and Uniform being without parts, accidents or
any Composition, not like to the Creatures, for the best of them, although they
have not a Substantial and Physical simplicity, i. e. no^ compounded of Matter
and Form, nor consisting of Integral parts, yet a Metaphysical and Accidental
Composition they have and no simplicity, for as much as they are compounded of
Essence and Existence, of Act and Power, or of Actions and Qualities, which,
whatsoever it be called, cannot he said of God, who is a simple and Indivisible
Essence, whose Essence is his Existence, and whose Act is Power, Power in God
is neither objectiva nor passiva, such distinctions are not in God, whose Power
is pure activa, and all that is in God is but one God, so do those words impart
(viz.) I am that I am, as much as to say, whatsoever is in me it is my self, in
God is nothing but himself, nihil in se nisi se habet, says St. Bernard, hear
him further, But God is a Trinity, what then? do we overthrow Gods Unity by
confessing a Trinity, no, but we confirm the Unity, we acknowledge the Father,
and so the Son, and so the Holy Ghost, yet not three Gods but one God, what
means this number and no number, as I may so speak? For if three, how is it not
a number? And if but one, where then is the number? But I have (say thou)
both what I may number and what I may not, the Substance is one, the Persons
are three, and what Rid or Mystery lies in this? none at all, if we may
divide the Persons from the Substance, but since these three Persons are that
one Substance, and that one Substance those three Persons, who can deny a
number, for they are truly Three, yet who can call a number that is but truly
One? Or if thou have as thou think sufficiently numbered them by professing
three, what do thou number? Their Natures? That Is but one, their Essence?
It Is but one, their Substance? It Is but one, their God-heads? It Is but one, but
thou will say, I number not these, but the Persons, which are not that one
Nature, that one Substance, one Essence, and that one Godhead, Thou art a
Catholic and may not profess this.

The Catholic Faith believes the properties of the Persons is no other than
the Persons themselves, and that the Persons are no other than one God, one
Divine Nature, Substance, and Supreme Majesty, reckon therefore if thou can,
either the Persons without the Substance which they are, or the properties
without the Persons, which they are.

Qui duplici impietate and numerum trinitati minuit, and tribuit unitati.
Bernard. Epist. 190. fol. 1581. G.
Or if any go about to divide and sever the Persons from the Substance, or the
Properties from the Persons, I know not how the Trinity will own him for a
Worshiper -- we may therefore acknowledge Three, but not to prejudice the
Unity, and acknowledge One, but not to confound the Trinity; This is a great
Mystery and a sacred; if any would know how this Plurality is in Unity, or
Unity in Plurality, I answer, it is rashness to search, Piety to believe, life
everlasting to know.

7. To these we may add another Attribute appropriate to God, by which he is
made known unto us in his Word (viz) his Invisibility, where it is expressed as
in the place before mentioned, To the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, and
only wise God; no man has seen God at any time, neither indeed can see him
with Mortal eye, and though this manner of Invisibility be not the proper
Attribute of God, and so does not sufficiently set forth the Divine perfection,
being common also to all Spiritual Substances, as well the Rational Soul in
this life, as Souls abstracted and Spirits Intellectual; for as much as no
Spirit is Visible with Corporeal eyes; yet God in a more eminent manner is
Invisible. There is a twofold sight, one of the body, another of the mind, the
light of the body is the Eye, the light of the mind, Understanding; with the
bodily eye no Spirits can be seen, but with the eye of the mind they are
Visible, not properly and fully in this life; we know not any thing but per
species impressas, by Intelligible Forms imprinted in our Understanding from
some sensible Objects; not our own Souls, much less those purer Intellectual
Natures; But the Intellectual Spirits and separated Souls do see themselves and
other Created Substances though Superior, and so are they Visible with an
Intuitive Vision from Innate and Connatural Forms; which way notwithstanding
God is not Visible to any Created Intellect; And thus Invisibility comes to be
Appropriate to God alone, and not Communicative to any besides; no Created
Substance can see God as he is in himself by any Natural way of Created
Intuitive Vision of the Understanding, without the infusion of some other
Supernatural Endowments; which agrees with the rules of our Faith, and of
Sacred Writ, professing God to be Invisible, and to dwell in an unaccessable
light.

Yet may we not otherwise but according to Catholic Faith believe that God is
Visible too.

1. He is Visible to himself, as he is Comprehensible of himself, because he is
equally Intelligent and Intelligible, non minus Intellectivus quam
intelligibilis, as has been elsewhere said, therefore Visible in respect of
himself, though Invisible in respect others.

2. Visible in respect of others, (viz.) all the blessed Saints, and Angels;
these enjoy a full Fruition and Beatifical Vision of him; not a glimse as I may
say, or some Created brightness and illumination in a glass, and per aenigma,
either in the glass of his Creatures as Naturalists with the eye of Reason, or
in a more Spiritual glass, as Christians with an eye of Faith, in this Vale of
tears may behold him; but face to face, clearly and as he is in himself
Intuitively not in any Natural Created light, but by an eye and light of glory
unexpressibly Supernatural, by which God is pleased to convey Intelligible
Forms of his own Essence unto us; which Vision is meant and signified by Saint
John in his 1. Epistle. 3.2. We shall see him even as he is (viz.) in a
glorified estate, per lumen gloriae, by a light of glory unexpressible.

Of the Knowledge and Will in God

CHAP. V.
Chap. 5. Book 2.
WE have treated of God and his Attributes, which are of the Essence of God; we
come now to treat of the Knowledge and Will in God, (as much as may be known by
Natural and Metaphysical Reason) which by Analogy to things created (though
there be nothing in God but is of his Essence, for quicquid in deo est deus
est, yet) in a peculiar manner we shall here handle as Faculties and
Operations, and not as those which are of his Essence.

That in God there is Knowledge is so plain and evident by Natural light, that
none of the Philosophers who acknowledge a God has ever denied it; Aristotle
in his Metaphysics and Ethics affirms it, proving it further from the
Immateriality of God; the more Immaterial any thing is, the more Intellectual,
as we have formerly said, now God is sum immaterialis, therefore is he sum
cognoscitivus.

Again, from the Effects and Works of God in this World; the order and beauty
that is in them manifests they were produced both by an Intellectual and free
Agent, Vnus hic mundus satis superque de monstrat deum esse sum bonum, quia
sponte id fecit quod non tenebatur facere; sum potente^, quia potuit ex
nihilo facene quod voluit; sum sapientem, quia tam, admirabiliter and
sapienter omnia fecit.
which opinion was generally received of all Philosophers after Anaxagoras and
Hermotinus Clazomenius, who were the first that taught it, as Plato and
Socrates, yea and Aristotle in 1 Metaphys. cap. 3. affirm.

This Knowledge in God, according to himself must needs be Infinite, for so in
the precedent Chapter has been proved; the Knowledge and the Object known are
Adaequate and Proportionate the one to the other; the Object is Infinite, such
therefore must the Knowledge be; and this is called Gods Knowledge Essential.

Besides, there is a Knowledge of God External, and this is also Infinite, and
intensive and extensive, as the Schoolmen term it; by which is set forth unto
us that Infinite perfection which this Knowledge has even in all the
conditions and properties incident to perfect Knowledge; for first it is most
clear and evident, secondly most certain, thirdly most infallible, with a most
perfect and simple aspect beholding every truth as it is in it self, and
judging of every truth (though in themselves not equal) according to the
measure of Verity that is in every of them; some being Increate truths, some
Create, some Mediate, others Immediate, some Necessary, some Contingent truths;
yet all these Varieties fall within this Infinite Knowledge which sees every
Verity according to the state in which it has Determination and Certitude, and
judges thereof according to the measure and degree of truth that is in every
of them.

And this resolves the doubt which some have made how a Future Contingent
(which may or may not be) can be foreknown, (since till it come to pass it is
not determined to a being or no being, till which there can be no determinate
truth in either proposition; which was Aristotle's argument, from whence is
concluded, that even God himself could not foreknow either part, to wit, the
Affirmative or Negative of such Future Effects as determinately true; for what
is not true is not knowable, for truth is the Object of Knowledge, and
therefore what is not determinately true cannot be known as determinately true,
so God has no certain and infallible Knowledge of such Contingencies future:)
For this does not hinder but that such Contingencies may be certainly known
even before they have any being, at least with that Knowledge which according
to its all Infinite and Eternal verity comprehends all times, and every Object
knowable, and beholds them as they are in themselves, in the self same manner,
and according to the measure of truth they have in them.

Neither does this certain and Infallible Knowledge of Future Contingencies
destroy the Nature of a Contingent; for God does infallibly know Contingent
Effects under the notion of Contingencie, as well as necessary Effects under
the notion of necessity, without the destruction of either, without any change
or Alteration of the Object; otherwise that Knowledge is grossly deceived that
knows any thing to be Contingent, when by the very Knowledge such Contingent
Effects cease to be Contingent, and forthwith become Necessary.

Besides, Knowledge is not a Cause, but rather a Consequent of a future Event,
for scientia nil ponit in re, it adds no necessity to the being of the thing
known, though it may add certitude to it self, for that is the perfection of
Knowledge; the ground of Science is not necessity but certainty.

And for the Will which is in God by the like argument it may be proved; for
God is an Intellectual Agent, so has been said; and there is no Intellectual
Agent but works for some end, and is also determinate to that work by some
Appetite, will and desire; hereupon the ancient Philosophers laid it down for a
rule, mentem and amorem esse causam mundi efficientem; according to those
Verses quoted by Aristotle, 1 Metaphys. cap. 4. out of Hesiod and Parmenides,
to prove this Assertion; Aristotle besides every where affirming that God
works intelligendo and volendo.

God as he is an Intellectual, so is he a a free Agent, all his Operations ad
extra are freely and willingly done, not driven on by any necessity of Nature;
True it is, the love wherewith he loves himself is necessary, arising from the
dignity of the Object and necessity of it; God as he is summum, so is he
necessarium bonum, which being the Object of his Will cannot but be willed
necessarily ex necessitate naturae, himself being the Object of his Will,
necessitates his Will to love him; voluntas divina etiam naturaliter ac
necessario vult suum principale objectum, says Suarez; But there is not the
like necessity in any created Object to compel Gods good will unto it, but so
to love it as he may also not love it; Though it was the opinion of certain
Philosophers of the Sect of the Stoics, who held, That all things here below
were Ruled and Governed by a certain Fate; and though they denied not that the
Order of these Secundary Causes proceeded from the good will of God, Yet they
Attributed thereunto a necessity altogether Inevitable, even in respect of God,
because they supposed that God did order and work all things ex necessitate
naturae; Deum libere, nec ex necessitate naturae agere and liberime hunc mundum
produxisse rationi humanae contrarium non est, cum enim deus sit ens
perfectissimum a nullo dependens nullius indigens sibi ipsi sufficiens, (...)
and (quam vocem pulchre excogitavit Scal. ex. 365. sect. 2. (...); nullam
creaturam dei voluntas necessario appetet, nullamque ne^^ario producer, nec
ulla re cogetur ejus potestas, sed ipse liberime vult, po^uis^etque sivol^^sset
mundum hunc vel long ante producere, vel post, vel plane non Sennertus
But clear it is by Natural Reason, that as God works knowingly, so he Acts
willingly and freely; for is freedom of Will an Essential and necessary
Concomitant of all created Intellectual creatures, whether Angelical or Humane,
and shall we deny it in God? This freedom of Will in God may be proved from the
effects of Divine Power. Ask we therefore why God made no more Worlds than one;
or the Angels, wherefore he Created in such a number and not in a greater or
lesser multitude, and the like, the resolve must be either that he could not,
or he would not; to say he could not, must exceedingly Derogate from Gods
Power, which we have heretofore sufficiently manifested to be Infinite; to say
he would not, is to grant him freedom of Will, and that whatever he does, he
does not necessarily but freely.

Nor is not God therefore free because he is Immutable, as some would thence
conclude so, for Immutability and freedom of Will in God will very well stand
together, and it is no more than to say God is Immutably free; for that
necessity which comes from Gods Immutability, thwarts not Gods Will, but
necessarily inferrs this perfection of Will (which we call freedom) to be as
unchangable as his other Attributes, of Wisdom, Goodness, Power and Eternity
are; nam ineo quod deus semel libere decrevit immutabilis permanet, says
Suarez; so to speak in reference to this present time, and according to our
capacities, God necessarily wills now, what formerly he did Will; but this
is necessitas ex supposi ione, or immutabilitatis, though to speak properly,
there is neither time past nor time future with God, to say he has willed or
shall Will; But God does Will and Will freely from Eternity, and to Eternity
abides in the same freedom Immutably.

This Metaphysical Science of Gods free Will in all things agrees with the
Faith which Holy Church professes; the Scriptures every where are plain and
full; not Metaphorical, but Literal and proper, and so are understood by the
Fathers, He does what ever pleases him; and again, Who works all things
according to the Counsel of his own Will; whereby it is evident, that the Power
and Will of God are two distinct things; he does not what ever he can do, but
he does whatever he pleases; so that the Effects of God are the Effects of his
Will, God wills what he does, and does what he wills; to do which is an Act
Extrinsecal, is an Effect of his Will and love which is Intrinsecal.

Though there are and have been some Stoics in the Church of Christ as well as
in the School of Nature, who have maintained that all things fall out by such
an Intrinsecal necessity, that even God himself could not have made things
otherwise than they are made, nor Govern otherwise than he does Govern.

And however few have been so bold as to call thus in question the Infinite
Power of the Supreme Cause, yet have many laid an Inevitable necessity upon all
Secundary Causes and Effects, even the Liberal Actions of men and Angels;
saying, all things are Necessary in respect of Gods decree, nothing can fall
out Contingently; It is impossible for ought that is, not to have been, for
ought that has been, not to have been, for ought that is, not to be, for ought
that shall be hereafter that shall not be.

But there are Contingencies in Nature, some things that might have fallen out
otherways than they do or shall, as well as there are some things which could
not fall out otherways than they have done; we speak not only of those
Extrinsecal Contingencies which proceed from Natural Causes, (for those come
not from the Power (but rather from a defect and weakness of the Power) of
their Immediate Cause, which toughit work necessarily, is notwithstanding
unable to resist the Counter-workings of all other Causes conducing to that
effect, and so produces an Effect praeter intentionem suam, which therefore is
called Conting^nt) but also of those Intrinsecal Effects which flow from a
Cause, that of it own Intrinsecal Power and Virtue is able to give Contingencie
to them, as being not determinate to one Effect, but is inspired with Variety
of choice, and this is the Praerogative of all Rational and Intellectual
Agents, yet none of these that fall out praeter intentionem dei, besides the
mind and Will of God; he wills Contingencies as well as Necessities.

Nor do they fall out extra scientiam dei, Gods infinite Knowledge comprehends
them all, those which are in their own Nature absolutely Contingent, are not
Casual in respect of his Providence and Eternal Wisdom; in that he comprehends
the number of all means possible, and can mix the several possibilities of
their miscarriage in what degree or proportion he list; he may, and oftentimes
does Inevitablely forecast the full accomplishment of his proposed ends by
multiplicitie of means in them themselves not Inevitable but Contingent, thus
Doctor Jackson.

And though some Theologists as well as Naturalists have or do question how
there can be a certain Knowledge of a Future Contingent; I answer.

1. All Contingencies are Finite, but Gods Knowledge is Infinite, therefore
must they needs be swallowed up and comprehended in that Infinite, Infinite not
to be Incomprehensive of them.

2. Infinite and Eternal Knowledge has Coexistence with all times, therefore
the Futurition is no impediment; with God is no distinction of times, flux of
time belongs to the Creature; he knows all things in aeternitate sua, as we
do in praesenti tempore; our instant is Gods Eternity; all things are present
before him, and Eternally present.

So Contingents (future in respect of us, not of God) do fall within this
Infinite Eternal and Infallible Knowledge, and not only Contingents future,
but Contingents possible, though never future, as in the case of Keilites, Sam.
23.11, 12. God did as certainly know that the Keilites would have delivered
David to Saul, if he had stayed in their City, as that David should thence
depart and be safe.

Therefore the prescience of God is most certain and infallible of Future
Events of what kind soever: but this proceeds not from a necessity of the
Event, but from the Infinity of his Science.

3. Gods Knowledge is as large and extends as far as his Power, otherwise it
should not be Infinite; but Gods Power extends to Contingent Effects, to all
that may be, as to all that must be, to all that never shall be, as to all that
necessarily will be, to all possible Effects though they never come to pass, as
to those that are already accomplished; for Gods Power which is Infinite cannot
be determined to produce all it can of it self, but in that it produces these
Effects rather than other, makes some entia realia, others only entia
possibilia, is merely by the determination of his Will and Knowledge; therefore
entia possibilia, such are all Future Contingents, fall within the prescience
of God, and are certainly known of him.

He calls things that are not, as though they were, says the text, and the
Psalmist, thou know my thoughts afar off; God is a searcher of the heart and
trier of the reins, the desires of the soul, and thoughts of the heart are not
hid from him; he long before knows all the free and voluntary acts of men, and
certainly can foretell the Event of every Future Contingent; this is by Virtue
of that Infinite Knowledge which is proper to God alone. Prevision and
Prediction of Contingent Effects none is capabel of but God alone, and those to
whom God is pleased to reveal it; and therefore though the Prophets of old have
foretold (as we may read in holy Writ) of many effects of this Nature, which
most truly and certainly came to pass; yet it was not they, but God in them
foretold them, Luke 1.70.
so says Zachary in his Benedictus; As he spoke by the mouth of his Prophets
since the World began, and St. Peter in his 2. Epist. 1.21. Prophecy in old
time came not by the Will of men, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost.

The Devils have formerly spoken in Oracles, and taken upon them to foretell
such Future Events; but this is above the Nature of any Angel; a Conjectural
Knowledge they may have at the best (such as a Mariner by his long Experience
may foretell of the Wind, the Husbandman of rain, the Physician of diseases, and
the like) by which the Devils have presumed to foretell such things to come, in
which also often they have both deceived themselves and others.

And where this Knowledge could not be attained, wherein they could have no
probable conjecture of Future Events, they have in Oracles uttered
Amphibologiously, and in a double meaning, that so (if the Event proved
otherways) the fault might be imputed to the Misinterpretation, and not to the
Prediction; But a certain Knowledge of a Future Contingent that they have not,
it is only proper to God.

Your Astrologers, Genethlialogists, Vide Sennertum lib. 2. cap. 2. fol. 34. a
and b.
and other such Diviners, who (like Gods Apes) take upon them to imitate him in
such Predictions, are here to be derided and rejected as Impostors and deluders
of mankind; since they pretend not to Divine Revelation and Inspiration of God,
from whom alone such Effects do come to be certainly known.

The consideration hereof may make us with the Appostle cry out, and say, O the
depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God; Great is the Lord,
and great is his Power, yea and his Wisdom infinite; sapientiae ejus non est
numerus.

Stand thou in Admiration and Adoration of this Knowledge of God (O my Soul)
and say with the Prophet David, such Knowledge is too wonderful form (O God) I
cannot attain unto it: for of such Knowledge does the Prophet David there
speak, (viz.) of the Knowledge of Future Cogitations, saying, thou know my
thoughts afar of; not such as there already are, but such as shall be
hereafter, nor such as shall be, but such as may not be hereafter also.

Now the heart of Man is deep and unsearchable (profundum and inscrutabile,
says the Steptuagint) and who can know it? It is answered, I the Lord which
search the heart and try the Reins; this makes the Psalmist cry out; such
knowledge is too wonderful for me.

If we but cast in our mind the number of all mankind that have been since the
Creation of the World living upon the face of the Earth, and add thereto the
number of those that are, with those that shall be conversant upon the Earth
before the Consummation of this Universe, and we shall find they will not fall
within the number of Arithmetic; Millions of Millions, and ten thousand times
ten thousand are not the one half of them. Let us withal cast in our mind, the
several various thoughts and desires of the heart which this day and night has
passed us, thee and me, much less the thoughts of every man's particular heart
since the beginning of the World throughout the whole course of his life; we
are not able to recount them; yet (such is the infiniteness of his Wisdom and
Knowledge) that God in the Book of his Remembrance has the number of all, with
the names of every one that has been, or now are, from the beginning of the
World to this very instant, with a Register of all, and every one of their
Thoughts, Words, and Actions, of what Nature soever, or how secretly soever
committed; nor only so, but every man's thoughts and imaginations of heart that
shall be, nay more, every thought that may be (though it never be) fall within
the compass and comprehension of this infinite knowledge of God; the thoughts
which are not in thy heart (O my Soul) but furthest from thee, nay and against
thy mind as loathsome to retain, are known to God.

It was not in Hasaels heart to kill his Master, to take the strong holds of
the Children of Israel and set them on fire, to slay the young men with the
sword, to dash their Children, and rip up their women with child; when he
answered the Prophet, What? is thy Servant a dog, that he should do these great
things? nor was it in Peter's heart, (he was not guilty of such dissimulation)
to deny his Master when he answered our Savior, though all should forsake
thee, yet would not I; and again, though I should die with thee, yet will not I
deny thee, yet these were foretold, and so came to pass as they were foretold,
by that admirable Knowledge of him, who searching the hearts, and trying the
reins, sees not as Man sees, but knows the thoughts afar off, even such as
are not, yea and depend upon the Will of Man, whether ever they spall be or
not; Such Knowledge is too wonderful for thee (O my Soul) thou can not attain
unto it.

Naural and Divine CONTEMPLATIONS Of the Passions and Faculties Of the Soul of
Man; In Three Books.
THE THIRD BOOK. The Theological part.
CHAP. I.
BUT oh the Trump has sounded; the Earth has opened her Womb, those that
slept are awaked, the bodies of the dead are raised to life, and blessed are
they that have died in the Lord.

No longer now shall we view the Souls of those departed in their Metaphysical
shapes and abstracted Forms, every form to its Individual determinate matter,
and every Soul to its Numerical body; the Soul has quickened and revived the
Body; the Body is again reunited to the Soul in an Indissoluble Conjugal knot,
in an everlasting wedlock.

But since Corruption cannot Inherit Incorruption, or Souls Immortal ever dwell
in trunks of clay and dust, therefore has the Body cast off her old Garments,
and changed her attire: she was sown a Natural body, she is raised a Spiritual
body; sown in weakness, but raised in Power; in dishonor, but raised in Glory;
sown in Corruption, but raised in Incorruption, that she may for ever dwell
with the Incorruptible Soul in Unity.

There are no jarrings twixt Soul and Body here as in the days of their
Pilgrimage upon Earth, the flesh lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the flesh; she who was erst Rebellious, is now Obse quious to the
Dictates of the Soul; now is she wholly subject to the will of her Lord,
yielding obeisance and obedience with admirable Agility and Celerity of motion;
now not the least Ponderosity of a Massy substance or Natural body to foreslow
her motion appears any more, but the Perpensility of a Caelestial and Spiritual
body, mounted as it were on the wings and Plumes of a Cherub to expedite the
Souls Injunctions; such Homage and obedience the Body paies unto its Soul, that
(as St Augustine says) ubi volet spiritus ibi protinus erit corpus, nec volet
aliquid spiritus, quod nec spiritum nec corpus possit decere.

1. Hereupon is the body enfranchised of sundry Praerogatives and Immunities,
which are altogether inconsistent with it in its Natural condition; whilst it
was Elementary, its Natural motion tended downward according to the Nature of
the Predominant Element; the ascendent motion of a Physical body is Excentrique
and Irregular, which motion is Concentrique and Consonant to a body glorified;
solo voluntatis impetu, etc. at the beck and command of the glorious Soul is
the body mounted from Earth to Heaven, whose Nature it is to be wholly subject
to that glorified Spirit, from whose Redundancie the body likewise receives its
Glorification.

2. The Humane body in the state of Nature, in a slow Progress marches forward
step by step, and that not without some Earth or other solid body to tread or
go on; whereupon the Earth is made a cause of our walking; Causa fine qua non.
but in the state of Glory, most swiftly, and as it were in an instant, it
moves from place to place, from one part of Heaven to another, absque
adminiculo, without the benefit of Earth or other Element to impress the least
Vestigias or footsteps of his treadings.

3. In the terrene estate the body is Opaque and Luskie, Dark and Purblind;
Beautified only by the Additaments of External color; but the Spiritual body
is Diaphanous, transparent, transplendent, not like those lesser lights which
only appear in the night, but like the Sun at noon day in the Firmament of
Heaven, Matthew 13.43.
Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father; The Co^fulgurations of bodies glorified are like the bright shining of
the Sun, or compare we them to our Saviors glorious Body after his Exaltation,
which no doubt exceeds all the glory can be expressed or conceived, when this
transfiguration upon the Mount was so glorious, That his face did shine as the
Sun, Matthew 17.2.
and his Raiment was white as the light; yet such is the condition and state of
these bodies which are fashioned like unto his glorious Body, according to the
working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself. Phillip 3.21.


Yet does not this transcendent Glory superadded to the Humane body alter the
Nature and Essence of the same, the same Humanity is retained as well after as
before the Resurrection; the same body that is laid in the dust, the self same
body arises and ascends into glory; that body is resumed in the Resurrection
which was assumed in the Conception, only one to a Mortal, the other to an
Immortal life, alterius gloriae sed ejusdem naturae, the glory is different,
but the body's the same.

The glorified bodies of Saints, and the glorious body of our ever blessed
Savior in Heaven, all of them of one Nature and Substance, made up of Flesh,
and Blood, and Bone, Nerves, Sinews, Arteries, and what else conduces to the
perfection of a Humane body.

To deny this is to run into the Heresy of Eutiches condemned in the several
Councils of Constantinople and Chalcedon, who affirmed that the body of Christ
was not of the same Nature with ours, and that ours also after the Resurrection
were not Palpable or Visible, but more subtle and slender than VVind or Air.

But (as we have said) the same body that is laid in the dust, the same arises
and puts on Immortality and glory, a body of flesh is sown in dishonor, but the
same body of flesh is raised in glory; Consonant hereto are the words of Job,
Job. 19.25 26, 27.
I know that thy Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day day
upon the Earth; And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my
Flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for my self, and my eyes shall behold,
and not another, though my Reins be consumed within me; thus we read, and thus
is our Creed, so is preached, and so is believed, for the Resurrection of the
flesh is an Article of our Faith, a Fundamental point of that Religion the
Church Catholic professes, and that our Saviors body is of the same
Substance is another Fundamental, Athanasius is plain, perfect God and perfect
Man, Of a Reasonable Soul and Humane Flesh subsisting; yea Palpable flesh and
Visible even after his Resurrection, our Saviors words are full for it, behold
(says he) my hands and my feet, that it is I my self; handle me and see, for a
spirit has not flesh and bones as you see me have.

And therefore those words of the Apostle (flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God) are to be understood of sinful lusts and corruptions of the
flesh, 1 Cor. 15.10.
and not of the flesh and blood it self dismantled of these.

And as the substance of a Humane body continues entire, so has she her
faculties and qualities perfect (though not all) for in as much as the body is
purged of sin and corruption, those qualities which argue corruption and
infirmity must needs be perished also; absit labes (silicet corruptionis) assit
effigies, assit motio, absit fatigatio, assit vescendi potestas, absit
esuriendi necessitas, etc.

Soft, soft, (O my Soul) dash not thy self on the Rock of Contention, be not
prolix in Polemick discourses and points Controversal, since thou art devoted
to thy calmer Theoremes, and Diviner Speculations.

The case standing thus, that none have admittance to those glorious Mansions
in the new Jerusalem, the City of God, but bodies purged from their filthy
lusts and sinful corr^ption; bodies morigerous, submisse and pliant to Soul and
Spirit; see then and lament the wretched estate of us Mortals upon Earth, An
evil it is under the sun, an error proceeding from the ruler, folly set in
great dignity and the rich set in low place, servants on horseback and Princes
walking as servants upon the Earth. Eccles. 10.5, 6 and 7.
whose lives and conversations Diametrically oppose the glorified Saints in
Heaven. Apame, was but Concubine to the great and mighty King Darius, yet was
she seen sitting on his right hand, and taking the Crown from off his head, did
set it upon her own, she also stroke the King with her left hand; Semblable to
which is the rule and Dominion which Impetuous and Implacable flesh usurpeth
and excerciseth over the Souls of Mortal men in their Pilgrimage here below,
leading them Captive to the Law of sin and death.

This is that miserable Bondage under which the Sons of men in this Vale of
^ars do groan, from which Bondage of Corruption and body of sin, they wait with
earnest expectation to be delivered into the glorious liberty of the Sons of
God; And not only they but our selves also which have the first fruits of the
Spirit; even we our selves groan within our selves waiting for the Adoption, to
wit, the redemption of our bodies; not that we should be found naked, and our
bobodies unclothed, but clothed upon; that Mortality might be swallowed up of
life.

It is not a change of our bodies, but of our Raiment and Vestments which we do
look for, a Crown of glory for a Crown of thorns, the Robes of Righteousness
for the Rags of Sin; This change must be in^hoate here, though completed
hereafter, the Foundation must be laid on Earth in Grace, but finished in
Heaven in Glory, the Garments of the Old man laid aside, and the Garments of
the New man put on; the lusts of the flesh mortified, the fruits of the Spirit
quickened; Ephe. 4.22, 23, and 24.
We must put off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceiptful lusts; and be renewed in the Spirit of our
mind; and we must put on that new man which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, that we may henceforth serve in the newness of
the Spirit and not in the oldness of the letter; For if we live after the flesh
we shall die, but if we through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body,
we shall live.

Woe is me, that I am constrained to live in Mesech, to have my habitation in
the tents of Kedar, my Soul has long dwelt with them that are Enemies to
peace, they are daily fighting and troubling it, the Body with all its sinful
lusts rebel against my Soul, and when I labor for Peace, they make them ready
for Battle, they will not have her rule over them, whom thou (O Lord) have made
the Monarch and sole Empress of this little World, but attempt by continual
Insurrections and Intestine Wars to introduce an Arbitrary Power over an
Athenian and Popular Government For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant me (according to the riches of his
glory) to be strengthened in the inward Man, in the spirit of my mind, by the
might and Power of his Spirit; who raised up Jesus from the dead, that (as he
died for my sin, and rose again for my justification, so) I may die to sin, and
live unto righteousness, and being buried with Christ into death by Baptism,
may walk in newness of life, that being planted together in the likeness of his
death, I may be also in the likness of his Resurrection; kowing this, that my
old man is Crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth I should not sin; And though I live and walk in the flesh, yet that
I may not war after, but against the flesh (the weapons of my warfare being
Spiritual and mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds) to the
casting down of Imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self against
the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ, and having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience of
the flesh against the Law of my mind, which is only subject to the Law of God;
Help me (O God) so to keep under my body and bring it into subjection, that I
my self be no a castaway.

Thy will (O Heavenly Father) be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, and as thou
have praepared an Heaven and fitted the body with all Obsequiousness to serve,
and the Soul to rule and command with all just Authority and moderation; all
this in the Resurrection of the body at the last day, when Soul and Body meet
again in a glorified estate to Possess the Heavenly Mansions; so fit and and
prepare them here, that whilst they are in this Earthly Tabernacle, all Schism
being abandoned, all Rebellion Anathema^ized, the heel may not kick against the
body, or the foot tread upon the head, but (however it fares in the body
Politic) there may be such an orderly subjection in the body Natural, that my
flesh may be subject, not Predominant to my Spirit, my Body unto my Soul, and
both Soul and Body subject unto thee.

O my God do thou thus set my foot over the threshold of thy Heaven, Chap. 2.
Book 3.
put thou my Soul into this happy condition of an inchoate blessedness; so
shall I cheerfully spend the remaind^r of my days in a joyful expectation of
the full Consummation of my glory. Amen.

Bish. Hall his Susurium cum Deo.

CHAP. II.
Of the Organs of the body, and the Exercise of the Sensitive faculties of the
Soul by them in the state of glory.

AS the appearance of the Bride newly come from her Chamber in the days of her
Espousals, on the Solemnity of her brideale and other Nuptial Rites, bedecked
and adorned with all the Ornaments both of body and mind that may render her
gracious, and Amiable in the eyes of her Betrothed; or like the Kings Daughter
all glorious within, and without in clothing of wrought Gold, brought into the
Kings Palace attended on among the Honorable Women by a Train of Virgins that
be her fellows: Even such is the inward grace and outward Magnificence, Pomp
and State of the body in the morning of her Resurrection and Ascension from the
Chamber of death, to be Espoused again to the Soul in an everlast-VVedlock, the
Bill of Divorcement being cancelled and Nullified by an Act of perpetual
Oblivion.

Her Soporiferous bed of rottenness she thenceforth lotheth and outrunneth;
leaving behind her load of inward Corruption, all waywardness of mind, and
frowardness of disposition; and her Troops of Natural Imperfection, Deafness,
Dumbness, Blindless, Lameness, etc. such Sons of sorrow and servants of sin and
perdition presume not to approach the marriage Chamber; all other her
Companions in the flesh, that were faithful and serviceable to her, and
instrumental to the Soul in the Acts of grace, are still her attendants, and
are admitted into the Royal Palace, and invested with the Robes of Glory and
Immortality, as a badge and livery of the glorified Soul, whose Servants and
Ministers they are.

Those Organical parts of the body in which the Soul was exercised, and without
which it could not Operate (in which respect the Soul as to such faculties and
Operations might be termed Mortal) are revived with the body and useful to the
Soul in their several Stations.

I do not, I dare not here affirm that all the parts of the body do still
remain Organicall after this life, so as the Soul may exercise all the Powers
of her triple life, Vegetative, Sensitive, and Intellectual, as she did in her
Natural and Physical state according to those several Organs in which the
Faculties were resient and peculiarly seated; Nourishment Growth and Generation
(the proper Effects of the Vegetative life) accomplish their ends in this life,
whereunto when they have obtained, those Operations cease, and the Organs rest
from that labor and employment; but since the Senses are Operative in a
glorified body, (for it is not deprived of Sense) I have no reason to think the
Soul has utterly rejected her manner of Operation by bodily Organs, declining
those old Servants as useless and inconsistent to such a glorified state; Eyes,
Ears, Nose, Mouth, Palate, Hands, Feet, and all to be quite emancipated and
freed from the service of the glorified body and Soul in their works of that
kind, but to believe the Senses External, and Senses Internal are Organical in
Heaven as they were on Earth, and subservient to the Soul in their several
stations and places of residence as Eye, Ear, Nose, Palate, Nerves, Brain, by
which the Soul does exercise its several faculties of Seeing, Hearing,
Smelling, Tasting, Touching, and the rest.

The eye (the Noblest of the External Corporeal Organs) offers it self first to
our consideration, which is not obscurely proved by holy Writ, to be useful,
and serviceable to those in the state of glory; for this the damned in Hell do
so far enjoy, though to their torment and woe, to see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
in the Kingdom of Heaven, and they themselves thrust out; But the Saints to
their endless joy and comfort have the use of their eyes and sight to see and
behold the Splendour and Beauty of their own bodies, being changed from vile to
glorious, after the fashion of Christ's most glorious body which exceeds the
brightness of the Sun, as the Apostle witnesses, Acts 26.13. What delight and
pleasure must it needs be unto the Saints in Heaven to see every part of their
body, Hands, Feet, and all issuing forth such rays and beams of light,
sufficient to dispel all mists and darkness from them, without further
assistance of Sun, Moon, Stars, or other Luminaries?

Nor is this Optic faculty of the Eye limited to it own body, so, as not to be
of use to discern other Objects; for all the Saints and Servants of God whose
bodies are likewise glorified, yea, and the glorious body of Christ himself,
Christ the head with all his members, are all of them Visible Objects of this
Sense; I know (says holy Job) That my Redeemer lyveth, and that he shall stand
at the latter day upon the Earth -- whom I shall see for my self, and my eyes
shall behold, and not another.

It is not enough for the eye to behold its own glorified Body shining as the
Sun, but it beholds an infinite number of Suns together, no Parelia, nor yet
in their Eclipss, but the glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly
fellowship of the Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs, and the holy Church
throughout all the World, whose bodies do not only send forth a glorious
shine, but every member, part and Organ of those bodies are bespangled with the
like rays of glory and splendour, to the admiration of the beholder

Who doubts (says Bishop Hall) that these eyes shall see the glorious manhood
of our blessed Savior advanced above all the Powers of Heaven? and if one
body, why not more? if our elder brother, why no more of our Spiritual
Fraternity? Certum est, Bellar. in praefatione ad librum de aeterna felicitate.
beatos homines omnes ab omnibus videri, and sciri, and inter se familiariter
versari ut amicos and proximos, says another Doctor; so then there is a
Communion of Saints in Heaven as well as on Earth, a society of bodies Visible
one to another.

Besides, the Vision of new Jerusalem apperteins to the glorious Saints; to
them it is given to see Jerusalem built up with Saphires and Emeruads, and
precious Stones, the Walls, Towers, and Battlements with pure Gold, the Streets
thereof paved with Beril, Carbuncle, and stones of Ophir, and the Citizens
thereof singing Hallelujah, and saying, Praised be God who has exalted it for
ever; which was the Prophecy of Tobias, and of Isaaih; which also Saint John
in his Revelation saw (together with a new Heaven and a new Earth) to wit, the
Holy City, the new Jerusalem descending from God out of Heaven, having the
glory of God, and her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a
Jasper stone, clear as Crystal, it had no need of the of Sun nor the Moon to
shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light
thereof, and the Nations of them that are saved do walk in the light of it.

Yea we our selves (together with the whole Creation) do with earnest
expectation wait for a Renovation and Melioration of the state of all things at
the coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens that now are, being on fire
shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and we
shall (as it is promised) see new Heavens and new Earth wherein dwells
Righteousness, as the Apostle Peter has it, 2 Peter 3. Chapter and verse. 10.

What neither the eye here can see, nor the ear can hear, nor the heart of Man
conceive in their Natural state, shall all be Object and Visible to the eye in
the state of glory; so says St. Bernard, Erit quando iam non dicetur, Audi
filia and vide and inclina aurem tuam, sed leva potius oculos tuos and
contemplare; quid? plane ea modo quae interim quidem etsi non videre adhuc and
audire tamen credere potes; verum etiam quod sicut non videt oculus, sic nec
auris a^divit, nec in cor hominis ascendit, quod praeparavit deus diligentibus
se; nimirum tant a capiet oculus resurrectionis, quanta nec auaitus nec animus
nunc captat; these eyes shall behold them and not another, therefore in
another place he adds, nec novos tibi instaurandos pates, sed tuos utique
restaurandos; not that they shall be of another Nature, but of another glory.

The Ear also is exercised with Variety of sounds and voices, both Articulate
and Inarticulate; the Organs of speech are as entire and perfect (yea more) in
Heaven than on Earth; we may not conceive a deficiency in any part, there are,
Guttur, Lingua, Palatum;

Quatuor and dentes and duo labra simul. For the bodies of the glorified Saints
are true, real, and lively bodies, and perfect in every member, even as our
blessed Savior after his Resurrection was manifested to be, both by his
Conversation and Confabulation with his Apostles and Disciples, speaking of
many things perteining to the Kingdom of God; and by his hearing and answering
of questions; and further from his voice from Heaven to St. Paul, and his reply
to the Quaere of St. Paul.

Such bodies and bodily Organs for Vocal music have all the Saints to sing and
hear Halellujahs sung; a great voice was heard of much People in Heaven, saying
and singing Hallelujah, in a most Melodious tune, the ditty or ballad whereof
was, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God. There is
a full Quire of Saints, thousands of thousands harmoniously canting the praises
of the Lord, and as full a Chorus with the like affectionate melody again and
again ecchoing and resounding the like praises and loving kindness of the Lord.

And as the company of singers is great, so are the songs and Canticles
various, though all of them Eucharistical; some in Memory of our Creation,
others in Memory of our Redemption, some in triumph of the Holy Martyrs, some
in joy of Converts and Penitents, others in Honor of Chastity and Virginity,
and those who were not defiled with Women, the redeemed from amongst men being
the first Fruits unto God and to the Lamb; others for the Victory of all Saints
over the World, the Flesh and the Devil; over the Beast, and over his Image,
and over his Mark, and over the number of his Name; others for the judgments
of God inflicted upon the ungodly ones; There is sung the song of Moses, and
there is sung the song of the Lamb; yea there is sung the Psalm of David,
misericordias domini in aeternum, as St. Augustine affirms; and fortasse non
solius dei lauds in civitate illa canentur, sed etiam t^iumphi sanctorum
martyrum, and confessorum praeconia, and virginum gloria, and sanctorum omnium
contra diabolum victoriae cantibus extollentur; haec enim omnia in dei lauds
and gloriam redundabunt; And all these songs and cantons cannot but be
wondrous pleasant and delightsom to the ears of all the blessed and glorified
Saints of God, for which Cause, the Ear is Organical and serviceable to the
Soul and Body in their state of glory.

In the next place consider we the Sense of Olfaction, and those sweet smeling
savours and Odors in the Nostrils of all the Saints; to show that the body is
not destitute of an Organ for the exercise of this Sensitive faculty of the
Soul, no more than of the rest which are so useful to her in this state.

For though the Scriptures afford not so pregnant proofs for the two Senses of
Smelling and Tasting, as for the other three, yet may we not in reason conceive
a total Deprivation or Annihilation of them more than of the rest, nor without
injury to the Humane Nature, (to which we attribute so great perfection and
integrity of parts in that condition) debar her the freedom of exercising any
of her faculties (other than what argue and favor Corruption) which so much
tends to the perfection of a Humane body; there is no Privation of Sight, of
Hearing, or of Touching, why then of the other? are the Saints Hosmei, and are
not Goglites? if the want of an eye or an ear be such a blemish and
imperfection, as may not befall a glorified body, is not the want of a nose as
great a deformity? but Odors and Olfaction there is in this state, and this
Sense has its Objects of delight as well as the rest.

Glorified bodie^ are Odoriferous bodies, sending forth most fragrant sents; as
they are glorious to the eye, so are they Aromatical to the smell. St. Hierom
of the body of St. Hilarion affirms, after its ten months burial it was found
lively fresh and whole, and tantis fragrans odoribus ut delibutum unguentis
putaretur; the like does St. Gregory witness of St. Servulus, saying, anima
exeunte, tanta fragrantia odoris aspersa est, ut omnes qui illuc aderant
inaestimabili suavi ate replerentur; and a little after, quousque corpus ejus
sepulturae traderent, ab eorum naribus odoris itlius fragrantia non recessi;
and Bellarmine hence infers, the alive bodies of the Saints in Heaven must
needs send forth most sweet perfumes, when their dead bodies are so Fragrant.

But above all is the glorious body of our blessed Savior, being perfumed with
Mirrh, and Frankincense, with all powders of the Merchant, and whose Garments
smell of Mirrh, Alloes, and Cassia; whereupon the Church, that Spiritual
Spouse, cries unto Christ her Head and her Husband, melioria sunt ubera tua
vino, fragrantia unguentis optimis; oleum effusum nomen tuum; Ideo
Adolescentulaedi lexeruntte; trahe me post te, curremus in odorem unguentorum
tuorum, thus says St. Bernard. Now if the body of Christ be so Odoriferous, it
is most propable the Saints are likewise so, the Members in a due proportion to
their head, as in brightness, so in sweetness.

The like probability is of the Sense of Tasting, that it should remain in the
glorified estate; For if the Power of eating, then the Sense of tasting, but
the first is granted, then why not the latter? adest vescendi potestas, abest
esuriendi necessitas; and so resolves St. Augustine, non potestas sed egestas
edendi corporibus refurgentium aufertur; Lib, 13. de civit dei.
and this puts the difference twixt the Humane Nature, Spiritual and
Caelestial, and the Natural and Terrestrial; the one eats necessitatis, the
other potestatis gratia; Christ after the Resurrection did eat and drink with
his Disciples, yet not as his Disciples for refreshment and nourishment, non
alimentorum indigentia, sed ea qua hoc poterat popotestate; and therefore the
Paraphrase of venerable Beda upon those words of our Savior (have you here any
thing to eat) is worthy our observation. Luke 24 41.
Aliter obsorbet aquam terra sitiens, aliter solis radius calens, illa
indigentia, iste potentia, manducavit ergo post resurrectionem non quasi cibo
indigens, sed ut eo modo naturam corporis resurgentis astrueret; so glorified
bodies may sometimes eat to show their Power and Freedom, but never for hunger
or satisfaction of a Natural Appetite or an empty Panch.

And this Comestion is real and true, not a Fictitious and feigned eating of
the Angels, as that of Raphaels; for the bodies which Angels sometimes assume
(being no Humane lively bodies) have not the true and Real faculty of eating,
though happily of chewing or grinding, and swallowing down into the interior
parts of the body; for a true Comestion is accompanied with a gust or taste,
which Sense continues to the glorified bodies, and has its recreation and
delight as well as the other faculties, though not in the Act of eating, which
they seldom use; de sensu gustandi scribunt Theologi non usuros beatos cibis
mortalibus, sed habituros tamen oblectationem aliquam in eo sensu ne supervac
aneus esse videatur; futuram tamen oblectationem illam loco and statui beaterum
and immortalium congruentem. Bellarmine de aeterna felicitate lib. 4. cap. 8.

As for the Sense of Touching, there is no difference amongst Divines, nor
indeed can be any doubt but that it has its Operations in this blissful state;
since the gloried bodies may be felt and touched as all other true and lively
bodies may, and as our blessed Saviors was after his Resurrection, as well
Palpable as Visible, not miraculously, but according to its own Nature; handle
me (says he) and see, for a Spirit has no flesh and blood as you see me have.

Thus much of the Senses Corporeal, External, and those parts of the body which
are Instrumental and serviceable in the state of glory to the Humane Nature, as
they were to her in her Natural condition, only with these exceptions and
limitations.

1. From hence is banished all sensual lusts and carnal Concupisence, the Eye
has no lascivious looks, the Ear's infected with no blasphemous breath or
impious sound, nor this Sense deflowred with any adulterous touch; here is no
lust or desire of generation, no respect of blood; they neither marry, nor are
given in marriage; this grosser acquaintance and pleasure is for the Paradise
of Turks, not the Heaven of Christians; here is as no marriage (save betwixt the
Lamb and his Spouse the Church) so no Matrimonial affections

2. Banish we likewise from hence all Impatibility of Sense; sensus non
fallitur nec laeditur circa proprium objectum; no vehemency of Object can
destroy the Sense; in their Natural estate, their objects many times confound
and wound them; too great a light may make a man blind, too great a sound may
make him deaf, we may not long gaze upon the Sun without blemish to our eyes;
otherways here, for the Senses are blessed and glorious, and so made
Impassible and Immortal; he who strengthens the Eyes of the Soul with such a
measure of light and glory, that they may see God face to face, and yet not be
dasled and confounded with his glory, does also so confirm and strengthen the
Eyes of the body, that without any hurt or damage to themselves, they may
behold not one but infinite Suns and Illuminated bodies, though in themselves
never so glorious.

3. All Acts of Necessity are hence excluded, the Soul does not exercise her
Sensitive Faculties Necessarily, but freely, and rules with the body and bodily
Organs when she pleases, and when she pleases the Soul rules alone; For she
has other ways of Operation out of the body more Excellent and Noble; the
Senses are Secundary means for acquiring Knowledge, not the Primary; only
subservient and at command of the Soul. In the Natural estate the Sensitive
Knowledge precedes the Intellectual, nihil est in intellectu quod non prius
fuit in sense; and without Sense there is no intelligence. Not so in the
Resurrection; the Soul knows all things as fully and infallibly by Intuitive
Vision and Inate Forms, at once, unico intuitu, by one single aspect, as by
those various multiplied Forms imprinted from sensible Objects under so many
several notions and conceptions; the Understanding stands not need of an Eye,
or an Ear, or other bodily Organ to evidence the truth of what it apprehends,
it is not subject to Sense, but Sense to it, not the Soul to the Body, but the
Body to the Soul; for the Nature of a glorified body is to be Spiritual, that
is, subject to the Spirit, not that it has no flesh and bones, but that it is
so subject to the Spirit, that at the beck and command thereof, without any
pains and difficulty, it moves most swiftly, Ascending, Descending, Coming,
Going, and through every place penetrating, as if it were not a body but a
Spirit, Ad hoc autem quod sit omnino corpus subjectum spiritui requiritur, quod
omnis actio corporis subdatur spiritus volun^ati (says Aquinas) and therefore
it is in the Power of the Soul to see or hear, or the like, to use or not to
use these bodily Organs, when and as often as she pleases, without which in
her Natural condition she could not Operate or reduce all her Faculties into
Act.

This is the state of that Church, that part of Christ's Body triumphant, whose
Organs and Senses are Spiritualized, to whom that part of Christ's Church
militant here does hold resemblance, the like Analogy and proportion bearing
every Member one to another, they on Earth to those in Heaven, as every one
bears to Christ the H ad; as the Spiritual Body in Heaven is Organized, so is
the Organical Body on Earth Spiritualized, and has five Spiritual Senses,
Senses refreshed with Spiritual Objects.

This I can assure thee (O my Soul) being a Member of that Mystical Body
whereof Christ is the Head, thou art entitled to, yea, and refreshed with such
Sensitive Objects as the Saints in Heaven are refreshed and delighted with;
Objects for thy Eye, thy Ear, thy Nose, thy Palate, thy Hand, as Form, Sound,
Odor, Sapor, Spissitude; but these made Spiritual, and are so to be received; I
speak of Christ in the Eucharist, who is made the Object of every Sense, that
the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ may more fully be evidenced to us
from him of whose fullness we all receive; Christ is Visible to the Eye, Audible
to the Ear, Sweet and fragrant to the Smell, Savory to the Taste; to the Nose,
Palate, Hand sensible; he is meat to the hungry, and drink to the thirsty;
Angels food, and man's repast. Christ in the Sacrament is the Object of our
Eyes, and as real y present here as in Heaven, and is as really exhibited to
us, who spiritually discern him though under other Forms; and hic and ibi
veritas, sed hic palliata, ibi manifesta, he is palliated here, but unveiled in
Heaven; here we see him darkly through the instrument of Faith, for we walk by
Faith, and not by sight; his real presence is believed, our Corporal Eyes do
not behold him otherways than veiled under those outward signs of bread and
wine; the eyes of our Body sees the signs, the Eye of our Faith the thing
signified, aliud latet, aliud patet, what we see is Bread and Wine, what we
believe is the Body and Blood of Christ; what our Souls cannot reach with
Corporal Eyes, it may discern by an Eye of Faith; Faith is a director of the
Soul, or prospective to the Eyes to bring to their sight such things as are not
discernable without in this Vale of tears; through the prospect of Faith is
Christ Visible to us, though the Saints in Heaven have a clea^er Vi^ion of him,
seeing him face to face (...) as they are seen. This is but a glimpse of that
beatifical Vision the glorified bodies have of Christ; here per aenigma, there
facie revelata, here veiled, there revealed; unde preciosior dicitur faciei
visio, quam speculi frequens imaginatio; non enim pari omnino jucunditate
sumitur cortex sacramenti and medulla frumenti, fides and species, memoria and
praesentia, aeternitas and tempus, speculum and vultus, imago Dei and forma
servi?

My Soul is athirst after Christ my Savior, O when shall I come and appear
before him? Grant (holy Jesu) I may so behold thee (though veiled) here, that
when this earthly tabernacle shall be dissolved, when it shall turn to the
Lord, and be clothed upon with our horse of immortality and glory, which is
from heaven, the veil which to this day is upon my heart may be taken away, and
I may with open face behold the glory of my Lord, being changed into the same
image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Amen.

Christ in the blessed Eucharist is the object of our Ears, speaking unto our
hearts, both in secret whisperings, and in shriller notes, and holds a familiar
conference with us; he is an audible Voice, and a speaking Word, the sound
whereof is gone to the ends of the world, that Word which in the beginning was
with God, and was God, but was made Flesh and dwelt among us; God made Man, the
Son of God the Son of Man, unicus patris, filius hominis, verbum quippe caro
factum; this Word incarnate is that Bread of God which comes down from Heaven,
and gives life unto the World.

This Word is not only audible to the Ear, but penetrable to the Heart,
piercing like a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit,
and of the marrow and the joints. Those reverend thoughts and meditations we
have of Christ (especially in this Sacrament) are nothing else but so many
words of his spoken to our Souls; though all our cogitations are not Christ's
locutions, nor all his communications our meditations, cum enim mala in cord
versamus nostra cogitatio est, si bona, Dei sermo est; illa cor nostrum dicit,
haec audit; our good thoughts are Christ's words, our evil thoughts are our own
words: The fool has said in his heart there is no God, there is our own words;
The Lord speaks peace unto his people, those are Christ's; one is spoke from
the heart, the other is to the heart.

Our own words again are twofold, or have two ways of proceeding, one from
Natures corruption, another from Satan's suggestion; but of all these bitter
fruits and sinful effects proceeding from within us, it is a hard matter to
assign a proper cause and author, to demonstrate which are the works of the
Devil, and which be the fruits of the Flesh; we are not able so exactly to
distinguish inter morbum mentis, and morsum serpentis; inter malum innatum, and
malum seminatum; inter partum cordis, and seminarium hostis; only we may know
they both are evil, and proceed from evil; both in the heart, though not both
from the heart; this I know most assuredly, though which to ascribe to my
heart, which to Satan, I know not.

But for my good thoughts (since all our sufficiency is from God) I do
undoubtedly believe they are the very words of that very Word, verba verbi Dei,
written in my heart by the finger of his blessed Spirit: This is that Word
which is not sonans only, but penetrans, non loquax sed efficax, non
obstrepens auribus sed blandiens affectibus: Happy art thou (O my Soul) if when
thy God calls, thou answerest with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears; or with holy David reply, I will hear what the Lord my God will say
unto me.

Christ is the object of our Sense of Olfaction, s^nding forth most sweet
perfumes; he is sweet in his Name, Christ Jesus; Christ (i. e.) Ann^inted, so
much the name imports; Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is
as ointment poured forth; he is sweet in his name Jesus, a Savior; there is no
other name given under heaven whereby we shall be saved; neither is there any
malady of Mind, any disease of the Soul, which this precious balm and ointment
cannot cure; Erit tibi sapor and odor in medicinam salubrem morbos si qui
fuerint repellentem, venturosque caventem: He is sweet and pleasant to God the
Fath r; he is his beloved Son in whom he is well pleased; and the smell of his
Son is like the smell of a field whom the Lord has blessed; he is that Lamb
slain from the founda^ions of the world, whose b^dy and blood being offered as
an Holocaust unto God the Father, smells a sweet smelling sacrifise unto him;
and from whom issues unto his Spouse the Church, to every particular Member,
and to every worthy Communicant partaking of his Body and Blood, such streams
of precious ointment, and oil of the Holy Ghost, running down not only to the
beard of Aaron, that is (as St Bernard expounds it) to the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ, but unto the very skirts of his clothing, that is, to the
meanest of his Members, in infima membra Ecclesiae, quae est tanquam Christi
vestimentum; that even these vile bodies and souls being offered an oblation,
smell also a sweet smelling sacrifise, to God through Christ holy and
acceptable; we are anointed with oil of gladness, but Christ with holy oil, and
oil of gladness above all his fellows. It falls first upon Christ the Head, so
runs down to his beard, so descends to the skirts of his garments, the meanest
member in hi Church; the smell of Christ's garment is like the smell of Lebanon;
but the smell of his ointments super omnia aromata, is better than all spices.

Christ is the object of our Spiritual Taste, and that food of Saints and Angels
in Heaven, of which it has pleased God to give a taste to his Saints on earth,
feeding them with the bread of Heaven, the food of life which comes from
Heaven, that Heavenly Manna and food of Angels the Prophet speaks of, more
pleasant and sweet to the taste than honney or the honney-comb.

But that we might eat Angels food Christ was Incarnate, the Word was made
Flesh, so all are partakers of Christ, the Saints on Earth, as well as Saints
and Angels in Heaven, only with this difference, Comedunt Angeli verbum de Deo
natum, comedunt homines verbum faenum factum; pane suo vivunt Angeli in caelis
and beati sunt, faeno suo vivunt homines in terris and sancti sunt.

Yet does not every man taste of the food that partakes of the outward Elements,
the Natural man has no sense or taste, no fruit and benefit of this Sacrament,
because it is spiritually discerned; it is food eternal, not temporal,
spiritual, not corporal; for supernatural nourishment unto Eternal life, not
for physical and natural, which accomplisheth its ends in this life; pereat hic
physicale nutrimentum, cibis iste non ventris, sed mentis; we feed on him in
our heart by Faith and Thanksgiving.

My Body is nourished with the outward Elements of Bread and Wine, my Soul is
2nourished with the inward Graces, the Body and Blood of Christ; not with the
Bread of Affliction, the corn arising from the earth; but with Consolatory
bread, and Angels food, that true Bread descending from Heaven; nor with the
Wine of the Grapes of Gomorrha, but of the true Vine Christ Jesus, the Lamb,
the Head, and Husband of the Church, which at the heavenly Marriage shall be
drunk new in the kingdom of Heaven.

There we drink not of this Wine made of water (as at the Marriage in Cana) but
ex botro illo magno terrae promissionis, qui interim in vecte portatur dum
secundum carnem novimus Christu^, and hunc crucifixum; which we drink at the
Lords table in types and signs here, which are mortal and perishing; but in
Heaven at that great Supper of the Lord, really, and truly, immortal, and
incorruptible, enduring to eternal life. For in Heaven is no laboring for the
meat which perishes; the Saints glorified use not corruptible food; their food
is spiritual and immortal, fitting and suitable to that state of glory; and
their taste is accordingly, no carnal relish, no earthly savor; nil quippe in
his carnale sapit, nil seculare, nil vanum; sed spiritus veritatis and
caelestis sapientia est, cujus in utraque suavitas praelibatur.

He that comes to the Lords Supper in his old garments, has not this
spiritual relish, nor shall he be thought worthy to be partaker of that great
Banquet, the Supper of the Lamb, in Heaven, or taste of that food; as well those
that come here unworthily, as those that refuse to come though invited, shall
all be excluded hereafter, so says the Lord of the Feast, I say unto you, none
of those men who were called shall taste of my supper: And to the unworthy
person it is said also, Friend, how came thou hither not having thy
Wedding Garment? take him, etc.

And lastly, Christ is the object of our sense of Touching, we receive him into
our hands, we take him into our mouths, we feed on him in our hearts, we dwell
in him, and he in us; so to every sense is Christ spiritually sensible,
tangible by the hand, as visible to the eye, prae manibus, as he is prae oculis.

CHAP. III.
Of the Knowledge of the Soul by Intuitive Intellection, or Beatifical Vision.

Chap. 3. Book 3.
HItherto of the knowledge fetched from External objects by the means of outward
senses, the Internal are not without their use (viz.) Fantasy and Memory;
but of these sufficient has been said already.

Nor yet shall we further treat of that Internal intellectual knowledge which
the humane soul in its Glorified estate has of all Material and Immaterial
created substances (viz.) of Angels, and abstracted Forms, and other inferior
creatures, which are represented to its knowledge per speciem, by an innate
form and similitude, chiefly and primarily in their universal natures,
secundarily in their individuals in one single aspect and intuition, which
manner of knowledge is natural and essential to Spirits, and Essences
intellectual; for this has also been elsewhere handled.

But here we shall principally insist upon that Science of the Soul, or rather
Sapience which consists in the sole intuitive Intellection, or Beatifical
Vision of the divine Essence and Nature of God himself, which is not per
aenigma, as in this life, but facie revelata, not in his back parts only, but
the infinite Essence and Majesty, the very quiddity and being of the great
Jehovah, as he is in himself (so St. John expresses it) fully and clearly
manifested.

And the divine Sapience which comes by this Intuition or Intuitive
Intellection surpasses all other manner of knowledge whatsoever; this is not
natural to any created Angelical Intellect; comes not by any strength of nature
created by God into any finite being; nor can it stand with natural reason, how
a finite capacity (for so are all created intelligences) should perfectly and
distinctly, clare and perspicue cognitione perfecta, and non confusa,
apprehend, see, and know an infinite Essence as intensively Infinite; this is
supra captum humanum, and exceeds all natural power.

Yet above reason is believed (for so is the Faith of holy Church) that the
blessed Saints and Angels in Heaven do clearly and fully see, and know God, do
behold him as he is in himself. The Mind and Intellect glorified sees, and the
Will enjoyes God, its chiefest, and most desirable good, more fully, and more
certainly, than any man here enjoyes any temporal estate.

In this Intuitive Vision, and Fruition of God, is Man's eternal felicity, his
beatitude, his summum bonum seated; here comes in the fullness of the Promises,
here is the consummation of our Hopes, this is the final intrinsical end of Man's
Creation, to see God clearly, and to enjoy him fully; our Beatitude consists in
this, and is the same beatitude wherewith God himself is blessed; God is most
blessed, and therefore most blessed because he always beholds himself as he
is, and eternally enjoys himself; he has made us partakers in hope of the same
chiefest good, to be like him in the same felicity, together with all the
glorious Saints and Angels, so says the Apostle, We shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is.

There were certain Heretics, Armenians, and others (but condemned of old by
several Decrees and Councils) who held it imposible for any created Intellect,
by any power whatsoever, clearly to see God; and therefore they held further,
the Beatitude which is promised by God, and waited for by us, to consist, non
in familiari illo quem speramus divine naturae intuitu, sed cujusdam creati
fulgoris ab ea manantis.

And indeed in the eye of Reason it is impossible, and unto Nature altogether
repugnant, that any created Intellect, by any strength of it own, should
perfectly know the infinite Godhead; but what is impossible with men, is
notwithstanding possible with God; Multa fie^i possunt virtute divina, quae
naturae creatae viribus fieri non possunt, says Suarez; nam etsi Deus a nullo
intellectu creato clare cognosci potest viribus naturae, videri tamen clare,
and perspicue po^est ab iis quorum mentes divina bonitas supra naturae modum
illustraverit, and ad quandam divinae natur^e participationem evexerit (says
Fonseca.) This is done by a supernatural power; and fide tenemus quod ratione
improbamus.

Though all power is not excluded from the nature of created Intellection; for
an Obediential power is founded in the nature of the Reasonable Soul, even unto
acts of divine and supernatural quality, to those supernatural habits of Faith,
Hope, Charity, etc. not Acquisite by any intrinsical power of it own, but
infused by God, drawn out of the power of the Soul, eductione supernaturali, ad
quam non requiritur ex part subjecti potentia naturalis receptiva, sed
obedientialis sufficit; which obediential power is founded in the nature of the
Soul, Suarez tom. 1 disp. 15. sect. 2.9.
and in that respect is natural and essential to it: In which sense Aquinas is
to be understood, saying, 1.2. q. 113. art. 1.
Rationalis anima naturaliter est capax gratiae; and in another place,
habilitas animae ad gratiam consequitur naturam ejus, 1 part, q. 48. art. 4.
And in the same sense St. Augustine de Praedest. sanct. cap. 5. Posse habere
fidem and charitatem naturae est fidelium.

And in this sense as Grace, so Glory is seated, and is to be found in the
Reasonable Soul; the Soul is capable of Grace, there is a capacity also in the
Intellect to the light of glory, the clear vision of God, the full enjoyment of
him, though not a Natural, properly so called, yet an Obediential, or a
Non-repugnant faculty; which power and virtue is not to be found in any other
creatures below man.

Yet is not this full Intuition and Fruition of the Divine Essence a
comprehension of his Infinity; for it is one thing to have a quidditative
knowledge of any substance, another to comprehend it; and therefore though the
Souls of the blessed in heaven have this supernatural endowment, fully and
clearly to behold God; yet is it not given to any created Intellect fully to
comprehend him, because none can understand or perceive his infinite power, or
attain to the knowledge of all those infinite number of things possible to the
making of which his power does extend.

To know all the Individual creatures possible to be made (omnia quomodocunque
possibilia) which are infinite; or to know but all the thoughts and cogitations
of every man's heart which shall, or may be, is only proper to God, and is not
communicable to any created Intellection of Saint or Angel whatsoever;
wherefore though Created Intellect by divine assistance is able clearly and
fully to apprehend the divine nature, as it is in it self, and that all things
(any way possible to be) necessarily and naturally are in God; yet are not all
things altogether known which are in his divine Essence; quia cognitio omnium
omnino quae a deo effici possunt, dari non potest sine comprehensione divinae
essentiae. Ad argumentum quod deus ut speculum est and quod omnia quae fieri
possunt in eo resplendet, respondet, Tho. per 1. q. 12. a. 8. ad 2. quod non
est necessarium quod videns speculum omnia in speculo videat nis^ speculu^ visu
suo comprehendat nemo aute^ deum cumprebendit.
Of the divine Essence there is a full Intuitive knowledge, which being fully
seen, begets the like knowledge of all created beings, all actual existencies
of Men, Angels, etc. of their natures, differences, properties, powers, and
operations, which are all in him, and flow from him.

But of all beings possible only, which have no real and actual Existence
(omnia omnino) all of these altogether cannot be seen by any created
Intellect, by any intuitive Vision or Intellection; for such is (as has been
said) only proper to God, being both a quidditative and a comprehensive
knowledge also; and is that perfection of infinite knowledge, than which a
perfecter cannot be conceived, which to ascribe to any creature is such an
implication of contradiction as falls not within the compass of Gods
Omnipotency.

But pass we by the knowledge of all other Existences, and proceed in the
declaration of that knowledge of God himself which comes by Intuitive
Intellection, which for the excellency of its object is termed Sapience: 3 ibs
3. dis. 5. b.
Aquinas puts this difference 'twixt Science, Intelligence, and Sapience (viz.)
that Science and Intelligence relate to the creatures, and has them for
object, but Sapience only looks upon God, and in that object is delighted;
Scientia valet ad rerum temporalium rectam administrationem, and ad bonam inter
malos conversationem; intelligentia vero ad creatoris and creaturarum
invisibilium speculationem; sapientia vero ad solius aeternae beatitudinis
contemplationem and delectationem.

In this knowledge is all our bliss and joy, the greatest felicity that Man is
capable of, for according to the excellency of our knowledge is the greatness
of our happiness and delight ever; now the excellency of this divine Sapience
is manifested,

First, by the Faculty and Power.

Secondly, by the Object suited to that Power.

Thirdly, by the Union of the Object with the Power.

And lastly by the Means, Instrument, or Organ of this Union of the Object with
the Power.

First, the Power and Faculty of Knowledge is the Intellect or Mind, which is
far more pure, noble, high, and lively, and therefore more apt for knowledge
than any or all of the Senses.

Secondly, the Object is God, a divine Essence, an infinite Being, the highest,
and excellentest of all objects either of Body or Mind, because he is summum
bonum, omne bonum, infinitum bonum, Truth it self, and Goodness it self.

Thirdly, the Union of the Intellect with God in this beatifical Vision is an
Union so near and close, ut essentia Dei totam mentem videntis penetret and
men's ipsa in ipsum Deum quasi in mare magnum tota mergatur and transformetur.
Bellar. de aeterna felicitat. lib. 4. cap 2.

Fourthly, the way and means whereby God is thus united to the
Underderstanding, to this Intuitive Intellection, is per lumen gloriae, by this
is God conveyed to the souls of the blessed, and to Angelical spirits, and
made one with them.

In this life the Eye of Reason is dark and purblind, and cannot behold God but
by the light of Faith, which is but obscurely, per aenigma; hereafter the eyes
of our understanding are opened to see God without this light of Faith, but not
by its own intellectual light, natural and created; nor by the light of Faith,
though it be supernatural; but by a light of Glory unexpressibly supernatural;
in a peculiar way and manner flowing from the very Essence of God as a peerless
piece of his own uncreated Glory; Lumen gloriae, quod Theologi dicunt infundi
beatis, sicut nulli creaturae esse potest connaturale, ita peculiari quodam
modo and ratione ab essentia Dei fluit tanquam singularis participatio increati
luminis ejus. This light of Glory as it is the means and instrument of
conveighing the Object to the Soul, the divine Essence to the Mind and
Intellect, has God for its proper Object, and therefore works not as an Organ
or Instrument of any created Intelligence to which it is commensurate and
adequate, but of an increate and independent Intelligence as a proper
instrument of God.

And now (O my Soul) art thou come to the Mountain of Nebo, to the top of
Pisgha, where though thou may (though afar off) take a view of the promised
Land, having traveled through the planes of Moab, from the deserts of Arabia,
and Wilderness of Zin; from the Rudiments of Philosophy, to the Mysteries of
Divinity; thy burblind eason by the conduct of Faith is in some measure raised
to a Revelation and Vision of that Eternal Beatitude, which Naturally thou
desire.

First then, thy Science of this was Philosophical, drawn from the light of
Nature; Reason teaches thou art Immortal, and capable of everlasting Felicity,
which consists in the Vision and Contemplation of God thy chiefest good, and
have an Innate concreate desire thereto; And although the principles of
Rational Knowledge are for the most part per se nota, so known by their own
light as may force an assent; yet in as much as God who is thy summum bonum is
a light inaccessible, such a light as blear-eyed Reason can not behold; the
full Knowledge of God is not by Rational principle, Natural Science is not a
scale large enough to contain, nor a yard long enough to measure out the true
Virtue and full force of this divine Essence, but must resolve into principles
of a higher nature; here thou must run from the principles of Philosophy to the
maxims of Divinity; here thou must submit thy understanding to the rules and
articles of Faith.

Thy Science of God then is Theological, drawn (not from the light of Nature,
but) from the revelation of God in the Scriptures; the principles of this
Theological science are supernatural, and resolve not into the grounds of
natural reason, but into the maxims of divine knowledge supernatural; and of
this we have just so much light, and no more, than God has revealed to us in
the Scriptures; which is not so full a light as the prime principles of
rational Sciences carry along with them to force reason upon the first sight to
yield unto it; such as are these (viz.) Every whole is greater than a part of
the whole; and again, The same thing cannot be, and not be, at one and the same
time, and in one and the same respect.

These carry a natural light in them, clear and evident, the Scriptures not so,
yet such a light as is of force to breed Faith, though not to make a perfect
Knowledge; for though it be life eternal to know God, John 17.
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, yet this knowledge is no more than a
belief; since God requires not a demonstrative knowledge of him here, but our
Faith in him, and such a knowledge as may fit that, we walk by faith, and not
by sight, or perfect knowledge; for Man having sinned by pride, God thought it
fittest to humble him at the very root of the tree of knowledge, and make him
deny his understanding, and submit to Faith, or hazard his happiness.

Faith then is a Christians rule, and ground of Science; now the evidence of
Faith is not so clear as that of Reason, tum ratione objecti, tum ratione
subjecti.

First, Ratione objecti, God; Faith is the evidence of things not seen.

Secondly, Ratione subjecti, the Subject that sees, it is but in aegnimate, in
a glass, or dark speech. Moreover, Faith is an act of the Will primarily and
chiefly, and not of the Understanding. It is not in this Theological Science as
in other Sciences, where voluntas sequitur dictamen intellectus, but
contrariwise, intellectus sequitur arbitrium voluntatis. For Faith is a mixed
act of the Will and Understanding, and the Will first inclines the
Understanding to yield full approbation to that whereof it sees not full proof.
Credere enim est actus intellectus vero assentientis, productus ex voluntatis
imperio. In sent. d. 23. q. 2. a. 1. Tho. 2.2. q. 2. a. 2. ad 3
Biel. And again, Intellectus credentis determinatur ad unum, non per rationem,
sed per voluntatem. And Stapleton contra Whittaker. says, Fides actus est non
solius intellectus, sed etiam voluntatis quae cogi non potest; Triplic. contra
Whittak. cap. 6. p. 64
imo magis voluntatis quam intellectus quatenus illa operationis principium
est, and assensum (qui proprie actus fidei est) sola elicit; nec ab intellectu
voluntas, sed a voluntate intellectus in actu fidei determinatur.

And though the principles of Faith (being concealed from our view, and foulded
up in the un-revealed counsel of God) appear not so evident and manifest unto
us as those of Reason, yet they are in themselves much more sure and infallible
than they; for they proceed immediately from God that heavenly Wisdom, which
being the fountain and original of ours, must needs infinitely precede ours
both in nature and excellency: And therefore, though we be far unable to reach
the order of their deductions, nor can in this life come to the vision of them,
yet we yield as full and firm consent, not only to the articles, but to all the
things rightly deduced from them, as we do to the most evident principles of
natural reason; so that thou may justly say, thy Faith is stronger than thy
Reason or Knowledge is, because it goes higher, and so upon a safer principle
than thy Reason or Knowledge can in this life attain unto. Hoc intelligendum
est, ut scientia certior sit certitudine evidentiae, fides vero certior
firmitate adhaesionis; majus lumen in scientia, majus robur in fide, says Biel
in 3 sent. d. 23. q. 3 a. 1. Thus much and more may thou find couched, and
excellently handled by the most reverend Father in God, William Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, in his book against Fisher, page 16.

And for certainty and assurance in this kind, Faith does not only exceed all
certainty that can proceed from any natural Science be it never so
demonstrative, but in a manner equals the very knowledge by Intuitive Vision in
the world to come. St Bernard makes it good too, in sermonibus Domini
Gilleberti super Cantica Canticorum, cap. 3.

Intelligentia quidem etsi fidem excedit, non tamen aliud contuetur quam quod
fide continetur; in intelligentia quam in fide non major certitudo inest sed
serenitas; neutra vel errat vel haesitat, ubi vel error vel haesitatio est,
intelligentia non est, ubi haesitatio est fides non est; et si fides admittere
posse videtur errorem, non est vera nec Catholica fides, sed erronea credulitas.

Thus are Reason, Faith and Vision instrumental and necessary one for another;
without Reason no Faith, without Faith no Vision; and this is all the
difference amongst them, it is St Bernards still, and exquisitely done, Fides
(ut sic dicam) veritatem rectam tenet and possidet, Intelligentia revelatam and
nudam contuetur, Ratio conatur revelare, ratio inter fidem intelligentiamque
discurrens, ad illam se erigit, sed ista regit; ratio plus aliquid quam credere
vult; quid aliud? conspicere; aliud est credere, aliud est cernere; non tamen
aliud quam quod fide concipit conspicere conatur: et si nondum sincere videre
potest, quibusdam tamen accommodatis experimentis conjicere tentat, quae jam
solida fide concepit; ratio supra fidem conatur, fide tamen nititur, fide
cohibetur; in primo devota est, in secundo prudens, in tertio sobria: and (ut
sic dicam) fides tenet, tuetur ratio, intelligentia intuetur: bonus iste
circuitus in quo men's rationis ductu pervestigando procedit, sed a fide non
recedit, instructa a fide and restricta ad fidem.

Thus have I showed thee (O my Soul) thy spiritual progress, in the search of
thy Felicity; this is the circuit and round of the Soul in its Military march
to the heavenly Jerusalem, in the search of him who is the dearly beloved of my
Soul; these are the streets it compasses about; bonus quidem rationis
circuitus, a happy circuit and progress of the Soul doubtless, when the Soul
prosecutes its felicity by rational disquisition; and this search too is
bounded and limited by the rules of Faith, walking from Faith to Faith, or from
Faith to Vision and Contemplation, till it come to the full fruition of what it
so much desires and loves.

And now having brought thee to thy journeys end, to thy harbor and haven of
joy and bliss, I will here sing a Requiem to my soul, a nunc dimittis to my
Spirit; Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy
word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. And since the way to this
beatitude lies by the gates of Death, that there must be a separation of Soul
and Body, before there be a full Vision and Fruition; I do here desire to set
this little house in order, and to make this my last Will and Testament: where
I bequeath my Soul into the hands of God that gave it, and my Body to the grave
in Christian burial; Earth to Earth, Dust to Dust, Ashes to Ashes, in hope of
a joyful and glorious resurrection unto eternal life, through the merits of
Christ my Savior. Amen.

FINIS.

