Hugh Peter's.



The most vile and lamentable CONFESSION OF Hugh Peter's OF All his Bloody
Advices given to the late Oliver Cromwell, touching all the horrid murders
committed upon those Martyrs whose names are all herein specified, immediately
after his apprehension near Horsly-down, Sept. 4.

Together with a conference between him and Sir Henry Martin, now in the Tower
of London.

Sing hey ho my honey, My heart shall never rue,
Twenty four Traitors now for a penny,
And into the bargain Hugh.
London Printed, for John Andrews at the white Lion near Pie-Corner.

Enter Hugh Peter's into the Tower.
Martin. O Father Peter's our Ghostly father, and profane Teacher I much
congratulate to see you here.


Peter's. No not so glad as I am to see you here Sir Henry, for indeed I thought
you had been hanged half a year ago.


Mar. Oh what need that Mr. Chaplin, so long as you and I can be hanged
together?


Peter's. Ah, ah, Sir Harry you say right that one Gallows might serve us both,
but I knew the time once when a whole Kingdom could not serve us both.


Mar. No, how could they when you Preached the Destruction of three at once?


Peter's. Ah, and had brought it to pass to, had you and I continued.


Mar. Truly Mr. Chaplin I believe we had, for I could have persuaded Noll our
Mr. that all things came by nature.


Peter's. Yes and I believe I went as near to it, until he took an occasion to
dye, as the devil would have it, then all our long laboring mischief came all
unto ruin and confusion in a moment.


Mar. But what did you think of Riohard the innocent?


Peter's. Truly as much as ever I did, for I found him a fool at first, and
even so I left him at last.


Mar. But what say ye to Harry the Novice who had all Ireland, and an Army at
command.


Pet. Troth even as the Devil said to the Colier, like to like, for had he
stood it out like a brave stout Rebel there, we could have played our high born
prancks of vilany, and glutted our selves in the very Ocean of Tyranny, till
the surged waves of Calamity had overspread the three Nations, then for
quietness sake, we had been safe enough, I Will warrant you.


Mar. No not so secure as we are now, I Will warrant you too.


Pet. Nay but we had took our full swing in Rebellion then.


Mar. Gad I cannot tell for that, but the full swing for Rebellion I am sure we
shall take ere long.


Pet. What swing do you mean, Sir Henry, speak out.


Mar. The downright English word, I know you are a Scholar, we shall take our
swing upon Tyborn Gallows, do you under^^and me now?


Pet. I understand all can be but a hanging, and that I prophesied seven years
ago twould be our end.


Mar. Truly I wish then you had been hanged seven years ago, you could not tell
us that jest in your Pulpit amongst them all, it might a been a warning to us,
but I thought too sudden risings would prove divellish fallings at the last.


Pet. Why how did you advance your self, Cosen Martin?


Mar. O lass Cosen Peter's do you not know that I was first the Kings Jeweller,
then a Judas, next his Judge, and walked one the right hand of the Devil, even
to this place.


Pet. And has he left the now? Alas poor Dog of Egypt. But how long time were
you ere you obtained your judgeship?


Mar. But one whole year, and then I was at the top of my self-minded Religion.
Why were you Religious to? O yes always for a color, for I acted nothing but
what was under pretense of Religion.


Pet. Surely you must needs be some great Scholar then.


Mar. No indeed Cosen Peter's never none in my life.


Pet. Nay then I know you could not other ways choose but have a brave sweet
disembling tongue of your own.


Mar. Yes, yes, that I had ever from a youth, and a great many more besides you
and I, but pray what were you Cosen Peter's when your Money flowed upon you
like the Ocean upon the shore?


Pet. Why, Faith I was any thing then for money, Churchman, or Statesman, and
sometimes Privie-Counsellor, unto Old Oliver the Dragon of mankind.


Mar. Ah, but what did you advise him to, in the prime of your flourishing,
everlasting in famous ambition?


Pet. Alas, did not you know all this while what I advised him to?


Mar. Yes, you caused him to cease upon several Gentlemen's estates, which did
promote our horrid designs beyond Seas bravely, and paid for the contrivances
of many a wicked plot here besides.


Pet. Ay, and I made him to be head Doctor Hewit, and hanged Mr. Peter Vowel two
Loyal Sub^ects of the Kings, and I believe I was bravely commended for it.


Mar. Ah, but I am afraid now you will bravely hang for it.


Pet. Tru^ly Cosen Martin I speak unfainedly upon the word of a Divine, I had
as live be hanged for that, as for a lesser matter: but what brave acts did you
advise him to bring under his rod of Tyranny?


Mar. O I and Oliver St. John's were the two prime Imps, that first invented the
plots concerning that Syndercombe who was hanged drawn and quartered
afterward, and buried upon Tower-hil.


Pet. Pray Cosen Martin, relate to me the story how you invented that Noble
piece of wickedness, for I was then at St. Albons Preaching up to the ears in
Sorcery and Southsaying, to the poor hypocritical led away simpletons, yet
every one gave a Tallent unto my treacherous Treasury, which amounted to above
a hundred pound and more.


Mar. Ah mary Sir, I think though I got the gown you got the money, but what
did Oliver himself get do you think?


Pet. He get, he got the Devil and all by excise and customs.


Mar. Truly, I am of your mind, for the Devil was always very near him; and
to you to I Am persuaded.


Pet. No not when I was in the Pulpit.


Mar. Yes truly I am confident then most of all, for you were always telling us
who ought to be sequestrated, and who to be hanged, and how to contrive and set
our Engines at work upont, which made us give more audience to that then ever
we did to the best proof in Scripture.


Pet. Why should you not, it did more concern you then any thing in the Bible
ever did I am sure on it.


Mar. Nay, I must confess we did never much make our selves students in
Scripture language, except it was now and then to make use of it for a color
to our ireligious, profane, tyranicall actions for we was constrained ever to
say it was for religion sake, and the liberty of the people.


Pet. Aye brother Martin I did commend you highly in that, for indeed I think
they might have had liberty to a gone a begging to what country they pleased
at last.


Mar. Truly I believe so they might, at the rate we held on: neither did we
care what end went foremost so we might have kept them low enough, and by that
means we knew we should rise high enough; and then for sermons I believe we
brought them to such a pass that there was never more Preachers know in England
since Nebuchadnezzar the great Pagan.


Pet. Truly Cosen Martin I think our Master Oliver did not go much behind him
in all the best of his tyranicall murders, spoils, vilanies, had the devil
spared him a little longer I did intend to have baptized him a new and called
his name second Nebuchadnezzar.


Mar. Why do you cosen Peter's believe he was ever baptized in all his life.
Truly I cannot tell that cosen Martin I never heard that ever he was.


Pet. But I think he came to his dignity like Pope Bonifas, cuning like a fox,
he lived like a lion and died like a dog.


Mar. But nevertheless let you and I give him his due Character he was the
bravest contriver of plots as I verily believe the devil never went before him.


Pet. No because he always came after and put him foremost to act his plots for
he had a devilish brain with him always and ever had.


Mar. Aye truly cosen Peter's it is a question whether the devil had not him at
the last, ye or no.


Pet. Nay as for that matter we need not to question, for I believe it is very
well known that we set him as forward on his way as any two alive could do: and
he us, that's the truth on it, for we were actually every one of us, jointly and
severally in all the horid murders, chancemedlies, burglaries, Rapes spoils and
Vilanies, frauds deceits and perjuries: therefore lets not curse one another
knowing there be so many thousand do curse us already for wronging the
fatherles, oppressing the widows, depriving the Orphants driving them by whole
sale into utter ruin, extremity, calamities, miseries and destruction; and now
having declared no more then what do very well know to be truth and the most
part of the three kingdoms can wittness, let us leave Noll where he is, and
speak one little touch of our own unreconsilable proceedings, deploring fortune
and cursing fate for our too sudden, unexpected, long deserved securement of
these our sad, co^rupted, ilbegotten carcasses in the tower of London.


I Person Peter's fully do declare,
And tell the world what ever I have bin,
And if you please to hang me do not spare
Because I proved Traitor to my King,
The cause of Doctor Hewets death I was,
And Peter Vowel hanged at Charing Cross.
And old Sir Henry Slingsby he likewise,
With his gray hairs I brought him to his grave,
Which at the bar he twice was on his knees
Beseeching that a pardon he might have;
For as he was aged, so he was innocent,
And in our plots he never had finger in it.
But I most impious Vilain did put in,
that he unto the Tower should be brought
And Martyr like, to suffer for his King,
I always in such horrid Murders sought,
Then like a lamb he bowed down his head,
Which from his body soon was severed.
When Peter Vowel came to Charing Cross,
I was in person present to behold,
He had a spirit so magnanimous,
And wondrous in his Language he was bold,
Quoth he I suffer for my King I hope,
And then his neck submitted to the rope.
Heavens did know, and now the world does hear.
What a Malefactor in my life I Would been,
My horrid acts are more then I can bear,
For it is aleadgd I murdered my King,
Though impious Villain yet will not confess
Until such time I see how things will pass.
Martin.
I Hen. Martin late such prancks have played
That generations now does me deride,
For Judas like my Master I betrayed
And sat in judgment when that he was tried
This did I do for little wordly pelph,
Which now could take a rope and hang my self.
Peter's.
No, no, Sir Henry others they will take,
The pains to hang you up upon a bough,
For they on you Anatomy will I make,
That all might say, see what is come on him now,
And when your heart they open do within
They wonder will at such a stony thing.
O brother Peter's that was for the King,
I prethy take that word away by stealth,
you know long time together we have bin
Both Thieves and Robers to the Commonwealth,
And as the Devil pleased to bring us hither,
So let us rebel like now hang together.
I Henry Martin now cannot confess,
No more then what good people all does know,
I tutered was always in wickedness,
And Traitor both to King and country too
And now to the Tower late I have come hither,
Where I and Parson Peter's are together.
FINIS.
Hugh, thou art welcome to the Tower,
We are glad we have got you in our power,
And hope ere long hither to bring,
The whole pack of Rogues that murdered the King,



