Col: Morgan Governor of Glocester's LETTER TO The Honoble William Lenthal Esquire
Speaker to the Honorable House of Commons.

Concerning the total ROVTING AND Taking of Sir Jacob Ashley and his Army at
Stowe upon the Would, intended to join with His Majesty's Army at Oxford.

Together with a LIST of the persons of quality, and Officers in Commission
taken in that fight by the Parliaments Forces.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter and List be
forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London: Printed for EDW. HUSBAND, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
March 24. 1645.

TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Truly Honorable,
HAving received a command from the honorable Committee of both Kingdoms to
take charge of a Brigade of horse and foot, drawn out of the Garrisons of
Gloucester, Hereford and Evesham, to prevent the Lord Ashleys conjunction with
the Kings forces at Oxford; and to effect that design I drew forth and
rendezvouzed seasonably betwixt Evesham and Warwick, notwithstanding the Lord
Ashley endeavored by all ways to get by me, which much foiled my Brigade to
prevent in marching from place to place to secure the Fords upon the river
Avon: yet after some considerations perceived that he was unwilling to pass
over so long as I lay near the river, resolved upon Thursday last to draw off
and to quarter at Cambdin, the most convenient place wheresoever he made his
passage, and that night had intelligence of his march from Droitwich near
Worcester, toward Bitford, three miles from Evesham; whereof I presently
advertised Colonel Walley and Colonel Fleetwood, and sent post to Sir William
Brereton, to desire the assistance of his Horse, which was accordingly granted.
But upon Friday the Lord Ashley still continuing his march (and Sir William
Breretons horse not come up) was forced to hold him in action for the space of
four hours, skirmishing with him by parties, and keeping my Body drawn up in a
most advantageous place for pursuit, in case he should pass by me (before Sir
William Brereton came up) which about nine a clock that night he did: whereupon
I resolved to pursue, thinking it more advantageous to follow upon his rear,
then at that time to draw out to meet him in the field; and in my pursuit Sir
William Brereton came up with 800 horse, (of whom I desired to receive orders,
but he referred the whole command of the field to me) then being equal in
number to the Lord Ashleys forces consisting of 3000, I commanded 400 horse and
200 firelocks to charge home his Rear guard, to put him to a stand before he
should pass through Stow upon the Would (and as my intelligence informed me,
the King was to have joined with him within seven miles of that place) where he
made choice of his ground and had the wind with him: yet trusting in God I drew
up and charged him home (half an hour before day upon Saturday morning) put
him to a total rout, killed many Gentlemen and Officers of quality, took
prisoners the Lord Ashley, and all his Foot officers, whose names are in the
enclosed List, besides 1600 common Soldiers; whereof many of them being
wounded, I gave them liberty to go to their own homes, (taking the oath of the
5 of April) the rest are now sent to Gloucester. I took also 2000 arms and all
their ammunition. Sir William Brereton desired that the Lord Ashley might be
his prisoner, which I willingly condescended unto; not doubting but he will
give a good account of him to the Parliament. This good success, (the glory
whereof I desire may be given unto God) will prevent the King from drawing an
army into the field which he expected, and am now marched toward Worcester;
where I shall observe such orders as shall come from the honorable house of
Parliament, or the Committee of both Kingdoms; and in the mean time shall
endeavor to make use of all opportunities to weaken the Enemy, and to advance
the public service. The honorable House was pleased to promise a sum of
money to this Brigade, which I hope you will be pleased to hasten down, that
thereby Free Quarters may be prevented, and I enabled to prevent the disorders
of the Soldiers in the country; which shall always be the desire of him who
will ever subscribe himself to be

Sir, your Honors most faithful and humble Servant THO. MORGAN.
Cambdin the 22 of March 1645 at 6 a clock at night. There was no considerable
Officers of ours slain but 2 Lievtenants, nor none wounded but Col. Rous,
Governor of Evesham. T. M.



A Note of what Officers in Commission are Prisoners.
THe Lord Ashley. Colonel Corbet. Col: Gerard. Col: Mauldsworth. Lieut. Col:
Broughton. Major Billingsley. Major Harnedge. Major Sal^onstone. Captain Ed.
Gray. Capt. Tho: Gilbert. Capt. Peacock. Capt. Silvanus Hallsel. Capt. Ardinge.
Capt. John Bonner. Capt. Henry Bonner. Capt. Joshua Smy. Capt. Hutton. Capt.
Harinson. Capt. Jewnger. Capt. Harris. Reformadoes
Capt. Ioh. Matthews Capt. Devenport. Capt. Geo: Wright. Capt. Pots. Capt.
Smith.
Lieutenant Hill. Lieut. Hopson. Lieut. Edriswick. Lieut. Warberton. Lieut.
George Fancot. Lieut. Hobman. Lieut. Benjamin Thornbury. Lieut. Fletcher.
Lieut. Kerk. Lieut. Powle. Reformadoes.
Lieut. Smith. Lieut. Heart. Lieut. Kelly. Lieut. Vaughan.
Capt. Lieut. Aston. Lieut. Ed. Barker. Cornet Godfrey Preses. Cornet Brooks.
Cornet Roberts. Cornet Russel. Corne^ Francis Hesketh. Ensign Blackburn. Ensign
Horton. Ensign Detheck. Ensign Ellis. Ensign Farmor. Ensign Airs. Ensign
Cliever. Ensign Hopson. Ensign Colebrook. Ensign Broughton. Ensign Mason. John
de Ashfield Clerk. Alexander Clogley, Chaplein to Sir William Vaughan. Ed.
Barker, Marshal General. Quartermaster Stone. Quartermaster Wats, Reformado.
Quartermaster Gardener, Robert Weal Chyrurgion. Richard Aston Gentleman,
Servant to the Lord Aston. Mr. William Gent.
This is a true List of who is taken, besides the Names of some that are not
yet brought in.

T. M.

FINIS.

