The Complete BONE-SETTER: Wherein The Method of curing broken Bones, and
Strains, and Dislocated Joints, together with Ruptures, vulgarly called Broken
Bellyes, is fully demonstrated.

Whereunto is added The Perfect Oculist, and The Mirror of Health, Treating of
the Pestilence, and all other Diseases incident to Men, Women and Children.

Also, The Acute Judgment of URINES.

Written originally by Friar Monlton, of the Order of St. Augustine.

Now Revised, Englished and Enlarged by ROBERT TURNER (...).

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Martha Harison, at the Lamb at the East End of
Paul's. 1656.

To the truly worthy, and Religious Gentlewoman, Mrs ELIZABETH CRESWEL, Widow,
Wife to the Worshipful Thomas Creswel, late of Heckfield in Hampshire Esquire
Deceased, and to his Honorable Memory; Robert Turner humbly dedicates these his
studies.
Mrs CRESVVELL,
AS the Lord has abundantly blessed you with internal graces, so has he
likewise honored you with external blessings; whereby you are instrumental in
relieving the wants, and binding up the Wounds of your poor Sick and Lame
Neighbors: my experience of your affections and endeavors thereunto, (if I
were not otherwise obliged) is no small cause of this assay. But large
courtesies require large acknowledgements, from all that would not willingly
lie under the Ignominious brand of ingratitude: And many have endeavored, and
sought by this means, to render satisfaction for benefits received: but no such
construction must be made of my present intention; that is not my end and
scope, but only to show a thankful acknowledgement for your former favors.
Then that I have thus chosen you out by a single Dedication, to be the
Patroness of these my Lucubrations, I hope you will account it but a venial
transgression. If therefore you shall please to accept of these my poor
presented pains, there shall my Ambition Anchor. And I doubt not but your
reading and practice of this small Treatise, will gain you the poors Prayers,
and plead my excuse.

London, July 23 1656. Your humble Servant always to be commanded, Robert
Turner.

To the Readers.
THis is not the first time that I have bestowed my pains for the public good,
having already translated four Treatises in print, and as many more are in the
Press, of Physic and Occult Philosophy: my only aim in them all, is to learn
men, (if once they would learn) to admire and glorify the great power of God,
who has commanded such weak means as the Herb or Grass of the field, that
grows and flourishes to day, and to morrow is cast into the Oven, to preserve
the life, and cure the infirmities that the sin of man has originally
subjected himself and all his posterity unto; and to see and contemplate the
power of the great Creator in the influence of those superior Bodies the
Stars; if they are duly observed, and well regarded in their operations, it is
a great Book so full of uncontrollable Arguments, as are enough to stop the
mouths of all Gainsayers, and Raylers against Astrology and the Professors
thereof, calling them Wizards, and the art unlawful; but rather to cover their
Faces with shame, that they are ignorant therein, and of the wonderful
dispensations of God by them.

This treatise indeed tends not thereunto only, but is chiefly composed and
made plain in the English tongue (not to make Cobblers cast away their Lasts and
Auls, and such fellows, and straightway turn Doctors; I would never write an
English line on that account; Neither do I write any thing in derogation of the
honor due to the learned,) but, for the use of those Godly Ladies and
Gentlewomen, who are industrious for the improvement of their Talent God has
given them, in helping their poor sick Neighbors; expecting the recompense of
the reward of Come ye blessed, etc. when I was sick ye visited me; which Christ
the righteous judge shall give them; accounting what they do for the poor
members of his, as done to himself: and not for those who think they were
created for no other end, and had estates given them to bestow and spend in
painting their Faces, deforming themselves with ugly black patches, minding
nothing but their crispingpins and curling Irons, powders and perfumes; going
with stretched-out Necks, like those in Isaiah, but never remembering the
afflictions of Joseph; not regarding the answer of Abraham to Dives when he
cried for a drop of water to cool his Tongue: Remember, That in thy lifetime
thou have had thy good things, etc. nor fearing that dreadful sentence of ITE
MALEDICTI.

I have made this plain to every Vulgar capacity; putting all the Physical
terms in words at length, and plain English, that so people who are able, may
easily make Medicines for themselves, and reap the harvest of the sown Spring

Of Robert Turner (...).
London 23 July 1656. from my study at Christs-Church in Carpenters-yard.
The Contents.
A.
Aches. 100, 101. Against infected Airs. 146, 154, 155.
B.
Broken bones. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Bones putrified. 16, 17. To
keep a broken Bone being set, from falling out again. 6, 7. To stanch blood.
15. Broken Bellyes. 30, 31, 32, 33. Bowels to strengthen. 50. Bleared Eyes.
64, 66. Breast. 123 Spitting Blood. 126. Stinking Breath. 127.
C.
Callus to engender. 45. Pultis for Childrens Cods that are broken. 36, 37.
Clysters. 38, 49, 50, 106. Lotions for the Cod. 39. Cods putrified. 46, 47.
Confection for a Rupure. 51, 52. Clysters for the Headache. 106, 109.
Consumption. 123. Dry Cough. 123, 144, 145. Tough Cough. 124, 125. Cold and
Cough. 128, 129, 130. Cramp. 142. Confections against the Plague. 154, 155.
D.
A Drink for a Rupture. 57. Drink for the Eyes. 68. Drink for the Head. 105.
Decoction for the same. 107. Drink for the Headache. 110. Deafeness. 112, 113.
E.
Waters for Eyes. 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 92, 93. Sore Eyes. 59. 60. Pain in
the Eyes. 60, 67, 74. Ointment for Eyes. 64, 65, 73, 80. Pin and Web in the
Eye. 6^ 71. Blasted Eyes. 67. Hurt or thorn in the Eye. 71. Rheumatick Eyes.
73, 74. Redness of the Eyes. 74, 75, 76. Hot Eyes. 77. Blisters in the Eyes.
78, 79. Itching Eyes. 80. Spots in the Eyes. 87. Electuary for the Head. 110.
Pain in the Ears. 113. Noise in the Ears. 113, 114.
F.
Fomentations. 42. Frantic persons to cause sleep. 134, 135. Falling sickness.
143, 144.
G.
Guts falling into the Cod. 48, 49. Gargarisme for the Head. 108, 131. Gums
imposthumated. 120, 121. Gout. 142.
H.
Headache. 62, 99, 100, 101, 103. 104, 107. Haw in the Eye. 64. Honey to
prepare for the Eyes. 89. Hoarseness. 123. Head to cleanse. 131. To draw
moistures out of the Head. 132. 133. To st^^^gthen the Heart. 137.
J.
To set a Joint. 5. Joints luxated. 20, 21. Imposthumes in the Head. 101.
Imposthumes in the ear. 115, 116, 117. Against Infection. 151, 152.
L.
Lotions. 39, 112. Liver to strengthen. 42. Lungs infected to help. 123.
Lozenges for hot Rheumes. 144. Legs scabbed. 146.
M.
Withered Members. 25. Mirror of Health. 99. Meagrim. 101, 102. Memory to
strengthen. 131, 132, 133.
N.
Noise in the Ears. 114, 115. Bleeding at Nose. 115.
O.
Ointments. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 64. The perfect Oculist. 53. Oculists
Electuary. 94, 95.
P.
Plasters. 15, 18, 19, 22, 23, 42, 43. Pultis for Ruptures. 36, 37. Pills. 41.
107. Purges for a Phlegmatic Rupture. 43, 44. Plaster for the same. 44, 45.
Perle in the Eye. 68. Powder for Eyes. 69, 70, 88, 89, 90, 92, 97. Pomander for
Eyes. 90. Purblind. 98. Perfume for the Head. 118. Powder for the Headache.
111. Potion for to purge the Head for a weak sight. 97. Palsy. 135, 136, 137.
Against Poison. 137. Dead Palsy. 138, 139. 140, 141, 142. Pleurisy. 145, 146.
Pain in the back. 145. Plague. 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 152, 156, 157, 158,
159. Pomanders. 152, 153. Pills against Pestilence. 153, 154. Powders for the
same. 155.
R.
Ruptures. 26 27, 30, 31, 32, 33. Drink for Ruptures. 35, 36. Ointment for
Ruptures. 38. Rheum. 144.
S.
Sprains. 20, 21. Salve for swelling in the Members. 29, 30. To clear the
Sight. 58, 59. Salgem. 63. Swelling of the Eyes. 89. Speech lost to restore.
121, 122, 123. Speaking in sleep. 126. Sickness and pain in the side. 129.
Squinancy. 130. To cause Sleep. 134, 135. To Comfort the Stomach. 137.
T.
Tumors. 28, 29. Tabulats for the Eyes. 96. Toothache. 117, 118, 119, 120. To
make Teeth white. 120. Against stinking Teeth. 120. Tumor in the Throat. 130.
Trembling in the joints. 137, 138.
U.
Ulcers. 17, 18, 19. Urine to provoke. 41, 42. To make the Voice clear. 124,
125. Of Urines. 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, etc.
W.
Windy Rupture. 38. Watery Rupture. 40. A Water for the sight. 55, 56, 60, 61,
62, 63, 96. Watery Eyes. 68, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85. Wheezing. 124, 125.
Any of all these Medicines, besides many others, as Pumicils, and a powder for
to cleanse and whiten the Teeth, prevent the Toothache, and fasten loose Teeth,
Lozenges for the Cough, and an excellent Cordial Water, called Aurum Potabile,
effectual against all infections agues, and surfets, being taken and swear
upon, with many other Virtues, far exceeding the intellect of the Modern
Speculator of Spittle-fields, are prepared, and to be had at Mr. Hepburns in
the Carpenters-yard in Little Britain, by (...).

Dxa t THe
The PREFACE Shows the mind and intent of the Author, in setting forth this
treatise: which take as follows in his own words.
COnsidering that this treatise is very needful and necessary for a
Commonwealth, and amongst the Common liege-people: I Thomas Moulton Doctor of
Divinity of the Order of the Friars of St. Augustine, am induced to Compose and
publish the same for diverse causes.

One is Prayers of my own Brethren.

[A thing it seems in those days more esteemed then profit.]

Another is cause of prayers of many worthy Gentry.

Another is Compassion that I have of the poor people; who oftentimes are
destroyed and perish for want of help.

And the fourth cause that moves me hereunto is pure Conscience, for every
Christian Man and Woman are bound by the Law of Conscience, if they know their
fellow-Christian in peril, or likely to fall into any mischief, to help them if
he may, by his Counsel, with his Travel, and with his goods. And these four
causes moved me to compound and gather this treatise, and that every man both
learned and lewd, rich and poor, may do thereafter, and thereby come to be
their own Physicians in time of need; And therefore I have prescribed Remedies
for diverse other diseases that hurts or grieveth the body of man: and in the
first place, of broken bones, and luxated or dislocated joints.

The Complete BONE-SETTER.
Of broken Bones.
THis is an accident often happening in the Country amongst poor people, where
Surgeons, and especially good ones, are very scarce, and oftentimes remote; and
thereby many times ensues much danger to the party thus afflicted, through the
neglect or perchance misdressing of his wound: and therefore it ought
diligently to be regarded.

The first progress that is to be made in the remedying of any such mischance,
is diligently and dexterously to join and reunite together the fractured Bones
into their proper seats and places again; that thereby the member may be again
enabled to perform his proper office he is ordained for by God and Nature.

Secondly, in the next place care is to be taken, that the bones thus reduced
to their proper form and figure, be so kept and preserved without motion, to
gather strength.

Thirdly, to use means to engender Callus, whereby the parts of the broken
bones are conglutinated, joined and fastened together again.

And fourthly, to take heed to prevent and preserve the part afflicted, from
those accidents which in such cases are apt to follow the fracture of the Bone,
bringing much hurt to the patient.

First therefore, to join and set again the broken Bones into their right and
proper place; observe how and which way the member where the Bone is fractured,
does extend and stretch it self: if the member where the Bone is broken, does
stand upwards, and is pricking, showing an inequality when it is touched; it
certainly manifests, that the broken Bone is out of his natural place*
wherefore to reduce the same again, the fractured member is decently to be
extended, and that part of the Bone which is depressed or crushed down into the
flesh, to be gently lifted up; and that part which stands upwards, to be put
down, until both ends of the broken Bone do and be united and closed together,
and brought again into their natural and proper place; having a diligent care
that the member be not too immoderately extended and drawn out, for that will
bring very vehement pain, and consequently the Fever, Palsy, Convulsions, and
such like accidents will pursue it: and oftentimes by this means, the fibers
and threads in the heads of the Muscles be broken; whereupon lameness ensues.

Therefore to proceed rightly, and avoid such danger, let one man lay his hand
on the member above the fractured or broken place, and another on the nether
part of the member under the fractured Bone; and so gently and moderately
stretch and extend the member, till both parts of the Bone do meet together in
their proper place: then form it together, till you feel you have brought it
again to its natural form and figure, and the Bone be reposed in his due place;
Which being done, then, and not till then, shall the Patient be eased of his
pain.

To keep the Bone, being set, that it fall not out again.
THE second progression to be made in the effecting this Cure, is to keep the
fractured Bones, being reduced and brought to their proper place and figure,
that they start not out again.

The means to be used in the effecting hereof, is to use apt and con^enient
splinting, binding, ligature, and rolling of the fracture; and by all means to
keep the member without motion, as much as possible may be.

But when you have reduced the member, or to speak more plain, set the broken
Bone, before you roll up the member, mix some Oil of Roses, and the white of an
Egg together, and dip therein a soft linen cloth, and lay it all over the
place, that it may compass it all about, and above and below it; and then roll
up the member, but not too hard, so as to compresse it, and draw humors,
causing inflammation therein; nor so slack, that the broken Bones separate
again: but always remember that in measure rests virtue.

Begin your roller smoothly upon the broken place, going three or four times
about it, until you have compassed about the sound place above and below it.

Wet your rollers well in Water and Wine, before you use them; and if the place
be much afflicted with any Vehement pain or inflammation, then the member ought
to be wrapped about with fine Wool, or towe well carded, and wet in Oxicratum,
or Oil of Roses.

Then, to defend the member from accidents, and to keep it together, and
strengthen the same, lay upon the rollers a plaster or Cerecloth, made of Wax
melted in Oil of Roses; but if there be besides the broken Bone any bruise or
hurt in the flesh, then do not apply any Oil or Cerecloth to it; but in stead
thereof, Cloths dipped in red and Stiptick Wine.

Also, to keep the member from pain and accidents, there must be splints
prepared, to put about the broken member; which splints must be smooth and
equal, without ruggedness or crookedness, and are to be thus applied: First,
wet cloths in Rose Water, and then lay them upon the Roller three or four times
double; then roll Wool or Cotton round about the splints, and place them about
the member, about the breadth of a finger one from another; and bind them gently
on, taking heed that you do not compresse the member, nor touch any joint, if
the broken Bone be near a joint, lest the joint do thereby become inflamed and
ulcerate: but make your splints the shorter and smaller, if the fracture be
near to any joint.

Now after this progress, if the Patient receive ease, and no pain,
inflammation, or itching be fell in the fractured part; then let the splints
remain on and unopened twelve or fifteen days: but if on the contrary, any of
the forementioned accidents happen, then you must unrole the Member the third
day at the furthest, and foment and wash the place with warm water, to put away
the pain and itching.

It is likewise good to prevent and remove such accidents as usually attend
these mischances; as gangrenes, ulcers, inflammation, itchings caused through
immoderate dryness or moisture, and for the most part extreme pain; which the
Patient will quickly be too sensible of then must you speedily loose the
binding about the broken place, and take off your roller; which being done,
foment and bathe the place with Oil of Roses, Vinegar, before and hereafter
mentioned; and also use Unguentum Album, and Unguentum Populeon, or either; and
do not either roll or splint up the Member again, till the pain abateth, and
the inflammation cease, but only endeavor to strengthen and keep the Member
together, and afterward roll it, and splinter it as before: and to strengthen
the weakened Member, this following is very good.

A special Ointment to resist accidents, and strengthen a broken Member.
TAke Camomile, Mallows, Balm and the Roots thereof, of each one handful,
Chop and stamp them very small, and then take May-Butter 2 pound, Dogs Grease
1 pound and a half, and therein boil the Herbs very well: strain it, and then
Take Wax five ounces and a half, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, of each 2 ounces.


Dissolve the Gum in Vinegar, and strain it; and then boil it till the Vinegar
be wasted away: then, melt the Wax amongst it; then put amongst the strained
Herbs before, and when it is almost cold Take Bevercod 1 ounce and a half, Oil
of Camomile 2 ounces and a half, Oil of Bays 16 ounces.


Mix all this together into an Ointment, and reserve it as a special secret for
your use: And when you have occasion to use it, melt a little of it, and
therewith anoint the grieved place, and afterward apply thereon this Cerecloth
following.

A Cerecloth for broken Bones.
Take Frankincense, Galbanum, of each 3 quarters of an ounce, Mastick 1 ounce,
Wax 3 ounces, Rosin 1 ounce and a half, Oil an ounce:
Dissolve the Galbanum in a little Vinegar, and then melt all together in the
Oil; and afterward strain it through a Cloth, and then dip your Cerecloth
therein, and apply it after the anointing.

Another for the same.
Take Sallat-Oil 4 ounces, Wax half an ounce, Mastick half an ounce.
Beat the Mastick to powder, and melt the Wax in the Oil; and when it is almost
cold, put in the Mastick, and temper them well together, and use it as before
is directed.

For the same.
Take Virgins-Wax, Frankincense, of each half an ounce, Linseed Oil 4 ounces.
Melt and incorporate them all well together, and dip a Cerecloth therein, and
use it as the other.

Also for the same, because if you have not one Medicine in readiness, I
prescribe many, that you may speedily apply what remedy is next at hand:

Take Wax and fresh Butter, and melt them together, and apply it.

Another for the same.
Take Fenegreek meal as much as you think good, and Comphrey; pound the
Comphrey small, and boil them together in Water, till they be as thick as
grout, and apply it moderately warm to the fractured place.

For the same.
Take Litharge of Gold, Bolus, Comphrey, of each 3 ounces, Bean-meal, one ounce
and a half:
Beat them all together, and infuse them in good Vinegar one night: then Take
Wax, Rosin, of each 3 ounces, Sallad-Oil 12 ounces.


Incorporate them all well together on the fire, and let them boil till all the
Vinegar be consumed. Then when it is almost cold, stir into it two ounces of
Dragagant in powder, that has been well steeped in Wine, and so make it into a
plaster, and apply it.

Another very good for the same, and for other Ruptures.
Take Saffron, Euphorbium, Long pepper; of each 1 Dram. Rosin five ounces,
Aquavitae, 1 ounce and a half.
Dissolve the Rosin in Aquavitae, and beat all the rest to powder, and then
boil them all together till the Aquavitae be consumed; and afterward add to it
as much Wax as is sufficient to make it into a plaster, and reserve it for the
use aforesaid.

Another plaster for the same.
Take Ammoniacum half an ounce, Galbanum 3 quarters of an ounce, Wax,
Turpentine; of each 4 ounces, Myrrh a quarter of an ounce.
Dissolve the Gums in Wine, and then melt them all together; and when it is
almost cold, put in the Myrrh, and make thereof a plaster for your use.

But if together with the breaking of the Bone, there happen any wound or flux
of blood, then endeavor to stanch the blood: for which you may use this powder
following.

A Powder to stanch blood in a wound.
Take of Frankincense, Arsenick, Aluminis Succarini; of each two ounces. Calcis
Vivi 6 ounces.
Mix them all together into fine powder, and add thereto a pint of Vinegar,
and boil them together till the Vinegar be consumed; then let it dry in the
Sun, or against the fire, and make it again into fine powder; then to 3 ounces
of this powder, add half an ounce of Bole-Armoniack, and one ounce of Pulvis
Alcamistinis, and mix them all together into a very fine powder, and reserve it
for your use, to stanch any flux of blood in a wound. And when you have any
occasion to use it, take 4 ounces of this powder, and incorporate it with
whites of Eggs; then take a bolster of towe, big enough to cover the place
where the wound is, and dip the towe in Vinegar, and press it out again; then
spread your Medicine on the towe, and after strowe a little of the dry powder
upon it, and apply it; and after lay upon this many more little bolsters of
towe, as much as is needful to stanch the blood. And proceed in the cure, as
you do in the cure of green wounds, if there be no Ulcer, or inflammation, or
putrefaction in the Bones; but if the Bones ulcerate or putrify, then to resist
the same, use these Medicines following.

For putrefaction of the Bones.
Take burnt Lead 2 ounces, Myrrh half an ounce, Aloes, Opopanacum, Iron
Dross, Burnt Squinant, Rindes of firre-Tree; of each 1 dram.
Make them all to a powder, and strew thereof upon the putrified Bone; it
separates the putrefaction, and heals the place very much.

Also wash the place with water, wherein Sal Armoniak has been decocted.

If there be any ulcer therewith, then have a care you use no Oil thereunto,
for Oiles bring putrefaction in Ulcers; but wash the Ulcer with this Medicine
following.

For Ulcers in broken Bones.
Take White Wind 4 ounces, Rose Water two ounces, Burnt Allom 1 quarter of an
oun. Verdigrease 1 dram, The White of an Egg sodden hard.
Bruise the white of the Egg small, and boil them all together a little
gently; then strain it, and keep it well stopped for your use; and afterward if
it be too thick or too strong, add some more Wine and Rose Water unto it, and
use it as before is directed: And afterward lay upon the sore this plaster
following.

A Plaster for Ulcers.
Take Oil of Roses 3 drams, Oil of Camomile 1 dram, Ceruse 1 quarter of an
ounce, Dragons blood, Bolus; of each half an ounce, Camphire 1 dram, Litharge
of gold half a dram, Tutty prepared a quarter of an ounce, Coral 1 dram.
Make them all into a plaster with Wax, as much as is sufficient; spread it on
leather, and lay it upon the Ulcer.

But if these accidents happen not, or at least be removed; then endeavor to
strengthen and Conglutinate the fractured Bones; which is done by a certain
Nutriment or substance that grows out of the Bones, which gleweth them, and
causes to Unite and grow together. This nourishment is called Callus, which
must be increased by all means. When once it begins to grow, you shall perceive
it by these signs; the inflammation cease, and the pain is abated, and the
member again reduced to it is natural Color. To engender Callus, let the
patient use meats that are gross and viscous, and breed good juice: and that
the Callus may be engendered neither too big nor too small, have respect to the
diet, fomentation and plasters. If the Callus grow but slowly, that there be
need to increase it, use plasters that do moderately heal; of which sort here
be many directed, in this book. And on the contrary, if it appear too big, use
Astringent Medicines, a compressing ligature or binding; apply also a plate of
lead upon the place, And use fomentations made with Oil, Saltpeter, or Water
and Salt made hot. But if the member appear smaller and leaner then ordinarily
and naturally it was before, then apply unto the affected member hot attractive
Medicines. Let the patient use large diet, and void all things causing
Melancholy.

Of eluxation of the joints, and to set a Bone put out of joint.
THE Greeks call this Exarthrema, the Latins Eluxatio; which is as much as to
say, a Joint writhen or started aside out of its natural place into another; so
that the free natural motion thereof is thereby hindered: so that if the Bone be
quite out of joint, then this is called an eluxation; or a luxation only,
without a compound, you may call it, if you please; but if it be only a little
extorted and strained aside, that is not properly a luxation, but only a strain
or wrench. If the joint be luxated, then must manual operation be used to set
the same, and reduce it to its proper place; which is the first intention to be
used in this case. And the manner of this operation must be in this manner: to
reduce the bone out of his socket into his natural seat, extend the member
decently and tenderly with the hands, till you feel the Bone brought again into
his proper place; but sometimes the operation of the hands suffices, not to
perform this work alone, but instruments and bands prepared fit for that
purpose must be used, as Hippocrates teaches, Hippocrates lib. de Luxatis and
fractis.

The Luxated member being well reduced again to his natural place, your next
intention must be to endeavor to strengthen and confirm the affected joint,
and keep the Bone that it slip not out of its place again; for which purpose,
have Rollets and Splints in readiness to bind up the member, and keep it from
hurt and motion. But before you roll or bind up the same, anoint it with Oil of
Roses, and lay upon it some old fine Linen-cloths wet in Oil of Roses, or
whites of Eggs, and apply them to the joint; then gently roll up the member,
having first wet your Rollers in Water and Vinegar mixed together; then apply
your splints about the joint, if there be necessity: and they may be made of
leather or pastboard.

This being done, if the patient be at ease, and no accidents happen, open it
not again in ten days: if any inflammation happen, some refrigerating
Cerecloth is good to be used. And to prevent and stop defluxions of humors,
which may chance to fall down and weaken the joint, this plaster following is
very good to withstand the same.

Take Colophonia, Pitch; of each 1 ounce, Galbanum, Myrrh, Ammoniacum,
Frankincense; of each 3 drams, The Muscilage of Holly-hocks 3 quarters of an
ounce, Polypody Roots, Misleden, Heartwort; of each 1 quarter of an ounce, Wax
1 ounce, Turpentine 3 quarters of an ounce.
Dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, and then put to it the Wax, Pitch and
Turpentine: melt them together, and boil them over a gentle fire, till the
Mussilage and Vinegar be consumed; then temper the other things being beaten
very small, amongst them, and then make it into a plaster.

Spread of this Plaster upon a cloth or piece of leather, and lay it on the
grieved place.

Another Plaster for the same.
Take Holly-hock Roots 3 ounces, Acorn-budds 3 quarters of an ounce. Flowers of
Self-heal 1 ounce and a half, Sallet-Oil, Oil of Mirtles; of each 3 quarters of
an ounce, Red Wine 24 ounces, Self-heal Water 12 ounces; Frankincense, Myrrh;
of each 1 dram, Deeres suet 1 scruple and a half, Turpentine half an ounce,
Sealed earth half a dram, Mumy two Drams and a half.
First bruise the Holly-hock roots, Self-heal flowers, and Acorn-budds, very
small, and beat them to pap; then add thereunto the Wines, Oils, and Self-heal
Water, and boil all together, till the Wine and Water be consumed; then strain
it out hard, and put in the Frankincense, Myrrh, Deeressuet and Turpentine;
then sees them again, till the moisture be consumed; then put in the
Sealed-earth and Mumy, and as much Wax as is sufficient to make it into a
Plaster: which is very good for all Luxations and broken Bones, to assuage the
pain, and strengthen the sinews.

In all such accidents, as broken and dislocated Bones and joints, have a care
to defend the afflicted Member from inflammation and humors that are apt to
flow thereunto; To prevent which, a moderate diet must necessarily be used, and
that not only in this, but in all other distempers; for health consists in
mediocrity: and also, if need require, purging and letting blood are not amiss
to be used.

It will not be here amiss, to add some remedies fit to be used for the
shrinking of sinews, and withered joints, and contractures, which oftentimes
happen after Luxation of the joints, or fractures of the Bones; which many
times happens after such mischances, if the same be long before they be cured.

A Salve very good for an extenuated or withered Member.
Take Cats Grease, Deers-suet, Bears-Grease, Hogges-Grease, The marrow of Neats
feet, Honey, Doggs-Grease, Badgers-Grease; of each a like quantity:
Boil them all together in Wine to an ointment; then strain it, and therewith
anoint the place affected, before the fire, twice a day.

Another for the same purpose.
Take Sage, Mallows, Nettles, and their Roots, Camomile, Sprigges of Juniper,
of each one handful; Dogs-Grease, and fresh Butter, of each 3 ounces; Chop the
Herbs small, and boil them to a grout, and then strain them through a
Course-cloth, then put the Grease and Butter to it, and sees it again to an
ointment; then reserve it for the uses before mentioned.

And thus have we done with the first part of Luxated, dislocated, and broken
Bones, and withered members, and shrinking sinews: next follows an accident
many both old and young languish under; namely, Ruptures, or broken Bellyes.

Of Ruptures.
THIS Disease is generally called in Latin Hernia; although there be several
causes, degrees, and distinctions thereof: but generally is that which falls
down into the Cod.

There is a kind of Rupture that comes about the Navel, or privy parts, both
of Man and Woman; the Rupture of the Navel swells and hangs out of the
forepart of the Belly: for a remedy whereof, these following Medicines are
convenient:

Take Comphrey well stamped 1 ounce, then melt half an ounce of Wax, then mix
them well together in the form of a Plaster, and lay it on the Navel.

But if the Rupture be great, then anoint the backbone of the party with
Bears-Grease.

The Herb Perfoliata, in English called Thorough Wax, is very profitable for
all Ruptures, either in Children or other people, if the Herb and Seed thereof
be sod, and laid upon the Rupture.

A dragm of the Decoction thereof in Water or Wine given to drink, is good, or
the Herb and Seed stamped, and the weight of a scruple and a half thereof given
to a Child in Pap.

The groyn and privy places be likewise subject to tumors and swellings, with
heat, hardness; and by reason of the tenderness and sensibility of those parts,
afflicted with great anguish and pain: for which it is not besides the purpose,
to prescribe these following Remedies.

For a Tumor or smelling in the groyn or privy parts.
TAke Muscilage of Elecampane Roots, Linseed, Figs, and Sebestes, of each six
ounces, and as much Oil of sweet Almonds, Litharge of gold prepared, three
ounces; sees it until the Muscilage be consumed, always stirring it: then
put thereto an ounce of Wax; make it into a Plaster, and lay it on the place
grieved.

A Salve for the same.
Take Rosin and Wax, of each 1 ounc. a great Onion, and two Lilly-Roots; stamp
them, and sees them in Goats Milk; then strain them through a linen Cloth, and
let it sees well again; then stir it about until it be cold, and so reserve it
for the use aforesaid.

If there be any open Ulcer, then use this following. Take Tutty prepared 1
ounce. Mastick, Frankincense, of each 1 quarter of an ounce, White Wax, half an
ounce.
Oil of Roses a sufficient quantity, to make it into a Salve. If the place be
raw, and in great anguish, then anoint the same with Oil of sweet Almonds.

Also take Argal, and put it into a new pot, and burn it till it be black; then
beat it small, and strew it on the sore.

These are only for outward swellings and Ulcers: if there be any inward sore
or Ulceration in the conduit of the yard, stoppage or inflammation, then use
this injection following, spouting it in gently with a Syrringe.

Take White Wind one pint, Burnt Allom 2 dragms and a half, Verdigrease 1
dragm and a half.
Boil them well together, then strain it through a Cloth, and inject it with a
Syrringe.

A Salve for the same, to anoint the whole member.
Take the Juice of Tassels of Planten, and Comphrey, of each two ounces;
Camphire 4; Starch and Ceruse of each one ounce, Litharge of Gold half an
ounce, Tutty prepared with Rose Water 1 dragm and a half; the whites of three
Eggs well beaten: bruise the Champhire very small, then incorporate them all
together in a leaden Mortar, and make a Salve thereof, for the use
aforementioned.

But to return to speak of the Ruptures falling into the Cods: of which there
are several causes and kinds; one is a swelling or puffing up of the Cods
through wind; Another, and that is most properly called a broken belly, when
the Rym of the belly is broken, and the bowels or guts fall down into the Cod
little or much, sometimes in one side only, and sometimes into both. And
another kind (with is improperly called a Rupture) is a swelling of the Cod
with water, and superfluous matter of moisture; to which Hydropical persons are
subject: And that Disease is very well known by the swelling of the Cods.

But first we come to speak of the Hernia, or broken belly, with happens above
the Cod; the cause hereof is oftentimes in Children, crying, some
loud-hooping-cough, or extreme blowing with wind; in older persons as well as
the former, falls, thrusts, blows, much labor, or heavy burdens.

A speedy remedy is necessary to be sought after for this Rupture; for the
older it grows, the more difficult it will be to Cure. Let the Patient be laid
on his back, and put up the bowels gently again till they come into their due
place; then lay thereon this Plaster following, spread upon a piece of Leather,
and bind it hard on, and apply thereto a convenient trusse.

A Plaster for one that is broken in the Belly.
Take Pitch, Mastick; of each 3 dragmes, Frankincense 1 quarter of an ounce,
Hypocistis, Sarcocolla, Juice of Sloes, of each 1 dram and a half. Boodstone,
Dragons blood, Aloe; of each 2 dragmes and a half, Birdlyme 1 dragm and a half,
Comphrey, Galls, Pomgranate Pills, Fine Bolus; of each 3 dragmes, Aristolochia
1 quarter of an ounce, Sumach, Pomgranate Flowers, of each 1 drag. Deers suet 2
ounces, Turpentine and Wax a quantity sufficient.
Dissolve the Gums and Juyces in hot Vinegar or Wine, the rest beat small, and
make thereof a Plaster, and apply it as before is directed.

Another of the same.
Take Pitch half an ounce, White and Red Wax, Litharge of Gold, Ammoniacum,
Galbanum, Mumy, of each 2 dragmes and a half, Bridlyme, Myrrh, Cypres Nuts,
Frankincense, of each one dragm, Gypsum, or Plaster of a wall, Bolus, Aloe, of
each half an ounce, Mastick, Comphrey, Daisie Roots, of each 3 dragms and a
half, Turpentine 1 ounce, Aristolochia, Galnuts, of each 1 ounce, Dragons blood
1 quarter of an ounce.
Dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, and melt the Pitch, Wax, and Turpentine; and
beat to powder all that is to be powdered; then make them all together into a
Plaster: you may increase or diminish the quantity of the Wax, as the cause
requires.

Another Plaster for a Rupture.
Take Cypres Nuts 2 ounces, Myrrh, Cypres Roots, Marjoram Gentle, Galls, Juice
of Sloes, Frankincense, Gum, of each 1 ounce.
Dissolve the Gum in Wine, then temper the rest amongst it, and make thereof a
Plaster, and lay it upon the Rupture.

For the same.
Take Daisy Roots and flowers, Wild Tansy flowers and roots, Comphrey; of each
half an ounce, Mastick 1 quarter of an ounce, Pomgranate flowers, Juice of
sloes, of each half a dragm, Hares Hair chopped small 1 dragm, Birdlyme 1 ounce,
Pitch 2 ounces, Wax five dragms,
Oil of Roses, a sufficient quantity to make thereof a Plaster, and apply it
as before is directed: you need not take off the trusse but once in 4. or 5.
days, and then renew the Plaster.

Another excellent Plaster for the same.
Take Dragons blood half a dragm, Myrrh* Sarcocolla, Opopanacum, Brimstone,
Amber, Mastick, Comphrey, of each 2 dragmes and a half, Myrtle Seed, Yellow
Myrobalaus, of each 2 drag. Bark of Pine-apples, Cypres Nuts, of each 4
scruples, Dragagant 1 dragm. Garden-Snayls 4. or 5.
Dissolve the Gum in Vinegar, and add thereto as much fish-lyme dissolve in
Vinegar, as is sufficient to make the rest into a Plaster; mix them all
together, and dry away the moisture by a small fire.

A Drink to be used after this Plaster.
Take Comphrey, Tormentil, of each 1 quarter of an ounce, Codwort, Sengreen,
Cinquefoil, Mugwort, Herb Trinity, of each 2 handfulls, Gariofilata, Verbascum,
Broad planten, of each 2 dragms and a half; Roses, Horse-tail, of each half a
handful:
Cut and bruise the Herbs gross, and put to them Aquavitae, and red seething
Wine, of each six ounces, or so much as will cover it: let it so stand 14
hours; afterward strain it through, and wring it out, and sweeten it with
Syrup of Myrtles; And give hereof from one ounce to three, according to the
strength of the Patient, about 6 hours after the applying of the Plaster last
before mentioned.

A Pultiss for young Children.
Take meal of Lupins, and burnt Linen, of each a like quantity; and make a Pap
or Pultiss thereof with Wine, and spread it between two fine Clothes, and lay
it upon the Rupture.

A mild Plaster for Children.
Take Beans what quantity you please, steep them in warm water, peel them, and
let them dry again; then beat them to powder, and take 2 ounces thereof,
Oaken-wood filed small 1 oun. Comphrey sodden in Wine, and then beat to Pap 3
ounces: Let all these be boiled together till it be thick; then spread it on a
Cloth, and lay it on the Rupture, changing it three times a day, and once in
the night: fasten it well on with a trusse; continue it 4. or 5. Weeks
together, till the Rupture be cured, and the Skin grown strong.

A Drink for a Rupture.
Take Sengreen, Consolida, Saracenica, red Beets, Herb Bennet, Fennel,
Knot-grass, and Paul's Betony; of each one handful: boil them all in Wine, and
drink of it twice a day, morning and in the afternoon, but not at night: let a
Child continue taking it 6 Weeks, and an old body 12 Weeks.

Shepherds purse, Sanacle, and Valerian, and Hart's-tongue, decocted in Wine,
and drunken, are very good.

An Ointment for a Rupture.
Take Woman's Milk 16 ounces, Badgers-grease, Capons-grease, Deers-suet and
Comphrey, of each two ounces, the innermost rynde of a Cherry-tree, cut small,
one ounce and a half; boil them all a little together, and strain it hard
through a Cloth, and therewith anoint the Rupture morning and evening.

Of a Rupture through Wind.
In this case, the Patient must eschew all such meats and drinks as cause wind;
as Milk, sweet Wine, and the like; moist fruits, and all moist meats: And use
means to expel the wind* for which this Clyster following is good.

A Clyster for a windy Rupture.
Take Cumin, Annis, Caraway, Fennel, Ameos, of each one dragm, Rue one handful
and a half:
Sees these together in a quart of water, till the half be consumed: Then take
12 ounces of this decoction; Oil of Rue, and Oil of Bays, of each one ounce
and a half; Jndia-Salt, and Salgem, of each half a dragm; Sugar 1 ounce and a
half; make a Clyster thereof, and give it once a day: and every morning let the
Patient take a dram of Mithridate, with 2 ounces of Ruewater, 7 hours before
meat: this expels wind marvelously.

An outward Losion for the same.
Take Sulpher vive beaten 2 ounces, Grains half an ounce, grossly beaten; sees
this together till the third part be sodden away: dip a Sponge in this water
being warm, and lay it on the Privities, renewing it 5. or 6. times a day.

Hernia aquosa, or the watery Rupture.
This is an Hydropical watery humor in the Liver, Veins and pores, that does at
last fall down into the Cods, and is known by the swelling of the Cods and
Navel: for a Remedy hereof, the Patient must be purged, and keep an orderly
diet; that thereby the water may be expelled out of the body: to purge those
humors, take this Drink following:

A Drink to purge for the watery Rupture.
Take Agarit and Hermodactyls of each one dragme and a half, Ginger one
scruple, Ireos a dragme; Hony-Water 4 ounces: then make the Hony-Water warm,
and steep the other things therein 24 hours; strain it, and drink it warm, and
fast 6. hours after it.

Another for the same.
Take Electuarium Indium 3 dragms, burnt Copper 8 grains, Water of blew flower
de Luce 2 ounces: mix them all together, and drink it.

Pills for the same.
Take the Root of Laureola one scruple, steep it 5. days in Vinegar, Sulpher
Vive 4 grains, burnt Copper 2 grains, Licoris, Annis, and Dragagant, of each 4
grains: make pills thereof with Juice of Roses, and take them all at once.

To provoke Urine in this case is requisite: for which, use these things
following.

To move Urine.
TAke red Pease 6 ounces, 2 Fennel Roots: boil them well together, and take 5
ounces of this Decoction, at a time.

For the same.
Take Smallage-water and Melilot-water; of each 2 ounces and a half; sweeten it
with Sugar, and drink hereof a week together.

Or for the same, drink Broom-water about 5 ounces at a time.

To strengthen the Liver, use this Confection.
Take Trochiscos, Diarhodon, Species Diacynamomi; of each 1 dragme, burnt Ivory
one scruple, 4 ounces of white Sugar: sees it in Fennel-water, and make
Tabulats of it, and take of these a quarter of an ounce before meat.

A Fomentation for the Rupture.
Take Seseli, Cumin, Camomile, and Melilot, of each one ounce; sees these
together in a quart of Water, until the third part be spent, and therewith
bathe and foment the Rupture; and then lay this Plaster following upon it,
binding it on warm.

A Plaster for the watery Rupture.
Take Roots of blew flower de Luce, and Roots of wild Cucumers, of each 3
ounces, Pease-meal and beane-meal, of each 2 ounces, Oil of Rue, and Juice of
Bay Leaves, of each 2 ounces: sees this together to the thickness of a
Plaster, and then spread it on a Cloth, and bind it warm upon the Rupture.

Another Plaster for the same.
Take Mastick one ounce, Cypres-Nuts half an ounce, Dragagant and Gum, of each
one dragme: temper these together with Oil of Roses unto a Plaster, and so
apply it.

If the Rupture be caused of Phlegmatic humors, then use these Purgations
which follow.

A Purge for a Rupture caused through blood or Phlegm.
TAke Turbith 1 quarter of an ounce, Ginger one dragme, white Sugar 3 dragmes:
temper them together; Let the Patient take a dram hereof every fourth day with
Worm-wood-water, and the other mornings between them take this Potion following.

A Drink for the same.
Take Water of Balm, Betony, and Wormwood, of each one ounce and a half,
Sugar half an ounce, Vinegar of Squills one ounce: mix them together, and so
drink them.

A Plaster for the same, to take away the Phlegmatic matter.
Take Sandaracha two ounces, Sarcocolla one ounce, Ashes of Bean-straw, or
Vine-stocks 6 ounces, Vinegar of Squills 2 ounces, Water as much as is needful
to sees them all together till they come to the thickness of a Plaster; and
lay it upon the place, binding it on warm, as before is directed.

If the Rupture be fleshy, that is, a fleshy excresence growing in the Cods,
which may be caused through overmuch heat and moisture in the Cods, whereby the
blood turns into flesh, which much weakneth and infeebleth this member; in
this case, such meats and drinks must be refrained, which do overmuch heat or
moisten, such as sweet Wines, Sugar, delicate meats, and the like; and on the
contrary, the Patient must eat such meats as are cooling and drying. The
Hemorrhoids in the fundament must be opened together with the Liver or Median
Vein, and outwardly apply these Plasters following.

A Plaster for a fleshy Rupture.
Take Leutil, Nightshade, Roses, Plantayn, of each 6 ounces, Barley-meal 12
ounces.
Boil these together in a sufficient quantity of Vinegar, and thrice as much
water, adding thereto 3 whites of Eggs; boil it to the thickness of a
Plaster, and lay it all over the Cod, renewing it every day, 5 or 6 days one
after another.

Of the Melancholy blood putrefying in the Cods, which is called Buris.
THis is the falling of Melancholy blood down into the Cod, which causes great
swelling there: and sometimes if the Cod be full of matter and corruption, and
it remain long, it putrifyeth the Stones, and spoileth them; therefore care is
to be taken speedily to purge away, and draw out the Melancholy humors; to
effect which, it is necessary, that the Liver-Vein be opened, and the next day
afterward, give the Patient this purging Potion, viz. Catharticum Imperiale,
with Violet-Water, or Lilly-water; and take 6 or 8 days following after, these
Potions following: Take Violet-water, Lettice-water, and Hop-water; of each one
ounce, Syrrup of Cytron-Pills one ounce and a half; drink it warm in the
morning: And outwardly to assuage the swelling, take these Medicines following,
viz.

Take Bean-meal 3 ounces, Muscilage of Holly-hocks, Camomile, Annis Seeds,
Fenegreek Seed, Raisins stoned, of each half an ounce.
Temper them with yolks of Eggs, and apply it to the grieved place.

A Pultis for the same.
Take Cow Dung, Crumbs of Rye-bread, Cumin, Nightshade, Bean-meal, Melilot,
Camomile, and Oil of Lillies: pound and sees them all together, and lay them
on the place grieved.

For the same.
Take Bean-meal, Lilley-Roots, Colewort-Leaves, Figs and Fenegreek-meal, of
each a like quantity, and sees them together being bruised into the form of a
Pultis, and so apply it.

Of the falling of the Bowels or Guts into the Cod.
THE first thing in this case, as before is generally directed, is diligently
to endeavor the putting up of the Bowels again into their due place; by taking
hold of the lower part of the Cods, and gently thrusting them up; the Patient
lying on his back with his buttocks something higher then the other part of his
Body, that thereby the Bowels may the easier be reduced to their due place.

Then foment and bath the whole Cods and parts about it, with such Lotions as
before are directed; then lay this Plaster following thereupon, and bind it on
with a good Trusse.

Take Cypres-Roots 2 ounces, Mil-dust 3 ounces, Comphrey-Roots, Daisy-Rootes,
of each 1 ounce, Isinglas 1 ounce and a half, Dragagant, Gum, Mumey, Burnt
Ivory, of each half an ounce, Dragons blood, Sagapenum, Sealed-earth, Fine
Bolus, of each 5 dragmes.
Pound the Roots, and sees them with the meal in 2 parts of Water, and 1 part
of red Vinegar, until it be thick enough; then mix molten Wax amongst it, as
much as is needful; stir it well together with dissolved Gum, till it be cold;
so spread it, and apply it as before is directed.

To assuage the pain of the falling down of the Bowels, Clysters are very
commodious to be used; for which, these following are very good.

Take white Sesamum Seeds grossly beaten, Linseed and Fenegreek; make a
decoction thereof, and mix therewith Butter and Oil of Violets, and administer
it warm.

For the same.
Take broth made of a Hen or Cock, and Oil of Sesamum; of each 6 ounces, Salgem
half an ounce: temper them together for a Clyster.

Another.
Take sweet Wine 12 ounces, fresh butter, and Oil of sweet Almonds, of each 2
ounces, Benedicta Lax, half an ounce: temper them all together for a Clyster.

To strengthen the broken place where the Bowels come through.
Take Iron Dross sodden in Vinegar, and Myrrh, of each half an ounce, Dragons
blood, fine Bolus, Frankincense, Mastick, Sealed Earth, and Juice of Sloes, of
each one quarter of an ounce, Cypres Nuts, and Mumey, of each 3 quarters of an
ounce, Isinglas 2 ounces: make them all together into a Salve, with Wax and
Rosin as much as is needful; with this anoint the Cods thrice a day, and knit
it up always with a Trusse.

A good Drink for a Rupture.
Take Rosemary half an ounce, Cynamon half a dragme, Balme-Flowers, Ginger,
Borage, Nutmegs, of each half a dragme; sees these together in 7 quarts of
Water till the 4 part be consumed, then add thereto 16 ounces of Honey, then
boil it again, till the third part be consumed, and use it.

A Confection for the same.
Take Frankincense, Mastick, Juice of Sloes, Hypocistis, of each 1 dragme and a
half, Roses, burnt Ivory, parched Cummin, Dill-Seed, of each one drag. Cypres
Nuts half an ounce, Steel filed small, Iron Dross decocted together in red
Vinegar, of each one quarter of an ounce; dried Seeds of Pomgranates one ounce:
beat them all small together; then take Honey of Roses 18 ounces, white Sugar
12 ounces, Granado Wine 6 ounces, Dragagant-Gum, of each half an ounce: sees
both of these Gums with Honey, Sugar, and this Juice, till it be thick: when it
begins to be cold, put it into a Mortar, and temper the other things amongst
it, stirring it well together: give the Patient 2 dragmes thereof in the
morning, and let him fast 2 hours after it; and one dragme at night, 2 hours
after Supper.

Let the Patient keep himself as quiet as possible, forbear much stirring and
carnal Copulation; and all excess either of meat or drink; and forbear binding
meat, strong drink, and new Wine. So far of Ruptures.

The perfect OCULIST.
THE Author first begins with 6 precious Waters, profitable both for the
Eyes and other things; which he thus sets down:

For to tell of 6 precious Waters, made and sent to a Queen that sometime was in
England.

The first Water is this.
Take Fennel, Rue, Vervaine, Endive, Betony, Germander, Red roses, Maydenhaire,
of each 1 ounce.
Stamp them, and steep them in White Wind a day and a night, and distill a Water
of them; This Water shall depart in three, ( that is, you shall draw 3 several
Waters,) the first part ye shall do in a glass by it self: and know ye of a
truth, that this Water is as precious as Gold, The second as Silver, The third
part as precious as Balm; and keep these 3 parts in glasses.

This Water shall ye give to the Rich for Gold; to mean men for Silver, and to
the Poor for Balm.

This Water keeps the Eyes in cleerness, and avoydeth the Quitery and gounde,
and cleereth and sharpneth the sight.

The second Water.
TO the second Water take Salgema pound, and wrap it in a green Dock-leaf, and
lay it in the fire till it be well roasted, and wax white, and put it in a
glass against the air at night, and at the morrow it shall be turned to white
Water like unto Crystal; keep this Water well in a glass, and do a drop into
thy Eye, and it shall cleanse and sharp thy sight: And it is good for the evil
at the heart, and for the Morphew, and for Sance-fleam, and for the Canker in
the Mouth, and for other evils in the Body.

The third Water.
THE 3 Water is as follows: Take the Root of Parsley, Endive, Monache, Fennel,
Betony an ounce: wash them well in Water, and bray them well, and then steep
them well in White Wind a day and a night, and then distill them.

This Water is more worth then Balm: It keeps a good sight, and cleanses it
of all filth; it refraineth tears, and comfort the head, and avoideth the
Water that causes headache.

The fourth Water.
THE 4 Water is this; Take Parsly-Seed, Annis, Caraway, Vervaine, of each 2
dragmes, Centory 10 dragmes: beat all these to powder, and do it in warm water
a day and a night; then distill it. This water is a precious water for all sore
Eyes, and very good for the health of a man's body, or Woman's.

The fifth Water.
THE fifth Water is such, that with it you may do many marveylous things.

Take Lymel of Gold, Silver, Latin, Copper, Iron, Steel, and Lead; And take
Litharge of Gold and Silver, and take Camomile and Columbyne, and steep all
together in the Urine of a man-child a day and a night; The second day in
White Wind; the third day in the Juice of Fennel; the fourth day in the whites
of Eggs; the fifth day in a Woman's milk that nourishes a man-child; the 6 day
in red Wine; the 7 day in whites of Eggs; and upon the eighth day, blend and
mix all these together, and distill a water of them, and keep this water in a
vessel of Gold or Silver. The Virtues of this water is this; it does away all
manner of sickness of the Eyes, the Perle, the Sckome of the tears, and the It Is
an old English word; if Geofry Chaucer were here, he could tell you the meaning
of it. It Is too old for me.
Quiters, and draws again into their due form the Eyelids that are bleared;
it slays the ach of the head; And if a man drink of it, it keeps his visage
long to be young. There is no man can tell half the Virtues of this Water.

The sixth Water.
TAKE Lapis Caluminaris, and do it in the fire till it be red as a Rose, and
slack it in a pint of white-VVine, and do so 9 times, and after grind it and
beat it small, and searse it very clean; then Infuse it in the Sun, in
Fennel-water, Vervain, Roses, Celendine, Rue, and three-leaved Grass (the
distilled water of them, not the Herbs,) of each a like quantity, in a Vial of
glass, so that the Water may settle clear about 5 inches above the stone in
the bottom; and when you will use it, stir it together; and take up a drop of
it with a feather; and if it abide, then it is fine and good; then drop of it
in an Eye that is watery or running, or an Eye that has a dim sight: and for
the headache anoint the Temples herewith; it is precious for helping the sight,
and for ache in the head.

To clear the sight of the Eyes, a good Water, and for itching thereof.
TAKE Fennel, Roses, Vervain, Celendine and Rue, of each 2 ounces, and distill
water of them, which is good to clarify the sight of the Eyes, being washed
therewith, according to this verse:

Feniculus, Rosa, Vervens, Celedonia, Ruta,
Ex istis fit aqua quis lumina reddit acuta.
Of Fennel, Vervain, and the Rose,
Herb Celendine and Rue,
A pure Water is Compose,
That does the sight renew.
Another for the same.
Take red Snailes, and sees them in fair water, and there will arise an Oil or
fat; which separate clean by it self, and reserve it in a glass, and therewith
anoint thy Eyes morning and evening.

To Clarify the sight of the Eyes.
Take red Roses, Smallage, Rue, Vervain, Mayden-hair, Eyebright, Endive,
Sengreen, red Fennel, Celendine, of each a quarter of a pound; wash them clean,
and infuse them in white wind a day and a night, and then distill them: the
first Water will be like Gold, the second like Silver, and the third like
balm. And this water is very good for all manner of sore Eyes, for a web,
perle, or haw.

Another for sore Eyes.
TAKE Smallage, Fennel, Rue, Vervain, Egrimony, Betony, Scabious, Avens,
Hounds-tongue, Eyebright, Pimpernel, red Roses, and Sage; Distill all these
together with a little Urine of a Man-child, and five grains of Frankincense;
And of this distilled water, drop a drop or two into the Eyes at night when you
go to bed.

For pain in the Eyes.
TAKE Egrimony, Vervain, Fennel, Rue and Roses, and put them in a Scillatory,
and spring on them good white-VVine, and distill it. This water is good for
swelling of a man's Eyes that comes of Cold, and for bleared Eyes, and Eyes
that be red with anguish, and eases the pain of them.

Another for the pain in the Eye.
TAke a little Allom and powder of Mint, and mix them together; draw thereof a
Water, and put thereof a drop into the Eye, going to bed, and in the morning.

Another for sore Eyes.
TAke Flowers of Hawthorn, and the Flowers of Withy, and distill it; make
thereof a Water, and this Water is good for the sight in the Eye, and for the
redness in the Eye, and for burning and heat in the Eye, and for Eyes that do
lightly Water; and for webbs in the Eye of a Man or Woman.

A good Water for the sight.
TAke Sage, Fennel, Rue, Vervain, Betony, Egrimony, Sanacle, Pimpernel,
Eyebright, Cinquefoil, and Rue, of all these like much, and grind them in a
Mortar; then take powder of Alom, and a little Camphire, and mingle them
together, and distill it: And know you of a truth, that this Water is
profitable for all evils of the Eyes; And restores the sight that has been
almost lost, by the space of 3 years.

Water of Copporas, to make good for the Eyes.
TAke Copporas, and grind it to powder, and put a little water to it, and let
it stand a day and a night, and strain it through a Cloth. This Water is good
for the Eyes, and for the Canker in the mouth, and for noli me tangere, and to
make a deer complexion.

Another Water for sore Eyes, and pain in the Head.
TAke red Roses, Maydenhair, Rue, Vervain, Eyebright, Betony, Calamynt, of
each one handful; steep them in white-VVine 24 hours: The second day, distill
it in a Distillatory. The first water that thou do distill, it shall be like
color of Gold; The second, of Silver; The third, of Balm. And this is called,
the precious water for Ladies.

Another Water for sore Eyes.
TAke good red Wine, and Cumin, and Salt, and put it in a pot; and set upon
the pot an Alembick, and stop it fast about with good paste, and make a slow
fire of Cole: The first Water that is distilled, is good for all cold sickness
in the Eyes of Man or Woman; The second Water is good for all manner of hot
maladies in the eyes.

Another for the same.
Take and fill a pot of thick Dregs of good Ale, and put thereto a handful of
Cumin and Salt, and put a Lembeck on thy pot, and stop it about with paste, and
distill it: a precious Water for the Eyes.

Salgem.
THE Water of Salgem is good to clear the filth of a man's Eyes, and it is good
for the scurffe and Morphew, and for the stink of the hammes and Arme-pits.
Take a pound of Salgem, and wrap it up in Colewort-Leaves, and do it in the hot
Ashes, And there let it sees in his own kind, till it be turned to whiteness;
after that, lay it on a marble-stone a day and a night, and that which goes
over thereof, will be a Silver Color: Then take that, and keep it in a glass,
and when need is, put a drop thereof into the sore Eye.

For the haw in the Eye.
Take Pepper, and stamp it to powder; then take the marrow of an old Gooses
wing, and mingle it together; and do it in a Cloth, and burn it to powder, and
put thereof into the Eye.

For dim sight, and bleared Eyes.
Take Ginger and rub it on a whetstone, into a fair Basin, and put thereto as
much Salt, and temper it in Wine with the juice of Eyebright, and let it
stand infusing a night and a day; And then take the cleerness that ascends
above, and put in a glass for use: and with a feather, when thou go to bed,
or as often as thou lie down to sleep, therewith annoint thy eye-lyds within
and without, and it will heal them.

An ointment for sore Eyes, approved.
Take Vinegar, and put it in a clean Basin, then take the flowers of plumbs and
mingle all together, and let it stand three days and three nights covered:
then put it in a box, and reserve it for your use, to anoint the Eyes when need
requires.

Another for the same.
Take Raw Cream made of Ewes milk, and spread it on the bottom of a fair
scowred Basin; then take a vessel that has stood with Ale in it 6. or 7.
days, and pour out the Ale, and whelm the pot or vessel over the Basin, so
letting it remain a whole night: then take the Cream, and keep the Cream in a
box till you need it for an ointment for sore Eyes.

Another for the same.
Take red Snayles that be without houses, and sees them in water; and after
that, burn them on a hot tilestone to powder, and mix the powder with the fat
that will arise above the water they are boiled in, And anoint the Eye-lyds
therewith at night going to bed.

For bleared Eyes.
Take the Juice of VVorm-wood, and mingle it with water, made of the white of
an Egg; and therewith anoint the Eyes, and it will put away the bloodiness and
aching thereof.

Another for the same.
Take Celendine, Rue, Planten, Annis; of each a handful, and as much Fennel as
of all the rest, and stamp them in a new earthen pot, and let it stand two days
and two nights, and then strain it, and therewith anoint the Eyes evening and
morning.

For a pin and Web in the Eye.
Take an Egg and roast it hard, and take the white all hot, and put in as much
white Copporis as a pease; and while it is hot, strain it through a Cloth, and
let it drop into the Eye a good drop. And this for young and old is proved a
good Medicine.

For Eyes that be blasted.
Take Tutty and Calamint, and wash them in White Wind 9 times, and then grind
them upon a stone with some of the White Wind, and white Goose-Grease, and
Capons Grease; and put thereof in the eye morning and at night: approved.

For Eyes that be red, and full of pain.
Take white Ginger, and rub it into a Basin on a whet-stone, put thereto as
much white Salt, and grind them together on a Marble-stone; and when it is
small ground, add thereto White Wind, and then temper them well together, and
let it stand so a day and a night; then pour out the thin clear liquor that
stands above, and put it in a Vyal: And when the sick goes to bed, anoint
well the Eyes with a clean feather. Probatum.

For Eyes that run with Water.
Take a Colewort leaf, and anoint it with the white of an Egg beaten well, and
lay it to thy Eyes when thou go to bed, and let it lie all night; and it
shall help thee by the grace of God.

To clear the Eyes, a Drink.
Take Celendine and stamp it, and temper it with fair water, and drink it three
days, and it shall heal the head, and clear the sight marvelously.

For the Perle in the Eye at first.
Take white Ginger that is good and fine, and rub it on a whet-stone of
Norway, into a sawcer of ^ewter, and put thereto White Wind; but let it be
muddy of the Ginger, and with a feather do it into thy Eyes.

A precious Water for Eyes, called the Water of Mr. Peter of Spain.
Take Fennel, Rue, Celendine, Vervain, Eyebright, Clary, Rosin, or the water
of Rosin, and stamp them by the space of a natural day in White Wind, and then
put all together in a Lymbeck, and distill a water thereof; wherewith wash the
Eyes: it clarifyeth and comfort them greatly.

The Powder of Master Peter de Villa Nova.
Take Tutty prepared one dragme, Antimony one dragme and a half, Marjoram 2
dragmes, Flower of red Coral one dragme and a half, Raw Silk of the Silkworm
cut small as may be, half a dragme; make hereof as subtle a powder as may be
made, and keep it in a box of Metal. This powder dries tears, and rectifieth
redness of the Eyes: And was made for Bishop John.

A Powder for the Eyes, called Bonaventure.
Take a dragme of Sugar Candy, Tutty prepared half a dragme, powder them, and
wash them with water of Roses, and spread them abroad on a Basin, and fumigate
the Basin with the fume of Lignum Aloes, and Frankincense; dry it, and powder
it subtily, and keep it in a box of brass or pewter, And put it in the Eyes
with a Pencil of Silver. This powder is good for all manner of spots in the
Eyes.

A precious Powder for a pin and Web in the Eye.
Take two dragms of Tutty prepared, of Sandragon one dragm, of Sugar one
dragme; beat them together to a very fine powder; whereof put into the Eye a
little at a time: approved.

For a hurt in the Eye, with a Thorn, Stubble, or any other thing.
Take Monsear and stamp it, and drink the Juice thereof; and lay three drops
upon the Eye: and stamp Egrimony, and lay it on the hinder part of the Eye.

For the Web in the Eye.
Take ground Ivy, and dress the Eye with the Juice thereof once a day, and it
will destroy it.

Another for sore Eyes.
Take Centory, and make thereof an Electuary with Honey, very thick, and eat
thereof. It is good for the stomach, and will make a man to have a good talent
to his meat: And therewith anoint the Eyes: it is very good for sore Eyes.

A Sovereign Medicine that helps the sight, and purges and clarifyeth the
Eyes, be they never so bleared.
Take a good quantity of Housleek, and stamp it in a Mortar, and wring out the
Juice clean; and put it in a broad Vessel a day and night till it be clear,
then take 20 Eggs, and sees them very hard; then take away the Yolk of every
Egg, and set the shell hot in wheat-bran, and fill it full of the water of
Housleek; and so serve all the Eggs while the water lasts, and let them stand
so a day and a night, at the least a day; then take the water and put it in
Vials. With this water anoint the Eyes morning and night.

Also, take a Pidgeon, and let it bleed in the right Vein under the wings, and
anoint thine Eyes with the blood 9 days and 9 nights, and more if it be need;
for this Medicine has been proved many times.

An excellent Ointment for the Eyes.
Take new Hogges-lard 2 ounces, Tutia prepared 1 ounce, Lapis Hematis washed 1
scruple, Aloes washed and powdered 12 grains, Perles 3 grains,
Steep the Grease 6 hours in Rose Water, then wash it 12 times in White Wind;
powder the Tutia very fine, and make it into an ointment with a little
Fennel-water, and therewith anoint the corner of the Eyes.

For Rheumatick Eyes.
First, purge the Head and the Body, and let the Patient sweat a little: Then
use this powder following for the Eyes.

Take Tutia, prepared 1 ounce and a quarter, red Coral, yellow Myrobalaus, of
each 1 quarter of an ounce, Pepper half a dragme: powder them very fine, and
strew them in the corners of the Eyes.

A Water to wash Rheumatick Eyes.
Take Rainwater, boil therein Galnuts, Myrtle-Seeds, fine Bolus and
Cypres-nuts, And therewith wash the Eyes oftentimes.

To assuage and drive away the pain of the Eyes.
Take prepared Tutty, Camphire bruised very small; of each one scruple,
Rose Water 1 ounce, White Wind half an ounce: temper them well, and when you
have occasion to use it, stir it well about, and put a drop or two in the Eye.

For redness in the Eyes.
This oftentimes proceeds from superfluity of blood, which flows unto the
Eyes; it is necessary in this case, to apply Cupping-glasses to the shoulders,
if need be, to open the Head-vein on the contrary side, and to purge the Body;
and outwardly to apply such things to the Eyes, as may repercusse and drive
back the humor offending, as follows.

For the redness of the Eyes.
Take the white of an Egg, and bray it with Woman's milk, and apply it to the
Eyes; I mean, drop a drop or two thereof into the Eye.

For the same.
Take Linseed and boil it in water, and wet a Sponge in that Decoction; and lay
it warm on the eyes; or do in like manner with the Decoction of Fenegreek or
Camomile.

For the same.
Take the Juice of Nightshade, and mix it with the white of an Egg well
beaten, and Oil of Roses: make a cloth wet in it, and lay it on the Eye.

For blood-shot Eyes.
Take the Juice of Wormwood, bray it well with the white of an Egg, and drop
thereof into the eye.

Another for pain or redness in the Eyes.
Take broad Planten water 1 pint, small bruised Verdigrease 1 ounce, fine
Bolus, Dragons blood; of each half an ounce, Camphire 1 quarter of an ounce,
distill this in a glassen helm in Balneo. This water takes away redness of the
Eyes and pains thereof, and helps swollen Eyelids that have long continued;
And is also good for all sore mouths, and stinking imposthumations therein, and
especial for all Ulcerations in the privy members.

For the same.
Take water of Vervain, Eyebright, Marjoram, of each half an ounce,
Fennel-water an ounce, Camphire half a dragme; the Gall of a great Pickerel:
temper and stir it all together, and use it as the other.

An Ointment for red Eyes.
Take Tutia half an ounce, Oil of Bay 1 quarter of an ounce, Honey and Vinegar,
of each one spoonful, Camphire 1 dragme; make a Salve thereof, and therewith
anoint the Eyelids: this is also good for inverted Eyelids.

Nutmegs confected in Honey, do help the redness of the Eyes, and defend the
sight, being eaten.

For hot Eyes.
Take water of Eyebright, Fennel, Celandine, of each 1 ounce; Tutia prepared 3
scruples: Sarcocolla and Pearls prepared, of each half a dragm: temper it
together, and therewith anoint the Eyes.

Another for the same.
Take Rue, Fennel, Vervain, of each equal parts; stamp them, and put to them
Rose Water and White Wind, as much as will cover them quite over. Let it infuse
a night, and then distill it in a glass body in balneo, and reserve the water
for the use aforesaid.

For pricking and hot Blysters in the Eyes.
This is oftentimes caused through overmuch moisture, settling it self in the
white or apple of the Eyes; These are dangerous to be cured: The Patient must
be let blood in the Head-Vein, and purged, to divert and carry away the
humors; And first take for it this Medicine following.

A Water for blystered and pricking Eyes.
Take Lycium and Saffron, of each half a dragme, Juice of sloes 1 scruple; mix
this with Rose Water, and drop a little into the Eyes with the white of an Egg.

Another for the same, to ripen and draw out the corruption, and assuage the
pain.
Take Fenegreek and Linseed, of each one quarter of an ounce; Melilot one
quarter of an ounce: sees it in fair water, and wash the Eyes oftentimes
therewith, and sometimes drop a drop thereof into the Eyes.

Another for the same.
Take Crumbs of white-bread, and steep it in Woman's milk; and lay it on the
Eyes; and when it grows dry, renew it, and lay on fresh.

A Confection, good for all heat, pricking and swelling in the Eyes.
Take Eyebright, Fennel, Cinnamon, of each 3 dragms, long Pepper, Mynts, Mace,
Marjoram, Vervain, Calamus, Rosemary, of each one dragme and a half, Sugar
Pennets 3 ounces, white Sugar 5 ounces: with the Sugar sees these Juyces
following, of Roses and Vervain, of each 2 dragmes, Juice of Fennel clarifyed,
five ounces, Juice of Celendine and Rue, of each one ounce and an half; let
them sees almost as thick as a Syrrup, afterward temper amongst it the rest
well beaten.

Another Ointment, to assuage the pain and heat in the Eyes.
Take young Endive, and stamp it with Oil of Roses, or Oil of Violets, and
therewith anoint the corners of the Eyes, and Eyelids.

Against itching Eyes.
This commonly proceeds from a defluxion of salt humor, that falls down to the
Eyes, and causes great itching and pricking in them, which makes the Patient
always very apt to rub them; but that he must by all means refrain, for that
hurts the sight, and makes the eyes more red, hot, and angry: he must be
moderate in eating, and forbear strong drink; purge the Body of choler, and
open the Head-vein, wash the Eyes well in Rose Water, and afterward foment and
bath them with the Decoction of Mallows, Violet-Leaves, Vervain, and Celandine.

For running Watery Eyes.
This infirmity sometimes flows from the weakness of the faculty retentive, And
is also often occasioned through superfluous moist Rheumes, falling down from
the brain upon the Eyes; and likewise it may be caused through mirth, but
oftener through its opposite sorrow; for that always follows that kind of
deceitful pleasure, under which excessive drinking seems to mask it self:
sharp winds, smoke, Coughs, stinking Savours, do perish the Eyes. For help of
this defluxion, use these remedies following.

Purge the Body with Pill. Cochiae Aureae, with succo Rosarum, or with Pills of
the 5 kinds of Mirobalaus.

Forbear all moist sharp meats and drinks, Salt Fish and Flesh, Milk, Cheese,
Onions, Garlic, and all that fumes into the head.

Outwardly, beat the white of an Egg, and temper it with Woman's milk, and drop
a drop thereof into the eye.

For the same.
Also take unripe Grapes, and burn the same to ashes, and make it into a fine
powder; and blow thereof into the Eyes, it dries up the Rheum, and takes
away the redness.

Another for Watery Eyes.
Take Rose-Leaves fresh half an ounc. Saffron, Spica, Indie, Gum Arabic, of
each 1 quarter of an ounce: beat them small, and make Cakes thereof with
rainwater; And when you will use it, take 1 dragme thereof, and lay it to
steep in the beaten white of an Egg, and herewith anoint the Eyes. This
repelleth the matter, and consumes the pain.

Another for the same.
Take Juice of Fennel well clarifyed 1 ounce and a half; Aloe two dragmes and a
half, a leaf of beaten Gold: mix them well together, then add to it 7. grains
of Frankincense: dissolve them in good White Wind, and mix them all together
with Fennel and Rose Water; and drop of this water into the Eyes twice a day.

Another for running and overmoist Eyes.
Take Myrrh half a dragme, Bloodstone one dragme, Rose-leaves one ounce: sees
them in a glass in Balneo to the consumption of half; then strain it through a
cloth, and drop thereof 4* times a day a drop into the Eyes.

A Salve for watery Eyes, to ease the pain, and stay the defluxion.
Take Juice of Rue, Oil of Myrtle; of each 2 ounces: Let it boil until the
Juice be sodden away: then strain it, and set it again upon the fire, and mix
amongst it Sapphire prepared half a dragme, Jacynt one scruple, Antimony one
dragme, burnt Copper 1 scruple, Tutia prepared 3 dragmes; let it sees gently
on the fire, adding thereto two or three dragmes of Wax, more or less,
accordingly as you desire to have it hard; when you will use it, melt a little,
and anoint the Eyelids therewith.

If the Rheum in the Eyes comes of cold; then at the first beginning of it,
take inwardly this Confection following.

A Confection for Watery Eyes, that come of taking cold.
Take Spica Indie 5 dragmes, Agarick 1 dragme and a half, Cynamon 1 ounc.
Mastick as much as the weight of them all: make a Confection thereof with
clarifyed Honey, and take thereof every morning.

Musk and Pomanders are good for the Patient to smell to in this case, and to
chew Betony in his mouth every morning.

An outward Ointment for the same.
Take Bloud-stone prepared 1 quarter of an ounce, Roses, burnt Ivory, white and
red Coral, Amber, yellow Mirobalaus, of each one dragme, Juice of Housleek 4
ounces: temper them together, and so keep it well stopped; anoint the Eyelids
every day herewith, and put of the same a drop into the Eye.

Another Water for the Eyes, to dry Catarrhes and cold Rheumes.
Take Gummi, the Muscilage of Fenegreek-Seeds; of each one quarter of an ounce,
of prepared Sarcocol, Spikenard, Myrrh, Cynamon, Aloes, Bever-cod; of each
half a scruple: powder them all together; then steep them in Woman's milk, and
drop thereof into the Eye.

A Salve for running Eyes, and for all Imposthumes and Pains, Scabs, Wounds,
and Bloud-shots in the Eyes.
Take Tutia prepared in Rose Water half an ounce, fresh Hogges-grease one
ounce, Starch 3 quarters of an ounce: bruise and temper them well together in a
Mortar, then wash it three times in the Water of Nightshade, and with this
anoint the forehead, the Temples and the Eyelids, both within and without.

A precious Water to strengthen the sight.
Take Rue, Roses, Endive, Betony, Vervain, Maydenhair, Egrimony, Clevers,
Yarrow, Eyebright, Pimpernel, Sage; of each two handfuls.
Cut the Herbs small, and steep them a day and a night in good White Wind: then
strain them out, and let the Moisture run from them: then bruise them grossly in
a Mortar: then distill them in Balneo, and keep the water for your use close
stopped.

For spots in the Eye.
Take Prepared Boodstone 3 dragmes, Burn Copper a quarter of an ounce,
Perles, Red Coral, of each 1 dragm. Gummi, Tragacant, of each 3 dragmes, Pepper
30 grains, Washed Ceruse 1 dragme, Dragons blood, Saffron, Amber, of each half
a dragme,
Make it into the form of trochises of a dragme apiece; and when you have
occasion to use it, bruise one of them, and infuse it in Woman's milk, and drop
a drop thereof into the Eye.

Another for spots in the Eyes.
Take Frankincense 5 dragmes, Saffron one dragm, Ammoniacum, Sarcocolla, of
each two dragmes and a half: beat them all into very fine powder, and make it
into Trochises, with Muscilage of Fenegreek; then when you will use it, bruise
it into Woman's milk, and therewith wash the Eyes: this does mundify and deer
the sight.

For mists and clouds before the Eyes.
It oftentimes happens in them that have the small Pox, afterward some clouds
or white spots remain in the Eyes, endangering the sight thereof; for which,
take the Juice of Corn-roses, the Juice of Centory; each apart or mixed
together, and therewith anoint the Eye.

A powder for the same.
Take the dried Juice of Celendine 3 dragmes, Ameos one quarter of an ounce, as
much white Sugar Candy; make a fine powder thereof, and blow a little into the
Eye when you go to bed. Probatum.

With this Medicine, I cured my self of a spot of whiteness, that grew over the
sight of my left Eye, immediately after my recovery of a grievous sickness of
the small Pox, in October 1646. by putting a little thereof into my Eye going
to bed, with a piece of clean Paper, rolled in form of a quill; which in a
short time took the spot clean away, not putting the Eye to any pain. Gloria
Deo in excelsis. Turner.

Another Powder much commended for the same.
Taste Pumice-stones, Cuttle-bones, prepared Sarcocolla, Aristolochia, red
Coral, Boras, of each one dragme, white Sugar Candy 6 dragmes; make them all
into a fine subtle powder.

A Honey to be prepared for the mists before the Eyes.
Take clarifyed Honey 2 ounces, the Juice of Fennel, the Juice of Centory, of
each 1 ounce and a half; sees it a little, and scumme it till it be clear, and
drop thereof on the cloud or white spot in the Eye.

A Plaster for swollen and extuberated Eyes, as if they would fall out.
Take Shepherds Purse, Planten, Housleek; make a Plaster thereof, and apply it
to the Eye: but if it proceed of weakness of the sinews, then it is needful to
purge the Head with Hiera, or pill Cochie: use Gargarismes, wherewith foment
the mouth; and lay to the Eyes this Plaster.

Take Juice of Sloes, Frankincense, Mastick, Cypres-Nuts, (and the Leaves of
each, if you can get them,) of each a like quantity; beat them very small, and
mix them with the Oil of Camomil, and lay it on the Eyes.

A Pomander for to strengthen and help a feeble and dim sight.
Take Rosemary, Nep, Marjoram, Pennyroyal, of each 1 dragme, Lignum Aloes,
Marjoram Gentle, Mace, of each 2 dragmes, Musk, Amber, of each 2 grains,
Make thereof a powder, and bind it in a piece of red Silk, and smell often to
it. All odoriferous Herbs, as Rosemary, Lavender, Gillo-flowers, Roses; and all
sweet smelling Fruits are good for the Eyes; so also does the sight of green
Fields, green Trees, the precious stone Smaragdus, green Glass, green Linen,
set before the Eyes, strengthen and quicken the sight: on the contrary,
lechery, and unmeasurable Venery, Drunkenness, sleeping on a full stomach, much
reading small prints or writing, vaporous Meats, moist Fruits, dark misty
weather, Smoke, Wind, Dust, Idleness and gross Meat, weakens and diminishes
the sight.

A Powder to strengthen the sight.
Take Tutia prepared 10 dragmes, make it into Past with the Juice of Marjoram
Gentle: when it has stood a night, and be well settled, Let it dry well; then
beat it again, and add to it Ginger, long and black Pepper, and Celendine, of
each 1 dragme, sal Armoniack half a dragme, all beaten small, and made Moist
with the Juice of Fennel; let it dry again, and so preserve it: when you will
use it, beat it into a very fine powder, and put thereof into the Eye.

A Powder to be strewed upon the Head, to strengthen and preserve the sight.
Take Cloves, Lignum-Aloes, Betony, Sandarac, burnt Ivory, Styrax, Calaminta,
of each half a dragme; make them into powder, and strew all the Head therewith;
and when you will renew it, kemb the Head, that the first may come off:
afterward use twice a month, before you go to sleep, one quarter of an ounce
of Trochises of Diambra, and hold them in your mouth till they be dissolved.

A Water to preserve and strengthen the sight, used by the Emperor Frederick
the third.
Take green Betony, Rue, Vervain, Celendine, Eyebright, Roses, of each 6
handfulls, Long Pepper, Cloves, of each half a dragme, Aloe one ounce,
Wood-bind and the flowers 3 handfulls.
Chop all the Herbs small, and distill it through a glass body; drop of this
Water into the Eyes, and anoint the Face therewith.

Another to preserve the sight.
Take Fenegreek, Holly-hock Roots, of each 2 ounces; cleanse them well, and
boil them in fair water by a mild fire, till half be consumed: then strain them
out, and add thereto, Aloes 2 dragmes, Sugar Candy, or Sugar of Roses 1 ounce;
strain it with Rose Water, through a Cloth, and let it sees unto a Syrrup;
keep it in a glass close stopped, And when you have occasion use it as other
Eye-waters.

Another for the same.
Take Rose Water, and white Sugar Candy, of each what quantity you please, And
infuse them in a glass together, and let them stand in the Sun two or three
days or more, before you use it.

The Galls of all Ravening Birds, as also of partridges, of Bulls, Hares,
Wolves, Foxes; and especially the Gall of a Bucke, does clear the Eyes and
sharpen the sight: if any one of them be decocted with Juice of Fennel, and
clarifyed Honey, and dropped into the Eyes.

A Confection for a bad sight, called Electuarium Oculiste, or the Oculists
Electuary.
Take Silver Mountain-Seed, Eyebright, Fennel and Cinabes, of each one dragme,
Cardamome and Mace, of each one dragme and a half, Seeds of Rue and Celendine,
of each one quarter of an ounce; Rosemary one ounce, Annis-Seed, Lignum Aloes,
Caraway, Consolida, Saracenica, of each half an ounce: make a Confection
thereof, with Sugar or Honey. This also strengthens the brain, restores lost
sight, and makes the Spirits of the sight subtiller and stronger.

Another Confection to preserve and strengthen the sight.
Take dried Betony. Celendine, Eyebright, Hysop, Penny Royal, of each 1
dragme, Fennel, Silver Mountain, Coriander prepared, Marjoram Seeds, Basil
Seeds, Cardamom, Cynamon, Ginger, Galingale, Nutmegs, Cloves, Long Pepper,
Lignum Aloes, Mastick, Spikenard, of each half a dragme,
Preserved Citron Pills 3 dragms, Conserves of Borage and Rosemary, of each 6
dragms: make them all into a Confection with Sugar Decocted in Fennel and
Rose Water; and take hereof as you have occasion.

Tabulats to strengthen the sight.
Take Species Diambrae a dragme and a half, Eyebright, Celendine, Fennel,
Vervain, of each one scruple; Seeds of Rue, and Silver Mountain, of each half a
dragme, Sugar 5 ounces; boil them all in Eyebright water, and make Tabulats
thereof, whereof take one every night after supper.

An excellent Water for the Eyes.
Take the Waters of Rue, Celendine, and Eyebright, of each 2 ounces; Fennel
and the Juice of Vervain, of each 1 ounce; the Gall of a Pickerel three dragms,
Lignum-Aloes beaten small, half a dragme: The Seeds of Rue, of Celendine, and
Marjoram Gentle, of each one dragme; put them together in a glass close stopped,
and luted with Dough: Let it stand a day in an Oven after the Bread is taken
out; the next day take of the past, and set it 12 days in the Sun; strain it,
and keep it in a glass close stopped for your use: when you will use it, put a
drop thereof into the Eyes morning and evening, lying on your back.

A Potion to purge for a weak sight.
Take Treacle half a dragme; mix it with White Wind, Water of Rue or Fennel:
take it once a week.

A Powder to strengthen the sight.
Take Eyebright half an ounce, Caraway sodden in Vinegar and dried, and
Marjoram Gentle 3. quarters of an ounce, Lignum Aloes, Spica Indiae, of each 1
ounce, Sorrel Seeds 5 scruples, Coriander prepared, Cinnamon, Fennel, of each 2
dragms,
Make thereof a Powder with Sugar as much as you please, And hereof you may
take a dragme after Supper, with a little Julip of Roses.

A Medicine to strengthen the sight, and for those that be purblind.
Take the Liver of a Buck, take out the Gall, and cut the Liver in pieces,
laying thereon whole long Pepper: cover it with another piece of Liver, and
Pepper, as before; thus continuing till all the pieces be laid one upon
another, and above and beneath be nothing but Liver: put this in an Oven, and
dry it well; then take off the Pepper, beat it small, and mix some Musk amongst
it; And with the moisture that droppeth from the Liver, moisten the Powder, and
make Lozenges thereof, And keep them till you have occasion for to use it; then
temper it with Eyebright water, and eat thereof two or three mornings together.

In all diseases and infirmities of the eyes whatsoever, have a special respect
unto your diet, avoid Salt and gross meats, strong drinks and venery,
especially excess in either: use temperance and moderation in all things, for
in mediocritate salus.

The Mirror of HEALTH. Of Aches, Meagrims, and other Diseases in the Head.
A Drink for the Headache.
TAKE Betony, Vervain, Wormwood, Celendine, Walwort, Rue, Bark of an Elder
Tree, Honey and Pepper, of each equal parts; stamp them together, and sees
them in Water, and drink thereof morning and evening.

Another for the same.
Take Rue, Vervain, Wormwood, Sage, Walwort, Alehoof, red Fennel, Planten,
inner rind of Elder, of each a handful; stamp them small, and put them in a
new earthen pot, with a quarter of an ounce of Pepper in Powder; put thereto a
Pottle of red Wine, and another of Stale Ale, and sees it till half be
consumed: strain it, and drink thereof 8 spoonfulls at a time, 9 mornings
together: And wash thy Head with this liquour following.

A Water for the Headache.
Take Rue, Alehoof, Betony, Vervain, Mints, red Fennel, Wormwood,
Southern-wood, of each a handful; wash them, and shred them small, and sees
them in Water in an earthen pot, and wash thy Head with some of the Water; and
mix the Herbs with wheatbran, and apply it to the mold of the Head as hot as
may be suffered, binding it on with a Cloth.

To cleanse the Head, Breast and Stomach, and cause a good appetite.
Take 3 handfulls of Centaury, and sees it in a Gallon of Water, till half be
consumed: then strain it, and put to it a pint of clarifyed Honey: then sees
it softly to a quart, and drink thereof two spoonfulls, morning and night,
first and last.

To cease Aches and swellings caus^d of Sores and Wounds in the Head.
Take Mallows, Wormwood, Mugwort, Betony, and Egrimony, of each a handful:
wash them, and stamp them, and put thereto 3 ounces of fine Wheat Flour, as
much Honey, and as much barrows Grease; stamp them together, and put thereto
red Wine a little quantity, and fry them, and lay them warm to the sore; but
lay a Colewort-leaf between the Plaster and the wound, and it will cease the
ach, and put away the swelling.

For the Meagrim in the Head, Imposthume, Dropsy, Fever, and all Aches in the
Head.
Take 4 penny weight of the Root of Pellitory of Spain, a half penny weight of
Spikenard, and grind them, and boil them in good Vinegar; and when it is cold,
put thereto a spoonful of Honey, and a Sawcer full of Mustard, and mingle them
well together; and hold thereof in thy mouth a spoonful at once, as long as a
man may be saying 2 Creeds, (if you have not forgot how to say the Creed) then
spit it out into a Vessel, and take more: and do so 9 or 10 times together.
Take it after Dinner, and going to bed, and wash thy mouth after it: and use
this Medicine 3 days together. Probatum.

For the Meagrim.
Take Galingale half a dragme, Ginger one dragme, Nutmegs half a dragm, Cloves
two dragmes, Elecampane two dragmes, Annis a dragme, Licoris and Sugar, of each
half a dragme; make them all into fine powder, and take thereof a dragme, first
and last in some Betony Water.

For the Headache, that proceeds from hot and Choleric causes.
If heat be the cause of the Headache, it is known by the swiftness of the
Patients pulse, redness of the Urine, much thirst, dry'th of the Mouth, Tongue
and Nostrils; no sleep, little appetite to meat, heat over all the Body.

Outward Applications for the Headache, proceeding from hot causes.
Take Oil of Roses, Rose Water, and Vinegar of Roses, of each a like quantity;
dip double linen Cloths herein, and lay them to the temples and the forehead;
refreshing and changing them again as often as it dries.

Another for the same, more strong.
If the heat be very extreme, take the Water of Nymphea, called in English
white water Lilleys, water of Endive, of each 3 ounces, Saunders red, white,
and yellow, of each one dragme; or else 3 dragmes of one of them, if you cannot
get them all three; Rose leaves beaten half a dragme, beaten Camphire half a
dragm; mix them all together, and use them as the other.

If there be any flux of the Belly, or ague, that causes the Headache, then
for young or weak persons you may use these Medicines following, with good
effect: Such as are Cassia, Manna. Syrrup of Roses, or Sene-Leaves, boiled with
some cooling Herbs: more stronger Bodies may purge with Pill Cochiae, or the
like strong purge, if they have no looseness with it.

If there be any great flux or looseness of the Body, then let the Patient
avoid light and loosening meats; but boil his meat in steeled water, which is
thus made: Take as much fair water as you intend to use; set it on the fire:
then take a good piece of Steel, heat it red hot in the fire, then quench it in
the Water; repeating it over three or four times; So likewise may you Steel
Milk or Wine, and prepare Gold, Silver, or flints for the same purpose: but if
the Patient has no looseness, then you may soon prepare for him this Decoction
following.

Drink for the Headache.
Take Sene-Leaves 1 ounce, Cinnamon, Anniseeds, Fennel-Seeds, and Currants, of
each one dragme, Licoris two dragmes, sweet Marjoram and Rosemary, of both half
a handful, two or three Figs; boil them all in a quart of water with one
ounce of Sugar, till half be consumed: then strain it; And for the Dose, give
hereof to a Child 2 ounces at a time; or weak Persons: to stronger Bodies, 4
ounces.

If there be pain in the Head, and the Body bound endeavor, the first thing
you do, to open and make it soluble: otherwise the ascension of vapors unto
the brain, will so distemper the Head with heat and pain, that phrensies,
raging and madness will ensue: to do this, use Clysters, Purgations, and some
purging Potions and Suppositories.

A Clyster, to provoke the Body to go to Stool.
Take Mallows 3 handfulls, Beets and Herb Mercury, of each two handfulls; boil
them well together in fair water, then strain them: Then take 12 ounces of this
Decoction; three yolks of Eggs, Oil of Sesamum or Linseed 4 ounces, Salgem
half a dragme; temper them together, and minister it warm.

Another.
Take Mutton-broth, Veal-broth, or Hen-broth, of either of them 16 ounces; melt
therein fresh Butter and Ducks-Grease, of each one ounce, Saffron half a
dragme, Oil of Lilleys, and Oil of Dill, of each one ounce and a half,
Indie-Salt one dragme: then temper them together, and administer it.

A Decoction to open the Body for the same.
Take 12 Prunes, Licorice, Currants, Annis-seeds, and Fennel, of each half an
ounce, Flowers of Burrage and Buglosse, of each one dragme and a half: boil
them in a quart of water till a third part be wasted; strain it, and drink
thereof.

Another for the same, and to cool the Body.
Take Currants, Licorice, Prunes, Injubes, Violets, Barley, Melon-seed,
Pompeon-seed, Gourd-seed, and Cucumber-seed, of each one quarter of an ounce;
boil them as the other.

Pills for the Headache.
Take Rhabarb 2 drames, Mastick one scruple, Scammony half a dragm make them
into Pills with Juice of Rue, one dragme of them at a time.

A sweet Ball or perfume for the Headache.
Take Violets, Water Lilleys, Willow Leaves, Roses, of each one ounce; Camphire
2 grains: beat them all together, and bind them up in a piece of fine Silk, and
wet it often in Rose Water, and smell often to it.

If the Headache proceed from a cold cause, it is good to use Gargarismes, to
draw forth the Rheum out of the Head: for which this following is effectual.

A Gargarisme for the Headache.
Take Mastick, Calamus, Licorice, Currants, of each half an ounce, Hysop, Ireos,
of each 2 drams, Pellitoty of Spain, Ginger, Saxifrage, Mustard-Seeds, of each
one dram: beat them all together, and boil them in fresh Water, and gargle the
mouth therewith three or four times a day, warm.

A Clyster for the same.
Take Mallows, Herb Mercury, Dill, Rue, Bran, of each one handful; boil them
in a sufficient quantity of Water: take of thi^ Collature 12 or 16 ounces; mix
with it Hyera Picra, and white Sugar, of each half an ounce, Salt two dragmes,
Oil of Dill and Rue, of each one ounce and a half, and give it warm.

A Conserve for the Headache.
Take Conserve of Roses 2 ounces and a half, Conserve of Betony one ounce and a
half, Cinnamon, Cloves, Annis-seeds, of each one dragm, green Ginger half an
ounce, Syrrup of Citrons a sufficient quantity to make it into an Electuary;
and take thereof every morning the quantity of a Nut.

Another for the same, called Electuarium Vitis.
Take Currants 6 ounces, Licorice 2 dragmes: boil these in the Waters of
Buglosse, Scabious and Betony, of each 12 ounces; then strain it out hard, and
steep in the liquour warm 1 dragme of Rhabarbe, Lavender 5 grains, bound up
together in a Cloth: stop it close, and boil it a good while in Balneo; then
strain it out, and add to it as much Rhabarbe and Spike as before, and let it
steep therein a night: strain it again; and then put therein one ounce of the
Barks of yellow Mirobalaus: then boil it a little more, and strain it, and add
to the Collature 6 ounces of Sugar, and two ounces of Manna, and boil it to a
Syrrup; when it is almost cold, mingle in it half an ounce of Cinnamon, Cloves,
Galingale and Nutmegs, of each one dragme, Seeds of Fennel and Annis, of each
half an ounce: boil them up to an Electuary, and keep it for your use for the
purposes before recited.

A good Drink for a Headache of cold.
Take Buglosse Roots 1 handful, Chicory Roots, Hart's-tongue, Flowers of
Buglosse, Borage, Roses, of each half a handful.
Boil them all in 4 quarts of White Wind, a quarter of an hour: when it is
cold, strain it, and add to it 4 quarts of White Wind more; and steep in it
Sage-Leaves and Rosemary, of each half a handful, long Pepper, Galingale,
Cloves, Cubebs, of each half an ounce; Currants, Cinnamon and Coriander-Seeds
prepared, of each one ounce; grossly beaten, and tied up all together in a
Cloth: boil the Wine 3 or 4 walms, and put up the Wine in a Rundlet, and drink
thereof as you please.

A Powder for a cold pain, and Rheum in the Head.
Take Nutmegs, Mace, Rosemary, Cloves, Frankincense, Mastick, Lavender, Myrrh,
Marjoram and Stechas, of each a like quantity: beat them all to powder, and rub
the Head well therewith; then cover and keep the Head warm with a Cap.

A Lotion or Water, to Bath and Wash the feet for the Headache.
Take Betony, Roses, Elder Flowers, Sage, Camomile, and Marjoram, of each 4
handfulls, Bran 2 handfulls, as much Lavender; sees them all together in a
sufficient quantity of Water, and bath the Feet in it every night very hot,
holding them in it about half an hour; and every three days cast away the old
bath, and make fresh.

For Deafness.
Take Betony and Horehound, and stamp them in a Mortar, and strain out the
Juice; and drop thereof into the Patients Ear, when he is going to bed.

Another for the same.
Take a round piece of an Ash-Tree with the bark on, and lay the midst thereof
in the fire, and keep the Water that droppeth out at both ends; and take the
Juice of Monks Rhabarbe, White Wind, and the fat of fresh Eel; of each a like
quantity: mingle them all together, and put a drop or two thereof into the
Patients Ears when he goes to bed; use it every night.

Another for the same.
Take the Gall of a Weather, and Honey, of each a like portion, and mingle them
together, and put it into the Patients Ears.

For Pain in the Ears.
Purge the Head with Syrrup of Roses, Cassia, and Electuary de Succo Rosarum;
Then oftentimes take Oil of Roses, Oil of Water Lillies, and Woman's Milk, and
drop thereof into the Ears.

Another for pains in the Ears.
Take the Juice of Strawberry-leaves, of Paul's Betony, Sage and Housleek, of
each one ounce; Mastick and Frankincense a dragm and a half, of the Decoction
of Cole-worts two ounces; temper them all together, and drop thereof into the
Ear.

Against Noise and Hissing, or Singing in the Ears.
Deafness usually follows after this, if not timely prevented: which to do, it
is necessary to purge the Brains with Pills de Hyera, Mastichine, Cochie, or
Hyera cum Agarico; either or all of which you may have at the Apothecaries:
take of one of these Pills a dragme at a time: If you take of the Pill
Mastichine, you may take a dragme thereof, and form it into six little Pills
more or less, according as you can swallow them, and take them at night going
to bed; if you take of any of the other Pills, take a dragme thereof in the
morning.

Afterward take this Decoction which follows; and let the fume or hot vapor
thereof ascend into the Ears.

A Fumigation for Noise in the Ears.
Take Marjoram, Mints, Wormwood, Rosemary, Sage, Betony and Camomile, of each
half a handful; boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, till half be
consumed, and let the fume or hot vapor thereof ascend into the Ears.

To stanch bleeding at the Nose.
Take the Seeds of the Hazel-Tree, and burn them to powder, and let the Patient
have some of it blown into his Nose through a quill, and let him drink the
Juice of Planten.

The Juice of Planten, or Planten-Water and Milk made into a posset, stanch and
heal any bleeding inwardly.

To Ripen an Imposthume in the Ear.
Take fine wheat Flower one ounce and a half, the Muscilage of Linseed, and
Fenegreek Seed, Eels-Grease, Litharge of Gold, Ceruse and Frankincense, of each
one dragme: mix them all together, and make a Plaster thereof, and lay it all
over the Ear, and rub it into the Ear.

Another for the same.
Take fresh Holly-hock Roots beaten small two ounces, Linseed, and Fenegreek
Seeds beaten, of each one ounce; Dill-Seed and Camomile, of each half an ounce;
boil them in Butter to the consistence of a soft Plaster, and lay it to the
Ear.

To draw out the matter, cleanse and heal an Imposthume in the Ear.
When the Imposthume is ripe, and begins to break, then to cleanse and heal the
same, use this Unguent following.

Take Sarcocolla, Aloes, Dragons-blood, Myrrh, and Frankincense, Iron Dross,
and Verdigrease, of each half a dragme: incorporate them all well together with
Vinegar; and dip a taint therein, and put it into the Ear.

Another for all kinds of Imposthumes in the Ears.
Take Honey 5 dragmes, Vinegar half an ounce, Verdigrease 1 dragme bruised
small; sees them together, then dip Wool therein, and lay it into the
imposthumated Ear.

The Ointment called Unguentum, Apostolorum, which is to be had at the
Apothecaries, is also good for Imposthumes in the Ears, to be used as the
former.

For the Toothache.
Take Alum and Brimstone, of each what quantity you please thereof; burn them
on a Tyle-stone, and make powder thereof; and add thereto powder of Pepper a
like quantity: stamp them all together with a Clove of Garlic; then ty them up
in a little piece of linen, and lay it between the Teeth where the pain is.

Another for the same.
Take Honey and sees it, and take off the scum as it arises, and put thereto
powder of Pepper, and sees it till it be black: then put some of it on a Sage
leaf; lay it to the aching Teeth.

Another for the same.
Take Vinegar, Mustard, powder of Pepper, and Pellitory of Spain, of each what
quantity you please, the Kernel of a Gal-nut; boil them all together, and if
the Teeth be hollow, put thereof into the Teeth; or else lay it hot to the Gums.

Of the Toothache that comes of Worms.
If there be Worms in the Gums, as it often happens there are, which cause much
pain in the Teeth, and do imposthumate and perish them; to kill them,

Take Pepper and beat it to powder, and temper it with good Wine; and sup
thereof warm, and hold it in thy mouth till it be cold, and then spit it out:
use this often, and thou shall be delivered of all anguish in the Teeth.

Another to fasten loose Teeth.
Take Hartshorn and burn it, and put the ashes that come thereof in a linen
cloth and lay it to the Teeth, and it will make them fast.

To make a Tooth fall out of it self.
Take the tallow of a Ram, and Planten, and stamp them together, and anoint the
Teeth therewith, and it will fall out of its own accord.

Turner. So says my Author Verbatim, I do not deviate from him: the Medicine is
easy to be made: if it do no good, I am sure it can do no hurt; if you have
occasion, you may soon try it.

Here follows another receipt for the same purpose, which you may use as you
like it; it will not cost you much.
Take a water-Frogge, and a green Frogge, and sees them together: gather the
Grease that arises, and therewith anoint thy Gum, and the aching Teeth: I do
not like this, so well as the former.

For stinking Teeth.
Take two handfulls of Cumin-seed, and sees it in White Wind, and let them
wash their Teeth therewith.

To make Teeth white.
Take Honey, Salt, and Rye-meal, of each what quantity you please; and
therewith rub thy Teeth and Gums.

For an Imposthume in the Gums.
Take Honey of Roses one ounce and a half, Vinegar half an ounce; mix them
together, and therewith gargle the mouth: when you spit it out, take in fresh
again; using it often.

Likewise it is good to open the Gums if there be any sores: and wash it three
times a day with water, wherein Allom, Myrrh, and Salt have been sodden.

Another for the same.
Take half a pint of the Water of Knot-grasse, and half an ounce of Allom;
dissolve the Allom in the Water, and therewith wash the Teeth and Gums.

For loss of Speech.
Take the Juice of Southern-wood, Sage, and Pimpernel, and put it under thy
Tongue; or take the Juice of Wormwood, and temper it with Honey; and let the
Patient hold it in his mouth.

The voice is oftentimes spoiled, and corrupted by hoarseness, or weakened by
long sickness; for which this Electuary which follows is very good.

An Electuary for loss of Speech.
Take Ireos half an ounce, Pennyroyal, Hysop, Licoris, of each 3 drag,
Dragagant, bitter Almonds, Kernels of Pine-apples, Cinnamon, Ginger and Pepper,
of each one dragme and a half, Figs, Dates, Currants; of each one scruple, red
Styrax 3 scruples and a half; cut the fruits small, beat all the rest to
powder, and to every ounce of this powder add 12 ounces of Sugar: make it into
an Electuary with Honey or Syrrup of Hysop; or if you please, you may make
Lozengs thereof.

Another for the same.
Take Ireos half an ounce, Sugar Candy a dragm, Cinnamon, Ginger and Pepper one
dragme, Sugar 12 ounces; boil it in Hysop-Water, to the thickness of an
Electuary; then make Lozengs thereof: these are good for a Cough, a cold
Rheum, and a wheezing breath.

Against Hoarseness, a dry Cough, and all infections of the Lungs, and Breast,
proceeding of heat and dry'th; from whence a Consumption follows.
Take Dragagant 1 ounce, Gum Arabic 5 dragms, Starch 2 dragmes, Licoris,
Melon-Seeds, Gourd-Seeds, Pompeon-Seeds, Cucumber-Seeds, of each 1 drag.
Camphire 5 dragmes, Sugar Pennets one ounce and a half.
Beat all these to powder, and add to an ounce of this powder, 12 ounces of
fine Sugar; and boil it in Violet water unto a Confection, or make Lozenges of
it, if you please.

A hot Confection for a tough, phlegmatic, and slymy Cough; so that the Patient
cannot get up any thing, for a wheezing and short Breath.
Take Dragagant, Hysop, of each 2 ounces, Kernells of Pine-Apples, Sweet
Almonds, Linseed, of each 3 dragmes, Fenegreek, Cinnamon, of each 2 dragmes,
Juice of Licoris, Ginger, of each one dragme.
Boil them all into an Electuary, or Confection, as the other; or if you will,
you may make Lozengs thereof: and every night when you go to bed, dissolve one
of them in sweet-Wine, and add half a scruple of Saffron unto it: this comforts
the Heart, and vital Spirits.

A Drink for the same.
Take five pints of fair Water, half a pint of Honey, six Figs, one ounce of
Currants, 2 dragmes of Licorice; boil it till one pint be wasted, and drink
thereof every morning fasting, a good Cup full warm.

To make the voice clear, an Electuary. Take Cabbage-Seeds, Hysop, Elecampane
Roots, Coltsfoot, Roots of Flower De luce, Horehound, of each half an ounce,
Annis-Seeds, Fennel-Seeds, Ameos, Cubebs, Aristolochy, of each one dragme and a
half, Sugar Pennets 3 dragmes, Oxymel Compositum, Syrrup of Horehound, of each
3 ounc. Pineapple Kernells 4 ounces, Saffron 1 dragme.


Make them all together into a Confection or Electuary, with 12 ounces of Honey
clarifyed: take hereof about 2 dragmes morning and night, in a little of the
Decoction of Nettle-Roots, mixing a little Sugar with it.

For them that speak in their sleep.
Take the Juice of Southern-wood 1 spoonful; and temper it in Wine, and drink
it going to bed.

Another for the same.
Take the Tops of Rue and Vervain, of each a like quantity; drink the Juice
thereof in Wine, going to bed.

For them that spit Blood.
Take Smallage, Rue, Betony, Mynts and Planten* of each a like quantity, boil
them in good new Milk, and drink thereof warm.

For a stinking Breath.
Take Butter, the Juice of Moonwort, and the Juice of Fetherfew; of each a like
quantity: temper them with Honey, and give the Patient every morning a
spoonful thereof.

Another for the same.
Take two handfulls of Cumin-Seeds, and beat it to powder; and boil it well in
White Wind, and drink of this decocted Wine 15 days together, every morning,
sweetened with a little Sugar.

Another for the same.
Take three handfulls of Cumin, Vervain, Mynts and Rue, of each three
handfulls, Licoris 1 dragme, Ginger and Nutmegs; of each half an ounce: bruise
them all in a Mortar, then boil them in a Gallon of White Wind till half be
wasted: Drink thereof morning and evening, first and last, for 15 days
together, as hot as you can suffer it. Probatum.

For a cold and Cough.
Take Hysop, Rosemary, Planten, and Radish Roots; of each a like quantity, and
boil them in White Wind from a Pottle to a quart; then poer out the Liquor, and
put the Herbs into a Mortar, and mingle them well together, bruising them, and
strain them into the Liquor again: then take a pint of Life-Honey, and boil it
and scum it, and put thereto a quarter of a pound of May-Butter that is
clarified; and let it sees together by the space that one may say the Psalm of
Miserere mei Deus, (that is, the 51 Psalm in English, called in those days
one of the 7 Penitential Psalms: but now penitency is out of fashion. The Psalm
will not hurt you, if you think it not too much superstition to read it;
neither will your Reading it do the Psalm any hurt at all; nor your letting it
alone, will not alter its Religion.) Then strain it through a linen Cloth, and
take the Collature, (that is, the Liquor or Medicine, thus compounded,) and
reserve it in a glass Vessel close stopped, And let the Patient take a little
thereof first and last, in a draught of stale Ale, warm, till it be whole; for
this is a proved Medicine; says my Author in Haec Verba.

For a Man or Woman that has great sickness in the sides, and cannot well draw
their wind, nor Cough, for pain.
Take Hill-wort, Alexander, Parsley, Lovage, Smallage, red Fennel, Burnet,
Grommel; of each a like quantity, sees them in sufficient quantity of
White Wind till half be wasted: And let the Patient Drink thereof hot, first
and last.

For a Cough.
Take the Juice of Sage, and Rue, and Hysop; of each a like quantity, of Cumin,
Pepper, Licorice, and sweet Fennel Seeds in powder; of each a like quantity:
sees them all in clarified Honey, sufficient to make an Electuary thereof, and
let the Patient take thereof morning and evening.

Of the Tumor or swelling in the Throat, called the Squinancy.
This is a dangerous Disease, that comes about the Troat-Boll, and shuts up
the inward parts of the Throat, so that thereby the breath is stopped: which
commonly proceeds of gross humors, that fall from the Head into the Throat;
which is also increased by sleeping immediately after meals. The Patient if he
feel this infirmity approaching, ought to purge his Head well with Pill
Elephanginae, eat and drink but little, and to eat light meats, and Gargarize
his mouth with Wine of Pomgranates and Barley-Water mingled together.

Also take Syrrup of Poppeys, and Syrrup of Mulberryes, of each one dragme,
Rose Water 3 ounces: temper them together, and use them as the other before.
But to conclude;

Take Album Graecum, Anglice, a white Dogs Turd; beat it to powder, and mix it
with Syrrup of Mulberryes, Black-berryes, or Honey, and give it to the Patient
to swallow by little and little. Probatum.

To strengthen the Memory; an Experiment of Johannes Coletus, taught him by a
Jew. A Gargarisme to cleanse the Head for the Memory.
TAke Pieretrum, Marjoram, Galingale, Ginger, Caraway, Broad Planten-Seed, and
Mustard Seed; beat them gross together, and put two ounces of this powder to
one quart of Water, into a Vessel close stopped, and boil it in Balneo; then when
it has well sodden, put a quart of strong Wine to it, and an ounce of clear
Honey; and let it sees again till about a pint of the Liquor be wasted:
herewith gargarize the mouth well, and many times together, every morning,
holding it hot a good while in the mouth, that the fume may ascend up into the
Head; but use it only, when the Moon is increasing.

Then use this Drink for the Memory, to draw superfluous Moisture out of the
Head.
Take Ginger, long Pepper; of each one dragme, Galingale one scruple, Cloves,
Cubebs, of each one dragme and a half: beat them all together to powder, and ty
them up in a linen Cloth, and boil them in Balneo, in a pot close stopped, with 2
quarts of Wine: then let it stand covered till it be clear; then drink a good
draught thereof, morning and going to bed.

Kemb your Head a good while together in the Sun, or by the fire, as the season
of the year is, to open the pores: then wash your Head with Rue-Water, and
drink a draught of Wine after it, and eat a bit of bread steeped in the Wine:
eat light suppers, be moderate in your sleep and diet: And continue this use
many days together; And then anoint the Head and Temples with this Ointment
following.

Take white Lillyes, Colewort-Leaves, Balm; of each one dragme: pound them
together, and put them in a pot: pour therein 2 ounces of Sallet-Oil, fresh
Butter as much as all the rest, Spirit of Wine 4 times rectified, 3 spoonfuls
of water of Rue, Sage, and Celendine, of each 2 spoonfulls, White Wind 5
spoonfuls: incorporate and mix them all well together; then set them 6 or 8
hours in a warm place, strain it, and sees the liquour till it be as thick as
Honey, and set it in the Sun afterward, till it look red as Copper. This Salve
will keep two years. The best time to make it, is about June.

And after the Head is purged as before is directed, anoint the hinder parts of
the Head and Temples with this Salve; and keep the Head warm with a leather
Cap, that it may have the better operation; wash the Head with warm Wine at
night; let your meat be easy of digestion, and especially forbear excessive
drinking: use this at first four days together, and then two or three days
together, every eight weeks for a year, every three months the second year; and
once every year afterward, as long as you live: Let the Moon be increasing
when you use it.

A Potion to procure steep in Frantic people.
Take white Poppey-seeds half an ounce, Roots of Mandragora, Henbane-seeds; of
each half a dragme, Saffron 4 grains: bruise them all together, and bind them
up in a Cloth; then steep them 6 hours in 5 ounces of Water-Lilleys: then
strain it, and give to the Patient of this water, from one ounce to three,
according to the quality of the Disease, and strength of the party.

Another for the same.
Take 12 ounces of Water-Lilleys, Opium one dragme; steep them together in 3
pints of Malmsey 24 hours: then cast therein one quarter of an ounce of Salt,
as much Henbane-seeds, Lettice-seed 3 dragms: and distill it in Balneo; and
give hereof from half a dragme to a dragme, at night when the Patient goes to
bed.

An Ointment or Salve to cause sleep.
Take one ounce of Poplar Salve, That is the Ointment, which the Apothecary
calls Unguentum Populeon.
half an ounce of Oil of Violets, Henbane-seeds, and Mandragora Roots; of each
half a dragme, Saffron, Cassia-wood; of each one scruple: mix them together,
and apply it to the privityes of Men, and the Breasts of Women.

For the same.
Take Willow-leaves, Water-Lilleys, Vine-leaves, and Lettise: boil them in
water, and with the Decoction bath and wash the privy Members, hands and feet.

A Clyster against the shaking Palsy.
Take Centaury, Sage, Rue, Cowslips. St. John's Wort. Mercury; of each half a
handful, Saffron-seed, Rue-seed, Silver Mountain-seed, Basil-seed; of each half
an ounce, Agarick 5 dragmes, Stechas, Amaranthus of each half an ounce;
Sees them together in sufficient water; then take 12 or 16 ounces of this
Decoction, Honey, and Oil of Lilleys, of each one ounce and a half, Salgem, and
Pill Cochiae; of each half a dragm: temper them well, and administer it for a
Clyster.

A Powder for the Head, against the shaking Palsy.
Take Field-Cypres, Cowslips, Lignum Aloes, Ireos, Hermodactils, Stechas,
Marjoram, Mints; of each half adragme, Spica Indie, Grains, Rue, of each one
scruple,
Beat every one by himself to a subtle Powder; then temper them together, and
bestrew the Head with it, when it is new shorn.

An excellent Confection, which resists Poison, and defends the Heart
against all Contagion and Infection; comfort the Stomach, and helps the
Palsy, or the trembling of the Joints.
Take Cynamon, Lignum Aloes, Cloves, Spica Indie, Galingale, Licorice, Trochis
de Vialis, sive Scammonio. Diarrhodon Abbatis; of each 5 dragmes, Nutmegs,
Aliptae Muscatae, Sedoary, Spikenard, Mace, Rhabarbe, Red Storax, of each half
an ounce, Pearls prepared, Burnt Ivory, Hearts Bones, Ginger, Blatia by Zantia,
of each 2 dragms and a half, Musk, Amber, Cardamom, Lovage-seed, Basil-seed,
of each one dragme and a half, Camphire one dragme,
Make them all into a Confection, with 3 ounces of clarifyed Honey; take
thereof every morning about the quantity of a Nutmeg.

You may if you please, for your better convenience, make Lozenges thereof, by
adding 12 ounces of Sugar, boiled in Buglosse-water, to one ounce of the
forementioned ingredients.

For the dead Palsy.
Take Nutmegs, sliced Licorice, and Annis-seeds; of each one ounce, Piony Roots
one dragme, Elecampane Roots half an ounce, Spirit of Wine 16 ounc. Honey 8
ounces; mix these all together, and make a Conserve thereof; and if you use it
in VVinter, put thereto a quarter of an ounce of long Pepper, and give the
Patient about a spoonful thereof every morning.

Pills to purge for the dead Palsy.
Take Agarick one scruple, Assa-Faetida half a scruple, Ginger 13 grains,
Diagrydion 1 grain; make Pills thereof with the Juice of Hysop; and after the
Patient is purged, let him take this Drink following for eight days together.

Take Egrimony-water, and Southern-wood-water, of each 2 ounces, and sweeten it
with Sugar: Drink it in the morning, and fast four hours after it.

A Syrrup for the dead Palsy.
Take Calmus half an ounce, Cowslips 3 handfuls, St. John's Wort, Sage, Betony,
Balm, Rue, Bayleaves, of each one handful, Silver Mountain, Balsam-wood, Balsam
fruit, Bazil-seed, of each 2 dragms, Licorice, Currants, Lavender Flowers,
Amaranthus, of each one ounce,
Boil all these together into a Syrrup, with six ounces of clarifyed Honey, and
a pint of Rainwater clarifyed with the white of an Egg.

A Clyster for the dead Palsy.
Take Sage, Rue, Stechas, Mallows, Centory, Mercury, Bran, of each half a
handful,
Sees them all together: then take 12 ounces of this Decoction, of mix
therewith Hyera Logodion half an ounce, Salt one quarter of an ounce,
Sallet-Oil 3 ounces; minister it warm.

A Powder to strew on the Patients meat, in stead of spice, that has the dead
Palsy.
Take Cynamon 1 ounce and a half. Coriander, Cloves, Galingale, Pepper, Cubebs,
Mace, Nutmegs, Saffron, of each one ounce, Calmus 2 ounces, Coutchenel half an
ounce.
Temper them all to a fine powder with 6 ounces of fine Sugar.

A bath for the dead Palsy.
Take Bay-berryes, Juniper-berryes, and Pepper; of each as much as you will:
beat them to powder, and set the Patient in a dry bath, and pour of this
powder on hot Irons tempered with Lavender-Water; and let him sweat well with
the vapor thereof, then rub all the infected Members with Venice Soap till the
Soap be dry: And after the Patient comes out of the bath, keep him in a warm
place, and rub the lame Joints hard with Deers-suet.

An Ointment for the dead Palsy, Cramp and cold Gout.
Take Squills, Rue, Calmus, Nettle-Roots, Egrimony, Cowslips, of each one
handful,
Pound them all together, and put to it Oil of Nuts, and old Sallet-Oil; of
each 12 ounc. Wine as much: sees these all together till the moisture be
evaporated away: then strain it, and temper amongst it Saltpeter, Euphorbium,
Pepper, Oil of Bays, of each one ounce and a half, Galbanum, Turpentine; of
each 2 ounces, Wax as much as is needful to make a Salve thereof; and keep it
for the use aforesaid.

A Powder against the falling sickness.
Take Pearls prepared, Harts-bones, of each 1 dragm. Red Coral, Piony-seeds and
Roots, of each half a dragm, Misleden one dragme and a half, Amber prepared 2
scruples, White Sugar one ounce, Six Leaves of Gold,
Make them all into fine powder, and take hereof a dragme once a week in
Piony-water or Broth.

A Clyster for the falling sickness.
Take Swines-bread, black Hellebore, Centory, Daffadil, of each one dragme,
Saffron-seed half an ounce: sees this in a quart of water till half be
consumed: take 13 ounces of this Decoction, temper therein Hyera Logodion one
ounce, Oil of Euphorbium 10 dragmes, Salgem one drame and a half: mix them all
together for a Clyster.

A Confection for the same.
Take Diapenidium 3 dragmes, Pliris Arcoticon 1 dragm, Diambra half a dragm,
Cynamon 1 dragme and a half, Nutmegs, Cubebs, of each 2 scruples, Ginger one
dragm, Sugar 8 ounces,
Make a Confection thereof with Piony Water.

Lozenges for the Cough and Rheum.
Take white Poppey-seeds, Lettice-seeds, and Purslain-seeds, of each one
dragme, Dragagant, Gum-Arabick and Saffron, of each half a dragme, Opium 5
grains: pound all that is to be pounded, and make it to a dough with Syrrup of
Poppey: make Lozenges thereof as big as small Beans; and let one of these at a
time dissolve in thy mouth: this is for hot Rheumes.

Other Lozenges for a Cough.
Take Pineapple Kernels, steeped a night in Rose Water, and bitter Almonds
blanched, of each 3 quarters of an ounce, Juice of Licoris 2 ounces, powder of
Licoris 3 dragmes; make Lozenges thereof with Rose Water; they are good against
the Cough, and rawness of the Throat that proceeds thereof.

An Ointment for pain in the back.
Take Oil of Spike, and Oil of Lilleys, of each half an ounce, Oil of Camomile
and Dill, of each one ounce, Saffron, Lavender, Madder and Egrimony, of each
one dragme, Mastick and Squinant, of each one scruple, Wax as much as is
needful to make it a Salve: herewith anoint the backbone.

A Clyster for a pleurisy of heat and blood.
Take 16 ounces of broth, made of a Calves-Foot, or Lambs-Head; put therein one
ounce of brown Sugar, the yolk of an Egg, 2 ounces of Sallet-Oil, Salt one
dragme and a half: temper them together for a Clyster.

An Ointment for Scabs, and breaking out in the Legs.
Take the red Dock-Root, the Roots of Celendine, and Wormwood, and the Leaves
of Laurel; of each a like quantity: stamp them, and sees them in May-Butter
unto an Ointment; strain it, and keep it in a box for use.

How the Body is to be Governed against Pestilential, and infectious Airs.
The first and principal preservation, is to avoid all that may engender any
Fever or Ague; and forbear all manner of excess, either of meat or drink: eat
no gross meat, no Onyons, Leeks, Garlic, nor fruit.

Abstain from venereous actions; for that both opens the Pores, and
destroys the kind natural, and infeebleth the Spiritual Members, and the
Spirits of Man.

Also in time of Pestilence suffer no great thirst; and drink but measurably,
only to slacken thy thirst: and drink such drinks as will abate heat, as Water
of Borage, Endive, Lettice, Violets, Roses, Scabious, Tormentil, Dittany;
either mingled, or else severally alone by themselves: For if the Pestilence
reign in the heat of the Summer, these Drinks be profitable, especially for
those that be of a Choleric Complexion.

Also when you sleep, either in the afternoons, or at night a-bed, shut your
Chamber-doors and Windows close, and cast on a Pan of Coals, this Powder
following.

Take of Laurel-Leaves, and Rosemary dried, and Frankincense; of each a like
quantity; make them into powder, and strew about half a spoonful hereof upon
the Coals.

Use also to burn in thy Chamber Juniper-wood; or for want thereof, Ash-wood,
and use to cast on the fire Frankincense, Storax, Calamint. If one be infected
with the Pestilence, and a sore begin to arise between the thigh and the privy
Members, it is a sign that the Liver purges out the infection, in that place:
then bleed on the Foot in the same side the swelling appears, the Vein betwixt
thy great Toe; And if the botch be more outward to the side, and further from
the privy Members, bleed then on the Vein between the Ankle and the Foot.

If the matter appear in the cleansing place of the Head, then consider well in
what side it appears, and bleed on the Medium Vein of the Arm, or the Vein of
the Hand, between the Thumb and the next finger of the same side; but take good
heed that you sleep not in 12 hours after bleeding.

It is good always to have in your hand to smell to, this Pomander following,
which comfort the Vital Spirits.

Take Lapdanum purified an ounce, Storax Calamita dissolved; Roses, Cloves,
Mace; of each three half penny weight, and make them into powder: add thereto 5
spoonfulls of Oil de Bay, an ounce of Virgins Wax: mingle them well all
together, and make thereof a Ball of the quantity of a Wal-Nut.

It is necessary in time of Pestilence, or hot Agues, to wash thy Temples, and
the Pulses of thy hands with Rose Water, and Betony-water, And to wet linen
Cloths therein, and lay to thy Temples, Forehead, and Liver, and to each
Arm-hole, one 4 times double.

Let thy Cods be always freshly washed, and after dipped in Rose Water; let thy
Cap be dipped also in Rose Water, after it is clean washed; and dry it in the
fire, and not in the infected Air.

Drink every morning 9 spoonfulls of White Wind, in a sawcer full of fine
Vinegar; before thou go abroad out of thy house.

You shall understand, that all the principal Members, the Heart, Brain, and
Liver, have every one his proper purging place given him by nature; whereby he
may avoid all infections and superfluities, and clear himself thereof.

The Heart has his cleansing place in the Armpits.

The Liver has his cleansing place in the groyn, between the Thigh and the
Body.

The clensing place of the Brain is under the Ears, at the Ear-Roots, and in
the Throat.

Then the sickness of the Pestilence comes thus: when the Pores of the Body
are open, then first enters the venomous and corrupt Air, which infecteth the
blood; and then comes to the Heart, that is the Root and ground of Life, and
infecteth all the lively Spirits in man; whereof death insues: but the Heart
and clean blood seeks to expel, and fly from all that is noyous, and contrary
unto mankind. And the Heart seeks to expel the Corruption and venom from him
to his cleansing place the Arm-hole: But then sometimes that place is stopped,
that it cannot come out; then it soon passes to the next principal Member the
Liver, And then the Liver does in his kind endeavor to expel it by his purging
place the Groyn: but if he be weak or obstructed, that he cannot expel it,
then it runs to the third principal Member the Brain, which also striveth to
expel, and drive it out by his purging place in the Throat, and under the
Ears: but if through the stopping of the Pores, or thickness of the Venomous
matter that is mingled with the blood, it is hindered of this kindly course;
then are all the principal Members infected and overcome thereby; whereupon
death follows.

Against infection.
In the morning always before you go abroad, be sure to break your fast; and
wash your mouth with Vinegar, wherein Wormwood has been boiled; and
afterward hold in your mouth a bit of Zaedoary Root, Citron-Peels, Tormentil,
Angelica or Unicornes-horn.

Also it is good to anoint the mouth, lips, and nose, with this Composition
following.

Take the Juice of Garlic, and Vinegar of Roses; of each one ounce and a half,
Treacle 3 quarters of an ounce, Beaver-Cod 2 dragmes: mix them together for an
Ointment.

Another Ointment to anoint the Heart, not only for those that are well, but
for those that are already infected.
Take 3 quarters of an ounce of Treacle, Saffron, and Canaphire; of each 10
grains, Juice of Lemons, and Vinegar, as much as is needful to make a Salve
thereof.

A Pomander to smell to in Summer, for them that be of a hot Complexion.
Take Water Lilley-flowers, Mynts, Violets, Vine-leaves, Roses, Mittle-seeds,
white and yellow Sanders, Citron-Peels, dried Quinces, dried Prunes; of each
half a dragme, Saffron and Camphire; of each a scruple, Gallia Muscata 10
grains: make them up into a Pomander ball with Vinegar, wherein fine Bolus is
dissolved.

Another Pomander to be used in Plague-time.
Take Roses a quarter of an ounce, red and white Saunders; of each one dragme
and a half, Camphire, Cinnamon, Mace, and Nutmegs; of each one scruple, Amber,
Citron-Peels, of each half a dragme, Musk 4 grains, red Storax half an ounce,
Laudanum 1 ounce: beat them small, but dissolve the Laudanum with Liquid
Storax, and make thereof a Pomander.

Care must be taken in times of infection, to keep dry, and comfort the Heart,
and principal Members; for which it is good to take once a week a dragme of
Mithridate and Treacle in Sorrel-water, and sweat after it: and keep within
Doors all the day after.

Pills preservative against the Plague.
Take the Pestilential Pills, called at the Apothecaries, Pill Ruffi 4
scruples, Agarick prepared half a dragm, Zedory, and Angelica, of each one
dragm, Rhabarb 1 scruple, Trochisci Alhaudal 5 grains: make Pills hereof with
Carduns water, take a dragme hereof once a week 3 hours after Supper: in the
morning drink a draught of the Decoction of Pease, and fast 3 hours after it,

A Confection to strengthen and preserve nature against corrupt and Pestilent
Airs.
Take Sealed Earth, white Diptamus: fine Bolus, Myrrh, Wormwood, Rue,
Scabious, Pimpernel, Sorrel, and Zedoary, of each 1 dragme, Aristolochy,
Tormentil, and Bay Leaves; of each 1 dragme and a half, 5 or 6 Kernels of
Wal-nuts 12 new Figgs, Mithridate and Treacle, of each an ounce, Saffron and
Camphire; of each one scruple, Unicorns-horn, prepared Pearls, Bones of a
Stagges Heart, burnt Hartshorn and Smaragdes; of each one dragme and a half,
Citron-seeds peeled half an ounce, Mace 1 dragme: pound all that is to be
pounded, and with Syrrup of Citrons make them into a Confection; and take a
little hereof morning and evening, in Winter, in a draught of Malmsey or
Muscadine, and in Summer with Rose Water.

A Powder against the Plague.
Take Pimpernel, Gentian, Tormentill, Dragon, Rue, Wormwood, Nut Kernels,
Granats prepared, and Juniper Berryes; of each a like quantity: use it upon a
tosted piece of bread; or if you will, you may make a Confection hereof with
Treacle, and Vinegar of Roses.

Thus far by way of prevention, if one be infected: The first means to be used,
is to provoke sweat, and that both morning and evening, (if the Patient can
abide it,) for which you may use this Confection.

A Confection to cause sweat, when one is infected of the Plague.
Take Treacle and Mithridate, of each half an ounce, Pimpernel, and Angelica;
of each 10 grains, Cardamom 5 grains, Camphire 5 grains, Cinnamon 10 grains;
make thereof a Confection; give the Patient the quantity of a Hazel-Nut
thereof, in Carduus or Sorrel-water; and then cover him well, and let him sweat
well 3 or 4 hours after, if he be able. If you have none of this Confection
ready at hand, then take a dragme of Treacle or Mithridate, in Carduus or
Sorrel-water.

A Diaphoretical Potion, that expels the Contagion of the Plague, and all
Venom and Pestilent Diseases.
Take Rue, Wormwood, and the uppermost tops of Black-berryes; of each a
handful, Celendine a handful and a half; put them into a Pot with a pint of
Vinegar, and stop the Pot very close, that there come in no air, nor no vapor
get out; and then let them sees in Balneo, till the third part be consumed:
then strain it out, and keep it close stopped; give the Patient 2 or 3 ounces of
this drink when he is infected, and let him sweat after it, and not sleep.

An Oil to provoke sweat, and expel the Venom of the Plague.
Take a glass Bottle as big as you will, fill it halffull of Elder flowers, a
third part of Holly-hock Flowers, and uppermost a third part of the Flowers of
St. John's Wort; filling herewith the glass: then put thereon old Sallad-Oil as
much as the glass will hold; stop it very close, and let it stand a sunning a
whole Summer; with this Oil rub the Body very warm 3 or 4 times a day; it
provokes sweat abundantly.

Anoint the sick Persons Breast or Heart, with this Medicine following.

Take of the best Treacle one ounce, Juice of Lemmons and Vinegar, of each half
an ounce, Saffron and Camphire, of each one scruple: mingle them together, and
spread them on a piece of Scarlet, and apply it: If a Plague-soar begin to
appear with any redness, and will not imposthumate, then take a young Pullet,
and pull off the feathers off her Belly; then cut her open and hold it upon the
swelling: then shortly after take another, and do as before.

Another to draw out the Plague Sore.
Take a great Onyon, and roast it with Treacle therein, and lay it upon the
soar with a plaster of Oxicroceum, and Diachilon cum Gummis.

Also take the common Plaster of Diachilor 3 dragmes, and the Juice of
Celendine; and make a Salve thereof with a little Wax: or sees Cole-worts with
a little Bacon, and lay it on the swelling; and when you see it begin to
imposthumate, then use this following.

Take Holly-hock Roots, Scabious, and Mallows; of each a like quantity: sees
them and beat them to a Pap, and make thereof a Plaster with Barrows-Grease;
And apply it to the swelling.

To kill the Plague-soar.
Take 2 or 3 yolks of new laid Eggs, and temper therewith about half an ounce
of Salt pounded small, and lay it on the place, renewing it every quarter of an
hour.

If the sore Corrode further, take fine Bolus, Dragons-blood, Vinegar,
Rose Water, and whites of Eggs, as much as you please: lay the same
Plaister-wise upon the sore.

When the Plague Sore is thoroughly killed, take Scabious 4 handfuls, Treacle
one ounce, Barrows-Grease one ounce and a half: stamp the Herbs, and make a
Plaster thereof, and refresh it often.

To cleanse the Ulcer, and engender new flesh when other accidents are past.
Take Turpentine, washed in Scabious water 4 ounces, Barly-meal one ounce, two
yolks of Eggs, Saffron, Sarcocolla, Mastick and Frankincense; of each half a
dragme: mix them all together for a Plaster.

Lastly, take Beaten half an ounce, Honey of Roses a sufficient quantity, to
make thereof a Salve; use it till the sore be perfectly whole. Et Laudate
Dominum.

A fulgure and tempestate, A Pestilentia and fame, a bello and Caedibus, A
subitanea, and improvisa morte, Abira tua, and a morte perpetua; libera nos
Domine, Amen. OF URINES.
IN the Judgment of Urines, you must have regard to the Substance, Colors,
Regions, and Contents. And these be the Colors of Waters that follow.

Urine white as Clay-water of a Well, this Color signifies ill Digestion, a
bad Stomach, and a bad Liver: if you see in this Color many shining beams, it
denotes an Imposthume in the Milt.

Medicine. Take Gromel, Saxifrage, Parsley, and Sage; boil them in stale Ale,
and drink it: Also use powder of them in thy Pottage.

If the Urine be white as Whey, thick, and little in quantity; it betokens
the flux.

Medicine. Make Drink with white Poppy-Seeds, and Lettice, and use it.

A white Russet: if it be thick in substance, it betokens the Cholica Passio.

Medicine. Take Watercresses and grind them small, and boil them in
White Wind, and drink thereof evening and morning.

Urine of the Color, as it were broth of flesh half sodden; If it be little in
quantity, and fat as Oil, and frothy above, it betokens wasting.

Medicine. Take the powder of Elecampane and Turmentil; and boil them with
clarifyed Honey, and make a Confection thereof, and so use it.

Urine of the Color of broth of flesh well sodden, and thick in substance; it
denotes a quotidian Fever that comes of Phlegm. And this and all the other 5
colors are signs of bad Digestion.

Medicine. Take Vinegar and Mustard, and boil them together, and then take
Treacle as much as a bean or two: wash it with White Wind, and mix therewith,
and use it when the sickness takes thee.

Urine of a yellow Color, as a yellow Apple, with a thin substance, and a salt
savor, betokens a double Tertian that comes of Melancholy.

Medicine. Take Figs, Licorice, Hyssop, Hore-hound and Elecampane: and boil
them in water till half be wasted, and drink thereof morning and night.

Color of Urine red as Saffron, if any yellow froth above it, betokens the
Jaundice.

Medicine. Take Mirobalans, Aloes, Epatick, Seen, Sugar and Annis: make them
into powder, and use thereof at night and morning.

Urine as pale Gold, and thin in substance, in a Child denotes a quotidian; in
a young Man a tertian; in an old Man a double tertian; and in a Woman a
quartain.

Medicine. Take Powder of Get, the seed of Cresses, and seeds of Broom; and
use it in thy Pottage.

Of the Color of red Gold, thick in substance, and shaddowing above, betokens
a lasting quotidian.

Medicine. Take Satyrion-Roots, Mustard Seed, Pepper, Annis and Cinnamon: and
mix them with Honey to an Electuary, and so use it.

Urine as red as a Rose, and thick, denotes a burning Fever.

Medicine. Let him blood under the Ancle, or on the Vein of the Arm; And take
Aloes, Epatick 1 dragme, and boil it in a pint of White Wind, and drink
thereof a spoonful, at evening and in the morning.

Urine as black Wine, or rotten blood, This in a lasting Fever betokens
death: if it be troubled, fatty and stinking, it betokens bursting of a Vein in
the Reyns.

Medicine. Take Osmond, Savin, and Gromel; and boil them with White Wind, and
clarifyed Honey; and use it first and last.

Urine green as worts, and little in quantity, betokens death.

Urine black as a Coal, fatty and stinking, betokens death.

Subrufus is like Gold and Silver medly.

This Color betokens a Fever and Imposthume. If there be a Circle with small
Bells in it, as it were of rainwater, it is a wind in th Head that rises out
of the Stomach.

Medicine. Take powder of Elecampane and Turmentil, and boil them to a
Confection with Honey, and use it.

Albus, like a clear water, it denotes wasting of the Spleen, the Dropsy,
Madness, pissing against ones will, heat of the Liver, Emrods, and stopping of
the Flowers,

Medicine. Make a Drink of Gromel, Saxifrage, Pellitory, Sage, and Hemp: and
sees them in stale Ale, and drink it.

When the Urine has great contents and stink, it betokens pain in the Reyns
and the Spleen.

If it be bloody and clear, and pure, it denotes a Vein broke in the Liver; if
it be little, with a strong savor, and ly in Gobbets in the Bottom, it comes
from the bladder: If it be spotted as blood, and red, the pain is in the Reyns
and in the share.

If it be clear and blackish, then the pain is in the back, and in the share,
and about the bladder.

Raw humors is a content of the Urine; which you shall know thus.

If the Urine after his casting fleet full of Gravel motes, which come of the
residence of the bottom, or in the middle Region, then in the Urine be raw
humors; And if the raw humors be above on the water, it betokens a
straitness in the Breast, and shortness of breath, and nipping of the Spleen:
If it appear in the middle, it signifies griping in the Body and Guts, and wind
in the Stomach, which comes of excess of meat and drink. And if they be in
the bottom, the pain is in the Reyns, and sometimes it is in the Cod.

Fat without Axys, betokens wasting of Grease about the Fundament: if it be
with Axys, wasting of the Body.

Moates white, small and round, signifies the Gout both in Man and Woman.

Spermatick Resolutions, if they appear fleeting about in the Urine, and the
Urine raw in Color; it denotes involuntary wasting of the Seed.

How to know Man's Urine from Woman's, and Beasts from Man or Woman.
You shall understand, that if there be any trouble in Man's Urine, it shows
it self in the midst of the Urine: and in the Woman's Urine it does not so. And
the froth after the casting of Man's Urine, it shall be long; and of a Woman's
after the casting it shall be round: thus says Avicenna.

Now to know Beasts Water from Man's Water; Beasts Water is more sad and subtle
of Complexion. Also the Beasts Water swells more then the Man's.

Also mingle the Urine of a Beast with a Man's, and they shall part asunder.

And if it be a Cow that is with Calf, the Contents of the Cows Urine is much
greater then the Urine of a Woman; in as much as the Woman is less (and fair
of Complexion) then the Cow is.

Urine fat and troubled, betokens a burning Fever that comes of Choler.

Urine red and thick over all with a black Circle, betokens sickness over all:
and if the Patient sweat not, it is death.

Urine white and thin, and little, declares cold in the Body.

Urine clear with a black Circle, betokens the Tissick.

Urine thin and somewhat black above in the casting, declares great loss of
Nature.

Urine thick and troubled as Horse-pisse, betokens Headache.

Urine fat in the bottom, white in the midst, and red above, betokens a Fever
quartain.

Urine that has black Contents, small as moats in the midst of the Water,
signifies an Imposthume under the side.

Urine that has grains under the Circle, betokens a Stomach full of Worms, and
burning of the Heart.

Urine that is foul above, signifies heat in the Heart, in the Lungs, and in
the Spleen.

Urine frothy, clear, and a little red, betokens pain under the right side.

Urine of a Woman that is with Child, that Water shall have some clear strikes:
and the most part shall be troubled; and the troubleness shall be reddish in
the manner of a tawney: and this token shall never fail. As soon as the Child
has life, if it be a Girl, the troubleness shall draw downward; and if it be
a Boy, it shall ascend above.

Urine of a Woman, white, heavy and stinking, betokens pain in the Reyns, and
pain of the Mother, and sickness of cold.

Urine of a Woman shining as bright Gold, signifies lust to a man.

Urine of a Woman that fleeteth fat above, betokens pain in the Reyns.

Urine of a Woman with black Contents in the bottom, betokens falling of the
Flowers.

Urine of a Woman colored as white Lead; if she be with Child, the Child is
dead within her. And if she be not with Child, and the Water stink, it
betokens that the Mother is rotten.

Urine of a Woman colored as Linseed, and if she have the flux, it betokens
death.

Urine of a Woman red as Gold, with a watery Circle above, signifies that she is
with Child.

If thou see thy face in a Woman's Water, and she be without a Fever, it
betokens she is with Child. But if thou see thy face in the Urine of a hot
Fever, it is a sign of death.

And if thou see thy face in Urine that has no Axes, it betokens long sickness.

Urine thin in substance, having fleeting above as it were a dark Sky,
betokens death.

Of the Regions of the Urine.
You shall understand, that in the Urine, when it is in the Urinal, there be
three Regions. The first, second, and the third.

The third begins at the bottom of the Urinal, and lasts to the thickness
of a fingers breadth upward.

The second Region begins as the 3 does end, and lasts upward to the Circle.

And the first Region contains all that is upward above the Circle. And in
these Regions be diverse Contents.

There be 4 Contents that belong to Urines, which I will here declare to you;
and first, I will begin at froth. Froth that dwells and cleaves to the
Circle, betokens indigestion, and wind in the Stomach, and in the Bowels,
and in the Head: And if above that froth dwell great Bubbles, it betokens
great pain in the Reyns.

And if the froth dwell small, it is a sign of burning in the Stomach, and burnt
blood in the Liver.

If the froth be full of grains, it betokens Rheum in the Head, Breast, and
the black Jaundice.

If it be green, it is a sign of the Jaundice that comes of burnt blood in the
Liver.

A small sky appearing and shadowing the Urine above; if the Urine be a party
blew, it betokens pain at the Heart, and shortness of breath, and wind that
comes of the Lungs: And if the Urine be not blew, and such a sky shadow the
Urine above it, it betokens chafing of the Liver, and especially if the froth
be yellow.

A Circle thick, and little Color, betokens pain in the Brains.

A Circle thick and little, and colored as Purple, betokens pain in the
forehead.

A Circle black or white, thin, and a little colored, betokens pain in the
left side of the Head.

A Circle thin and high-colored, as red or yellow, signifies pain in the right
side of the Head.

A Circle green, betokens wavering in the Head, and pain in the Stomach; And if
it appear in an hot Axis, it betokens the phrensy that comes of cold.

A Circle in a hot Axis, colored blew, if it trembled, betokens death.

Grains that dwell in the Circle, after casting of the Urine gone down, and
after rise up again to the Circle, they betoken Rheum in the Head.

And if they go down, and turn not again to the Circle, then they signify
Rheum in the Breast, Lungs, and the Spleen: And if you see 2 small grains, or
more, in the second Region, knit to a small sky, they betoken pain in the
Breast, of Rheum, a bad Stomach, Liver and Lungs.

Urine white or pale, neither too thick nor too thin, with an even and clean
substance, betokens health in a Melancholy man.

Urine white as Water, and not thin, with beams as they were yards, appearing
in the midst, betokens sickness of the Spleen.

These be the tokens: overthwart swelling in the side, with hardness,
indigestion, a small Neck, a lean Body, heaviness and sloth in all the Body,
Especially if they go against a Hill; Paleness of Visage, and swelling after
meat.

Urine white and thin, with fleshly and long resolutions, much in quantity, and
often made, betokens a sickness that is called Diabites; and of the said
sickness, comes Urine overmuch and unmeasurably. The tokens are, great thirst,
unmeasurable dryness of Body; and this breeds often the Dropsy.

Urine white and thin, with small round moats, betokens the cold Gout.

The tokens are. The Patient is wan of color, and shaking.

Urine white and thin as Water, with a manner of darkeness, and with Gravel,
betokens the stone, and the spices thereof; as is showed in the Contents.

Urine white and thin, long continuing, with Scales, and black resolutions,
signifies in Woman's Water, stopping of her Flowers. The tokens are, ach in the
Head, and Back, and Neck, and in the nether part of the Body, And an evil
appetite to meat.

Urine in the beginning red, and shining as flames of fire, and thin, and after
white and thin; betokens the Frenzy.

These be the tokens: a Fever, Ague, great thirst, Alienation of mind, and
many times they think their bed is full of straw, or such like things, which
they seek after; and when they cannot find it, they be very raging.

Urine white and thin as color of Lead with whiteness, betokens the falling
sickness.

These be the tokens: heaviness of the Head, sloth of the Body, Yawning,
Quaking of the Hands and Feet, Pollution of Nature, pissing involuntarily.

Urine white and thin, and clear, and much shining, and little Gravel
appearing, betokens the swimming in the Head, which is called Vertigo.

These be the tokens: ach in the Head, and especially in the forehead, darkness
of the Eyes, and overcasting of the uppermost part: so that if they see wheels
go, or running water, they fall down; loathings of meat, and oftentimes
abomination of the Stomach.

Urine white and thin in lean people, betokens wasting of the substance of
the Body.

These be the tokens: the Face is wan, the Eyes hollow and dry, a faint heat
like a soft Fever, in the hands, loathing of meat.

Urine white and thin, in what sickness soever it be, betokens indigestion,
and feebleness of natural heat.

The tokens be these: closing of wind under the Ribs and the Sides, rumbling in
the womb, swelling of the Sides, heaviness of the Eyes and Joints; The Body
slothful, and evil disposed on the left side. And thus have I set before you
the Symptoms of Diseases our frail Bodies are incident unto, manifested by the
Urine: if you desire to know the Medicines, look into the Table annexed to this
Mirror of Health, where you will find several fitted, and plainly prepared for
you; for which means give God the praise.

Triuni Deo, sacro-Sanctae and individuae Trinitati, sit Honor and Gloria, in
secula seculorum, Amen.
23 July 1656. Sol in Aries 10. 33. Per Rob. Turner.


