SINGLE SONGS, AND DIALOGUES, IN The Musical PLAY OF MARS and VENUS.

Performed with the ANATOMIST, or the SHAM DOCTOR.

Set to Music by Mr. Finger, and Mr. John Eccles.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for the Authors, and Sold by John Hare
Musical Instrument Seller, at the Golden Viol in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at
his Shop in Freeman's* Yard in Cornhill. And by John Welsh Musical
Instrument-maker in Ordinary to His Majesty, at the Golden Harp and Hautboy in
Catharine-street against Somerset House Watergate in the Strand. 1697.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Robert Howard, Auditor-General of the Exchequer,
and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. etc.
Sir,
AMong the many Arts and Sciences whose Reputation is raised by your excellent
Performances and generous Encouragement, Music is particularly obliged to pay
you a thankful Acknowledgement. As such, we humbly beg leave to lay these
Musical Composures at your Feet. Were not your condescending goodness as Famous
as your other Virtues, we should not dare approach so great a Shrine with so
small an Offering. But, like Heaven, you ever loved to countenance every good
Intent, and suffer the Zeal and Sincerity of your Votaries to atone for their
Imperfections. As you fully grasp at once and with ease all the Valuable
Qualifications of which others are proud though they but singly and superficially
possess them, so with a larger Capacity of Soul you exert your diffusive
Generosity in a more ample manner; and while your whole Time seems engrossed by
the most serious and important Affairs, to prop the State and Vindicate Reason
and Liberty, by your Councels, by your incomparable Pen, and your exemplary
Zeal and Resolution, even then you still redeem some Moments to support the
Drooping Muses. Your very Recreations are but a Change of Study, and more
beneficial to your Country than the labored Endeavors of others. We see in
the Productions of your Mind all the sprightly Vigor of Youth with the
profound Judgment of a Riper Age; all the Felicity of Nature with all the
Graces and Delicacies of Art. Those three Charming Sisters, Music, Painting
and Poetry have strove to out-rival one another in bestowing their utmost
Favors on you, but you have so highly obliged them, that, though they are
Goddesses, it is not in their Power to oblige you equally. Thus the Greatest, as
well as we, must despair of expressing, as they ought, the Respect they have
for your inestimable Worth: But, were our Power answerable to our Desires, none
would be more ambitious of discharging the mighty Debt due from all Lovers of
the Muses to you, than,

Sir, Your most Humble and Obedient Servants, Godfrey Finger, John Eccles.


PROLOGUE.
The first Song Sung by Mrs. Hudson.
Set by Mr. Finger.
^COme all, come all, come all, come all with mo -- ving Songs prepare to Char
-- m the Witty and the Fair; ye Trum -- pets soft -- ly breath, or cease,
cease, cease, cease, Love may in Britain raise -- e a War, a War, but 'twill
be sweeter far than Peace, but 'twill be sweeter far than Peace.

Sung by Mrs. Ayloffe.
^LOve a -- lone can here a -- larm us, and he on -- ly strikes to Charm us;
gazing, liking, and ad -- miring, firing, pan -- ting, and de -- siring,
fearing, daring, trying, flying, feigning, pressing, faint de -- nying, still
re -- viving fierce delights, this is Love, and these his fights, still re --
viving fierce delights, this is Love, and these his fights.

II.
Eager Kisses, Fiery glances,
Balmy Blisses, melting trances;
Kind complying, kinder denying,
Happy days, and happier nights,
Sill reviving fierce delights,
This is Love, and these his fights.
A Song in Three parts.
^War sheds Blood and Love sheds Tears, War has Swords, LOve like War has no --
ble cares, War sheds Blood and Love sheds Tears, War has Swords, and Love has
Darts, War takes Towns, and Love takes Hearts: Love like War has and Love has
Darts, War takes Towns, and Love takes Hearts: Love like War has flames and
fires, Love like War the bold requires, Love like War does Art ad -- mit,
flames and fires, Love like War the bold requires, Love like War does Art ad --
mit, Love like War for Youth is fit. Love like War for Youth is fit.

Sung by Mrs. Hudson.
^SCorn though Beauty frowns to tremble, Lovers bold -- ly urge your flame, for a
Woe -- man will dis -- sem -- ble, loves the joy but hates the name; Her re --
fusing your per -- su -- ing, yields a -- like a pleasing pleas -- ing pain,
ever cu -- ring and re -- newing, soon, soon, soon appeased, soon, soon, soon
appeased to burn a -- gain, soon appeased to burn a -- gain.

Sung by Mrs. Ayloffe.
^TO dou -- ble the sports, to Tha -- li -- a be -- longs, I Will join, comic
Scenes to your A -- mo -- rous Songs; To heighten Life's pleasures, to soften
its cares, no Cha -- rm like a Farce, no Phy -- sicians like Plays.

Sung by Mrs. Ayloffe
^TO tree -- ble the pleasures with re -- gu -- lar measures, my Train shall ad
-- van -- ce; Some join in a Chorus, while gay -- ly be -- fore us some joy --
n in a Dance.

Grand Chorus.
Let Scenes of mirth and love,
With Songs and Dances joining,
The fleeting hours improve,
And banish dull repining;
He who those Joys refuses,
When kindly they invite,
The end of Living loses,
Life's business is Delight.
(1 Act.)
First Song Sung by Mrs. Hudson.
Set by Mr. John Eccles.
^TO meet her Mars the Queen of Love comes here, adorned with all her Charms;
The Warrior best the Fair can move, and crowns his toiles in Beauty's arms,
the Warrior best the Fair can move, and crowns his toiles in Beauty's arms.

Venus. ^FLy, fly ye la -- zy hours, have bring him here, swift, swift as my
fond wishes are. are. When we love, and love to rage, every moment seems an
age; when we love, and love to rage, ev -- 'ry moment seems an age.


Cupid. ^BEau -- ty's Goddess cease to mourn, soon to your Arms from Wars a --
larms, your He -- to will re -- turn. -- turn. Your grief will then be lost in
Kisses, mel -- ting, mel -- ting, mel -- ting Blisses, you shall La -- ugh,
shall laugh, and free -- ly toy, as gloomy Night adds Charms to light, so ab --
sense to your Joy.


CUPID. ^THere the kind -- est Husbands are, and the kind -- est heart -- ed
Fair; each in Hy -- men's bonds is free, and when Wives with Lo -- verse go,
Cuckolds, not to dis -- a -- gree, thank the men who make'em so.


II.
Others fond of Roving Lives,
Love all Women but their Wives:
Painted Beautys there abound,
Nay some Men are Painted too;
Crowds are in the Temples found,
But come most to Worship you.
A Dialogue between Vulcan and Venus.
Set by Mr. John Eccles.
Vulcan. ^THou plague of my life, thou plague of my life, thou Devil, thou
Devil, thou Devil, thou Wife; come tell me, come tell me, why did you Dress,
why did you Dress so like a Crack? you know, you know you know I forbad you,
why do you Patch thus, and Prink? what? you're Painted I think! why this Head six
Foot high? Blood and Fire, who am I? who am I, who am I, who am I.


Venus. ^My Fool, for what else can that properly be, that is ug -- ly and old,
and ill natured like thee, I Will dress when I please, nay I Will Cuckold thee too,
what else have young Wives with such Husbands to do?


Vulcan. ^If ever you dare, If ever you dare, I Will make the world know what a
Strumpet you are.


Venus. ^Nay what do I care, nay what do I care, you will make the world know
what a Cuckold you are.


Both together Scolding. ^You'll make the world know, you will make the world
know, you will make the world I Will make the world know, I Will make the world know,
I Will make the world know, I Will know what a Cuckold, a Cuckold, a Cuckold you
are; you will make the world make the world know what a Strumpet, a Strumpet you
are, I Will know, you will make the world know, you will make the world know what a
Cuckold you are. make the world know, I Will make the world know what a Strumpet,
a Strumpet you are.


Venus. ^Thus at least,


Vulcan. ^Joyn and curse the tie with me, that confines us to one Bed, thus at
least we'll once a -- gree, cursed be he, cursed be he that made us Wed, cursed
be he, Cursed, cursed be cursed be he, cursed be he that made us Wed, cursed be
he, cursed be he, cursed be he, cursed be he, cursed be he that made, that made
us Wed, cursed be he, cursed be he, cursed be he that he that made us Wed, thus
at least we'll once agree, cursed be he that made us made, that made us Wed,
thus at least we'll once agree, cursed be he that made us Wed; cursed be he,
cursed be he, cursed be he that made us Wed. Wed; cursed, cursed be he, cursed
be he that made, that made us Wed.


(2 Act.)
Venus running in to Mars's Arms.
Set by Mr. John Eccles.
^MY Mars, oh! oh! oh my Mars, oh my Mars, my dear -- est, dearest Love, my
Joy, my Soul, my all, my all, oh my dearest, dearest Mars.


^My Venus, oh! oh! oh my Venus, oh my Venus, my dearest Love, my Life, my
Heaven, my all, my all, my dearest, dearest Venus.


Trumpet. ^COme all ye Loves clap, clap every Wing; come all ye Loves, clap,
clap ev -- 'ry Wing; I -- o Triumph! I -- o Triumph! I -- o Triumph, Tri --
umphe, Tri -- umphe, dance, dance, dance and sing! I -- o Triumph! I -- o
Triumph! I -- o Triumph, Triumph, dance, dance, dance and sing, Triumph,
Trium -- phe dance, dance, dance and sing.


A Dialogue between Mars and Venus.
Set by Mr. John Eccles.
^How sweet, how sweet, how lovely, when re -- turned; how sweet, how lovely,
how lovely when re -- turned is the dea -- -- turned; how lovely, how sweet,
how lovely when returned, is the dea -- r, is the -- r, is the dear, dear ob --
je -- ct, is the dear, is the dear, dear dear, dear ob -- je -- ct, is the
dear, dear object, is the dear, the dear, dear object whom we mourned;
recruit-ed fires more fiercely warm, and absence heigh -- object whom we
mourned; re-cruited fires more fiercely, fiercely warm, and absence -- tens,
height-ens heightens every, every Charm, the Blessing that a while heightens,
heightens every, every Charm, the Blessing that a while was lost, when it is
regained, is valued, va -- lu'd most; my dear, my dear, my was lost, when it is
regained, is valued, va -- lu'd most; my dear, my dear, my Life, my Joy, my
Soul, my Heaven, my Love, oh! my dearest, dearest Mars. Life, my Joy, my Soul,
my Heaven, my Love, oh! my dearest, dearest Love.

Songs in the 3d. Act,
Set by Mr. Finger.
And Sung by Mrs. Hudson.
^SEe Vulcan, Jealousy, Jea -- lousie ap -- pears, though not to ease but raise
-- e thy cares, still restless round the world I ru -- n, to Rack the wretched
Lovers mind, I watch and journey with the Sun, to search for what I dread to
find, thence slid -- ing on a Beam, my Eye saw Mars with Venus loose-ly toy,
saw Mars with Venus loosely toy.

A Dialogue between Mrs. Bracegirdle and Mr. Bowman.
She. ^NO, no, no, no,


HE. ^Yield, yield


HE. ^My dear, my dear, dear, let full possessing crown my Love, crown my Love
and Charm my Sense;


She. ^No I must oppose your pressing with as gallant a defense,


He. ^When Love's Harvest should be reaping, will you wast the time, in doubt;


She. ^Ev'ry Town that is worth the keeping, keeps a while the -- in -- va --
der out; Cheap Em -- bra -- ces quickly cloy, Ea -- sy Conquest seems a toy,
but de -- ny -- ing, struggling, flying, wanton playing, wise de -- lay -- ing,
rai -- se us to a Sen -- se of Joy.

^Love's a Hawk and stoops a -- pace, we Love's a Hawk and stoops a -- pace,
Love's a Hawk and stoops a -- pace, we all, all, all, all hurry for the Quarry,
we all, all, all, all hurry all, all, all, all hurry for the Quarry, we all,
all, all, all hurry for the Quarry, though the sport, though the sport ends with
the Chase, for the Quarry, though the sport ends with the Chase, ends with the
Chase, though the sport, though the sport ends with the Chase. though the sport ends
with the Chase, ends with the Chase.


Cupid. ^THus all un -- e -- qual Unions break, thus Hymen without Love is
weak; but I Will Ex ert my power a -- new, make Vulcan kind, and Ve -- nus true;
her gra -- ti -- tude shall thus im -- prove, and Friendship shall re -- sem --
ble Love; where Hymen wov -- e un -- e -- qual Ties, Lov -- e to no high -- er
pitch can raise.


FINIS.

