CONFESSIONS AND PROOFS OF PROTESTANT DIVINES OF Reformed Churches, That
EPISCOPACY is in respect of the Office according to the word of God, and in
respect of the Use the Best. TOGETHER, With a brief Treatise touching the
Original of BISHOPS and METROPOLITANS

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall, in the Year 1644.

TO The Pious and Religous Reader, Grace and Peace in Christ Jesus.
THe matter subject of this Treatise being yet in suspense, and to be
determined de futuro. vid: What Ecclesiastical Government is to be judged to
be, According to the word of God in respect of the office it self, and also
the Best in respect of its use: After that upon more and more deliberation I
had perfected my conclusion, the saying of Augustine came into my mind, He that
concealeth a Truth, and he that teaches a falsehood, are both guilty: the first
because he will not profit; the other, because he intends to hurt and delude:
which I apprehended as a double caution, both of not publishing any Utopian
Ecclesiastical form of Government of mine own forging, as also, of not
stifling, by my silence, a form truly Apostolical.

Which Resolution, notwithstanding, I did not adventure to take, before that I
was fortified in my persuasion by a general consent of Protestant Divines of
reformed Churches, and among others, in some principal points appealing to the
Divines of the Church of Geneva; Nor yet do we so much insist upon their
Confessions, as upon their Proofs, especially being grounded upon two
infallible foundations. The first, the General Verdict of Antiquity, as well
Doctrinall as Historical: though we should not name that General Council of
Calcedon consisting of 630 Fathers, which by one Canon decreed it to be a
Sacrilege to press down a Bishop into the degree of a Presbyter. The same
Council that did also ordain another Canon, which was then the very
break-neck of Romish Popedom. 2ly, The Authentical Texts of Scripture so
far as thereby to demonstrate Christ his own approbation of Episcopal
Prelacy after his Ascension in the Churches of Asia: in one whereof without all
contradiction was one Polycarpus Bishop and Martyr.

As for the Churches, whereof we are to speak; The Tractate has been
undertaken in behalf of Protestant Churches, which practice at this day the
same Prelacy under these two diverse names of Episcopacy and Superintendency, as
much exceeding the number of those which are destitute of Bishops, yet so, as
justly condemning the Romish Hierarchy (rather Tyranny) poisoned with most
gross Idolatry, and not so only, but so far opposite to the Episcopacy
which we defend, that it is a false Usurpation, that all Bishops be originally
deduced from the Pope, and dependant upon him. Other Churches destitute of
Bishops we differ from, yet not so (far be it from us) as not to account them
essential Churches of Christ, but to whom, as formerly, we do desirously give
the right hand of Brotherly fellowship; to join against the Common and grand
adversary in the Romish Babylon.

Concerning other points circumstantiall we have provided, that our Method be
with coherence, our Style plain and even, our allegations direct and
punctual, our Authors justly approveable, our Taxations toothlesse, and our
Inferencies brief, pertinent and consectary.

As for you (good Christian Reader) his hope is, that he shall not need the use
of the Apostles Expostulation, saying, Am I your enemy, because I tell you the
truth? and his prayer to God shall be to protect and bless you, to the Glory
of his saving Grace in Christ Jesus, that he also will distribute to this our
lacerated Church some portion of that his peerlesse Legacy left unto his
Apostles, when he said, My peace I leave with you, by virtue whereof we may
with one Heart and Mind faithfully Worship God in Spirit and in Truth.

The Contents of every THESIS.
I. THesis. That our English Episcopacy has been justified by the confession
of the most learned Protestants of remote Churches, in special by the Church
of Geneva. Page 1 II. Thesis. That there was never any visibly constituted
Church in all Christendom since the Apostles time for 1500 years and more,
which held Episcopacy in it self to be unlawful. Page 5 III. Thesis. That
Episcopal Prelacy is acknowledged by Protestant Divines of remote Churches to
be according to the Word of God, and their consent therein unto Primitive
Antiquity. Page 7 IV. Thesis. That Episcopal Government in the Church is, in
respect of the necessary use thereof, the Best, by the consent of Protestant
Divines of other reformed Churches. Page 9 V. Thesis. That the most Protestant
Churches do profess and practice a Prelacy over Presbyters. Page 13 VI.
Thesis. That the former Reasons of Confessions of Protestant Divines,
concerning the necessity of Episcopal Prelacy, for preservation of concord and
preventing of Schism, is correspondent to the judgment of Antiquity. Page 14
VII. Thesis. That Bishops primitively were not only the chiefest Champions for
the Christian Faith, but also the greatest adversaries to Romish Popedom, as
have also our English. Page 16 VIII. Thesis. That to be of Apostolical
Institution argues in it a divine Right by the confession of excellent Divines
of the Reformed Churches. Page 18 IX. Thesis. That no Ancient Father absolutely
denied the Apostolical Original of Episcopacy, no not the objected Hierome,
who will show himself a manifest Patron thereof. Page 19 X. Thesis. That
Clement an Apostolical Disciple, to whose arbitrament both our Opposites and
we offer to yield our selves does patronize Episcopacy, as being Apostolical.
Page 21 XI. Thesis. That other Primitive Fathers before Hierome did unanimously
testify an Apostolical Light of Episcopacy. Page 24 XII. Thesis. That the
Apostolical Antiquity of Episcopacy is confessedly proved out of Ignatius.
Page 26 XIII. Thesis. That Antiquity has given us Rules of Resolution for the
knowledge of any Apostolical practice; which may serve in the case of
Episcopacy. Page 27 XIV. Thesis. That Protestant Divines of other Reformed
Churches have held it most equal to be directed by the judgments of Ancients
for a proof of a practice Apostolical. Page 28 XV. Thesis. That Master Beza
himself is challengeable to yield unto an Apostolical right of Episcopacy
from his own former confession. Page 30 XVI. Thesis. That the testimonies of
Nazianzen and Augustine are unworthily objected to the contrary. Page 30 XVII.
Thesis. That Timothy and Titus both had a Prelacy over Presbyters
notwithstanding the objection of the community of names of Bishops and
Presbyters is sufficiently confessed by Protestant Divines of remote Churches.
Page 32 XVIII. Thesis. That Timothy and Titus have had a Prelacy as Bishops
over Presbyters in the Apostles times, notwithstanding the Objection, that they
were called Evangelists according to consent of Protestants of Reformed
Churches. Page 34 XIX. Thesis. That Antiquity taught an Episcopacy both in
Timothy and Titus. Page 36 XX. Thesis. That our Opposites first Exposition,
which interprets the Angel to mean the whole Church and Congregation is
notably extravagant. Page 38 XXI. Thesis. That our Opposites second Exposition
of the word Angel to signify only the Order and College of Presbyters is
erroneous, notwithstanding the Arguments of our Opposites to the contrary. Page
39 The Answer to the first Argument. Page 39 To the Second. Page 39 To the
Third. Page 41 To the Fourth. Page 42 To the Last. Page 43
XXII. Thesis. That our Opposites third Exposition of the word Angel to
signifies one only Pastor in the Church of Ephesus is extremely now and
naughts. XXIII. Thesis. That by the word Angel of Ephesus to signify a
singular and individual Pastor having a Prelacy over Presbyters is proved by
a large consent of Protestant Divines without Exception judicious and
ingenuous. Page 45 XXIV. Thesis. That Antiquity held not the word Angel,
(whereof we treat) to be taken collectively for a Multitude of Pastors. Page
48 XXV. Thesis. That the word Angel in other places of the Revelation is
commonly, if not always individually taken. Page 48 XXVI. Thesis. That by
Angel is meant individually one Bishop, is demonstrated by Historical
learning without contradiction. Page 50 XXVII. Thesis. That Christ himself
showed his approbation of Prelacy, which the foresaid Angels had in their
several Churches. Page 52
The judgment of Protestant Divines, of remote Churches, as well such, as were
the first Reformers of Religion, as others, after them, in behalf of
Episcopal degree in the Church.
THis they perform, both by their direct and ingenious confessions, and after
by sound and solid proofs, so far as to show Episcopal Prelacie to be
According to Gods Word, as also to acknowledge the same for use to be the Best
kind of Ecclesiastical Government. We are, in the first place, to try their
plain confessions concerning the said Prelacy, as well in special, for our
English, as touching Episcopacy in general, in what Orthodox Church soever,
and afterward to adjoyne the proofs.

I. THESIS. That our English Episcopacy has been justified by the confession
of the most learned Protestants of remote Churches, in special by the Church
of Geneva.
OUr Episcopal Prelacy we are sure was professed, and practiced by Bishops.

1. In the days of King Edward the 6th, who as they were the principal
Authors of the Reformation of our Protestant Religion, so did some of them
seal the truth of their profession with their blood, and have therefore been
with others thus extolled by that golden mouth of the French Church Moulin
epist. ad episc. Winton Quorum Martyrum habemus scripta, and meminimus gesta,
ac zelum; nulla ex part inferiorem zelo praestantissimorum Dei servo rum, quos
Germania, aut Gallia tulit: hoc qui negat, opor tet ut fit vel improbe vecors,
vel gloriae Dei invidus, vel cerebrosa stoliditate caliget in clara luce.
Master Moulin saying, That they were for zeal nothing inferior to the most
excellent servants of God, that Germany or France ever had; which (says he)
none will deny is so, if not wilfully stupid, and blinded in daylight. Yea,
and touching those then Archbishops and Bishops, Bezae Respons ad Sarav. de
Minist. gradibus, c. 18 p. 303. Quod si nunc. Anglicanae Ecclesiae instauratae
suorum Episcoporum and Archiepiscoporum authoritate suffulta praestant,
quemadmodum hoc illi nostra memoria contigit, ut ejus ordinis homines non
tantum insignes Dei Martyrs, sed etiam praestantissimos Pastores, ac Doctores
habuerit
Beza for the Church of Geneva. It happened in our memory, that she (speaking
of our English Church) has had men of that calling, not only constant Martyrs
of God, but also excellent Pastors, and Doctors.

2. In the days of Queen Elizabeth, Calvin the most lustrious star of the
Church of Geneva doubted not to instile Archbishop Cranmer Calvin epist.
Cranmero, Te praesertim (Ornatissime Praesul) qui altiori in specula seeds, in
hanc curam incumbere necesse est. Scio non ita unius Angliae haberi abs Te
rationem quin universo orbi consulas.
A most accomplished Prelate, (says he) who has the cure, not only of
England, but also of the whole Christian world, which he did to the dignifying
of the government of our English Church; and no marvel, seeing that he durst
profess to yield, in behalf, even of Popish Bishops, upon condition, that
renouncing the dependence upon the Pope, and acknowledgement of Christ as their
only Head, with profession of his Truth Calvin. tom. 7. ad Sadoletum, and de
necessitate reformandae Ecclesiae. p 69. Verum talem nobis si contribuant
Hierarchiam in qua emineant Episcopi, ut Christo subesse non recusent, ut ab
illo tanquam ab unico capite pendeant, and ad ipsum referantur, in qua si
fraternam charitatem inter se colant, and non alio modo quam ejus veritate
colligati, tum vero nullo non Anathemate dignos fatemur si qerunt, qui eam non
reverenter and summa cum obedientia observent.
Then shall we profess all them (says he) who shall not reverently and
willingly submit to their government, to be worthy of whatsoever Anathema or
curse. So he, even in his Tractate of reformation of the Church. At what time
also Beza after his congratulating the restitution of our Protestant Religion
in England, earnestly desired the whole Clergy under the government of Grindall
then Bishop of London, to Beza ad Grindal Epist. 23. ut omnibus praesulibus
suis ex animo obsequantur: majori poena digni sunt qui Authoritatem Tuam
aspernabuntur. Idem rursus ad Sarav. upon the consideration of the Government
by Archbishops and Bishops. Fruantur sane ista Dei beneficentia, quae utinam
sit illi nationi perpetua.
submit unto him, holding him worthy of much punishment who should despise his
Authority. Yea, and so well did he approve of the then government by
Archbishops and Bishops, as to wish it might be perpetual unto them. This is
cited by the Author of the Survey of the pretended holy discipline, etc. Beza
apud Saravia de Minist. gradibus. p. 343. c. 21. Nedum, ut quod falsissime and
impudentissime nonnulli nobis objiciunt cuiquam uspiam Ecclesiae sequendum
nostrum peculiare exemplum praescribamus, imperitissimorum illorum similes, qui
nihil nisi quod ipsi agunt, rectum putant.
Sadell likewise, who is sufficiently commended by his excellent writings in
defense of the Protestant Religion, did join together with Beza in an Apology
to vindicate themselves from a sinister report, as if they had detracted from
the Right of Government by Archbishops and Bishops, avouching the same
aspersion to have been a most impious slander. And Pet. Martyr Epist praefix.
Juelli Apol. Amplissime Praesul, and Domine mihi quotidie etiam atque etiam
observande.
Bishop Juell, how was he honored by Peter Martyr, calling him A most renowned
Prelate; and by Sibbrandus Sibrand contra Grotium p. 183. citatus a Nicholao
Videlio, lib. de Episcopat. Constantini magni p. 25.
Lubbartus, entitling him The Ornament not only of England, but also of the
whole world.

Zanchius in Epist. ad Elizab. Angliae Regin. Cogitet Tua Majestas in hoc omnem
Tuam curam, potentiam, and authoritatem intendere, ut Imprimis Episcopos habeas
pios, and in Sacris literis eruditos sicut Dei beneficio habes quamplurimos,
eosque foveas and audias.
Hierom Zanchee, one in the opinion of our Opposites (we doubt not) worthily
renowned, in his Letters to Queen Elizabeth, he exhorts Her Majesty with an
Imprimis, and especially to extend her care, power, and authority, to have
godly Bishops, skillful in holy Scriptures, of which sort (says he) by the
blessing of God you have already very many: and to cherish and hear them. Idem
Epist. Edmund. Grindallo Episcop. non possum non gratulari novam and
amplissimam dignitatem: quoniam ista sunt divinae benedictionis Testimonia and
constantis Tuae in Deum pietatis qua ejus beneficentia cura Tua magis magisque
in vera Religione and pietate promoveri possit.
Also in his Epistle to Archbishop Grindall, upon occasion of his remove to
Canterbury, he expresses his joy for that access of dignity, as a testimony
of Gods love toward him, and a means whereby he might more and more promote
Gods true Religion. Our Opposites ought not to be offended with us, although we
offer unto them next an Author, somewhat distasteful unto them at the first
hearing, namely Saravia de Minist. gradibus in Epist. ad Lectorem. Saepe
miratus sum eorum sapientiam, qui Anglicanae Ecclesiae restituerunt divinum
cultum, and ita se attemperarunt ut nusquam decessisse ab antiqua and prisca
Ecclesiae consuetudine reprehendi possint. Et in Epist. Dedicatoria. In part
foelicitatis Regni Anglicani numerandum est, quod hunc Ordinem Episcoporum
retinet.
D. Saravia, because as he is a Religious Divine, and as un-Episcopall as any
other, so also is he as Orthodox; every where, as they know, inveighing against
the Romish Hierarchy; he confesses himself to wonder at the wisdom of the
Reformers of Religion in England, so as not any where deviating from the
ancient Church of Christ: and concludes with this Epiphonema, saying, I hold
it a part of her happiness that she has retained with her the order of
Bishops.

3. In the reign of King James, that famous Isaac' Casaub. Regem alloquens, in
praefat. ad exercit. Qui Ecclesiam habeas in Tuis regnis partim sum olim ita
institutam, partim magnis Tuis laboribus ita instauratam, ut ad florentis
quondam Ecclesiae formam nulla body propius accedat, quam Tua: inter, vel
excessu, vel defectu peccantes, mediam viam sequuta. Qua^ moderatione hoc
primum assecuta est Ecclesia Anglicana, ut illi ipsi, qui suam foelicitatem
invident, saepe tamen ex aliarum comparatione illam cogantur laudare. Idem
Epist. ad Card. Peron. Reg. Brit nomine: sed ex animi quoque sui sententia.
Certo ac liquido mihi constat, si notae (...) quaerantur, and vere necessaria
ad Salutem spectentur, aut etiam ad decorum Ecclesiae, nullam in orb terrarum
(Deo uni sit laus and gloria) inventam, quae propius ad fidem aut speciem
antiquae Ecclesiae Catholicae accedat, etc.
Isaac Casaubon, whom we reckon as the fourth witness from the Church of
Geneva, had that estimation of our English Episcopal government, as to
confess, That no Church does come nearer the form of the Primitive Church,
then it does; so far, that even they who envyed her happiness, are
notwithstanding constrained to extol it. He proceeds furthermore to blazon the
worthiness of it. If (says he) the essential part of the Church be enquired
into, and what either necessarily belongs unto the doctrine of Salvation, or
else to the decency of the Church, then (praised and magnified be God) no
Church upon earth can be found, which more professes the faith, and resembles
the form of the ancient Catholic Church, then it does. So he.

But to return to our French witness again: worthy Master Moulin in his
Buckler of Faith, p. 271.
Master Moulin, in an answer to a Papist, who upbraided him with the discipline
of England, does avouch the dignity thereof, telling him furthermore, That
their agreement is such, that England (says he) has been a refuge to our
persecuted Churches, and correspondently the excellentest servants of God in
our Churches, as Peter Martyr, Calvin, Beza, and Zanchee, have often written
Letters full of respect and amity to the Prelates of England. So he.

Lastly, now under our Gracious Sovereign King Charles, in the time of
Archbishop Abbot, whose daily experience did testify the reciprocal
correspondence between him, and with other Bishops and all reformed Churches
beyond the Sea. At what time likewise Cyrill late Greek Patriarch of
Constantinople did so far honor both him and our English Church, as to
profess his accordance therewith, more specially then with any other. And if
our Bishops of later date had not been respected, then surely would not the
Divines about Breme in Germany have sent their controversies had among
themselves, only unto certain Bishops in England (as they did) to have them
moderated by their judgments, not to speak of their dedications of some of
their Books unto Bishops. These last Relations nothing, but the importunity of
these times, could have extorted from us. Thus much of particular respects had
in special to our English Episcopal Government, by singular approved Divines
of the reformed Protestant Churches. In the next place, as the thread of our
method leads us, we are to examine what they will say touching the
unlawfulness, or lawfulness thereof in general.

II. THESIS. That there was never any visibly constituted Church in all
Christendom since the Apostles time for 1500 years and more, which held
Episcopacy in it self to be unlawful.
WE are not ignorant that even at this time, all Episcopacy, and Prelacy of any
one above Presbytery, is cried down by some as unlawful in it self, August.
de Aerio lib. de Haeresi cap. 53. Quia non potuit Episcopus ordinari, dicebat
Presbyterum ab Episcopo nulla differentia debere discerni.
notwithstanding our Opposites cannot but know what, besides Epiphanius, Saint
Augustine recorded of one Aerius, to wit, that he, because he could not obtain
to be made a Bishop, did therefore teach that there ought to be no difference
between a Presbyter and a Bishop. So he: and for that cause they listed him
among the erroneous Authors of that Age, but (he being excepted) never any
visible Church of Christ before him, we add, not yet any thus protested after
him, nor before these days of contradiction defended his opinion. Now whether
the humor of desire to rule others, and the unwillingnesse to be subject unto
others, may not equally transport some Ecclesiastics to oppose against
Episcopacy, they can best judge whom it most concerns. We know (beside
infinite others, who have acknowledged the lawfulness of Episcopacy) some
Protestant Divines of remote Churches, who have fully condemned the opinion of
Aerius. Three may suffice for three hundred if they be learned and judicious
Authors, and not interested in that which is now called Episcopal Policy.
Master Moulin in Epist. 3. ad Episc. Winton. Ab incunabulis Aerium damnavi.
Master Moulin comes on roundly: I have since my infancy (says he) abhorred
the opinion of Aerius. Tylenus in paraenes. Ante Aerium de Episcopis
exautorandis nemo, post Aerium solum Genevenses studebant.
Tyllenus also a Divine of the French Church as pertinently and plainly. None
ever before Aerius endeavored the extirpation of Episcopacy, nor yet after him
any, but some of Geneva. What some he might mean we know not, but whom he
might not mean we have already shown; as Calvin, Beza, Sadel, and Casaubone,
who have given their ample suffrages for our English Episcopacy, but only
speak against the Romish Hierarchy: And now, for the generality of it, Beza
de Minist. gradibus. p. 2. Si qui sunt (quod sane mihi non facile persuaseris)
qui omnem Episcopatus Ordinem, ut Tu scribis, rejiciunt, absit, ut quisquam
sanaementis furoribus illorum assentiatur. Iidem si modo deformatam domum Dei
adamussim ex verbi divini Regula proviribus instaurarent, ut Ecclesiae
Christianae fidos pastores, cur non agnoscamus? observemus? and omni Reverentia
prosequamur?
Beza is again at hand, saying, If there be any, as I think (says he) there
is not, who altogether reject the Episcopal Order, God forbid that any of
sound brains should ever assent to their furies; and besides, protests his
acknowledged observance, and all reverence to all Bishops reformed. Hitherto
against the objected unlawfulness of Episcopacy in the Church of Christ. But
this will not satisfy some men, except furthermore the lawfulness thereof may
appear in that degree which is called in respect of its right, According to
the Word of God. It belongs unto us to show this by the Confession of Divines
of remote Protestant Churches, which we are ready to perform, and more too.

III. THESIS. That Episcopal Prelacy is acknowledged by Protestant Divines of
remote Churches to be according to the Word of God, and their consent therein
unto Primitive Antiquity.
LVther may well be allowed for the foreman amongst the Reformers of the
Protestant Religion, Luther. com. 1. fol. 309. Resolut. ejus super
propositionibus Lypsiae disputationibus habitis, conclusio. Probo quam libet
civitatem habere debere Episcopum proprium jure divino, quod ex Paulo ad Titum
ostendo dicente (Hujus rei gratia reliqui Te Cretae, ut quae desunt corrigas,
ut constituas simplices Presbyteros per civitates sicut Ego disposui Tibi, Hos
autem Presbyteros fuisse Episcopos Hieron. and textus sequens ostendit, dicens,
oportet Episcopum irreprehensibilem esse.
who proves the Prelacy of Episcopacy above simple Presbyters (for so he
says) by divine Right; and this he does in his Tractate called his Resolution,
grounding his judgment upon Scripture, whereof hereafter. Accordingly Bucer,
against the Pope as Antichrist: Bucer, de Regno Christi lib. 2. cap 12. Ex
perpetua Ecclesiarum observatione ab ipsis Apostolis videmus visum hoc esse
spiritui Sancto, ut inter Presbyteros unus Ecclesiarum and totius Sacri
Ministerii gerat curam singulorum, and cunctis praerat aliis qua ac causa
Episcopi nomen hujusmodi Ecclesiatum Curatoribus est peculiariter attributum:
tametsi hi sine Presbyterorum consilio nihil statue^re debuerant qui and ipsi
propter hanc communem Ecclesiarum administ. rationem Episcopi in scripturis
vocantur.
We see (says he) by their perpetual observation of Churches, and from the
Apostles themselves, that it seemed good to the Holy Ghost that some singular
one should be appointed among the Presbyters to govern in so sacred an Order,
who has, for the same cause, the Appellation of Bishop in Scripture, Scultetus
the Divine, Professor at Heidelberg, professing Episcopal degree to be of
divine Right, and professes to prove it to be such by efficacious reasons, who
in the sequel of his discourse, will be as good as his word; with whom agrees
that admirable Scholar Isaac Casaubon. Exercit. Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi
apertit Scripturae testimoniis sunt fundati. Ibid Apostolorum hodie vicarii
sunt, et si non pari potestate cum Apostolis omnes Episcopi, ut e B.
Cypriano-antea dicebamus. Exercit. 14. Cyprian, Ep. 65. Apostolis vicaria
ordinatione succedere Episcopos.
Isaac Casaubon the ornament of Geneva, who held the same to be grounded upon
the Testimonies of Scriptures. These may serve for the present, till we come to
a larger consent.

All these and other the former confessions of Protestant Divines are the
proper idiom, and language of primitive Antiquity, teaching thus. Episcopacy is
by the Ordination of Christ. So Ignatius illam formam Episcopalem (...). Test
Sculteto in Titum.
Ignatius: and again, Cyprian Epist. 65. ad Rogat. Quod sinos aliquid facere
contra Deum audemus, qui Episcopos facit. Et Epist. 27. ad Laps. cum igitur
divina lege sundata sit etc. Epist ad Cornel. Ecclesiae gubernandae sublimem a^
divinam potestatem.
Reverence your Bishop as Christ and the Apostles have commanded you. Or thus,
To be a divine power, the resistance whereof is against God himself: So
Cyprian. And thus, God placed Bishops over his family: So Origin. Tract. in
Mat. 31. cognoscunt Episcopi quod hoc non vos salvat, quod constituit eos
Dominus super familiam ejus etc.
Origin. And thus, The Apostles were made Bishops by Christ, who ordained
others (meaning Bishops) in other places, by whom the Church should be
governed: August. in quaestion. veter. and novi Testament. page 97. Nemo
ignorant Salvatorem nostrum Episcopos instituisse, quando Apostoli facti sunt,
qui missi sunt ut mittere possint alios; Ipse enim imprimit Apostolos instituit
Episcopos.
So Augustine. Or thus, Epiphanius adversus Aerium. (...). De Haeresi 75.
Bishops constituted over Presbyters, as the Word of God teaches: So
Epiphanius. And thus, August. lib. 7. contra Donatist. cap. 42. De Apostolis a
Christo missis, quibus nos successimus eadem potestate Ecclesiam Dei
gubernantes: and de Verb. Domini Sermon 24. Qui vos spernit, me spernit etc.
None can be ignorant that Bishops were instituted by Christ when he made his
Apostles, by whom others should be made Bishops, whom we succeed, and (speaking
of Bishops) of whom Christ said, he that despises you, despises me: So again
Augustine.

Before we end this point we shall desire our Opposites to bethink themselves
what they think may signify the suffrages of the Fathers of the Synod of
Calcedon, for Antiquity, one of the first four General; And in this
generality universally received throughout Christendom, for amplitude
consisting of six hundred and thirty Bishops, and for averseness against the
Pope of Rome, that which undermined the very foundation of Romish Popedom,
which is a pretense of having been established by the divine Authority of
Christ the universal Bishop of the Church, and equalling another Patriarch
with him, and showing that all the Primacy which the Pope of Rome had, was but
from humane Authority. This Council Calced, Can. 29. (...).
Council concerning Episcopacy ordained, that To depose a Bishop down to the
degree of Presbyter, is Sacrilege.

This so great a Harmony, between the former Protestant Divines, and those
eminent Fathers, how shall it not sound delightful unto every docible and
unpreoccupated hearer? These confessions notwithstanding, we have not
discharged our Assumption, until we produce their proofs, which is to be
performed according to our former promise, after that we shall manifest the
like confessions of Protestant Divines and accordance to Antiquity, in
acknowledging Episcopacy to be the best form of Government in respect of the
use thereof.

IV. THESIS. That Episcopal Government in the Church, is, in respect of the
necessary use thereof, the best by the consent of Protestant Divines of other
reformed Churches.
SOme peradventure will conceive, that three at the least being required in the
degree of comparison, to make up a best: Therefore our three must be taken
either for Episcopacy, which is a Prelacy of one above more; or Presbytery,
which is an equality of more among themselves; or that which is called an
Independency, of one in each Parish without relation to any other. Which
mis-begotten brat was never heard of in ancient times, or approved of any
latter Church of Christ since; and indeed is but the erecting of a Pope in
every Parish, whereof something See hereafter.
hereafter. It will be sufficient that we understand a best in the full
latitude with comparison of whatsoever other.

Our Protestant Witnesses we rank into two Classes; First is the Church of the
Lutherans, who were the first Reformers of our Protestant Religion. Luther:
tom. 2 fol. 307. Plus illis tribuo, quam merentur, qui eos tam sancto and
veteri nomine dignor. Lupos enim and canes appellare oportet, and fol. 320.
Nemo contra statum Episcoporum, and veros Episcopos vel bonos pastores dictum
putet quicquid contra hos Tyrannos dicitur. Apol. Confess. Aug cap. de numero
and usu Sacramenti. Nos saepe protestati sumus summa cum voluntate conservare
Politiam. Ecclesiasticam and gradus in Ecclesia factos etiam summa authoritate.
lib 4. cap. Protestant. de unitat. Eccles ut schismata vitarentur accessit
utilis ordinatio ut ex multis Presbyteris eligeretur Episcopus qui regeret
Ecclesiam docendo Evangelium, and retinendo Disciplinam, ut praeesset
Presbyteris, etc.
If our Reader will be pleased but to cast his eye upon the Marginalls, he may
find out these following observables, viz. that Luther will be known, when he
complained of Bishops, to have meant over tyrannous (Popish) Bishops, and them,
(as he says) who are unworthy of the Holy name of Bishop; next, that all
Protestant Churches of Germany in their general Confessions, had (as they say)
often protested their earnest desire to conserve the discipline of degrees in
the Church by the Authority of Bishops, whereby to remove dissensions and
Schisms from the Church, Then that Phil Melanct Hist. conf. Aug. page 365.
Test Sarav. de Minist. gradibus cap. 16. Quanquam ut ego quod censea^ dicam,
utinam possem administrationem restituere Episcoporum. Video enim qualem simus
habituri Ecclesiam dissoluta politia Ecclesiastica. Video postea futuram
Tyrannidem multo intolerabiliorem, quam unquam fuit, nihil concessimus praeter
ea Lutherus censuit esse reddenda. Melancthon citat Bucerum discipline cleric.
Quia omnino necesse est ut Clerici suos habeant Curatores atque Custodes
instaurandos, ut Episcoporum, ita and Archiepiscoporum, aliorumque omnium,
quibuscunque nominibus censeantur potestas and animadversio, ne quis omnino fit
in hoc ordine (...).
Melancthon, by the persuasion of Luther, was as much bent for Episcopal
Government as any, when he burst out into this expression; I would to God it
lay in me to restore the Government of Bishops, for I see what a Church we
shall have, the Ecclesiastical Policy being dissolved, I foresee it will be
far more intolerable then ever it was. There is added to this the
acknowledgement of Bucer; Holding it necessary, that the Clergy have those,
(speaking of Bishops) to whom the Authority of the Church is committed: His
reason, lest that refractory and dissolute persons should be in the Church.
Prince Hanolt, after he became a sincerely professed Protestant and faithful
Preacher of the Gospel, speaking of Bishops, that would be faithful in
governing the Church: Georgius Princ Anholt. Concion. In praefat. de
Ordinatione Test Saravia page 267. utinam sicut gerunt nomina and titulos, ita
se reipsa praestarent Episcopos. Si fideliter Ecclesias regerent, quam
libenter, quantaque cordis laetitia, pro Episcopis ipsos habere, revereri,
morem gerere, debitam jurisdictionem and ordinationem eis facere, eaque sine
ulla recusatione frui vellemus.
How willingly, and with what gladness of heart, would we (says he)
reverence, obey, and yield them their ordination and jurisdiction, the which we
and Luther have very often protested, both by word and writing.

We now pass unto the other Classes of Protestant Divines, of Reformed
Churches, beginning with Calvin himself, who has a double intuition
concerning Presbyteriall Government. One as it may be considered is in an
Independency; so that every one have a Right of excommunication in himself:
Calvinus Epistol. ad Gasparum Magnum. utile fuit jus excommunicandi permitti
singulis pastoribus, nunc ea res odiosa est, and facilis est tapsus in
Tyrannidem, and Apostoli alium usum tradiderunt.
this he calls, unprofitable, odious, and such as easily turns into
Tyranny, and contrary to that which the Apostles taught. Next beholding them in
a joint parity, he relates the reason of the first beginning of Episcopacy,
and says truly, Calv. inflit. lib. 4. cap. 2. and Tom. 7. fol. 218.
Presbyterum in suo numero ex singulis civitatibus unum eligebant, cui
specialiter titulum Episcopi dabant, ne ex aequalitate ut feri solet, dissidia
nascerentur.
That by the parity and equality among Presbyters, (as it uses to be) Schisms
and dissentions might arise among them. This Parenthesis [as it uses to be]
which he inserteth, certainly has in it a sting, which pierces into the
bowels of the cause. Successor to Calvin was Beza, who thus far succeeds
him also in his opinion, as Beza de diverse. Ministrorum gradibus cap. 23. apud
Sarav. p. 386. Ipsa tandem experientia compertum suisse, non satis virium eos
habuisse ad improbos compescendos; communicata viz: singulis pastoribus per
vices hujus Primatus dignitate: Ergo visum fuit ad unum, and illum quidem
totius Presbyterii judicio, delectum trans far, quod certe reprehendi non
debet cum praesertim vetustus hic mos fuit in Alexandrina Ecclesia, jam inde a
Marco Evangelista observatus esset, and rursus, absit ut hunc Ordinem, etsi
mera divina dispositione non constitutum, tamen aut ut temere, aut superbe
inventum reprehendam, cujus potius magnum usum fuisse, quandiu boni and Sancti
Episcopi Ecclesiis praefuerunt, quis inficiari possit?
to confess (as he says) from experience, this of the Presbyterian
Government, That it being not sufficient to repress vices, choice was made of
one to govern the rest, as was observed anciently (says he) from the Evang.
Mark in the famous Church of Alexandria: Again, speaking of the institution
of Episcopacy, whatsoever it was, he will be known to abhor and reprehend it,
as erected by pride: But why? For none can deny (says he) but that there was
great use of it whilst that goodly and godly Bishops were chief over others.

We may well presume (as was said) that the other part of the misquoted
sentence of Zanchie is extant in some Impression of his Works, wherein he did
so symbolize with the forecited Sentence of Calvin, Citat. per Petrum Moulin:
filium Hieron. Zanch. Thesibus de vera reformandarum Ecclesiarum ratione.
Testor me coram Deo in mea conscientia non alio habere loco quam Schismaticorum
illos omnes, qui in part Reformationis Ecclesiarum ponunt nullos habere.
Episcopos, qui authoritatis gradu suos compresbyteros emineant, ubi liquido
possint haberi. Praeterea cum D. Calv nullo non Anathemate dignos censeo,
quotquot illi Hierarchiae, quae se Domino Jesu submittit, subjici nolunt.
Testifying before God (for these are the words) that he holds them
Schismatics, who shall determine, that in the restoration of Churches there
ought to be no Bishops, having authority over Presbyters, where freely they may
be had. He proceeds furthermore, I think with Calvin says he, them to be
worthy of whatsoever Anathema, who will not be subject to their government,
which submits it self to Christ. So he, furthermore concerning the
testimonies, as I may so say, of Ecclesiastical Government, Zanchius Page 7.
in sua confessione. Quid certius exhistoriis, ex conciliis, ex omnium patrum
scriptis, quam illos Ministrorum Ordines, de quibus dicimus cum totius Reipubl.
Christianae consensu in Ecclesia constitutos and receptos fuisse? Quis autem
ego sum qui quod tota Ecclesia approbat, improbem? neque omnes docti viri
nostri temporis improbare ausi sunt, quippe quod norunt and licuisse haec
Ecclesiae, and ex pietate atque ad optimos fines pro aedificatione electorum ea
omnia fuisse perfecta and ordinata: quid quod in Ecclesiis protestantium non
desunt Episcopi.
Zanchie confessed Episcopacy to have been ordained for the best end, to wit,
the edification of the Elect. The sentence of Calvin has been formerly
alleged; Unto these we add the saying of the Proloquutour in the Synod of
Dort, who is rendered unto us, by them that heard him, to have wished, That the
Church with them were so happy as our English, by having an Episcopal
Government among them. This case was so evident to a late Advocate for
Presbyters, Salmasius by name, that although he relucteth justly against an
irregular Prelacy, yet does he freely and ingenuously grant, That Walo, alias
Salmasius lib. de Epise. p. 413. Episcopus Ecclesiis regendis unicus
praepositus est qui and Presbyteris pluribus unius Ecclesiae praeesset. Bono
fine hoc institutum esse nemo negat, cum optima ratio fuerit ita instituendi.
the preferring of one Bishop in every Church, was instituted with best reasons.

Would any see more? Then he is to observe the Protestation made by the German
Divines in the Augustane confession, protesting their desire for the
conservation of Episcopacy; whereof it is testified by a Conradus Vorstius in
Apol. pro Eccles. Orthodox; de Augustan. Confess. page 285. In Colloquio
Possiaceno Augustanae confessioni per omnia se subscribere paratos esse,
testati sunt, praeterquam Articulo doctrinae de Eucharistia, utpote obscurius
posita.
Theological professor, that other Protestants were ready to subscribe to the
Augustane Confession, (per omnia) excepting only the Article of the Eucharist,
because it was not clearly explained: among these Protestants he names Calvin,
Beza, Vermilius, Marlorat, and Zanchius, which probably could not have been
altogether true, if they had been adversaries to the foresaid Protestation.

Before we can conclude, we return to Geneva to be satisfied in a maine
question; which is, whether the form of Government in Geneva ought to be
prescribed as a pattern to other Reformed Churches to be regulated thereby:
and when we consult with Beza c. 21. page 343. apud Sarav. Quod falsissime and
impudentissime nonnulli nobis objiciunt, cuiquam uspiam Ecclesiae sequendum
nostrum peculiare exemplum praescribamus, imperitissimorum illorum similes, qui
nihil, nisi quod ipsi agant, rectum putant.
Beza about this very point, he tells us, that this opinion was imparted unto
their Church, but in the name of the whole Church of Geneva rejects it as A
most false and impudent exprobration. After this comparison made by weight and
ponderation, we seek to try what may be done by computation and numbering.

V. THESIS. That the most Protestant Churches do profess and practice a
Prelacy over Presbyters.
MAny now look upon our English Bishops as birds upon owls, yet not
peradventure so, as they for strangeness or for reverence; but with left eyes
in an opinion of singularity and onelinesse, as a thing not acknowledged in
other remote and Reformed Churches of Protestants; not considering what has
been published to the world long-agoe, that the word Superintendent is of the
same signification with the word Bishop: both from the same Greek, (...). Yet
some Protestant Churches practicing a Prelacy, veil it over with the word
superintendency: If we would know what, Zanchius in sua confessione. fuit mihi
praeterea habenda ratio illarum etiam Ecclesiarum, quae licet Evangelium
complexae sint, suos tamen, and re and nomine habuerunt Episcopos, quos
(mutatis bonis graecis nominibus in male latina) vocant Superintendentes and
Generales Superintendentes; sed etiam ubi neque vetera illa bona Graeca neque
haec nova male Latina verba obtinent, ibi tamen solent esse aliquot primarii,
penes quos fere tota est Authoritas. Sed cum de rebus convenit quid de
nominibus altercamur? Test Sarav de Ministrorum gradibus, c. 23. p. 365.
Zanchie will speak out, and to the purpose, in telling us that Episcopi (whom
we call Bishops) and Superintendents are words of the same sense and
signification: and therefore where there is an agreement in the thing
signified, there ought not to be any altercation and strife about words. But
what will he say to the practice? he distinguishes Protestant Churches in this
respect into three differences, some whereof practice a superiority of one
above the Clergy under the proper name of Bishops; another sort the same, but
under the name of Superintendents and General Superintendents, whom we call
Archbishops. Lastly, he discloseth a third kind, (a circumstance very
remarkable) who although they avoid the Titles of Bishops or Superintendents,
yet use they to be such primarii, as to say, eminent in Prelacy, as in whom
(for so he says) the whole Authority consists. Now therefore our question
must be, whether the Church exercising Prelacy, or the other, that only
practice equality exceed in number.

The number of Churches, which had Prelates under the name of Bishops, and the
other of Superintendents (being in signification the same) seemed to Greg. de
Valentia the Jesuit so many, that he thought all Protestant Churches to have
Bishops.

An excellent servant of God Doctor Duraeus, and a zealous hunter after the
best game, which is, the general peace of Protestant Churches among
themselves, has set down a Catalogue of the Churches reformed on both
Parties, and reckons (if I be not mistaken) seven Bishops in the Kingdom of
Swede: in Denmark Bishops, in other Lutheran Churches Superintendents, and in
all Imperial Cities among the Protestants, besides diverse other reformed
Churches the like; which we suppose will rather keep their conformity with
England, then taste new wine with others, seeing that, as the Text says, Luke
5.39.
The old is better: and whether the Episcopal form be not the only and
Apostolical comes now to be discussed by inquiring into Antiquity.

VI. THESIS. That the former reasons of Confessions of Protestant Divines,
concerning the necessity of Episcopal Prelacy, for preservation of concord,
and preventing of Schism, is correspondent to the judgment of Antiquity.
IT would be worth our knowledge to understand, that the former Confessions of
Protestants Divines are, in effect, but the ecchoings unto the sentences of
ancient Fathers. Among whom, Hierome could tell us, Hieron. in Epist. ad Evagr.
Omnes Episcopi (ubicunque sunt locorum) Successores sunt Apostolorum. Ad Evagr.
Quod postea unus est electus, qui praeponeretur caeteris, in Schismatis
remedium factumest, ne quisquam ad se trabens Ecclesiam Christi corrumpat.
That the original of Episcopacy (which is the placing of one Presbyter in a
degree above others) was decreed throughout the whole world, for taking away
Schism: which use thereof was held so necessary in the days of Antiquity,
that the said Hierome spared not to affirm, Hieron. advers. Lucif. Ecclesiae
salus ex summi Sacerdotis dignitate pe^det, cui nisi exors quaedam and ab
omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesia efficientur Schismata quot
Sacerdotes.
That the safety of the Church depends upon the dignity of a Bishop, to whom
except some eminent authority be given, there will be as many Schisms, as
there are Priests in the Church. So he, and before him Tertullian thus,
Tertull. lib. de Baptismo, Episcopus propter Ecclesiae honorem, quo salvo salva
est Pax.
The Bishop is for the honor of the Church, which being in safety, our peace
will be also safe. But how Nyssen Hom. in Ecclesiast ut Chorus ad Choriphaeum
respicit nempe suum ductorem, nauta ad Gubernatorem and Acies ad Imperatorem;
ita etiam ad Ecclesiamii, qui praesunt in coetu Ecclesiae. Chrysostom. orat. in
dicta Apostoli Omnia in gloriam Dei] Quemadmodum Chorus Praecentorem, and
nautarum multitudo Gubernatorem requirit sic and Sacerdotum coetus Pontificem,
etc.
Chrysostom and Gregory Nyssen do illustrate, both affirming the same
necessity of a Bishop in the Church, as is a Praecentor in a Quire, a Governor
in a Camp, and a Pilot in a Ship. By which Episcopal order (says Basil. in
Epist. ad Eccles. Ai. de Episcopis Membra Ecclesiae hac dignitate tanquam una
quadam anima in concordiam, and communionem reducantur.
Basil) the Church is reduced as one soul into communion and concord: yea, and
before all these; Cyprian. Epist. Vnde Hereses, unde Schismata, nisi quod
Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperent, qui est loco Christi Judex. Idem Epist. 55.
Actum est de Episcopatus vigore, and de Ecclesiae gubernandae sublimi ac divina
potestate, etc. ( where he speaks of himself, and not of the Bishop of Rome)
Cyprian Bishop and Martyr, complained of such insolences of Presbyters
against their Bishops, as being causes of heresies and schisms against a
divine power of Government. So he; These, will some say, are but their sayings,
and shall we therefore think that their sayings were not the symbolls and
expressions of their meaning? but we presume better of them that are ingenuous,
and the rather for their further satisfaction which may be had in the next
Thesis.

VII. THESIS. That Bishops primitively were not only the chiefest champions
for the Christian faith, but also the greatest adversaries to Romish Popedom,
as have also our English.
BEfore we can begin the proof of this Thesis, we are confronted by our
Opposites against Primitive Fathers in strange terms, Smectym. in their
vindication.
Bishops by advancing the authority of Episcopacy did thereby (say they) but
plead their own cause, and made a stirrup for the Romish Antichrist to mount
into his Pontifical saddle. So they. Which contumely against the reverend
antiquity, we are loath to call by its proper name; being therefore not to
reprove others, but to prove what we have in hand, which is that some of the
ancient Bishops lived in the torrid zone of fiery persecution, and others in a
temperate. Of the first sort we have it confessed, That the persecuting
Emperors did, above all others, make their Inquisitions and exercises of their
furies most especially upon Bishops; we have it upon record in Cyprian, but
much more in other Ecclesiastical Histories, wherein, as is confessed by
Brightman. in Apocalypse. Dioclesiani te^poribus erant atrocissimae clades, sed
tamen fideles ad extremum certamen constanter perstitetunt, reportantes
Trophaea victoriae corporis stigmata.
Master Brightman, although Dioclesian in his Edict, did especially command the
destruction of all that had taken sacred Orders, yet in a further Complures
Episc. insignes erant in Concitio Nicaeno; and rursus qui historiam scripsit,
meminit centum and sexaginta Episcoporum, qui in Sagasana extincti sunt, and in
provincias edicto Regis proferantur ut delerentur universi qui sacros ordines
habuerint.
speciality the massacring of Bishops; he relates that one hundred and sixty
of them were martyred in two places; yea, and in the Church of Rome it self is
also reckoned the number of 25 Bishops, who were Martyrs of Christ in those
primitive ages. To fancy that these afflicted and persecuted Members of Christ
for their degree sake, could pride it in their Episcopal office, would be held
to be but a dream, they will rather think, that if they should prelate it,
(as Mariners use to frolike it) rather in a calm of tranquillity; but for this
also we shall easily subscribe to the judgment of Master Beza, who when he was
thus posed, whether he should impute the note of pride unto these Primitive
servants of God, (whose names have always been celebrious in the Church of
Christ (to wit) Basil, Nyssen, Nazianzen, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and
Augustine, who are known to have afterward had Episcopal Government in their
several Churches) answers, saying, Beza de Ministrorum gradibus, c. 25. page
543. apud Saraviam. Neminem adhuc audivi loquentem, neque lege^ scribentem, qui
non honorifice, sicut par est, de magnis illis suorum temporum hominibus
sentiat: nempe Nazianzeno, Nisseno, Basilio magno, Athanasio, Cypriano,
Chrysostimo, Ambrosio, Augustino.
I never heard any speak, or read any write otherwise then honorably of those
men, as was meet. So he, of his time; he could not prophecy of the future. It
were good, that these who use this new and broad language had considered, Iren.
lib. 5. adversus haeres. cap. 20.
That Bishops were then almost the only ones, who, as occasion fell out,
either pulled the Romish Pope out of his Saddle when he was mounted, or else
plucked away his Stirrup, that in those times he could not get up. For whereas
Popedom, being a double usurpation one of plenitude of Authority, See the
book entitled, The Romish Grand Impostor, throughout.
universal over Bishops; and the other of an infallibility of judgment in
determining all Controversies of Faith, it has been evidently and copiously
proved, that the amplitude of his Diocese was limited by three hundred Bishops
in the General Council of Nice. His pretended right of Universal Authority
was contradicted an. 553. by six hundred Bishops in the Council of Calcedon,
where we find it accounted to be but of Humane Authority against his pretended
universal challenge of appeal to Rome, it was twice contradicted by Bishops
in two Counsels in Africa; and as for his pretended infallibility in
judgment, the 165 Bishops in the Council of Constantinople condemned the
Decree of Pope Vigilius; and in the sixth and seventh Counsels, consisting in
all of 603 Bishops, was Pope Honorius condemned for an Heretic. We may not
omit the mention of singular persons Bishops, who have had their solemn
oppositions against the Popes of their times, Cyprian, Athanasius, Basil,
Cyrill of Alexandria, Hilary of Arles, and Augustine, with many others. But
what talk we of Bishops in other Sees? seeing we have in the Sea of Rome it
self one, who did prejudice the pretended and usurped dignity and authority of
all his Successors in condemning the pretense of the highest Title and
Prerogative which the Pope does challenge; which is to be called, The
Universal Bishop of Christ's Church, by judging it to be proud, profane, and
blasphemous, and the Bishop we mean was Pope Gregory the first, whom Mr.
Brightman has adorned with this Encomium, Mr. Brightman, in Apoc cap. 8.13.
cited hereafter.
The flying Angel mentioned, Apoc. 8.13. whose luster, says he, God would use
for the Church. As for our Church of England since the Reformation, it has
been conformable to the Primitive. Surely greater faithfulness could not be
shown then in the seal of Martyrdom, nor more opposition to Popedom, then
to cut off all dependence upon it by the neck ever since, not this more by any
then in Bishops, as our Ecclesiastical monuments have recorded; not to mention
the writings public in confutation of all Popish errors and Heresies, only
let it be lawful for us to point at, the last Synod and Convocation was
vehement against Popery, as (for this is spoken by him that was absent from it)
any one may read. After these Confessions of Protestant Divines we are to
ascend higher to our proofs, for evincing the same to be according to the word
of God, as Apostolical; first from Antiquity, and after from the word of God
it self.

Our first proof, that Episcopacy is according to the word of God, by
manifesting it to have been of Apostolical Institution by necessary reasons.

VIII. THESIS. That to be of Apostolical Institution, argues in it a divine
Right, by the Confession of excellent Divines of the Reformed Churches.
FRom the Church of Geneva, we have before us Mr. Beza to deliver his own
words. Beza tractat. de Minist. gradibus c. 23. Certe si ab ipsis Apostolis
esset profecta haec mutatio, non vererer illam ut caeteras Apostolicas
Ordinationes divinae in solidum dispositioni tribuere.
Surely if Episcopacy had proceeded from the Apostles, I would not doubt to
ascribe unto it a divine Ordinance. So he. This is plain; Secondly, From the
Churches within the Palatinate Scultetus by name, argues accordingly.
Scultetus observat in Tit. esse jutis divini. Ratio. Apostolos praefixisse
Presbyteris Episcopos.
The Apostles placed Bishops above Presbyters, and therefore is Episcopacy of
divine Institution. A third, property called Salmasius, out of the University,
and Church of Leiden in the Low Countries, one of great fame, and a professed
friend unto our Opposites; and notwithstanding confesses, saying, Walo alias
Salmasius lib. de Episc. page 422. Institutio Episcopi si ab Apostolis, est
Jure Divino.
If the Institution of Episcopacy (says he) be from the Apostles, then it is
of divine Right. So they. Certainly, because what power was ordained by the
Apostles proceeded from the Spirit of God: like as was their decree against
Strangled and Blood, their Holy-kisse, their Agapae, and the like in their
first Institution.

And although these were abrogated in time, yet the necessity of perpetuating
Episcopacy stands upon two grounds, one is the first reason of institution
thereof, which was, for avoiding Schism; the other was, the universal
continuance thereof from Age to Age, upon experience of the same reason: which
as we have heard, has been held most reasonable to almost all Protestant
Divines of remote Churches. Now therefore, that which we are to make good is
only our Assumption, to wit, that Episcopacy was of Apostolical Institution,
then which nothing almost can be more evincible, if testimonies from Antiquity,
evidences out of Scriptures, and upon both these, the confessions of Protestant
Divines of the Reformed Churches may be held satisfactory, our first endeavors
concerning Antiquity, for this performance must be to remove objections which
our opposites cast in our way. The only peremptorily objected Ancients are
these two, Hieron, and Clement, both whom we are now to salute.

IX. THESIS. That no Ancient Father absolutely denied the Apostolical
Original of Episcopacy, no not the objected Hierome who will show himself a
manifest Patron thereof.
THe objected sentence of Hieron. in 1. ad Tit. Sicut Presbyteri^ sciant se
Ecclesiae consuetudine iit, qui sibi praepositi sunt esse subjectos; ita
Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine, quam dispositionis Dominicae veritate
Presbyteris esse majores, and in communi debere Ecclesias regere.
Hierome, saying, concerning Episcopal Prelacy, That it is rather by the
custom of the Church, then by the Lords disposal, is confessed by the
Theological Protestant Professor in the University of Heidelberg to be
understood, Scultet. observat in Tit. c. 8. Nisi forte consuetudinem Ecclesiae
pro consuetudine Apostolica, et dispositionis Dominicae veritatem pro instituto
Christi capiat.
by the decree of the Lords disposal; the immediate ordinance of Christ, in
his days upon earth, and affirming the Custom, happily, to have meant the
Apostolical custom after they began the forming and framing of the Churches.
However, for this one place objected against us, we have many most evident
Testimonies out of Hierome himself, to prove the first institution of
Episcopacy to have been indeed Apostolical.

First is from the original occasion, whereunto he alludeth, even the
contention in the Church of Corinth, when Hieron. in 1 Tit. Antequam Diaboli
instinctu studia in Religione fierent diversa inter populos, Ego sum Pauli, Ego
Apollinis, Ego Cephae, communi consitio Presbyteris Ecclesiae guber nabantur
postea autem in toto terrarum orb decretum est ut unus ex Presbyteris electus
superponetur caeteris.
some held of Paul, some of Apollo, some of Cephas, whereof it is confessed by
the forecited Palatinate Doctor, Scultetus in Tit. Hoc coeptum est viventibus
Apostolis, prior Epistol. ad Corinthios nos dubitare non finit.
That the words of the Apostle will not suffer me (says he) to doubt, but that
alteration was made in the days of the Apostles, and his confirmation is as
doubtless; namely, because no man can produce any other original of the
questioned Schism and contention. This is a chief point, and therefore we
desire to hear what Videlius in Epist. Ignat. ad Philadelphenses, cap. 14.
Discrimen illud Presbyterorum and Episcopi ut ex pluribus Epistolarum locis
apparet, tempore Ignatii fuit, etenim illud valde mature ipsorum Apostolorum
temporibus in Ecclesiam irrepsit statim post quam dici coeptum est. Ego sum
Pauli, Ego Cephae, etc. Test Hieronymo in Titum.
Vedelius the Divine Professor in Geneva will say unto it. He handles the
matter accurately, which is to be reserved to its proper place. In sum out of
Ignatius the disciple of the Apostles he shows the difference of Bishop and
Presbyter begun timely in the Church even presently after the contention to the
Corinthians, whereof it is said, some held of Paul, and some of Apollo, and
some of Cephas.

Secondly, Hierome grants in general, yet distinctly of Bishops, Hieron. in
Epist. ad Euagr. Omnes Episcopi (ubicunque sunt locorum) successores sunt
Apostoli.
That they are the Successors of the Apostles.

Thirdly, yea he shows who were Successors in the very days of the
Apostles, reckoning among others, As they are set down in their diverse Titles
in his Book, De Ecclesiasticis scriptoribus.
Timothy, Titus, Polycarpus, and Euodius.

Fourthly, He relates who were first Bishops of all others after them, to wit,
Idem de script. Eccles. Jacobus minor Hierosolymitanus Episcopus, Marcus
Ecclesiae Alexandrinae primus Episcopus.
James of Jerusalem, and Mark of Alexandria.

Fifthly, Idem Epist. ad Euag. 58. Aaron and filii summi Sacerdotes and ut
Aaron, Eleazar, and Levitae, juxta traditiones Apostolicas hoc sunt Episcopi,
Presbyteri, and Diaconi.
he alleges the Analogy between Aaron and his sons in respect of the
Levites with Bishops and Presbyters, from (as he says) Apostolical tradition.

Sixthly, the Idem ad Rupert. advers. Vigilant. Miror sanctum Episcopum in
cujus parochia Presbyter esse dicitur, acquiescere furori ejus, and non virga
Apostolica and ferred confringere vas inutile.
Episcopal part of Excommunication against Vigilantius he calls His
Apostolical Iron Rod. So Hierome. It were incredible if that all these
Apostolical Relations concerning Episcopacy, should not amount unto so much as
to make up an Apostolical Institution thereof.

The second objected Father is Clement, whereof their success will be no
better, if not much worse.

X. THESIS. That Clement an Apostolical Disciple, to whose arbitrament both
our Opposites and we offer to yield our selves, does patronize Episcopacy, as
being Apostolical.
We are earnestly called upon to hearken unto Clement talking of a Prophecy of
a future contention which should happen about the name of Bishop. Next,
Smectym. vind. page 136.
That there is no piece of Antiquity of more esteem, then the Epistle of
Clement unto the Corinthians, Then; That this was brought to light by a learned
gentleman M. Patrick Young; and lastly for the matter it self, That there is a
common and promiscuous use of the word Presbyter and Bishop.

We shall answer punctually to every one, viz. The Prophecy makes for us, the
Epistle much more, the Publisher also as much as can be desired, and that
Objection of the indifferency of the Words of Bishop and Presbyter is scarce
worthy the mention.

We begin with the Prophecy. The Prophecy was only, that there should be in
time to come, a contention about the word Bishop. If we should ask our
Opposites, when this contention was first known in times of old, they would be
loath to tell us, knowing right well, that it was first raised by one Aerius, of
whom Epiphanius and Austin have See above.
told us, that he broke out into Schism, and See above.
because he could not obtain to be made a Bishop, did therefore spurn against
Episcopacy, teaching, says Saint Austin, that there ought to be no difference
between Bishops and Presbyters; therefore thus they may see the Prophecy
fulfilled, both when, and in whom, if they like it. But if any shall boast,
that it is fulfilled now by their present Opposalls against Episcopacy, after
that it has had approbation with a continual use universally in the Churches
of God: then have we nothing else to reply, but what the spirit of God, from
the pen of the holy Apostle, puts in our mouth; If any be contentious (says
he) we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God, whereby the wilfully
contentious makes himself an adversary to the Churches of God, and
consequently no way acceptable to God himself.

The second point which we are to discern, is that, which they call identity
of names of Bishops and Presbyters: they should have called it community of
names, especially knowing that there is no more identity in the words
Presbyters and Bishops, then there is between the letters of P. and B. but
this was a lapse; Therefore to our matter in hand. We answer, that mere names
and words make but verbal consequences, to which we oppose a real and
Logical consequence a paribus, thus; for of the very Apostles of Christ one
instiled himself Co-presbyter, another himself Presbyter, a third himself
Deacon, who are all common names with others that were not Apostles; and
notwithstanding; the Apostles themselves in respect of their Offices and
Functions were Governors over Presbyters, which shows that the
enterchangeablenesse of names cannot conclude an indifferency of degree. But
this crambe will be sodden once again, when we shall be occasioned to give
further satisfaction. As for the present, it may well be said, what shall we
need words, when we see acts and deeds, namely concerning this Clement? not
only that he maintained the distinct degrees of Episcopacy, but that also he
was distinctly above Presbyters, a Bishop himself. Yet should not our
Opposites pose us in that, where Vedelius. Exercit. 8. ad Mariam in Ignatium,
cap. 3. Lino and Cleto defunctis ante Clementem, solus Clemens superstes, solus
etiam Episcopi nomen retinuit, tum quia inter adjutores Apostolorum solus ipse
restabat, tum quia jam invaluerat distinctio Episcopi and Presbyteri, ita ut
caeteris Ecclesiae Romanae Presbyteris, qui cum solo Clemente essent, nomen id
non fuerit tributum.
Vedelius a Professor of Geneva gave them (if they have read him) some
satisfaction; showing, that as soon as Clemens remained the sole Adjutour of
the Apostles after Linus and Cletus, the name of Bishop was given unto him, and
not attributed to any Presbyter or Presbyters in the Church of Rome. So he. Is
not this to the point; the distinguishing of times does salve many doubts. It
is meet now at length we hear Clemens himself speak. Clement immediately
after his relation of the aforesaid Prophecy, adds, saying concerning the
Apostles, Clement ad Corinth. Epist. p. 57. (...).
For this cause, they having a perfect foreknowledge, constituted the
aforesaid, and left a description of Officers and Ministers in their course,
who after that they themselves should fall asleep, other godly men might
succeed and execute their function. So Clement. Whence it is evidently
collected, that Bishops were the successors of the Apostles, because a Role
and Catalogue of Bishops is frequently had in Ecclesiastical stories, lineally
deduced from the Apostles, as the most of the learned Protestants of the
Reformed Churches have ever confessed. But if our Opposites cannot prove the
like Catalogue of Presbyters of a primitive and right line of descent, then are
they wholly to yield the cause, and that even by the judgment of Clement, which
is now ready to be furthermore confessed by the exact learning of the Publisher
of Clement. This Gentleman, our Opposites call Learned, we owe him an higher
title, even one exquisitely learned; he commenting upon the same Epistle of
Clement, now objected against Episcopacy, teaches that the right word (...)
agrees with the word census in Tertullian, by whom it appears, that it was a
custom in Apostolical Churches to make a Role (for this word he held not
unfit) of the Order of Bishops to bring them unto their first original, even
as, says Tertullian, Polycarpus was from John the Apostle in the Church of
Smyrna, and Clemens, in the Church of Rome, from Peter, speaking even of this
our Clemens, and adds of others; and others (says he) whom the Apostles
constituted Bishops, from whom others might deduce their traductions and
offsprings; what is, if this be not, an inexpugnable convincement of our
Opposites to prove Episcopacy to be of an Apostolical Ordination. Yet is not
this all.

Clement is further represented unto us by the same learned Publisher, as one
registered and enrolled by antiquity as Bishop of Rome, in the Catalogue of the
same Bishops lineally descended from the Apostles, whether in the first,
second, or third rank, it matters not; and the doubt, such as it is, is solved
in the Margent by our foresaid Geneva Professor: And for witnesses hereunto,
are cited Optatus, Hierome, Ruffinus, Eucherius, and Photius, set down
expressly in the same Book, which our Opposites have objected against us;
which if you would not see, or seeing not regard, all we shall say is, We are
sorry for it: Yet after this our retorsion of their objected Authors upon
themselves, we shall endeavor to give them further satisfaction from our
selected and express suffrages of antiquity for the truth of Apostolical
succession of Episcopacy.

XI. THESIS. That other Primitive Fathers before Hierome did unanimously
testify an Apostolical right of Episcopacy.
NOthing can be more manifest for the first three Ireneus advers. haeres. l. 3.
c. 3. Habemus annumerari eos qui ab Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in
Ecclesiis, qui nihil tale docuerunt, and l. 4. c. 43. Qui cum successione
Episcopatus Chrisma Veritatis certum acceperunt.
Ireneus Tertull praescript. cap. 31. lib. 4. contra Marcion. cap. 5. Romanae
perinde and caeterae extant Ecclesiae, quae ab Apostolis in Episcopatum
constitutos Apostolici seminis traduces habeant.
Tertullian, and Origin in Johan. de Episc. Quod Dominus in Ecclesia ordinavit
post Apostolos, quia in ea primum sortiti sunt locum.
Origin, to which we add August. Epist. 42. Radix Christianae societatis per
seeds Apostolorum and successiones Episcoporum certa per orbem propagatione
diffunditur.
Augustine, do all profess themselves ready to deduce the succession of
Bishops in the principal Sees from the days of the Apostles? next they
instance in some Apostolical Church, as namely from Ja. the Bop of Hierus. and
Mark in Alexandria: What say our Opposites to this? a principal one Walo alias
Salmas. de Episc. page 201. Absurdum est Clementis Alexandrini commentum. and
p. 406. Fabula est, quam in libre Hypotyposeo^r de ordinatione, etc.
( Salmasius by name) calls this alleadgement of James a Bishop false and
foolish: his reason was, because James was an Apostle, and therefore not to
keep residence in one See. First, be it known, that whatsoever this James
was, all Antiquity rendereth him unto us a Bishop of Jerusalem, (viz.)
Eusebius lib. 7. cap. 8: Jacobus, quem Scriptura fratrem Domini nominat,
Hierosolymae Ecclesiae sedem accepit.
Eusebius, Epiphan. lib. 2. cap. 2. Haeres. 65. Jacobus primus Ecclesiae
Hierosolymitanae.
Epiphanius, Hierom, Egesippus. Apostolorum temporibus erat quod Jacobus
cognomento Justus Ecclesiam Hieros. post Apost. accepit, sic Hieron. de
scriptis Ecclesiae in Jacobo
Egesippus, Chrysostom. Hom. 33. in Act. 1.15. Jacobus Episc. Ecclesiae
Hieroselymitanae.
Chrysostom and Ambros. in 1 Galat. Jacobus ab Apostolis Hierosol. constitutus
est Episcopus.
Ambrose the Synod. 6. in Trullo can. 32. Ad stipulantes. enimvero hic est ille
Jacobus, qui fixum Hierosolymis habuit domicilium velut Ordinarius Episcopus,
quem Paulus primo and ultimo suo adventu invenit in urbe Apostolis sere omnibus
foris Evangelizantibus, Gal. 1. Act. 21.
Synod of Trullo: How then shall it become us but of yesterdayes birth, thus to
pull reverend Antiquity, by the beard, and give them the fool? Yet we may not
restrain rational men from reasoning, and therefore we answer; that were it
that Ja. had been an Apostle, yet other Protestant Divines of the reformed
Churches, were no fools, as Dr. Scultetus observat. in Tit. Jacobum ab
Apostolis Hierosolymorum Episcopum ordinatum testantur patres quam plurimi.
Scultetus, Zuinglius tom 2. de Eccles. fol. 48. Apostoli Apostolorum nomina
deposuerunt, uni sedi affixi, sive senecta impediti, aut peregrinationibus
afflicti; exemplum esto Jacobus minor Hierosol. Episcopus.
Zuinglius, and Mr. Moulin lib. de Vatibus cap. 10. Apostoli toti Ecclesiae
invigilabant in solidum and indivisum, aliquam tamen peculiarem provinciam
quibusdam Apostolis fuisse assignatam discimus ex Sacra Scriptura. Gal 2.7.
Moulin each one can answer; that notwithstanding the proper functions of the
Apostles, in visiting of Countries after Countries for conversion of people,
and founding of Churches; yet whether enfeebled by Age, or upon extraordinary
occasions, they might fix themselves to one Province. But yet are we not
constrained to this Answer; but furthermore tell our Opposites that, (which
has been Archiepiscopus Spalatensis, tomo quarto.
judiciously proved at large, that this was not James that Apostle, but James
the Brother of our Lord; and only an Apostolical Disciple, which may satisfy
our Opposites, until we come to speak of their objected Timothy and Titus,
called Evangelists; As for Mark if in the line of succession of Bishops of
Alexandria, he only be taken exclusively, yet must the Ordinance of that See
be necessarily held Apostolical.

XII. THESIS. That the Apostolical Antiquity of Episcopacy is confessedly
proved out of Ignatius.
Vedelius professor Genevensis Apol. pro Ignatio. cap. 1. Ignatius Apostolorum
discipulus erat; quem nemo negabit fuisse virum sanctissimum, Ecclesiae
Antiochiae Episcopum, et qui Christi veritati Testimonium praebuerit saevissimo
mortis genere sub Trajano Impera torc.

Item Exercit prima in Ep. ad Tract cap. 4. 4. Bellar. lib. 4. de Pontifice c.
25 Quemadmodum Apostoli primi erant sub Christo, ita Episcopi primi sub
Pontifice. Resp imo Episcopi non sunt primi sub Pontifice, sed sub Christo,
nisi Bellarmino Ignatius mentitur, qui Episcopum nullam in Ecclesia habere
supra se potestatem dicit hac ipsa Episteta Et Epist. ad Smyrnenses. (...). Ib.
c 9. number 8. Pontificii statuunt Papam ut Episcoporum Dominum: at Ignatii
tempore maximus in Ecclesia erat episcopus, post. Archiep. Item Exercit. 1.
cap. 2. number. 4 Ignat. in Epist ad Polycarp. Verba ejus monent Episcopum officii
sui. ut agnescat se tum demum aliorum Episcopum esse quando ipse Episcopori^
principi pareat: Talibus Episcopis and libenter paremus. (...).


VEdelius that learned Divinity Professor in the Academy of Geneva, in his most
elaborate work of Exercitations upon the Epistles of Ignatius for vindicating
his Doctrine from the false glosses of Bellarmine, Baronius and other Romish
writers, is copious in manifesting the direct judgment of Ignatius in many
notable points. Concerning Ignatius himself he rendereth him unto us a
Disciple of the Apostles, a Bishop of Antioch, an holy man, and a faithful
Minister of Christ. 2. Concerning the cause against Bellarmine, and others who
will have Bishops the first under the Pope of Rome, as the Apostles were under
Christ, this he confuteth out of Ignatius, who tanght that Presbyters should be
subject to Bishops, and Bishops to Christ. 3. Against Papists who proclaim the
Pope to be Bishop of Bishops: he confesses Ignatius holding the Bishop in
every Church to be the next under Christ, and chief therein. 4. The
distinction between Bishops and Presbyters, was in the days of the Apostles:
and lastly professes for himself and others, that if they had a Bishop such
as was Polycarpus (a Disciple also of the Apostles) they as Ignatius required
of the Smyrnaeans, would willingly, yea, necessarily obey him. So he. In this
Maxim we behold two Disciples of the Apostles, Ignatius and Polycarpus: both
Bishops distinctly from Presbyters and governors: and this in the Apostles
times. As well therefore may our opposites deny themselves to have depended
naturally from their own parents, as Bishops originally from the Apostles. We
are to pursue this yet a little further.

XIII. THESIS. That Antiquity has given us Rules of Resolution for the
knowledge of any Apostolical practice, which may serve in the case of
Episcopacy.
THe rule given by Antiquity, was always held Catholic throughout all
Christian Churches of ancient times. St. Austins rule may be our first
direction thus August. de Baptism. contra Donatist l. 4. Quod universa tenet
Ecclesia, nec consiliis institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi
Authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur.
Whatsoever the Universal Church holds, and was not instituted by Councels,
but always kept, that must most rightly be judged to have been from
Apostolical Authority: So he: which for our purpose is as much as Dr.
Scultetus most judiciously and ingenuously confessed, that if no Interim can be
shown between the Apostles times, and the days immediately succeeding, when
there was no Episcopal Government over Presbyters in the Church, then must the
same have proceeded immediately from the Apostles. We hold this most
reasonable; even as if the Question were, what the practice is of the Country
adjoining unto us; Our next bordering neighbors to it, would be the most
competent witnesses of their manners, such have been hitherto our proofs even
from such ancients, as either had seen the Apostles, or else from such as had
been conversant with the immediate Disciples of the Apostles. Our Opposites
not able to instance in the practice of any one Primitive Church to the
contrary, only object a community of names of Presbyters and Bishops, which
shadow will vanish, as soon as we shall give light by proofs of the
Apostolical Original of Episcopacy in diverse Theses following, by expression,
confession and Authorities.

XIV. THESIS. That Protestant Divines of other reformed Churches, have held it
most equal to be directed by the judgments of Ancients for proof of a
practice Apostolical.
Calv. Tract. Theol. Eccles. reform. page 374 Ireneo and Origini negotium erat
cum improbis nebulonibus, qui, dum prodigiosos errores proferrent in medium,
eos sibi divinitus revelatos dicebant. Hujus mendacii facilis erat Revelatio,
quod ad huc superstites erant multi, qui familiares Apostolorum discipuli
fuerunt, quibus recens erat hujus doctrinae memoria, quam Apostoli tradiderunt.
WE plead no other equity in this cause, then what Calvin held necessary
against Anabaptisticall Revelations, arguing negatively in this manner. These
lies, (says he) are easily confuted, because many were then living who had
been conversant with the Disciples of the Apostles. So he concerning
doctrines. How much more convincent must this Argument be, when our Question
shall be of the practice of the Church in the days of the Apostles? even as is
daily done by all Christian Churches, for proof of the practice of baptizing
of Infants, against the same Anabaptisticall Faction; yea, why not also for the
like Original practice of Episcopacy, even by the confession of Protestant
Divines of excellent judgment: Beza de Minist. gradibus. Pro primatu Ordinis
inter Presbyteros communicato singulis pastoribus per vices Primatus dignitate,
quod visum fuit hunc ad unum equidem totius presbyterii judicio delectum
transfer, certe reprehendi nec possit, nec debet cum praesertim vetustus mos
fuit primum presbyterum deligendo in Alexandrina Ecclesia celeberrima inde a
Marco Evangelista observatus.
Beza must not be neglected, telling us, that he ought not to neglect the
Ordinance of a higher degree of a Bishop above a Presbyter, because this was an
ancient custom in the famous Church of Alexandria. So he. This is well, but he
has not quite told out his tale, which he does elsewhere out of the words of
Beza de Minist. grad. cap 23. Quod autem unus electus est qui caeteris
praeponeretur, in Schismatis factum est Remedium, ne unusquisque ad se Christum
trahens Ecclesiam rumperet; nam and Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista ad Heracl.
usque et Dionysiam Episcopos, Presbyteri unum semper a se electum in celsiore
gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant.
Hierome, saying namely, that in Alexandria, from Mark the Evangelist, one was
elected by the Presbytery, and placed in a higher degree, whom they named
Bishop, which was done for a remedy against Schism. Be it then that touching
this Series and order of Succession, as it was said of Saint Mark the Apostle,
be it taken inclusively, or exclusively; it necessarily implies, that the
Original of Episcopacy was in the days of the same Apostles. Master Moulin
gives us a louder Accent. saying, that Moulin Ep. 3. ad Episc. Winton. Non sum
adeo oris duriut velim adversus illa veteris Ecclesiae Lumina Ignatium,
Polycarpum Cyprianum, Augustinum, Chrysostomum etc far sententiam, ut
adversus usurpatores muneris illiciti: plus semper apud me potuit veneranda
Antiquitas, quam novella cujusquam constitutio See below. The like
acknowledgment will Beza give us hereafter.
he was never so hard faced, as to censure these Bishops: Ignatius, Polycarpe,
Augustine, Chrysostom, and other great lights of the Church, to have usurped
an unlawful function in the Church of Christ. So he: Alleging among his
ancients Polycarpe, and Ignatius; the first of which, as all the learned know,
lived in the days of the Apostles, and as antiquity it self teaches, and
consent of Protestant Divines of Remote Churches will afterward grant, to have
been in the days of Saint John the Evangelist, the Bishop of Smyrna. The
other, viz, Ignatius, was also acquainted with those, who had been the
Disciples of Christ. Besides, we have heard Scultet. observat. in Titum. c. 8
sed ego de Jacobo dicam, non illo quidem Apostolo sed Salvatoris nostrifratre.
Sculietus resolving, that James (not the Apostle) the Brother of our Lord, was
Bishop of Jerusalem, from the plentiful testimonies of Antiquity it self. We
will conclude with this our proof from the same Antiquity, but what? even that
which Bucer de Anim. cura et officio pastor: Apud patres Hieronymo vetussiores
clara habemus Testimonia, in praecipuis Ecclesiis omnibus temporibus
Apostolorum ita comparatum est, ut Presbyteris omnibus quidem officium
Episcopale fuerit impositum Interim tamen Apostolorum temporibus unus de
Presbyteris electus utque ordinatus est in officii ducem and quosi Antistitem,
qui caeteris omnibus praei^it, and curam animarum, ministeriumque Episcopale
praecipue and in summo gessit atque administravit, quod de Jacobo legis, Act.
15. ubi Lucas Jacobum describit ut Antistitem totius Ecclesiae omniumque
Presbyterorum
Bucer finds resolved upon (as he says) before Hierom. let us take his own
words. Divine Fathers more ancient then Hierom. Cyprian, Ireneus, Eusebius, and
other Ecclesiastical Historians show, That in the Apostles times there was one
elected, and ordained, who should have Episcopal function, and superiority
over Presbyters; so he, instancing in James, of whom we have spoken who was
Bishop of Jerusalem.

XV. THESIS. That Master Beza himself is challengeable to yield unto
Apostolical right of Episcopacy, from his own former confession.
MAster Beza has already Vide Thesin 12.
confessed concerning the famous Church of Alexandria, that from Mark the
Evangelist, one was chosen to be placed in a degree above Presbyters, called
Bishop, is according to the Testimony of Hierom. The story hereof has been of
late published by Master Seldom, the Ornament of our Nation, excellently
conversant in ancient and exotic Learning, out of the Relation of Eutycheus,
that Mark the Ev. placed Anianus Patriarch or Bishop over Presbyters in the
Church of Alexandria. In which book also, there is set down the full Catalogue
of 18 Bishops successively unto Dionysius, that possessed the same See, which
proves as plainly an Episcopal and personal succession, by an Apostolical
Constitution from Anianus to Alexandria in a lineall succession, as was the
filial and natural descent from Adam to Thara, which makes up eighteen
Generations. What need then many words? the most Theses which have been
premised, and almost all afterward to be propounded, do declare the same by
joint accordance of Protestant Divines of reformed Churches, and surffages of
Antiquity. We hasten to our last proof; but are arested in our way by our
Opposites, to answer two objected Testimonies of Antiquity.

XVI. THESE. That the Testimonies of Nazianzen, and Augustine are unworthily
objected to the contrary.
WE are urged to reckon these two excellent Bishops, although in true
Construction they have answered for themselves. Smect. vindicat. page 88.
Nazianzen (say our Opposites) mustering up the evils that had happened unto
him, reckons ejection out of his Episcopacy, holding it a part of wisdom to
avoid it, wishing that there were no (...) place of President-ship, or (...) or
Tyrannical Prerogative in the Church, but that they might be known only by
virtue, We have alleged Nazianzen according to the genuine sense; So they; but
so as usually in an Heterogeneall sense to infer a necessary abnegation of
Episcopacy. They who seek ingenuously the genuine sense of Sentences in
Authors must be Janus-like faced, looking (...) backward and forward, both
which properties have been wanting to our opposites; first because before the
words objected they lay before their eyes this saying of Nazianz. orat. 28.
Fuit tempus quando cordati and prudentes viri Episcopatum in admiratione
habuerunt and desiderabant.
Nazianzen; There was a time when Episcopacy was had in great admiration, and
desired of wise and prudent men; and the second, as not considering that was
then spoken only comparatively against the Tyrannical Government of Bishops,
which by all Protestant Bishops has been condemned in the popish Hierarchy;
besides, that this was but the breath of vexatious passion upon occasion of one
Maximus, whom Nazianzen calls a Cynicke and doggish Philosopher, because,
whereas he himself had the general esteem in the Church of Christ to be, by
way of excellence, called (...), the Divine, notwithstanding he was vehemently
persecuted by the same unworthy Prelate, and by his circumvention disturbed out
of his Bishopric; and therefore sensible of that indignity, did utter the
language of his hearts grief. But why did not our Opposites tell us, that
after this storm their fell a calm, when the same godly Bishop was with
general applause received to his Bishopric again; but especially we may
complain that they have by their silence smothered Nazianzens judgment
concerning the cause it self, which is the right of Episcopacy, and which he
esteemed the most perfect kind of Government; So he. And is not this as much
as to have held it the best? which he further declares in his funeral
Orations which he had of 3. famous Bishops, Basil, Athanasius, and Cyprian.
Augustine writing to Hierome Walo page 355. usus, inquit obtinuit, ut
Episcopatus Presbyterio major fit secundum honorum vocabula Ergo usu and
consuetudine Ecclesiae prius constitutum est ut Episcopi majores essent
Presbyteris, tum ex re distincta vocabulorum etiam insequuta est distinctio.
says, that custom has obtained, that Episcopacy should be higher then
Presbytery, according to the honor and dignity of the words. Therefore (says
Walo) the distinction of Episcopacy and Presbytery was first constituted by the
Church. So he; whose Disciples our other Opposites have learned this lesson,
saying, Smect. Vin. dic. page 87.
If Augustine had known the majority of Bishops above Presbyters, to have
been of Divine or Apostolical institution, he might have said so much; nay,
he would have said as much. And we answer, if any of our Opposites had regarded
to search the judgment of Augustine, they would not have said thus much,
because it is evident that Augustine did say as much as they require he should
have said, as has been shown; saying of himself and other Bishops, thus; we
succeed the Apostles in the same power, and that Christ instituted Bishops when
he ordained his Apostles: that we See above
repeat not his condemning Aerius (as Epiphanius did) for denying Episcopacy
to have been an institution Apostolical; and now whether our Reader think it
more reasonable, to yield to the supposition of what Augustine would have done,
or the manifestation what he did, we permit to his judgment. This obstacle
thus removed, we fall now upon the last proof.

Our last proof, That Episcopacy is of Apostolical right, and according to
the word of God, even from the word of God it self.

To this purpose, two places of Scripture are especially to be alleged: The
Epistle of Paul to Timothy and Titus, and the Epistles of St. John in the
Revelation to the seven Churches in Asia, which are to be discussed according
to our former Method, by the consonant Testimonies of ancient Fathers; and
consent of Protestant Divines of general esteem and approbation.

XII. THESIS. That Timothy and Titus both had a Prelacy over Presbyters,
notwithstanding the objection of the community of Names of Bishops and
Presbyters, is sufficiently confessed by Protestant Divines of Remote Churches.
THere can none be held a more sufficient witness with our Opposites, then he
who has professedly pleaded this cause in their behalf, and notwithstanding
freely, and deerly grants: that Walo lib de Episc. per totum cap primum
extraordinaria missione and functione p. 70 sic alii discipuli Christi and
Apostolorum ejus etc. p. 229. Titum Cretae insulae praefecit Paulus, qui non
singulari in aliqua Civitate Episcopus fuit, sed totam illam provinciam ad
tempus procuraret. Tales fuerunt Apostolorum auditores and discipuli, quique
primi eorum successores.
Timothy and Titus were indeed Governors over their Provinces and places,
where the Apostle had appointed them; and that they had over the Presbyters a
kind of Apostolical authority, which he in his own judgment calls
extraordinary, and we take him at his own words; in granting that it was some
way an Authoritative Prelacy, and for the distinction of extraordinary, it will
by and by receive an ordinary, but a true Answer: yet we do not so much press
his confession, as we may do his Reasons thereof, deducted from the Texts
themselves, concerning their Prelaticall power of ordering matters that were
amiss. Tit. 1.5. of receiving Accusation against Presbyters, 1 Timothy 5.19. and
the like.

But our other Opposites will needs pose us, requiring us to answer their first
Objection, videl. Smect.
That the Bishops, whose pedigree was derived from the Apostles, were no other
then Presbyters; then, this is proved, say they, by two instances: The first
is, The identity of their names, which (quoth they) is a proof of no small
consequence, we answer, yea, rather of none at all: else was Master Beza but of
small judgment, when speaking of the Apostolical Age, he confessed, Beza de
Minist. grad. cap. 22. Habuit jam tum Presbyterium suum aliquem (...)
Presbyterum, etiam Presbyterorum manente communi appellatione.
that the Presbytery had then a President over them, yea, when the community of
names So he of Presbyters and Bps remained among them: accordingly as Doctor
Reynolds his conference with Heart. c. 8. divis. 3.
Dr. Reynolds has said that the Presbytery had then one, who was President
over them, when as yet the names of Bishop and Presbyter were the same; who
furthermore concerning the time of distinguishing the name of Bishop and
Presbyter, whether sooner or later, here or there, he says. The name of Bishop
was afterward appropriated by the usual language of the fathers of the
Church, to him that had the Praesidentship over the Elders, So he, Hereby
granting that the Presidentship by Bishops was of force before the title and
name was appropriated and allotted unto them. If our Opposites had acquainted
themselves with these learned authors, they would have spared their pains in
oppugning Episcopacy. How much more if they had consulted with Gods own Oracle
in his word, wherein we find (which formerly we pointed at) that Saint Peter
entitled himself a Copresbyter. 1 Pet. 5. and 1. Saint John himself a
Presbyter. 1 John 1. And Saint Paul himself thrice (he could then stoop no
lower) a Deacon. Col. 1.23. and 25. 2 Cor. 3. and 6. Yet notwithstanding all
these inferior appellations they held still the Authority of their
Apostleship: we end this point in hope that our Opposites will take out that
lesson, which Calvin learnt from the divine Text in the Epistle of Titus:
what is that? even our full conclusion in this cause. Calvinus in Titum 1.5.
Discimus ex hoc loeo non eam fuisse aequalitatem inter Ministros, quia unus
aliquis authoritate praeesset.
We learn from hence, that there was not then an equality (says he) among the
Ministers of the Church; but that one was with Authority placed over others.
Their second convincing objection would be discussed.

XVIII. THESIS. That Timothy and Titus have had a Prelacy, as Bishops over the
Presbyters in the Apostles times: notwithstanding the objection that they were
called Evangelists, according to consent of Protestants of reformed Churches.
IN the next place we are to examine the second, and only other objection,
which our Opposites enforce in this case, to wit, Smectym vindicat. page 115.
that Timothy and Titus, with all other such Disciples of the Apostles, the
Assistants and immediate successors, did take care of the Churches, not as
properly Bishops, but as Evangelists, who had no settled residence in any of the
Churches: So they; But are encountered with other Protestant Divines of remote
Churches in good number. For Luther tom 1. fol. 309 Resolutiones ejus super
propositiones Lypsiae disputat. conclus. 13. Probo quamlibet civitatem habere
debere Episcopum proprium jure divino, quod ex Paulo ad Titum ostendo dicente,
(Hujus rei gratia reliqui te Cretae, ut quae desunt corrigas, and constituas
Presbyteros per civitates, sicut ego disposui tibi) Hos autem Presbyteros
fuisse Episcopos Hieroni and textus sequens ostendit dicens, Oportet Episcopum
irreprehensibilem esse, etc. B Augustine. in Epist. ad Hieron. Episcop.
descripturus rationem reddit and dicit. Erat enim Civitas quasi diceret, non
erat simplex Presbyter, sed Episc. de quo loquor, quia erat civitas cui
praeerat.
Luther among his other Resolutions inserted this: That Episcopacy was of
divine Right, grounding his judgment upon the Text, specifying Titus his
Government in Creete, as being consonant to the judgment of Augustine.

2. Their learned Scultetus in Titum cap. 8. pa. 10. At Paulus Ephesi et in
Creta aliquandiu docuerat, ideo Titum and Timotheum in Creta jubet manner, non
utique ut Evangelistas, sed Ecclesiae gubernatores. Id quod etiam Epistolae ad
utrumque scriptae evincunt: In his enim non Ecclesiae colligendae, quae erat
Evangelistarum, sed collectae gubernandae, quae est Episcoporum, rationem,
illis praescribit; suntque praecepta omnia ita confirmata, ut non speciatim ad
Timotheum vel Titum, sed generatim ad omnes Episcopos referantur. Ideoque ad
Temporariam Evangelistarum potestatem minime quadrent.
Scultetus shows, that at this time, they were not exercised in assisting the
Apostles for collecting of Churches as Evangelists, but for governing of them,
that had been collected, as the general praecepts given by the Apostles,
(says he) do prove thereby to become the examples and Types for the
successors to follow: and thereupon he concludes them to have been the same,
who otherwise were called Evangelists for preaching the Gospel, although by
their superintendency Bishops. To the same purpose Moulin in Epist. 3. ad
Episc. Winton. Quomodo appellaveris Titum, Timotheum, and Marcum, seu Episcopos
five Evangelistas? constat eos habuisse successores Episcopos haeredet illius
preminentiae
Master Moulin will have it known, that whatsoever Timothy and Titus had,
whether as Bishop or Evangelist, it was such as had a continual succession in
the Church, which is as others confess, as James had in Jerusalem, and Mark
in Alexandria, which was Episcopal. Titus (says Paulus Tossanus index in
Sacra Bib. Titus comes Peregrinationum Pauli, postea Cretensium Episcopus.
Tossanus) after his peregrinations with Paul, was appointed Bishop of Creet,
and before these Zuinglius tom. 2. fol. 45. Idem Episcopi and Evangelistae
nomen: nam Paulus, 2 Timothy 4. [Tuvigila, opus Evangelistae perage; ministerium
tuum probatum reddito] aliquo in loco tunc temporis fuit Episcopus, cum haec
scriberet Apostolus, Ergo constat idem fuisse Officium utriusque.
Zuinglius confessed, that Tim. at that very time, when Paul advised him to
pursue the work of an Evangelist. 2 Timothy 4. was then Bishop in some place or
other, by all consequence.

Gerhard. tom. 6. De Minister. Ecclesiast. number. 227. 2 Timothy 4. Fac quae
Evangelistae. Haec vox hoc in loco generaliter sumitur, non specialiter pro
quodam Doctorum ordine, quo Timotheus constitutus fuerit Ecclesiae Ephesinae
Episcopus, nec ulterius Paulum comitatus. Sicut etiam Lutherus reddidit
specialiter [dicti Evangelista erant Apostolorum (...), a quibus in partem
muneris Apostolici asciti ad diversa loca ab illis mittebantur. In illorum
Evangelistarum numero censendi sunt Timotheus et Titus. Timotheum Lystriae
assumpsit Paulus Act. 16. postea eum misit in Macedoniam Act. 19.22. and ad 1.
Cor. 4 17. Ad Phil. 2.19. Ad These. 1: c. 3.2. Tandem vero Ephesinae Ecclesiae
Episcopus. 1 Timothy 3.15. Titum (...). 2 Cor. 8.23. Eum misit ad Corinth. 2 Cor.
5 6.12.18. Assumpsit secum Hierosol. Gal. 2.1. Misit in Dalmatiam. 2 Timothy 4.10.
Tandem Cretensium Ecclesiarum constituit Episcopum Tit. 1.5.
Dr. Gerhard a late famous Theological Author is copious in this Argument: who
in the same shows that the word Evangelist, given to Timothy when Paul wrote
unto him, was taken in a general acceptance, and not as properly belonging to
him, as he had been an Assistant, even as Luther (says he) understood it.
Besides he shows out of Scripture exactly the several Stations, which
Timothy had with Saint Paul in exercising his office, before that time that he
was placed Bishop in Ephesus.

We forbear the full allegation of the like Authors cited by others, that we
may hearken to our English Doctor Reynolds, nothing inferior to any of the
rest even in the opinion of our Opposites themselves, telling us of that very
time, when Paul assembled the Ministry at Miletum, Act. 20.28. Dr. Reynolds
Conference with Heart, cap. 8. distinct. 3.
One was chosen as chief in the Church of Ephesus to guide it, the same whom
afterward the Fathers of the Primitive Church called Bishop. So he. And for
confirmation hereof shows that which must indeed be impregnable, to wit, A
lineall succession of 27 Bishops (as has been proved) from Timothy in the
Church of Ephesus, and for surplusage to all this we answer, to the objected
reasons propounded for Timothy's non-residence in Ephesus by that
qualification, which Calvin. institut lib. 3. c. 3.. 7. Pastoribus singulis
assignatur seeds, interea non negamus, quia pastor alias Ecclesias adjuvare
possit, qui uni est alligatus: sive quid turbarum intercedat quod ejus
praesentiam requirat, sive ab eo petatur consilium. Nec enim sunt veluti Glebae
addicti, ut Jurisconsulti.
Calvin has done in like cases, namely, that Pastors are not so strictly tied
to their Glebe or charge, as that they may not help other Churches upon
necessary occasions. As for the objected term of Evangelists, we moreover
answer from Scripture, where we find Philip preaching the word of God in
Samaria, Act. 8.5. Called an Evangelist, Act. 21.8. And yet was one of the
seven, meaning Deacons, Act. 6.5. Our Quaere is, why Timothy might not as well
be called an Evangelist for preaching the word, being a Bishop, as Philip was,
for the same cause, named an Evangelist, being a Deacon. We think all this
should be satisfactory, although no more were said: But more we have.

XIX. THESIS. That Antiquity taught an Episcopacy both in Timothy and Titus.
OUr strongest Opposite Walo, alias Salmas. lib. de Episc. page 229. Titum
Cretae insulae praefecit Paulus, qui non singulari in aliqua civitate Episcopus
fuit, sed totam illam provinciam ad tempus procuraret. Tales fuerunt
Apostolorum Auditores and discipuli, quicunque primi eorum successores extitere.
Salmasius could not but confess concerning Antiquity, (although he spurn
against it) That Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Theophylact, Theodoret, and other
Greek Commentatours have collected out of the words of Paul, that Titus was
verily Bishop of Creete, and that there could not be diverse Bishops in one
City, which is our present defense, and agrees as well to Timothy as to Titus.
Hieron. de Eccles. script. Ephesiorum Episcopus a Paulo ordinatus.
Hierome has recorded both Timothy, and Titus Bishops, the one of Ephesus, and
the other of Creete, to whom Ambros. in praefat. ad Timoth. c. 3. Hunc creatum
Episcopum.
Ambrose, Greg. Pap. de Curat. Past. part. 2. c. 11.
Primasius, Primasius in 1 Timothy
Gregory the Great, do consent: Luther also brings in Augustine into the
said Chorus. We hasten to our last Act.

Our second ground out of Scripture to prove a Prelacy over Presbyters, to be
according to the word of God is, Rev. c. 2.3.
In the book of Revelation, Christ by his Angel (properly so called)
commands John to write unto the seven Churches in Asia, verse. 1. Telling him
mystically of seven golden candlesticks, verse. 13. and of seven stars, verse.
16. and afterward expounds their meanings; seven stars, to signify seven
Angels of the seven Churches; and seven candlesticks, to betoken the seven
Churches, verse. 20. By and by, descending to particulars, he directs his
several Epistles to the several seven Angels of the seven Churches,
beginning at the Church of Ephesus, saying, Write to the Angel of the Church
of Ephesus, and so of the rest. These are our Texts, which we are in discussing
these our differences to insist upon.

The State of the Question.
We readily grant, that whatsoever matter was written to these Angels
concerning either themselves or others, were by them to be communicated
severally to the Churches, and all the faithful, as they were interested
therein, according to that Epiphonema, severally applied in every Epistle thus;
[He that has an ear to hear, let him heare] But the only question is,
whether each of these Angels of the Churches were singular persons, having a
Prelacy over other Pastors, and Clergy, or no? our Opposites say nay, we yea.
The odds is ex Diametre.

We are therefore according to true method; first, to disprove their negative,
and after to evince our affirmation: But, in the first place, be it known that
our Opposites in their negatives are distracted into three Opinions. One sort,
by the word Angel, will have understood the whole Church collectively, as well
Laity, as Clergy. Not so, say the second Opinatours, but by Angel is
collectively meant only the Order or College of Pastors or Presbyters. After
these the Novelists, its neither so, nor so; but by Angel is meant one
individual Pastor, without relation to any other, newly called an
Independent, whereas our tenet is, by Angel, to understand one individual
Ecclesiastical person, having a Prelacy above the rest.

XX. THESIS. That our Opposites first Exposition, which interprets the Angel
to mean the whole Church and congregation, is notably extravagant.
ALthough Lib. 3. de Episc. page 183. Sit ergo hoc fixum, per Angelos nihil
aliud voluisse Johannem designari, nisi ipsas Ecclesias.
Walo Messalinus, the grand adversary to Episcopacy, be very peremptory for
this exposition, yet will it altogether appear groundless. But first we are
to hearken unto his gloss. Let it be held a firm and fixed truth, (says he)
that by the name of Angels are not signified any that had Presidency over
others, but the whole congregation and Churches. So he; Pythagorically upon his
own word, as we see: whereunto we may rather answer, Let it be held firmly
and fixtly, that this gloss upon the Text is evidently confuted by the
context, which stands thus, cap. 1. and 20. The Angels are called Stars,
and the Churches Candlesticks, so that he must turn Stars into Candlesticks,
before that he can make the Angel to signify the whole Congregation. Beside
cap. 2.1. the command to John is, Write to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus,
where if by Angel must be understood the Church, then were it as much as to
have been said, Write unto the Church of the Church of Ephesus. But we know
the spirit of wisdom could not write unwisely.

XXI. THESIS. That our Opposites second Exposition of the word Angel, to
signify only the Order and College of Presbyters, is erroneous,
notwithstanding the Arguments of our Opposites to the contrary.
The Answer to their first Argument.
THis indeed is the common exposition of our opposites, whereunto our
objectours adhere, upon, as they call them firm Arguments, as first; Our first
Argument, say they, is drawn from the Epistle to the Church of Thyatira, where
after it was said to the Angel [I have something against thee] in the singular
number, cap. 2.20. It is after added in the plural, verse. 24. [But I say to
you, and to the rest] But what of this? This shows (say they) the word Angel
to be collective, to signify a multitude of Pastors. We answer, if so, then
was Beza but dim-sighted, who paraphrased upon these words thus [unto you] that
is (says he) unto the Angel as President, and unto Colleagues, as unto the
Assembly (meaning of Presbyters) and to the rest, that is, to the whole flock.
So he. Where we see that the Angel was as individual, and singular, as
either, Thee, or Thy: And is it possible our Opposites should be ignorant what
an Apostrophe is? and that there is no figure of speech more familiar and
usual among men, then it is? as when a Lord writing to his chief Steward of
matters belonging to him and other Officers under him, and the whole Family: Be
thou circumspect in managing my affairs, and afterward as well unto him, as
others, But see that you and the rest keep at home, as much as may be, because
of the danger of the Pestilence which now rages on all sides,

Answer to the second Argument.
Our second Argument (say they) is drawn from the Phrases, Smect. vindication.
even in this very book of Revelations, wherein it is usual to express a
company under a singular person, as the civil State of Rome called a Beast
with ten heads, which proves that the Angel might be taken collectively. Is
this all I Master Meade (say they) one better skilled in the meaning of the
Revelation, then our Adversary, said, that the word Angel is commonly [if not
alwayes] in the Revelation taken collectively. So they. This saying have I
diligently sought after, but it fled from me: but yet I shall be content to be
satisfied of Mr Meade his meaning from his other sayings more obvious unto me,
to show, that he has not been rightly understood by these objectours. For
Collectively, properly taken, is a word comprehending a multitude without
distinction of persons, as Christ in his Lamentation said, O Jerusalem, how
often would I have gathered Thy Children, but Thou would not] where the words
singular Thou, and Thy, do here comprehend all the Citizens of Jerusalem
without distinction. Had Master Meade this collective sense? He shows the
flat contrary, Apoc. 9.14. [foure Angells] These four (says he) were put for
Nations, which they were thought to govern. So then, they did represent
Nations, as notwithstanding to be distinctly their four Governors. Next upon
Revel. 14.6. [I saw another Angel flying] We are to call to mind (says he)
that, which before was cap. 7. showed: That the Angels of like Visions do
represent them, of whom they have government wheresoever. And again upon verse.
7. The flying Angel is ruler, not only of men, but also of a more eminent
rank. So he. If that our Objectours had (according to Master Meade's
direction) but called to mind his own explanations, they might have easily
perceived he said no more, then as if we may grant that under the word Angel,
to whom the Epistle is in special directed, are employed all those who are
concerned therein. But how? not by alteration of his person, but by communion
of interest, for which cause Master Beza acknowledged him the President over
others, even as many other Protestant Divines are ready to do, and that as
exactly as either we can desire, or our opposites mislike, when we come to
discharge the affirmative point.

Two Answers we wish our Opposites to take into their second thoughts; One, as
they have presented him by way of comparison, as better skilled in the Book of
the Revelation then his adversary: the other, as he is to be singly respected,
and in his own worthiness. To the first we say, that comparison might well
have been forborne, which now provokes us to another comparison, between him
and one as dear to our Opposites as any other, whom they know to have been as
conversant in the Book of the Revelation altogether, wherein he,
notwithstanding, after the second and third Chapters, has been so far from
the collective interpretation of the word Angel, that he has not any where,
as we can find, set it down as comprehendnding any Multitude, nay in many
places he expresses by name the individual persons themselves, or some
Individuum Vagum signified thereby, some singular notable one.

The consideration of Master Meade his worthiness and judgment touching
Episcopacy, would be had the rather, because we have read the Translation of
his Book authorized in this manner, It is Ordered by the Committee of the
Commons House in Parliament, that the Book entitled, the Key of the
Revelation, be Printed. So they. Which key does unlock unto us his judgment in
behalf of Episcopacy, to be so fully according to the word of God, that part.
1. c. 4. v. 67. p. 35. The four and twenty Elders (says he) compass next
about the throne, which represent the Bishops and Prelates of the Churches, and
do answer both in place and order to the Levites and Priests in the Camps of
Israel, etc. Thus Master Meade, so commended by our Opposites themselves, who
if they shall approve his Key in this point, it is well, we in imparting thus
much unto them have but done our duty.

The third Argument.
Our third Argument, say they, Smect. vindic. page 143.
is taken from the word Angel, as it is a common name to all Ministers and
Messengers, and surely if Christ had intended to point out any individual
person, be would have used some distinguishing name, as to have called him
President, Rector, Superintendent. So they. As if by this their surely they
would assure us it is a Truth, if we shall take their own word for it,
contrary to the judgment of all the Learned, who have every where taught that
ever since Angelical Spirits were revealed to the world, the word Angel,
spoken in the better part, has been used to express the Dignity of their
office, and accordingly of the Ministers of God whenever it is applied unto
them: Otherwise our Opposites, I think, would have gratified us with the
allegation of some one Author that ever fancied the contrary, whom
notwithstanding we shall endeavor to satisfy by a parallel in the word
Apostles (signifying Messengers) whereof Mr. Calvin, Calvin Institut. l. 3. c.
3.. 5. De voce hac Apostoli, et si ex verbi Etymorite sic possunt vocari omnes
verbi Ministri, quoniam a Domino mittuntur nuncii; sed tamen quia magni refert
certam habere de eorum missione notitiam, qui rem inauditam afferrent, duodecim
illos peculiari hoc titulo ante omnes insigniri opor^uit.
This word (says he) according to its Etymon agrees to any Minister of
Christ, yet was it entitled upon the twelve Apostles, because they were the
immediate Ambassadors of Christ. So he. And yet we presume that our Opposites
would not, because of the Community thereof, call either every Minister of
Christ sent to preach the Gospel, an Apostle; or every Cobbler sent on a
message, an Angel.

Their fourth Argument.
Our fourth Argument, say they, stands thus; Smect. vind. page 146.
Our Savior says, that the seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches, but he
says not likewise that the seven Stars are the seven Angels, but in
mentioning Angels omitteth the word seven, which is not done without a
Mystery, to wit, that the Angels do not signify seven Individual Pastors.
So they. Whose Tenants are two; First, that the omission of the word Seven
argues a Mystery; Secondly, that the Mystery signified thereby is this, that
the word Angel is not individually, but collectively taken. We cannot but deny
both, and so will any even with wonderment at the Objectours boldness in
uttering such their conceptions: for first to call that a Mystery, which by all
Grammar learning is in every Language most common, by that which the Grecians
call (...), that is a word not expressed following upon course in the
understanding of any rational Reader. As for example: If any one of our
Opposites writing to any of his Servants to bring him his two Horses, the black
Horse, and the white, omitting in the second place the word Horse, which word
does follow in course of common understanding; yet his man should bring only
the black, but not the white, might his excuse have been, It was a Mystery?

Secondly, Were it that a Mystery should be imagined therein, yet that denial
of the word Angel, to be an individual person in the Text, contradicts the
Context. The context stands thus, cap. 1.26. The Stars are said to be the 7
Angels of the Churches, and cap. 2. and 3. The same Angels being reckoned prove
accordingly to be seven. In the Context we have Numerum numerantem, in the Text
numerum numeratum, that that which makes up a number, should be said not to
refer unto a number, which was before expressed by Christ. He that has a
perfect natural hand, is said to have individually every finger, although he
reckon them not to be five.

Their last Argument answered.
This Argument, Smectym. page 148. Vindicat:
(say they) is taken from Christ's Denunciation against the Angel of the Church
of Ephesus, to remove his Candlestick out of its place, if he did not repent:
where by Candlestick is meant the Church, or Congregation; But if there by
Angel were signified one individual person, then the congregation and people
should be punished for the offense of that one Pastor. So they. Who would not
have thus argued, if they had considered; that by thus oppugning our
Exposition, they have as utterly undermined and overthrown their own. As for
example, their tenent has been; that, by the word Angel is signified the
Order and College of Pastors, in the Church of Ephesus: Now then (to return
their own engine upon them) if the Candlestick, signifying the Church, should
be removed out of its place, except those Pastors should repent, then should
the people and congregation be punished for the fault of those Pastors.
Therefore all the odds that is between both these consequences, is no more
than this, viz. the punishing of people for the fault of the Pastor: and for
the faults of the Pastors, in extremity equally, unequally in both; whereas
they should have labourd to solve the doubt by some commodious, and congruous
interpretation.

Whether thus, if by Candlestick be to be understood the people: then by
people to conceive such of whom the Prophet spoke like People like Pastor, so
that the irrepentant people adhering to the unpenitent Pastor, may justly be
involved in the same punishment. Secondly, or thus, by taking the word
Candlestick to signify the Pastor himself, for the Ministers of the Gospel
are so called. Matt. 5.15. And that the same word should be diversely taken in
the same sentence cannot be strange to him, who is not a stranger to Scripture.
As where it is said. He that shall save his life, (viz. Mortal) shall loose
his life; to wit, the Eternal: And again, 2 Cor. 5.21. Of Christ. He that
knew no sin, (properly taken) was made for us sin, that is a sacrifice for
sin, or else (not to seek further) by distinguishing of the word place, as
here betokening man's estate and condition with relation to others, in which
sense might the Church of Ephesus be removed by altering the relation to that
one Pastor, both by not acknowledging him their Bishop, and by withholding
maintenance.

XXII. THESIS. That our Opposites third Exposition of the word Angel, to
signify one only Pastor in the Church of Ephesus, is extremely new and naught.
THis misbegotten brat, namely an exposition, which before these days of
distraction never saw print, we might think should by and by vanish with its
own novelty: how much more for the safety thereof, which we are rather to
enquire after, seeming to us to be very transparent. For the reasons, which
these our Opposites might have read in Brightman in Apoc. p 11. Ephesus evasit
nobilior propter Pauli operam triennalem in ea Act. 19.10. and 20.31. Divinam
ad populum Scriptam Epist. datum iis Timotheum pastorem ac faeli cissimam
Johannis Apost. per tot annos irrigationem.
Master Brightman, viz. The City of Ephesus was more innobled of all other, by
Paul's Trienniall labor therein: Next, by the divine Epistle written unto the
people there, as also by that Timothy was ordein'd their Pastor, and besides,
for John's laborious watring thereof for so many years together. So he. But
how successful were these then? this was told us in the Acts of the Apostles,
concerning the Church of Ephesus; whereof it is said, so mightily grew the word
of God, and prevailed. Act. 19.20. Now that after Paul's long residence, after
Timothies Pastorship, and after Saint John's watering of that Church, and so
long a time; and that with so admirable success, and yet here but one only
Pastor among them. Is this credible? What says the Scripture? The Harvest
indeed is great, but the laborers are few. But here in the mightily great
Harvest, the laborers are fewer then few. We ought not to be blamed for
meddling with such trifles in earnest, but that our study has been to weed out
even the least scruples, now that we are to expedite a matter of highest
importance, which is our proof of Episcopacy from the word of God: and to that
purpose from confutation of the negative part held by our Opposites, we pass
to the proofs and confirmations of our affirmative.

XXIII. THESIS. That by the word Angel of Ephesus, to signify a singular and
individual Pastor having a Prelacy over Presbyters, is proved by a large
consent of Protestant Divines without exception judicious and ingenuous.
THe Divines, which we shall produce shall be those, whom our Opposites
themselves cannot call Partialists in behalf of Bishops, whether they be of
remote Churches, or as it were domestiques in our own Country. Of the first
kind, we allege the last chief Pastor of the Church of Geneva Master
Deodate his notes upon the Apoc. 2.1.
Master Deodate, who is to be cited out of his Book lately authorized to be
published, by Order of the House of Commons this Parliament. The Text in the
Revelations is, Write to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus: His paraphrase
thus. That is, says he, to the Pastor or Bishop; under whose person ought to
be understood the whole Church. The Church to be employed or understood, and the
Pastor or Bishop, under whose person, which, because person, can be but one,
according to the Etymon of the word Angel, Persona quasi per se una: Or as it
is defined in Philosophy. A person is an individual intellectual Nature, yet
so in this place as he being to acquaint all with the contents of this Epistle,
all were understood to be concerned in him, as all the other following
witnesses will acknowledge. Before him in the same Church of Geneva was
Theodore, Beza in Apoc. 2.1. Angelus (...), quem oportet admoneri and per eum
Collegas, totamque adeo Ecclesiam.
Beza, By Angel (says he) is meant the President, who was admonished and his
Colleagues with him. So he.

Bullinger in Apoc. cap. 2. concio septima. Nemo autem existimet hanc
Epiostlamuni inscriptam Angelo, i. e. Episcopo vel pastori, nihil ad Ecclesiam
pertinere. Nam sub finem Epistolae Epiphonema adjicitur. Qui habet aurem audiat
quid Scriptura dicat Ecclesiis. Nominatur ergo pastor, sed non excluduntur
oviculae; Interim vero Angelo inscribitur, ut admoneantur Pastores, in ipsis
esse permultum situm qualis sit Eccles
Bullinger, although he, as others affirm, that the Epistle concerns as well
People as Pastors, yet does he consent unto us, that, the Epistle was inscribed
to one, by whom the Pastors and people might be informed: As punctually and
pertinently Marlorat. in Apoc. 1.12. Quamvis quaedam tam in Clero, quam in
Populo corrigenda essent non tamen populum, sed Clerum aggreditur: nec
quemlibet de Clero, nominatim Principem Cleri, utique Episcopum.
Marlorat, some things (says he) were to be corrected as well in the people,
as in the Clergy; yet does not John address himself unto the people, nor yet
to the Clergy, but to the chief of them, which is the Bishop, and that not
without good reason. So he. Of our chief Gualther. Hom. 9. in Apoc. 8. Angelo,
id est, Episcopo Smyrnensi, atque adeo toti Ecclesiae; constat ex Historiis
Polycarpum fuisse hunc Angelum.
Gualther held the same opinion with further evidence of these other words.
[Unto the Angel of the Church of Smyrna write] that is, says he, To the
Bishop thereof, as Histories do manifest. Gaspar Sib. in Apoc. p. 185. de uno
singulari Angelo, quae sententia mihi magis arridet.
Gaspar Sibilius having compared the diverse expositions confessed, saying,
This, as spoken but of one Angel, pleases me better. Piscator in eandem Apoc
[Angelo] id est, Episcopo, nec non ipsi Ecclesiae.
Piscator briefly and consonantly to the Angel, that is, to the Bishop, and to
the Church: namely Bishop expressly, and Church consequently, because of
matters of concernment to them also. Paraeus [Angelo Ephesinae Ecclesiae] sic
vocat pastorem ejus, eadem appellatione Christus aliarum Ecclesiarum Episcopos
dignatur.
Paraeus doubts not to make his explanation as generally to be observed in
these Epistles. It is the word of Christ (says he) that that, which is meant
to the Church, should be inscribed to the Bishop of the place, or Church.
Aretius [Angelo] id est, Ministro Ecclesiae per quem ad totum coetum res
proferantur.
Aretius is of no less esteem then the former, and as punctual altogether,
by Angel interpreting a special one Minister, and Disciple of John; by whom
the writing might be commended to the whole Church. P. Martyr comment. in
primam Corinth. 11. Johannes jubetur scribere ad Angelos Ecclesiarum, qui erant
illarum Episcopi.
Peter Martyr used to be reckoned among the first Worthies. John (says he) was
commanded to write to the Angels, who were the Bishops of the Churches. But
what do we multiply remote Authors, when one of their Doctors may satisfy us
both for the general, and for himself? Scultetus observat. in Tit. Doctissimi
quique interpretes per septem Ecclesiarum Angelos interpretantur septem
Ecclesiarum Episcopos, neque enim aliter possunt, vim nisi facere textui velint.
All the most learned Interpreters, (says Dr. Scultetus) by Angels expound the
Bishops of the Churches, nor can it be otherwise interpreted without violence
to the Text. So he. After our so long peregrination in remote Churches, it is
time to have home, to try what our own English Divines have judged of this
matter; and lest now we be too numerous, we shall single out three, who will be
held singular in the estimation of our Opposites themselves. Dr. Reynolds in
his Conference with Heart. c. 2. divisio. 3.
Dr. Reynolds. Although in the Church of Ephesus, says he, there were sundry
Elders and Pastors to guide it, yet, among these sundry, was there one Chief,
whom our Savior caelleth the Angel of the Church. Apoc. 2. So he. His words
need no Paraphrase, Dr. Fulke in Apoc 2 Ad Pergamensis Ecclesiae Episcopum
Epistola haec destinatur.
Dr. Fulke is one of them whom our Opposites have cited for their part, who, if
he speak directly against them, they may not be offended with us. The Epistle
to Pergamus, says he, was directed to the Bishop thereof. We have reserved
Master Cartwright to the last, that his Testimony may be more lasting in the
memory of our Opposites, as from one who uses to be most grateful unto them.
The letters written to the Churches, says he, were therefore directed to the
Angel, because he is the meetest man by office, by whom the Church may
understand the tenor of the letter. So he, and so they. Although this Cloud of
witnesses thus raining down abundance of Testimonies, for proof of an
Apostolical original of Episcopacy, Mr. Cartwright on the Rhemes Testament
upon Apoc. 2.
may justly be held so convincent, that nothing but selfenesse in any party can
oppose any thing against it, yet shall we furthermore fortify their proofs,
desiring that this one thing may be observed, (to wit) the reason why all our
Opposites have strugled against this our Exposition, as a break-neck to their
whole cause; but we will go on.

XXIV. THESIS. That Antiquity held not the word Angel (whereof we treat) to be
taken Collectively for a multitude of Pastors.
IF that our Opposites had not said that we cited no ancient Fathers for our
exposition, we should not have framed this Thesis; only we cannot tell with
what appetite they did it: Is it that they hold the judgment of Fathers
satisfactory in this case? why then have they not alleged any one sylllable
out of them for their own collective sense? But we list not to expostulate,
rather hoping the best, we entreat them to spell the words of Ambros. in 1
Corint. 1. Angelos Episcopos dico, sicut docet in Apocalypsi Johannes.
Ambrose, they are but few, I call Bishops Angels, as I am taught in the
Revelation. What Ambrose meant by Bishops who can doubt? Likewise August.
Epist. 192. Divina voce laudatur Angeli nomine Praepositus Ecclesiae.
Augustine the famous Bishop of Hippo, says, of one of these Angels, That he
was set over the Church by the divine voice (meaning the Scripture.) If See
above.
Scultetus when he said, that all the most learned Interpreters, by Angels,
understood Bishops; if among All, he comprehend the Ancients, we have not to
seek more witnesses; however, we need not, because there is but very rare
commenting upon the Apocalypse among the Fathers, much less upon these Texts.
All this notwithstanding we are sure of that what is wanting in their
Commentaries, they supply in their historical relations, as will appear by
and by, rendering unto us one Polycarpus Bishop and Martyr to have been one of
these Angels in the Church of Smyrna. In the interim we will plead Reason with
our Opposites.

XXV. THESIS. That the word Angel in other places of the Revelation is
commonly if not always Individually taken.
BEtter reason they cannot expect then is the retorting of their own Argument
upon them: when they dislike this, The word Angel is commonly, if not always
taken Collectively, ergo, ought it to be so interpreted in the second and third
Chapters. So they; but altogether amiss, as has been shown. It will be our
part to prove the contradictory, whereof upon observation in reading
Commentaries upon the Revelation, we are the more confident; our Opposites at
their leisure may inquire to other Authors; We for this present shall need but
commend a special one unto them who in their opinion may stand for many,
because only now at hand. He after these two Chapters (as the Marginalls show)
Brightmannus in cap. 7.2. id est. Constantius. cap 8.17. Angelus volans. i. e.
Greg. Magnus. c. 10. Angelus robustus, id est Chestus. cap. 14. There is seven
times alius Angelus, and of the first three he says, Erant hi tres totidem
coelestes viri, etc. v. 15. Alius, ut probabile est Minister, and yet after
doubleth fondly, v. 17. Angelus alius est, Tho. Cromwellus, v. 18. Alius Tho.
Carmerus, cap. 16. Sunt 7. Angeli, v. 2. Angelus primus Eliz. Regin. v. 3.
Secundus, id est, Mart. Chemnitius v. 5. Angelus Aquarum, Civis aliquis
Magistratus, v. 7. Alius Angelus. Vnus aliquis. Videat relic Lector, cap. 16.
verse. 2, 3, 5, 7, 12.17. cap. 19. verse. 21. cap. 19. verse. 17.
through his whole Commentaries upon the same Book, takes the word Angel so
far Individually, as to interpret it of some one person, either expressly by
name, or else equivalently by an Individuum vagum, as thus, some notable one,
or the like.

In the second place, we do appeal to the Texts themselves to give a
sufficient taste; for oftentimes the Angels are reckoned seven, and after
distributed ordinatively into first, second third, and so till the seventh, as
plainly as one can reckon the seven days in the Week, Chap. 15. and 16.
Afterward we have recited one Angel having the Key of the bottomless pit,
Chap. 20. was there need of a Collectively understood multitude of Angels to
keep one Key? The like may be said of a mighty Angel for delivering a little
book, Chap. 10.1, 2. Besides the Angel whom John is said to have worshipped,
Chap. 22. will they say this Angel also to comprehend a Multitude? then might
the Angel reply, have you forgot when I said to John, I am thy fellow Servant,
but five words, and every one an Individual.

Thirdly, to return to the questioned Texts, whereas some of the Angels are
commended for notable virtues, and as much condemned for some notorious vices;
they that think that all the same vices and virtues did as well imply every
Pastor in all the Colleges of the seven Churches may as well conceive, that
where the deformities are noted in any Corporation, therefore every person in
it is equally flat-nosed, crook't-legged, bald-headed, and the like.

Lastly, the Angels and Churches being both reckoned distinctly seven times,
that there should be a Collective number of the Order of Pastors, without so
much as any insinuation of distinguishing them either from Angels, or
Churches; have they any Key to unlock such a Mystery? From this kind of
reasoning, we pass unto an evidence of no less importance, Historical
Experience, and Practice.

XXVI. THESIS. That by Angel is meant Individually one Bishop, is demonstrated
by Historical learning without contradiction.
HIstory is the life of memory, and memorial of men's lives, if it may be
undubitably had, it must necessarily seal up the verity of all that has been
said of an Apostolical Institution of Episcopacy, whereof we have had evident
instances in the Episcopal Traditions from James in Jerusalem, Mark in
Alexandria, Peter in Antioch and in Rome: And now we are to insist upon
examples of the descent from John in two of these Angelical Churches Ephesus
and Smyrna. For the first, it has been made good unto you out of Eusebius,
that Polycrat. Epist. ad Victorem apud Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5. cap 25.
Polycrates writ himself Bishop of Ephesus, testifying withal a line of seven
Bishops of his own kindred, his Predecessors: whereunto may be added the
Declaration made by Leontius the Archbishop of Magnesia in the general C^ncil.
Cal^ed. Act. 11.
Council of Calcedon of the succession of the seven and twenty Bishops from
Timothy in the same Church of Ephesus; which Timothy, all antiquity with a
large consent of most approved Protestant Divines have testified to have been
Bishop there; none will think, but shame it self would have restrained
Leontius from making such a public Declaration in the hearing of six hundred
Fathers assembled in this Council, if the matter it self had been liable to
any contradiction. The next instance (as we are persuaded) may be held
satisfactory and infringeable in it self, in Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, in
the days when Saint John lived: our witnesses deserve your hearing, we will
begin with the veriest junior of all, saying, Hieronym. de Scrip. Eccles.
Polycarpus Johannis discipulus and ab eo Smyrnae Episcopus ordinatus, totius
Asiae princeps fuit, qui nonnullos Apostolorum qui Dominum viderant Magistros
habuerit and viderit. Postea vero regnante Marco Antonio quarta post Neronem
persecutione Smyrnae sedente proconsule and universo populo in Amphithet.
adversus eum personaliter igni traditus est.
Polycarpus who had been Disciple to one that heard the Lord, and afterward
burnt a Martyr of Christ, was ordained Bishop of Smyrna by Saint John.
Hieronym. de Scrip. Eccles. Polycarpus Johannis discipulus and ab eo Smyrnae
Episcopus ordinatus, totius Asiae princeps fuit, qui nonnullos Apostolorum qui
Dominum viderant Magistros habuerit and viderit. Postea vero regnante Marco
Antonio quarta post Neronem persecutione Smyrnae sedente proconsule and
universo populo in Amphithet. adversus eum personaliter igni traditus est.
So Hierome. Another, Polycarpus Bishop and Martyr was placed by John Bishop of
Smyrna. So Eusebius. Alius Polycarpus. Episc. and Martyr suffragiis Smyrnes.
Episcopatum obtinuit.
Eusebius A third before him. By John was Polycarpus constituted Bishop of
Smyrna. So Tertull. praescript. cap. 23. a Johannae Smyrnae collocatus. Eusebius.
Hist. lib. 3. c. 30. Episcopus Smyrnae abiis qui erant (...).
Tertullian. And before him a fourth testifies as one that had seen this
Polycarpus, That after that he had been instructed by the Apostles of Christ,
with whom he had been conversant, he was made by them Bishop of Smyrna. So
Iren lib. 3. cap. 3. vide and apud Eusebius lib. 3. c. 55. (...), etc. Polycarpus
non solum edoctus a Christi discipulis and conversatus apud multos qui Christum
ipsum viderunt, verum etiam ab Apostolis constitutus Episcopus Ecclesiae in
Asia quae dicitur Smyrna, quem in tenera nostra aetate nos ipsi vidimus; diu
enim vixit and valde senex per nobile and gloriosum Martyrium vita docessit.
Ireneus. We ascend somewhat higher, to one who writ an Epistle to the same
Polycarpus, intiutling him the Bishop of Smyrna; and in his Epistle to the
Church of Smyrna, saluting him as their Bishop. Ignatius Epist. (...): and
Epist ad Smyrnenses, (...), Vedelius. Exercit. in ista^s Epistolas.
Ignatius in these Epistles and sayings which Vedelius the Professor in the
Church of Geneva, and an exact discerner and discoverer of the corruptions
crept into his writings, does hold as genuine and legitimate. Can our Opposites
require a greater confirmation of any historical point, which they themselves
maintain, as more amply testified then this is? whereto as many of our former
Protestant Divines did subscribe, so is there not one to our knowledge from
this Saint John that ever did contradict it.

XXVII. THESIS. That Christ himself showed his approbation of the Prelacy
which the foresaid Angels had in their several Churches.
THere was yet never either favorites to Episcopacy, not opposites against it,
but have granted, that whatsoever the government was meant in these seven
Churches, it had the approbation of Christ, by the tenor of his Epistles
written unto them. First from the words of the Chap. 1.1. The Revelation of
Jesus Christ sent by his Angel to his Servant John] to acknowledge the
Epistles to have been dictated by Christ himself, conveied by an Angel to
John, and as it follows in the second and third Chapters, distributed by John
to the several Angels, and communicated to the Churches. After this, by the
virtue of the same letters, an inquisition is made, (as it were a Visitation
kept) upon every Angel of the Churches, concerning the discharge of their
offices; wherein two of them are found of weight and commendable, the other
five, more or less criminally delinquents, yet so; as to manifest a
justification of the offices. The approbation of the function is seen, not
only (which reason none can deny) by Christ his commending their diligence,
zeal, and faithfulness; but even likewise in his process of convictions,
reprehensions, and denuntiations against their remissness, dissoluteness,
and faithfulness of others; but how? certainly, so that the condemnation of
their vices and abuses argued an approbation of their Offices and Functions
because it was done not with an absolute intent to remove them at the first,
but only to reform them, and continue them upon their Reformation; therefore
was it said from Christ to one, Repent, or else, etc. Chap. 2.5. and 16. to
another, Repent, if not, I will come against thee, and the like; this we see
was no deprivation of the Ofcers at first, much less abolition of the Offices
which were to continue from age to age.

The last point will be our Assumption from all these premises, which is, that
these Angels, being so amply, evidently, and with so unanimous consent of the
most and best approved Protestant Divines, agreeable to Historical practice of
Apostolical Churches, proved to have been such Bishops as had a Prelacy over
the Clergy with Christ's own approbation, a truth, which the evidence of these
Scriptures did express in part from Beza de Minist. grad. cap. 13. Quid
objicis in aetatem Johannis Apost. Asiae Ecclesiae septem habuerunt Episcopos,
divina non humana ordinatione sibi praefectos, Apostolo singulos illos
singularum Ecclesiarum Angelos minime compellaturo, and culpam male obitae
functionis minime illis attributuro, nisi eminentior fuisset eorum in Ecclesiae
regimine auctoritas. Hoc, inquam, quor sum adversus Hieronymum and nos torques?
nec enim ille, quum diceret Ecclesias initio fuisse communi Presbyterorum
consilio gubernatas, ita desipuisse existimandus est, ut somniaret neminem ex
Presbyteris illi coetui praefuisse, etc.
Beza himself; his sentence is large, consisting of these briefes; First, that
the Episcopacy which seemed to him to be regulate, was to be collected out of
this Scripture of the Apocalypse. Secondly, that the same was a Presidency, and
Prefecture-ship of one Presbyter over the rest. Thirdly, that it was a Prelacy
of Authority. Fourthly, that Hierome was of judgment. Fifthly, that to hold
otherwise, were to doat and play the fool: all which prove the difference of
Bishop and Presbyter both to have been of Apostolical Institution, because
under John in the Church of Asia; and to have had the approbation of Christ,
because of Christ his commendation of the faithful discharge of this Function,
which fully makes good unto us, both our Conclusions, That Episcopacy for the
Office and Function it self is according to the word of God, and in respect of
use, therefore the Best.

FINIS.
The Original of BISHOPS and METROPOLITANS, briefly laid down by JAMES,
Archbishop of ARMAGH.
THe ground of Episcopacy is derived partly from the pattern prescribed by God
in the Old Testament: and partly from the imitation thereof brought in by the
Apostles and confirmed by Christ himself in the time of the New. The
government of the Church of the Old Testament was committed to the Priests and
Levits: unto whom the Ministers of the New do now succeed; in like sort as our
Lord's Day has done unto their Sabbath that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the Prophet, touching the vocation of the Gentiles. Esa ^^ 21.
I will take of them for Priests, and for Levits, says the Lord.

That the Priests were superior to the Levits, no man doubts: and that there
was not a parity, either betwixt the Priests or betwixt the Levits themselves,
is manifest by the word of God; wherein mention is made of the Heads and Rulers
both of the one, and of the other. 1 Chronicles. XXIV. 6, 31. and Ezr. VIII. 29.

The Levits were distributed into the three families of the Gershonites,
Cohathites, and Merarites: and over each of them God appointed one (...) (...)
or Ruler, Number. III. 24, 30, 35. The Priests were divided by David into four
and twenty courses; 1 Chronicles XXIV. who likewise had their Heads: who in the
History of the New Testament are ordinarily called Matthew. 2.4. and 27.1. Act
19.14. etc.
(...), or chief of the Priests; and clearly distinguished from that singular
one, who was the type of our Heb. 4.14.
great High Priest, that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the son of God. Yea
in the XI. of Nehemy, we find two named Bishops, the one of the Priests, the
other of the Levits that dwelt in Jerusalem. The former so expressly termed
by the Greek in the 14. the latter both by the Greek and Latin Interpreter in
the (...). LXX. Episcopus Levitarum. Hieron.
22. verse. and not without approbation of the Scriture it self, which renders
the (...) Psalm. 109.8.
Hebrew word of the same original in the Old, by the Act. 1.20.
Greek (...) in the New Testament.

Of Levi it was said by Moses the man of God Deuteronomy. 33.10.
They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law; they shall put
incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine Altar. Because this
latter part of their office has ceased with them, and the Leviticall Altar
(the truth prefigured thereby being now exhibited) is quite taken away: may not
we therefore conclude out of the former part (which has no such typical
relation in it) that our Bishops and Presbyters should be (as the Apostle would
have them to be) 1 Timothy 3.2.
(...) apt to teach; Tit. 1.9.
able by sound doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers? Nay,
and out of the latter part it self; where God had appointed, that Deuteronomy. 28.1.
the Priests the Levits and all the Tribe of Levi should eat the offerings of
the Lord made by fire: does not the Apostle by just analogy infer from
thence, that forasmuch as 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
they which waited at the Altar, were partaker with the Altar; even so had the
Lord ordained, that they which preached the Gospel, should live of the Gospel?

With what show of reason then can any man imagine, that what was instituted by
God in the Law, for mere matter of government and preservation of good order
(without all respect of type or ceremony;) should now be rejected in the
Gospel, as a device of Antichrist? that what was by the Lord once Jerem. 2.21.
planted a noble vine, wholly a right seed, should now be so turned into the
degenerate plant of a strange vine; that no purging or pruning of it will serve
the turn, but it must be cut down root and branch, as Matthew. 15.13.
a plant which our heavenly Father had never planted? But nothing being so
familiar now a days, as to father upon Antichrist, whatsoever in Church
matters we do not find to suite with our own humors: the safest way will be,
to consult with Christ himself herein, and hear what he delivers in the
cause.

These things says he, that has the seven stars. Revel. III. 1. He owneth
then, we see, these stars; whatsoever they be, and, the mystery of them he
thus further opens unto his beloved Disciple. The seven stars, which thou
saw in my right hand, are the Angels of the seven Churches. Revel. I. 20.
From which words a learned man, very much devoted to the now so highly admired
Discipline, deduceth this conclusion. Quanta igitur dignitas verorum Pastorum,
qui tum stellae sunt, non in alio firmamento, quam in dextra Christi fixae, tum
Angeli? T. Brightman. in Apocalypse. 1.20.
How great therefore is the dignity of true Pastors, who are both STARS,
fixed in no other firmament then in the right hand of Christ, and ANGELS?

He had considered well, that in the Church of Ephesus (one of the seven here
pointed at) there were many Act. 20.17, 28.
PRESBYTERS, whom the holy Ghost had made BISHOPS, or Overseers, over all that
flock; to feed the Church of God, which he had purchased with his own blood.
And withal he saw, that by admitting one Angel there above the rest (all, as
well Judge. 2.1. Hagg. 1.13. Matthew. 11.18:
extraordinary Prophets, as Malach. 2.7.
ordinary Pastors, being in their own several stations accounted Angels or
Messengers of the Lord of Hosts) he should be forced also to acknowledge the
eminency of one Bishop above the other Bishops (that name being in those days
Philip. 1.1. 1 Timothy 1.2. Tit. 1.5, 7.
common unto all the Presbyters) and to yield withal, that such a one was to
be esteemed as a star fixed in no other firmament, then in the right hand of
Christ.

To salve this therefore; all the stars in every Church must be presupposed
to be of one magnitude, and though those stars which typified these Angels
are said to be but seven, yet the Angels themselves must be maintained to be
far more in number: and in fine, where our Savior says, Revel. 2.1.
unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write; it must by no means be
admitted, that Nec uni ali cui Angelo mittuntur, sed toti (ut ita dicam)
Collegio Pastorum; qui omnes hac communi voce comprehenduntur. Non enim unus
erat Angelus Ephesi, sed plures: nec inter istos ali quis Princeps. Brightman.
in Apocalypse. 2.1.
any one Angel should be meant hereby, but the whole College of Pastors
rather. And all upon pretense of a poor show of some shallow reasons; that
there was not one Angel of Ephesus but many, and among them not any Principal.

Which wresting of the plain words of our Savior is so extreme violent; that
M. Beza (though every way as zealously affected to the advancement of the new
Discipline, as was the other) could by no means digest it: but ingenuously
acknowledges the meaning of our Lords direction to have been this. (...), id
est, (...). Quem nimirum oportuit inprimis de his rebus admoneri, ac per eum
caeteros Collegas, totamque adeo Ecclesiam. Bez. in Apocalypse. 2:1.
To the Angel, that is, to the President as whom it behooved specially to be
admonished touching those matters; and by him both the rest of his colleagues,
and the whole Church likewise. And that there was then a standing President
over the rest of the Pastors of Ephesus, and he the very same (as learned
Conference with Heart, c. 8, divis. 3.
Doctor Rainolds adds) with him whom afterward the Fathers called Bishop: may
further be made manifest, not only by the succession of the first Bishops of
that Church, but also by the clear testimony of Ignatius; who (within no
greater compass of time then twelve years afterward) distinguishes the
singular and constant President thereof, from the rest of the number of the
Presbyters, by appropriating the name of Bishop unto him.

As for the former: we find it openly declared in the general Council of
Chalcedon, by Leontius Bishop of Magnesia; that (...) Council. Chalcedon. Act.
11.
from Timothy (and so from the days of the Apostles) there had been a
continued succession of seven and twenty Bishops; all of them ordained in
Ephesus. Of which number the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, mentioned in the
Revelation, must needs be one: whether it were Timothy himself, as some
conceive; or one of his next Successors, as others rather do imagine.

Vid. Peter. in Apocalypse. cap. 2. disp. 2. Alcasar. Prooem. in cap. 2. and 3.
Apocal. notat. 1. and Petr. Halloix. Notat. in vit. Polycarp. cap. 7.
For that Timothy had been sometime Notandum est ex hoc loco, Timotheum in
Ephesino Presbyterio tum fuisse (...) (i. e. antistitem) ut vocat Justinus.
Bez. Annotat. in 1. Tim. 5.19.
the (...) (which is the appellation that Qui politiae causa reliquis fratribus
in coetu praeerat (quem Justinus (...) vocat) peculiariter dici Episcopus
coepit. Id. in Philip. 1.1.
Justin Martyr, in his second Apology for Christians, and Dionys. Corinth. in
epist. ad Athenienses, eodem sensu Publium martyrem nominat (...), quo proximum
ejus successorem Quadratum (...), apud Euscbium, lib. 4. histor. (...):
Dionysius of Corinth not long after him, in his epistle to the Church of
Athens, and (...). Marcell. Ancyran. apud Epiphanium, haeres 72.
Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra in his letters to Julius Bishop of Rome, do give
unto a Bishop) or Antistes, or President of the Ephesine Presbytery, is
confessed by Beza himself: and that he was ordained the first Bishop of the
Church of the Ephesians, we do not only read in the subscription of the
second Epistle to Timothy, and the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius. Hist.
lib. 3. (...).
Eusebius, but also in two ancient Treatises concerning the Martyrdom of
Timothy; the one namelesse in the Library of (...). and post. (...). Phot.
Bibliot, number. 254.
Photius, the other bearing the name of Polycrat. de Martyrio Timothei: inter
Vitas Sanctorum edit. Lovanii anno 1485.
Polycrates. even of that Polycrates, who was not only himself Bishop of this
Church of Ephesus, but borne also within six or seven and thirty years after
S. John wrote the forenamed Epistle unto the Angel of that Church: as it
appears by the years he was of, when he wrote that Epistle unto Victor
Bishop of Rome, wherein he makes mention of (...). Polycrat. Epist. ad
Victorem: apud Eusebius. l. 5. Hist. (...).
seven kinsmen of his who had been Bishops; he himself being the eight.

I come now to the testimony of Ignatius: whom Theodoret. in Dialogo 1. sive
(...).
Theodoret, and Felix III. in Epist. ad Zenonem Imp. recitat in V Synodo
Constantinopol. Act. 1. (tomo 2. Concilior. page 22^. edit. B^nnii. anno. 1606.)
Felix Bishop of Rome, and Johan. Malela Antiochenus, Chronic, lib. 10 M S.
John the Chronographer of Antioch, report to have been ordained Bishop of
Antioch by S. Peter in special, Chrysostom (who was a Presbyter of the same
Church) by (...). Jo. Chrysostom. in Ignatii Encomio.
the Apostles in general; and without all controversy did sit in that See,
the very same time wherein that Epistle unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus
was commanded to be written.

In the I Will of Patmos had S. John his Revelation manifested unto him, (...).
Iren advers. haeres. lib. 5. cap. 30.
toward the end of the Empire of Domitian, as Irenaeus testifies; or the
fourteenth year of his government, as Eusebius. Chron. Hier. Catal. scriptor.
Ecclesiast. in Johanne.
Eusebius and Hierome specify it. From thence there are but twelve years
reckoned unto the tenth of Trajan: wherein Ignatius, in that last journey which
he made for the consummation of his glorious Martyrdom at Rome, wrote another
Epistle unto the selfsame Church of Ephesus. In which he makes mention of
their then Bishop Onesimus: as it appears both by Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. (...).
Eusebius citing this out of it, and by the Epistle it self yet extant.

In this Epistle to the Ephesians, Ignatius having acknowledged that their
(...). Ignat. epist. ad Ephesians.
numerous multitude was received by him in the person of their Bishop Onesimus,
and (...) Ibid.
blessed God for granting unto them such a Bishop as he was: does afterward
put them in mind of their (...). Ibid.
duty in concurring with him, as he shows their worthy Presbytery did, being
(...). Ibid.
so conjoined (as he says) with their Bishop, as the strings are with the
Harp: and toward the end exhorts them to (...). Ibid.
obey both the Bishop and the Presbytery, with an undivided mind.

In the same journey wrote Ignatius also an Epistle unto the Church of Smyrna,
another of the seven, unto whom those letters are directed in S. John's
Revelation. wherein he also (...). Id. in epist. ad Smyrn
saluteth their Bishop and Presbytery: exhorting all the people to (...). Ibid.
follow their Bishop, as Christ Jesus did his Father, and the Presbytery, as
the Apostles; and telling them that (...), etc. Ibid.
no man ought either to administer the Sacraments, or do any thing
appertaining to the Church, without the consent of the Bishop.

Who this Bishop, and what that Presbytery was; appears by another Epistle
written a little after from Smyrna, by (...). Polycarp. epist. ad Philippens.
Polycarpus and the Presbyters that were with him, unto the Philippians. And
that the same Polycarpus was then also Bishop there, when S. John wrote unto
the Angel of the Church of Smyrna; who can better inform us then Irenaeus? who
did not only know those worthy men, (...). Iren. advers. haeres. lib. 3. cap.
3.
who succeeded Polycarpus in his See; but also Id. in epist. ad Florinum: (apud
Eusebius. lib 5. (...).) and ad Victorem, (ibid (...))
was present, when he himself did discourse of his conversation with S. John,
and of those things which he heard from those who had seen our Lord Jesus.

Polycarpus, (...) Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. Vid. and Eus b. lib. 3. hist. (...).
says he, was not only taught by the Apostles and conversed with many of those
that had seen Christ, but also was by the Apostles constituted in Asia Bishop
of the Church which is in Smyrna: whom we our selves also did see in our
younger age, for he continued long: and being very aged, he most gloriously and
nobly suffering Martyrdom departed this life.

Now being ordained Bishop of Smyrna by the Apostles; who had finished their
course, and departed out of this life before S. John (the last surviver of
them) did write his Revelation: who but he could there be meant by the Angel
of the Church in Smyrna? in which that he still held his Episcopal office unto
the time of his Martyrdom (which fell out LXXIV. years afterward) may
sufficiently appear by this testimony, which the brethren of the Church of
Smyrna, who were present at his suffering, gave unto him. (...). Smyrnens
Eccles epist. de martyrio Polycarpi. Eusebius. lib. 4. hist. (...).
He was the most admirable man in our times, an Apostolical and Prophetical
Doctor, and Bishop of the Catholic Church which is in Smyrna. Whereunto we may
add the like of Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, who lived also in his time and
in his neighborhood, affirming (...). Polycrat. epist. ad Victorem: apud
Eusebius. lib. 5. hist. (...).
Polycarpus to have been both Bishop and Martyr in Smyrna. So says he in his
Synodicall Epistle, directed unto Victor Bishop of Rome, about 27 years after
the Martyrdom of Polycarpus; he himself being at that time 65 years of age.

About the very same time wherein Polycrates wrote this Epistle unto Victor,
did Tertullian publish his book of Prescriptions against Heretics: wherein he
avoucheth against them, that Sicut Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia Polycarpum ab Johanne
conlocatum resert, sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro ordinatum edit: proinde (
ot. perinde) utique and caeterae exhibent quos, ab Apostelis in Episcopatum
constitutos, Apostolici seminis traduces habent. Tertul. de Praescript. cap.
32. Vid. and ejusd. lib. 4 contra Marcion. cap. 5.
as the Church of Smyrna had Polycarpus placed there by John, and the Church of
Rome Clement ordained by Peter; so the rest of the Churches also did show, what
Bishops they had received by the appointment of the Apostles, to traduce the
Apostolical seed unto them. And so before him did Irenaeus urge against them
Successiones Episcoporum, quibus Apostolicam quae in unoquoque loco est
Ecclesiam tradiderunt. Iren. lib. 4. advers. haeres. cap. 63.
the successions of Bishops, unto whom the Apostles committed the charge of the
Church in every place. Omnes enim ii valde posteriores sunt quam Episcopi,
quibus Apostoli tradiderunt Ecclesias. Id lib. 5. cap. 20.
For all the Heretics (says he) are much later then those Bishops, unto whom
the Apostles committed the Churches. And, Habemus annumerare eos qui ab
Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis, and successores eorum usque ad
nos; qui nihil tale docuerunt, neque cognoverunt quale ab his deliratur. Id.
lib. 3. cap. 3.
we are able to number those who by the Apostles were ordained Bishops in the
Churches, and their Successors unto our days; who neither taught nor knew any
such thing as these men dream of.

For proof whereof, he brings in the succession of the Bishops of Rome, from
(...). Id. ibid.
Linus (unto whom the blessed Apostles committed that Episcopacy) and Anacletus
(by others called Cletus) and Clement (who did both see the Apostles, and
conferred with them) unto (...). Ibid.
Eleutherius; who when Irenaeus wrote, had the charge of that Bishopric in the
twelfth place after the Apostles. Concerning whom, and the integrity which then
continued in each other succession from the Apostles days, Hegesippus, who at
the same time published his History of the Church, says thus. (...). Hegesip.
apud Eusebius. lib. 4. hist. (...).
Soter succeeded Anicetus, and after him was Eleutherius. Now, in every
succession, and in every City, all things so stand, as the Law and the Prophets
and our Lord do preach.

And more particularly concerning the Church of Corinth, (...) (ita enim ex MS.
legendum, non (...). Eusebius. lib. 4. histor. (...). cum lib. 3. (...).
after he had spoken of the Epistle written unto them by Clement, for the
repressing of some factions wherewith they were at that time much troubled
(which gave him occasion to tell them that (...). Clem. epist. ad Corinth. page
57. edit. D. Patricii Junii.
the Apostles, of whom he himself was an hearer, had perfect intelligence from
our Lord Jesus Christ, of the contention that should arise about the name of
Episcopacy) he declares, that after the appeasing of this tumult, (...) (ita
MS. non (...). Hegesip. apud Eusebius. lib. 4. (...).
the Church of the Corinthians continued in the right way, until the days of
Primus, whom he did visit in his sailing toward Rome. Which Primus had for his
successor that famous Dionysius, whose Epistle to the Church of the Athenians
has been before nominated; wherein he put them in mind of Dionys. Corinth.
apud eund. Eusebius. lib 3. (...). and lib. 4. (...).
the first Bishop that had been placed over them, even Dionysius the
Areopagite, Act. 17.34.
S. Paul's own convert. a thing whereof they could at that time have no more
cause to doubt, then we should have, if any question were now made of the
Bishops that were here in King Edward the VI. or Queen Maryes days: I might
also say, in the middle of the reign of Queen Elizabeth her self; if with
Baron. Annal. tom. 2. ann. 120.
Baronius I would produce the Areopagites life unto the government of the
Emperor Hadrian.

This Hegesippus, living next after the first succession of the Apostles (as
Eusebius. lib. 2. (...) ( non, ut vulgo legitur, (...)) (...). Egesippus qui post
ipsas statim primas Apostolorum successiones fuit: ut Rufinus locum expressit.
Eusebius notes) and being himself a Christian Eusebius. lib. 4. (...). fin.
of the race of the Hebrews; was careful to record unto posterity the state
of the Church of Jerusalem in the days of the Apostles, and the alteration
that followed after their departure out of this life. Where first he shows,
that (...). Hegesipp Commentarior. lib. 5. apud eund. Eusebius. lib. 2. (...).
James the brother of our Lord, surnamed the Just, did govern that Church
together with the Apostles: yet so (as Clem. in libro 6o. Hypotyposeon: ubi nar
rat, (...). apud eund. l 2. (...).
Clement of Alexandria, who wrote some twenty years after him, further adds)
that he had this preferment even before the three prime Apostles, Peter and the
two sons of Zebedee (James and John) to be chosen the peculiar Bishop of
Jerusalem, the then mother Church of the world.

After the death of James the Just, Apud Eusebius. lib. 4. (...). Vid eund lib 3.
(...). and (...).
Hegesipp. declares that Symeon the son of Clopas or Cleophas was
constituted Bishop, and so continued until the days of the Emperor Trajan:
under whom he suffered a glorious Martyrdom (about the same time that Ignatius
did) being then an hundred and twenty years of age; and by that account borne
before the Incarnation of our blessed Savior. Where, the observation of this
prime Historian is not to be passed over: that (...). Hegisipp. apud eund. lib.
3. (...).
until these times the Church was called a Virgin; as being not yet corrupted
with the overspreading of heretical doctrine. For howsoever heresies did
spring up before, yet they were so kept down by the authority of the Apostles
and the Disciples who had heard our Lord himself preach; that the authors and
fautors thereof were not able to get any great head, being forced (by the
authority of such opposites) to lurk in obscurity.

But as soon as all that generation was gathered unto their fathers, and none
of those were left who had the happiness to hear the gracious words that
proceeded from the Lords own mouth: the Heretics, taking that advantage,
began to enter into a kind of combination, and with open face publicly to
maintain the (...). 1. Tim. 6.20.
oppositions of their science falsely so called (from whence they assumed unto
themselves the name of Gnostics, or men of knowledge) against the preaching of
that truth, which by those who were Luke 1.2.
eyewitnesses and ministers of the Word had been Jude, verse. 3.
ONCE delivered unto the Saints. (...). Hegesipp. apud Eusebius. lib. 4. (...).
The first beginner of which conspiracy was one Thebuthis: who had at the first
been bred in one of the seven sects, into which the people of the Jews were
in those days divided; but afterward, because he missed of a Bishopric unto
which he had aspired, (this of Jerusalem, as it may seem; whereunto Iustus,
after the death of Symeon, was preferred before him) could think of no readyer
a way thoroughly to revenge himself of this disgrace, then by raising up the
like distractions among the Christians. Which as, in the effect, it shows the
malignity of that ambitious Sectary; so does it, in the occasion, discover
withal the great esteem that in those early days was had of Episcopacy.

When Hegesippus wrote this Ecclesiastical history (the ancientest of any,
since the Acts of the Apostles) Eleutherius as we heard before, was Bishop of
the Church of Rome: unto whom. Misit ad eum Lucius Britannorum Rex epistolam:
obsecrans ut per ejus mandatum Christianus efficeretur. Et mox effectum piae
postulationis consecutus est: susceptamque fidem Britanni usque in tempora
Diocletiam Principis inviolatam integramque quieta pace servabant. Bed. hist.
ecclesiast. Anglor. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Lucius King of the Britains (as our Bid relates) sent an Epistle; desiring
that by his means he might be made Christian. Who presently obtained the
effect of his pious request: and the Britains kept the faith then received
sound and undefiled in quiet peace, until the times of Dioclesian the
Emperor. By whose bloody persecution the faith and discipline of our British
Churches was not yet so quite extinguished; but that within ten years after
(and eleven before the first general Council of Nice) three of our Bishops
were present and subscribed unto the Council of Arles: Tom. 1. Concilior,
Galliae, a Sirmondo edit. page 9.
Eborius of York, Restitutus of London, and Adelsius of Colchester; if that be
it, which is called there Colonia Londinensium. The first root of whose
succession we must fetch beyond Eleutherius, and as high as S. Peter himself:
if it be true, that he (...). Metaphrast. Commentar. de Petro and Paulo ad diem
29. Junii.
constituted Churches here, and ordained Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons in
them; as Symeon Metaphrastes relates out of some part of (...). Ibid.
Eusebius (as it seems) that is not come unto our hands.

But, to return unto the Angels of the seven Churches, mentioned in the
Revelation of S. John: by what has been said, it is apparent, that seven
singular Bishops, who were the constant Presidents over those Churches, are
pointed at under that name. For other sure they could not be; if all of them
were cast into one mould, and were of the same quality with Polycarpus, the
then Angel of the Church in Smyrna: who without all question was such, if any
credit may be given herein unto those that saw him and were well acquainted
with him.

And as Tertullian in express terms affirms him to have been placed there
by S. John himself (in the testimony before alleged out of his Tertull.
Praescript. c. 32. Similiter and Hieronymus in Catal. script. Ecclesiast. cap.
17. in Polycarpo; and Nicephorus, lib. 3. Hist. Ecclesiast. cap. 2.
Prescriptions:) so does he elsewhere, from the order of the succeeding
Bishops, not obscurely intimate, that the rest of that number were to be
referred unto the same descent. Habemus and Johannis alumnas Ecclesias. Nam et
si Apocalypsim ejus Marcion respuit; ordo tamen Episcoporum ad originem
recensus, in Johannem stabit auctorem. Sic and caeterarum generosit as
recognoscitur. Tertullian, advers. Marcion. lib. 4. c. 5.
We have, says he, the Churches that were bred by John. For although Marcion
do reject his Revelation; yet the order of the Bishops reckoned up unto their
original, will stand for John to be their Founder.

Neither does the ancient Writer of the Martyrdom of Timothy (mentioned by
Photius) mean any other by those seven Bishops, whose assistance he says S.
John did use, after his return from Patmos, in the government of the
Metropolis of the Ephesians. For (...). Phot. Bibliothec. number. 254.
being revoked from his exile, says he, by the sentence of Nerva, he betook
himself to the Metropolis of Ephesus; and being assisted with the presence of
SEVEN Bishops, he took upon him the government of the Metropolis of the
Ephesians: and continued, preaching the word of piety, until the Empire of
Trajan.

That he remained with the Ephesians and the rest of the brethren of Asia,
until the days of Trajan, and that during the time of his abode with them, he
published his Gospel; is sufficiently witnessed by Irenaeus advers. haeres. l.
2. cap. 39. item. lib. 3. c. 1. and 3.
Irenaeus. That upon his return from the Island, after the death of Domitian,
he applied himself to the government of the Churches of Asia, is confirmed
likewise both by Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. (...).
Eusebius, and by Hieronym. in Catal. script. Ecclesiast. c. 9.
Hierom: who further adds, that Id. ibid. and Praefat. in Evangel. Matthaei.
at the earnest entreaty of the Bishops of Asia he wrote there his Gospel.

And that he himself also, being free from his banishment, did ordain Bishops
in diverse Churches, is clearly testified by Clement of Alexandria; who lived
in the next age after, and delivers it as a certain truth, which he had
received from those who went before him, and could not be far from the time
wherein the thing it self was acted. (...). Clem. Alexandrin. in lib de divite
salvando. (qui falso Origenis nomine habetur editus, ad catcem tomi 3.
Commentariorum Michaelis Ghislerii.) Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. (...).
When S. John (says he) Domitian the Tyrant being dead, removed from the Island
of Patmos unto Ephesus, by the entreaty of some he went also unto the
neghbouring nations; in some places constituting Bishops, in others founding
whole Churches.

Among these neighboring Churches was that of Hierapolis: which had Papias
placed Eusebius. lib 3. hist. (...). Hieron. Catal script. Ecclesiast. cap. 18.
and Chronic. ad ann Trajani 2:
Bishop therein. That this man was (...). Irenaeus advers. haeres lib. 5. cap.
33.
a hearer of S. John, and a companion of Polycarpus, is testified by his own
Scholar Irenaeus, vir Apostolicorum temporum and Papiae auditoris Evangelistae
Johannis discipulus, Episcopus ecclesiae Lugdunensis. Hieronym. epist. 29. ad
Theodoram.
Irenaeus: and that he conversed with Hi sunt Presbyteri Apostolorum discipuli;
quorum Irenaeus, lib. 5. cap. 36. meminit.
the disciples of the Apostles, and of Christ also; he himself does thus
declare, in the Proeme of the five books which he entitled, A declaration of
the words of the Lord. (...) (ita enim ex Graecis M^^. and vetere Ro^^ versione
locus est restituendus.) (...). Papias, in Pro^emio (...), apud Eusebius. lib. 3.
hist. (...).
If upon occasion any of the Presbyters which had accompanied the Apostles did
come; I diligently enquired what were the speeches which the Apostles used.
what Andrew or what Peter did say, or what Philip, or Thomas, or James, or
John, or Matthew, or some other of the disciples of the Lord; and the things
that Aristion and John the Elder, our Lords disciples, did speak (...). Eusebius.
Ibid.
. The two last of whom he often cited by name in the process of the work;
relating the passages in this kind which he had heard from them.

Neither can any man be so simple as to imagine, that in the language of
Clemens Alexandrinus the name of a Bishop should import no more then a bare
Presbyter: if he consider, that not the (...) Clem. Alexandr. Paedagog. lib. 3.
cap. ult.
difference only betwixt Presbyters, Bishops and Deacons is by him
acknowledged; but further also, that the disposition of their three offices, in
his judgment, does carry with it (...). Id. Stromat. lib. 6.
an imitation of the Angelical glory, to say nothing of the Emperor Hadrian:
who, hard upon the time of the forenamed Papias, writing unto the Consul
Servianus touching the state of things in Egypt, makes distinct mention in
his letter of Nemo Christianorum Presbyter. Hadrian. epist. ad Scivian. apud
Fl. Vopisc. in vita Saturnini.
the Presbyters of the Christians, and of those Qui se Christi Episcopos
dicunt. Id. ibid.
who call themselves the Bishops of Christ.

And thus having deduced Episcopacy from the Apostolical times; and declared,
that the Angels of the seven Churches were no other, but such as in the next
age after the Apostles were by the Fathers termed Bishops: we are now further
to enquire, why these Churches are confined unto the number of seven, in the
superscription of that Apostolical Epistle prefixed before the book of the
Revelation. Revel. 1.4.
John to the seven Churches in Asia: Grace be unto you and peace. where S. John
directing his letters unto them thus indefinitly, without any mention of their
particular names; cannot by common intendment be conceived to have understood
any other thereby, but such as by some degree of eminency were distinguishable
from all the rest of the Churches that were in Asia, and in some sort also did
comprehend all the rest under them.

For taking Asia here in that stricter sense, wherein the New Testament uses
it, as denoting the Lydian Asia alone (of the circuit whereof I have treated
Disquisit. touching the Asia pro^^^ so calls (...) chap. 2. (...)
elsewhere more particularly:) it is not to be imagined, that after so long
pains taken by the Apostles and their disciples in the husbanding of that part
of the Lords vineyard, there should be found no more but seven Churches
therein. especially since S. Paul that 1. Cor. (...)
wise master builder professes, that he had here 1. Co^. ^. 8, 9.
a great door and effectual opened unto him: and S. Luke testifies
accordingly, that Act. 1.20.
all they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and
Greeks; so mightily grew the Word of God and prevailed. Which extraordinary
blessing of God upon his labors, moved the Apostle to make his residence Act.
2 31.
in those parts for the space of three years: wherein he ceased not to warn
every one night and day with tears.

So that in all reason we are to suppose, that these seven Churches (comprising
all the rest within them) were not bare Parochial ones, or so many particular
congregations; but Diocesan Churches (as we use to call them) if not
Metropoliticall rather. For that in Plin. (...) 5 hist. nat^^ cap. 29.
Laodicea, Sardis, Smyrna, Ephesus and Id. ibid. c. 30.
Pergamus, the Roman governors held their Courts of justice, to which all the
cities and towns about had recourse for the ending of their suites; is noted
by Pliny. And besides these (which were the greatest) Thyatira is also by
Ptolem. Geograph. lib. 5.
Ptolemy expressly named a Metropolis: as Philadelphia also is, in the Council.
Constantinop. sub Mena, Act. 5.
Greek Acts of the Council of Constantinople held under Menas. Which gives us
good ground to conceive, that the seven Cities, in which these seven Churches
had their seat, were all of them Metropoliticall, and so had relation unto the
rest of the towns and Cities of Asia, as unto daughters rising under them.

This Lydian Asia was separated from Caria by the river Maeander: upon the
banks whereof Magnesia and Trallis were seated, to the Christians whereof
Ignatius directed two of his epistles; wherein he makes mention of Damas
Bishop of the one Church, and Polybius Bishop (or (...). Eusebius. lib. 3 hist.
(...).
Ruler, as Eusebius calls him) of the other, whom they had sent to visit him
at Smyrna. adding withal in that to the Trallians, his usual admonitions.
(...). Ignat. epist. ad Trallian.
Be subject to the Bishop, as to the Lord: and (...). Ibid.
to the Presbytery, as to the Apostles of Jesus Christ our hope. (...). Ibid.
He that does any thing without the Bishop and the Presbyters and the Deacons,
such a one is defiled in conscience. (...). etc. Ibid.
Fare ye well in Jesus Christ; being subject to the Bishop, and likewise to
the Presbyters.

Wherein we may note, that within twelve years after mention of the seven
Churches made in the Apocalypse (for then, as has been showed, were these
epistles of Ignatius written) other Episcopal cities are found in the same
Lydian Asia: and two such, as in after times are well known to have been Ordo
Metropolitar. in Append. Geograph. sacr. Caroli a S. Paulo, page 11. and in
tomo 1. Juris Graeco-Romani, a Jo. Leunclavio edit. page 90.
under the government of the Metropolitan of Ephesus. But whether this
subordination were as ancient as the days of Ignatius (whose Epistles are
extant unto these three Churches) and Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. (...).
Damas the then Bishop of Magnesia, with Polybius of Trallis, were at that time
subject to Onesimus the Bishop of Ephesus, might well be doubted: but that the
same Ignatius directs one of his Epistles unto the Church (...). Ignat.
epist. ad. Roman.
which had presidency in the place of the Region of the Romans; and in the body
thereof does attribute unto himself the title of the Bishop of Syria. Whereby,
as he intimates himself to have been not only the Bishop of Antioch, but
also of the rest of the province of Syria, which was under that Metropolis: so
does he likewise not obscurely signify that the Bishop of Rome had at that
time a presidency over the Churches that were in the Ex Vrbicaria Regione. Cod.
Theod. lib. 11. tit. 2. leg. 3.
Vrbicarian Region, as the Imperial Constitutions, or the Ex Provincia Romana,
civitate Portuen. etc. In nominibus quae Concilio Arelatensi I. praesixa
leguntur.
Roman Province, as the Acts of the first Council of Arles call it.

What that Vrbicarian Region was, I will not now stand to discuss: whether
Tuscia only, wherein Rome it self was situated (which in the days of
Ignatius was one entire region, but afterward divided into Tuscia Suburbicaria
and Annonaria) or the territory wherein the Praefectus Vrbis did exercise his
jurisdiction (which was confined within the compass of a hundred miles about
the City) or, with that, those other provinces also whereunto the authority of
the Vicarius Vrbis did extend; or lastly the circuit within which those 69
Bishoprics were contained that Insuper praeter septem collaterales Episcopos
erant alii Episcopi, qui dicuntur suffraganei Romani Pontificis, nulli alii
Primati vel Archiepiscopo subjecti; qui frequenter ad Synodos vocarentur. MS.
Vatican. apud Baron. ann. 1057.. 23.
were immediately subject to the Bishop of Rome, and frequently called to his
Synods; the names whereof are found registered in the Records of that Church.
The antiquity of which number as it may in some sort receive confirmation from
the Roman Synod of seventy Bishops held under Gelasius: so for the distinction
of the Bishops which belonged to the city of Rome, from those that appertained
to Italy, we have a far more ancient testimony from the Edict of the Emperor
Aurelian; who in the controversy that arose betwixt Paulus Samosatenus and
Domnus for the house which belonged unto the Church of Antioch, commanded that
it should be delivered to them, (...): says Nicephorus Callist. lib. 6. Hist.
cap. 29. but Eusebius. lib. 7. (...). more fully. (...).
to whom the Bishops of Italy and Rome should by their letters declare that it
ought to be given. which distinction, as well in the forecited Ex Provincia
Italiae, civitate Mediolanen. etc. Ex Provincia Romana, civitate Portuen. ut
supra.
Acts of the Council of Arles, as in the Epistles of the (...). Synod. Sardic.
epist. ad Alexandrin. in 2. Athanasi^ Apologia (tomo 1. Oper. edit. Commelin.
page 588.)
Sardican Synod and (...). Athanas. epist. ad solitar. vlt. agentes. (ibid.
page 640.)
Athanasius, may likewise be observed: the name of Italy being in a more strict
sense applied therein to the seven Provinces, which were under the Civil
jurisdiction of the Vicarius or Lieutenant of Italy, and the Ecclesiastical of
the Bishop of Millaine.

And it is well worth the observing, that the Fathers of the great Council of
Nice afterward confirming this kind of primacy, in the Bishops of Alexandria,
Rome and Antioch, and (...). Council. Nicaen. 1. Can. 6.
in the Metropolitans of other Provinces; do make their entrance into that
Canon with (...). Let the ANCIENT customs continue. Which as it clears the
antiquity of the Metropoliticall jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome; so does it
likewise confirm the opinion of those, who conceive the Metropolitan of
Alexandria to be meant in that passage of the Emperor Hadrians epistle unto
Servianus. Ipse ille Patriarcha quum Aegyptum venerit, ab aliis Serapidem
adorare, ab aliis cogitur Christum, Hadrian. epist. ad Servian. apud Vopisc. in
Saturnino.
Even the very Patriarch himself, when he comes into Egypt, is by some
compelled to adore Serapis, and by others to worship Christ. as if, upon his
returning into Egypt, either from his visitation of Lybia and Pentapolis
(which this same Nicene Canon shows to have of old belonged unto his care) or
from his flight in that present time of persecution; he should suffer this
distraction: the heathen laboring to compel him to the worship of Serapis,
and his own Christian flock on the other side striving to keep him constant
in the service of Christ. For that either the Heathen had will, or the
Christians power at that time to force the Jewish Patriarch (of whom some do
understand the place) to the adoration of Christ; has no manner of probability
in it.

That part also of the Canon, which ratifieth the ancient rights of
Metropolitans of all other Provinces, may serve to open unto us the meaning of
that complaint which, some threescore and ten years before the time of this
Synod, S. Cyprian made against Novatianus; for the confusion which by his
schism he brought upon the Churches of God: that Cum jampridem per omnes
provincias, and per urbes singulas, ordinati sint Episcopi in aetate antiqui,
in fide integri, in pressura probati, in persecutione proscripti; ille super,
eos creare alios pseudo-episcopos audeat. Cyprian. epist. 52.
whereas long since in all Provinces, and in all Cities, Bishops had been
ordained, in age ancient, sound in faith, tried in affliction, proscribed in
persecution; yet took he the boldness to create other false Bishops over
their heads. namely, subordinate Bishops in every City, and Metropolitans in
every Province.

In Afric at that time, although there were many civil Provinces, yet was
there but one Ecclesiastical: whereof Cyprian himself was (...). Council.
Constantinopol. in Trullo, Can. 2.
Archbishop; as the Fathers of the Trullan Synod call him. It pleased, says he
in one of his Epistles, Vniversis Episcopis, vel in nostra provincia vel trans
mare constitutis. Cyprian. epist. 40.
all the Bishops constituted either in our Province or beyond the Sea:
intimating thereby, that all the Bishops which were on his side the Sea did
belong unto one Province. Quoniam latius fusa est nostra provincia; habet etiam
Numidiam and Mauritanias duas sibi cohaerentes. Id. epist. 45.
For our Province, says he in another place, is spread more largely; having
Numidia also, and both the Mauritaniaes, annexed unto it. Whence that great
Council assembled by him for determining the question touching the baptizing
of those that had been baptized by Heretics, is said to be gathered Ex
provincia Africa, Numidia, Mauritania. Council. Cypriani.
out of the Province of Africa, Numidia and Mauritania. For howsoever in the
civil government, the Proconsular Africa (wherein Carthage was seated) Numidia
and both the Mauritanies (Sitifensis and Caesariensis) were accounted three
distinct Provinces: yet in the Ecclesiastical administration they were joined
together and made but one Province, immediately subject to the Metropoliticall
jurisdiction of the prime See of Carthage.

Some threescore years before this African Council was held by Cyprian, those
other Provincial Synods were assembled by the Metropolitans of sundry nations,
for the composing of the Paschall controversy, then hotly pursued: and among
the rest, that in our neighbor country, out of (...). Eusebius. histor. lib. 5.
(...).
the Parishes (for so, in the ancient language of the Church, those precincts
were named, which now we call Dioceses) of which Irenaeus had the
superintendency; whence also he wrote that free Epistle unto Victor Bishop of
Rome, (...). Ibid. (...).
in the person of those brethren over whom he was president. at which time (and
before) the (...). Ibid (...)
most famous Metropoles of that country, and so the (...). Id. ibid.
most eminent Churches therein, were Lions and Vienna; in the one whereof
Irenaeus (...). Theodoret. in (...).
was then no less renowned a Prelat, then Cyprian was afterward in Africa.

Dionysius the famous Bishop of Corinth, was elder then they: who among many
other Epistles, directed one (...). Id. lib. 4 (...).
to the Church of Gortyna, and all the rest of the Churches of Crete; wherein
he saluted their Bishop Philip. whereby it appears, that at that time, as well
as in the ages following, Subscript. Council Chalcedon. Act. 6. and Council.
Constantinop. sub Mena Act. 5. and Synodi V. general. Constantinop. Collat. 8.
Gortyna was the Metropolis, and the Bishop thereof the Metropolitan of all the
rest of that whole Island. Which kind of superintendency there, Eusebius (the
ancientest Ecclesiastical Historian now extant) deriveth from the very times
of Titus; whom, out of the histories that were before his time, he relates to
have held (...). Id. lib. 3. (...).
the Bishopric of the Churches in Crete. With whom the Grecians of after times
do fully concur: as appears both by the subscription annexed by them unto
the Epistle of S. Paul (...).
to Titus, ordained (as there they say) the first Bishop of the Church of the
Cretians; and by the argument prefixed by them before the same, speaking of him
to the same effect. that (...). Theodoret. argument. epist. ad Tit. in
Oecumento.
he was by Paul ordained Bishop of that great country, and had commission to
ordain the Bishops that were under him. which they gather out of those words
of S. Paul unto him. Tit. 1.5.
For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed
thee. Out of which M. Calvin collecteth this doctrine unto us for the general.
Discimus ex hoc loco, non eam fuisse tunc aequalitatem inter Ecclesiae
ministros quin unus aliquis autoritate and consilio praeesset. Calvin. in Tit.
1.5.
We learn out of this place, that there was not then such an equality betwixt
the ministers of the Church, but that there was some one who was president over
the rest both in authority and in counsel. and S. Chrysostom, for the
particular of Titus. (...). Chrysostom. in Tit. 1. Honul. 1.
Had he not been an approved man, he would not have committed that whole Island
unto him: he would not have commanded him to supply the things that were
defective; he would not have committed unto him the judgment of so many
Bishops, if he had not had very great confidence in the man, and Bishop Jewel
upon him again. Having the government of many Bishops; what may we call him
but an Archbishop?

Which is not so much to be wondered at, when we see that the Bishops of another
Island stick not (and that without any control) to deduce the ordination of
their Metropolitan from the Apostolic times, in the face of the whole general
Council of Ephesus. For whereas the Patriarch of Antioch did claim an
interest in the ordaining of the Metropolitan of Cyprus: the Bishops of that
Island prescribed to the contrary, that A sanctis Apostolis nunquam possunt
ostendere quod adfuerit Antiochenus and ordinaverit, vel communicaverit unquam
insulae ordinationis gratiam, neque alius quisquam Council. Ephesians in. Act 7.
from the time of the holy Apostles it could never be showed, that the Bishop
of Antioch was ever present at any such ordination, or did ever communicate the
grace of ordination to that Island; and that the former Bishops of Constantia
(the Metropolis of Cyprus) Troilus, Sabinus, Epiphanius, Et nunc memorati
Episcopi, and qui a sanctis Apostolis erant omnes orthodoxi, ab his qui in
Cypro constituti sunt. Ibid.
and all the holy and orthodoxe Bishops which were before them, ever since the
holy Apostles, were constituted by those which were in Cyprus. and therefore
desired that Sicut initio a temporibus Apostolorum and constitutionibus and
canonibus sanctissimae and magnae Synodi Nicaenae; illaesa and superior
infidiis and potentia permansit nostra Cypriorum Synodus. Ibid.
as in the beginning from the times of the Apostles, and by the constitutions
and canons of the most holy and great Synod of Nice, the Synod of the Cyprian
Bishops remained untouched and superior to privy underminings and open power;
so they might still be continued in the possession of their ancient right.
Whereupon the Council condemning the attempt of the Bishop of Antioch, as
(...). Ibid.
an innovation brought in against the Ecclesiastical laws and the canons of
the holy Fathers; did not only order, that (...). Ibid.
the governors of the Churches which were in Cyprus should keep their own
right entire and inviolable, according to the Canons of the holy Fathers and
their ancient custom: but also (...). and paulo post. (...). Ibid.
for all other Dioceses and Provinces wheresoever; that no Bishop should
intrude himself into any other Province, which had not formerly and from the
beginning been under him or his predecessors.

The beginning of which kind of subordination of many Bishops unto one chief,
if it were not to be derived from Apostolical right: yet it is by Beza fetched
Neque vero magis existimandum est, hunc externum ordinem juisse initio humani
generis. Pagi enim ex familiis, and ex pagis urbes, and ex urbibus civitates
ipsae, suadente natura and necessitate flagitante, sensim coierunt; aliis
aliorum exemplum sequutis. Bez. de diverse. gradib. ministr. contr. Sarav. cap.
24.. ^.
from the same light of Nature and enforcement of Necessity, whereby men were
at first induced to enter into consociations, subjected one unto another; and
by Bucer acknowledged to have Atque hoc consentiebat legi Christi siebatque ex
jure corporis Christi. M. Bu^er. de vi and usu S. Ministerii. (inter scripta
ejus Anglicana, page ^65.)
been consentaneous to the Law of Christ, and to have been done by the right
of the body of Christ; and by all men must be confessed to be conformable to
the pattern delivered by God unto Moses. For having set apart the three
families of the Levites for his own service, and constituted a chief (as we
have heard) over every of them: he placed immediately over them all, not Aaron
the High Priest, but Eleazar his son, saying. Number. 3.32.
Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, shall be chief over the chief of the
Levites; and have the oversight of them that keep the charge of the Sanctuary.

In respect of which oversight, as he has by the Septuagint (warrantably
enough by the Word of God) given unto him the name of (...). LXX Number. 4.16.
a Bishop: so the Holy Ghost having vouchsafed to honor him with the title of
(...), i^d. Number. 3.32.
(...), the President of the Presidents of of the Levites; none, that without
prejudice did take the matter into consideration, would much stick to afford
unto him the name of an Arch bishop. at least he would be taught hereby, to
retain that reverend opinion of the primitive Bishops of the Christian Church
(who so willingly submitted themselves, not only to the Archiepiscopall, but
also to a Patriarchicall government) which Calvin professed he did: that in all
this, they were far from having a thought, Reperiemus veteres Episcopos non
aliam regendae Ecclesiae formam voluisse fingere ab ea quam Deus verbo suo
praescripsit. Calvin. Institut. lib. 4. cap. 4.. 4.
to devise another form of Church Government, then that which God had
prescribed in his Word.

The VVriters which, in the next age after the Apostles, have here given
testimony for Episcopacy.
IN the XIIIIth year of Domitian, about the XCVth year of our Lord (according
to the vulgar account) S. John wrote his Revelation; and in it, the Epistle
directed by our Savior to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia. No longer
then twelve years after that time, Ignatius (S. John's Scholar) writes his
Letters unto the same Church. In the beginning whereof, he gives this
testimony unto their Bishop; that (...). Ignat. epist. ad Philadelph.
he knew him to have been promoted, not of himself, nor by men, unto that
ministry, pertaining to the public weal of the Church: which is every whit
as much, as if he had called him their Angel. Afterward he tells them, that
there is but (...). Ibid.
one Bishop, joined with the Presbytery and the Deacons: and that he delivered
this, as the voice of God; (...). Ibid.
Take heed unto your Bishop, and to the Presbytery and the Deacons: (...). Id.
ibid. cum Antiocho, Sermon. 124.
calling him to witness, for whom he was bound (and for whom (...) went then
unto his last martyrdom) that he had not this from humane flesh (or from the
mouth of man) but that the Spirit spoke it. Without the Bishop do nothing. So
that from S. John's time, we have this continued succession of witnesses, in the
age next following, for Episcopacy.

In the year: CVII. Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch; where first they were called
Christians. CXXX. Hadrian the Emperor, touching the Bishops of Egypt. CL.
Justin Martyr, from Samaria. CLXIX. The Church of Smyrna. CLXXV. Dionysius,
Bishop of Corinth. CLXXX. Hegesippus, from Judaea. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lions,
near unto us. CXCV. Tertullian, from Africa. Polycrates, Bishop of Ephesus.
CC. Clemens, Presbyter of Alexandria.


The Apostolical Institution of EPISCOPACY; deduced out of the premises, by W.
C.
IF we abstract from Episcopal government all accidentals, and consider only
what is essential and necessary to it; we shall find in it no more but this.
An appointment of one man of eminent sanctity and sufficiency to have the care
of all the Churches, within a certain Precinct or Diocese; and furnishing him
with authority, not absolute or arbitrary, but regulated and bounded by laws,
and moderated by joining to him a convenient number of assisants. To the intent
that all the Churches under him may be provided of good and able Pastors: and
that both of Pastors and people conformity to laws and performance of their
duties may be required, under penalties, not left to discretion, but by law
appointed.

To this kind of government I am not by any particular interest so devoted, as
to think it ought to be maintained, either in opposition to Apostolic
institution, or to the much desired reformation of men's lives, and restoration
of Primitive discipline, or to any law or precept of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: for that were to maintain a means contrary to the end. for obedience
to our Savior is the end for which Church Government is appointed. But if it
may be demonstrated, or made much more probable then the contrary, as I verily
think it may: I. That it is not repugnant to the government settled in and for
the Church by the Apostles. II. That it is as complyable with the reformation
of any evil which we desire to reform either in Church or State, or the
introduction of any good which we desire to introduce, as any other kind of
government: And III. That there is no law, no record of our Savior against it:
then I hope it will not be thought an unreasonable motion, if we humbly desire
those that are in authority, especially the High Court of Parliament, that it
may not be sacrificed to clamor, or overborne by violence: and though (which
God forbid) the greater part of the multitude should cry, Crucify, Crucify,
yet our Governors would be so full of Justice and courage, as not to give it
up until they perfectly understand concerning Episcopacy it self, Quid mali
fecit. I shall speak at this time only of the first of these three points:
That Episcopacy is not repugnant to the government settled in the Church for
perpetuity by the Apostles. Whereof I conceive this which follows as clear a
demonstration, as any thing of this nature is capable of.

That this government was received universally in the Church, either in the
Apostles time, or presently after, is so evident and unquestionable, that the
most learned adversaries of this government do themselves confess it.

Petrus Molinaeus in his book De munere pastorali, purposely written in
defense of the Presbyteriall government, acknowledges: That presently after
the Apostles times, or even in their time (as Ecclesiastical story witnesses)
it was ordained, That in every City one of the Presbytery should be called a
Bishop, who should have preeminence over his Colleagues; to avoid confusion
which often times arises out of equality. And truly this form of government
all Churches every where received.

Theodorus Beza in his Tract De triplici Episcopatus genere, confesses in
effect the same thing. For having distinguished Episcopacy into three kinds,
Divine, Humane, and Satanicall, and attributing to the second (which he calls
Humane, but we maintain and conceive to be Apostolical) not only a priority
of order, but a superiority of power, and authority over other Presbyters,
bounded yet by laws and canons provided against Tyranny: he clearly
professes, that of this kind of Episcopacy is to be understood whatsoever we
read concerning the authority of Bishops or Presidents (as Justin Martyr calls
them) in Ignatius, and other more ancient Writers.

Certainly from To whom two others also from Geneva may be added: Daniel
Chamierus (in Panstratia, tom. 2. lib. 10. cap. 6.. 24) and Nicol. Vedelius
(Exercitat. 3. in epist. Ignatii ad Philadelph. cap. 14. and Exercit. 8. in
epist. ad Mariam, cap. 3.) which is fully also demonstrated, in the former
Treatise, by the testimonies of those who wrote in the very next age after the
Apostles.
these two great defenders of the Presbytery we should never had this free
acknowledgement, so prejudicial to their own pretense, and so advantageous to
their adversaries purpose, had not the evidence of clear and undeniable truth
enforced them to it. It will not therefore be necessary to spend any time in
confuting that uningenuous assertion of the Anonymus Author of the Catalogue
of Testimonies for the equality of Bishops and Presbyters, who affirms, That
their disparity began long after the Apostles times: But we may safely take for
granted that which these two learned Adversaries have confessed; and see,
whether upon this foundation laid by them, we may not by unanswerable reason
raise this superstruction.

That seeing Episcopal Government is confessedly so ancient and so Catholic,
it cannot with reason be denied to be Apostolic. For so great a change, as
between Presbyteriall Government and Episcopal, could not possibly have
prevailed all the world over, in a little time. Had Episcopal Government
been an aberration from, or a corruption of the Government left in the
Churches by the Apostles, it had been very strange, that it should have been
received in any one Church so suddenly, or that it should have prevailed in
all for many Ages after. Variasse debuerat error Ecclesiarum: quod autem apud
omnes unum est, non est erratum, sed traditum. Had the Churches erred, they
would have varied. What therefore is one and the same amongst all, came not
sure by error, but tradition. Thus Tertullian argues very probably from the
consent of the Churches of his time, not long after the Apostles, and that in
matter of opinion much more subject to unobserved alteration. But that in the
frame and substance of the necessary government of the Church, a thing always
in use and practice, there should be so sudden a change as presently after
the Apostles times, and so universal, as received in all the Churches, this is
clearly impossible.

For what universal cause can be assigned or fained of this universal
Apostasy? you will not imagine that the Apostles, all or any of them, made any
decree for this change, when they were living; or left order for it in any Will
or Testament, when they were dying. This were to grant the question. To wit,
that the Apostles, being to leave the government of the Churches themselves,
and either seeing by experience, or foreseeing by the Spirit of God, the
distractions and disorders which would arise from a multitude of equals,
substituted Episcopal government instead of their own. General Counsels to
make a Law for a general change, for many ages there was none. There was no
Christian Emperor, no coercive power over the Church to enforce it. Or if
there had been any, we know no force was equal to the courage of the
Christians of those times. Their lives were then at command (for they had not
then learned to fight for Christ) but their obedience to any thing against his
law was not to be commanded (for they had perfectly learned to dye for him.)
Therefore there was no power then to command this change; or if there had been
any, it had been in vain.

What devise then shall we study, or to what fountain shall we reduce this
strange pretended alteration? Can it enter into our hearts to think, that all
the Presbyters and other Christians then, being the Apostles scholars, could
be generally ignorant of the will of Christ, touching the necessity of a
Presbyteriall government? Or dare we adventure to think them so strangely
wicked all the world over, as against knowledge and conscience to conspire
against it? Imagine the spirit of Diotrephes had entered into some or a great
many of the Presbyters, and possessed them with an ambitious desire of a
forbidden superiority, was it possible they should attempt and atchieve it once
without any opposition or contradiction? and besides that the contagion of this
ambition should spread it self and prevail without stop or control, nay,
without any noise or notice taken of it, through all the Churches in the world;
all the watchmen in the mean time being so fast asleep, and all the dogs so
dumb, that not so much as one should open his mouth against it? But let us
suppose (though it be a horrible untruth) that the Presbyters and people then
were not so good Christians as the Presbyters are now, that they were generally
so negligent to retain the government of Christ's Church commanded by Christ,
which we now are so zealous to restore: yet certainly we must not forget nor
deny that they were men as we are. And if we look upon them but as mere
natural men, yet knowing by experience how hard a thing it is even for policy
armed with power by many attempts and contrivances, and in a long time to gain
upon the liberty of any one people, undoubtedly we shall never entertain so
wild an imagination, as that among all the Christian Presbyteries in the world,
neither conscience of duty, nor love of liberty, nor averseness from pride and
usurpation of others over them, should prevail so much as with any one, to
oppose this pretended universal invasion of the Kingdom of Christ and the
liberty of Christians.

When I shall see therefore all the Fables in the Metamorphosis acted and prove
stories; when I shall see all the Democraties and Aristocraties in the world
lie down and sleep, and awake into Monarchies: then will I begin to believe
that Presbyteriall government, having continued in the Church during the
Apostles times, should presently after, against the Apostles doctrine and the
will of Christ, be whirled about like a scene in a masque, and transformed into
Episcopacy. In the mean time, while these things remain thus incredible, and
in humane reason impossible; I hope I shall have leave to conclude thus.
Episcopal government is acknowledged to have been universally received in the
Church, presently after the Apostles times. Between the Apostles times and
this presently after, there was not time enough for, nor possibility of so
great an alteration. And therefore there was no such alteration as is
pretended. And therefore Episcopacy, being confessed to be so ancient and
Catholic, must be granted also to be Apostolic. Quod erat demonstrandum.

FINIS.

