A MOST EXECRABLE AND BARBAROVS MVRDER done by an East-Indian Devil, or a
Native of Java-Major, in the Road of Bantam, Aboard an English Ship called the
Coster, on the 22. of October last, 1641.

Wherein is showed how the wicked Villain came to the said Ship and hid himself
till it was very dark, and then he mudrdered all the men that were a Board,
except the Cook, and three Boys. And Lastly, how the murderer himself was
justly requited.

Captain William Minor being an eyewitness of this bloody Massacre.

massacre of the men of the Coster

LONDON, Printed for T. Banks, July the 18. 1642.

A MOST EXECRABLE AND BARBAROUS Murder, done by an East-Indian devil, or a
Native of Java-Major in the Road of Bantam, Aboard an English Ship called the
Coster, on the 22. of October last, 1641.
THe Blessings of gracious Favors, Mercies and Bounties (which God has bin
pleased from time to time, to pour upon this our undeserving Nation) are
innumerable and infinite: Of all which happinesses, amongst things Temporal;
the knowledge of Building, Shipping, Skill, Strength Honor and profit of
Navigation is not the least, the glory of God, the propagation of the Gospel,
the discoveries of strange Empires, Kingdoms, and mighty Regions, the
conversition of many Pagans, Heathens, and Infidels, the Exportation and
Importation of native and foreign Commodities, the great increase of
Traffic, the raising of Merchants and Merchandise the great nursery of
Mariners and Seamen, and the strength of this Kingdom. by the multiplicity of
goodly ships; all these blessings (or the most part of them) have bin by pains,
cares, happy successes and prosperous voyages of many worthy men, Adventurers
and skillful seamen; by their trading to Moscovie, Turkey, Spain, Barberie, to
the West Indies, the Straits and Levant, but especially to the East Indies.

Amongst the many voyages that have bin made into the Oriental Cuntreyes,
(whereof some Ships have been 4. some 3. years in performing the said voyages
out and home,) this treatise which follows is exceeding remarkable, for the
speediness of departing and return.

On the 7. of April last 1641. Captain William Minor,) A Gentleman whose
skill, valor, and industry is well approved,) being commander in the good Ship
called the Royal Mary, of the burden of 1000 tuns, Set sail from the Lizar,
(in Cornwall,) and after many variations of winds, weathers, and climates.
From the Lizard, he saild for Bantam, a city of Java Major, where he arived in
the Road the 14 of August, it is one of the Eastern Island of the Indies,) and
having the Ships lading there and disburthened: He with all cellerity, began to
lade again on the third of September and on the 9 of November, being richly
laden, weighed Anchor for England, with such prosperous success (through Gods
great goonesse and mercy,) that by the 18. of April, made the Lands-end; and
on the 20. he Anchored in Plymouth Rode, Arived at London, having bin in all
out but 12 months and 11 days, of the which he stared 20. days by the way;
that is 11 days, at the Cape Bona Spes, and 9. days at St. Hellena. This is
one of the shortest voyages to the East Indies that ever was performed betwixt
England and India.

And now I proceed to the Relation of the murderous Masacre which was done by a
Pagan or devil, aboard a Ship called the Coster, which Ship was in Burden
400. tuns, and mand with 100. English men and boys: But at this Masacre the
men were most of them a shore to fetch fresh water, and on other occasions, by
reason whereof those few that were a board the Ship, suffered as follows.

On Friday the 22. of October last 1641. toward night there came aboard an
English Ship called the Coster, in a small Prow (or flat Boat with one padle) a
proper young man, (a Java which is as much to say, as a man born or native of
the Territory of Java.) This man (or devil in man's shape,) with a pretense to
sell some Hews, (hatching mischief in his damnd mind,) did delay and trifle
time, because he would have the night more dark for him to do his deeds of
darkness: At last he sold 6. Hews for half a Royal of 8. which is not much
above two shillings. There came also another Java aboard, (with the like small
Prow or Boat) to whom he gave the half Royal, sent him away and bad him make
haste; he being asked for what the other Java went for, the answer was that he
had sent him for more Hews and Goats to sell.

Night being come, and very dark, (for it was the last night of the wane of the
Moon,) This inhumane dog staid lurking under the half deck, having 2. Crests
(or dangerous waving Daggers) and a Buckler, of which he would have sold one
and the Buckler with it, and as he was discoursing, he took off one of the
Crests hefts, and put cloth about the tongue of the Blade, and made it sure
fast; on the other Crest he roled the handle with a fine linen cloth to make
it also sure from slipping in his hand; these things he did whilsts the Master
Robert Start, Stephen Roberts his mate, Hugh Rawlinson Chirurgian, William
Perks Steward, James Biggs Gunner, and 3. Boys or Youths attending. At supper
they were very merry, and this Caitiffe took notice of their carelessness of
him, to suffer him to sit on the quarter deck upon a Cot close by them.

Supper being ended about 6. at night; the Master went to his Cabin to rest,
the Gunner asked leave to go a shore; (the ship riding but half a mile from
landing. Afterward Robert Rawlinson, and Perks walked upon the quarter deck;
and the devilish Java perceiving the Master to be absent, he asked the Boys
where he was, who answered he was gone to sleep, this question he demanded 3 or
4 times of the Boys, and finding it to be so, he arose from the place where he
sat, which was on the starboard side, and went about the Table next the Mizzen
Mast, (where Roberts, Rawlings, and Perks were walking,) with his Target about
his Neck for defense against Pikes, or the like; and his 2 Crests in his hand,
and upon a sudden ^yes a Muck, which in that language is, I hazard or run my
death: Then first he stabd Roberts, secondly he stabd Rawlinson, thirdly Perks,
all three at an instant. After that, he let drive at the Boys but they leapd
down, and ran forward into the fore castle, where they found the Cook, to whom
the Boys related what had happened.

The Villain presently went to the great Cabin door, where the Master being
wakened and heard some bustling opened the door, and was no sooner out, but
stabd dead. The Gunners Mate hearing some stir, went out of the Gun-Roome, and
coming up a Scuttle (where the Master was murdered,) there was he also stabd
that he fell down the Scuttle, but making shift to creep into the Gun-Room and
was there found dead upon his knees, leaning upon a Chest: The Chirurgian
(Rawlinson) gat into the fore Pick, and there sat down and dyed.

The Java keeps his stand under the quarter Deck, where he had slain the Master
and the Gunners Mate, and never proffered to pursue or assault those in the
fore-castle.

John Tailor, seeing the danger he was in, made way to give fire to a piece of
Ordnance in the Cook-room, and laying a Coal upon the Touchhole of the Piece,
he foolishly blew the same with his mouth, whereas the Peec^ took fire, and so
violently blew into his mouth, that he dyed of the same blast within 2 days
after.

In this time the Ships Longboat and Skiffe, had made a turn a shore for fresh
water; which returned about 7 in the evening, which they in the fore-castle
perceiving, called unto them, telling them there was a Muke aboard who had
slain the M^^^er; and all the men except the Cook and 3 boys at which the
Longboat laid the Ship aboard in the Bow, and took into her the said Cook
and Boys,) which were all that were left alive in the Ship;) except one John
Tailor, who was not yet dead, for they took him into the boat, and he died 2
days after; and presently they went aboard the Royal Mary, and certified
Captain Minor of the bloody Masacre committed.

The Gunner and Carpenter (as yet) knew nothing of this mischief, for they went
ashore together to fetch a bag of Royalls; and returning, the Gunner first
entered, with the bag under his arm, and going to open a grating door under
the quarter deck, where the Java kept his stand, there the Rogue also stabd him
into the left breast, but by the mercy of God in lighted glauncing upon a rib,
so that it pierced not into his body; he wondering who it should be that stabd
him and there being no light nor any that would speak or answer him; called to
the Carpenter, and bad him stay in the Prowe (or boat,) for I am stabd in the
dark (quoth he,) and so the Gunner and the Carpenter left the Ship Coster, and
went aboard of the Royal Mary. But it is to be noted, that the Java did not
pursue the Gunner after he had stabd him but suffered him to go over the Ships
side into the boat where the Carpenter was. Being come to the Mary, there
related what had happened to them and likewise there they found their
Longboat, with the Cook and the 3 Boys. And presently the Captain commanded
his own Skiffe and the Costers, to be well mand, and because it was very dark,
he gave them order that they should keep about the other Ship till it was day,
and not to suffer any boats to board her: This charge was given to the
Captains Mate Master Gardner, who performed it discreetly, but by that time
the boats got to the Coster, the lights were almost burnt out, and there no
more to be had at that time. So the Skiffe being mand well, went and cut away
the small Prowe or boat which brought the cursed Cur aboard.

The Mary's Pinace well furnished, being appointed by Captain Minors command,
what to do in boarding the Coster, and that by no means they should enter till
night was past; but the giddy multitude overswayd Master Gardner, and forced
the boats aboard, on each bow of the Ship, and the Mariners entered with Pikes,
Halberts, Swords, Bucklers, and other Weapons necessary, they cleared the
Cook-room, the Waste, and between the Decks, all this while the Java constantly
kept his stand in the quarter deck, by the great Cabin door. Our men (finding
no resistance,) our Trumpeter too hastily entered the quarter deck door, would
not stay till light came.

But he; (poor man) had his fatal portion which the Master and Gunners Mate
had in the very same place where they were killed, there fell he wounden
mortally: Had he but stayed for light according to order, or for some Pikes they
had with them, the Tragedy had been ended without the loss of him: for after
the Halberts, Pikes and such Weapons, plied fast upon the Villain, that he was
forced to retire Abafte the Mizzen Mast, and Bitacle, where they had him at a
Bay, as it were in a snare or Net, for over his head was a Scuttle, where one
of our men stood with a cross spit, who gave him a Launching wound into the
breast, that the thrust went down into his belly, which made him turn, and
then his Buckler did him no good, for he was fastened to the Bulk-head, (as if
he had been nayld, and presently he had as many wounds upon him, as would have
killd a score of his companions.

Diverse are the opinions of men concerning this Action, the King and Natives do
say, that it was upon discontent; that he could not obtain a woman in marriage,
(after their fashion,) and had vowed therefore he would be revenged on any
whomsoever, he cared not who, and that affront was the period of his revenge,
as sable as his soul. Some others do allege that Keyradding who is in that
Country a Noble man; (one that is in good esteem with our Nation,) had been
aboard the day before, and had seen some gold that the Master had to sell, and
agreed with him for the price, and promised to come at that time that this Muck
came aboard, and bring the money to pay for it, but it is otherwise
conjectured, that he supposed to have it by the attempt of this Muck, (for the
Iava or Muck) had seen the gold and enquired for it after he came aboard; but
instead of that money Keyradding promised to send, he brought 2 Crests and a
Target, (wherewith he did the mischiefs.) And when the 6 murdered corpse were in
the boat, to be carried ashore to burial; the President and Captain Minor were
in anothr boat, and met Keyradding, showing him the dead Corpse, and the
Weapons, whereat he was much abashed, he was demanded if he knew the Crests or
Target, he presently answered that it was very eas^y to be known, being the
Picture of a Sea-Devill, with a hand that held a Crest-handle with two blades,
(the one forward, and the other backward.) The President sent to the King for
Howkame (which is justice,) and did intend to have gone himself after, to have
seen the event: But whilst the President was at Dinner, Keyradding came in, and
said that the King with his great Counsel and Oronkeyes (who are as Earls,
Dukes, ot Princes) had Prichard (which is concluded that it was for the
discontent for the denial of his love, that he had ran (...) Muck, and
therefore it was but vain to trouble the King any fu^ther in th^^ matter; and
this is the Javas Howkam, or strange kind of justice.

Some 2 days after, there was a great Orankey confessed that the nigh^ before,
he did tell him that he would run this Muck aboard an Engl^^^ Ship: And this
Orankey was the Kings favorite, yet he never made the King, or our President
acquainted with it; for which neglect of his, the King seemed to be very angry
with this Orankey, (who has a by name, and is called Turner.) It is
observable, that of all these men that were thus Butcherd the Hel-hound did
never stab any man twice, so sure did he strike, nor di^ he pursue any man that
kept clear of his stand, under the quarter deck t^^^ there dyed in all (in this
bloody action, Robert Start Master Stephen Robe^^ his Mate, Hugh Rawlinson
Surgeon, William Perks Steward, Walter ^^gers Gunners Mate, and Francis
Drake Trumpeter of the Mary; and (...) the Muck, Java or Devil, had ended the
first part of this bloody Traged^ there was only left in the Ship, the Cook, 3
Boys, and one John T^y^^^ that was almost dead with a shot he foolishly made:
So tha 7 men were (...) fortunatly lost, (as you have heard, and the Gunner
escaped very narro^^^ through Gods merciful prevention, from the like of these
related disas^^^^ and suddiane mischiefs, Good Lord deliver us.

FINIS.

