A Mournful Elegy, In pious and perpetual Memory of the most Honorable,
ROBERT, Earl of ESSEX, and EVVE, Viscount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley,
Bourchier, and Lovaine, late Lord chief General of all the Parliaments
Forces, who exchanged his Life September. 14. 1646.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Banks. 1646.

For the Tombe-Stone.
PAying a tribute tear, admitted be
To view this cover of Mortality;
Which because fifty odd years it did detain
A heavenly soul, within its earthly chain,
Within this heap of stones is doomed to be,
Till time submit unto eternity;
Which notwithstanding, when you see it have
This Marble Statue, say it is a Grave,
Whose outside, howsoever fair it be,
The inside's putrifi'd deformity:
This penance ended, 'cause it once was blessed,
In entertaining so divine a Ghuest,
In glorious form it shall presented be
To heavens unknown joys, by the Majesty
Of God himself; there let his blessed soul rest,
Till that his body be with glory blessed.
An Elegy on the death of the most honorable Earl of ESSEX.
TO shadow sorrow, seek not tears of brine,
For that is a woman's Rhetorique, not mine;
I may paint part of grief, but cannot cry,
The tide's too great, to drop out misery;
Whole floods of tears must like a Cataract
Gush, and affright, when I my sorrows act.
Shallow streams mutter, silent are the deep;
My flood her flood gate breaks, if I do weep:
Then come Melpomene with thy graving pen,
Sink deep into the iron hearts of men,
What they are senseless of, array my Verse
With accents sadder, then this sable Hearse.
Let every sine my dull brain shall afford
Rend one good heart at least, let every word
Gain one poor soul t'accompany to bliss,
This lamp of light, that here ecclipsed is,
To shine in heaven; a train see that he have
To Attend him there, greater then to his grave
Attends his corpse, or if my words may move
None else that do so well his virtue love:
Then let my captived soul infranchis'd be,
To pass with his unto eternity;
If earth-dull'd spirits such height cannot aspire,
Then for Associates, let the heavenly Quire
Of Angels guard him, and his Requiem sing,
Where unmasqu'd joy, and perfect music ring
His happy entrance, S. John, Brook, Hambden be
Ready to wait with best observancie
On his approach. But say Malignant death,
What caused thee so soon to stop his breath?
Was it that I thy cruelty might find?
Or the general hate thou bear to all mankind?
To glut thy intralls, all-devouring grave,
Thou might have taken some wretch whom need
A corner in the concave of thy womb, (makes crave
And have made that, not him, to fill the tomb
Of thy inveterate malice, our hearts grief,
Could none suffice thee, but the Chiefest Chief
Of all our Sex? Must Jems of such esteem
Give luster to thy hated Diadem?
Or was it because things of greatest price
Unfit for earth, inhabit must the skies?
If it were so, yet for a little space
Thou might have spared him, till of his race
One branch had issued forth, not at one time
Have crop'd both fruit and tree, even in the prime
Of all his glory, when th'admiring world
Upon his goodness every eye had hurld,
When hope lay bedrid, and all comfort dying,
When cruelty her self sat almost crying;
When neighboring worlds his glory most envied,
Then Englands honor, Europes wonder di'd.
Which us to check, the charitable skies
Embalme him with rich tears, sent from bright eyes,
As if just heaven were pleased, that he should have
A second Deluge to attend his grave.
What sad events have happened since his death,
Since much loved Essex was deprived of breath:
No day, nor night has past, nay scarce and hour,
In which heaven has not pleased to send a shower
Of tears to celebrate his obsequies,
Which men should pay from overflowing eyes;
Storms have produced shipwracks, shipwracks dearth
Of food and fuel from the teeming earth,
Bread-corn, and firing, both are dearer sold,
As if with him, all charity were grown cold,
As if the axill-tree of the world should crack,
Which Atlas-like, he bore upon his back.
Our Kingdoms being in a tottering State,
God, by his hand, the same did regulate,
Prop, and uphold, which now at six and seven,
Again do hang, as if not swaid by heaven.
The Kings best friend, and eke the Kingdoms too,
Who loving both, to neither could be foe:
The Clergies Patron, and the Soldiers glory,
Both read him, and admire him in his story.
Germans, both high and low, lament with me,
That Spain and France joys in your misery,
Occasioned through his fall, that Schismatiques,
Tub-Preachers, Anabaptists, Heretics,
The Independents, Antinomians, Papists,
The Brownists, and (which worst of all) the Atheists
Begin to glory. In thy triumph, death,
Thou might have spared his, and stopped my breath:
Thy cruelty had then been kindness styled,
And death to mankind had been reconciled;
Those few among the multitude of men
That wish me well, had Trophies to thee then
Erected; and instead of bitter Lays,
Thou had been crowned with Encomiastike bays.
Me that am weary of a wretched life,
Neglected, friendlesse, all composed of grief,
Thou give leave to see my Lords sad death,
And after him to draw abhorred breath:
Him that was happy in all things under heaven,
By God or nature might to him be given,
Helpful t'all, open-handed unto merit,
Sober in carriage, of an humble spirit:
Him that (like God of War) in conquering field,
His brandisht sword, never force of foe made yield;
Him have thou taken away, and me have left,
To moan his loss, of so much good bereft:
Could nothing serve thy wrath, for to appease,
To spare his life, and breed our Kingdoms ease?
Could not the plaints of Peers, the Commons fears,
The Churches supplications, soldiers tears,
His sisters scorching sighs, his kindreds groans,
The clamor of his friends, his servants moans,
The votes of Parliament, the orphans cries,
The poors Petitions, nor the weeping eyes
Of widows, move th'impartiall hand to dart
Thy death-wing'd arrow at some others heart?
They could not: why? because his prayer was
That he might be dissolved, with Christ, to pass
From hence to heaven; where most victorious he
In triumph treads on sin, and destiny.
Had thou with judgments eye but once beheld
His most Majestike face, it would have queld
Thy fearelesse rage, as often it has done,
When Mars himself, did smile on Mars his son:
Let Edgehill-Fight and Gloucester witness be,
The famous battle fought at Newberie,
And thousand Trophies more of victory,
Of prowess and of magnanimity,
By him obtained, had his unlimited soul
In other Lands been suffered, fans control,
To actuate what he at home has done,
It had appeared more glorious then the Sun.
'Twas he made smooth the rigid path of war,
'Twas he that did remove the enemy far
From our Avenues: Others did but build
On his foundation, he first gained the field.
Yet was he slighted, scoffed, scorned and jeered
By those that loved him not; those he not feared:
Stigmatike coxcombs, that durst once to lay
Aspersion on that Sun, whose light made day,
Which now Ecclipst, our Hemispheare is made
All night; our Sun is now become a shade:
And in this shade we now are left to moan,
Not Essex loss, but in his loss our own;
But I do but obnubilate his praise,
Striving unto a higher pitch to raise
What my impolisht quill cannot express,
But by expressing, that I make it less.
Had thou this seen death, thou had not then don
What now thou have, nor I had cause to moan;
But being gone, why do I wast my breath,
It Is he that triumphs, and not grisly death?
On him thy envy has gained only this,
To change his fading good, for endless bliss.
Let us not then as men without hope grieve,
Since that his purer part, his soul does live,
That would of incredulity us reprove,
Or challenge us of envy or self-love;
To grieve would argue doubt of his estate,
Or envy that he proved so fortunate;
Or at the least self-love it would express,
In prizing our loss, not his happiness.
But here me thinks, I hear some whispering, ask
How silly I dare undergo this task,
When many hundreds that more able are,
Who in his loss do likewise claim a share,
Have and do daily write in mourning Verse,
With which to garnish this bedewed Hearse?
I answer, all that write, write not for love,
Fashion their pens, but passion mine does move;
My hope does therefore guide me to believe,
My mite shall be received, with theirs that give
Abundantly: but this digression leaving,
With his pure soul, let prayers fly to heaven,
That all surviving Peers, now left behind,
May be affected in their soul and mind
As he has been; that when fate ends their days,
They may be crowned with never-dying Bays
Of good name here, and with that blessed renown
Of lasting joy, the everlasting Crown,
In a far better world, as he now is,
Being possessed of never-ending bliss;
I then shall think me truly happy, when
Divinest Echoes answer shall AMEN.
J. B. AN ELEGY UPON the unhappy loss OF THE NOBLE EARL OF ESSEX.

LONDON, Printed for John Benson, and are to be sold at his shop in Dunstanes
Churchyard. 1646.

An Elegy on the Death of the noble Earl of Essex.
I Need no fatal quill that has the art
At every line it writes to break an heart:
For when I shall but once begin to express
The public cause, and subject of my verse,
More motives may be spared our unstrain'd grief
Will need no provocation, but relief.
Essex is dead. What thunder strikes our ears,
Threatening an inundation of tears?
This is a judgment more then we conceived,
To be by our best hope the most deceived:
And that the Noble Cause of our Redress,
Should now be so of our extreme Distress.
Or is it a mercy, since Heaven did intend
At last, an exiled peace back to us to send?
Thus to make way, by softening our hard hearts
By such a blow; which the successive darts
It shot at our own persons, could not pierce
Who never had wept but at his frown or hearse.
That we exchanging for new grief, old hate;
(Though senseless of our own) might mourn his fate;
That tears begun for loss might end for sin,
And hearts twice broke let peace and mercy in.
But is he gone from us! Injurious Death
Have thou deprived him of that purer breath
Then quickens vulgar lumps; I then could wish,
That old Pythagoras Metempsychosis
Were not a fable, that the world might boast
A second Phoenix, now the first is lost.
When England lost it is darling in the fate
Of his loved Father (though unfortunate
In their desires) their hopes did still surviue,
Whilst he had left so brave a Son alive.
Whose early youthful blossoms did presage
Most glorious fruits in his more riper age
But all that then was hoped was that the Son
Should keep that honor which his Father won.
But he not bounded by strict president
His, as all other patterns quite out went.
Compleatest acts of ancient Hero's were
The essaies of his youth, whereon to rear
Fames highest Stories, their great aims were found
His first attempts, their battlements his ground.
So that great Essex's name is greater grown
By his Sons honor added to his own.
For even in them was long time verified
What Is said of Kings, for Essex never di'd
Till now. But now the Title too is gone
A Title men will tremble to put on
Though offered; since it strongly does oblige
To courage, council, combat, storming, seidge,
Devotion, Temperance, and what ever can
Render the wearer a most perfect man.
And surely, had Heaven blessed us but so much
As with a Son of his, he had been such:
This envious fiends suspected, and did try
Their utmost skill to bar him progeny.
But he shall live in his more lasting name
Borne on the wings of never-dying Fame.
No Chronicler shall need to write his praise
In moldy parchment left to after-daies
For as the holy Patriarchs Religion
Was left to them by long-deriv'd tradition;
So shall his acts be handed to those men
Are yet unborne, and they the same again
shall tell their Childrens Chidren, till it grow
Part of their education to do so.
In his poor Cottage by a Winter fire
To his great granchildren shall the aged sire
From's easy chair relate the ancient stories
Of his exploits and virtues; whilst he glories
TO have trail'd a pike at Keinton, or received
A shot at Reading, or when 'twas relieved
TO have marched to Gloucester, then the memory
Of that unparalleled Newb'ry victory
Shall cause him rake his embers, and proceed
To tell the Generals virtue as his deed.
"And yet my Children, though all this did he
"He courted not the peoples cap or knee.
"Their praise or dispraise he did not regard,
"Virtue that set him on was his reward.
"And though he had (yet was) been praised by none;
"He durst in spite of all be good alone.
"He moov'd by his own principles, for it is known
"He was not wrought by Royal smile or frown.
"Like to the trusty Sun he kept his line
"Pursuing still his first and known design,
"He was not made for changes, nor could lend
"An I. in Parliament for a by-end.
"If he had foes they durst not mak't appear,
"His frown alone would strike them dead with fear.
"And if they wisp'rd any thing amiss
"They guard his name with a parenthesis.
"Still [He was faithfull] who so ever offended
"It Is much to be by All so well commended.
"But they were wise; who durst the same deny
"Sure he was desperate and resolved to dye.
"Who so durst meet him, durst do more then Death
"That ravished not, but stole away his breath
"Ah treacherous coward that did slily creep
"And unawares, to kill him in his sleep.
Now Noble Peers after his Hearse march on,
Mourn as you go, your great exampl's gone.
And you grave Patriots learn to know your loss,
He was your blessing whom some thought your cross.
You reverend Synod, cannot choose but shed
Some Fun'rall tears since your stout Patron's dead.
And you brave Soldiers will have moistened eyes
For he is fallen by whom you all did rise.
Weep Widows weep, he is gone that was of late
Your most indulgent, constant Advocate.
And you that once were foes some tears bestow
On your own selves, your fines will not be low.
Weep England now, thou se'st thy Champion's end,
Scotland weep too, for thou have lost a Friend.
But Ireland most of all, express thy grief
For he is dead that longed to send relief.
Weep Virtue too, for thou a Widow art,
And well mai'st act the chiefest mourners part:
And Envy weep, and starve, now he is gone
Thou Wilt scarce find goodness here to feed upon.
An Epitaph on the Earl of Essex.
BOast Marble, that conceal'st this Dust
Not of thy Lastingnesse, but Trust.
Ten thousand unto thee shall bring
Of vowed tears their offering.
The driest eye shall drop a Gem
TO enrich death's envied Diadem.
To thine, great Essex's Memory
Shall add it is own eternity:
Thereby thou shall thy self out last
Which else, like other stones, would waste
And mix thy Dust with them, that deep
Thou unprophaned now do keep.
Nay Death it self will sure prevent
Of His and Essex Monument
The least decay: For near did he
More glory in a victory.
On thee Death sits in state, and braves
Himself more then on neighbour-graves.
To kill a Prince, or Duke, or so,
Is counted but Death's common blow.
But when he slew brave Essex, he
Did triumph ore Humanity.
The Virger that is wont to relate
This Princes valor, that is estate,
The virtuous life and famous acts
Of Peers deceased, the extracts
Of every noble Family;
May find all in Epitome:
And save the labor of Retaile
And tell the people, HERE LIES, ALL.
An Elegy upon the most lamented death of the Right Honorable and truly
valiant, ROBERT Earl of Essex, etc.
I Thank thee, Grief, that thou have found a voice:
Some think there runs no stream, where is heard no noise;
And yet I Will bear thee witness, when there stood
No water in thine Eye, thy Heart wept Blood;
So may the stealing Brook mourn under ground,
When on the surface, naught but Flint is found.
Advance my Tears then, and your Office be
To bring the Rear up of this Obsequie.
A Rear of Mourners, which shall reach from hence
To Doomes-day, mourning not for Form, but Sense.
We now but see the Pomp; but after times
Shall make us feel our Loss, due to our-Crimes;
When Monarchy shall faint, and Faction thrive,
How shall we then wish Devereux alive?
When there is none to dry up Widows Tears;
None to Repulse our Jealousies and Fears:
When Justice self shall want an Advocate,
And truth in coward silence read her Fate;
When those days come, (O never come those Days;
Never to us!) that he shall wear the Bays,
And be accounted valiant, who shall dare
To whisper Truth, though only to the Air:
When the mean Feet shall trample ore the Head;
How shall we then feel Devereux is dead?
Devereux, the Nobles Orb, the Gentries Starr,
The Cities Altar, the wronged Countries Bar:
Devereux, the Just, Devereux, the Stout, the Wise,
The maimed Soldiers Limbs, the Blind man's Eyes.
The Armies faithful Alm'ner; or what is more
Devereux, the very Devereux of their Poor;
Yet He, this Cedar's fallen: or rather, is
Transplanted, for to grow in Paradise.
How the Ghosts throng to see their great new Ghuest;
Talbot, Vere, Norris, Williams, and the rest,
Those valiant Shades, England's best Sons! each one
Courting Him to their Bowers; (Bowers, whereof none
But was of conquering Laurel) there to hear
A story, which would force from Ghosts a Tear.
(Their Mothers Tragedy) as 'twas acted late
By her own Children, to make sport for Fate;
For they had seen the Stygian Boats even sink,
Laden with Souls up to the very brinke;
Had known their Charon tugg and sweat, and say;
England did find him most work and best pay.
He (the new Ghuest) who (since he did afford
To hold in peace the Scales, in War the Sword,
Could therefore give best Judgment: the pure stamp
How things'ith Senate passed, how in the Camp:)
Dissects the Body politic, and with weight
Lays open the Griefs and Maladies of State.
Shows how those hands that held the Scales were numb,
And how that Tongue which should preach Peace was dumb;
The Feet (says He) went staggering, and it is sed,
Some Clouds and Vapors did possess the Head,
Whose little finger, had the poison moved,
Heavier then all his Fathers Loins had proved;
The Eyes grew dim and darkish, whiles the Ear
Deaf to sage Counsel, yet strange Tales could hear;
And the whole Frame did so with Fever burn,
Fever might serve for Piles to fill the Urne;
And England mouldring thus through Feverish Ire,
Save Heaven the labor of a Doomes-day Fire.
All now was turning into Ashes: so
Consuming Flames Incendiaries blow,
Hence Englands best Physicians judged it need
(To save the Body) that some veins should bleed;
Surgeons from all parts come to work the Cure
(She now was patient and must all endure.)
Leeches and Emp'ricks (College fulls) all came,
To cure? no, but to practice on their Dame.
And thus they let her bleed too much: so they
Can gain, no matter though she bloodlesse lay.
Yet some there came, Artists, and honest too;
Men that without a plot their work would do:
Men, that to stop her blood, their own did give,
And paid their Deathlesse Lives to make her live.
So sharp a Pill is War, that some have thought
Even Health it self, at this price, too dear bought;
Physic on a Swords point can seldom please,
Men count such Remedies worse then the Disease.
And thus as he was blazning States, and Men,
Persons, and Things, the Cause; why? how? and when?
Still passing ore Himself, as if he were,
Though others Trumpet, His own Silencer:
Still his own Mute, whilst yet he Trumpets forth
Great Warwicks, and Northumberlands great Worth:
With other Heroes placed in high Command,
Neptunes at Sea, and Marses on the Land;
But who was He, cried some, (not but they knew:
But that they longed to hear those gests anew
Which they so dearly loved) who is he that fought
So much for Peace 'bove Victory? that thought
The bloodlesse Bays the best? He that aimed more
To save one Citizen, then kill many a Foe?
He that knew how to value Lives? the Man,
So much good Soldier, and good Christian;
That killed and sighed, mourned as he Trophies wore,
Mingling his own Tears with his Enemies gore?
As if his Grand Commission did not give
Him power to kill and slay, but kill and grieve.
And yet again, that most undaunted He,
(When the Armies were to join, to disagree)
Who speech'd his Soldiers first with Voice and Drum,
Then Caesar-like bad them, not go, but come?
He, who Himself an Army was alone!
He, who was then most General, when yet none?
And had whole Legions ever at his need,
Legions of Soldiers not to Fight, but Feed:
Yea but who is He, cried one among the throng,
That with so few men raised a Siege so strong?
That made Retreat from twice his odds, the while,
As he Retreated, fighting, threescore mile?
And this, not through fenced Lanes, and in thick nights,
The Downs and Midday Sun saw all his fights.
An honor, we could envy, could this place
(Loves Throne) admit a wrinckled Heart or Face.
With that, some Cavalier Ghosts (for there come
Of them to rest here in Elysium)
The Learned Faulkland, and Carnarvan stout,
Fierce Lindsey, (Spartan shades, above the Rout;)
Such as had paid him Homage with their Blood,
And fallen his Sacrifices, when he stood
Pointed at our dear loss, and said; all this,
And more is Devereux; this, and more is His;
Which made him blush; His pale Ghost blushed; and then
He looked, as if he had been alive again.
But when such praises even from Enemies come,
It were a sin in us, should we stand dumb?
And is it not pity so Famed worth should dye
Without an Heir? No Son to close his Eye?
No Child to wear his virtue with his Name?
None to inherit his well-gotten Fame?
But as great 'Paminondas answered those
His Friends, that mourned his Fall, (mourned by his Foes)
'Cause he fell Childlesse; as if Greece were done
Since so much virtue dyed without a Son:
But yet (says He) still bear it in your mind,
I Have left two Daughters with you here behind,
Leuctra and Mantinea; who shall keep
Their Fathers Name from Death, and Thebes from sleep;
So when our Devereux, ( Devereux, a word
Great as that Greek's, and keener then his Sword:
A Name that fills the Mouth, and wounds the Ear:
A Name that Machiavell would be pleased to hear.
He, who admires the Pagans large-siz'd Name
'Bove Christians; as if words could create Fame.)
So when our Devereux is bemoaned in Death,
As one that leaves no Son to breath his Breath,
Answer is made, He leaves two Daughters fair,
Reading and Gloucester, Daughters such as are
Sans parallel; and which will cost the State
Millions to match them with an equal Mate.
Or should this Issue fail, yet how can He
Want Sons and Heirs, who is Pater Patriae.
C. G.

