SION'S PROSPECT IN ITS FIRST VIEW.

Presented In a Summary of Divine TRVTHS, consenting with the FAITH professed
by the Church of ENGLAND.

Confirmed from SCRIPTVRE and REASON: Illustrated by Instance and Allusion.

COMPOSED and PUBLISHED TO BE An Help for the prevention of APOSTASY,
Conviction of HERESY, Confutation of ERROR, and Establishing in the TRUTH, By A
Minister of CHRIST, and Son of the CHURCH, R. M. quondam e Coll S. P. C.

Henceforth be no more children, ((...)) tossed to and fro, and whirled about
by every wind of Doctrine. EPHESIANS. 4.14. London, Printed by T: N: for Humphrey
Moseley, and are to be sold at the sign of the Princes-Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1653.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY Marquess of Dorchester, Earl of Kingston, etc.
My LORD,
YOur Patronage, like your Self, is Honorable; the true merit, and high repute
of whose piety and learning, is voice enough to speak my Summary of Truths
Orthodox. It is not (then) without design, that I am solicitous to present
Sion's Prospect to your Lordships sight, it being my confidence and aim, that
this View of Divine Truths, having had its review by so clear a judgment for
its approbation, I may not hereafter fear what eye it shall be exposed to, for
its censure. Besides (My Lord) in this general maze of the Churches troubles,
affrighted Truth, seeking safety, I directed her to take Sanctuary in the
Temple of Honor, and to offer her devotions at your Lordships shrine; Let
(then) a propitious goodness deign acceptance, and give protection to the
humble Suppliant, not to be violated by the profane hands of ignorance and of
error. If any question the confidence of this my Address to your Lordship, it
is enough that I point them to the Apud Antiquos, Quercus Jovi, and Laurus
Apollini Sacrae, virum nobilem tam de Ecclesia, quam de schola literaria optime
meritum, emblematicws loquuntur.
Oak, and the Laurel standing at your Gate, with this Inscripsion of honorable
Fame, Here dwells the Clergy's Patron. But, besides this, (My Lord) mine (once
near) relation, to your (late deceased) Ds. T. G. Eques felicis memoriae.
Uncle, as it gave me my first admission into Your Lordships presence, so will
it countenance my present presumption of Your Lordships Patronage; and it will
be no error, if I think at once to engratiate my Service to Your Self, by his
Memory, and ennoble my Work unto others by Your Name. This in public, as to a
formal Dedication; I retire into privacy for the more real devoting my self, in
the sincerest fervor of my heartiest Prayers.

My LORD, Your Honors most truly faithful and humble Servant, ROBERT MOSSOM.
Richmond in Surrey, pridie Non. Maii, 1651.
The Author's Preface to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THE grand Apostasy of these latter days may sufficiently experience thee to
know, how dangerous it is to want a Pilote in the storm; a seasonable service
(then) it must be, (and should be an acceptable work) in any measure of
proportion to supply that defect. Here thou art brought into the Ark of the
Church, and the amidst the many contrary winds of false doctrines, thou art
taught much of the profession of a true Faith; to which as divine Reason does
contribute its clearest of evidence, so does sacred Scripture confer its
firmness of proof. And in the many Scripture proofs, fear not any thing of
(what is now Epidemical) (...), Greg. Naz. orat. 36.
Scripture sacriledg, either surreptitiously stealing away the true meaning, or
profanely corrupting the proper phrase of Gods word; upon the strictest
examination, it shall not be found that the Oracle does here Demosth. de
Oraculo Delphico.
(...), The Scriptures (I mean) speak that sense, which faction or fancy has
Non imponendus sensus sacris literis, sed expectandus Hilar. de Trin.
imposed, but what the Spirit of God and of Truth has revealed.

With those mysteries which are of the Catholic Faith, as necessary to
salvation, here are interwoven many Truths which are of Theological Science, as
useful to spiritual edification; yet those questions which some men's curiosity
has vainly started, and other men's nicety has as scrupulously resolved, I
have purposely waved, as being (especially in these times, wherein men are more
Critics then Christians in Religion) the occasions of contention, which
further unto Dum alter alalteri anathema esse coepit, prope jun nemo Christi
est. Hilar. cont. Constable.
uncharitableness, rather then matters of instruction, which edify unto
holiness. If Thou do question, or Any will oppose this Summary of divine
Truths being wholly consenting with the judgment of the Church of England;
Know, that as it has been perused and approved by some of the reverend
Fathers, so will it be asserted and justified by others of the dutiful Sons of
the English Church, to be in all parts agreeable to that Faith which has been,
and yet is with all constancy by Her acknowledged and professed; which
argreement will evidently enough appear to him who shall diligently consult the
Book of Articles, the Books of Homilies, the Forms of public Administrations,
and Divine Service; In all which, the Church does speak more fully, though
dispersedly, what is here delivered more concise and methodically; so that,
this Summary (especially in matters of Faith) is perfectly consenting with the
Church, as teaching the same Truths for matter, though not for method; for
substance, though not for circumstance; the Analogy one, though the Expressions
diverse.

If Truth (then) might gain (...). Greg. Naz. orat. 20.
esteem from Persons, and Faith receive credit from the repute of its
Professors; This Summary presented might have a fair gloss from that reverent
respect this Nations owes, and other Nations give unto the Fathers of our
Church, for learning and piety, for Martyrs multi, and multi Martyrs
designati.
sufferings and constancy so eminently renowned. And whosoever are true Sons of
this Church, will acknowledge the Doctrines here delivered to be the milk sucked
from their mothers breast, pure and wholesome, made such from the well digested
food of Gods word. And however the factions of men have made a rent in the
unity, and their actions too, cast a stain upon the purity of our Church; yet
let other Nations know, they ought to have more care to preserve and secure
themselves, then they, have reason to disdan or (...) Greg. Naz. orat. 13.
upbraid us; for certain it is, the envious man is sowing the like tares in
their field and they cannot tell how soon our Judgment may be the portion of
their Cup.

In this Treatise, if any phrase seem improper according to the language of the
learned Schools, it is a sufficient Apology, that the Author made it his aim,
as he thought it his duty, to write according to the weaker capacities of those
he was to nistruct, rather then the stronger apprehensions of those by whom he
is instructed; and therefore he has desired and endeavored so to express
himself, that he might not amaze, but inform; not puzzle, but teach; studying
brevity and clearness (which -- Brevis esse laboro, obscurus fio, Hor.
seldom meet in one subject, especially where the matter is mysterious:)
brevity, as an advantage to memory, and clearness as an help to the
understanding, both conducing much to an instructing and establishing in the
Truth.

If any demand a reason of the Authors composing this Treatise, this answer
will be satisfactory (if that demand be not too supercilious) that the public
behoof did put him upon it: for, among the many excellent Works composed by
our Churches Heroes, we have not one Systeme of Divinity in all parts consenting
with her judgment and practice; but what has been of this kind, has had a
taste of the vessel, some private opinions ( (...), Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 4.
domestica judicia, as Tertullian calls them) or at best some foreign Resolves
has been intermixed with our Churches more pure and perfect determinations.

Upon observation whereof, the Author designed his studies to do with Christian
Theology as Florus with the Roman History, ( Flor. Epit. Rer. Romans l. 1.
In brevi tabella totam ejus imaginem amplecti) draw its whole pourtraiture in
a small Table, comprise its large Body in a short Volume; therein delivering
the whole and entire judgment of our Church, confirmed from testimony of sacred
Scripture, and illustrated by argument of divine Reason. This whole Work,
bearing the Title of Sion's Prospect, he has divided into two Parts, as its
first, and second View; the First is now published, the second reserved till
its more fit opportunity for publication; which in a correspondency of Method,
Scripture, Reason, Brevity and clearness, does treat of those several Heads
which concern that peculiar part of Gods Providence over the Church of his
Elect, viZ. Concerning Election and Predestination; concerning Christ in the
Person, and in the office of Mediator; concerning the Church; concerning the
Covenant of Grace; concerning the diverse Administrations of this Covenant
before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel, etc.

That this former part published does prevent that latter part designed for
publication, the Author gives this most full and satisfactory Reason; that he
would gladly hereby prompt an able judgment and pen to undertake the task,
rather then do it himself; lest, through weakness and insufficiency (in those
grand Mysteries of the Gospel) he should Veritatem defendendo concutere, and
fidem explicando obscurate.
shake the Truth in defending it, and obscure the faith in explaining it.
Wherefore, if what he has already done may occasionally stir up some eminent
person, in an holy emulation of pious zeal, to undertake so useful and
honorable a Work; He shall desist from his further Enterprise, and rest very
well satisfied, yea, very much joy'd with this Blessing from God, that he has
given breath to another divine flame. Otherwise, if he find the encouragement
of acceptance, and be confirmed in some hopes of public benefit to the Church;
rather then this so much necessary, and so much desired work be not done at
all, He will (by the assistance of Gods Spirit) finish and publish what is now
under his hand; tuneing the Instrument to the best of his skill, thereby
happily provoking some more dextrous hand, and more accurate Artist to perfect
the harmony.

If any man shall Critically question, or enviously quarrel at the Authors
present undertaking, be thou (Courteous Reader) so far his Advocate, as to
plead in his behalf, that it is not his ambition to be exposed public to the
world, but to be accepted of private Friends, to whom (especially) he has
devoted the present service of the Press; and if this particular service to
some few Friends, shall (by a gracious dispensation of divine Goodness) be
extended as a general benefit to the whole Church, it will be an additional
blessing, as much beyond his own hope, as it is above another envy; and well
may the blessing be beyond his hope for the attainment, who is himself so far
short of the blessing by his unworthiness; and therefore does he the more
earnestly beg the benefit of thy Prayers, if not as a return of gratitude for
his service, yet as a boon of charity to his soul, who is from his soul in all
Christian and Ministerial offices.

Thine, faithfully devoted, ROBERT MOSSOM.

The SYLLABUS To the TREATISE.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Holy Scriptures.
Sect. 1: REason arguing from Scripture for the Scriptures. Sect. 2: The
Knowledge of God, and his worship by Revelation; This Revelation either with
the Jews or with the Christians. Sect. 3. The Church of the Jews enquired into
by Reason. Sect. 4. Reason leads from the Church of the Jews, to the Church of
the Christians; with the Church of Christ is found the word of God, as the
Revelation of his will. Sect. 5. The word of God is the holy Scriptures in the
books of the old Testament and the new; What Editions are Authentic;
Translations in the vulgar tongue allowed. Sect. 6. The Apocrypha why so
called; Why not canonical; The Old Testament received from the Jews. Sect. 7.
The Authority of the Scripture is not from the Church. Sect. 8. The Authority
of the Church is from Christ by the Scriptures. Sect. 9. The Tradition of the
Church leads to the Scriptures; The excellencie^ of the writings effect the
mind; The Spirit convinces of the Truth. Sect. 10. A moral persuasion from the
Church, and the letter; a divine belief from the Spirit. Sect. 11. Why the
Scriptures are not discernable, by their own light without the Spirit. Sect.
12. What, and from whence the Authority of the Scriptures: Their sufficiency:
Their perfection. Sec. 13. How the Rule of our faith. Such to the end of the
World. Sec. 14. Particular Revelations not now to be expected. Sec. 15. What
received as the Truth by the Church: What left to the prudence of Governors,
and to what end. Sec. 16. In what the Scriptures are plain, and in what hard to
be understood; How to be Interpreted. What the Analogy of Faith. Sec. 17. The
duty of Christians in the use of the Scriptures: Their fullness of heavenly
Doctrine: How a perfect form of Institution.
CHAP. II. Concerning God in the Unity of Essence.
Sec. 1. WHy the nature of God is not to be comprehended by the understanding
of Man; How the incomprehensible God is apprehended by faith. Sec. 2. How God
is described in Scripture; the Names of God. Sec. 3. The description of God
according to his names. Sec. 4. Further described by his Attributes: The first
and principal. Sec. 5. Why incommunicable to the creatures. Sec. 6. The
Attributes communicable to the creatures; How communicable. Sec. 7. Gods
essential attributes his one entire Essence, how distinguished: why diversely
expressed in different names. Sec. 8. Why there can be but one God: How One
single, pure, and perfect Sec. 9. Why said to have eyes and hands, to be angry
and grieved, etc. He admits no bodily likeness.
CHAP. III. Concerning God in the Trinity of Persons.
Sec. 1. WHat the Knowledge of God from a natural light: What from a light
supernatural: Who are the three Persons, and what a Person is. Sec. 2. A finite
understanding not possibly able to comprehend this infinite Mystery: Not to be
illustrated by any Instances. Sec. 3. The highest pitch of Reasons
apprehension. Sec. 4. Reason directing to Faith: What and how a Trinity of
Persons in the Unity of the Godhead. Sec. 5. The Son of God and the Holy Ghost,
firmly proved. Sec. 6. How the Persons are distinguished. Sec. 7. How Trinity
and Person are found in Scripture; What a subsistence is. Sec. 8. How the
Father is the first Person: How each Person is (...). Sec. 9. How the essence
and attributes of the Godhead are communicated. Sec. 10. The properties of the
Persons incommunicable.
CHAP. IV. Concerning Gods Knowledge.
Sec. 1. HOw God knows all things. Sec. 2. Gods foreknowledg how and what it
is; Not the cause of things and why. Sec. 3. How all things depend upon Gods
Will preordaining, not his Knowledge foreseeing: Yet Gods fore-knowledg depends
not upon the creatures future existence. Before and after, past and to come
relate not to God. Sec. 4. But is in the creature: This aptly illustrated. Sec.
5. God knowing things to come, and past, does it in one and the same act of
Knowledge: This act eternal: So no change in God. Sec. 6. No contingency in
respect of Gods fore-knowledg: Yet in the secondary causes. Sec. 7. All future
events are fore-known of God: His fore-knowledg infallible. Sec. 8. How applied
unto the Elect in Scripture.
CHAP V. Concerning Gods Will.
Sec. 1. GOds Will one, and absolutely free; Distinguished into his will secret
and revealed: of sign and of good pleasure. Sec. 2. What his secret will: What
his revealed will. Sec. 3. The Will of Gods good pleasure has its reason, not
its cause. Sec. 4. Gods glory the final cause of what he wills, but not of his
will: How the impulsive cause of Gods will to be understood in Theology. Sec.
5, 6. The execution of Gods will admits several causes, the volition not any:
what the volition, and what the execution is. Sec. 7. God wills not sin, and
why. Sec. 8. The purpose of Gods will does not abolish, but establish the
liberty of man's will: what the necessity of being, from the immutability of
Gods will. Sec. 9. How Gods secret will becomes revealed by his word, and by
his works: How Gods word is called his will. Sec. 10. How they agree in a sweet
harmony: So to be interpreted, as that ille harmony be preserved. Sec. 11. How
Gods revealed will argues with that of his good pleasure, when he wills all men
to be holy. Sec. 12. Where also he commands Abraham to sacrifice his Son Isaac.
Sec. 13. How the promises and threatenings in Gods revealed will, which are
conditional, de agree with Gods secret will, which is absolute. Sec. 14. What
the true meaning of the conditions declared.
CHAP. VI. Concerning Gods Decrees, Power, and Manner of Working.
Sec. 1. GOd the primary Cause, and supreme Agent in his Understanding, Will,
and Power; What his Decree, what his Work. Sec. 2. What his absolute power: How
limited by his will. Sec. 3. Why, and how said to be omnipotent. Sec. 4. There
is no overcoming Gods power, no resisting his will: what he acts in time, he
has decreed from eternity. Sec. 5. How the creatures are in God, before they
are in themselves: What the Counsel of God in his decrees. Sec. 6. How the
whole Trinity is one entire cause; What their diverse manner of working. Sec.
7. How some one action is appropriate to some one person. Sec. 8. The firm
relation between Gods decrees and his works; God has not decreed sin, though
he has decreed to permit sin; What the effectual decree accompanying the
permissive. Sec. 9. The purpose of Gods decree imposes no forcible necessity;
but brings an infallible certainty to all Agents and Events.
CHAP. VII. Concerning the Works of Creation.
Sec. 1. GOd the Creator of all things as an absolute and free Agent. Sec. 2.
Creation, the Work of the whole Trinity, as one entire cause; Why of God, as a
free and all-sufficient cause. Sec. 3. Observed in the Work of Creation; 1 The
command of Gods Power; 2 The approbation of his Goodness; 3 The ordination of
his wisdom; 4 The declaration of his Authority. Sec. 4. The immediate Creation
what, and of whom; The mediate Creation what, and of whom. Sec. 5. Man's
partaking of both. Sec. 6. How and why called the lesser world. Sec. 7. What
the first Heaven; what the second Heaven; What the third Heaven. Sec. 8. What
the influences: And what the predictions of the heavenly bodies. Sec. 9. The
creation of man, and the forming of woman: How God rested the seventh day. Sec.
10. Gods wisdom in the Order of his creation. Sec. 11. Every thing created
perfect in its kind. Sec. 12. In his works God manifests his glory: 1 The
glory of his Power: 2 Of his Goodness: 3 Of his Wisdom: 4 Of his Eternity. Sec.
13. The light of nature directs to the worship of God as the Creator. The
seventh day the Sabbath; How long to continue. Sec. 14. How the Creation is an
object of our faith.
CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Providence of God.
Sec. 1. ALL things subordinate to Gods will; In order either to his Me^cy, or
his Justice; The wisdom and power of his Providence Infallably in its
administrations. Sec. 2. The Infallibility of Gods Providence does not take
away the use of means; but confi^ms it: Sec. 3. To deny Gods Providence is
atheism: to despise the use of means is profaneness: to establish both, is
truth and righteousness: to what end is the use of means. Sec. 4. The course of
nature declares the Providence of God: this aptly illustrated. Sec. 5. Gods
Providence is no naked view, but an actual administration: What Gods Providence
is in its general concourse: How absolutely necessary for the creatures
preservation. Sec. 6. This aptly illustrated. Sec. 7. The extent of Gods
Providence: Why it makes use of means. Sec. 8. The seeming disorder in the
world, does advance the glory of Gods Providence, and assure the general
Judgment of the last day. Sec. 9. Gods Providence does order sinful actions
without any the least share in the sin. This illustrated. Sec. 10. That Gods
Providence extends to what is sinful, is not by a mere permission, but by a
powerful and wise ordination. Wicked Instruments are proper Agents and how.
Sec. 11. How the Executioners of Gods Justice: and in that Execution, how
guilty of sin: The wonder of Gods Providence in respect of wicked minds. Sec.
12. Gods Providence imposes no compelling force, but establishes the nature
of all causes, contingent, free, and necessary: No compelling force of
Providence in necessary causes. Sec. 13. Contingency in secondary causes,
illustrated; Sec: 14. How Gods Providence is equal, and how unequal. The
Providence of God general, special and peculiar. The law of Nature, and how
executed in Gods general Providence. Sec. 15. What a miracle is; and how one
greater then another. Sec. 16. Wherein miraculous effects exceed the strength
of nature. Sec. 17. Gods special Providence over Angels and men: How over
Angels; How over men. Sec. 18. Gods peculiar Providence over the Church of his
Elect: The dispensation hereof committed to Christ, and how performed. Sec. 19.
Gods Providence particularly applied, and how. Sec. 20. This aptly illustrated.
Sec. 21. Why Gods Providence does not admit Annihilation of the creatures.
CHAP. IX. Concerning the Angels, Elect and Apostate.
Sec. 1. WHat the nature of the Angels is. Sec. 2. How and when created. Sec.
3. Why and how immortal. Sec. 4. The trial of Angels; The obedience and
confirmation of the good Angels. Sec. 5. In what the confirmation of the good
Angels. Sec. 6. How and why from grace, and not from nature. Sec. 7. This grace
in the understanding. Sec. 8. And in the will made perfect by Christ. Sec. 9.
The fall and punishment of the evil Angels. Sec. 10. The service of the good
Angels in behalf of Christ's Church: the use and malice of the evil Angels in
respect of the wicked: Sec. 11. Gods glory manifested in both; No fear to the
good; no hope to the evil Angels. Sec. 12. What the orders and names of the
good: how given and constituted. Sec. 13. How they assumed bodies in their
ministrations with men; What the actions they performed in those bodies. Sec.
14. What their Knowledge, how increased and perfected. Sec. 15. Yet know not
all things, not the secrets of the heart: This Gods prerogative: How they know
the mysteries of Grace. Sect. 16. How they admonish, and persuade, yet cannot
savingly enlighten or convert: This also Gods prerogative. Sec. 17. How the
Angels enjoy Gods presence in their ministrations to the Church. Aptly
illustrated. Sec. 18. What honor we give the good Angels as their due: What we
may not give, as not being due. Not make them our mediators, not invocate them:
and why. Sec. 19. Their manner of working, and of utterance not known: what we
believe of both: What meant by the tongues of Angels. Sec. 20. What Reason
dictates concerning the speech of Angels. Sec. 21. How different, and how
agreeing with that of Men. Sec. 22. How the same with that of the souls
separate. Sec. 23. What the sin of the Apostate Angels. Satan's malice against
Christ, and how especially prosecuted. Sec. 24. What the knowledge of the
Apostate Angels. How increased: how not foretell events: how foretell them. The
end of all diabolical predictions: why not to be allowed of. Sec. 25. What the
power of the evil Angels: how exercised. Sec. 26. What their names, and how
proper and common. Gods Glory manifested in all. Sec. 27. The wonderful working
of Satan: Why not true miracles: all miracles are from God; such the miracles
of Christ. Sec. 28. Why not such the workings of Satan. Sec. 29. The punishment
of the evil Angels, 1 Of loss: 2 Of sense. How tormented with the infernal
fire. How the Doctrine concerning Devils helps to confirm the faith of God.
CHAP. X. Concerning the estate of Man before his Fall.
Sec. 1. BY the common work of creation is manifested the will and power of the
Godhead; not the mystery of the Trinity; That clearly manifested, this darkly
presented in man's creation. Created in Gods image: Sec. 2. Wherein the image of
God in man did consist: 1 In respect of his soul. Sec. 3. 2. In respect of his
body. Sec. 4. 3. In respect of his person; This peculiar to man above the
woman; Woman otherwise equal to the man. Sec. 5. 4. In respect of his estate:
In all man a complete image of God. Sec. 6. What the resemblance of the Trinity
in man. Sec. 7. What most properly meant by those words of God the creation of
man, After our likeness. Sec. 8. The souls immortality not lost by the fall;
What the change in man by his fall. Sec. 9. Why the soul is immortal. Sec. 10.
When the soul is created and infused into the body; What its principal seat,
and how it informs the body; How the soul is the offspring of God. Sec. 11.
How possessed of all virtues in its integrity. Sec. 12. The souls of men not
propagated: and why. Sec. 13. Especially proved from their immortality. Sec.
14. What the immortality of humane nature: and from whence; and how lost. Sec.
15. How some bodies said to be incorruptible: and how the bodies of our first
Parents. Sec. 16. What and how great things God did that Man should not sin:
and what he would have done that Man should not dye. Sec. 17. What original
righteousness was, and how to have been transmitted to Adams posterity. Sec.
18. Why said to be a connatural endowment. Sec. 19. The will the chief seat of
original righteousness; What its essential liberty is; What the liberty of
contrariety is; and why not essential to the will. Sec. 20. What that of
contradiction is, and why not essential to the will; In what it is necessary
that the will have a liberty of contradiction. Sec. 21. What is the liberty of
will in God, in Christ, in the Angels, and in the Blessed; what in the Devils,
and in the wicked; what in man in the state of innocence, and of grace.
CHAP. XI. Concerning the Covenant of Works and the Fall of man.
Sec. 1. ADam had a knowledge of Gods will perfect in its kind; What the Law to
Adam: How the same with the Decalogue. Sec. 2. What the covenant of Works: What
the seal of of Covenant. Sec. 3. The trial of man's obedience. Sec. 4. Man left
to the use of his free will, Tempted by Satan, Transgresses in eating the
forbidden fruit. Sec. 5. Satan's bait to catch man: The subtilty of Satan's
temptation: His order and progress in it: The Tree of knowledge of good and
evil, why so called. Sec. 6. Wherein the hainousness of Adams transgression
does consist: how a violation of the whole Law. Sec. 7. What was man's first
sin, is doubtful, and so difficult to determine. What the first internal
principle of evil in man: Adams sin was from himself freely, without force.
Sec. 8. Adams sin incurs Gods curse of death upon himself and his posterity;
why upon his posterity. Sec. 9. Adam propagates the curse and the sin too: and
this in propagating his nature. Sec. 10. Gods goodness justified in giving Man
a freewil, though he knew the Devil would thereby enter and destroy man: how it
was necessary that man should have a will, and that will a liberty to good and
evil. Sec. 11. To have made a rational creature without a will, or a will
without its liberty, does imply a contradiction. Sec. 12. The mutability of
estate in Angels and man did depend upon the liberty of the will; To be
immutable by nature is peculiar unto God. Sec. 13. Man's fall not to be laid to
Gods charge. Sec. 14. Illustrated by a fit similitude: where man cannot
satisfy his reason, it is reasonable that he exercise his faith. Sec. 15. Gods
will was permitted and disposed in man's fall, So that as God did not will man's
fall, so nor was man's fall without Gods will: How ordered to his glory and man's
good. Sect. 16. Why God did neither possitively will, nor properly nill man's
fall. Sec. 17. Why God ordered man to be tempted, left him, and permitted him
to be overcom; Adam lost the assistance of God, by not seeking it in his
prayer; what strength Adam had by creation; and what he might have had by
prayer. Sec. 18. Why God cannot be said to be the cause of man's fall; why he
permits sin.
CHAP. XII. Concerning the Author, Cause, Nature, and Adjuncts of Sin.
Sec. 1. WHy God cannot be the Author and cause of sin; Its first Original in
the Devil: how by him in Adam. Sec. 2. How the fountain and cause of sin is in
our selves fallen in Adam; how actual sin is brought forth. Sec. 3. What those
Scriptures intimate in their truth, which wicked men wrest, to make God the
Author of sin, in their Blasphemy. Sec: 4. God restrains from sin, does not
prompt to sin; The wicked rush into sin, when not restrained; how the same
actions are holy in respect of God, yet sinful in respect of the wicked. Sec:
5. It is no excuse to the wicked, that they fulfill Gods secret will, when they
disobey his will revealed: and why. Sec. 6. God wills the permission, not the
commission of sin: and why. Sec. 7. How God is said to harden in sin. Sec. 8.
What sin is in its privative being; what in its proper nature. Sec. 9. In the
several adjuncts of sin, that. 1. It is guilt; From whence proceeds horror
attended with despair. Sec. 10. 2. Its pollution; whereby God abhors man, and
man himself, with a confusion of face. Sec. 11. 3. Its punishment. Gods
vindicative Justice diversely expressed. Sec. 12. Why the guilt and punishment of
sin is infinite; How all punishment is equal and how unequal. Sec. 13. The
duration of punishment is correspondent to the duration of sin; and how. Sec.
14. How Gods justice does punish, and his mercy pardon sin; Penal satisfaction
is inconsistent with sins remission. God does not punish man for the sin he
forgives him. Sec. 15. What is formal punishment; and why the afflictions of
the godly are not such punishments. Sec. 16. To say, God punishes sin with
sin, is very improper: and why. Sec. 17. How that which is sinful may be the
punishment of sin, yet not sin the punishment. Sec. 18. How sin and punishment
are formally inconsistent. Gods wisdom and power in ordering sin and
punishment. Sec. 19. Punishment the concomitant or consequent of sin, but not
the same with it.
CHAP. XIII. Concerning Original Sin.
Sec. 1. WHat original sin is; how imputed and inherent; The unhappy consequent
and effects of both. Sec. 2. Original sin does formally consist in the
privation of original righteousness. Sec. 3. How we become deprived of original
righteousness; Why this deprivation is a sin; Sec. 4. Why the punishment of
Gods withholding righteousness is no excuse for man's sinful waste and want of
it. Sec. 5. How we become by nature children of disobedience, and children of
wrath; How proved that we are such. Sec. 6. How original sin is a repugnancy to
the whole law. Sec. 7. The contagion of original sin extends to the persons of
all mankind, and the parts of the whole man; and how. Sec. 8. What original
corruption is called in Scriptures. Sec. 9. The analogy between Christ and Adam
in respect of the righteousness and disobedience imputed What meant by that
saying, The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father. Sec. 10. How
original sin is propagated; How it remains even in the regenerate; How they
propagate it to their children. Illustrated by apt similitudes. Sec. 11. How
the children of Believers are said to be holy: Illustrated by a fit allusion.
Sec. 12. What is the subject of original sin: When the human nature is perfect,
and when the subject of original sin. Sec. 13. How the humane nature in man
becomes infected with original Sin. Sec. 14. That original sin is propagated by
carnal generation, appears by its antithesis of spiritual regeneration: How
propagated by virtue of divine ordination: Sec. 15. The sum of what concerns
original sin. Sec. 16. What concupiscence is, as spoken of in sacred Scripture:
Why seated in the superior, as well as in the inferior faculties. Sec. 17. From
whence concupiscence in its inordinacy is: why the sensitive appetite cannot be
this concupiscence: Sec. 18. What the sensitive appetite in man is; and in pure
nature how subordinate unto reason: thereby specifically distinguished from
that in the beasts. Sec. 19. Concupiscence in its inordinacy is the issue of
man's fall, and why: wherefore called sin.
CHAP. XIV. Concerning Actual Sin.
Sec. 1. THe privation of original righteousness is inseparably accompanied
with the corruption of original uncleanness: What original corruption is to
actual sins. Sec. 2. What actual sin is: what the immediate internal causes of
it: and how: Sec. 3. No inducement whatsoever can cause sin, without a
conspiracy in the inward man: No actual sin committed without the will
consenting. The will not necessitated in its volition, by any power but that of
Gods. Sec. 4. How one sin is the cause of another. Sec. 5. What the least
actual sin is: Sin is manifold in its kinds: All sin is either of omission, or
of commission: and that either in thought, in word, or in work. Sec. 6. What is
the formative power in original sin in respect of actual: Sins of omission
always accompanied with sins of commission. Sec. 7. This illustrated by
instance: He that wills the occasion of sin, by consequence wills the sin: How
sin is willed antecedently in its cause, though not directly in its self. Sec.
8. Sins of commission and of omission, having the same motive and end, are not
specifically distinct: Proved by instances. Sec. 9. What the division of sin
into that of thought, word, and work. Sec. 10. The first inordinate motions of
lust contained under the evil thoughts of the heart, though not consented to by
the will, y^^ are sin: and why. What makes any act to be sin. How the motions
of concupiscence are voluntary, through the wills defect, before they rise,
though not consented to when raised; how concupiscence it self is voluntary.
Sec. 11. The motions of concupiscence proved to be sinful by an infallible
argument, drawn from the indifferent nature of the wills consent. Sec. 12. What
the special distinction of sin into spiritual and carnal is; how all sin is
carnal, and how spiritual; What the true difference betwixt both. Sec. 13. What
the specifical distinction of sin, into that against God, against our
Neighbors, and against our Selves. How all sin is against God; how said to be
against our Neighbors, and our Selves. The threefold order which God has
established amongst men. The threefold inordinacy in breach of this order,
making three kinds of sin. Sec. 14. What the distinction of sin into that of
infirmity, of ignorance, and of malice. From whence this distinction is taken.
What is the inordinacy of the sensitive appetite; what the inordinacy of the
understanding; what the inordinacy of the will. When a sin of infirmity is;
when a sin of ignorance; when a sin of malice. Sec. 15. How the sensitive
appetite does beget an inordinacy in the will. Which are the sins of infirmity.
Sec. 16. Why sins of sudden and inordinate passion are said to be sins of
infirmity. Sec. 17. What passions do excuse wholly from sin, and what do not.
How reason ought to moderate passion. Sec. 18. What is the office of the
understanding. When guilty of that ignorance which is sin, and when guilty of
those sins which are of ignorance. Sec. 19. What ignorance does not, and what
ignorance does make the sin. What things a man is capable of knowing, but not
bound to know; what things a man is neither bound to know, nor capable of
knowing; in all these, ignorance (rather a nescience) is not sinful. Sec: 20.
What ignorance does excuse from sin: somewhat excuse, not wholly acquit;
illustrated by instance. Sec. 21. When sin cannot be excused by any ignorance:
what an affected ignorance is, and how it aggravates the sin. Sec. 22. What
ignorance is indirectly voluntary; how it self sin; yet the sins issuing from
it lessened in their guilt: and why. Sec. 23. How the sin of malice is rightly
discerned; How men are said to sin wilfully, and against conscience. Sec. 24:
That the will does not necessarily follow the right judgment of the
understanding, clearly prooved: Especially from the work of regeneration: in
which the will is renewed, as well as the understanding enlightened. Sec. 25.
How we may distinguish sins of infirmity from sins of malice. Sec. 26. What the
distinction of sin, into that of mortal and venial is: no sin venial in its
nature: and why, All sin is directly against, not any merely besides the law:
which incurring the guilt of eternal death, cannot be expiated by temporal
punishment. Sec. 27. In what all sins are mortal: yet not all equal: How some
sins mortal, and some venial: from whence we are to take the just weight of
sins guilt: what the guilt of the least sin without Christ. Sec. 28. Though all
sin be mortal, yet most especially the sin against the Holy Ghost; What the sin
against the Holy Ghost is not. Sec. 29. What it is: As in the Pharisees: As in
Julian: Why not now to be discovered by us. Sec. 30. Why called the sin against
the Holy Ghost: why this sin shall not be forgiven. Sec. 31. Sins against
Conscience lead the way to this sin against the Holy Ghost: How an erroneous
conscience entangles in sin, but binds not to what is sinful. Sec. 32. An
erroneous conscience may somewhat excuse, but cannot wholly acquit; and why.
What is the entanglement of an erroneous conscience.
CHAP. XV. Concerning the State of man fallen.
Sec. 1. THe original of all man's misery is in original sin: and how. Sec. 2.
Adams disobedience imputed, makes liable to the punishment inflicted: which
punishment is death. Sec. 3. In what this death does formally consist: In what
it does materially consist. Sec. 4. This death is spiritual, corporal, and
eternal. What this sp ritual death is. Sec. 5. What are the relics of man's
primitive estate in the estate of man fallen: In respect of his understanding;
In respect of his will; In respect of his conscience, and in respect of his
affections: Sec. 6. The soul in man's fall, is whole in its natural essence,;
but spoiled of its spiritual habits. Thereby disabled for any spiritual good.
Sec. 7. What freedom the will has lost by the fall, and what it retains after
the fall. What liberty of will remains in the vilest Reprobate, or Devil. Sec.
8. How God does turn and incline the wills of men, without any forcibly
compelling. Why the exhortations, etc. of Gods word are not in vain in respect
of the wicked. Sec. 9. By multiplying his sin, man aggravates his punishment;
and how in spirituals. Sec. 10. What the corporal death; and how begun. Sec.
11. How and when finished. Sec. 12. What the eternal death: In its punishment
of loss, and of sense. Sec. 13. What the punishment of loss is. Sec: 14. What
the punishment of sense is. Sec. 15. How the punishment of the damned is
infinite, as well as eternal. Sec. 16. That wrath which comes by original sin,
is aggravated by man's actual transgression; the full measure, is at the day of
judgment; and how. Sec. 17. The estate of man fallen summarily described. No
salvation by the law, or first covenant of works; So that, without Redemption
by a Mediator, Adam and his posterity must inevitably perish in their sin.
SION'S PROSPECT In it is FIRST VIEW.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Holy SCRIPTURES.
SEeing Grace does not destroy, but exalt Nature; therefore, as the Natural
inclination of the Will becomes subservient unto Charity, so does the Natural
Reason of the Understanding become subservient unto Faith. Hence it is, Reason,
arguguing from Scripture for the Scriptures.
that the holy Scriptures do not only establish our Faith, but also instruct
our 1 Pet. 3 15. Isa. 1 18. Eze. 18.25, 29.
Reason; even furnishing us with arguments rationally to prove their Truth to
be sacred, their Authority divine. The manner and method of arguing is this;
Among all the Principles of Natural Divinity, there is none more firm, more
evident, more universal then this, That 1 Ki. 18.21. Act. 17.23. Romans 1 23, 25.
God is to be worshipped.

. 2. The true Knowledge of which God, The knowledge of God and his worship by
Revelation.
and right form of whose Worship cannot be had, but by some John 1.18. Deuteronomy.
29.29.
Revelation, (whereby he does manifest himself and declare his will) as the 2
Cor. 3.18. 2 Cor. 4.6.
Glass of his Divinity, and the Mat. 7.21. Isa 1 10, 12. Col 2.23. Mat. 5.9.
Rule of his Worship. This Revelation either with the Jews or with the
Christians.
Now such a Revelation (upon Reason's strictest enquiry) is no where to be
found, but either in the Jewish, or the Christian Church. The former tells us,
they have committed to them the Rom 3.2. and chap 9.4.
Oracles of God; the latter the Mar. 16.15. 1 Cor. 1.17.
Gospel of Christ, and this Gospel as a 2 Cor 3 9. Mat. 5.17. Romans 10 4. 2 Cor.
3 14. Heb 9 10. and chap. 10.1.
cleerer light, in the full complement of those Oracles.

The Church of the Jews enquired into by Reason.
. 3. And here whilst we view the Jewish Sanctuary, Sacrifices, and Prophecies
by the light of Reason, we see them plainly Joh. 5.39, 46 Lu. 10.23, 24. 1 Cor.
15 3, 4.
look and lead unto Christ. For their Sanctuary and Sacrifices being Heb 9.1.10.
Earthly and Carnal, must needs (in the pure worship of that God, who is a John
4.24. Heb. 12.9. Isa 1 10, 12. etc. Heb. 1.5, 6, 7.
spirit, and the Father of spirits) be the H^b. 8.4.5. chapter 9 9, 23, 24.
Types and shadows of things Heavenly and Spiritual; so that as their
Prophecies having their appointed time, either they are fulfilled, or they have
expired; so their Sanctuary and Sacrifices being Types and shadows, either
they were vain, or they have vanished, and this in Christ the Col. 2.17. John
1.17.
Substance of those shadows, and the John 1.45. Luke 24.27. Mat 1.22, 23. chap.
26.56. chapter 27.35. Luke 22 37. Joh. 19.36, 37.
Subject of these Prophecies.

Reason leads from the Church of the Jews to the Church of the Christians.
. 4. For let the Jews search the several places and Ages of the World, they
cannot find a fulfilling of Genesis 49.10. Hag. 2.7.9. Genesis 3.15. Deuteronomy. 18 15.
Isa 2.2. and 7.14. and 9.6, 7. Dan. 2.44, 45.
Special Prophecies; nor can they give us an Antitype and substance for their
Sanctuary and Sacrifices, but in the Person and in the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
as the promised Messiah. So that for the true and more full Knowledge of God,
with the right and more pure form of his Worship, we are directed by the
Dictate of Reason to the Church of Christ; With the Church of Christ is found
the Word of God as the Rev^l^tion of his Will.
1 Timothy 3.15.
which as the Pillar of Truth does hold forth to us the Holy Scriptures, as the
Romans 3.2. Luke 1.70. 2. Cor. 2.17. chap. 4.2. 1 These. 2.13.
word of God, delivered by the 2 Timothy 3.16 2 Pet. 1.21. 1 Cor. 2.13.
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit.

. 5. These Holy Scriptures are the writings of the Ephesians. 2.20. 2 Pet. 3.2.
Prophets and Apostles in the books of the Old 2 Cor. 3.14.
Testament and the New. The Word of God, the Holy Scriptures in the Books of
the Old Testament and the New.
The Original and Authentic edition of the former, according to the writings
of Moses and the Prophets, is the Hebrew; and of the latter according to the
writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, is the Greek. What Editions are
Authentic
That the Mother language of the Jews; this the most common language of the
Gentiles, who in a contradistinct notion to the Jews are therefore called 1
Cor. 23.24. Romans 2.9, 10. Gal. 3.28.
Greeks; and as the first edition of the Holy Scriptures were, Translations in
the Vulgar tongue allowed.
so the after translations ought to be in the Vulgar tongue, that they may be
John 5.39. Col. 3.16. Acts 8.28. 1 These. 5.27. Rev. 1 3.
read of all.

. 6. The Apocrypha (signifying secret or hid, The Aprocrypha why so called.
either, in respect of their Authors, being not certainly known; or their
Authority not being publicly received) seeing we find them not in the Hebrew,
we acknowledge not as Canonical, to prove doctrines of faith, Why not Canonical.
though profitable for instruction in moral duties. We receive those books
only to be of the Old Testament, The Old Testament received from the Jews.
which were kept Luke 24.44.
Sacred by the Jews, by an especial Providence and Rom 32. chap 9.4.
Divine appointment made faithful Registers and Bibliothists to the Christian
Church.

. 7. And seeing the Church has its Ephesians. 2.20.
foundation fixed upon the Scriptures, The Authority of the Scriptures is not
from the Church.
the Scriptures cannot have their Authority derived from the Church; so that as
not Joh. 5.33, 34.
Christ's Ministry, so nor does Christ's Word receive its Weight or Worth, its
Excellency or Authority, from the Testimony of Man. That the Lord Jesus Christ
was Romans 4 25.
delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification, we
believe; what? because the Church does so teach us? No, but because the Romans
10.17.
Scriptures do so teach the Church.

. 8. The Holy Scriptures being those 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20.
Credential letters, The Authority of the Church is from Christ by the
Scriptu^es.
which Christ the King of glory has given to his Church, must necessarily have
their Authority from their Author, which is Christ; and what Authority the
Church has from Christ, is conveyed and confirmed by the 1 Timothy 3.15.
Scriptures; so that the Authority of the Scriptures, is far above the
Authority of the Church And though the Tradition of the Church does declare the
Authority of the Sciptures, yet does it not give Authority to them; as the John
1.7.29 34.
Testimony of John Baptist does declare Christ to be the Messiah, yet does not
make him to be the Messiah by so declaring him.

The Tradition of the Church leads to the Scriptures.
. 9. Yea, in our believing the Scriptures to be the word of God; though true it
is, the Church leads us unto the Scriptures, as the John 4.39.
woman did the Samaritans unto Christ, by a Traditional report of their Divine
excellency; yet having read them diligently, and faithfully Joh. 7.17, 18
observed the deep Mysteries, The excellency of the writings affect the mind.
the sure Prophesies, the glorious Miracles, the purity of the Precepts, the
harmony of the Parts, the efficacy of the Doctrines, the sincerity of the
Writers, the plainness of the Style, with the Majesty of the Word; having
observed these, it is through the convincing power of the John 14.17.
spirit of Truth, The Spirit convinces of the Truth.
that we say to the Clurch, as the John 4.42. and 5 39.
Samaritans did to the woman; Now we believe no more because of thy saying (of
thy Tradition) for we our selves have read and know, that these Scriptures are
indeed the word of God, and in them we have eternal life. A moral persuasion
from the Church, and the letter a divine belief from the Spirit.


. 10. That the Scriptures then are the Word of God, we believe in a 1 John 5.9.
John 16.13. 1 Cor. 2.10 12. 1 John 2.20.27.
moral persuasion from the outward Tradition of the Church, and the
incomparable excellency of the matter; but in a Divine Faith from the b inward
Testimony of the Spirit.

. 11. Indeed, though the Scriptures are a light, Psalm. 119.105. 2 Pet. 1.19.
yea the 2 Cor. 3.18.
clear light of the Sun of Righteousness; yet it is only to those who have
their eyes opened. The brightest day appears not in it is glorious beauty to the
blind, Why the Scriptures are not discernable by their own ligh^ without the
Spirit.
nor the plainest Scripture in its Divine Truth to the 1 Cor. 2.14.
unbelieving; and Faith being the Ephesians. 2.8.
Gift of God, none can believe, but to whom it is Luke 8.10.
given. Yea, were the Scriptures like the Sun, discernable by their own light,
all should acknowledge them Divine, who read them written, or hear them
preached; but the contrary practice confirms the contrary opinion, that seeing
all do not receive them, it is by a 1 Cor. 2.15.
peculiar Gift of the Spirit, that any do believe them, that they are the word
of God.

. 12. What, and from whence the Authority of the Scriptures.
And believing these books of Holy Scriptures to be (as (...)) the word of God,
we acknowledge them to be ((...)) of sovereign and sacred Authority, for the
proving, deciding, and determining all Deuteronomy. 17.9, 10, 11. Isai. 8.20. Acts
17.2.11. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. Gal. 1.8.
controversies in Doctrines of Faith, containing in them 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Acts
20 27.
all Truths necessary to Salvation, Their sufficiency.

Their perfection.


and as not being subject to Mark 12.24.
error in themselves, nor to receive Joh. 10 35. 2 Pet. 1.19. Deuteronomy. 12.32.
Prove. 30 5, 6. Rev. 22.18.
Addition, or Diminution, or Change, by the Gal. 3.15. and 2.8.
Authority of Men, or revelation of Angels.

. 13. How the Rule of our faith.
We say the Holy Scriptures are the 1 These. 5.21. 1 John 4.1, 6. 2 John 9. Romans
16.17.
Canon and Rule of our Faith; and as a Rule has its just measure inherent in
it self, not depending upon the hand of the Artificer; so the Scriptures have
their infallible truth inherent in themselves, not depending upon the judgment
of the Church. And as when we speak of a Rule, we mean not the material wood,
but the formal measure; so when we speak of the Scriptures, being the Rule of
our Faith, we mean not the material Book, but the formal Truth, even the will
of God revealed. And we expect not any more, nor any other Revelation as a Rule
of faith or life, Such to the end of the world.
but this to Heb. 1.1, 2 Mat, 28.20. 1 Cor. 11.26. 2 These. 2.8.
continue to the end of the world.

. 14. Prophesies and particular Revelations, Particular Revelations not now to
be expected.
they were to the Church as the light of the Moon and of the Stars to the
world; of much use and benefit in the night, even in the darkness of
ignorance, and dim light of Types and Figures; whereas the glory of the Gospel,
like that of the Sun, it gives us a Noon-light of divine Truth; so that, now to
expect particular Revelations in matters of faith, were to light a candle in
the Sun; or to look for a Star at Noon. Doubtless this is the high way to 2
These. 2.10, 11, 12. 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 These. 2.1.
Heresy, and gives advantage to Satan, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14.
transformed into an Angel of light, the more easily to deceive, and the more
dangerously to seduce.

What received as the Truth by the Church.
. 15. Whatsover is preached or taught, expressed in the letter, or agreeable to
the Analogy of the Holy Scriptures, we receive as Mal. 2.6. John 17.17. Acts
18.28. 2 Timothy 2.15.
Truth; But what is opposite to, or dissenting from them, we reject as Acts
17.11. Mark 12.24.
error. And what things are indifferent in their own nature, as being neither
directly expressed in the word, nor necessarily deduced from it, nor any way
opposite to the word, or inconsistent with it, those things we acknowledge left
to the Prudence of Governors, What left to the Prudence of Governors, and to
what end.
for the preservation of 1 Cor. 11.16. chap. 14.26, 33, 40. Heb. 13.17. Philip.
2.14.
Order and Unity in the Church; which things, indifferent in their nature, by
the command of lawful Authority, do become necessary in their use.

In what the Scriptures are plain, and in what hard to be understood.
. 16. And seeing the Holy Scriptures though in most texts they are Deuteronomy. 30.11,
14. Psalm. 19.7, 8. 2 Timothy 3.15. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. Psalm. 119.105. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
clear, yet in many they are 1 Cor. 2.6, 7. 2 Pet. 3.16.
obscure; Though in Truths absolutely necessary to salvation, they are easy,
yet in mysteries excellently profitable for edification, they are difficult to
be understood; Therefore for the true Interpretation of Scripture, How to be
Interpreted.
we admit the judgment of the Church, as a trusty Guide, and the opinion of
the Learned as a rational Argument; but we approve the Scripture it self as an
2 Pet. 1.20.
infallible Rule; clearing those texts which are dark and doubtful, What the
Analogy of Faith.
by those places which are more plain and evident, being careful to keep close
to the Romans 12.6. Phil. 3.16.
Analogy of Faith, which does consist in those Principles of Christianity,
which are clearly set forth in Scripture, and generally received of the Church.
A Sum whereof we have in those short Confessions of Faith, called the Apostles
Creed, Athanasius Creed, and the Nicene Creed, together with the Decalogue, the
Lords Prayer, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments.

. 17. The duty of Christians in the use of the Scriptures.
And that every true Christian may be thoroughly furnished with Knowledge unto
works of Holiness and Righteousness, it is his duty diligently to Joh. 5 39. 2
Pet. 1.19. Luke 16.29.
search the Scriptures, and to Deu. 5 32, 33 John 13.17. Jam. 1.22, 25.
conform his judgment and conversation according to their rule and direction:
Their fullness of heavenly Doctrine.
They being the Heavenly Storehouse from whence the Church of Christ is
furnished with all spiritual Luke 4.4. Heb. 5 12, 13, 14 1 Pet. 2.2.
Provision of sound Doctrine, whether it be in matters of Faith or Manners; 2 Timothy 3.16.
Profitable they are ((...)) for Doctrine and Instruction in what concerns God
and Christ, Creation and Redemption, Sin and Grace, Death and Life, Misery and
Blessedness: ((...)) for Argument and Conviction, in discovering and refuting
Error, in discerning and confirming Truth: ((...)) for Correction and
Reformation, How a perfect form of Institution.
in what concerns Mind and Manners, the inward and the outward Man, in
thoughts, in words, and in works; and of these Three does consist the Apostles
perfect ((...)) form of institution in Righteousness.

CHAP. II. Concerning God in the Unity of Essence.
. 1. AS the Sun is in it self most visible, Why the Nature of God is not to be
comprehended by the understanding of Man.
so is God in himself most intelligible; and therefore that the Sun dazeleth
the eye, and God the understanding, it is from the abundance of glory in both,
in respect of our weakness to see, and insufficiency to apprehend; so that our
defect of Knowledge in the nature of God, is not so properly from the
excellency of the object, as from the deficiency of the faculty; our John. 1.18.
understanding being too narrow to comprehend the incomprehensible Essence of
the Godhead; as whatsoever is finite must needs be too short either to reach,
How the incomprehensible God is apprehended by faith.
or to fathom that which is infinite. Wherefore God dwelling in that 1 Timothy
1.1. and 6.16.
light of glorious Excellency, and inaccessible glory, which no eye of humane
Reason can approach, or enter; we not being able to Psalm. 136.6. and 145.3.
Exodus 33.20.23. 1 Cor. 13.12.
comprehend him in a full knowledge, have some apprehensions of him by a divine
faith, as he has Deuteronomy. 29.29. John. 1.18.
revealed himself to us in his word.

. 2. By which Ephesians. 1.13.
Word of Truth, we believe God to be a john. 4 24.
Spirit of Psa. 148.13.
incomprehensible glory; who is in Scripture described unto us, How God is
described in Scripture.
by his Names, and by his Attributes; (described, not defined; for there is no
Name nor Attribute which can give us an adequate signification of God in his
Essence. The Names of God.
) His Names, especially Jehovah, and Shaddai; His name Exodus 6.3. Isa. 42.8.
Jehovah declares him to be Exodus 3.14.15.
a God absolute in his Essence; and his name Shaddai, Genesis 17.1.
a God all-sufficient in his fullness.

. 3. So that from the Names of God we believe him to be an absolute and an
infinite Spirit, having his being in himself, who as Adonai, Deuteronomy. 4.39 Col.
1.16. Nehem. 9 6.
sole Lord of heaven and earth, The description of God according to his names.
Further described by his Attributes. The first and principal.
gives and preserves being to all his creatures; whatsoever is (extra deum)
without Acts 17.24.25.28. Phil. 2.13. 1 Cor. 8.6.
God depending upon God, in essence and subsistence; in faculty and operation;
in habit and in act.

. 4. But God is further described unto us by his Attributes, of which the first
and principal are these, that he is most 1 John 1.5.
simple (without any the least composition) Exodus 3.14.
absolute, and Psalm. 145.
infinite, having all fullness Psalm 36.9. Heb 10 31.
of life, Dan 4.34. Job 22 2.3. Psalm. 16.2. Romans 11.35.
perfection, and 1 Timothy 1.11. and 6.15.
blessedness in himself. And God being simple in his essence, he is also Mal
3.6. Jam. 1.17.
immutable in his nature; being absolute, he is also Exodus 6.3 4
all sufficient; and being infinite, he is also 1 Kin. 8.27.
incomprehensible, Jer. 23.2.4.
omnipresent, and Psalm. 90.2.
eternal.

. 5. Why incommunicable to the creatures.
All which Attributes are so proper unto God, that they are Isa. 4.28.
incommunicable to the creatures, their contrary being found in all the
creatures, as depending upon him who is absolute, subject to change by him who
is immutable, comprehended by him who is incomprehensible, receiving their
measure from him who is infinite; their place from him who is omnipresent, and
their beginning from him who is eternal.

. 6. The Attributes communicable to the creatures.
But the knowledge of God whereby he is Heb. 4 13.
omniscient; the power of God whereby he is Psalm. 91.1.
omnipotent; the Exodus 34.6. Isa. 6.3.
Goodness and Truth, Mercy and Justice, etc. in all which he is infinite, How
communicable.
are Attributes communicable to the creatures; not in Essence, but by Analogy,
according to that impress of Divinity which God has stamped upon Angels, and
Men, either by Acts 17 28.
Nature, or by 1 Pet. 1.4.
Grace, or by 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.
Glory.

. 7. God's essential attributes his one entire Essence.
All the essential Attributes of the Godhead are not so many several qualities
or accidents in God, But the Ephesians. 4 6. 1 John 1.5. and 4.5.
one very entire Essence of God; His omniscience, omnipotence, How
distinguished.
and other his Sacred Attributes, not being distinguished one from another
really in Gods nature; but only formally in our conceptions; for though as
they are conceived by us they seem diverse and different Attributes; yet 1 Cor.
15.28. 1 John 1.5.
in God they are but one most single and pure Act; Which single Act in God is
diversely expressed to us in different Names, because of our weakness, who cannot
in any measure conceive of it, Why diversely expressed in different names.
but in different notions: And thus though the Act be one in God as the Agent,
and the Attributes one with God in his Nature, yet are they said to be diverse
according to the diversity of the Objects and Effects which are without God in
his Essence.

. 8. Thus there is but one God; and impossible it is there should be many gods;
for seeing it is absolutely necessary, Why there can be but one God.
that he who is God have all perfection of being in himself; to make many gods,
were to make them all imperfect, and so they can be no gods. To allow of
Polutheism (then) is to admit of Atheism; he cannot worship any God, who
acknowledges many gods; seeing there can be but One most perfect, as but One
first Mover, one first efficient. How One single, pure, and perfect.
And this One God, is Deuteronomy. 6.4. Isa. 45.5. 1 Cor. 8.4. Jam. 2.19.
one, single, pure, and perfect Being; 2 Cor. 3.17. 1 Timothy 6.16.
single without parts, 1 Samuel 15.29 Hos. 11.9.
pure without passions, Mat. 5.48. 1 John 1.5.
perfect without infirmities.

. 9. So that when in sacred Scripture God is said to have Psalm. 34.15.
eyes, and Heb 10.31.
hands; to be Psalm. 7.11.
angry, and Ephesians. 4 36.
grieved; to Psalm. 44.22.
sleep, and Psalm. 44.22.
awake, or the like; These we so understand as spoken ((...)) after the manner
of men, Why said to have eyes and hands, to be angry and grieved, etc.
according to our capacity of conceiving, that we might in some measure truly
apprehend that in a divine analogy to be done of God, which we see and know to
be done of men, who indeed have eyes and have hands, are angry and are grieved,
He admits no bodily likeness.
do sleep and do awake. The incorporeal Isa. 40.18. and 46.5. Romans 1.23. Deuteronomy.
4.15, 16. Col. 1.15.
God is not to be imagined like any thing that is visible and bodily.

CHAP. III. Concerning God in the Trinity of Persons.
What the knowledge of God from a natural sight.
. 1. THE Knowledge of God which is from the Romans 1 19, 20
light of Nature, does take it is rise from sense, and can ascend no higher then
it is supported, nor go any further then it is led by sensible objects; which
give us no clearer Knowledge of God, then the effects do of their cause; namely,
that He is, and that He is not such as they are; but far excelling them in
Essence and in Attributes; as not being compounded, not depending, not finite,
not mutable, and the like; But the Knowledge of God which is from a Supernatural
light, What from a light Supernatural.
that is merely by divine Joh. 1.18. Exodus 33.23.
Revelation; as that God is the Ephesians. 1.2, 3. Mat. 6.9.
Father of Christ, and of his Church, the Genesis 15.1. Heb. 11.6.
Reward of the Faithful, the Psalm. 68.20. Isa, 12.2. Jer. 3.23.
Salvation of Israel, and the like. Yea, such is our Knowledge of God (through
the apprehension of Faith) in the Glorious Mystery of the Blessed Trinity;
whereby we believe the same God which is Deuteronomy. 6.4. Isa. 45.5. 1 Cor. 8.4.6.
One in nature or being, Who are the three Persons, and what a Person is.
is also Genesis 1.26. and 11.7, 8. Isa. 6.3. and 63. ver. 7, 9, 10. Mat. 3.16,
17. and 28.19. 2 Cor. 13 14. 1 John 5.7.
Three in Persons or manner of subsisting, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: which
Three Persons do not divide the Unity into parts, but distinguish the Trinity
by their properties.

. 2. A finite Understanding not possiby able to comprehend this infinite
mystery.
And here we acknowledge it impossible that a finite understanding should
comprehend that mystery which is infinite in its Glory; and therefore when the
mind soars high to conceive the truth of the Unity, it is dazzled with the
glory of the Trinity; and when it would conceive the mystery of the Trinity, it
is overcome with the glory of the Unity. And to illustrate this mystery with
instances is to shadow out the light with colors; Not to be illustrated by any
Instances.
though the instances are that of the same Sun in its body, beams and light;
the same water in its fountain, spring, and river; yea the same soul in its
understanding, memory, and will.

. 3. This is as high as Reason will reach, The highest pitch of Reason's
apprehension.
God is an infinite being, having in himself a power to be, which begets a
Knowledge that he is, and from both proceeds a love of that knowledge and power
of being; This infinite Being is equal and one in all these Relations, yet the
Relations distinguished in themselves, as distinct manners of the Beings
subsistence. Thus the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three distinct subsistences
of one infinite Essence; three distinct Persons of one eternal Godhead; the
Father as the power of the Godhead, begets the Son; the Son, as the wisdom of
that Godhead, is begotten of the Father; and the Holy Ghost, as the Love of
both, proceeds from the Father and the Son. And as that power never was without
that knowledge, nor that power and knowledge without that love; so nor ever was
the Father without the Son, nor the Father and the Son without the Holy Ghost.
And as that Knowledge is equal to the Power, and the Love equal to both; so the
Son is equal to the Father, and the Holy Ghost equal to the Father and the Son.

. 4. Now though Reason cannot instruct us to know what is hid, Reason directing
to Faith.
yet it does direct us to believe what is revealed concerning this mystery. For
what more reasonable then this, that what we cannot attain by a Natural
Knowledge, we should receive by a Divine Faith, when revealed unto us by God in
his Word? Which Word teaches us, What and how a Trinity of Persons in the
Unity of the Godhead.
that the three Persons in the Godhead are not three parts of God, but John
10.30. 1 Timothy 1.17.
One only God. The Ephesians. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.3.
Father God, the John 1.1. Heb. 1.2, 3. 1 John 5 10.
Son God, and the Acts 5.3, 4.
Holy Ghost God; and yet not Isa. 6.3. Rev. 4.8.
three Gods, but one God; all the three Persons being Genesis 1.26. John 5.18.
Phil. 2.6.
Coessential and Coequal.

. 5. That the Son is God, The Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, firmly proved.
and the Holy Ghost is God, is made evident to the eye of Faith, from these
testimonies of sacred Scriptures, which give them the Jer. 23.6. 1 John 5.6.
Romans 9 5. Acts 28.25. Tit. 2.13. 1 Cor. 3.16.
Proper Names, the Isa. 9.6. Heb. 9.14. Phil. 3.21. Psalm. 13.9 7. John 21.17. 1
Cor. 2.10, 11
Essential Attributes, 2 Cor. 13 14.
the Heb. 1 23. Job 26.13. and 33.4. Ephesians. 4.8.11. 1 Cor. 12.11. Mat. 12.28.
John 6.54. Rom 8.11.
Divine operations, and the H b 1.6. 1 Cor 6.19. Psalm. 2.12. Ephesians. 4.30. Mat
28.19.
Holy worship of God.

. 6. In this Trinity the Godhead is not divided, How the Persons are
distinguished
but the Persons are distinguished; the Godhead is not divided in it is essence,
but the Isa. 61.1. John 8.16, 17, 18. John 14.26. and 15.26.
Persons distinguished by their properties; The Psalm. 2.7. Heb. 1.5.
Father begetting, the John 1.14. Heb. 1.6.
Son begotten, and the John 15.26. Gal. 4.6.
Holy Ghost proceeding; which properties do not make them different Beeings,
but one and the same Being in a diverse manner of subsisting. God begetting is
the Father; God begotten is the Son, and God proceeding is the Holy Ghost.
Again, the Father is God begetting the Son; the Son is God begotten of the
Father; and the Holy Ghost is God proceeding from both the Father and the Son.

. 7. Though the Word Trinity and Person are not found literally expressed, How
Trinity and Person are found in Scripture.
yet are they found plainly employed in Text of Mat. 28.19. John 14.16. Ephesians.
2.18.
sacred Scripture. Yea, seeing St. John does tell us of God, that he 1 John.
5.7.
is Three, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; who shall question the
word Trinity (numerus numeratus) in the abstract, who reads the word Three
(numerus numerans) in the concrete? Which Three bearing record, most firm it is
by a Trinity of testimonies, which does plainly intimate a Trinity of
subsistences; What a Subsistence is.
and what a subsistence is, St. Paul resolves us, when he says of the Son,
that he is Heb. 1.3.
((...)) the express Image of his Fathers Subsistence; where the word
Subsistence does truly, and fully, and clearly signify the Divine Essence with
it is personal property.

. 8. Mat. 28.19. John 5.26.
The Father is the first Person, How the Father is the first Person
not in priority of Dignity or of time, but of Order as being the fountain of
the Trinity, Joh. 10, 30, 38. Mat. 11.27. Joh. 16.14, 15.
Communicating (not alienating from himself) the whole Nature and Essential
Attributes of the Godhead to the Son, and with the Son to the Holy Ghost. So
that the Father has the whole Essence and Attributes of the Godhead in
himself, nd from none other; the John 5.26. and 6.63. Romans 8.12.
Son has the whole Essence and Attributes of the Godhead in himself, but from
the Father; and the Holy Ghost has the whole Essence and Attributes of the
Godhead in himself, but from the Father and the Son. Thus the Person of the Son
is (in the Unity of Essence) begotten of the Heb. 1.3.
Person of the Father; and the Person of the Holy Ghost is (in the unity of the
same essence) proceeding from the Person of the Father, and of the Son; This
divine Essence and Godhead is (...), neither begets, nor is begotten; How
each Person is (...).
neither proceeds, nor is proceeding; so that each Person of the Godhead is
((...)) God subsisting in himself; which subsisting does imply, with the unity
of the Essence, ((...)) the manner of existence.

How the Essence and Attributes. of the Godhead are communicated.
. 9. As the Father is God Deuteronomy. 33.27.
eternal, so the Son is God Isa. 9.6.
eternal, and the Holy Ghost is God Heb. 9.14.
eternal; And as the Father is God Psalm. 91.1.
Almighty, so the Son is God Rev. 1.8.
Almighty, and the Holy Ghost is God Romans 8.11. Luke 1 35.
Almighty; and thus also in the other Attributes of the Deity, they are all
equally and fully John 16.15. Isa. 53.8.
communicated in an eternal Generation, from the Father to the Son; and in an
Psalm. 33.6. Luke 1.35.
eternal Spiration, from the Father, and the Son to the Holy Ghost.

The properties of the Persons incommunicable.
. 10. But though the essential Attributes of the Godhead are communicable to
all the Persons, yet the several properties of the Persons are incommunicable
to each other of themselves; so that the Son cannot be said to beget, nor the
Father to be begotten, nor the Holy Ghost to be begotten, or begetting, but
proceeding.

CHAP. IV. Concerning God's Knowledge.
How God knows all things.
. 1. GOD being a simple and absolute Essence, (simple without any composition,
absolute without any dependence) Psa. 33.13.14.
knows all things, not by any faculty or habit, but by Psalm. 147.5.
One eternal, indivisible, and unchangeable act in himself, without any
succession of priority or posteriority, past, or to come; to whose eye all
things are Heb 4 13.
naked and 2 Pet. 3.8.
present, according to the Acts 15 18.
omniscience of his nature, and the Acts 15 18.
eternity of his being Here we must not expect to give or receive any Romans
11.33. 1 Cor. 8.2.
full or clear knowledge of God; but such as is encumbered with many imperfect
notions, whilst we endeavor to Isa. 40.18.28
apprehend or represent so lofty a Majesty in our low conceptions.

. 2. God's fore-knowledg how and what it is.
The Scriptures speaking according to our capacity of conceiving, do tell us of
God's fore-knowledg, whereby it is, that he Psa. 139 2, 14. Acts 2.23. Isa.
45.21.
beholds afar off (already determined in the council of his will) what is
future in the existence of its being. And things are not therefore future,
because God fore-knows them, but he therefore fore-knows them; because they are
future. For if God's fore-knowledg had an effective power, all things must
needs have been from eternity in their existence; being Pro 8.22, 23. Acts.
15.18.
eternally fore-known of God in his decree: yea, Not the cause of things, and
why.
if God's fore-knowledg were the cause of things, then were he the cause of all
he fore-knows; and if the cause of all he fore-knows, then were he the cause of
sin; which is as opposite to God, as Psalm. 5.4. 2 Cor. 6.14.
hell to heaven, or darkness to light.

. 3 God's knowledge and will being equally absolute and eternal; How all things
depend upon God's Will pre-ordaining not his Knowledge fo e-seeing.
he must needs know in himself from before all time, what he Ephesians. 1.11.
wills in himself to be in time; and hereby the creatures depend upon his will,
pre-ordaining them to be; not upon his knowledge, foreseeing them in their
being; Yet God's fore-knowledg depends not upon the creatures future existence.
yet as the creatures future existence does not depend upon God's
fore-knowledg, so, nor does God's fore-knowledg depend upon the creatures
future existence; Before and after, past and to come relate not to God.
he fore-knowing them as they are Ephesians. 1.9.
in him their proper cause, not as they are Romans 11.36.
from him in their own nature.

. 4. It is by one and the same Act that God does know all things before and
after they have their being; which before and after does not relate unto God,
But in the creature.
but unto the Creatures; and the change of Exodus 3.14. Psalm. 102.24. etc. Acts
1.7.
past and to come, is not at all in him, but altogether in them; which is thus
very aptly, though not enough fully illustrated. This aptly illustrated.
A man standing upon an high mountain, does behold in the valley beneath
several persons passing and repassing, some before, and some after another; all
which are present to the single view of his eye. Thus God seated on the high
mountain of his Isa. 57.15.
eternity, looking Psa. 33.13.14. and 113.6.
down upon the low valley of time; he does behold his several creatures, one
before and after another, but all Isa. 44.6.
present to the intuition of his knowledge; so that there is no future in
respect of eternity, but Eccles. 3.1. Jer. 6.16. Psalm. 77.5. 1 John 2.18.
Eccles. 1.4.
past, and to come, are the parts and properties of time, in the relation of
one creature to another, in the succession of their beings.

God knowing things to come, and past, does it in one and the same act of
Knowledge.
. 5. That God did know the world should be created, and since does know that
the world has been created, is by one and the same knowledge in God, though it
be not one and the same truth in the propositions; that being altered according
to the change in the creatures existing, without any Jam 1.17.
change or alteration in the Creator's knowing their existence; This act
eternal.
who knows them by an eternal act, which admits no succession of time: There
may be, and is a Eccles. 9.11. Heb. 1.10, 11, 12
change in the creatures; So no change in God.
but neither is, nor Mal. 3.6. Heb. 1.12. and 13, 8. Rev. 1.8.
can be in God, who does not receive either addition or diminution of Nature,
or of Attributes, by the creation or annihilation, the salvation or destruction
of any; And that God now does what before he did not, is nothing else, but that
beginning to be which before was not; and so the change is in the effect, not
in the efficient: yea, seeing a mutability of Knowledge is inconsistent with an
eternity of Being; it must needs be, that God knows the several changes in the
creatures, without any change in his Knowledge.

. 6. No contingency in respect of of God's fore-knowledg.
Though God's fore-knowledg does not cause a necessity of being, yet all things
must Acts 2, 23. and 15.18.
necessarily be as he fore-knows them; so that there is no Numb. 35.22, 23.
Prove. 16.33.
contingency in respect of God the primary cause; contingency being a part of
his creation, and founded in secondary causes; whereby it is, Yet in the
secondary causes.
that both these propositions are true; All things are infallibly necessary in
God's fore-knowledg; and some things are merely contingent in their causes.

. 7. Sure we are, All future events are fore-known of God.
nothing can be but what God wills, and his will does not decree without his
knowledge, nor effect without his power; so that impossible it is, that any
thing can be besides his knowledge foreseeing, any more then without his power
producing, or his will determining. All future Psalm. 135.6. Prove. 21.1. Acts 18
21. 1 Cor. 4.19. Jam. 4.15. Rev. 17.17.
effects then, and events whatsoever, being within the compass of God's will,
they must needs be within the circumference of his fore-knowledg; His
fore-knowledg infallible.
which being certain and infallible, nothing can be to him (though never so
much in it self) uncertain and contingent. And sure, needs must God's
fore-knowledg be infallible, seeing his will is independent.

. 8. The fore-knowledg of God, How applied unto the Elect in Scripture.
besides the Acts 2.23.
determination of his will, does also signify (in the language and notion of
the sacred Scriptures) an Romans 8.29. 1 Pet 1.2.
approbation of his love, and so is more peculiarly applied unto his Romans 8.29.
1 Pet 1.2.
elect, as Exodus 33 17. Mat 7.23. 2 Timothy 2.19.
knowledge is unto his Saints; denoting his gracious love to them, and tender
care over them, for their safety and salvation.

CHAP. V. Concerning God's Will.
God's Will one, and absolutely free.
. 1. THE Will of God, whereby he is most properly ((...)) absolutely free in
himself, it is but one, as being his very Essence, which admits neither 1 John
1.5.
composition, not Isa. 45.6.
division; yet (because we speak of the things of God, after the manner of men,
wanting thoughts to conceive, Distinguished into his will secret and revealed;
of sign, and of good pleasure.
and words to express otherwise of him) we distinguish the will of God into his
Deuteronomy. 29.29. Romans 11.34. Col. 1.9.
secret will, and his revealed will; his will of sign, and his will of good
pleasure; which are one and the same will under diverse and distinct notions.

What this secret will.
. 2. His secret will (which is always his will of good pleasure, though his
will of good pleasure is not always secret) that being hid from our eye, we
are in humility to attend, not in curiosity to enquire. What his revealed will.
His revealed will (which is always his will of sign, as his will of sign is
always his will revealed) that being the Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 1.9. Col. 4.12.
object of faith, and the Mat. 6.10. and 7.21. 1 These. 4.3. Heb. 13.21.
rule of life. We are with diligence to John 5.39.
search, and with faithfulness to Romans 6.17.
obey.

The Will of God's good pleasure, has it is reason, not it is cause.
. 3. the will of God's good pleasure, whether secret or revealed, has it is
divine Isa. 1.18. Ezekiel. 18.25, 29
reason, but not it is proper Isa. 40.13.
cause, being perfect and absolute in its self; indeed, impossible it is, that
the Prime Cause of all, should it self be caused of any; seeing nothing can be
Isa. 43.10.
before it, as being eternal; nothing Exodus 18.11. John 10.29.
greater then it, as being infinite. As God's will then cannot be said to be
without reason; for it is the determination of his understanding; so of God's
will, there cannot be said to be any cause, for then it should it self be
determined by some other, and so God not absolute and independent in himself.

. 4. God's glory the final cause of what he wil's but not of his will.
The manifestation of God's Psalm. 8.1. Isa. 6.3. Ephesians. 1.12. and 3.16.
glory is the final cause of the creatures being, but not of his divine
volition; the end of what he wills, but not of his will; He wills one thing for
another, yet is not any thing the cause (though the reason) of his so willing
them. For that, he does determine the end and the means in one act of his will,
as he does know the cause and the effect in one act of his understanding. He
wills the end and the means, and the means for the end; yet seeing all are
external to him in his essence, he cannot be internally moved by them in his
will. How the impulsive cause of God's will to be understood in Theology.
So that when the Orthodox speak of any impulsive or moving cause of God's
will, it is an accommodating the mystery to our capacity, and a fitting their
expressions to our weak Heb. 5.11.12.
apprehensions.

. 5. The Execution of God's will a^mits several causes; the volition not any.

What the volition, and what the execution is.


There may be many causes of the Execution of God's will, which does consist in
the temporal effects; but none of the volition of God's will, which is an
eternal act. The Ephesians. 1.9.11.
volition of God's will is an immanent act, eternally residing in himself; the
Luke 2.14. 1 These. 4 3. Jam. 1.18.
execution of his will a transient act, temporally terminated in the creature;
of that there can be no cause; of this there are several causes, instrumental
and final.

. 6. Thus the preaching of the word, is instrumental to Romans 10 17. and 16.26.
faith and obedience; faith and obedience instrumental to this subordinate end,
the Ephesians. 2.8. Heb. 5.9.
salvation of the elect; and the salvation of the elect instrumental to this
the utmost end, the manifestation of God's Ephesians. 1.12.
glory; which end is communicated of God unto his elect, not Psalm. 16.2.
acquired by his elect unto himself; for that, as he is a God Exodus 3.14.
Independent, so he is a God Genesis 17.1.
Alsufficient. Thus there are several causes of Salvation decreed by God's
will, final and instrumental; but no cause of God's will decreeing Salvation,
neither instrumental, nor final, both being within the compass of his decree,
and therefore not beyond the circumference of his will, to be the cause of his
volition.

God wills not sin, and why.
. 7. God wills all things, but sin, which has no efficient, but deficient
cause, and therefore the cause thereof cannot be God; True it is, all evil is
founded in that which is good, and so sin cannot be but in some faculty, or
habit, or action, which thereby is denominated sinful. No doubt then, God Act
4.27, 28.
wills the action which is sinful, but not the Psalm. 5.4. Habak. 1.13.
pravity of the action which is the sin; He wills the action as a natural good,
and ordered by him to a greater good, but the ataxy or anomy of the action,
that he does not will, but permit; or at most, he does but will the permission;
For he cannot be said effectually to will, what he does actually forbid and
punish.

The purpose of God's will does not abolish, but establish the liberty of man's
will.
. 8. Besides, the purpose of God's will does not take away the Levit. 1 3. Dan.
11 3. Phil. 2.13. Psalm. 40.8.
liberty of man's will, no more then the certainty of his fore-knowledg does
take away the contingency of events: rather indeed, that purpose does confirm
this Liberty, and that certainty this contingency; for that thereby he makes
good the liberty which he has given, and the contingency which he has made;
accommodating the concurrence of his power and will, according to the nature of
the Agents which himself has created, and that constitution of the causes
which himself has established; wherefore though the purpose of God's will does
exclude every act and event, which is contrary to it, yet can it not be said to
destroy the liberty of man's will (even to that contrary act) which is
altogether consistent with it, What the Necessity of Being, from the
immutability of God's will.
yea, established by it. And thus, what necessity of Being is caused by the
immutability of God's Will, is only a conditional necessity, upon this
supposition that God wills it: And because what God wills in his ordinary
Providence, is according to that order which he has established in the
secondary causes; therefore the Necessity of Being, which flows from the
immutability of God's will, does not destroy the contingency of Events, or the
liberty of Agents.

. 9. How God's secret will becomes revealed by his word, and by his works.
The secret will of God's good pleasure is the first and Psalm. 135.6. Ephesians 1.11.
Rev. 4.11.
chief cause of all things, Number. 23.19. Psalm. 102.27.
unchangeable and Romans 9.19.
irresistible; which when God is pleased to reveal unto man, he does it by the
signification either of his word, or of his works. His works declare his will
in their events; and his word, that signifies his good pleasure, by Prophesies,
by Precepts, by Promises, and by Threatenings. How God's word is called his will.
God's word is called his will ((...)) figuratively; as the sign is put for the
thing signified; his word being the signification, or 1 These. 2 13. Romans
1.16.17. 1 Cor. 2.10.
revelation of his will, in what he has thereby determined, and decreed.

. 10. Such is the sweet Psalm. 119.160 John 5.32. 2 Cor. 4.2. 1 Timothy 3 15. Rev.
19 9.
harmony; How they agree in a sweet harmony.
and firm consent of the sign with the thing signified; the revelation of God's
word with the determination of God's will; that they admit not the least jar of
discord, without a manifest violation of the sincerity and truth of God
himself; wherefore to preserve that harmony, and prevent this discord, S^ to be
interpreted, as that the harmony be perserv'd.
it must be our care so to Mat. 9.13. 2 Pet 1.20.
interpret the right meaning of his word, that it agree with the true intent of
his mind, and purpose of his will; least otherwise we make God seem to
contradict himself or deceive his people.

. 11. If God should will any thing by his will of sign, which he does not will
by his will of good pleasure, he should plainly contradict himself, and destroy
the the truth of his word; wherefore seeing God does certainly Tit. 1.2. Heb.
6.18.
intend in his will, what he reveals in his word; we must observe rightly to
interpret, that his Revelation to a declaring what he truly intends, How God's
revealed will agrees with that of his good pleasure, when he wills all men to
be holy.
not what we 2 Cor. 2.17. 2 Pet. 3.16.
falsely conceive. As when God, by the precept of his revealed will, and will of
sign, does require all men to be Lev. 21.2. and 20, 7.
holy; we must not conclude it the purpose of his secret will, or will of good
pleasure, that all men be holy; For that, experience, and other parts of Psalm
14 3. 2 Timothy 3.13.
Scripture, too sufficiently testify, that all are not holy; which yet
necessarily they should be, or a contradiction must be in his revealed will, if
that were the intent of his good pleasure, which is ever Psalm. 135.6. Romans 9.19.
effective in what he wills. Wherefore, when God by the Precept of his revealed
will, requires all men to be holy; it is the purpose of his good pleasure that
men be thereby Deuteronomy. 30.11, 14.15.
admonished of their duty, and obliged to his Law.

Where also he commands Abraham to sacrifice his Son Isaac.
. 12. Again, we read that God gave Abraham a command, saying, Gen 22.2.
Take thy Son, thine only Son Isaac, whom thou love, and offer him for a
burnt-offering. If we say, God here purposed Isaac's sacrificing (as the words
seem to signify) we shall make a change in Gods secret will, to avoid a
contradiction in his will revealed; whereas if the true meaning of Gods word be
applied to the right purpose of his will, the harmony is sweet; and it is thus:
when God gave Abraham the Command, Take thy Son, and offer him for a
burnt-offering; the purpose of his good pleasure revealed in that precept of
his word, was to put Abraham upon the service, by obliging him to the duty;
which he intended for the testimony, and Heb. 11.17.
trial of Abraham's faith, not for the death or sacrifice of his Son; which not
till afterward he revealed unto Abraham by the voice of the Angel, calling to
him, and saying, Genesis 22.11.
Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him; For now I
know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only
Son from me.

. 13. How the promises and threatenings in God's revealed will, which are
conditional, d^ agree with God, secret will, which is absolute.
Whereas God's revealed will in his promises and threatenings runs Isa. 1.19,
20. Mark 16.16.
conditionally, yet is his will of good pleasure, signified in the true meaning
of those conditions, absolute; which is, to declare unto men the effectual
means, whereby his promises are obtained, and his threatenings avoided in them
that are saved; even a performing those conditions prescribed; And the
demeritorious cause for which his promises are nulled, and his threatenings
executed in them that perish, even a contempt of those conditions required.

. 14. What the true meaning of the conditions declared.
So that it is not the meaning of the conditions in God's word, to signify any
conditions in God's will, but that God wills them to be conditions; intended,
and so revealed, as Gal. 2.8. Ephesians. 3.7.
means effectual to that end he has appointed them for; even the obtaining the
blessings promised, and the avoiding the judgments threatened. And thus his
revealed will does not at all oppose that which is secret, not his will of
sign, that of his good pleasure; but the Analogy stands good in both, without
contradiction in Gods will, or deception in God's word, and thereby a violation
of both.

CHAP. VI. Concerning God's Decrees, Power, and Manner of working.
. 1. GOD, who is the primary Cause, God the primary Cause, and supreme Agent in
his Understanding, Will, and Power.
and supreme Agent, as he has in himself a principle of 1 Samuel 2.3. Job.
37.16. Psalm. 94.10.
knowledge, and Genesis 1.26. Isa 40.13, 14.
direction, his Psalm. 147 5.
understanding a principle of 2 Cro. 25.16 Acts. 2.23.
determination and Lev. 25.21. Psalm. 44 4.
command, his Ephesians. 1.5. Jam. 1.18.
will; so likewise a principle of Psalm. 28.5. and 135.6. Isa 28 29.
operation and execution, and that is his Job 37.23. Psalm. 62.11.
power. His understanding directs his will, his will actuates his power: Again,
his Isa. 46.10.
will determines his understanding, What his Decree.
and his power executes his will. God willing what he knows, that by an
immanent act is his Romans 8.28. and 9.11. Ephesians 1, 9.
decree, residing in himself; and when by his power he effects what he wills,
What his work.
that by a transient act is Psalm. 103. Isai. 64.8.
his work, terminated in the creature.

. 2. As in the Theory of God's Mat. 11.21.23
absolute understanding, he does know more, so in the might of his Mat. 3.9.
absolute power, What his absolute power.
he can do more, then what by the purpose of his will he does determine to have
done. So that his Prove. 19.21. Ephesians. 1.11.
will is at once the determination of his understanding, How limited by his
will.
and the limitation of his power, for the Ephesians. 1 5, 9. and 3.10.
decr^^ing of all things in himself from eternity, and the Ephesians. 1.11. Rev. 4
11.
effecting all things without himself in their time. Thus God is the efficient
cause of all things in his understanding, will, and power; not singly, and in
several acts, but jointly, and in one causation; by his power effecting, what
in his understanding and will he does know and determine to be done.

Why, and how said to be omnipotent.
. 3. The Power of God is said to be omnipotent, not because he can do all he
wills to do; for thus far the Angels, and the blessed may be said to be
omnipotent, who certainly have a power to do, what they will to do, who will to
do nothing but what God wills by them to be done. But in this is God
omnipotent, that he Phil. 3.21.
can do whatsoever he wills (not only to do, but also) to be done; and is
fully ably to do, what is any way possible to be done; and nothing is
impossible to God, but what either implies a contradiction in it is self, or
argues 1 Timothy 6.16. Heb. 6.18.
infirmity in him; the former is from an incapacity in the creature, the later
from the excellency of the Creator; neither from any deficiency in God; to say
God can do what argues infirmity, (as to lie, to go, to sleep, and the like)
would testify a weakness, not justify his power; to deny these in God, is
indeed to affirm his omnipotence, and to affirm these of God, is indeed to deny
him omnipotent.

. 4. There is no overcoming God's power, no resisting his will.
Seeing the only limits of God's power is his will, therefore he Psalm. 135.6.
Psalm. 115.3.
does effectually do, whatsoever he actually wills to be done. And as there
is no Luke 1.52. 2 Cor. 6.18.
might to overcome his power, so nor is there any power to Romans 9.19. Isa.
46.10.
resist his will; his secretly ordaining, and powerfully effecting will; to
which Psa. 135.6. and 103.20, 21, 22. Luke 8.24, 25.29, 30, 31. Rev. 20.1, 2.
and 4 10, 11.
Heaven and Earth, and Hell; Angels, and Men, and Devils, do, and must stoop,
and submit. What he acts in time, he has decreed from eternity.
And whatsoever God Acts 15.18. and 2.23. 1 Cor. 2.7.
actually wills in time, he intentionally decreed from all eternity; all
whose decrees are most Pro. 19.21. Isa. 46.10.
faithful and firm, he ordaining and disposing all things according to the Acts
4.28. Ephesians. 1.11.
Counsel of his own will, to this their ultimate end, the Ephesians. 1.7. Isa.
63.14.
glory of his own Name.

. 5. From which Counsel of God's will, How the creatures are in God, before
they are in themselves.
and purpose of his decree, it is, that the creatures have their eternal Psalm.
139 16.
Idaea in God's mind, before their actual being in their own existence; every
thing formed being (in it is own proportion) the Romans 1.20.
pattern and figure, declaring the mind of God who framed it. And thus God
having a Romans 8.29. 1 Pet. 1.2. Acts 15.18.
knowledge of vision in the Counsel of his will, his Counsel is not of
disquisition, but of approbation; What the Counsel of God in his decrees.
in that he knows and wills, fore-seeth and fore-ordaineth Psalm. 33.15.
all things, and every thing together at once.

. 6. And as in the Trinity of Persons there is but one God, so but one will;
How the whole Trinity in one entire cause.
and as but one will, so but Exodus 20.11.
one working in all actions which relate unto the creatures; and therefore the
works of Creation, and of Providence, are Heb. 11 3. Psalm. 33.6. Job. 26.13.
Psa. 104.29, 30.
sometimes attributed to the Father, sometimes to the Son, and sometimes to the
Holy Ghost. All three Persons being one single and entire Cause, 1 Cor 12 6.
Psalm 33.6. Ephesians. 2.22.
working all in all; yet in this Trinity there is a diverse manner of working,
What their diverse manner of working.
according to the distinct manner of subsisting; The John 1.3. 1 Cor 8 6. Romans
8.11.
Father he works from himself, by the Son, and the Holy Ghost; The H b. 9.14.
Son he works from the Father, by the Spirit; The Luke 1.35. John 15.26.
Holy Ghost he Works from the Father, and the Son, by Himself.

How some one action is appropriate to some one person.
. 7. And thus when any one action is more peculiarly appropriated to any one
Person of the Trinity, it is from some more immediate relation unto that
Person; as, when the Heb. 1 2. Ephesians. 3.9.
Creation with the Ephesians. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.3.
Original of all Beings is more peculiarly appropriated to the Father; Rev. 2
9. Heb. 1.8.
Redemption with the John 3.35. and 5.22.
dispensation of all Government more peculiarly appropriated to the Son; Romans
15 16.
Sanctification with the 1 Cor 12.8, 9 and 4.5.
communication of all gifts and graces more peculiarly appropriated to the Holy
Ghost.

The firm relation between God's decrees, and his works.
. 8. And such is the near relation betwixt God's will, and his Works; his
Decrees, and their effects; that whatsoever he Isa 44 7. Heb. 6.17. Psalm. 135.6.
wills is done, and whatsoever is done he wills; whatsoever he does effect,
he has decreed; and whatsoever he has Psalm. 133.11. Isa. 14.24, 27.
decreed, he does effect; so that this is certain; God has not decreed sin,
God has not decreed sin though he has decreed to permit sin.
because he does 2 Chro. 19.7. Psalm. 5.5.
not effect sin. And though God be said to have Acts 2.23. and 4.28.
decreed the permission of sin, yet is not that decree any way effectual to
produce or cause sin; What the effectual decree accompanying the permissive.
for the cause of any thing Ro^. 9.20.21.
permitted cannot be from the permission, where there is no Law natural, or
positive, to oblige the pevention. Again, sure we are, sin could not be
committed by man, if it were not permitted by God. And God would not permit sin
in time, if he had not determined to permit it from eternity; which permissive
part of God's decree is accompanied with that which is effectual; effectual for
the Genesis 50.2^. Acts 2.23, 36.
ordering to good, what is permitted to be evil. And thus God he would not
permit sin, were it not for good; yet is not sin therefore from God, for then
were he not himself good.

. 9. As the good pleasure of God's will Ro^. 11.34, 35.
receives not from the creatures any moving causality; The purpose of God's
decree imposes no forcible necessity;
so nor does the purpose of his decree impose upon the creatures any enforcing
necessity. All future events whatsoever, they have indeed an Mat. 2.28. John
19.36.
infallible certainty, but no forcible necessity from the determinate Counsel
of God's will; But brings an infallable certainty to all Agents and Events
which infallible certainty extends, not only to all Agents, and events,
Psalm. 104. Job. 3.8.
natural or necessary, but also Prove. 16.1. and 21.1.
free and Exodus 21.13. Prove. 16.33.
contingent, whether it be in the Exodus 14.4, 5. Act 4.27, 28.
greatest effects, or in the Mat. 10.29.30
smallest matters.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Works of Creation.
. 1. GOD, God the Creator of all things as an absolute and free Agent.
as a most free Agent without any Job 22.2.
necessity compelling, or Isa. 40.13.
external cause moving him (to Prove. 16.4. Psalm. 19.1. and 8.1.
manifest his Glory, or communicate his Psalm. 104, 24
Goodness) of his Rev. 4.11.
own good pleasure, and by his own most powerful will, he made the World; Genesis
1.1. and 2.4. Col 1.16.
in the beginning creating, and in Genesis 1.5, 31. Exodus 20 11.
six days forming all things in their natures Genesis 1 31. 1 Timothy 4 4.
very good.

. 2. Creation, the Work of the whole Trinity, as one entire cause.
The Creation was the Psalm. 146.5, 6. Jer. 10.11.
proper work of God alone, not from any one Person, but from Genesis 1.1. Psalm.
33.6.
all the whole Trinity; as being a work of infinite power, wisdom, and love; as
a work of infinite power, so more especially from the Father; as a work of
infinite wisdom, so from the Son; as a work of infinite love, so from the Holy
Ghost; and yet from all the three Persons, as it is from Mal. 2.10. 1 Cor. 8.6.
one entire cause, one single essence, God's; who creates the world as a Ephesians.
1.11. Rev. 4.11.
free Agent, Why of God, as a free and all-sufficient cause.
and as Genesis 17.1. Acts 17.25.
all-sufficient in himself; for if the World were made of God, by a necessity
of his nature, and not according to the liberty of his will; or if the World
made did add any thing to the fullness and perfection of the Maker, it must
needs have been, as himself is, from eternity, and should not cease to be in
the end of time; which Genesis 1 5.
time was created with the World, and did then Genesis 1.1. John. 1.1.
begin, when the Creation had it is beginning.

Observed in the Work of Creation.
. 3. In the work of Creation, we observe the command of God's Power, the
approbation of his Goodness, the ordination of his Wisdom, and the declaration
of his Authority. 1. The Command of God's Power.
By Genesis 1.2, 6, etc. Psalm. 33 9. Psalm. 148.5.
the command of his Power, he executes his will, to the producing all things in
their natural being; 2. The Approbation of his Goodness.
Genesis 1.4, 10, 31
by the approbation of his Goodness, he confirms (what is produced) in those
endowments of nature which he had given them Genesis 1.7.16.
the ordination of his Wisdom, 3. The Ordination of his Wisdom.
he orders and disposes (what is so produced and confirmed) to their proper
ends, for which he appointed them; 4. The Declaration of his Authority.
and Genesis 14.15. Psalm. 148.6.
in the declaration of his Authority, he enacteth a Law, establishing the
creatures (so produced, confirmed, and ordered) in their being, and working,
Genesis 1.22.28 Jer. 31.35, 36. and 33 20. Job 38.33.
to all generations.

The immediate Creation what, and of whom.
. 4. Of the Works of Creation, some by an immediate creation were made out of
Heb. 11.3.
nothing, to be of a perfect and complete existence, immortal and
incorruptible; by the Will of God made subject to no essential change, or utter
dissolution; such the Angels, and the highest Heaven, Genesis 1.1. and 2.1. John
38.7. Mat 24.36.
created together on the first day of the Creation. The mediate Creation what
and of whom.
Others of the Genesis 1.6.9.11.14 20.24.
creatures upon the whole visible part of the World were formed by a mediate
creation of matter pre-existent, and so by nature Psalm. 102 25, 26. 2 Pet. 3.11.
corruptible, subject to an essential change, and utter dissolution of their
being; The Isa. 34.4. Luke 21 33 2. Pet. 3.10, 12. Rev. 6.13.14.
Heavens themselves (which are visible) being liable to that final dissolution
of the last day.

. 5. Man ((...), Man's partaking of both.
the little world) as the compendium of the whole Creation, partakes of both
those kinds, as consisting of body and soul; he pertakes of a mediate
creation, with the corruptible creatures in his body, Genesis 2.7. 1 Cor. 15.44.
Genesis 18 27.
formed of the dust; also he pertakes of an immediate creation, with the
creatures incorruptible in his soul, Genesis 2.7. Zech. 12.1. Heb. 12 9.
breathed of God: and therefore in his body, he is by nature Isa 2.22. 1 Cor.
15.53.
corruptible, and in his Mat. 10 28. Eccles. 3.21. and 12.7.
soul immortal.

. 6. Man is aptly called the lesser world, How and why called the lesser world.
having in him something of affinity with, and participation of the several
parts of the greater world; He has an affinity with the Angels in his soul, as
being spiritual, invisible, intelligent, and immortal; and affinity with the
heavenly bodies, in the excellency of his constitution, and harmony of his
parts; and affinity with the four Elements, in the substance of his body, and
material part of his composition, the superior Elements being predominant in
their virtue, the inferior more abounding in their matter; whereby, man is
said to be Genesis 2.7.
formed of the dust of the earth.

. 7. The invisible and highest Heaven, What the first Heaven.
is that Saint Paul calls the 2 Cor. 12.2.
third Heaven; the first Genesis 1.1, 7, 8, 9, 20. and 7.11. Psalm. 148.4.
Heaven being that space of the Elementary Region from the surface of the
Earth, to the concave of the Moon: The second Heaven, Gen 1 14.15, 16, 17, 18.
What the second Heaven.
that expansion of the Aetherial Region, from the lowest Orb, that of the
Moon, What the third Heaven.
to the highest of the invisible Heavens, the Firmanent; The third Heaven, that
is, 1 King. 8.27.
the Heaven of Heavens, Ephesians. 4.10.
far above all the visible heavens, whither Mark 16.19. Ephesians. 1 20.21. Acts
1.11. Ephesians. 4.10.
Christ ascended, and where God has Psalm. 103.19.
set his Throne, and made his Isa. 5 7. and 66.1. John. 14.1.
Habitation with the Blessed; Mat. 18.10. 1 Cor. 13.12.
where he manifests himself in his glorious presence to the Psalm. 16.11.
perfect joy and felicity of Heb. 12.22. Dan. 7.10.
Angels, and Saints.

What the influences.
. 8. In the visible parts of the world, the Job 38.31, 32 Ephesians 6.12.
heavenly bodies have their influences upon the earthly, Judge. 5.20.
powerfully to incline, not Job 38.33.
forcibly to necessitate them in their constitutions and operations; They are
also appointed certainly Genesis 1.14. Jer. 33.20, 25.
to distinguish the Seasons, And what the predictions of the heavenly bodies.
not Isa. 47.11 12.
infallibly to foretell events; so that from their powerful disposing, there
may be made some conjectural predictions; but seeing they cannot necessitate,
there can be Deuteronomy. 18.10. Isa. 47.13. Jer 10.2. Acts 1.7. Prove. 27.1. Jam. 4 14.
made no infallible Prognostications.

The creation of man, and the forming of woman.
. 9. Man, the last part of the Creation, and chief of the visible creatures,
consisting of Genesis 2.7.
body and soul, was made Genesis 1.26. and 9 6.
in the Image, and after the likeness of God; And out of man thus created 1
Cor. 11.7.
the image and glory of God, God Genesis 1.27. and 2.12. 1 Cor. 11.8.
formed woman, the glory of the man, to be Genesis 2.18. 1 Cor. 11.9.
an help meet for him; by which two has been Genesis 1.28. and 49.25. Psalm. 113 9.
propagated through his blessing, the Acts 17.26.
offspring of mankind, to a replenishing the whole earth. Thus God having
Genesis 2 2. John 5.17.
finished his work of Creation in six days, he rests the seventh day, How
God rested the seventh day.
(where Rest has not any proper respect unto God as the Creator in his
working, but unto the works of the Creation in their producing) as ceasing to
create any new Species, or kinds of creatures; but not to preserve what was
created, or to produce and preserve new individuals, according to the several
Species of the Creation: And what strange kinds have since been produced,
different from those several Species, had their first Eccl. 1.9, 10.
principle of being in the active powers of the first ceatures, and so were
casually in the works of the six days creation.

. 10. The glory of God's Wisdom is excellent in the Order of his Creation.
God's wisdom in the Order of his Creation.
He first Gen 1.11, 12
forms the grass, herbs, and trees, before he Genesis 1.14, 15, etc.
makes the Stars, lest any should think they had their first production from
whence they have their after Gen 1 14. Job 38 31, 32.
growth, and generation. And in the inferior part of the visible world, God
first creates those things which have Genesis 19, 10.
only being, next those things which besides being have Genesis 1.12.
life, (and life vegetative) after these, those things which have Genesis 1.20,
21, 24, 25.
being, life, and sense: and lastly, Genesis 1.26. and 2.7.
man, who has being, life, sense, and reason. Thus God first makes ready the
habitation, and then Genesis 1.28, etc. and 2 8.
brings in the inhabitant; he first provides food, and then forms the feeder;
he first prepares what is useful for man, and then creates man to use them to
his Makers glory.

. 11. Every thing created perfect in it is kind.
God creates every thing Genesis 1.4, 31.
perfect in it is kind, and it implies a contradiction to say, that God might
have created the several kinds more perfect; for then they should have changed
their kind with their perfection: and the reason is plain, because the
super-addition of natural perfection does vary the Species, even as the
addition of unity does vary the Number; so that; though God could have made
more perfect kinds of creatures, yet could he not make these creatures more
perfect in their kind; he could have given them accidental excellencies, but
not any natural perfections, without altering their natures; Thus, through
incapacity in the creature, God could not do what implies contradiction in the
thing.

. 12. In the works of Creation, In his works God manifests his glory. 1. The
glory of his Power. 2. Of his Goodness.

is manifest the Romans 1.20. Rev. 4 11.
glory of the Creator, in his Power, Goodness, Wisdom, and Eternity; his Power
is gloriously manifested in his creating all things out of nothing, and
preserving them, in their being; his Psalm 104.24. Jer. 51.15. Acts 17.25.
Goodness, is gloriously manifested in his communicating a proportion of life
and blessedness unto his creatures; 3. Of his Wisdom.
his Psa. 104.24. Jer. 51.15. Acts 17.25.
Wisdom is gloriously manifested in that admirable harmony of order, and of
use; that excellent beauty of proportion, and of parts, which is in the
Creation; 4. Of his Eternity.
and his Eternity, that is gloriously manifested, in his being the Joh. 1.1, 2,
3.
Author, and Efficient of all things, who therefore must needs have his being
before they could have their beginning; and Rev. 1.8.
having his being before time, he must be eternal.

The light of nature directs to the worship of God as the Creator.
. 13. God Jer. 10.11. Acts 17.24.
manifesting himself in his creatures to be a Creator, in Power, Goodness, and
Wisdom, infinite and eternal; the light Acts 17.24, 25, 27. Romans 1.20, 21.
of nature does direct man to love him, to worship him, to invocate, and to
praise him. And to this end, God Genesis 2.3. Exodus 20.11.
resting the seventh day, The seventh day the Sabbath.
does bless and sanctify it; thereby setting it apart as Exodus 20.10. Isa.
58.13. Exodus 31.15.
an holy Sabbath for the solemnity of his worship, to be observed in all after
Generations; How long to continue.
till Christ the Mat. 12.8.
Lord of the Sabbath, by his work of Redemption, far greater then this of
Creation, does give Col. 2.16. Rev. 1.10.
change to the day in an higher advancement of the worship, by a more excellent
glory of the Solemnity.

How the Creation is an object of our faith.
. 14. That God is the Primary and sole Efficient Cause of the World's
existence, may be evidently and infallibly demonstrated by Romans 1.19, 20
light of Nature, and argument of Reason; yet the actual Creation of the World
(especially for manner and time) is not to be proved by any demonstrative
Argument, but by Genesis 1.1, etc.
divine Authority; and so is become an Article of our Creed, not a part of our
Science; we Heb. 11.3.
believe it as delivered by divine Revelation, we know it not, as discovered by
humane Reason.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Providence of God.
. 1. All things subordinate to God's will.
SEeing God's Will does determine his knowledge, and limit his power; all things
must needs be subordinate to the Psalm. 115.3. and 148.5. and 103.20, 21.
Counsel and Command of his will, whose essential properties being Psalm. 25 8.
goodness and holiness; Psalm. 145.9.
goodness the fountain of his grace and mercy; Rev. 15.3, 4.
holiness the fountain of his truth and justice; this subordination of all
things unto his will, must certainly be in order to the glory either of his
mercy, In order either to his Mercy, or his Justice.
or of his justice; of his goodness, or of his holiness; the two Psalm 89.14.
and 100.5.
pillars of God's Throne of Majesty, The wisdom and power of his Providence.
whereon he sits as Psalm 95.3. and 146 10.
King in the supremacy of his will, to govern by the wisdom and power of. his
providence Psalm. 135. Isa. 66.1.
all things in heaven and in earth; and God's will being immutable in its
determinations, Infallible in it is administrations.
his Providence must needs be infallible in its administrations.

. 2. The Infellibility of God's Providence does not take away the use of mean,
Yet neither are the deliberations of Counsels, the industry of endeavors, nor
the importunity of prayers; neither are the admonitions of precepts, the
encouragement of promises, nor the deterrement of threatenings, taken away or
made void, but rather 2 S^. 5.19, 24. Psalm. 128.2. Da. 9.2.3, etc. Mat. 4.45.
Acts 27.21.30.31. etc.
confirmed and made good by the infallibility of God's Providence in the
determinations of his will. For that, but confirm^ it.
God determining the end, does also Ephesians. 2.10. 2 These. 2.13.
order the means, means proportionable and agreeable to that end; which makes
much for the 2 These. 2.15.
strengthening of our faith, 2 Pet. 1 10.11
quickening of our obedience, and Romans 5 2.
confirming our hope: hope of obtaining the end as determined by God's will,
when we observe the means as appointed in God's word.

To deny God's Providence is Atheism.
. 3. So that to establish the means, and deny the Providence of God determining
the end, is a part of Atheism; to establish the Providence of God determining
the end, To despise the use of means is profaneness.
and despise the means, is great profaneness; but to use the means so, Psalm.
17.7. Pro. 30.5.
as withal to trust and Heb. 6.15. Isa. 25.9.
attend God's Providence for the obtaining of the end, To establish both, is
truth and righteousness
is a way of truth, and a work of righteousness: knowing this, that Prayers,
and Counsels, and Endeavors, they are appointed of God, To what end is the use
of means.
not whereby we should alter his will, but Mat. 6.10.
perform it; not whereby we should change his decree, but fulfill it; and in
what we obtain not our desires, we testify our obedience.

The course of nature declares the Providence of God.
. 4. The Order of Natures course, does plainly declare the hand of God's
Providence; for, seeing the irrational and inanimate creatures do all act to
some determinate end, it is thereby evident, that they are directed by some
powerful Agent determining that end; and so, though themselves are void of life
and reason, yet by their natural course, do they discover a supernatural
cause, who both Heb. 20.21.
lives and Psalm. 94.10.
knows, and accordingly both rules and orders, according to the end himself
wills and effects. This ^ptly illustrated.
The flying (then) of the arrow, and hitting it is mark, does not more certainly
and plainly declare the hand of man who shoots it, then the operations of the
creatures, and the attainment of their end, do certainly and plainly declare
the Providence of God which governs them.

God's Providence is (...) naked view, but an actual administation. What God's
Providence is in its general ^oncourse.
. 5. God's Providence being an Act of infinite power and wisdom, whereby he
Neh. 9.6. Psalm. 104 30. Psalm. 145.15, 16 Acts 17.28.
preserves and Psalm. 29.10. and 103.19.
governs all things in order to his glorious mercy and justice, it cannot be
any Psa 33.13.14
bare and naked view, but an Psalm. 33.15, 18, 19. Psalm 115.3. Ephesians. 1.11.
actual and efficatious administration: Even in the general concourse of his
Providence, he is Psalm. 139.7.8, 9, 10. Jer. 23.24. Col. 1.17.
powerfully present by an immediate and intimate operation at all times; and in
all places, with all things; All the creatures depending upon God, not in their
being only by creation, How absolutely necessary for the creatures
preservation.
but also in the Psalm. 4.29, 30. Col. 1.17. Psalm. 36, 7.
continuance of their being by Psalm. 104.21. and 147.9.
preservation; for that, if the World and all the creatures in the world were
not sustained by the same Heb. 1.3. Psa. 104.29, 30 Job 34.13, 14. Psa. 36.6.
word of power by the which they were created, they would presently dissolve,
and return to their first nothing.

. 6. This aptly illustrated.
Every thing depends upon God for it is being, as the Air upon the Sun for it is
light. The Sun has it is light in it self, but the Air has it is light by
participation from the Sun: thus God has his being from himself, but every
creature has it is being by participation from God; and as the Air partakes of
the Sun's light without any partaking of the Sun's nature, so the creatures
have their being from God without any being of the Essence of God; yea, as the
Air, when the Sun withholds his enlightening beams, cease to have any light;
thus the creatures, when God withholds his sustaining power, cease to have any
being.

. 7. The extent of God's Providence.
This wonderful Providence of God is extended to all Psa. 107. Job 12.17, etc.
Jer. 18.6 Psa. 75.6, 7. Psa. 145.15.16 Prove. 19.21. Dan. 2.21. and 4.32, 35.
persons, and actions, and Jer. 10.13.
things, Isa. 28.29. and 45.9. and 43.13. Romans 11.38.
determining all causes, but determined of none; his power neither 1 Samuel 14.6.
Psa. 33.16. Dan. 3.17. Amos 5.9. Luke 1.37. Job 9.12.
bound to, nor limited by means, God does work oftentimes Exodus 34.28. Mat. 4 2.
without, and oftentimes Josh. 3.16. 2 King. 2.8. and 20.21.
against means, to teach us to trust his Providence, even Psa. 23 4. Rom 4.18.
when we see no means. And when God makes use of means, Why it makes use of
means.
it is not from the deficiency of his power, but from the riches of his
goodness, communicating that virtue, and conferring that honor unto the
creatures, The seeming disorder in the World, does advance the glory of God's
Providence.
Psa. 77.20. 2 Cor. 6.11. Jer. 12.17.
instrumentally to cooperate with himself.

. 8. That things happen Ps. 73.3, 4, 12.
well unto the evil, and Psa. 73.10, 14
ill unto the good, is no ((...)) confused disorder, but a wise and Psa. 73.16,
17. Jer. 12.1.
just disposal of God's Providence, whereby the wicked become the more Romans 2.4.
inexcusable in their sin, and so God's Romans 9.22.
justce the more illustrious in their destruction; the godly become more Mal.
3.3.
eminent in grace, and so God's Romans 9.23. 2 These. 1.10.
mercy the more glorious in their salvation. By both which God assures to us
the 2 These. 1.5.
general judgment of the last day, and assure the general judgment of the last
day.
when he shall Romans 2.6, 7, 8 2 These. 1.6, 7.
render to the wicked according to their obstinacy and impenitency; and unto
the godly according to their humility and patience. Wherefore that seeming
((...)) disorderly disposition of particular Events, does exalt the glory of
God in the ((...)) wise and orderly dispensation of his general Providence.

God's Providence does order sinful actions without any the least share in the
sin.
. 9. Though God by his Providence has an Acts 17.28.
influence upon all men's actions, yet has he no Hab. 1.13.
share at all in any man's sin; his providence over wicked men, is no more the
cause of their sinful wickedness, then the Sun beams upon a rotten carcass are
the cause of it is noysom stench: That there is a scent is from the operation of
the Sun's beams, This illustrated
but that the scent is noyso, proceeds from the corruption of the carcass:
Thus, that there is any action is from the concourse of God's Providence, but
that the action is sinful, proceeds from the wickedness of the sinner. Or as
he who rides and rules a lame horse, is not the cause of his halting, so when
God 1 Kin. 12.15. Isa. 10.5.15. Isa. 13.3. Acts 4.28.
moves and governs the wills of the wicked, he is not the cause of their sin.
God does not move them to evil, but moves and orders them being evil,
sometimes Judge. 9 23. 2 Samuel 12.11. 2 Samuel 16.10. 1 Kin. 22.22.
letting loose the reins by permission, That God's Providence extends to what
is sinful, is not by a mere permission, but by a powerful and wise ordination.
and sometimes Genesis 31.29. Job 1 12. and 2.6
holding them in by restraint, as 1 Kin. 11.11.
his justice, or his mercy does require. Genesis 31.24.


. 10. Yea, God's Providence is extended to the evil wills and sinful actions of
the wicked, not by a mere permission, but by a power and wise ordination; 2 Samuel 16.10. 1 King. 22.22. 2 Chro. 11.4. 2 These. 2.11.
secretly moving and inclining their wills to some certain objects, and 2 Chro.
10.15 Isa 54 16. Romans 9 17.
wisely ordering and directing their actions to some righteous ends. And when
God does this work upon the evil wills of the wicked, he does not make Job 34
12.
their wills evil, or Jam. 1.13.
move them unto wickedness: for that, when God does make use of the wicked as
his instruments, they are not merely passive, Wicked instruments are proper
Agents, and how.
but really active, as endued with a rational faculty of understanding, and an
elective principle of will, whereby they become proper Agents, and propose
other ends to themselves then what God has purposed in himself; they Isa.
10.6, 7.
act their own wicked designs, whilst God orders them to the effecting his
sacred decrees.

. 11. Indeed, How the Executioners of Gods Justice.
the wicked are so the instruments of God's Power, as that they are withal the
Psa. 17.13, 14.
executioners of his Justice; and we know, that when the Judge gives up a
Malefector into the hands of the executioner for the punishment of death; and
in that Execution how guilty of sin.
if then the executioner have no respect to the justice of the Judge, but
pursue the rage of his own malice, satisfying his furious revenge in executing
the Malefactor punishment; the death of the Malefactor, though justice in the
Judge, will be found murder in the executionor before the Judgment Seat of
Christ. And what! Shall this stand good with those that are said to be Gods,
and not with him, Psalm. 82.6.
who has said they are Gods? The wonder of God's Providence in respect of
wicked minds.
This is then the wonder of Gods working in his Providence, that he does make
an Isa. 13.3, 5.
holy use of wicked minds, Acts 2.23. and 4.28.
effecting his just and holy will even by their wills, which are unjust and
unholy; and yet is this no Acts 3.15.
extenuation of their sin, nor shall be any Jer. 51.25, 26.
mitigation of their punishment.

. 12. Futher, as not the decree of God's will, Gods Providence imposes no
compelling force.
so nor does the concourse of God's Providence, impose any compelling force
upon the creatures; so that, though there is not any event Numb. 35.22, 23.
contingent, in respect of God, yet are there Exodus 21.13.
many contingents in respect of secondary causes: but establishes the nature
of all causes, contingent, free, and necessary.
And indeed; God the primary cause does work in all things according to the
nature of the secondary causes; Prove. 16.33.
with contingents according to the nature of their contingency, with free Mat.
17.12.
Agents according to the nature of their liberty; and with Psa. 104.14.
necessary causes according to the nature of their necessity; so far is God
from compelling and enforcing by his Providence in causes contingent and free,
No compelling force of Providence in necessary causes.
that he does not do it in causes Job 38.35.
natural and necessary: for in them both he implanted by nature such an
obediential power, that they Psa. 105.28. Psa. 147.15. and 148.8. Joel 2.25.
fulfill his word by a natural propension, not a violent compulsion; they
perform his command by a ready observance, not a forced obedience.

Contingency in secondary causes illustrated.
. 13. That in the Dispensations of God's Providence, some things are
fortuitously contingent in respect of their secondary causes, which yet are
infallibly necessary in respect of God the Primary and Supreme Cause, we
illustrate by this Allusion. When a Master sends two servants to one and the
same place, by different and diverse ways, each being ignorant of the other's
mission; Their meeting, as it relates to the servants who intended it not, is
casual and contingent; but as it relates to the Master, who pre-ordain'd their
meeting, it is intended and necessary: Thus are there many things contingent in
respect of the created Agents, who are Psa. 119.91.
all as servants; which yet are necessary in respect of their first cause God,
as Pro. 22.2.
Lord and Master of all.

How God's Providence is equal, and how unequal.
. 14. Though the several dispensations of God's Providence are all equal as to
the act of his will, yet are they very much unequal, as to the effects in the
creatures; for that, by how much any thing has its nearer access to God, in
the degrees of its excellency; The Providence of God, general, special and
peculiar.
by so much it has an higher place with God in the order of his Providence.
Hence it is, that as the Providence of God is general Psalm. 103 19. Job 34.13
over all the world, so is it special Psalm. 103.19. Heb. 12.9.
over Angels and Psalm. 22 28. Job. 7.20.
men, and peculiar Psalm. 45.6. Isa. 50. 2, 7. Rev. 15 3. 1 Timothy 4 10. Mat.
16.18.
over the Church of his Elect. The law of natu e, and how ^x^cuted in God's
general Providence.
For the order and government of the world by his general Providence, God has
established in the creatures a Psalm. 148.6. Isa. 55 10. Jer. 33.20.
law of nature, to the execution whereof he has given them Psalm. 19.5 Hos. 2
22.
natural inclinations, Prove. 6.6. and 30.^4. Jer. 8.7.
secret instincts, and an Job 37.12, 13 Psalm. 44.4. Psalm. 105.16, 19 31, 34.
Psalm. 103.21. Psalm. 148.8. Isa. 7.18, 19.
obediential power, whereby they are still ready at his Summons and command.

. 15. What a miracle is.
What is done in the world according to the Jer. 31.35.36 and 33.20. H^s. 2.22.
law of nature, is by God's ordinary Providence; but what is done above the law
of nature, is by his Providence extraordinary, and it is called a Psalm. 136.4.
Psalm. 77 14.
Miracle; so that Dan. 4.3.
miraculous effects do declare an omnipotent cause John 10.25. Acts 2.22. Exodus
8.19.
manifesting the efficient to be Almighty. and How one greater then another.
And that one John 14.12.
miracle is greater then another, is not in respect of God's power, which being
infinite, admits no degrees, but is Isa. 40.15, 17
equal and the same in all; but in comparing one miracle with another, they
will appear one greater then another, in respect of those different degrees,
they exceed the strength of nature in their production.

. 16. Wherein miraculous effects exceed the strength of nature.
Miraculous effects exceed the strength of nature, either in relation to the
substance of the thing done; or to the subject in which it is done, or the
manner how it is done. 1. In relation to the substance of the thing done; as
when the 2 Kin. 20.1^.
Sun went backward at he Prayer of Hezekiah; or, a^ when the 1 Cor. 15.53 Pail
3 21,
body shall be glorified in the resurrection of the just^; which (for the
substance of the thing) Nature at no time, and by no means can effect. 2. In
relation to the subject in which it is done; as to Joh. 11.33.34.
to give life to a dead Lazarus, and Mark 10.46.
sight to a blind Bartimaeus; nature indeed can give life, but not to a dead
body; it can give sight, but not to a blind man. 3. In relation to the manner
how it is done; as the Mark 1.31.
present and perfect curing of a Fever with a touch; the 1 Kin. 18.38.
speedy fetching down fire with a word; both may be done by nature, but not in
that order and manner which is properly the miraculous operation of a divine
power. These several kinds of miraculous effects are one greater then another;
the first greater then the second, and the second greater then the third; all
according to the several degrees they exceed the strength of Nature in her most
powerful operations.

God's special Providence over Angels and men.
. 17. Besides that general Providence of God common to all the creatures, there
is his especial Providence over Angels and men, correspondent to their so
excellent condition, How over Angels.
as being endued with understanding and will; God's special Providence over the
Angels, in his Psalm. 103.19. Heb. 1.6.
subjecting them to his government, Psalm. 104 4. Heb. 1.14.
appointing them their ministrations, and Psalm 91.11. Mat. 6 10.
ordering them in their services according to his will. How ever men.
His especial Providence over men, appears in his Job 10 8. Psalm. 139.13, 14,
15.
forming them in the womb, and giving them birth; in his Job 7.1. and 14.5.
numbering their days, and appointing their deaths; in Prove. 16.1.
ordering their thoughts Prove. 16 1.
ruling their tongues, and Jer. 10.23.
directing their paths.

God's peculiar Providence over the Church of his Elect.
. 18. Besides this special Providence of God over Angels and men in general,
there is a peculiar Providence of God over the Church of his Elect in
particula; The dispensation whereof is committed of the Father unto Psalm. 2.6.
Isa 9 6, 7. 1 Cor. 15.24, 25
Christ the Isa. 9.6.
Prince of Peace, The dispensation hereof committed to Christ, and how
performed.
and Psalm. 24.10.
King of Glory; and this as he is the Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. Col. 1.18.
Head of the Church, which is his body; the members of which body he governs by
his Spirit, Ezekiel 36 27.
putting his Law into their hearts, and Phil 2.13.
working in them both to will and to do, still leading them with his Counsels,
till he receives them unto glory.

. 19. God's Providence particularly applied.
The Providence of God whether Psalm. 113.5, 6
generally extended, or especially Psalm. 139 16.
eminent; or 2 Chro. 16 9. Psalm. 34.16.
peculiarly gracious, it is Job 39.1, etc. Psa. 113 7, 8, 9. Psa. 146.7, 8, 9.
Mat. 6.26, 28.
particuliarly applied. Though generally extended to all creatures, yet
particularly applied to every creature. Every Mat. 10.30.
head, and how.
yea every hair of the head; Mat. 10.29.
every sparrow, yea every feather of the sparrow; every Psalm. 147 8.
pile of grass or Mat. 6.30.
bit of straw, does declare not only the immediate presence, but also the
Almighty Providence of God; and not only in a general notion, but even in a
particular relation of providencial notice and regard.

. 20. This aptly illustrated.
God does not do with the world as the workman with a watch; when by the divine
art of his al-powerful hand, he has finished each wheel, and fitted each part,
then to wind it up by a law of nature, and set it by him, to observe how the
time spends, how the ages pass; no, but rather God does with the world, as
David with his harp; when artificially made, and accurately strung, he tunes
the creatures, as so many strings, unto an uni-sone consent of divine harmony,
by an obediential power, unto his holy will; and then by his hand of Providence
he strikes each string in its due place, whereby it has a particular note in
the Psalm. 103.22. Psalm. 148.
universal melody of the World's Hallelujah.

. 21. Why God's Providence does not admit Annihilation of the creatures.
Such is the Providence of God in his Government of the world, and for the
preservation of his creatures, that there is no annihilation of them, either by
course of nature, or miraculous power: not by course of nature, for in all the
vicissitudes of generation and corruption, the first matter, as the subject of
both, remains incorruptible, and not by miraculous power; for the end of
miracle, as an act of divine power, is to manifest the divine goodness; and
miraculously to annihilate, is not correspodent to this end of Miracles, which
is attained by preserving rather then by annihilating.

CHAP. IX. Concerning the Angels Elect and Apostate.
What the nature of the Angels is
. 1. THE Angels (in Dan. 7.10. Heb. 12.22.
number innumerable) were created in Job 38 7.
chief excellency over all the creatures, being Heb. 1 7, 14 Luke 20.36.
spiritual and Heb. 1 7, 14 Luke 20.36.
immortal substances, beautified with a more 2 Samuel 14 20. 2 Cor. 2.11. Ephesians.
6.10.
excellent knowledge, Job 38.7. John 8.44.
uprightness, Isa 6.2. Ezekiel. 1 7. Rev. 14 6.
agility, and 2 Pet. 2.11. Mat. 12.^0.
strength.

How and when created.
. 2. Created they were all together, and at once, ( Mat. 22.29.30.
propagation being inconsistent with the Angelical Nature, and proper only to
corporeal substances) made the Psalm. 103 21.
Host of the invisible Heavens, as the Jer 33.22.
Stars are the host of the visible, and so a Genesis 1.1. and 2.1.
part of the (Haxameron) six days creation. Indeed, the Angels, being a part
of the Universe, were certainly created with the whole Universe, of which they
are part, the whole consisting of creatures spiritual and corporeal.

Why and how immortal.
. 3. The Angels are therefore immortal, because immaterial; immortal
intrinsecally in the constitution of their natures, not extrinsecally in
relation to Gods power; which, as it did produce them out of nothing by
creation, so can it reduce them into nothing by annihilation. It is Gods
property alone to be Mal. 3 6. Jam. 1.17.
absolutely unchangeable in himself, and in relation to all outward Agents.

The trial of Angels.
. 4. For the Government of the Angels by his Providence; God imprinted in them
a John 8.44.
knowledge of his Truth at their creation, and enacted them a Law for their
trial, to which law having annexed a promise of free reward upon obedience, and
a threatening of due punishment upon transgression, The obedience and
confirmation of the good Angels.
some of the Angels being firm in their obedience commanded, became partakers
of the reward promised; being 1 Timothy 5.21. Luke 9 26.
confirmed in grace Ephesians. 1.10, 22. Col. 2.15, 20.
through Christ, and established in Mat. 18.10. and 22.30. 2 Cor. 11.14.
glory with God; according to their Ephesians. 1.21. and 3.10. Col. 1.16. 1 These.
4.16.
several offices and degrees enjoying his presence, and doing him Plas. 103.20.
Isa. 6.3. Luke 2.14. Rev. 5.11, 12.
service for ever in Heaven.

. 5. In what the confirmation of the good Angels.
The Angels confirmation (then) is in the Mat. 18.10. 1 John 3.2. 1 Cor. 13.12.
beatifical vision; and indeed, this and this alone does establish in a
gracious impossibility of falling, to behold God in his essence; which is the
full enjoyment of the chiefest good, from which the Blessed cannot Apostate; it
being more possible for them to quit their being, then to desert their God, and
forsake their Bliss. Which Bliss of the beatifical vision being supernatural,
could not be given to the Angels in their Creation from God, but in their
confirmation by Christ.

. 6. How and why f om grace, and not from nature.
The Angels and man where (indeed) created happy, in that natural blessedness
of spiritual contemplation, but not that supernatural bliss of the Beatifical
vision, which being the last end of the rational and intellectual Creature,
could not be attained by any ordinary work of nature, but by some extraordinary
1 Timothy 5.21.
act of Grace. For, To be, and to be Blessed, is one and the same in none but
God; and therefore to be is from Nature, but to be blessed is from Grace, as
the last end of being in a perfect communion with God through Christ by love.

. 7. This we know, This grace in the understanding.
thrt neither can the understanding attain in its knowledge, nor can the will
pursue in its desires, what is above its nature to desire or know. Wherefore
the Divine Essence being an Object infinitely transcending every created
understanding, it was impossible the Angels should know God in his essence by
any natural light, but by a Psalm. 36 9.
supernatural grace; which supernatural grace does fortify the understanding
of the Angels (as an habit does strengthen the faculty of the soul) to
apprehend God in the glory of his Divine Nature.

and in the will made perfect by Christ.
. 8. With which supernatural light in the understanding to know, the Angels
have communicated to them a supernatural strength in their will to love God in
his Essence, as the last end of their being, and the full object of their
happiness. Thus, The Angels in their beatifical vision of God, become united to
him by love, and are confirmed in their supernatural blessedness through
Christ, The Ephesians. 1.22. Col. 2, 10.
Head of all Power, and Ephesians. 1.10. Col. 1.20.
the Center of all Unity.

The fall and punishment of the evil Angels.
. 9. Others of the Angels under the conduct of their Mat. 12.24. Ephesians. 2.2.
Prince, called 1 Chro. 21.1. Mat. 4.1. Luke 10.18. Rev. 12 9.
Satan and the 1 Chro. 21.1. Mat. 4.1. Luke 10.18. Rev. 12 9.
Devil, by their sin committed, brought upon themselves the punishment
threatened. And so falling from the John 8.44. Jude 6.
Truth, they fell from their John 8.44. Jude 6.
estate, thrown down Luke 10.18. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6.
from Heaven to Hell, there to be reserved in Luke 10.18. 2 Pet. 2.4.
chains of darkness unto the judgment of the great day; that day, when Christ
shall fill up their measure of wrath, in a Mat 25 41. 1 Cor. 6.3.
full and final condemnation of them to Eternal torments.

The service of the good Angels in behalf of Christ's Church.
. 10. And now, as God in mercy and love has set and appointed the Luke 9 26. 1 Timothy 5 21.
good, holy and elect Angels under Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22.
Christ, to be Heb. 1.14. Psalm 91.11.
ministering Spirits for the benefit of his Children in their Psalm 34.7. Luke
2.10. and 16.22. Gal. 3.19.
direction, protection and comfort, so has he in judgment and wrath permitted
and ordered the Luke 8.2. and 9.42.
Evil, The use and malice of the evil Angels in respect of the wicked.
Rebellious, and Apostate Angels, under Satan to be 1 Samuel 16.14. John 8.44. 1
Kin. 22.21.22 2 Cor. 2.11. and 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2. Rev. 12.9.
seducing Spirits, for the deceiving of the wicked by their temptations,
suggestions, and subtilties.

. 11. God's glory manifested in both.
Thus does God make good the end he aimed at in all his works of Creation and
of Providence, even to manifest the Isa. 6.3. and 43.7.
glory of his Name; making some of the Angels to be 1 Timothy 5.21.
Mirrors of his free mercy, others 2 Pet. 2 4.
spectacles of his severe Justice, both the subjects and examples of his
wisdom, No fear to the good, no hope to the evil Angels.
holiness, and power. And now, as the Mat. 18.10. Luke 20 36. 1 Timothy 5.21.
good Angels, which stand, are confirmed in Bliss above all fear of falling; so
the 2 Pet. 2 4. Jude v. 6. Rev. 20.10.
evil Angels, which are fallen, are plunged in misery below all hope of
recovering.

. 12. Among the Angels in Heaven, that the orders and names of the good: how
given and constituted.
there are different Ephesians. 1.21. Col. 1.16.
orders and degrees, all according to their different offices and ministeries;
and the Isa 6.2. Dan 8.16. and 9.21. and 10 13. Genesis 3.24.
names or appellations given them in Scripture are not proper to them in their
natural constitutions, as Spirits; but in their virtual operations, as
Cherubims, Seraphims, etc. and in their Dan. 10.13.
temporary Ministrations, as Angels. Which name of Angels does signify them to
be Heb. 1.7, 14.
Messengers, being especially employed of God in the behalf of man.

. 13. How they assume bodies in their minist ations wi h men.
And when the Angels sent from God appeared in Genesis 18.2, 8. and 19, 1, 2, 3.
humane shape, they did but assume those bodies in which they performed their
Ministries; putting them on, suddenly formed of some preexistent matter, and
putting them off (as a man does his cloths) as suddenly resolved into the same
matter preexistent. What the actions they performed in those bodies.
And those bodily actions which they performed, as eating, speaking, going,
etc. though they were actions truly real, yet were they not operations
properly vital; they did indeed proceed from a living principle, but were not
acted in a living subject; those bodies being only temporarily assumed by the
Angels, not hypostatically united to them.

What their knowledge, how increased and perfected.
. 14. That excellent knowledge, which the good Angels had by John 8.44.
nature, is much improved by what they have by Luke 15.10. 1 Cor. 11.10. Ezekiel
10 3.
experience, and is farther increased by what they have from Dan. 8.16. and
9.21.
Revelation, but made incomparably excellent by what they have from the Mat.
18.10.
Beatifical vision of God. Such (then) is the fullness of intellectual light in
the Angels, that what they know, is not apprehended in parts, by a discursive
reasoning, but comprehended at once in a 1 Cor. 13.12.
present intuition of their understanding; and this so perfect and clear as is
without any the least mixture of falsehood, or mist of Errors.

Yet know not all things, not the secrets of the heart.
. 15. But though the Angels are so excellent in knowledge, yet do they not know
all things; no, not the 1 Cor. 2.11.
secret thoughts of man's heart, but as they are either revealed by Gods
Spirit, or discovered by man's self; he manifesting his affections by their
effects, his thoughts by their signs, whether internal in the soul, This Gods
prerogative.
or external in the body. To Jer. 17.10. Rev. 8.27.
be ((...)) the searcher of hearts, is the Prerogative of God alone; How they
know the mysteries of Grace.
And if the Angels know not the 1 Cor. 2.11.
secrets of man's heart, much less can they know the secrets of Gods counsel,
but when revealed: so that the Mysteries of Grace, are not known to the Angels,
but by Revelation from God.

How they admonish
. 16. The blessed Angels, as Mat. 2.20. and 3 19. Acts 27.23.
our Spiritual Counselors, they may by presenting truth to the mind
internally admonish; as our Heavenly friends, Heb. 1.14.
they may by secret instigations privately persuade; and persuade. yet cannot
savingly enlighten or convert. this also Gods prerogative.
but they cannot by any saving enlightnings illuminate the mind, or by any
effectual operation move the will; for he who is ((...)) the searcher of the
heart, he and he alone Prove. 21.1. Jer. 31.18.
is ((...)) the Converter of the heart.

. 17. When the holy Angels are busily employed in their Ministry, How the
Angels enjoy Gods presence in their ministrations to the Church.
for the service of Gods children, they still behold the face of God, by virtue
of his omnipresence; and though their Ministry be on Earth, yet are they said
to be in Heaven; though not in respect of place, yet in respect of the
beatifical vision, for that, as wheresoever the Royal person of the King is,
there is the Court; so wheresoever the glorious presence of God is, Aptly
illustrated
there is Heaven. Wherefore, as the Labourer hewing wood in the Sunshine so
plies his work, as that withal he enjoyes the light, cheered with the warmth of
the refreshing beams; so the Angels performing their Ministry in Gods presence,
so discharge their office, as that withal they enjoy their blessedness,
encompassed with the glory of the beatifical vision.

. 18. What honor we give the good Angels as their due.
We allow the holy Angels a due proportion of our love, our 1 Cor. 11.10.
reverence, and our Mat. 6.10.
imitation, but may not robb 1 Timothy 2.5.
Christ of the glory of his mediation by making Col. 2.18.
them our Mediators; And seeing that Invocation of Prayer is a main Psalm.
50.15. and 72.15.
Part of Divine worship, What we may not give, as not being due.

Not make them our M^diators, not invocate them: and why.


it must be Isa. 42.8.
appropriate unto God, and therefore it cannot Judge. 13.16. Rev. 19.10.
without Idolatry be applied unto Angels, who are our fellow creatures, though
far above us in the glory of their creation. We may not invocate any, but him,
who is the Mal. 3.1.
Angel of the Covenant, Christ Jesus, from whom Genesis 48.16.
Jacob (having received deliverance himself) beggs a blessing upon Joseph's
sons.

. 19. Their manner of working and of utterance not ^nown.
What is the manner of working whereby the Angels exercise and actuate their
power, and what their manner of Utterance, whereby they signify and
communicate their thoughts, we cannot determine, because it is not revealed;
only this, the former we believe to be 2 Kin. 19.35. Psalm. 103.20.
wonderfully effective, What we believe of both.
the later to be 1 Cor. 13 1.
clearly significant, and both exceeding quick and speedy in the performance.
So that when the Scriptures tell us of the Tongues of Angels, What meant by the
tongues of angels.
they are Metaphorically to be understood, of that Angelical Utterance whereby
they outwardly manifest, what they inwarldly conceive.

What reason dictates concerning the speech of Angels.
. 20. Thus much Reason dictates to us, That the Will being Empress of all the
faculties, does move the Understanding in it is intellectual operation, by whose
actual knowledge, if the Will confines within the limits of the mind, a man (by
that inward word of the mental conception) Mat. 9.3, 4.
speaks unto himself; But if the Will requires it to be manifested without, and
exposed to open view; by the outward word of voice, or Luke 1.22.
hand, or eye, or other external sign, a man speaks unto another. But in that
language, or rather, Manifestation of the inward thoughts which is Angelical,
one Angel speaks unto another (having no Obstacle of bodily substance, and so,
no need of external sign) by the only act of the Will, as willing, what he
knows or desires himself, to be made known and manifest unto another.

How different, and how agreeing with that of Men.
. 21. With men, the secrets of their heart are kept hid by a double obstacle,
that of the Will, and that of the Body; so that the thoughts of the heart which
a man wills not to be revealed at all, are kept hid from the Angels, as locked up
by the will; and when a man wills his thoughts to be known, if he declare them
not, they are kept hid from Men as veiled with the Body; for though the mind
be near so open as unlockt by the will, yet not being expressed by some
sensible sign, such is the thick wall of flesh, that we see it not. But with
the Angels, being spiritual substances, the only door to shut in, or let out
the secrets of the Mind, is the Will; so that, no sooner does one Angel will
that another know, but the other presently knows what that Angel wills.

. 22. It is consonant then to Reason, How the same with that of the souls
separate.
that the speech of Angels, is the same with that of Souls when separate from
their Bodies; even an act of the Will ordering the conceptions of the Mind to
be manifested to another. For that, remove the wall of flesh, and the soul then
needs no door of the mouth for the mind to come forth at, by voice to show its
self; the Will ordering the conceptions to be manifested, is language enough to
speak the intentions of the mind, for others (whether Angels or Souls
separate) to apprehend. This then is the voice and language of an 1 Cor. 13.1.
Jude 9.
Angel, even, a willing another to know, what he wills by him to be known.

. 23. The Sin of the Apostate Angels, What the sin of the Apostate Angels.
which was the cause of their fall, we cannot particularly discern, because the
Scriptures do not plainly discover. We suppose it to have been a sin
immediately against the Son of God, accompanied, or rather completed with the
Mat. 12.24. and 31.32.
Sin against the Holy Ghost, in an irreconcilable hatred, and enmity against
that truth, of which they were in conscience so fully convinced; Upon Isa.
14.12, 13, 14, 15.
Satan's pride and envy at Christ's person did follow his malice and John 8 44.
hatred of Christ's Truth, even the John 14.6. Rev. 14 6.
eternal Gospel of his Incarnation, as ordained of God in humane nature Ephesians.
1.22.23.
to be the head of the Angels, Ephesians. 1.10.
united to the body of his Church. Satan's malice against Christ, and how
especi^lly prosecuted.
Which malice and hatred of Christ and his truth, Satan has ever since
prosecuted by bloody persecutions raised against his Church by horrid
blasphemies and Heresies vented against his person in his Divinity; his
Humanity, and the offices of his Mediation.

. 24. What the knowledge of the Apo^tate Angels.
Though the evil Angels are Mat. 13.19. and 16.25. Ephesians. 6.12.
spoiled of grace by their sin, and 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6.
involved in darkness by Luke 10.18.
their fall; yet are they eminent in 2 Cor. 2.11. and 11.3. Ephesians. 6.11. Jam.
2.19.
knowledge by their Nature, How increased.
and this much Ephesians. 6.11, 12.
heightened by long experience in the world, and from divine Mat. 4.6. and 8 29.
J^m 2 19.
revelations in the Scriptures; yea by Jude 9.
frequent contests with the good Angels, yet can they not Isa. 4.23.
foretell future events, How not foretell events.
by any light of foreknowledg in and from themselves; but what they do foretell
are either such things as they find foretold by the holy Prophets, How foretell
them.
or prepared in natural Causes, or such things as they know already designed,
being privy to the good, and i assistants to the wicked designs of men; or such
things as by some evident signs they conjecture, or by some seeming
probabilities they presume; The end of all diabolical predictions.
but whatsoever it the prediction or revelation from the evil Angels, is is
intended to Mark 1.36. Acts 16 17.18.
deceive and seduce; to mischief and destroy; and therefore 1 Kin. 22 21, 22.
Deuteronomy. 13 1, 2, 3. Ephesians 6.11.
neither is to be sought for, Why not to be allowed of.
nor to be allowed of; all compliance with Devils being a 2 Cor. 6 14, 15.
Ephesians. 5 11.
renouncing of God, and thereby a ruin to the soul.

What the power of (...) evil (...).
. 25. As the Evil spirits are eminent in knowledge, so are they also Mat. 12.29.
Ephesians 6.12.
migty in power, yet a power Job 1.12. and 2 6. 1 Pet. 5.8.
limited and restrained, God holding them fast in the Chain of his Providence;
so that, when made executionors of his wrath, they are kept Mat. 8.32. Rev 7.2,
3.
subject to the command of his will. How exercised.
By Divine Permission and Providential ordination it is, that the Evil spirits
exercise their Job 1.12.16.19 Ephesians. 2 2. Rev 7.^, 3.
power in the fire, in the air, in the waters, and on the earth; upon trees,
upon beasts, and upon men. Some Luke 8.30. Mat. 8.16.
men they actually possess, some they Luke 22.3. Acts 5.3. Ephesians. 2.2.
wickedly pervert, some they Zech. 3.1. 1 These. 2.18.
eagerly oppose, but all they 1 Pet. 5.8. 2 Timothy 2.26.
daily tempt, and with the 1 Chro. 21.1. Luk 22.31.57.
best they often prevail, though not so as Gen 3.15. Psalm. 5.1. Luk 22.61, 62.
Romans 16.20.
fully to overcome and finally to destroy.

What their names, and how proper and common.
. 26. The Prince of the Apostate Angels is called by those Mat. 25.41. Luke
10.17.
names in an eminency of Evil, which will fit all the rest in their proportion
of Evil. He is called sometimes the John 8.44. 1 John 3.8.
Devil (the Rev. 12.10.
Accuser) with lies, reproaches and calumnies accusing God unto man, and man
unto God. Sometimes the Mat. 4.3. 1 These. 3.5.
Tempter by evil suggestions still soliciting unto sin. Sometimes the Mat.
13.19. Ephesians. 6.16
wicked one, being full of iniquity himself, and ever prompting others unto
wickedness. Sometimes Luke 10.18. Acts 26.18.
Satan (the Adversary) setting himself against God and Christ, the good Angels
and holy men, raising and promoting enmity and contentions. Sometimes the Mat.
13.25. Luke 10.19.
Enemy and the 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.
Destroyer, raising Rev. 20.8.
seditions and wars to destroy nations, 1 Samuel 16.14.
dissentions and divisions to ruin families, Gods glory manif^sted in all.
Mat. 13.25. Rev. 12.12, 13, 17
persecutions and Heresies to infest the Church. In all which God does manifest
the riches of his wisdom, and greatness of his power; to the glory of his
mercy, and the advancement of his Justice, in Mat. 24.24. Luke 21.18.
the gracious salvation of his chosen, and the Rev. 9.11.
just condemnation of the wicked.

. 27. The wonderful working of Satan.
By his subtilty and power Satan does work his 2 These. 2.9.
lying wonders, deceitful in themselves, and intended by him for the deceiving
of others; yea, sometimes he does work Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. Mat. 24.24.
true signs, yet thereby aims he at the destruction of truth; which true
signs, though they seem wonderful, Why not true miracles.
yet are they not such wonders as are truly Acts 8.13.
called Miracles. For they cannot be any supernatural Effects, being only the
events of some Natural Causes, Exodus 7.12. and 8.7.
which Satan by a secret subtilty does compact, not by any proper power does
produce. Every supernatural Effect must needs be the issue of a supernatural
Cause, ^ll miracles are from God.
which is God; and Psalm. 72.^8 and 136.4.
he alone who did wonderfully create the world without matter pre-existent, can
powerfully create wonders without means cooperating; Such the mira^les of
Christ.
and such were the Joh. 10.25. Act. 2.22.
glorious Miracles of Christ, whereby he did testify the Divine power of his
Godhead.

. 28. ^hy not such the workings of ^a^an.
Wherefore if the Devil could work true Miracles to persuade false Doctrines,
then were Miracles a weak and insufficient Mat. 16.17.20
argument to confirm the true faith. Besides, that is a true Miracle which is
above the order of created Nature, and so above the reach of any created power,
whether it be in the good Angels or in the Evil. As for those 1 Samuel 28.12, 13.
Acts 8.9, 11.
Diabolical impostures (then) wherewith Satan does delude the sight, and
deceive the fancy, however they may seem 1 Samuel 28.13. Acts 8.9, 10.
prodigious operations, yet are they indeed but airy apparitions.

The punishment of the evil Angels. 1. Of loss. 2. Of sense.

. 29. The Evil Angels by their Apostasy incur a double punishment of loss, and
of sense. Their punishment of loss, in being Luke 10.18. 2 Pet. 2.4.
cast out of Heaven, their punishment of sense, in being Mat. 25.4.
tormented in Hell; which torment is not only that of inward anguish, made more
accurately griping by horrid despair, but also that of outward flames, made
more horridly dreadful 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6.
by utter darkness. Luke 10.18.
And the Apostate Angels (though Spirits) become tormented with scorchings from
the infernal flames, How tormented with the infernal sire.
as the souls of men (though Spirits) become affected with pain from their
distempered bodies. The manner is wonderful, the measure inconceiveable, the
Truth real. And seeing that among contraries, as the reason, so the faith of
the one does clear and confirm the reason and faith of the other; therefore we
may conclude, How the Doctrine concerning Devils helps to confirm the faith of
God.
That if there be a Devil, there certainly is a God; and if Evil Angels to
serve the Devil, then, sure good Angels to attend that God; And if there be an
Hell of torment for the wicked, then sure there is an Heaven of joy for the
godly.

CHAP. X. Concerning the estate of Man before his Fall.
. 1. By the common works of creation is manifested the will and power of the
Godhead.
THAT Jer. 51.15.
efficient virtue whereby the world was made, and which in the Psalm. 19.1.
world as in its effect is manifested and declared, does not relate to the
subsistence and Persons, but to the essence and Rev. 4.11.
will of the Deity; therefore though by the common work of creation is made
Romans 1.20.
known Gods eternal power and Godhead, yet Mat 16.16, 17
not the mystery of the Trinity. Not the mystery of the Trinity.
But when God does form man, to denote the excellency of his creature, That
clearly manifested, this darkly presented in man's creation.
and to declare somewhat of the Mystery of the Trinity in the plurality of the
persons) he calls a council (as it were) for man's creation, and proposes
himself as the pattern of his Being: Let us (says God, Gen 1.26, 27.
even Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness; Created in Gods image.
thereby imprinting in man a conformity to the Divine nature; yea some
resemblance of the Personal subsistences.

. 2. Wherein the Image of God in man did consist.
This conformity unto the Divine Nature wherein man was created as the image of
God, did appear most of all in the Soul, much in the body, in the person, and
in the state of man before his fall. Man's Soul in its nature did (in some
proportion or analogy) represent God in his essence; 1. In respect of his soul.
as being a substance Genesis 2.7. Luke 23.46. Acts 7.59.
spiritual and Psalm. 49.15. Mat. 10.28. and 22.32. Phil. 1.23. 1 Pet. 3.19.
immortal, as God is; endued and adorned in his understanding with Col. 3.10.
perfect knowledge, in his will with Eccles. 7.29.
liberty, in his affections with purity, and in all his faculties with Ephesians.
4.24. Luke 3.38.
holiness and righteousness.

. 3. 2. In respect of his body.
That conformity in man to Divine Nature in respect of his body, did consist in
a Romans 5.13.
secret harmony (not visible shape) of the parts, and in an Genesis 2.25.
excellent beauty (not external figure) of the whole; such was the beauty of
the body from the virtuous luster of the soul, as is the light of the lantern
from the bright shining of the candle. Yea, the members of man's body represent
unto us the attributes of Gods nature; and therefore as the parts of the Jews
Tabernacle did Heb 8.5. and 9.23, 24.
bear the image of heavenly mysteries, so do the parts of man's body bear the
image of the divine attributes; so that we say the 2 Chro. 16.9. Psalm. 11.4.
Jer. 32.19.
Eye of God, to denote his wisdom and knowledge; the Deu. 33.27. Exodus 6 6.
arm of God, to intimate his power and strength; the Psalm. 139.10. and 145 16.
hand of God, to signify his protection and providence.

3. In res^ct of his person.
. 4. That part of Gods image in man which relates unto his person, does consist
in that Sovenaignty and dominion given Genesis 1.26. 1 Cor. 11.7.
him of God over the creatures, being G^n. 2.8.
placed in Paradise as his royal seat, the Genesis 2.19.
beasts of the Earth there made subject to him. And such is the excellency of
this representation of God in Sovereignty and Dominion, that Psalm. 82.6.
Kings and Judges of the earth are therefore called Gods. This pecular to man
above the woman.
And this part of Gods image is peculiar to man 2 Cor. 11.8, 9
above the woman, who in all particulars else is equal to the man, having her
Original being correspondent to her Conjugal condition, Woman oath wise equal
to the man.
being Gen 2 22. 1 Cor. 11.8.
taken out of man, not from the head, or feet, but the side; and so to be, not
his Mistress, or his Handmaid, but his Genesis 2.18. Ephesians 5 22, 23.
Associate, Genesis 2.23, 24 Ephesians 5.28.33.
near in relation, and dear in affection each to other.

4. In respect of his estate.
. 5. Thus man who was spiritual and immortal in his soul, who had knowledge and
wisdom in his understanding, liberty and uprightness in his will, integrity and
moderation in his affections, an harmony and soundness in his members,
Sovereignty and dominion in his person, must needs have a felicity and
blessedness of estate, and so be (in his proportion and measure) a complete
Genesis 9.6.
image of God, In all man a complete image of God.
who could not know misery Gen 2.17. Rom 6.23.
till he knew sin, and so not cease to be happy, till he did cease to be holy.

. 6. Besides this Image of God in a conformity to his divine nature, What the
resemblance of the Trinity in man
there is in man some likeness of the Trinity in a resemblance of the personal
subsistences; Which may be found, either in those three faculties of the Soul,
the Understanding, Memory and Will, which three faculties have but one soul,
and the soul is one and the same in all the three faculties: or else, in the
frame and order of man's intellectual nature and operation, for that in one and
the same spiritual Being, the understanding does beget the Word of the mind,
the image of it self, in which it knows; and from both issues a Dilection in
the Will, whereby it loves: which is some likeness, though no perfect Image of
the Trinity.

. 7. Wherefore, when God says, What most properly meant by those words of God
is the creation of man, After our likeness.
Genesis 2.26.
Let us make man in our own image after our likeness; those words, After our
likeness, we understand aright ((...)) by way of exposition to those words, In
our Image; and so, they intimate unto us what this image is; not of identity,
but of analogy; not of essence, but of quality; that being 2 Cor. 4.4. Col.
1.15. H b 1.3. John 14.9. 1 Timothy 3.16.
proper unto Christ, this common unto Job 1.6. Mat. 22.30.
Angels and Genesis 9.6. 1. Cor. 11.7.
Man. Man (then) being made in Gods image, and after his likeness, does denote
a distance of diversity, as well as declare a nearness of similitude. Indeed
Christ, and Christ alone, is the perfect and equal image of God, being
coessential, and coeternal with the Father; so that, Gods image is in Christ,
as that of the King in his connatural Son, by generation; but in man, as that
of the King in his public Coin, by impression.

. 8. It is an inseparable property of Man's soul, in its analogical conformity
to Gods nature, The souls immortality not lost by the fall.
to be immortal; which could not be lost by the fall; for that, in man
degenerated by Sin, as in man regenerated by Grace, What the change in man by
his fall.
the change is real, but not essential; it is in Col. 3 10. Ephesians. 4 24.
qualities, but not in substance; it is in the gifts and habits of the mind,
and thereby in the excellency, not in the essence of the soul; And as not in
the souls essence, so nor in its essential powers and properties; man by his
fall does become indeed Jer. 10.14.
brutish, but not a brute. Psa. 49 12, 20
Like the beasts in sensuality, but not a beast in real truth.

Why the soul is immortal.
. 9. The soul then in all men continuing to be immaterial, it must needs be
immortal, which otherwise could not be capable of an 2 Cor. 5.1. Romans 2, 7. 1
Pet. 1.4.
eternal reward in the godly, or an Mat. 25.4. Mark 9.43, 44.
eternal punishment in the wicked: and needs must the soul be immortal, which
is spiritually begotten of 1 Pet. 1.4.
immortal seed, and nourished by John 6.51.
incorruptible food; which, together with our whole Christian faith, would
become 1 Cor. 15.13, 14
vain, yea perish in the souls mortality: So that we cannot profess the
Religion of Christ, if we deny the immortality of the soul.

When the soul is created and infused into the body.
. 10. The soul is not Romans 9.11.
pre-existent in its self before it is united unto the body by inspiration from
God; but as in the Genesis 2.7.
primitive being of the soul in Adam, so in the successive beings of souls in
all men; The Number. 16.22. Zech. 12.1. Col. 1.17. Job. 5.17.
soul is then infused by Creation, and created by infusion when the body is
prepared by a fit Exodus 21.22.
organization of the parts, What its principal seat, and how it informs the
body.
made capable to receive it. Whose Royal seat is in Deu. 5.29. and 65. and
30.14. Prove. 23.26. Heb. 8.10.
the heart, and by its (analogically) omnipresent power and infinite essence in
its little world, it actuates 1 Cor. 12.14, etc.
the whole body, and each member according to the several dispositions of the
Organs. And the soul thus inspired or infused, it is not (de Deo) of God in his
essence; but Romans 11.36.
(a Deo) from God in his power, How the soul is the offspring of God.
and so it is Acts 17.28. Heb. 12.9.
his offspring by way of efficiency, in a conformity of divine habits in its
qualification, not by an identity of divine substance in its Constitution.

. 11. In man's primitive integrity, How possessed of all virtues in its integrity.
Reason being subordinate unto God, and the inferior faculties subordinate unto
Reason, Man was in a proportion possessed of all virtues; some in habit, though
not in act, some both in act and in habit. Those virtues which did imply an
imperfection in man's estate, were in him only according to their habits, and
not their acts, as mercy and repentance, which implies misery and sin. Those
virtues which did imply nothing repugnant to man's created perfection, were in
him both according to their habits and their acts as Faith, Hope, and Charity;
Justice, Temperance and Chastity; and the like.

. 12. The souls of men not propagated.
Seeing the soul does receive its being by Eccles. 12.7. Isa. 57.16. 1 Pet. 4.9.
creation, it cannot be (extraduced) propagated by generation; as if the soul
were from the soul as light is from light, or the body from the body; for then
sure, Adam would have said Genesis 2 23.
of Eve, that she was spirit of his spirit, as well as flesh of his flesh; And
why.
neither can that be by natural generation, which is incorruptible in its
nature; yea, simple and indivisible in its substance; now such is the Luke
23.46. H^b. 12 9.
soul of man.

. 13. Yea, Especially proved from their immortality.
the soul being an immaterial and immortal substance, subsisting in its self,
and so, Heb. 12.23. Rev. 6.10.
having the operations of life without the body, it cannot be by Generation,
but must have its being by Creation; otherwise, as it begins its being with the
Body generated, it should cease to be with the Body corrupted, and thereby
could not be immortal. Wherefore to say the soul is propagated by carnal
Generation, were to deny its immortality, and therewith overthow the Faith, and
destroy our Christianity.

What the immortality of humane nature.
. 14. Besides the immortality of the soul in its spiritual substance, man in
his primitive estate had an immortality of humane nature, not whereby he had no
power to dye, and from whence.
but whereby he had a power not to dye, from his Original righteousness he had
a power not to sin, and from thence did flow that his primitive immortality in
a power not to dye, and how lost.
Genesis 1.17. Rom 6.23.
death being a punishment, and so a consequent of sin.

. 15. Yea some Bodies we acknowledge incorruptible, either in respect of their
Matter, or of their Form, or of their Efficient; amongst which were the bodies
of our first Parents. How some bodies said to be incorruptible.
The Heaven of Heavens was created incorruptible, in respect of its Matter, as
having no capacity of, nor propension to any other Form then what it already
has. The Bodies of the blessed shall be raised 1 Cor. 15.42, 53.
incorruptible in respect of their form, as having thereby conveyed to them
such an endowment of immortality, as shall preserve from all corruption. and
how the bodies of our first Parents.
And the Bodies of our first Parents were kept incorruptible in respect of the
efficient, God communicating to them a preservative power by effectual means,
the Tree of life appointed for the preventing of corruption, whilst they
continued in their innocence.

What and how great things God did that Man should not sin.
. 16. That man should not sin, God gave him a Col. 3.10.
clear knowledge, and an Eccles. 7.29.
upright Will; he gave him a Genesis 2.17.
firm law, fenced with a gracious promise upon obedience, and a dreadful
threatening upon transgression; and he gave him a visible Genesis 2.9.
sacrament to signify and seal what was promised, and what was threatened. All
this God did, that man should not sin; and what he would have done that Man
should not dye.
and had not man sinned, more would God have done, that he should not die: he
would have preserved him from outward violence, by Psa. 91.1. and 121. 34, etc.
divine protection and the Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11, 12.
Ministry of Angels; he would have supplied him with continual food from the
wholesome Genesis 1.29. and 2.16.
fruit of a pleasant Paradise; he would have prevented all distemper, decay and
dissolution, from sickness, age, and death, by the virtue of temperance and the
Gen 3 22.
tree of life; yea after his temporal estate of an earthly happiness, God would
have Genesis 5.24. Heb 11.5. 1 Cor. 15.51.
translated him to an Heavenly habitation of eternal blessedness.

. 17. Original righteousness was not such, What original righteousness was,
as that thereby man had no power to sin, for the Genesis 3.6, 11.12, 17.
event shows the contrary; but such, as that thereby man Gen 1.27. and 2.17.
had a power not to sin; which Original righteousness was a Genesis 1.26. Eccles.
7.29.
con-natural endowment, no supernatural gift, and therefore had it been
transmitted from Adam in his standing, as the privation thereof is propagated
in his fall, unto his whole posterity; For that, being the righteousness of
man's nature, not Adams person, and how to h^ve bin transmitted to Adams
posterity.
it did belong to an equal right unto his Posterity as to himself; and so
should have been transmitted (not by virtue of any seminal power, but of Exodus
20 6.
divine ordination) to all after generations.

. 18. Why said to be a con-natural endowment.
Wherefore seeing Original righteousness was to have been propagated with the
human nature if man had not fallen, it could not be any supernatural gift; and
seeing Original righteousness is wholly lost, and yet man's specifical nature
retained in his fall, it could not be from any natural principle; therefore we
say it is betwixt both, a con natural endowment. It did not flow from any
principles of man's nature, but was given to man with his nature to be a natural
principle of Actual righteousness; And (seeing opposita sunt unius generis)
Original sin being opposite to Original righteousness; as Original sin is
become a natural deformity, so was Original righteousness a natural integrity,
and with man's nature, to have been transmitted by propagation to Adams
posterity.

The will the chief seat of original righteousness.
. 19. The inseparable property of the will (the chief seat of Original
righteousness) is this, that it act freely without constraint, either in
choosing or in refusing what is presented unto it by the understanding. What
its essential liberty is.
And this is the liberty, which is so essential to the will, as that without it
it were no will. And therefore it is to be found in God and in Christ, in the
Angels and in Devils; yea in man whether it be in his estate of innocence, of
sin, of grace, or of glory. What the liberty of contrariety is, and why not
essential to the will.
The liberty then which is essential to the will, does not consist in a liberty
of contrariety, which implies an indifferency to objects specifically
different, as Deuteronomy. 30.19.
good and evil, for then should not the will of God, nor of Christ, no, nor the
will of Angels, or of the blessed, have its liberty, seeing they cannot will
what is evil, being Heb. 12.23. Rev. 14.13.
perfectly confirmed in good.

What that of contradiction is, and why not essential to the will.
. 20. Yea, it is not absolutely necessary to the freedom of the will, that it
have a liberty of contradiction, being indifferent in the exercise of the act,
to will or not to will; for that the blessed Angels and Saints in heaven do
freely love and praise God, yet can they not 1 Cor. 13 8, 12. Rev. 4 8. and
7.15.
forbear or suspend the acts of loving and of praising him; sure, the will, as
in the desire, so much more in the enjoyment of its last end, it necessarily
wills; and yet freely too. It cannot but will, yet without any external force,
or internal coaction, being Psalm. 16.27. and 11.15. and 36.8.
wholly possessed with a delightful complacency in its object. In what it is
necessary that the will have a liberty of contradiction.
That the will then be free in a liberty of contradiction, is necessary only
in the use of means, which admit of deliberations; not in the desire or
enjoyment of the last end and chief good, to which the will is carried by a
natural propension, not a voluntary election, and so excludes all preceding
deliberation.

. 21. What Is the liberty of will in God, in Christ, in the Angels, and in the
blessed.

What in the Devils, and in the wicked. What in man in the state of innocence,
and of grace.


Such a liberty of will then as is free only to good, is in 2 Cor. 3.17.
God, and in Christ, in the Angels, and in the Blessed; such a liberty of will,
as is free only to evil, is in the Devils, and Gen 6.5. Job 15.16.
in the wicked; and such a liberty of will as is free both to good and evil,
was in man in his state of innocence, and is in him in Gal. 5 17. Phil. 2.13.
his state of grace. In Adam then before his fall, there was not any thing of
coaction from within, or of enforcement from without, to compel him to will or
do what was good, or what was evil, whether it were in things Natural, Civil,
Moral, or Divine.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the Covenant of Works, and the Fall of man.
. 1. MAN being made in Genesis 1.27.
Gods Image, Adam had a knowledge of Gods will perf^ct in its kind.
had a perfect Col. 3.10.
knowledge of Gods will; not that Isa 40.13. Rom 11.33, 34.
absolute and secret will of God, which is the Cause of all Being; but that
Deuteronomy. 29.29.
conditional and revealed will of God, What the Law to Adam.
which is the Psalm. 143.10. Mat. 6.10.
rule of man's working, Which will of God, was to be a law to man; How the same
with the Decalogue.
and Adam in his creation, had this Psalm. 40.8. Jer. 31.33. Romans 2.15.
law written in the table of his heart, the same in substance with the
Decalogue, Exodus 34.28.
that law of the ten Commandments, which afterward Israel had written in
tables of stone.

. 2. God having given man a law, What the Covenant of Works
he further enters with him a Exodus 34.28. Deuteronomy. 9.10. Jer. 31.31, 32. Heb.
8.9, 13.
Covenant. This called the Covenant of Works. In which the Lev. 18.5. Ezekiel
20.11. Romans 7.10. and 10.5. Gal. 3.12.
promise on Gods part, is the confirming man in his created estate of life,
holiness, and happiness: The Lev. 18.5. Ezekiel. 20.11. Romans 7.10. and 10.5. Gal.
3.12.
condition on man's part, is perfect obedience unto the Deuteronomy. 27.26. Luke 10.25,
26, 27. Gal. 3.10. Jam. 2.10.
whole law of his Creator, according to the full extent of his revealed will.
What the seal of the Covenant.
This Covenant God seals in a solemn ratification with that Sacramental Tree,
the Gen 2 9. and 3.22. Prove. 3.18.
Tree of life.

. 3. Thus God having made firm his Covenant, The trial of man's obedience.
he does put man upon the trial of his obedience, Genesis 2.16.17
forbidding him to eat of the tree of knowledge; setting on the prohibition with
this commination, Genesis 2.17.
that in the day he eats thereof, he shall surely dye. So that as upon man's
performing the condition, God freely promised by covenant a Blessing of life;
so upon his breach of the Covenant, God severely threatened in justice the curse
of death.

Man left to the use of his freewil.
4. Now God having entered a Covenant, and sealed it, enacted a probatory law,
and published it; he leaves man ( E^cles. 7.28.
furnished with sufficient power) to the use of his free will, for the trial of
his obedience. Tempted by Satan.
And here the John 8.44.
Devil in malice to God, and envy to man, making use of the Genesis 3.1, 2, 3,
etc. 2 Co. 11.3.
Serpent, by the subtilty of his suggestions, deceives Eve; and by the
plausible importunity of her Genesis 3, 6. 1 Timothy 2.14.
persuasions, Transgresses in eating the forbidden fruit.
seduceth Adam to a breaking the Covenant of his God, by eating the forbidden
fruit.

Satan's bait to catch men.
. 5. That which Satan (in his temptation) does labor by subtle Sophistry to
persuade, is this, That man should not dye though he did eat, but should be
like God, The subtilty of Satan's temtation
when he had eaten, This poison the Devil first presents unto Eve, in a covered
cup, words of a dark, dubious, and perplexed sense, by Genesis 3.1.
way of interrogation, (yea, has God said?) the better to catch at her answer,
His order and progress in it.
and pursue his design: And when by his questioning, he has Genesis 3.3.
brought Gods Command into question; he presently Genesis 3.4.
takes away the commination (which God has set as a bar to his law, lest man
should break in, and transgress his command) and to Gods severe threatening he
Genesis 3.5.
opposes an enticing promise; which he sets on with a false crimination cast
upon God; and as a gloss to his lie, he gives a rare commendation of the fruit,
The Tree of knowledge of good and evil, why so called.
seemingly made good by the very denomination of the Tree, the Genesis 2.17.
Tree of knowledge of good and evil; which name it had of God, not from the
constitution of its nature, but of his ordinance, with respect to the event of
man's sin foreseen.

. 6. wherein the hainousness of Adams transgression does consist
The enormity and hainousness of Adams sin, is not to be sought for in the
taste, or in the fruit, or in the tree, which present but a low estimation of
the sin, to a seeming meanness of the fact; but it is to be sought for in the
Genesis 2.17. and 3.11. Exodus 20.1.2.
high contempt of the Divine Majesty, and Law, in the Genesis 3.5.6.22.
proud affectation of the Divine Dignity and Likeness; yea, in the horrid
Apostasy of preferring Satan's word before Gods, and thereby turning from God in
his truth, to a siding with Satan in his John 8.44.
lie. The sin then of our first Parents, it was no light, trivial, or single
sin, but indeed a mass or heap of heinous, horrid, and manifold impieties, even
to a violation of the whole Decalogue, how a violation of the whole Law.
in a total breach of that Jam 2 8
Royal Law of love, which does Mat. 22 36, 37, 38, 40. Romans 13.10.
fill up both tables in what concerns God, our neighbor, and our selves.

. 7. In this transgression of Adams, What was man's fist sin, is doubtful, and
so difficult to determine
the concourse and complication of many sins, it is doubtful and difficult to
determine which was the first sin; the erroneous Jer. 4.22. Psalm. 14.2.
judgment of the understanding, that must necessarily go before the evil
election of the will in order of nature: yet we conceive the understanding and
will, What the first internal principle of evil in man.
by error and evil choice, did in one and the same instant complete the sin,
and thereby became the first internal principle of evil in man, whether that
evil were a sin either of vain confidence, or infidelity, or of pride, or of
covetousness; one of which most probably was (which is not necessary to be
determined) the first sin committed by Adam in his Apostasy. Adams sin was from
himself freely without force.
And thus, that Adam sinned, was not by any Jam. 1.13.
enforcement either of positive decree in God, or of Jam 4.7.
irresistible temptation in Satan; or of Eccles. 7.29.
evil disposition in himself; But at the suggestion of the Devil Adam misusing
the liberty of his will, of his own accord did Romans 5.14.15
transgress the command of his God, and thereby became guilty of sin and liable
to the curse.

Adams sin incurs Gods cu se of death
. 8. Thus the Act of disobedience committed by Adam of his Eccl. 7.29.
own free will, brings upon him the curse of death, inflicted of God in his
just judgment, and not only upon himself in his person, upon himself and his
posterity.
but also in his Romans 5.18, 19
posterity; for that God entered not his Covenant with Adam as he was one man,
Why upon his posterity.
but as he Acts 17.26. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22
represented all mankind, of which he was the Root and the Head; And therefore
as by Adams obedience, all his Posterity should have received the reward of
life promised; so equal it is, that upon Adams disobedience, Romans 5.14 15
all his posterity should undergo the curse of death threatened.

Adam propagates the curse and the sin too;
. 9. And thus, as the blessing of the Covenant had not rested in Adams person,
so nor does the Romans 5 12.
curse and as not the curse, so nor does the Romans 5 12.
sin; But both sin and curse being seated in Ephesians. 2.3.
humane nature, and this in propagating his nature.
as well as Adams person, Adam propagating his nature, does propagate also his
sin, and with his sin the curse of Death. So that, as many, as by natural
generation descend from Adam, are Psalm. 51 5.
shapen in iniquity, and conceived in sin, Ephesians. 2 2, 3.
children of disobedience, and children of wrath, subject to Mat. 10.28. Romans
6.23.
temporal and eternal death.

. 10. Now that no man may question the goodness and Justice of God, in giving
Adam a free will, God's goodness justified in giving man a free will, though he
knew the Devil would thereby enter and destroy man.

How it was necessary that man should have a will; and that will a liberty to
good and evil.


whereat he knew Sin and Satan would enter and destroy him; we acknowledge
free will to be a Genesis 1.26.
necessary part of the pure natural being of man, and so likewise of Angels;
therefore, that God might make the Angels intelligent Spirits, and Man a
rational creature, necessary it was that they should have a will, which will
in its pure natural constitution must have its freedom, in a Deuteronomy. 30.19.
liberty to good and evil; for that the will does become free only to good,
is from confirming Grace; free only to evil, that is from degenerating sin;
free both to good and evil, that is from pure Nature.

. 11. Seeing then, it was absolutely necessary that Angels and Man, being
Intelligent and Rational Creatures, should have a will; and having a will, it
was absolutely necessary that will should be free; and being free, it was
absolutely necessary that freedom should be in a liberty to good and evil;
either God must not have made them such creatures, or he must make them such
wills. To have made a rational creature without a will, or a will without its
liberty, does imply a contradiction.
For God cannot do what implies a contradiction in the thing, not from any
deficiency in God, but from an incapacity in the creature; indeed to be free
only to good by Nature, is the perfection of Gods will, whose wi^^ thereby
becomes the very Rule of goodness.

. 12. Besides, The mutability of estate in Angels and Man, did depend upon the
liberty of the will.
the Job. 4.18. and 15.15. John 4 44. Jude 6. Genesis 2.17.
Mutability of estate in Angels and Man, to the manifestation of Gods justice
and mercy, does depend upon the liberty of their will to good and evil; so
that to have created Angels and Men in this perfection of will, as free only
to good, had been to have created them immutable in their estate, whereas to be
such by nature, To be immutable by nature is peculiar unto God.
is Mal. 3.6. Jam. 1.17. 2 Cor. 5.1. Luke 20.36. 1 Pet. 1.4.
proper unto God, and incommunicable to the creature, which is not made such
but by Grace, and that grace made c perfect in glory.

. 13. So that, to take away liberty from the will, is to take away the will
from man; and to take away the will from man, is to take away man from the
Creation; and to take away man from the creation, is to take away much of the
manifestation of Gods glory in the exercise of his mercy and justice, as well
as his wisdom and power. Wherefore though God gave man a free will, whereby
Satan entered upon the soul to destroy Adam, Man's fall not to be laid to Gods
charge.
and sin entered upon Adam to destroy his posterity, yet can we not in common
equity, lay man's fall to Gods charge.

. 14. To stop the mouth of all irrational reasoning; we make this reasonable
instance by way of apt illustration. Illustrated by a fit similitude.
In the building of an house it is necessary, that for use, convenience and
being, it have a door, which is made of sufficient strength to keep out the
thief, so the inhabitant have sufficient care to keep it shut. Now if the thief
by fair words, not violent force, get entrance and spoil the goods, whose is
the fault? the workmans that built the house, or the inhabitants that set open
the doors? With the application we curb and stop men's curiosity, that it do
not run or rush them into blasphemy; and where they cannot satisfy their
reason, they are taught to exercise their faith, Where man cannot satisfy his
reason, it is reasonable that he exercise his faith.
and with devout praise, to take a part in that heavenly Anthem, Rev. 15.3.
Great and mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty! just and true are thy
ways, O thou King of Saints.

. 15. This then we affirm as certain truth, that, In man's fall, Gods will was
permitting and disposing in man's fall.
Psalm. 5.4. Hos. 13.9.
God was neither compelling, nor commanding nor persuading; but permitting and
disposing. And thus, though God did not will man's fall, yet was not (indeed
could not be) man's fall without Gods will; So that as God did not will man's
fall, so nor was man's fall without Gods will.
for if the Matthew. 10.30
hair of man's head cannot, sure, the head of all mankind could not; if one poor
Matthew. 10:29
Sparrow cannot, sure, our first Parents, and in them whole humane Stock, could
not fall to the ground, universally sink into the gulf Romans 5.18.
of sin, How ordered to his glory and man's good.
and guilt of death, without the will of God; whose will did certainly determine
to permit and order man's fall, to the greater manifestation of his own glory,
and the higher advancement of man's happiness in a gracious redemption by Christ.

. 16. Thus, as God did not positively will, Why God did neither positively will,
nor properly nill man's fall.
so nor did he properly nill man's fall; for if God had wil'd that man should
fall, man falling must have derogated from his goodness and holiness; and if
God had willed that man should not fall, man falling must have derogated from
his Wisdom and Power; but God neither willing nor nilling, but permitting and
disposing man's fall, does manifest the glory of all his Attributes, in the
advancement of his mercy and justice; his mercy, in that Ephesians. 1.8, 9, 10.
grace he vouchsafes by Christ to his Church; and his justice, by Psalm. 9.16.
Romans 9.22, 23.
those judgments he executes upon sin in the world.

. 17. Why God ordered man to be tempted, left him, and permitted him to be
overcome.
God ordered man to be tempted for his trial; left him (in that temptation) to
himself, for his conviction; and permitted him to be overcome for his
punishment. In the trial he proves man's obedience, in the conviction he
discovers man's weakness, and in the punishment he does correct his Jer. 17.5.
vain confidence; his vain confidence, in trusting to his own strength, Adam
lost the assistance of God, by not seeking it in prayer.
and not seeking by prayer the assistance of God; who, as he gave Adam a power
in his Nature, whereby he might have obeyed, if he had willed; would also have
given him a further power in his trial, whereby he had wil'd that he might
have obeyed, What strength Adam had by creation.

and What he might have had by prayer.


1 Chronicles. 28.9. Psalm. 9.10.
if he had sought it of God. And thus, having obtained so much grace by
creation, as to have a power whereby, if had wil'd, he might not have sinned;
he had certainly obtained more grace by prayer, so as to have had a power,
whereby he neither might have sinned nor have willed it; being approved in his
trial, and confirmed in his conquest; and so established in grace, and made
perfect in happiness.

Why God cannot be said to be the cause of man's fall.
. 18. God cannot properly be the cause, of what he does not positively will.
Seeing then he did not positively will man's sin, he cannot properly be the
cause of man's fall. His determining to permit, and decreeing to order man's sin
and man's fall, does declare his wisdom and power, without the least impairing
of his holiness and justice; it does speak him in his providence an all wise
Disposer, Why he permits sin.
not an unjust Author of sin; for that his ^ Psalm, 145.9. 1 John 1.5.
infinite goodness is such, as would not permit evil in the world, were not
his infinite power such, as out of that Romans 6.20. 2 Cor. 4.6.
evil to bring a world of good.

CHAP. XII. Concerning the Author, Cause, Nature, and Adjuncts of Sin.
Why God cannot be the Author and cause of sin. Its first Original in the
Devil.
. 1. THe Psalm. 99.97. and 145.1. Isa. 26.7. Jer. 12.1. Rev. 15, 3.
Just and Holy God, who does Psalm. 97.10. Heb. 1.9. Rev. 2.6.
hate, Exodus 20, 3, etc. Levit. 11.44.
forbid, and Exodus 34.7 Jer. 9.8, 9. Amos 3.2. John 5.14.
punnish Sin, cannot possibly be the 1 John 1.5. and. 2.16. Jam. 1.13.18.
cause and Author of Sin, which indeed had its first John 8.48. 1 John 3.8.
birth and being from the Devil, and unto which Adam Eccles. 7.29.
voluntarily betrayed himself in the exercise and abuse of his free will, How
by him in Adam.
by Genesis 3.6. Matthew. 4.3.
consenting to the Devils suggestions, which had in themselves no power to
force, though permission from God to persuade.

How the fountain and cause of sin is in our selves fallen in Adam.
. 2. And thus by Adam sin Romans 5.12.
entered into the world, upon whose fall, we find the Original fountain and
efficsent (or more properly deficient) cause of sin to be in our selves; for,
having lost that harmony, and broken that subordination of the appetite to the
will, of sense to reason, of the body to the soul, and of all to God, man is
become even in his best and highest faculties Jer. 10.14. Romans 1.21. and 7.14.
sensual, and carnal; so that, sense overcoming reason, and the appetite
overswaying the will, the will does overrule all, to a leading the whole man
Romans 7.14.23
captive into sin. And thus the true cause of man's sin is in man's self; for
that, How actual sin is brought forth.
Jam. 1.14.15
Lust conceiving in the Matthew. 5, 28.
will's confenting, actual sin is brought forth.

. 3. It is not then any coaction or constraint of necessity in Fate, any force
or foresight of Providence in God, or any compulsion or power of Temptation in
Satan, but the perverseness and consent of Psa. 32.5. and 51.3. Acts 5.3.
Ephesians. 2.3.
will in man, which is the proper cause of his sin. What those Scriptures
intimate in their truth, which wicked men wrest, to make God the Author of sin
in their blasphemy.
Wherefore all those places of sacred Scriptures, which wicked men do wrest
against truth, and blasphemous mouths retort upon God to the making him the
Author of sin, do all declare and chiefly intimate that wonderful wisdom and
infinite goodness of the Almighty, who, as a powerful Disposer, not a bare
Spectator, does order the evil actions of the wicked to his glory, yet not any
way partaking of the evil, Jer. 51.20. John 19.11.
though powerfully assisting in the action.

. 4. God restrains from sin, does not prompt to sin.
God it is who Genesis 31.29. Number. 22.22. 2 Timothy 3.8.9. 1 Pet. 5.8.
restrains the wicked from sin; so far is he from prompting them for ward
unto wickedness: but as the Lion let loose from his chain, of his own cruel
nature does devour and spoil; The wicked rush into sin when not restrained.

How the same actions are holy in respect of God, yet sinful in respect of the
wicked.


so the 1 Samuel 16.14 1 King. 22.23. Ezekiel. 14.9. 2 These. 2.11, 12
wicked let loose by Divine Providence for the execution of Gods wrath, Rev.
20.7, 8.
of their own corrupt dispositions they rush into mischief and sin: Gen 50.20.
Isa. 47.6, 7. Acts 2.23. and 3.14, 15.
yea, the same Actions are good and holy in respect of God, as ordered to a
good end, even the advancing his Justice and Mercy which yet are sinful and
abominable in respect of man, as contrived to an evil end, even the satiating
their malice and fury. And thus, when 2 Samuel 12.11. Isai. 47.6, 7. Acts 2.23.
and 3.14, 15.
wicked men are raised up to be a scourge for the punishment of others, it is
from Gods most just and holy will; but the malice, covetousness, cruelty, and
other evils which they commit in their executing this punishment, are all from
their own corrupt and vile affections.

It is no excuse to the wicked, that they fulfill Gods secret will, when they
disobey his will revealed: and why.
. 5. And though true it is, the wicked do perform Romans 9.19.
Gods secrets will, his will of purpose, even when they disobey Acts 2.23.
his revealed will, his will of precept; yet because Gods revealed will is the
Rule of our obedience, to disobey that, though we perform the other, it 1 John
3.4.
is sin. So that, it can be no excuse of sin in man, or imputation of
unrighteousness in God, that the wicked whilst they sin (yet not in their
sin) actually do what he by his secret counsel and eternal decree has
appointed to be done: Acts 4.27. Isai. 10.5, etc.
because they do it, not in obedience to Gods just will, but in pursuance of
their own unjust wilfulnes.

God wills the permission, not the commission of sin: and why.
. 6. Besides, Gods purpose and foreknowledge, is not the cause of what he has
decreed to permit, but of what he has decreed to effect; seeing God then does
not will the commission but the permission of sin, he cannot be the cause of it.
And that God should will the permission of sin, is most just; for that otherwise
he should lose the glory of his Justice; yea and of his mercy too: of this we
may be confident, God is so infinitely good, that he would not permit evil,
were he not withal so infinitely powerful, as to Romans 8.28. and 5.20.
order that evil unto good.

How God is said to harden in sin.
. 7. Further yet, when God is said to Exodus 9.12. Deuteronomy. 2.30. Isai 6.10. and
29.10. and 63.17. Rom 9.18.
harden malicious sinners, he does it not by adding more sin, or infusing more
malice, but by further withholding, or quite withdrawing his Grace: and so in
just judgment 1 Samuel 16.14 Psalm. 109.6. 1 Timothy 1.20.
giving them up unto Satan, and their own Romans 1.24.26.28.
vile affections, they truly and really Exodus 9.34. Mat. 13.14, 15. Heb.
3.13.15. Acts 28.26, 27
harden themselves. Sin then is not prompted or caused by God, but suggested by
Satan, or raised by lust, and through consent of the will committed by man.

. 8. And as sin has no efficient, What sin is in its privative Being.
but Romans 3.23. 1 Cor. 6, 7.
deficient cause, so has it no positive, but a privative Being; and so cannot
properly be an action, which is a natural good, but the obliquity and error of
the action; which is a moral evil; it is not the work, but the evil of the
work, What in its proper nature.
in a deviation from the rule of righteousness, the Romans 4 5.
Law of God, which is the sin. And sin being in its proper nature the Rom
5.15.17.18 Job. 34.31. Jam. 3.^.
offense of Gods Justice in the Isa. 48.8. Job. 31 33. Isa. 35 5. 1 John 3.4.
transgression of his Law, does bring upon man a guilt, a pollution, and a
punishment.

. 9. In The several adjuncts of sin, that 1. It is Guilt.
The guilt of sin is that whereby Mat. 6.12. and 23 16. Romans 1 32. and 3.19.
and 4.15.
man becomes debtor unto God, bound over unto the penalty of that law which he
has transgressed. From this guilt does proceed an Gen 3 10. Heb. 10.31.
horror; From whence proceeds horror attended with despair.
The Romans 1.32. and 2.15.
Conscience terrifying the Soul with a selfe-accusing and condemning sentence,
Genesis 4.13. Heb. 2.15. Heb. 10 31.
made more dreadful by despair. 2. Its Pollution,


. 10. Besides this guilt of sin, which relates unto the punishment, there is a
Mat 15.11. Rev. 22.11.
pollution, Whereby God abhors man,
which cleaves unto the soul. Which pollution does make God to Prove. 3.32. and
6.16. Isai. 1.15. Jer. 16.18.
Isa. 59.2. Hab. 1.13.
abominate and abhor man, and Man himself with a confuon of face.
c hiding his face from him; and does make man Ier. 3 25 Dan. 9.7, 8.
with confusion of face to loath and Ezekiel. 6.9 Job. 42.6.
abhor himself, and to Gen 3.8. Ier. 32.33.
fly the divine presence. 3. Its Punishment. Gods vindicative Justice diversely
expressed.


. 11. The punishment of sin; that is, an Prove. 13.21. Ier. 18.8. Amos 3.2, 6.
evil of misery inflicted by God in the execution of his vindictive Justice.
Which Justice, as it is provoked by sin, is called Ier. 7.19. Mich. 7.18.
anger and wrath; as it is more hotly incensed to severity, it is called Deuteronomy.
29.20. Ierem. 7.20.
fury, and jealousy; as it denounces sentence, and executes punishment upon
sin, it is called Deuteronomy. 32.35 Ierem. 51.6. Romans 2.5.
judgment and vengeance.

Why the guilt and punishment of sin is infinite.
. 12. The weight of the offense committed, is to be measured according to the
greatness of the person offended; The Gal. 3.10. Matthew. 5.22. and 12.36.
least violation then, of an infinite Majesty, must incur the guilt of an
infinite punishment, How all punishment is equal, and how unequal.
which is Romans 6.23.
Eternal Death, And thus all punishment becomes equal extensively, in
duration of time, though not Matthew. 5.22. and 11.22, 24.
intensively in degrees of torment; yea, as is our obligation to the duty, such
is our transgression of the command; and as is our transgression of the
command, such is the punishment of our sin, all of equal extent; the
transgression infinite, because the breach of an infinite obligation, and so
the punishment infinite, because the penalty of an infinite transgression

The duration of punishment is correspondent to the duration of sin; and how.
. 13. Thus the duration of punishment does become correspondent to the duration
of sin; of the sin, not in respect of its Act, which is transient, but of its
pollution, and of its guilt, which are permanent; and so John 8.24.
permanent, as that they are eternal: Wherefore seeing the least sin (without
the grace of the Spirit to sanctify, and the mercy of God to pardon) is
eternal in its pollution and guilt; it must needs be so too in its John 3.36.
punishment: Rev. 21.27.
certainly excluding the sinner from life and glory, and Ezekiel. 18.20
eternally subjecting him to death and misery.

How Gods Justice does punish, and his mercy pardon sin.
. 14. When Gods justice executes the punishment of wrath, Lam. 3.39. Jerem.
9.9.
it is with respect to the guilt of sin. And therefore when Gods mercy does
pardon the sin, he Heb. 8.12.
remits the punishment, by acquitting from the guilt. So that if God should
require penal satisfaction when he has forgiven the sin, Penal satisfaction
is inconsistent with sins remission.
it were as if a man should demand the debt, when he has Col. 2.41.
cancelled the bond; an act this of absolute power, if not of direct injustice;
and cannot be supposed in the most holy God, who does forgive sin, God does not
punish man for the sin he forgives him.
but with respect to the Romans 3.23. and 5.11.
all-sufficient satisfaction of Christ, who has Heb. 9.28. 1 Pet. 2.24.
born away our sin, by bearing of our punishment. So that, the punishment of
sin and its forgiveness are inconsistent, both in the nature of the thing, and
by virtue of the satisfaction of Christ.

. 15. The afflictions then of the godly, What is formal punishment; and why the
afflictions of the godly are not such punishments.
they are not formal punishments, because inflicted of God, not as an avenging
Judge, but as a Heb. 12.9, 10
provident Father, and so are not intended for the satisfaction of his justice
(which is the nature of punishment) but either for the abolishing and
preventing of sin, by way Heb. 12.7. Rev. 3.19.
of correction; or for the proof and approbation of grace, by way Job 1.8, 9,
12. Zech. 13.9.
of trial; or for the testimony and propagation of the truth, by way of Phil.
1.29. and 2 17. and 3.10
martyrdom. And thus the afflictions of the godly have in them the nature of
Heb. 12.11.
healing medicines, not destructive punishments; Heb. 12.6.
they are the issue of a fatherly love, not the effects of an avenging wrath.

. 16. To say that God punishes sin with sin, is a saying so improper, To say,
God punishes sin with sin, is very improper: and why.
that unless heartily interpreted (cum grano salis) with a due proportion of
Prudence and of charity, it is very sinful, even unto blasphemy; for that, God,
and God alone is the Isa. 45.7. Amos 3.6.
prime Author of punishment, but no ways and in no sense the 2 Chro. 19.7.
Author of sin. Besides, punishment and sin are as inconsistent in their formal
being, as light and darkness; for (seeing privatives are best known by their
opposite positives) as the good to which the evil of punishment is opposite,
and that to which the evil of sin is opposed, cannot be one and the same good;
so no more can punishment and sin be one and the same evil; yea, sin is an evil
as being from the will, whereas punishment is an evil altogether against the
will.

. 17. True it is, that the same Psalm. 79.27.
thing, How that which is sinful may be the punishment of sin.
which is sinful, may be the punishment of sin, yet not a sin as a punishment,
nor yet a punishment as a sin. That any thing is a punishment inflicted, is
from the just ordination of Gods Providence, but that the same thing is a sin
committed, is from the evil deordination of man's perverseness. Thus the 2 Chronicles.
36.14, 15, etc.
slaughter and spoil of the Caldeans was a punishment inflicted by Gods justice
upon Judahs sin, yet the Isa. 47.5, 6. and 50 7, 11, 17, 18. and 51.24, 34, 35.
cruelty and covetousness of the Caldeans was a sin committed by their own
malice in Judahs punishment. Yet not sin the punishment.
God then does often punish sin with that which is sinful, but not so, as to
make sin the punishment.

How sin and punishment are formally inconsistent.
. 18. Indeed, punishment being the Deuteronomy. 32.4.
execution of Gods Justice, and sin John 3.4.
the transgression of Gods law, these two cannot possibly so consist together,
as to make one to be the other, and thereby God to be the Author of both, or
the Author of neither, which is equally absurd and impious. Besides, sin being
the Genesis 6.5, 6, 7 11, 12, 13.
disorder of the Universe, is reduced into order by punishment, God repairing
the breach of his law, by the execution of his justice, the transgression by
the penalty. And seeing God does order sin by punishment, sure he does not
punish sin with sin, Gods wisdom and power in ordering sin and punishment.
for that were more disorderly. No, here is the wisdom and power of God, in his
providence so to order the same thing which is 1 King. 12.19
sinful in respect of man's wickedness, to be 1 King. 12.24
righteous in respect of his justice, 1 King. 11.31 33, 35, 37.
even in the just judgment of sin; and this, without any such absurdity and
impiety of making sin to be formally a punishment.

Punishment the concomitant or consequent of sin, but not the same with it.
. 19. Wherefore true it is, that sin, which is the Job. 4 8. Lam. 3.39.
meritorious cause of punishment, may sometimes be its Romans 5.10.
concomitant or Romans 1.24, 28
consequent, but not the same with it, nor yet any proper effect of it; for as
darkness is the consequent, not the effect of the Suns withdrawing or
withholding his light; so is sin the consequent, not the effect of Gods
withdrawing or withholding his grace.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning Original Sin.
. 1. What Original sin is.
Original Sin is that guilt and pollution which seizes us in Psalm. 51.5. Isa.
28.8.
our mothers wombs, in the first Original of our humane being, and is either
imputed or inherent, according to our legal or natural capacity in the first
Adam. How imputed and inherent.
As we were Romans 5.12.
legally in Adam (he representing all mankind) we have Original Sin in Romans
5.18.
his actual disobedience imputed to our person; And as we were Acts 17.26. Heb.
7.9, 10.
naturally in Adam (he the root of all mankind) we have Original sin, The
unhappy consequent and effects of both.
in his Job 14 5. John 3.6.
propagated corruption inherent in our natures; by that imputed disobedience,
we are wholly deprived of Romans 5.19. 1 Cor. 15.22.
all Original righteousness, and by this inherent corruption, we are habitually
Genesis 6.5. Mat. 15.19.
inclined unto all actual wickedness.

. 2. We affirm, Original sin does formally consist in the privation of original
righteousness.
that Original Sin in Adams Posterity, does formally consist in the privation
of Original righteousness, as it is an evil defect Genesis 2.17. and 3.6.
through Adams default, we not having through the demerit of his Sin, what we
ought to have Genesis 1.16. Eccles. 7.29. Romans 7 10.14.
by the law of creation, and the Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5.
bond of Covenant with our God; by the breach of which law and Covenant in
Adam, it is, that whosoever descends from him by John 3.6. Ephesians. 2.2 3.
natural generation (even the Luke 1.47.
blessed virgin, the mother of Christ not excepted) is therefore a child of
^^^^h, because a child of Adam, communicating in his sin, by Mat. 7.16, 17.
Jam. 3 11.
partaking of his nature.

How we become deprived of Original righteousness.
. 3. That Adam then and his posterity become deprived of Original righteousness
is not because God does forcibly withdraw it by his power, but deservedly
withhold it in his justice; 2 Chr. 15.2.
God does not desert, but being first deserted; And therefore it was not God
that spoiled man, but it was man, Eccles. 7.29. Hos. 13.9.
who made void to himself the integrity of his nature by the guilt and
pollution of his actual disobedience, which disobedience was indeed a
complication of the most heinous transgressions; of pride, ingratitude, Why
this deprivation is a sin.
rebellion, etc. So that, the first loss of Original righteousness being by
Adams transgression, yea in Adam a sin, the after privation thereof in himself
and his posterity must needs be sinful.

Why the punishment of Gods withholding righteousness, is no excuse for man's
sinful waste and want of it.
. 4. Though true it is, that man having first cast away that rich treasure of
Original righteousness by his sin, God after Isa. 59.2.
withholds it in his justice by way of punishment; yet does not this just
punishment from God excuse the sinful privation in man; his Original sin, in
the privation of Original righteousness, being, though a necessary consequent,
yet not a proper effect of that punishment, much less the formal punishment it
self. Sin, in the privation of righteousness does follow Gods withholding his
grace, as darkness, being the privation of light, does follow the Suns
withholding his beams; not as a proper effect, but as a necessary consequent.
And though, to be deficient in necessaries is equivalent to an efficiency, be
true, where there is an obligation of law natural or positive to require the
assistance; yet it is not so, where the obligation is broken by his default, in
whose behalf the assistance is required; as it is ^^^e in the Case of man's
Original sin in the pr^^^^ion of Original righteousness.

. 5. Original Sin (then) is not from God; he is no ways the Author of it, How
we become by nature children of disobedience, and children of wrath.
nor it formally a punishment from him; it is properly the effect of Adams
disobedience, and the consequent of Gods wrath, whereby we are become by nature
children Eph^s. 2 23.
of disobedience, and children of wrath; otherwise, neither should children
conceived and quickened, Romans 5.14.
dye in the womb; nor ought they, How proved that we are such.
being newly born, be baptized Romans 6.3, 6.
into the remission of sins. As sin Rom 6.23.
does inseparably bring forth death, so does death infallibly presuppose sin;
which, in the quickened Embryo, and new born Infant, can be none other then this
of Original Sin.

. 6. How Original sin is a repugnancy to the whole law.
Which Original sin (not only as the depravation of corrupt nature, but also
as the deprivation of primitive righteousness) it is not barely 1 John 3.4.
((...)) a transgression of the law in some one, or some few particulars; but
is more fully Romans 7.23. and 8.7. Gal: 5.17.
((...)) an enmity or opposition against the whole Law in general. For the Law
is not only the rule of our life, and of our works, but also Psalm. 19.7. Mar.
12.33. Romans 7.14.
of our nature, and of our faculties, requiring integrity and holiness in
these, as well as purity and righteousness in them. The same precept which
commands love, requires strength; otherwise the Law has said in vain, Luke
10.27.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy strength, seeing Romans 5.6.
we have no strength to love him: so that, not only to want righteousness in
our lives, but even to want integrity in our natures, is opposite to the Law,
yea, the whole Law of God, and therefore must be sin.

. 7. Seeing that in original sin, The contagion of original Sin extends to the
persons of all mankind, and the parts of the whole man.
the evil deprivation of primitive righteousness, is accompanied with a total
deprivation of humane nature; therefore as the whole man and all mankind is
become guilty, so is Rom 5.12.13, etc. Gen 6.5. Isa. 1.6.
all mankind and the whole man become polluted. And as this Original
corruption of man's nature does extend to all men's persons; so does this
corruption of the whole man extend to all the parts; and how.
spreading its contagion into 1 Cor. 2.14. 2 Cor. 3.14.
the understanding by ignorance; into Deuteronomy. 32.18. Psalm. 106.21.
the memory by forgetfulness; into Mat. 23.37. John 8.44.
the will by perverseness; into Tit. 1.15, 16. Heb. 10.22.
the conscience by confusion; into Romans 1.24, 26 Jam. 4.6.
the affections by disorder; and into the Ro^. 3.13, etc. and 6.13, 19.
very members of the body as the instruments of sin.

What Original corruption is called in Scripture.
. 8. This Original corruption is called in sacred Scripture, sometimes Romans
7.7. Jam 1.14.
lust and concupiscence, sometimes Romans 7.8, 13
the sin, the Romans 7.17.20
inhabiting sin, the Heb. 12.1.
encompassing sin, and sometimes the Romans 7.23. and 8.2.
law of sin: It is sometimes called the Romans 6 6. Ephesians. 4 22. Col. 3 9.
old man, John 3.6. Romans 7.5. and 9.8. Gal. 5.19.
and the flesh, even as flesh is put for the whole man. And therefore we read
of the Col. 2 18. Rom 8 6, 7. 2 Cor. 1.12.
understanding, mind, and wisdom of the flesh; the Ephesians. 2.3. Gal 5.24.
will, affections, and lusts of the flesh; yea, that this man of sin
(inhabiting in sinful man) might be the more fully described; this flesh is
said to have its Col. 2.11.
body, and that body its Col. 3.5.
members.

The analogy between Christ and Adam in respect of the righteousness and
disobedience imputed.
. 9. Thus as there is an antithesis, so is there an Romans 5.14. 1 Cor. 15.45.
analogy between the disobedience of Adam, and the righteousness of Christ, in
that as Romans 5.18, 19 1 Cor. 15.22.
the righteousness of Christ (the Head of his Church) is imputed to his members
for their justification; so equal it is, that the disobedience of Adam (the
head of his posterity) be imputed to his members to their condemnation; and as
by the obedience of Christ, many (even his whole spiritual Generation) are made
righteous, so equal it is, that by the disobedience of Adam, many (even his
whole carnal race) be made sinners; What meant by that saying, The son shall
not bear the iniquity of the father.
whereas then it is said, that Ezekiel. 18.20.
the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father; it is meant, of those sins
(whether in Adam or others) as are merely personal, not of that disobedience,
which Adam committing as our representative, does therefore become ours by
imputation; nor of that corruption, which being seated in humane nature, does
therefore become common to Adam, with his posterity, as his natural branches.

. 10. It is not then, by Romans 5.14.
actual imitation, How orignal sin is propagated.
but by Genesis 5.3. Ephesians. 2.3.
natural generation, that we become partakers of Adams sin, and therefore
liable to Gods wrath; yea; in the regenerate themselves, How it remains even in
the regenerate.

How they propagated; it to their children.


though Original Sin be Romans 8.1.
remitted in its guilt, yet it Romans 7 23. Gal. 5.17.
remains in its pollution, and so becomes propagated in generation: So that the
children which descend of pious parents, do partake of Original sin, because
they are children by John 1.13. and 3.6.
carnal, not spiritual generation, begotten not according to the operation of
grace, but propagation of nature. For, that the regenerate beget children in
their likeness, is according to the flesh, as men, and the sons of Adam, not
according to the Spirit, as Saints, Illustrated by apt similitudes.
and the Sons of God. Sanctified parents Mat. 8.9, 10.
beget children sinful by nature, even as the circumcised Jews beget children
uncircumcised in the flesh; or as the wheat cleansed from the chaff, when sown
does bring forth wheat with its chaff again.

. 11. How the children of Believers are said to be holy.
Wherefore when the children of Believers are said to Romans 11.16. 1 Cor. 7.14.
be holy, it is to be understood as spoken of a political, or civil, or of a
sanctifying and saving holiness; even such a federal holiness as consists in a
capacity of right, and a privilege of claim, Genesis 17.7. Acts 2.29.
unto the promises of life and glory, made of God in Christ unto his Church;
And thus it is in the Christian Church, Illustrated by a fit allusion.
much like as it was in the Roman State: As in the Roman State a Consul did
beget a son in a political right to the Cities privileges, which son was not
born a Consul, though politically free; thus in the Christian Church, a Saint
does beget a child in a federal right to the Churches promises, which child is
not born a Saint, though federally holy.

What is the subject of Original Sin.
. 12. The Subject of Original sin cannot be the body or the soul alone, but
both together in the whole and perfect nature of man: And though true it is,
that in the knowledge of Original sin, it is more profitable, to seek how we may
evade it in its punishment, then to examine how it does invade us in its guilt;
yet somewhat to inform men's judgments, though not fully to satisfy their
curiosity, we teach, That, to conceive, when and how man does become the
subject of original sin, it must be observed, When the human nature is perfect
that the humane nature is not perfect, till the Genesis 2.7.
union of the soul with the body. Now the soul, that is Zech. 12.1.
infused by creation, and created by infusion; and in the same instant that the
soul is infused into the body by creation, the body is also united to the soul
in that infusion, to the making up of both into one entire Composition of
humane nature; and When the subject of Original Sin.
which humane nature in the first instant of its being, is the subject of
original sin.

How the human nature in man becomes infected with Original Sin.
. 13. Now, that humane Nature in the first instant of its being does become the
subject of original Sin, is not from the body infecting the soul, as the musty
vessel does the sweet liquor; nor yet from the souls infecting the body, as the
musty liquor does the sweet vessel; but by a secret and ineffable resultancy
from the inherence in them both; The depraved inclination unto evil inseparably
accompanying, and indeed necessarily flowing from the evil deprivation of
righteousness; which deprivation of righteousness, is the proper effect of
Adams sin, though the necessary consequent of Gods wrath; who does make this a
just punishment of Adams disobedience, even to withhold from his posterity that
treasure which he had prodigally wasted, that grace which he had wilfully lost,
that image which he had wickedly defaced. And seeing by a just imputation we
are partakers of his Sin, it is by a just dispensation that we become partakers
also of his punishment; And thus, no sooner do we partake of Adams Nature, but
we partake also of Adams curse, and so by an immediate and inseparable
consequence we become defiled with Original Sin.

. 14. That Original sin is propagated by carnal generation, appears by its
antithesis of spiritual regeneration.
That Original Sin in the image of God defaced is propagated by carnal
generation, appears by that, which in an apt antithesis, is opposite unto it,
even the image of God renewed by spiritual regeneration; which the Apostle
tells us, is through the Jam. 2.18. 1 Pet. 1.23.
incorruptible seed of Gods word; yet, that Original sin is propagated by
carnal generation, is not by virtue of any seminal power, How propagated by
virtue of divine ordination.
but by virtue of divine ordination, it being the just ordination of God, that
Adams Posterity, who were legally guilty of disobedience in him 1 Cor. 15.22.
as their Head, should be legally deprived of righteousness Romans 5.15.
from him, as his members; which deprivation of Original righteousness being
inseparably accompanied with a pollution of natural uncleanness, it was further
the just ordination of God, that Adam (having corrupted his nature) in
propagating his nature, should propagate his corruption; and so, we (being Romans
5.12. Heb. 7.9, 10.
naturally in him as our root) do become as men, so Romans 5.19.
sinn^^s too from him as his branches.

. 15. The sum of what concerns original sin.
Thus Original Sin is not seated in the substance of the body, or of the soul
single, but in the humane nature upon the union of both; and does consist in
the imputed guilt of Adams disobedience, and the propagated corruption of Adams
nature, conveyed in carnal generation, by virtue of the Divine ordination of
Gods justice; which propagated corruption in the regenerate is destroyed
according to the Romans 6.6. and 8.1.
condemning and Romans 6.12. Gal 5.16.
reigning power thereof; but does remain in its Romans 7.18, 24
inhering and Romans 7.23. Gal 5.17.
infecting nature, which becomes more Romans 7.25. Ephesians. 4.23.
weakened by grace, shall be perfectly 1 Cor. 15.53. Rev. 7.14.
abolished in glory.

What concupiscence is, as spoken of in sacred Scripture.
. 16. This propagated corruption inherent in our natures is called (sometimes
in Scripture) Romans 7.7. Jam. 1.14, 15.
concupiscence, which concupiscence is nothing else, but that depraved
disposition, or habitual propension of our corrupt nature, 1 These 4 5. Jam.
1.14.
inordinately and actually inclining unto evil; and this, not only in the
unbridled desires of the sensitive appetite, Why seated in the superior, as
well as in the inferior faculties.
but even in the inordinate lustings of the will, and so is seated not Gal.
5.19, 20, 21.
only in the inferior, but also in the superior faculties of the soul, as
appears in those sins of envy, hatred, heresy, idolatry, and the like.

From whence concupiscence in its inordinacy is.
. 17. Concupiscence (then) in its inordinacy, as sin, is not from the natural
condition of our primit^ve being, but from the corrupt condition of our lapsed
estate. For though it is true, that upon the union of the soul with the body, a
spiritual substance with a sensible matter, there did necessarily follow in man
(whilst stated in integrity) an 1 Cor. 15.47, 48.
inclination and propensity to what was sensible and material; yet that this
inclination does now become inordinate and rebellious, this propension
precipitate and vicious, is from the Eccles. 7.29. Rom 7.17, 20.
corruption of man's nature lapsed into sin. Why the sensitive appetite cannot
be this concupiscenc^
Wherefore the sensitive appetite and natural affection, they may be the Romans
7.18, 23
s^^t or subject of concupiscence, but not formally 1 John 2.16.
concupiscence it self, which does consist in an inordinacy and enormity Deuteronomy.
10.16 Romans 8.7.
repugnant to Gods Law, which law says, Romans 7.7.
Thou shall not covet.

What the sensitive appetite in m n is.
. 18. Further, we must know, that the sensitive appetite in man, it is the
faculty not of a brutish but of a rational soul; and therefore (in pure nature)
though the Spiritual part did desire carnal things; And in pure nature how
subordinate unto reason.
yet did not those carnal things return upon the spiritual part an inordinacy
of its desires; the sensitive appetite being an inferior faculty of the
rational soul; and so, subject to the dictate and command of the superior
faculties, the Understanding and Will. And thus (in the state of integrity) the
rational Soul in its natural desires, acting by its sensitive appetite, Thereby
specifically distinguished from that in the beasts
it was not in a sensuality the same with the beasts, but specifically
distinguished from them, as being seated in such a soul as was endued with the
light and rule of reason, and as being constituted in such an harmonious
subjection as was without the least breach or jar of inordinacy and
immoderation.

. 19. Concupiscence in its inordinacy is the issue of mas fall: and why.
Concupiscence (then) as an inordinate inclination transgressing the bounds of
reason, is altogether repugnant to the natural constitution of man in his
primitive purity, and therefore must necessarily be the issue of man's fall, as
the sin of corrupt nature. Indeed, we cannot, but with Saint Paul, call Romans
7.7, 8, 9, 11, 13, etc.
concupiscence sin, which exposes to Romans 7.24. Ephesians. 2.13.
death, Wherefore called Sin.
and makes subject unto wrath; yea, certainly it must be sin in its self, if
made Romans 7.8, 13.
exceeding sinful by the law. And how shall concupiscence Jam. 1.15.
conceive and bring forth sin if it be not it self sinful? The Mat. 7.17, 20.
fruit being evil does sufficiently declare the tree to be corrupt.

CHAP. XIV. Concerning Actual Sin.
. 1. AS the body which has lost its health, The privation of original
righteousness is inseparably accompanied with the corruption of original
uncleanness.
must needs be sick; the member which has lost its strength, must needs be
lame; so man having Eccles. 7.29.
lost his integrity, must needs be wicked; having lost Ephesians. 4.23, 24
his purity, must needs be corrupt. Which Original corruption does break forth
into Romans 7.5, 23. Gal. 5.17, 19, etc.
inordinate desires, and actual lustings, contrary to the rule of life, the law
of God: so that Original corruption is to Actual Sin as Genesis 6.5.
fuel to the fire, What original corruption is to actual sins.
or as the Mat. 15.19.
fountain to the stream, or as the Gal. 5 19. Mat. 13.17.
tree to the fruit, or as the Jam. 1.15.
womb to the child, or as the Col. 3.5.
body to the members, or as the Romans 7.5.
habit to the act.

What actual sin is.
. 2. Actual Sin, as it is formally a de-ordination 1 John 3 4.
in the transgression of Gods law, cannot properly have any efficient cause,
but is rather the 1 Cor. 6.7.
deficiency of those causes, which are the efficients of those acts wherein the
sin is seated. What the imme^iate internal causes of it; and how.
The immediate internal causes of actual sin are the Isa. 27.11. Ephesians 4.18.
understanding and Prove. 12.8. Isa 1.19.
will, as defective in their proper offices, the former to give, the later to
observe the rule and direction of Right Reason. The remote internal causes are
the Psalm. 94.8. Prove. 30.2. Jer. 10.21. Jam. 1.26.
imagination and sensitive appetite, moving and inclining the understanding and
will to what is evil, Romans 7.5. Ephesians. 2.3.
prompted on by the inordinate propension of Original Concupisence.

No inducement whatsoever can cause sin without a conspiracy in the inward man.
. 3. Evil Spirits, wicked men, and sensible objects may outwardly persuade, but
they cannot sufficiently induce to any sin, Psalm. 51.4. Jam. 4 7. Psalm. 1.1.
Jude 16.
without a conspiracy in the inward man, Jer. 4.22. Ephesians. 4.17.
even of the judgment and will. The external object by means of the
imagination may provoke the sensitive appetite, and the sensitive appetite by
the judgment may tempt the will; but neither truly necessitate, nor effectually
induce a man to sin, without some Gen 6.12. Prove. 1.16. 2 Pet. 2 15 22.
previous disposition in the inordinacy of the will, No actual sin prevailing
without the will consenting.

The Will not necessitated in its volition, by any power but that of Gods.


whereby it consents unto evil. So that the fort is not gained, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
Prove. 4.23. and 23.26. Mat. 15 8.
till the will by consent be surrendered; the soul by temptation is not
overcome, till the will in its consent be surprised; and God alone it is, who
in his wisdom and power can so Jer. 24.7. Phil. 2.13.
incline the will, as to necessitate ( Psalm. 110.3.
not enforce) its volition; the policy and strength of 2 Timothy 3.6, 13 1 Pet. 5
8.
men and devils is all too weak in this attempt.

. 4. One sin is often the cause of another; How one sin is the cause of another.
as when man by Sin makes forfeiture Jude 4. 1 These. 5.19.
of grace, and so laid Psalm. 109.6. Romans 1.26, 28.
open to Satan's temptations and his own vile affections, he Psalm. 69.27. Isa.
5.18.
falls from sin to sin, in a precipice of backsliding from his God. Again, when
by his sin man does ( Psalm. 12.8.
ambulare in circuitu) run the round or maze of sin; his sinful acts begetting
evil dispositions, those evil dispositions begetting customary habits, and
those customary habits bringing forth sinful acts; yea, when Ephesians. 5 18. Rom
13.14.
one sin prepares the way and brings fuel to another; as when 1 Timothy 6.10. Jam.
4.1.
covetousness and ambition make work for strife and murder in wars, arising
about wealth and honor, who shall possess and command most of this mole-hil,
the earth. Yea, when by way of finality one sin is committed in order to
another, as the means directed to the end; Thus Mat. 26.14, 15, 16.
Judas betrays Christ to satisfy his covetousness, and 1 King. 16 9, 10, 16.
Zimri slays his master to satisfy his ambition.

. 5. What the least actual sin is.
Every the least actual Sin is a 1 John 3.4.
transgression of Gods law; and Gal. 3.10.
every the least actual transgression of Gods law is a sin. Sin is manifold in
its kind.
And though sin be a tree which spreads it self into many branches, a fountain
which divides it self into many streams; whether it be in respect of the
Subject or the Object, All sin is either of omission, or of commission.
in respect of the efficient or the effect: yet is all sin whatsoever, either a
sin of Mat. 25.42, 43. Jam. 4.17.
omission, a^^ that either in thought, in word, or in work.
in not doing what Gods law does command, or of Exek. 5.6. and 33 18. Jer. 2 13.
commission, in doing what Gods law does forbid; and this either in Mat. 12.34
35.36. and 15.19 Acts 8.22. Tit. 1.16. Jam. 3.2.
thought, in Mat. 12.34 35.36. and 15.19 Acts 8.22. Tit. 1.16. Jam. 3.2.
word, or in Mat. 12.34 35.36. and 15.19 Acts 8.22. Tit. 1.16. Jam. 3.2.
work.

. 6. What is the formative power in original sin, in respect of actual.
Original Sin being as the Jam. 1.15.
womb to actual, has its formative faculty, to assimilate and make like in the
privation of righteousness, and corruption of nature. Whereby sins of omission
have with them something of commission, and Sins of commission have with them
something of omission, every aversion from God being accompanied with a
conversion to evil; Sins of omission always accompanied with sins of
commission.
and Jer. 2.13.
every conversion to evil with an aversion from God. Though the sin of omission
(then) be a mere negative in its self, yet considered in the Causes and
concomitants of it, it never goes without a Isa. 65.12. Jer. 25.7.
sin of commission joined with it, never without some internal or external act
inordinately evil, either ushering it in, or leading it by the hand.

This illustrated by instance.
. 7. Thus, when a man wills the not attending Gods worship at the time he is
required by God, besides the omission of his duty, he commits a sin in his
will, because he wills that omission; and if he busy himself in some temporal
affairs, (which, though they necessarily detain him, yet he might without any
forcing of necessity have avoided,) besides the breach of an affirmative
precept by the omission of his duty, he breaks a negative precept by the
commission of a further evil. For he that wills the occasion of any sin, He that
wills the occasion of sin, by consequence wills the sin.
does by consequence will the sin it self; yea, if through some preceding
intemperance or carelessness, he becomes indisposed or disenabled for the
performance of Gods worship, How sin is willed antecendently in its cause,
though not directly in its self.
and thereby neglects it, though he wills not the omission directly in its self,
yet he willed it antecedently in its cause, and so becomes guilty of a double
sin, that of omission ushered in by that of commission.

Sins of commission and of omission, having the same motive and end, are not
specifically distinct
. 8. When the sin of commission is accompanied with that of omission, they
having the same motive and end, cannot be specifically distinct. Wherefore that
the unjust Usurer Neh. 5.2, 3. etc. Isa. 3.14.
gathers by griping extortion, and scatters not in a relieving charity, are
streams from one and the same spring head of Jer. 8.10. and 22.17.
covetousness, Proved by instances.
and run into the same Ezekiel. 22 12. Hab. 2.5, 6. Isa. 56.11.
gulf, a satisfying his inordinate desire of riches; or that the Ephesians. 3.15.
Isa. 22.12, 13. and 58.3.
gluttonous Epicure neglects the Church in her lawful feasts, and fills himself
with his riotous feasts, issue from the same corrupt fountain of Phil 3.19. 2
Pet. 2.13.
intemperance, and tend to this one and the same end, the satisfying his
inordinate appetite.

. 9. The division of sin into that of thought, What the division of sin into
that of thought, word and work, is.
of word, and of work, is not a distinguishing it according to its complete (
species or) kinds, but according to its incomplete parts and degrees. For that
the same sin, which does take its Mat. 15.18.19. Iam. 1.15.
conception in the heart, may have its birth in the mouth, and its full growth
in the outward work. Thus, when the Mat. 5.22. Ephesians. 4 31.
wrathful person hatcheth revenge in his heart, and his troubled thoughts break
forth into contumelious words, and injurious actions, it is one and the same
sin specifically consummated by several degrees, and in its distinct parts.

. 10. Yea, The first inordinate motions of lust contained under the evil
thoughts of the hear^.
under the evil thoughts of the heart are contained the first Genesis 6.5. D^ut.
10.16. and 30.6. Ier. 4.14. Mat. 15.19.
motions of lust when inordinate. So that concupisence not only in the
habitual inclination, but also in the Romans 7.7, 8.
actual motions, even in the first inordinate lustings, is sin; and this,
though Romans 7.21.
those motions or lusts be never fully consented unto by the will, Though not
consented to by the will, yet are sin: and why.
nor perfected by the outward act. For though grace (in the regenerate) be
powerful enough to Gal. 5 16 24
suppress these inordinate motions, yet that does not excuse reasons being
defective in its duty to prevent them. They ought to be kept down by Reasons
watchfulness, and therefore cannot arise but in sins guilt. What makes any act
to be sin.
And whereas it may be pleaded, that they are involuntary and so cannot be
Sins, we say, How the motions of concupiscence are voluntary, through the wills
defect before they rise, though not consented to when r^ised.
it is 1 John. 3 4.
repugnancy to Gods law which makes the sin; and that, though it be against the
will that these inordinate lustings should be fulfilled, yet it is from the will
that these lustings (in their inordinacy) are not prevented, the will
neglecting or failing in her primitive powerful command, to keep under what is
rebellious. How concupiscence it self is voluntary.
Besides, concupiscence is voluntary, as flowing from Adams wilful
disobedience. For in mortality (quod ex voluntario causatur, pro voluntario
reputatur) what is caused by a voluntary act, is reputed voluntary in the
acting.

The motions of concupiscence proved to be sinful by an infallable argument,
drawn from the indifferent nature of the wills consent.
. 11. Further yet, That those motions of concupisence are sins when fully
consented to by the will, does infallibly prove them to be sinful before the
will does give (yea though the will does not give) its full consent. For the
consent of the will is a thing indifferent in it self, neither good nor evil,
but according to its object. If any thing be good, it is not the consent of the
will that makes it evil; and if any thing be evil, it is not the consent of the
will can make it good; but according to the nature of the object, such is the
act of the will, whether it be in good, or whether it be in evil: wherefore if
the first motions of concupiscence were not sinful in themselves, they could
not be made sins by the consenting of the will; But seeing (by the confession
of all parties) they are sin when the will does give its consent, therefore
they must be sinful before the consent of the will be given.

What the Specifical distinction of sin into spiritual and carnal is.
. 12. Whereas Sin in respect of the Subject is specifically distinguished into
spiritual and carnal Sins, the distinction is taken from the end; 2 Cor. 7.1.
Spiritual Sins being perfected in spiritual delight, as pride, vainglory and
the like; Romans 8.1. Gal. 5.19.
but carnal Sins in carnal delight, How all sin is carnal,
as gluttony, luxury, and the like. True it is, all sin is carnal as arising
from the flesh, as flesh in Scripture is taken for Original Sin in man's corrupt
nature; and how Spiritual.
and all sin is spiritual as affecting the Soul in the commission, and defiling
the spirit of man with guilt. What the true difference betwixt both.
But when spiritual and carnal Sins are contradistinguished as several and
specifical sorts of sin, by Spiritual Sins are meant those which affect and
defile the soul immediately in the body; by carnal sins are meant those which
affect and defile the soul immediately by the body.

. 13. Sin in respect of the object, What the specifical distinction of sin,
into that against God, against our neighbors, and against our selves.

How all sin is against God. How said to be against our neighbors, and our
selves.


is specifically distinguished into sins 1 Samuel 2.25 Luke 15.28. and 18.2. Acts
24.16. Tit. 2.12.
against God, against our Neighbor, and against our selves. For though it is
common to all sin, that it is against God, as being formally a violation Romans
4.13. 1 John 3.4. Jam. 2.9.
of his eternal law, and so properly the offense of his sacred Majesty; yet,
sin materially considered in respect of the injury and damage which
accompanies it, it may be against man's self, or his neighbor. Indeed, all
sins, as they are inordinate actions, do imply an acting something to the
breach of Order. The threefold order which God has established amongst men.
And seeing God has established among men a threefold order, there are three
kinds of sin, according to their threefold inordinacy. The threefold Order
is, 1. That of the inferior faculties unto reason, in man's natural
constitution. 2. That of one man in a political constitution unto another. 3.
That of all men in a religious constitution unto God. Now the inordinacy, which
makes a breach of any of these orders, is a sin against God, as the Exodus 20.2.
Jam. 2, 13.
supreme Lawgiver: but in comparing one with another, that sin sin which
immediately breaks the order of Religion, as Blasphemy, Heresy, Infidelity, and
the like, is said, The threefold inordinacy in breach of this order, making
three kinds of sin.
to be a sin against God. Again, that sin which immediately breaks the order of
policy, as theft, oppression, murder, and the like, is said to be a sin against
our neighbor. Lastly, that sin which immediately breaks the order of Nature (in
man) as drunkenness, gluttony, and the like, is said to be a sin against our
selves: yea, some sins there are at once against our selves, and our
neighbors, as 1 Cor. 6.18.
fornication, adultery, etc. and some against God our neighbors and our
selves, as the Romans 12.19,
prosecuting unjust revenge, the persecuting Gods Church, etc.

What the distinction of sin, into that of infirmity, of ignorance, and of
malice.

From whence this distinction is taken.

What is the inordinacy of the sensitive appetite.

What the inordinacy of the understanding.

What the inodinacy of the will.


. 14. That sin in respect of the efficient, is distinguished into sins of
infirmity, of ignorance, and of malice, is taken from the three principles of
all actions, and so consequently of all actual sins in man, the sensitive
appetite, understanding, and will; which as they are the principles of all
actions in their natural Beings, so are they the principles of all actual sins
in their preternatural inordinacies. The inordinacie of the sensitive appetite,
is in being irregular and immoderate in its affections; the inordinacy of the
understanding, is in not knowing what it ought, or in not actually dictating
what it habitually knows: the inordinacy of the will is in subjecting it self
to the sensitive appetite, or in following the understanding in its erroneous
dictates, or in opposing it in its right judgment. Now when the will becomes
inordinate, through the sudden Genesis 9.21. 2 Samuel 11.2, 3, 4. Matthew. 26.70.72,
74.
surprise and eager importunity of the sensitive appetite, When a sin of
infirmity is.
the sin is the sin of infirmity; again, when the will becomes inordinate,
through the defect of Genesis 19.33.35. Lev. 5.17. Lev. 4.2. Psalm. 19.12.
judgment in the understanding, the sin is the sin of ignorance; When a sin of
ignorance.
and when the will becomes inordinate through its own perverseness, Mat. 13.15.
John 15.22.23, 24. Matthew. 3.56. Acts 7.5.7.
opposing and repulsing the right judgment of the understanding, When a sin of
malice.
the sin is the sin of malice, and against conscience.

. 15. When the sensitive appetite does beget an inordinacy in the will; How the
sensit^ve appetite do h beg^t an inordinacy in the will.
it is by way of distraction, withdrawing it from its proper function, in the
exercise of its free choice, and chief command; for seeing all the faculties
are radicated in the essence of the Soul, by how much the operations of the
inferior faculties are the more intended, by so much the functions of the
superior (whether understanding or will) are the more remitted. The sensitive
appetite then being vehemently intent upon its object, the rational faculty
becomes but weakly employed, if not altogether hindered in its duty. Besides,
the 2 Samuel 11.2, 3, 4. Matthew. 26.70, etc.
imagination being disturbed by the affections, the understanding becomes
darkened by the imagination; and the understanding being darkened, misguides
the will, Which are the sins of infirmity.
whereby it becomes inordinate to a sin of infirmity, by sudden passion. And as
sudden passion, so Mat. 6.12. Prove. 24.16. 1 John 1.8. Jam. 3.2. Romans 7.19, 20.
likewise all inordinate motions, vain thoughts, sins of fly surreption, and of
daily incursion, and are all sins of infirmity.

. 16. What sins of suddun and inordinate passion are said to be sins of
infirmity.
Inordinate Matthew. 8.17 Isai. 1.5.
passions are the sicknesses of the soul; and therefore as the members of the
body disabled by distemper, so the powers of the soul disturbed by passion, not
performing their proper functions, are said to be Romans 15.1. Heb. 12.12, 13. 1
Cor. 8.11, 12.
infirm and weak. And thus, when the sensitive appetite by its vehement and
sudden passions does invade the rational faculties, to the disturbing the
understanding, and disabling the will in their operations, we truly, though
figuratively say, The soul is sick, and the sins which issue from this
impotency of reason, through distemper of passion, are properly called sins of
weakness, and infirmity.

. 17. What passions do excuse wholly from sin, and what do not.
Those passions which totally abolish the use of reason, totally excuse from
the guilt of sin, committed in those passions; as in the cases of frenzy and
madness; unless those passions were 1 Samuel 19.9, 10.
voluntary in their beginnings, or in their causes, for then they become
imputed as sins themselves, and so the evils committed in those passions, must
needs be sins too; but those Prove. 14.16 and 29.22.
passions which do not wholly intercept the use of reason, cannot wholly
excuse from the guilt of sin: because reason remaining, How Reason ought to
moderate passion.
ought to moderate and order passion, either by diverting it self to other
thoughts, or by hindering the effectuating of those obtruded upon it. The more
of passion there is in the sin, the less there is in the sin, the less there
is of reason, and so the less is the sin; and the more of reason there is in
the sin, the more there is of will, and the more voluntary, the more sinful.

What is the office of the understanding.
. 18. The office of the understanding, in respect of its own proper object,
being this, to enquire and find out truth, and in respect of the inferior
powers to direct and conduct them aright according to truth; if the
understanding do not know all the truth, When guilty of that Ignorance which
is sin.
it is both able and ought to know, it becomes defective in its duty, and
thereby guilty of Acts 17.30. Romans 1.21, 22.
that ignorance which is sin; and if the understanding dictate amiss to the
will, and when guilty of those sins which are of Ignorance.
bringing inordinate commands upon the subordinate powers, or after
deliberation had, does not check their exorbitancies, it becomes thus also
defective in its duty, and thereby guilty of those Number. 15.28. Lev. 4.13, 27.
Acts 3.17.
sins which are of ignorance. What ignorance does not, and what ignorance
does make the sin.


. 19. In the sins of ignorance then, it is not every ignorance that makes the
sin. It is not the ignorance of a pure negation, but that of a Ephesians 4.18.19 1
Pet. 1.4.
depraved disposition. It is not the negative ignorance, being a mere
nescience, a not knowing what is needless or not possible to be known; but the
privative ignorance, a not knowing what we are able and ought to know. There
are many things which a man is capable of knowing, What things a man is capable
of knowing, but not bound to know.

What things a man is neither bound to know, nor capable of knowing.

In all these, ignorance (rather a nescie^^e) is not sinful.


which yet by no divine law he is bound to know, as many Mathematical theorems
in Philosophy, many particular contingencies in Nature; yea there are many
things, which as a man is not bound to know, so he is not capable of knowing,
as Mat. 24.36 John 16.12.
many Mysteries not yet revealed, many secret truths not yet communicated by
Christ unto his Church. Ignorance of these is not sinful, and so whatsoever
consequent effect proceeds from this ignorance cannot be a sin; but an
ignorance of those truths which we are capable of, and concerned in, which is
vincible by the use of means; this ignorance is it self sin, and the
consequent evils thereof are said to be sins of ignorance.

. 20. In any inordinate act, What ignorance does excuse from sin.
it is not that ignorance which is concomitant with it, or consequent of it,
but antecedent to it, which does excuse from sin. Which ignorance being
antecedent to it, becomes accidentally Lev. 5.15. 1 Cor. 2.8. 1 Timothy 1.13.
the cause of it as excluding that knowledge, which would have restrained from
the sin. And though this ignorance does always somewhat excuse, Genesis 38, 15,
16, etc.
yet not always wholly acquit. Somewhat excuse, not wholly acquit.

Illustrated by Instance.


For should a man going forth with an intent to kill a man, unwittingly kill
his Father; though such an ignorance may excuse from patricide, yet not from
homicide. For had he known the man to be his Father, though happily he might have
been restrained by that knowledge from killing him, yet not altogether from
killing; from that kind, not from all kinds of sin or of murder.

. 21. Yea, When sin cannot be excused by any ignorance.
that sin cannot be excused by any ignorance, where there is an inclination or
resolution in the will to commit it, notwithstanding all knowledge: as for
instance, should a man have a disposition or purpose to kill another, though he
knew it were his Father; if killing the man, he knows him not to be his Father,
which yet after proves to be his Father, it is not the ignorance that shall
excuse, but the depraved disposition, and wicked purpose which shall make
guilty of patricide. For though ignorance had its Concomitancy with it, yet it
has not any efficiency in it; and so the malefactor cannot be said to offend
out of ignorance, but being ignorant. For there, What an affected ignorance is,
and how it aggravates the sin.
when a man will be Ezekiel. 12.2. Zech. 7.11, 12. 1 Cor. 14.38.
ignorant on purpose, that he may not suffer control in his sin, but have the
greater scope to offend, this ignorance is affected, and becomes directly Job
22.14. 2 Pet. 3.5.
voluntary, because it is wil'd upon design and for ends, and therefore does
rather inhance, then any way abate the guilt of the sin.

What ignorance is indirectly voluntary.
. 22. But that Hos. 4.1.6 1 Cor. 15.34.
ignorance which comes by negligence, in a sloathfull carelessness, or through
unnecessary imploiments, not indevouring to attain that knowledge which a man
ought and is able to attain; and that ignorance which comes by Genesis 19.32, 33.
intemperance, in a sottish drunkenness, a man being robbed of his discretion,
or the use of it; such an ignorance is truly, though indirectly wilful; seeing
he that wills the cause, does indirectly and by consequence will the effect, and
this ignorance thus wilful 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Romans 8.2, 3.
becomes it self a sin; How it self sin.
yet the sins which issue from this ignorance Luke 23.24 Acts 3.17. and 13.27.
are lessened in their guilt, having the less of reason and will in their act:
for seeing the understanding cannot pass a right judgment; yet the sins
issuing from it lessened in their guilt: and why.
the will cannot be said to give a direct consent, so that though the ignorance
may be aggravated by circumstances, yet is the consequent sin in it self
lessened by the ignorance.

How the sin of malice is rightly discerned.
. 23. To discern aright what the sin of malice is, we must know, that though
the will be determined by Psalm. 142. Prove. 2.11.
the understanding in the specification of its object, yet has the will this
liberty entire in it self, in the exercise of the act, freely to choose what is
presented as good, and freely to reject what is presented as evil. So that,
though the will does always follow the last practical judgment of the
understanding, How men are said to sin wilfully, and against conscience.
yet this last judgment being often after the right judgment, and the right
judgment (first given by the understanding, and repulsed by the will) Exodus
8.10.15, 19, 28, 32. and 9.13, 14.27, 28, 34, 35, etc. 1 Samuel 15.1, 2.3, 9, 11,
13, 15, 18, 19, 22, etc.
virtually remaining in the act of sin, and even then actually renewed by the
checkes of Conscience; men are hereby said to sin winfully, on set purpose, and
against conscience, which is the true nature of that we call the sin of malice.

. 24. That the will does not necessarily follow the right judgment of the
understanding, clearly proved.
That the will does not necessarily follow the right judgment, though it does
the last judgment of the understanding, is apparent in the Devils and
reprobate, in the sin against the holy Ghost, and in sins against conscience.
And indeed, if the will did necessarily follow the right judgment of the
understanding, Especially from the work of Regeneration.
the whole work of Regeneration were perfected in the act of illumination, and
God needed not 2 Cor. 5.17. 1 These. 5.23.
thoroughly sanctify; fully to enlighten were sufficient for the new birth and
the new man. But this is altogether dissonant from the truth of Christ, which
tells us, the Ephesians. 4.23, 24. Phil. 2.13.
will is renewed, In which the will is renewed, as well as the understanding
enlightened.
as well as the Ephesians. 1.17, 18 Col. 3.10.
understanding enlightened in the work of regeneration; The Phil. 1.9.10, 11.
understanding is enlightened to give a right judgment to the will, and the
will renewed to follow that right judgment of the understanding, to the
bringing forth the works of holiness and of righteousness.

. 25. How we may distinguish sins of infirmity from sins of malice.
By this we may distinguish sins of infirmity from sins of malice. In sins of
infirmity this Psalm. 40.8. Acts 11.23. Gal. 6.1. Matthew. 26.33. Luke 22.33.
purpose and intention of the heart to please God in all things, remains
sincere; so that, though for a time, the will suffer a violation of her
integrity, an interruption of her resolutions through some 2 Samuel 11.2.4.
inordinate affections, Luke 22.56, etc.
violent passion, or 1 Chro, 21.1 Luke 22.31, 32
prevailing temptation; yet after a while she returns to her former good
purposes by Psalm. 51. Luke 22, 61, 62 1 Chronicles. 21.8.17. Prove. 24.16.
repentance. But in sins of malice the heart is Jer. 13.23. Psalm. 10.4. Romans 3
18. 1 John 3.8.
habitually inclined unto wickedness, the will is evil disposed in respect of
the end. There are not any sincere purposes of holiness, no true aims at Gods
glory, and therefore the infection of the sin is the more permanent and
destructive to the soul, in a Luke 7.30. Acts 7.51.
stronger opposition of the good Spirit of grace in the work of repentance and
faith.

. 26. What the distinction of sin into that of mortal and venial is.
The last distinction of sin is in respect of the effect, into sins 1 John
5.16, 17.
mortal and venial, we say in respect of the effect, no sin being venial in
its nature; For, No sin venial in its nature, and why.
that any sin is pardoned, does denote an Exodus 18.20 Gal. 3.10.
act of divine mercy, which in Exodus 34.67
severity and rigor of Justice God might have not done. But for any sin to be
in its nature venial, as expiated by temporal punishment, were to destroy
this pardoning mercy of God, and after temporal punishment to oblige him to an
( improperly called) forgiveness, lest he be taxed with cruelty and injustice.
All sin is directly against, no any merely besides the law. Which incurring the
guilt of eternal death, cannot be expiated by temporal punishment.
Yea, Romans 4.15. 1 John 3.4.
whereas all sin is directly against, not any merely besides the law; and that
the violation of Gods eternal law does incur a guilt of Ezekiel. 18.20 Rom
6.23. 1 Cor. 15.56.
eternal death. There is no sin that can be expiated by temporal punishment;
but either it must be by John 1.29. Acts 4.12. and 13.38.
Christ's allsufficient satisfaction, or the Mat. 5.25 26 and 25.46
Sinners everlasting condemnation. Wherefore seeing the poisonous guilt of the
least sin is not expelled but by the Sovereign Antidote of Christ's blood ( Mark
1.15. Acts 20.21. Luke 24.47. Romans 3.25.
through repentance and faith) it cannot be that any sin is venial in its
nature, but in a respect to Gods mercy and Christ's merits in the effect.

In what all sins are mortal, yet not all equal.
. 27. In this all sins are mortal, that by their guilt they meke liable to
Matthew. 5.22
eternal death; and though all are mortal, yet are they not therefore Ezekiel.
8.6.13.15. John 19.11.
all equal; some by their more Mat. 5.22. and 11.22, 24. Luke 12.47.48
heinous guilt making subject to a more grievous punishment, in that death
which is eternal. How some sins mortal and some venial.
That some sins then are said to be mortal and some venial, it is not in the
nature, but in the effect (or rather the event) of the sin, in relation to the
subject (which is the sinner) to John 5.24. Romans 8.1. Acts 13.39.
whom, through faith and repentance, not only the lesser, but the greater sins
become venial; and John 3.36. Gal. 5.10.
without faith and repentance, not only the greater, but also the lesser sins
are mortal; so that if we take the weight of sin, From whence we are to take
the just weight of sins guilt.
not from the deceitful scales of our own opinions, but from the just balance
of the Sanctuary, the truth of Gods word, we find the least sin to have the
greatest guilt; so that Mat 12.36. 1 Cor. 4.5.
every vain thought, What the guilt of the least sin without Ghrist.
and idle word shall be brought to judgment; and whatsoever sin Christ brings to
the last judgment, shall (without Christ) bring upon the sinner everlasting
punishment.

. 28. Though all sin be in its nature mortal, Though all sins be mortal, yet
most especially the sin against the Holy Ghost.
and so to be mortal is common to all sin, yet ((...)) it is appropriate to
the 1 John 5.16
sin against the Holy Ghost, for its most deadly naure, called in Scripture the
sin unto death; which excluding repentance, depriveth Math. 12.32
of forgiveness, even so, as never to be forgiven. What the sin against the
Holy Ghost is not.
Which sin against the Holy Ghost, does not consist in any 2 Kings 21.6, etc,
and 24.4 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. 1 John 5.16.17, 18.
particular transgression of Gods Law, nor yet in that blasphemy, and
persecution of Christ and his Gospel which arises from ignorance; no nor in
that Apostasy from the truth, 1 Timothy 1.13.
and denial of Christ, which arises from Mat. 26.70, 72, 74, 75.
infirmity, though all of them sins of a deep die, and horrid guilt.

. 29. But the sin against the Holy Ghost, What it is.
is such a denying and rejecting of Christ, as arises from malice, in an
hatred of Him, and his Truth; contrary to knowledge and conscience, opposing
and persecuting the Gospel of Christ, as an imposture of Satan; the power and
grace of the Spirit, as a work and designment of the Devil; thus it was in the
Matthew 12.24, etc. Luke 19.14. and 20.13, etc. Mark 3.30. John 7.28.
Pharisees. As in the Pharisees.
Also to sin against the Holy Ghost, is to Heb. 6.4, 5, 6 and 10.26.
fall away from the faith of Christ, by an universal Apostasy, in wilfully
denying, and maliciously opposing Christ and his Truth; yea, in a contempt of
his Sacrifice, and an hatred of his Gospel, persecuting his Church with an
irreconcilable enmity. Thus it was in Julian; As in Julian.
thus in many in the Apostles times, and thus in many in these our days, of
whom we cannot, Why not now to be discovered by us.
we may not pass sentence of judgment, wanting that so eminent a gift Acts
5.3.9. and 8.32. and 13.10. 1 Cor. 12.10.
among the primitive Saints; namely, the discerning of the Spirits.

Why cal^d the sin against the Holy Ghost.
30. This sin is said to be against the Holy Ghost, in respect of his Isa.
12.2. Ephesians 1.17.
more immediate Office of illumination; not as being any ways the more eminent
person in the Trinity, all being Isai. 6.3. Matthew. 28.19.
coequall in their Unity of Essence, and of Glory. Seeing then, it is the more
immediate 1 Cor. 12.11
Office of the Holy Ghost to illuminate in the truth of Christ; a Acts 7.51.
wilful hatred of Christ and his truth, accompanied with a malicious
opposition of his illuminating power, is properly called a sin against the Holy
Ghost; and that this sin shall not be forgiven, is not because it Romans 5.20,
exceeds Gods grace, Why this sin shall not be forgiven.
or out-vies Christ's merits; Heb. 7.25.
but because it excludes Heb. 6.5, 6.
the work of Repentance, in despightfully opposing the Spirit; and rejects the
Heb. 10.26.
Sacrifice of Christ, in wilfully denying his truth.

Sins against Conscience lead the way to this sin against the Holy Ghost.
. 31. Sins against Conscience, they Psalm. 19.13
lead the way to this sin against the Holy Ghost. Wherefore that this may be
prevented, those must be avoided; avoid we not only sins against conscience, 1 Timothy 1 19.
when enlightened with the truth, but also, though Romans 14.23
seduced with error. For that an Erroneous Conscience does Tit. 1.15.
entangle and fetter in sin, How an erroneous conscience entangles in sin, but
binds not to what is sinful.
though it does not oblige or bind to what is sinful. So that he always sins,
who Romans 14.5, 23.
acts any thing against the dictate of his conscience, because the Romans 1.14,
15. 1 Samuel 24.5, 6
dictate of the conscience is by interpretation, the precept of God. And
thereby it is, that though the act be materially good, yet it cannot be
formally so; the good is not done well, because accompanied with so great an
evil, a contempt of God in the doing. Wherefore whatsoever is good in it
self, if done against conscience, though error judging it to be evil, it
thereby becomes sin, and a sin against Conscience, deep in its guilt.

An erroneous conscience may somewat excuse, but cannot wholly acquit;
. 32. Again, the erroneous Conscience may Acts 26.9, 10. Phil 3.6. 1 Timothy 1.13.
mitigate, but cannot make void, it may somewhat excuse, but cannot wholly
acquit, from what is sinful, whether it be in omitting what is good, supposing
it to be evil, or in committing what is evil, and why.
misdeeming it to be good. Indeed, impossible it is, that any thing evil in
its self, should be made good by what is evil in another; that sin in the
act, should be justified by error in the conscience. It is not the Conscience
then, Romans 3.8.
no nor any thing else whatsoever, What is the entanglement of an erroneous
conscience.
that can oblige to what is unlawful in it self; and as it cannot oblige, so
nor Romans 3.7.
can it acquit. Here then is the entanglement of an erroneous conscience, that,
if we do what it dictates, we sin; and if we do not what it dictates, we sin
too; so that there is no avoiding the sin, but by reforming the error.

CHAP. XV. Concerning the State of Man fallen.
. 8. SEeing Original Sin in its guilt, The original of all man's misery is in
original sin: and how.
pollution, and punishment, is Psalm. 51 5. Job. 14.5. Isa. 48.8. John 3.6.
effectually connveyed, and really communicated by natural propagation, and
carnal generation, in a lineal descent, and hereditary right from Adam the Acts
17.26. Romans 5.12. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. Ephesians. 2.3.
root of humane Stock, to all the posterity of mankind, his natural branches:
Therefore by Adams Romans 5.18,19.
Romans 3.9. Gal. 3.22.
disobedience is judgment come upon all men to condemnation, Jew and Gentile
being d shut up under sin, and thereby become Romans 3.19. Ephesians. 2.3.
subject to the just wrath and vengeance of God.

. 2. Adams disobedience imputed, makes liable to the punishment inflicted
Though that single act (then) of Adams disobedience did pass away, yet it
continued to be his, and remains ours by Romans 5.12, 13.
just imputation. And the sin imputed must needs make us liable to the Romans 5,
17.18.
punishment inflicted; Which punishment is death.
which punishment of Adams sin is Genesis 2.17. Rom 5.12.
death.

In what this death does formally consist
. 3. Which death does formally consist in a being Deuteronomy. 30.20. Psalm. 30.5. and
36.9. Isai. 59.2.
separated from the blessed communion, and banished from the gracious presence
of God. A Figure and Type whereof, God gave Adam, in Genesis 3.24.
driving him out of Paradise, that visible Testimony of Gods favor and
presence. In what it does materially consist.
And again, this death does materially consist in a miserable privation of that
life and happiness (accompanied with a sinful privation of that Holiness and
Righteousness) which man did either actually possess by Creation, or might
assuredly have obtained in a more eminent manner, and a more abundant measure
upon Condition, even upon the Genesis 2.16, 17 Ezekiel. 20.11. Gal. 3.12.
condition of obedience to Gods law.

This death is spiritual, corporal, and eternal.

What the spiritual death is.


. 4. This death is either spiritual or corporal, both which are consummated,
and swallowed up in that death which is Eternal. Ephesians. 2.1. and 5.14.
Spiritual death that especially seizes the soul, Romans 3.23. Ephesians. 4 18.
whereby sin defaceth the lively Image of God, in the Ephesians. 4.23, 24, Col. 3.10.
total deprivation of primitive integrity, and original righteousness;
despoyling man of all those sanctifying and saving graces, wherewith he was
endued in his creation; even to the Luke 10.30
wounding and weakening the very faculties and powers of his natural Being.

What are the Relics of man's primitive estate in the estate of man fallen,

In respect of his understanding


. 5. So that, though there be in man fallen, some Jam. 3.9.
Relics of his primitive estate, yet such only as are found with a corrupt
being of nature, not a spiritual well-being of grace. The understanding both
in the Romans 1.20, 21.
theoretick and Romans 1.32. and 2.15.
practick part, has some glimpses of moral righteousness, but not 1 Cor.
2.13, 14.
the least light of Evangelical truth. The will that as a free faculty
retains its liberty, In respect of his will.
which it exercises in Gen, 13.9. 1 Cor. 7.37. John 21.18.
natural and moral actions; but through the servitude of sin, is wholly
disabled (as of its self) for Romans 8.7. Ephesians. 2.1. 2 Cor. 3.5.
supernatural and divine. So that though the will is of its self Ephesians. 4.19.
Rom 3.15.
freely carried unto the willing what is evil; yet being Romans 6.16, 17
enslaved unto sin, In respect of his conscience.
does not of John 15.5. Phil. 2.13.
its self move to the willing what is good, good Romans 8.8. Heb. 11.6.
in order to eternal life. Yea, the conscience, though sometimes Romans 2.15.
awakened, yet is it Tit. 1.15.
polluted; and the affections, and In respect of his affections.
though 1 Cor. 5.1. 2 Timothy 3.5.
restrained from some evils, yet are they inordinatly Romans 1.28, 29, 30.
carried into other impieties.

. 6. In man fallen (then) the soul, The soul in man's fall is whole in its
natural essence; but spoyld of its spiritual habits.

Thereby disabled for any spiritual good.


with its rational faculties, does remain whole in its natural essence,
though it be spoiled of its spiritual habits: and being dispoyled of all
divinely spiritual habits, it becomes disabled for the Romans 3.11. Phil. 2.13.
Jam. 1.14.
apprehending, willing, and desiring any divinely spiritual good. And as the
soul has not lost its faculties, so nor have those faculties lost their acts,
in what is natural, moral, or artificial; but seeing 1 Cor. 2.14.
ignorance has seized the understanding, Romans 3.11, 12, and 8.7.
perverseness the will, and Number. 7.5.23
inordinacy the inferior appetite; the understanding, will, and affections
become averse, undisposed, and altogether Genesis 6.5. 2 Cor. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.1, 2,
3.
insufficient for what is divine and spiritual.

. 7. What fredome the will has lost by the fall, and what it retains after the
fall.
Though the will then has lost its freedom in respect of its John 8.34, 36.
Romans 6.6, 7, 20. and 8.2. 2 Pet. 2.19. Jer. 13, 23.
voluntary servitude unto sin, whereby it becomes necessitated, so, b as to
will nothing (in spirituals) but what is evil; yet has it not lost its freedom
in respect of the natural liberty of its acting, so as to be compelled, or
necessitated to will this or that evil; Indeed, seeing to will is an immanent
and elicite act; for man to lose his liberty, were to lose his will; to lose
his liberty in the exercise of its act, What liberty of will remains in the
vilest reprobate, or Devil.
were to lose his will in the faculty of its being. This liberty then remains
in the will of the vilest reprobate, and Devil, who can be no longer said to
will, then they will freely; though they do not thereby will any thing that is
good, yet have they the faculty still, and freely exercise it in willing what
is evil.

How God does turn and incline the wills of men,
. 16. God himself, Prove. 1.21.
who as he has the hearts, so has he the wills of all men in his hands; and
when he 1 Kin. 10.26. Jer. 31.18.
turns and bends, inclines and moves them as he wills, without any forcible
compelling.
he does it not by forcibly compelling, but either by Phil. 2.13.
graciously renewing, or by Genesis 9.24.
fairly persuading, or by Pro. 21.1.
wisely disposing them. And this indeed is the wonder of Gods working, Psalm.
19.7. Jer. 23.29. Jam. 1.18, 21.
that as a Psalm. 115.3. and 135.6.
free Agent he does freely what he wills, yet offers no violence to the wills of
men; but that in all that they do will, Why the exhortations, etc. of Gods
word are not in vain in respect of the wicked.
they will freely. Yea, Ephesians. 4.19. 1 Timothy 4.2.
and from hence it is, that the exhortations, threatenings, and promises of Gods
word, are not in vain in respect of the wicked; being the Heb. 4.12.
appointed means effectual (through the common enlightnings of the Spirit) to
Number. 22.18 1 King 21.27.
restrain from sin, and through the sanctifying power accompanying his word, to
convert unto righteousness.

By multiplying his sin man aggravates his punishment, and how in spirituals.
. 9. But man rejecting Gods Word, and transgressing his Law, does, by his Lev.
26.18.
multiplication of sin, beget a further aggravation of punishment; in that
contracting an habituated custom, to an Lev. 26.18.
hardness of heart, his soul is inseparably attended with an Romans 2.5. Heb.
10.27.
utter despair, to an horror of conscience. And thus man being Acts 26.18. Ephesians.
2.2. Col. 1.13. 2 Timothy 2.26.
subjected to Satan's power, he is by Satan inslaved unto the 1 John 2.15.16
John 8.23. Gal. 1.4.
world and John 8.34. Romans 6.12.16, etc. 1 John 3.8.
sin, and thereby brought under bondage unto Isai. 5.14. Luke 16.23. Romans 8.15.
1 Cor. 15.56. Heb. 2.15.
Death and Hell.

What the corporal death; and how begun.
. 10. This spiritual death, which especially seizes the Soul, is inseparably
accompanied with corporal death, which especially surprizeth the body; being
begun in Deuteronomy. 28.21, 22, 27, 28. Matthew. 9.2.
sicknesses and Genesis 3.16.17. Job 21.17.
sorrows; Deuteronomy 28.36. and 4.48, etc.
servitude and slavery; Genesis 3.19. Eccl. 2.22, 23.
weariness and toil; Deuteronomy. 28.25, 26, 53, etc.
calamities and Deuteronomy. 28.39, 40, 48, etc.
wants; the very Creatures intended for Man's use, being Genesis 3.17.18 Eccl. 1.2.
Romans 8.22.
cursed for Man's sake.

. 11. How and when finished.
When death at last does put a period to man's days, it does add a 1 Cor.
15.42, 43.
complement of his temporal miseries, and begin the anguish of eternal
torments. The body being laid in a grave of corruption, the soul is Luke 16.22,
23. Luk 12.5.
hurried to an hell of perdition, where they remain till death spiritual and
corporal be swallowed up in death eternal.

. 12. What the eternal death.
The dead Joh. 5.28, 29 Acts 24.15.
body at the last day being raised from the grave to an immortal death, shall
(by an Mat. 25.41
irrevocable sentence of the last judgment) be Mat. 10.28 and 22.13 and 25.30
Rev. 21.8.
cast with the soul into hell, the Luke 16.23 26, 1 Pet. 3.19.
place and prison of the damned, In its punishment of loss and of sense.
where they shall suffer together an unsufferable and eternal punishment, of
loss and of sense; that privative, this positive.

. 13. The punishment of loss, What the punishment of loss is.
that does consist in a Luke 13.27 28 Matthew. 22, 13 and 25.41 2 These. 1.9.
total and final separation from the Psalm. 139.8. Psalm. 16.11. and 36.8, 9.
gr^cious presence of God, and from all the c joy, bliss, and glory which does
accompany the beatificall vision, and full fruition of him.

. 14. What the punishment of sense is.
The punishment of sense does consist especially in that Isai. 66.24. Mark 9.44.
worm of an evil conscience which ever gnaweth with uncessant tortures, and in
that Mark 9.44. Luke 16.23, 24.
fire of hellish flames, which ever scorcheth with uncessant torments; which
cause endless, easeless, and remediless Luke 13.28. Matthew. 13.42.
weepings and wailings, and gnashings of teeth.

. 15. This punishment, as it is eternal, How the punishment of the damned is
infinite as well as eternal.
so it is infinite; infinite in respect of that privative part, the punishment
of loss; not in respect of that positive part, Mat. 11.22, 24, and 23.14, 15
Luke 12.47, 48
the punishment of sense. And therefore in Hell there are different measures of
punishment proportionable to the different degrees of sin; yet the least
measure, as it shall be then Isa. 33.14.
intolerable, so it is now Matthew. 22, 13
unconceiveable.

. 16. That wrath which comes by original sin, is aggravated by man's actual
transsgression. The full measure is at the day of judgment; and how.
Thus man having the wrath of God abiding on him for Romans 5.18.
original Sin, he increases his sin, and thereby, Romans 2.5.
aggravateth that wrath, by his actual transgression; treasuring up to himself
wrath against the day of wrath, that is, the Jude 6.14, 15.
day of judgment, which shall be at the Mat, 24.3.
end of the world, to the John 5.29.
final condemnation, 2 Pet. 2.2.
full punishment, and 2 Pet, 3.7.
utter perdition of the ungodly.

The estate of man fallen summarily described,
. 17. Wherefore, seeing this is the estate of man fallen, a captive to the
Prince of darkness, sold Romans 7.14.23.
under the power of sin, Romans 6.23. Gal. 3.10.23.
involved in the curs of death, Romans 3.19. Jer. 7.29.
made subject to the judgment of wrath, and Romans 5.18. Mat. 25.41.
liable to the condemnation of Hell; certain it must needs be, No salvation by
the law, or first covenant of works.
that by the Romans 3.20. Gal. 2.16. and 3.21.
law, or first covenant of works, no flesh can be saved. So that, unless God
in the unsearchable riches of his wisdom, and unconceivable tenderness of his
mercy, So that without Redemption by a Mediator, Adam and his posterity must
inevitably perish in their sin.
had decreed from all eternity, and in fulnness of time wrought recovery and
redemption by a 1 Timothy 2.5.6. Acts 4.12.
Mediator; Adam and all his posterity must inevitably have perished in their
sin.

FINIS.

