Several LETTERS FROM Colonel Morgan Governor of GLOUCESTER, AND Colonel
Birch.

Fully relating the manner of the taking of the City and Garrison of HEREFORD,
with the number slain on both sides, and the particular circumstances at the
gaining thereof.

With a perfect List of the names of the prisoners taken therein.

Die Martis 23. December. 1645.

ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That these Letters, with the
List, be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 24.
December. 1645.

For the Right Honorable the Committee of Lords and Commons for the safety of
both Kingdoms these,
May it please your Lordships:
ACcording unto your Commands I drew forth near nine hundred Foot, and my
Troop of Horse, and upon advice from the Governor of Gloucester I marched unto
him, but finding the way which was intended altogether frustrate, and the
Governor of Gloucester not very well, I went with Sir John Bridges near to
Hereford, and sent for thither the two Gentlemen who Sir John had treated
withal about the business, who were then out of Hereford fearing to come to
Town, whom I satisfied my self of the Enemies security and the negligence of
the Guards, which caused me to think of some other way; and amongst others
this was most prevalent with me, which by Gods blessing took effect, the way
was his; To march in one day and night to Hereford from Gloucester, which done
I had provided six men in the form of Laborers, and one with them to be a
Constable, with a warrant to bring these men to work in the Town to them, I
gave a good sum of Money in hand, and promised them a large reward; these men
with 150. Firelocks in the dark of the night I intended to lodge near the
Gate, and so near them as the ground would admit out of sight; I intended to
draw a Body to second them and enter with them, and so to surprise the Town
upon the letting down the Bridge in the morning; then I came back to
Gloucester and informed Col. Morgan of it, desiring him to join with me to put
it to trial, which he condescended unto, and we marched monday to that purpose
all night, but fell short, and therefore to delude the Enemy retreated back
within nine miles of Gloucester; the next day at night we returned again, and
with careful Spies and Scouts kept back intelligence from them, so that they
never discovered us; but I laid my Countrymen and Firelockes within three
quarters Musket shot, a place which I had enquired out for the purpose, which
Party I left to be managed by my Lievtnant Colonel, who behaved himself very
gallantly, and the maine body of Foot. I led my self, Col. Morgan being with
the Body of Horse which he undertook; and this morning upon the letting down
of the Bridge the Countrymen went with their Pickaxes and Spades to the
Bridge, the Guard beginning to examine them, they killed three of the Guard,
and kept the rest in play until the Firelocks came up to them, then made good
until the Body came up; and it pleased God the Design so took, that we entered
the Town with small loss; in which we had 11. pieces of Ordnance, much Arms,
and the Prisoners here inserted, there being many more in Town as I believe,
which one day will discover. The Mercy is wonderful, I desire the Lord may
have the honor of it, for it is his own Work. I am deeply engaged by Moneys
laid out in this business, and by promise with Col. Morgan; I humbly desire
your Honors to give Or^^^r for the Sum you were pleased to give Order for
this business, and for my self I shall endeavor to settle this place, and
wait the further Orders for the subsistence of my Regi^ent which is in great
necessity, or what other Commands you shall be pleased to signify unto

Your Honors most faithful Servant. John Birch.
I have herewith sent my Servant to wait upon your Honors, by whom I entreat
to receive your Commands. Hereford December. the 18th. 1645.
For the Right Honorable the Committee of both Kingdoms these.
May it please your Lordships;
WE gave you an account in our last that we found the City of Hereford, by our
Intelligence to be so strong, both in it self and the resolution of the
Defendants, that much hazard would be in the gaining of it; Notwithstanding,
having a party of about 2000. Horse and Foot betwixt us, viz. of Gloucester
Forces 1050 and of Ba^he Forces 930. resolved to make trial by falling on upon
the place; unto which endeavor the Lord was pleased so to add his blessing,
that this morning about break of day we forced our entrance, God putting such
a spirit into the Soldiers; as was beyond expression: Our engagements to them
was very large, the design being very desperate, and also to some other
Gentlemen who were very helpful, and behaved themselves very gallantly in the
falling on: Which engagements, that we may be able to discharge, we humbly
desire your Lordships to give Order for that sum which you were pleased to
promise for this service. After they had marched this night in the snow up to
the mid-legge, almost twenty miles in and out, which that the Enemy might not
be jealous of, we marched the same march upon Monday night, though with such
hardship, that three of our men died in the snow; and retreated upon Tuesday
almost to Gloucester, they then believing we had been clear gone, were more
secure, and we fell on unexpected; Our loss was not considerable, God be
blessed* whose goodness was plainly seen, (to him be the glory.) The Enemy
fought it out in the streets, where diverse are slain, and the rest prisoners:
We are not able at present to particularize them, only those whose names we
can at this instant be informed of we have here inserted. The Townsmen have
suffered by the Soldier, by reason we entered it by force, and that the Enemy
shot out at the windows and in the streets, the Soldier was so enraged that
we could not prevent them from plundering, which we endeavored much to have
done, and shall be always ready to approve our selves

Your Honors most faithful Servants THOMAS MOKGAN, JOHN BIRCH.
Hereford, 18. December. 1645.
For the Right Honorable the Committee of Lords and Commons for the safety of
both Kingdoms.
May it please your Lordships,
ACcording to your Commands I marched with the party, as in a former Letter
signed by Coll. Morgan and my self, we made bold to inform you, since which
time it has pleased the Lord to show his power in our weakness, by giving us
this City, into which we forced our entry this morning, as in the Letter signed
by Colonel Morgan and my self more particularly appears; the Resolution of
the Soldier carried them on beyond imagination. I shall endeavor to set
things in order here, according to that Command your Lordships have been
pleased to give me, (the place is very evil affected.) I have here 900. Foot,
but they will be too small a number; I intend to add to them, if your Honors
please, and make them up 1200. which will be few enough for this ill-affected
place. When I marched hither I left two Companies at Bathe, which being it is
to be slighted, I shall humbly desire an order for the drawing of those two
Companies to this place, which would be a good addition. I should have waited
upon your Honors my self, but I dare not be absent, though my extremity be
great for necessaries for my poor Soldiers; I shall humbly entreat you to
signify your further Commands in that or any other thing, which shall be
carefully observed by

Your real Servant JOHN BIRCH.
Hereford, December. 18. 1645.
Prisoners taken at Hereford by the Governor of Gloucester, and Colonel Birch
now Governor thereof, December. 18. 1645.
THe L. Brudenell Sir Tho. Lunsford Sir Walter Blunt Sir Henry Spiller Sir
Henry Bedington. Sir Marmaduke Floyd Sir George Vaughan. Sir Giles Mompassion
Sir John Stepney Sir Francis Howard Sir Francis Floyd Sir Richard Bassett Sir
Philip Jones Sir Edward Morgan. Sir Nicholas Throgmorton Lieutenant Col. Price
Lieutenant Col. Jews Lieutenant Col. Jefferies Lieutenant Col. Jones. Major
Price Judge Ienkins Captain William Hill Capt. Thomas Codwallis Capt. Richard
Ballard Lieutenant Gibs Coronet Denley Coronet Blood Coronet Tanton
Quartermast. Stephenson Comisary Linging. Secretary Barn Mr. George Blunt Mr.
Thomas Blunt Mr. Edward Blunt Mr. Windsor Mr. James Anderson Mr. Turbervile Mr.
Henry Morgan Mr John Philips Priest. Mr. John Tailor Priest. Mr. William
Chambers Mr. Venner Peter (...) a Frenchman Mr. Roger (...) Mr. Thomas Bod^^^
Mr. Terringham Mr. Seabourne Mr. William Chambers Mr. Matthew Mose Mr. John
Bemond Mr. David Powell Mr. Harrington. Mr. Powell Surgeon Mr. Watson
Surgeon Mr. John Risden Mr. John Tooley Troopers. Walter Higgins Samuel
Gemrell Buxley Richards Benet Whitingdon John Lingd^ Thomas Towsey Thomas
Stoaks James (...) John Scriven John Barns Mr. Roode.

FINIS.

