A LOOKING-GLASS FOR THE QUAKERS OR SHAKERS. And their FOLLOWERS, Wherein
they may behold their Errors, acknowledge their false Doctrines, and be
converted.

Written for the comfort of all true PROTESTANTS, and daunting of the QUAKERS,
JESUITS, SEMINARY PRIESTS, and all their cursed Crew, who do oppose the Church
and Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

By SAM. MORRIS of Bristol, a Well-wisher to the Truth and Gospel of Jesus
Christ.

1 John 4.1. Dearly beloved believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits,
whether they are of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the
world.

Math. 24.11. Many false Prophets shall rise, and deceive many.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Thomas in Green Arbor, 1655.

AS I was musing, I thought there was one asked me, what the Quakers were, or
from whence they came, and of whom they had their knowledge and learning? I
told him, I could give him no certain answer as yet, but I would consult the
Scriptures, and then return an Answer to his Question.

Our Savior Jesus Christ tells us, Math. 24 11. That many false Prophets shall
rise, and shall deceive many: And St. John says, Rev. 9.1, 2, 3. I saw a star
fall from heaven unto the earth; and to him was given the key of the bottomless
Pit: And he opened the bottomless Pit, and there arose a smoke out of the Pit,
as the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened, by
reason of the smoke of the pit. And there came out of the smoke locusts upon
the earth, and unto them was given power as the Scorpions of the earth have
power.

The Pope has the key of hell gate, and carries it on his arm, as he
acknowledges; he can with his false doctrines send men to hell, but can send
none to heaven: under the Pope are his Imps, viz. Abbots, Monks, Friars,
Jesuits, Quakers, who are compared to Locusts, because as Locusts destroy the
fruits of the earth, so the Quakers destroy the Church. And I do verily
believe, there are many of them in this Land, who, like the Locusts, begin to
eat up all the green things they can in our Churches. These Caterpillars were
bred of Ignorance, Error and Heresy, and came out of the smoke of the
bottomless pit; and by them the Gospel is much wronged, hindered and abused. The
Quakers we may call Spirits, which come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out
of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet: and St.
John says, these Spirits are like frogs: by frogs the holy Ghost means
Jesuits and Seminary Priests: now such are the Quakers, who are of the same
brood, and they may fitly be compared to frogs for two reasons.

1. As frogs delight in filthy lakes and puddles, so the Quakers delight in
their false Doctrines, teaching the Traditions of men, and so walk on in their
wickedness, according to St. John's saying, Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust let
him be unjust still, and he that is filthy; let him be filthy still.

2. As frogs make a great croking in marish grounds, so the Jesuits, Seminary
Priests and Quakers, by their sweet and fair words, get themselves favor in
such Gentlemen's houses, where they can have entertainment.

The Quakers also are like unto Scorpions, for as Scorpions sting the body, so
do they sting the soul, and with their ^air words and false doctrines do
corrupt as many as they can, speaking lies in hypocrisy having their
consciences seared with a hot iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. And therefore God shall send
them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they all might be
damned, who believed not the truth, 2 These. 2.11, 12.

The Quakers have stung and poisoned many in this Land by their fair words and
false doctrines: Behold, I am against the Prophets says the Lord, that use
their tongues, and say. He says, Behold, I am against them that prophecy
false dreams, says the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by
their lies, Jer. 23.31, 32. The Quakers walk after their Master, the Prince of
the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2.

But I hope and verily believe, that God will keep and maintain his Church, and
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in this Land, so that neither the Pope, nor
Quakers shall ever be able to set up Popery again in the same. And the reason
of my belief is this, because the everlasting Gospel, which was carried by the
Angel that did fly in the midst of heaven, shall spread still more and more,
as appears Rev. 14.6. And our Savior Jesus Christ has promised, that the
gates of hell shall not prevail against his Church and Gospel, Math. 16.18.
Wherefore our only wisdom is, to separate our selves from the Quakers, and
avoid their false doctrine, and to join our selves to the true Church of God,
whereas those that do not shall perish, for God is just, and therefore he will
recompense tribulation to all those that trouble the Church, 2 These. 1.6.

We of this Land and Nation, may justly fear, that as God heretofore had a
controversy with the children of Israel, because there was no truth, nor
mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land; so he will have a controversy with
us, because we are guilty of the same sins.

As concerning the knowledge and learning of the Jesuits, Quakers,
Anabaptists, Libertines, etc. I do believe, that their knowledge and learning
came from their old Master the Devil, otherwise they would not maintain and
defend these errors and blasphemies. viz.

1. That there is no need of preaching, reading, praying, the Sacraments,
singing of Psalms, and all other Ordinances, the Spirit is all (as they say:)

2. That all gifted persons may preach without ordination.

3. That God reveals his will, not only by the written word, but also by
Dreams and Visions, which they believe more than the Word of God.

4. They deny all Consequences drawn from the Scripture, though never so clear.

5. That the Magistrate must compel none in matters of Religion, but must
tolerate all.

6. That Heaven and Hell are no where, but within a man.

7. That they may dissemble their Religion, deny Christ before men, so that
they keep the Truth in their hearts: God delights not in our blood, nor
requires that we should die for the Truth.

8. That Infant Baptism is a childish needless thing, and that no Infants ought
to be baptized, until they come to perfect age, and are able to make a
Confession of their faith. That Infant Baptism came from the Pope or Devil.

9. That the Saints are freed by Christ, from all Laws, Covenants, Vows, paying
of Tithes, or Debts.

10. That after Baptism they cannot sin.

11. That the soul sleeps when it departs from the body, and neither goes
to heaven or hell till the day of Judgment; and that the souls of men are but
terrestial vapors, like Beasts, perishing with the body.

12. That a Christian cannot with a safe Conscience possess any thing proper to
himself, but he must let all be common.

13. That the Sacraments in use amongst us, are not appointed by God in the
Scriptures.

14. That the righteous enter into life for their good works.

15. That no opinion is damnable, and that a man may be saved in any Religion.

16. That Christ is a mere man, not having any other nature beside the humane
nature.

17. That the Holy Ghost is not God, but only the chief of the ministering
Spirits.

18. That man is a right Rule, yea, the Rule of all things.

19. That God neither does, nor possibly can hurt us, and therefore is not to
be feared.

20. That no civil Government is to be acknowledged by the Government of the
Law.

21. That the civil Magistrate has not any coercive power to punish any man,
or to restrain any for their Judgment, Conscience, Opinion, or way of worship,
if they act or speak nothing that is destructive to the civil Power, or
tending to the breach of the peace, or to the injury of another, and the reason
they give is this, because the Magistrate he is natural, and knows not what
is Blasphemy, Heresy, Error and Idolatry, they are foolishness to him,
neither can he discern them.

22. That the Magistrate ought not to have the Title of Worshipful or Right
Worshipful given unto them.

23. That none are Ministers of God, and called by him, who are sent forth by
Authority of men.

24. That the worship which is performed by the people of England, in
fellowship with the Ministers thereof, is heathenish worship.

By all which we may see how necessary it is, that both Magistrates and
Ministers, with united hearts and hands, endeavor to oppose and suppress these
errors and heresies, which bring swift destruction, both upon false teachers
themselves, and upon those that are deceived by them.

I do earnestly entreat all those that fear God, to take these things into
their serious consideration, and meditation, both in public and private, and
lay to heart, how dangerous and pernicious these errors and heresies are, for
if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge
of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and
overcome, the later end is worse with them than the beginning, 2 Pet. 2 20. And
let all men that have any care of their salvation, follow the counsel of the
Holy Ghost, saying, come out from among them, and be not partakers of their
sins; for many deceivers are entered into the world (and certainly into this
Land) 2 John 7. who privily shall (and do) bring in damnable heresies (even
amongst us) denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom
the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, 2. Pet. 2.1, 2. The time will come,
when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they
heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears, who shall say to their new
Lights, prophecy not unto us right things, speak unto us flattering things
prophecy errors, Isai. 30.10. And we will walk after our own devices, and we
will every one do the imagination of his evil heart. Jer. 18.12. Yea, they
made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the Law, and the
wordt which the Lord of Hosts has sent in his Spirit by the former Prophets,
Zech. 7.12. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the
Prophets that prophecy unto you, they make you vain, they speak a vision out
of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord. How long shall this
be in the heart of the Prophets that prophecy lies? yea, they are prophets of
the deceit of their own heart. Behold I am against them that prophecy false
dreams, says the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their
lies, and by their lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them;
therefore they shall not profit this people at all, says the Lord. Ierem.
23.16, 26, 32.

We read in the Book of Numbers, chap. 16.1, 2, 3. That Korah, Dathan and
Abiram rose up before Moses with two hundred and fifty Princes of the Assembly,
and they gathered themselves together against Moses, and against Aaron, and
said unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are
holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them, etc. So the Quakers gather
themselves together against the Godly learned Ministers of the Gospel, saying
unto them, the people are holy, and the Lord is among them, and therefore why
may not they preach as well as you Black-coats:

But they consider not, that none ought to preach except they be called,
according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 5.4. No man takes this honor unto
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. And how shall they preach,
except they be sent? Romans 10.15. It is a note of false Prophets, to run and
come without a call and sending, as our Savior Christ affirms, Math. 7.15.
Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you, etc. So that it is evident, no
private person ought to take upon him to expound and interpret the Scripture in
public, for this is the ready way to breed disorder, error and confusion in
the Church: If every Soldier, that has the gifts of a Commander, should take
upon him the Office of a General, without a lawful Call; or he that has the
gift of a Magistrate should take upon him the Office of a Magistrate, and
execute the same without a lawful Call; or if a Lawyer, ^^^ing the gifts of a
Judge, should step up into the Judges seat, and censure men without a lawful
Call: then farewell Generals, Magistrates, Judges, which would breed disorder
and confusion in the Commonwealth.

Be admonished all you that take upon you to preach (or rather prate) in
houses, gardens, and elsewhere, without a lawful Call, to desist from this your
ungodly practice, lest the same judgment befall you, which did befall Vzzah, for
putting forth his hand to stay the Ark of God, the anger of the Lord was
kindled against Vzzah, and God smore him for his error, and he died 2 Samuel
6.6, 7.

Let me conclude all with these scriptural exhortations to my Countrymen, for
whose sakes I have compiled this short discourse.

Beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ: How that they told you, there should be mockers in the last
time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts: these be they, who
separate themselves sensual, having not the Spirit, Jude 17, 18, 19. Who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power, 2 These. 1.9. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith,
quit you like men, be strong, 1 Cor. 16.13. Be sober, be vigilant, because your
Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may
devour; whom resist steadfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Be not soon shaken in
minds, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, 2 These.
2.2. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. Let us draw near
with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the
profession of our faith without wavering (for he is faithful that promised:)
He. 10.22, 23. Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might: put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against
the wiles of the Devil. Ephesians. 6.10, 11. There be some that trouble you, and
would pervert the Gospel of Christ. If any man preach any other Gospel unto
you, than that ye have received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.7, 9.

FINIS.

