THE TOUCHSTONE OF CONVERSION. OR, Marks of true FAITH.

WHEREIN The Impenitent sinner is rowsed. True Believer discovered. And
Doubting Saint resolved.


BY That excellent Man of God now in Heaven, Mr. ARTHVR MORTON Scotch man.

LONDON: Printed by Fr. Neile for Tho: Underhill at the Sign of the Bible in
Woodstreet. 1647.

To the Reader.
NOw are the days wherein Atheism and profaneness abound, many giving
themselves up to commit all manner of sins with greediness, as lying,
swearing, uncleanness, drunkenness, injustice, neglect of Gods worship, as if
there were no God, no Savior, no Day of Judgment, no Heaven, no Hell; Also
now are the times wherein thousands place all Religion and happiness
pharisaically upon their enjoyment of the public Ordinances, or their
external performance of such duties civil and religious as the Lord requires:
they are spiritually blind, knowing nothing experimentally of Gods gracious
presence in his Ordinances as the soul and life of them, nor of any gracious
work the Spirit has wrought in their own hearts by the use of them, as the
spring and fountain (within a man) from whence all his actions should flow;
these know not experimentally what to live by faith, (the life of a Christian)
to repent, to be born again, to enjoy communion with Jesus Christ, to have the
Spirit, Means: These are they that having but a form of godliness, deny the
power thereof, and are in a deplorable and damnable condition.

There are, in the last place, many that having their eyes opened, are
convinced of their sins, and deeply perplexed with fears and terrors; whose
very life is a burden to them, because of the frowns of the Almighty; who
hereupon if they split not themselves upon the rock of desperation, are in
danger either of betaking themselves to the forementioned by-path of their own
fancied righteousness, duties, and performances, the very way to hell, or of
being in such a sad uncomfortable condition, though the sons and daughters of
God (through believing) as that they have as little comfort and joy within
them, as God and the Church service from them; by reason they have not the
assurance of Gods love, and are always doubting that the promise belongs not
to them, so that the joy of the Lord is not their strength.

As an excellent help to all these three sorts of men, read this small and
excellent Book, compiled by the late Reverend Evangelicall Preacher of Gods
Word in our Sister Nation, Mr. Arthur Morton: my great desire of thy good
prevailed with me to Print it, and so to make that jewel common which was
before communicated but to a few in Manuscripts. Here are such excellent things
concerning the mysteries of sin, and the Gospel, concerning the woeful estate
of the wicked, and the happiness of the godly, counterfeit graces and true,
Mortification and Vivification, the freeness and fullness of the love of God,
of the righ^eousnesse of Christ, wherein the impenitent sinner is rowsed, the
true beleiver is discovered, and the doubting Saint resolved; as I am confident
will be acceptable to those that have the spirit of discerning to know the
things that differ, and prise the things that are more excellent, especially if
they confider that in such times of fears and danger, as these are, it behooves
every man to use all deligence to make his calling and election sure, to get
clear evidence of his interest in and union with the Lord Jesus Christ; Which
spiritual condition is above the world, both it is smiles and frowns, and is
real happiness. It Is privileges are for greatness and lastingnesse
unspeakable, of many this is not the least, namely, the assurance of Gods love,
and fatherly care over believers, that in every esta^e he will save and uphold
them, even when his wrath does burn against his enemies; he will teach them the
good way which they ought to walk in, give his Angels charge over them, carry
them in his bosom, cause all things to work together for their good: this very
one Privilege has these prerogatives attending it, viz. peace with God, or
stable tranquillity, and sweet calmnesse of mind, which passes all
understanding; free access unto the throne of grace, with boldness and
confidence, Christ as it were leading us by the hand into the presence of God,
and joy in the holy Ghost unspeakable and glorious, which does so lift the
faithful above the heavens, being cheared with the presence of Gods favors,
and contented with Christ alone, that they despise the world, and the base
things therein, and can be content in poverty, suffer with joy the spoiling of
their goods, and be willing to dye for the Name of the Lord Jesus.

Certainly if the men of the world did but know what peace, what joy, yea what
a heaven there is in a godly man's breast, he would either have no rest within
himself, until he could attain unto the same happy condition, or else like a
devil that is without any hopes of ever attaining to it, would out of envy and
hatred exceedingly persecute them, as Apostates usually do, to whom has been
discovered some things of Christ, and grace in the soul. Thus earnestly
desiring that this little excellent Book may be somewhat helpful for the
advancement of Christ's kingdom, I rest.

Tho: Underhill.

The Contents.
THe dreadful case of those that want Faith. p. 2. The fewness of those that
have, or shall have it. p. 2. 1. The Marks of Faith. Are such as go before,
that accompany and follow after Faith. p. 7 1. The Marks that goes before
Faith is, Humiliation. p. 9. The parts and Marks of it. p. 9. to the 15. The
Means of it. p. 92. to 148.
2. The Marks that accompany Faith p. 152. to 156. 3. The Marks that follow
Faith. p. 157. to 185.
2. The Means of Faith. General Means. p. 188. Special Means. p. 211.

Doubts resolved. Whether a Reprobate may not have all the parts of Humiliation
in him. p. 29. A Doubt is resolved, about the measure, manner, degree and kind
of Humiliation. p. 38. O then I cannot have Faith, for I find my heart
swarving with wicked and impure thoughts, many great and gross corruptions,
and some of them very strong, and indeed very predominant. p. 165. I do not
find the hatred and loathing of sin, and this does pusle me in this point, I
find that I do not entertain it, but I think it to be more out of fear of
punishment, then out of hatred. p. 167. I find not my self, right in this point
of obedience, but rather do, because I dare not do otherwise. p. 173. If this
be a token of true faith, I have need to fear; for I find not these rejoycings,
especially that joy unspeakable and glorious, I am far from it. p. 181. I find
much diffidence and impatience in time of adversity, much haste. p. 187 O
happy, most happy, is the case of that soul, whose conscience bears it
testimony, that it has these Marks of Faith, it has certainly great matter of
rejoicing, yea were it in the hardest condition that can befall it, for what
are other crosses, which are to be but for a moment, and what are other
comforts, so long as the main i^ wanting? that soul has more then good reason
cheerfully, and carefully to serve the Lord, who has best^wed so precious a
pearl upon it; but alas, I miss all or the most part of these Marks, and so my
case is most doleful. p. 188 Indeed I may justly accuse my self, that my
praying has not been so frequent, nor so fervent, so constant, nor so earnest
as it ought to be, but I have often prayed, and as earnestly as I could, and
find but little increase either of Faith it self, or of these Marks of Faith.
p. 190. I dare not apply the Covenant, the promises to my self I think they do
not belong to me (although very sweet in themselves) and that because I fi^d
not these Marks in me, which are in Gods children, now the promises belong
only to such. p. 198. 205. 248. W^ether our good works and sanctification of
^ife, be a s^fficient ground, and Mark of assur^^^e. p. 200 I have spent all my
days in sinning, so that justly I may fear that the day of grace is expired,
the door of mercy is shut. p. 213 I continually slide back to the same sins
daily. p. 215. Many are called, but few are chosen, why may not I be of the
number of these. p. 219. But you will say, although the Lord will not be the
first, yet when we break with him (as we do continually) will not the Lord
then, as he may most justly, break with us, and so alter the Covenant? p. 244.
I hear that upon my repentance I shall have access to this precious Covenant,
though after 70. times 7. times sinning, yea infinitely often; for Gods ways
are not like man's ways, but are above them as far as the heaven is above the
earth; which is very comfortable: and also that the Lord will take pains with
me to bring me to repentance, will visit me with the rod, etc. O but what if I
continue in sin without repentance, if I be not to be reclaimed, no not by
rods, and so fall away altogether? p. 228. But may it not be objected, that
this doctrine of the surenesse, everlastingnes, and steadfastnesse of the
Covenant is ready to faster security, and to prove an obstruction to Christian
obedience? p. 249. When I consider this surenesse, and everlastingnesse of the
Covenant, surely I must think them happy, that have propriety and interest in
it, but I fear that I have none. p. 251 O but I am so unworthy, guilty,
sinful, graceless, I cannot think that it belongs to me. p. 252 O but this
Covenant promises, that I shall have a new heart, be cleansed from my
filthiness, etc. those things I find not, hence is it, that justly I doubt,
that the promises of remission of sins belongs not to me, seeing the other
promises of sanctification, be not accomplished. p. 255. O but I fail in these
two, I cannot believe nor pray as I should, and therefore I fear to come short
of these precious promises. p. 261. O but I am so unworthy, that I dare not
believe it belongs to me; so graceless and so full of wants, so full of
bypast guiltiness, of present sinfulness. p. 264. O but I want the condition
that should be on my part, I cannot believe, I cannot repent, how shall I then
lay hold on the Covenant for remission of sins, seeing it is at what time a
sinner repents, the Lord will do away his iniquities? p. 264.

THE TOUCHSTONE OF CONVERSION. OR, The Marks of true FAITH.
2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith: prove your own
selves: know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates?


Q. WHat are we to consider to stir us up (whereof our selves are so slack, and
so secure) to discharge this so necessary a duty diligently, and without delay?

A. I. You should seriously consider the doleful and dreadful case of those
who want this true and saving faith; which certainly if truly believed,
thoroughly seen, and duly thought upon, is a most fearful and lamentable
condition, for it is full of sinfulness and guiltiness. They be the slaves of
the devil: Ephesians. 2.7. yea of sin, which is worse then the devil: Romans 6.16.
they be the children of wrath: Ephesians. 2.13. Now who knows the power of his
wrath even in this life? Psalm. 90.11. besides that which is to come. 1 These.
5.10. They have the Lord who is infinitely good, kind, merciful, and
gracious; the fountain of all goodness, not only to be a stranger unto them:
Ephesians. 2.12. which is lamentable; as depriving them of the interest of all sort
of good things and favors; but (which being duly considered is most
dreadful) they have the infinitely holy, just, powerful, sovereign God for
their unreconciled Enemy: Col. 1.21. which makes them liable to all sort of
judgments. Or clearly to set down unto you the fearful estate of those that
want this true faith, they are without the right and interest of all blessings
spiritual, temporal or eternal; and they be liable to all sorts of
judgments spiritual, temporal, and eternal, if their eyes were opened to
see it; First I say they be without right or intrest, to any blessing or
favors, for, for spiritual favors they be altogether strangers from them,
they are strangers from the Covenant, the promises, without Christ or God in
the world: Ephe. 2.12. For temporal blessings they may well have the
possession of them; but 1. without right to them, because they are without
Christ. 2. Without any assurance of them, because they are without the
promises. 3. They but tend to their conviction, their table is a snare to them,
and so all things else; as all evils work for the best to Gods children, so all
good things work together for the worst to them: and for eternal blessings,
and everlasting happiness, they shall be without, being debarred from that
celestial Jerusalem, Rev. 22.15. they shall come short of the glory of God,
Romans 2.23. they shall be holden at the gate of Heaven, when they shall come
from the East, and from the West, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
in the Kingdom of God, then shall they be thrust out, Luke, 13.28. As they have
not interest in any sort of Gods blessings and favors, as being strangers from
him: so they be liable to all sorts of judgments, as being his enemies, 1. To
spiritual judgments, blindness of mind, hardness of heart, vileness of
affections, benummednesse of conscience: a man that wants this true saving
faith, all his thoughts, words, and actions are sinful, without faith it is
impossible to please God: whatsoever he be thinking, speaking, doing, he is
sinning against God, and treasuring up wrath, against the day of wrath upon his
own soul, as the Scripture testifies: his ploughing is sin, and so all the
actions of his calling, all his civil actions, his praying is sin, and so all
his religions exercises, yea every I^agination of his heart is evil
continually: thus is it wi^h the person, or persons that want faith. 2. Again
for temporal Judgments though he may be for a time without them, yet it is
but for his further conviction and more fearful torment in the life to come,
nor is he sure of a freedom from them in this life, they are hanging over his
head, as it were by a hair, he knows not how soon they shall overtake him, for
they come suddenly as travel on a woman with child, as a whirlwind, or as an
inundation of waters: as the Scripture expresses it: he knows not when the
Angel will pour out the vial of Gods wrath upon him, yea the Angel may have
the sword already drawn though he, like blind Balaam, does not see it. And then
lastly, for eternal judgments when this life shall have an end (which may be
in a moment) there is nothing attending him but instantly utter darkness,
where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, everlasting burnings, the lake
that burns with fire and brimstone, everlasting fi^e, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels. Mat. 25, 41. Revel. 21. this is the doleful and dreadful
condition of the person that wants true faith, which consideration alone might
serve to awaken us out of our security; and to stir us up without delay, with
all diligence to prove and try whither we be in the faith or not. But for your
further stirring up.

II. In the second place consider, how that notwithstanding the case of these
that want this true saving faith be most lamentable, yet nevertheless there be
but very few that either have, or shall have, this precious jewel of faith
unfeigned, this to be true, the Scriptures, the ground of all truth make clearly
good, Many are called, and few chosen, Strait and narrow is the way that leads
to life, and few there be that enter therein: Christ when he shall come, shall
scarcely find faith on the earth; this seriously considered, would make men
look more narrowly to themselves then they do.

III. To stir you up yet further to this trial, consider that
notwithstanding the Scripture be clear in this point, that true faith belongs
to very few, yet every one thinks he has it, whereby (alas) it is most evident
(by comparing the truth of Scripture, with the opinions of men) that the most
part are pitifully deceived in this matter of highest concernment, and that the
faith of most men is but a fantasy, and surely there is nothing more incident
to us then presumption, and that by reason of the blindness which is in our
minds, the deceitfulness of our hearts, and that self-love which is in our
affections, as is to be seen in the Pharisee, the Laodiceans, yea in those who
preached, prophesied, and wrought miracles in Christ's name, which is fearful,
yea the very grossest sinners think they truly believe, which is strange, and
shows the great power of presumption.

Q. I grant you that all this should stir us up to be about this present duty
of trying whether we be in the faith or not, and that both diligently and
duly, least we be deceived with so many others, and also without delay, the
point being of so great consequence, and our life of so short and uncertain
continuance; and not to be at a point in a point of such importance which
betokens wonderful security, madness, yea spiritual deadnes, tell me
therefore, I pray you, some of the cleerest, and surest marks of faith, that I
may try my self thereby.

A. For your better remembering of them, you may take them up in 3. sorts, to
wit, they be either taken from these things which goes before faith: or from
these things that accompany faith: or from these things that follow after it,
from the antecedents, from the concomitants, and from the effects or
consequents.

Q. What be the marks that go before faith?

A. First of all in the general, where the Lord has a purpose to work true
faith in the hearts of any, before it, he works in them that preparatorie, and
groundwork of humiliation in the soul, and consequently a very sensible
change, a work indeed painful, and not joyous for the present, but most
necessary for those who are dead in sins, and trespasses, as all by nature
be: this he does, by sending his spirit, according to his promise, thereby to
convince them of their sinfulness, guiltiness, and wants. John. 16.8. and it
is usually called, the spirit of bondage. Romans 8. v. 15. Now this work of
humiliation, I say, is a very sensible work and makes a great and a sensible
change in the soul; for it puts a stirring in the soul, and an awakening in
the conscience which before was dead in sins and trespasses, and so needed some
strong alarm: it is the very pains and pangs of the new birth, which cannot
choose but be both painful, and sensible, it is the casting out of the strong
man, who, although while he holds the house all things be at peace, yet will
not be cast out without sensible unquietness; seeing then the change is great
and sensible, see and consider, if ever thou have found any such change in thy
soul or not.

Qu. But what be the particular changes that be wrought upon a man, by this
work of humiliation?

A. They be many, but these three chiefly, as both Scripture, and the
experience of Gods own children, do testify.

I. The first great change, that is wrought upon a man in the work of
humiliation, is by reason of the discovery of his guiltiness, and of his being
convinced thereof: for whereas before, his mind, and heart was filled with
false presumptions and apprehensions of Gods mercy: nothing but mercy before
his eyes, and no seeing of God in his Justice; now be they quite contrary (in
this work of humiliation) the case is changed, nothing so much before his eyes
as the Justice of God, and his anger against sin, the sight of mercy almost
being quite ecclipsed, he being upholden only with a glimering (as it were)
thereof, a possibility of pardon and hanging as it were by a very hair of
hope, Jona. 2. v. 4. nothing sounds in his ears so much as justice and wrath:
hence these sayings: Lord rebuke me not in thine anger: enter not into
judgment, etc. His former and forgotten sins are brought to rememberance, as
we see it fared with the sons of Jacob, and they are set in order before him;
Psa. 50.21. he trembles at Gods word, Isa. 66.2. the threatenings of the word,
like as the arrows of the Almighty, trouble him and write bitter things
against him, as it fared with Ioh. Now all this is done for very good ends, to
wit, these two especially; first, for their bypast sins that they may be
driven to Christ the horn of salvation. Luke 1.69: that they may fly
earnestly, or at least in sincerity unto him for a refuge, Heb. 6.18. to his
merits, righteousness, intercession, etc. that being wearied and laden, they
may run to him to be eased, Math. 11.28. which otherways they would not do, No
man can come unto me, unless the Father draw him. Secondly, that for time to
come they may stand in owe and sin not, Psalm. 4.4. that the fear of God may be
before their eyes, that they sin not, Exo. 20, 20. that they may be the more
pliable to all duties of obedience, and that being thus meek and lowly, they
may take the Yoke that Christ prescribes them, Math. 11.29. and try then if
ever thou have found such a change as this, if ever thou have trembled at Gods
word, if ever thou did apprehend the Lord in his justice, and did fear his
anger against thy sins, if ever thou wast pricked in thy heart by the
threatenings of the word, Acts 2.37. and if all these have wrought such a
Impression in thy soul, that still thou find that twofold effect before
spoken of, to wit, that for thy bypast sins, thy heart flies for a refuge,
and seeks to Christ, Heb. 6.16. that he is savoury unto thee, and then that
still thou find the fear and aw of God in thy heart, Jer. 32.40. that thou
fear always, and have a respect to all Gods Commandments, Psa. 119.6. and
judge of thy self accordingly.

II. The Second great change that is wrought in a man, by this work of
humiliation, is by reason of his being convinced, and having discovered unto
him his own sinfulness and corruptions, as also his manifold wants, and great
unrighteousness: for whereas before this work of humiliation, sometimes, he
had a great conceit of his freedom from sin, at least in any great measure the
ways of a man seems good in his own eyes until his iniquity be found to be
hateful, I thank God I am not like this Publican. O but when this work of
humiliation comes, that a man's sinfulness be discovered unto him, he sees afar
other sight, thinks far otherways, feels far other things; nothing but
sin and corruption, raging in him, sin revives, and taking occasion by the
Commandment, works in him all manner of concupiscence, To: 7.8, 9. he being
now stirred up, the dregs of his corruptions work abundantly; so that instead
of thinking that he is not like such a man, he thinks that for sinfulness, and
strength, and number of corruptions, there is none like unto him, and that he
is the chief of sinners: so likewise in regard of his wants, and gracelesnesse
and unrighteousness, there is the very like change: for whereas before, he
thought well of his own righteousness, both of the righteousness of his
person, that he had all sorts of inward graces, faith, repentance, the love and
fear of God, and that he was rich and increased in all things, and had need of
nothing, Rev. 3.17. as also well of the righteousness of his actions,
insomuch, that although with the Pharisee, perhaps he did not glory in them, in
his praying, hearing, fasting, etc. nor perhaps, with the Papist, did think to
merit by them; yet nevertheless with the Hypocrite, he did rest upon the
outward work, and was satisfied therewith, and regarded not the manner of his
doings, the ways of a man seem good in his own eyes, but the Lord ponders the
heart; now he sees a quite contrary sight, nothing but wants, that he is poor,
miserable, naked for inward graces, Rev 3.17. and that for outward practices,
all his righteousness is as a menstruous clout, Isa 30. now this work of
humiliation, or this part of the work, is also for notable good ends, to wit, 1
to drive and chase a man out of himself, to put him out of conceit with
himself, to make him deny himself, that so he go not about (which naturally all
are prone unto) to establish his own righteousness: Romans 10.3. And he who
attains once to this work and part of humiliation, may be assured that he shall
never be Arminian, Papist, or Pelagian, never stand for free will or merit.

A second end of this part of the work of humiliation is, that hereby the whole
glory of man's salvation may be given unto the Lord, that all boasting may be
excluded, and he that glories may glory in the Lord: Romans 3.27. Not unto us,
not unto us (O Lord) but to thy Name be the glory: Psalm. 115.1. Not for your
sakes, be it known unto you, O house of Israel, for ye are a stiff-necked and
a rebellious people, but for his Names sake.

3. That Christ may be further cleaved and clinged unto, and that nor only for
justification, but also for sanctification; for the sight of a man's own
sinfulness makes him fly to the sufferings and intercession of Christ; the
sight of his own unrighteousness, how all is but as a menstruous cloth, makes
him fly to, and to prise the righteousness which is through faith: Gal. 5.
the sight of his corruptions and spiritual diseases chases him to the
Physician. The whole needs not the Physician, but they that are sick: Matthew.
9.12. the sight of his wants makes him fly to the fullness of Christ's grace to
receive of that fountain and fullness: Joh. 1.16. the sight and sense of his
spiritual weakness, makes him fly to Christ for grace; Without me ye can do
nothing. Joh. 15.5. I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens
me. Phil. 4.13.

Fourthly and lastly, that the Spirit of God, the holy Ghost, may be the more
made use of, and fled unto; for it is by him, that 1. our sinful natures must
be renewed: Unless a man be born again by the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. Joh. 3.3. 2. It is by him that we must mortify our
corruptions, and the deeds of the flesh. Romans 8.13. 3. It is by him that all
grace must be shed abroad in our hearts and souls. Romans ^.3, 4. It is by him
that we must be strengthened in the inward man for all duties of obedience, yea
that must lead us and guide us in all the ways of God. Ephe. 3 16. Psalm.
143.10. And lastly, it is the holy Spirit that must go out with, and powerfully
accompany all the means of grace, to make them effectual for all these ends in
our souls: Prove. 1.23. So we see the great benefit of this change, or of this
part of the work of humiliation, both in regard of a man's life, and also in
respect of all the Persons of the Trinity.

Appl. Here also see and try thy self. 1. Concerning thy sinfulness and
corruptions: try if thou do see and perceive them, if thou be convinced of
them, and they be discovered unto thee; and not only those grosser ones which
a natural eye may perceive; but try if thou see thy inward, spiritual,
subtle, and most secret corruptions, as thy hypocrisy, infidelity,
spiritual idolatry, a whoring of thy heart, etc. for then may thou comfort
thy self, that the Lord has performed that his promise, in some measure,
toward thee; to wit, that he has sent his Spirit to convince thee of sin: Joh.
16.8. and thou art in some measure fitted and disposed for Christ, being
sensible of thy own diseases: The whole needs not the Physician, but they that
are sick. Matthew. 9.12. See whether or no thy heart can say humbly, and in
finceritie, with the Publican, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, and that with
condescending to the particulars of thy sins, failings, and corruptions; for if
otherwise thou be like the Pharisee, having a conceit of thine own innocence,
I thank God I am not like this Publican; yea, like the most part of the
presumptuous and secure world, who even when they are going to leave the world,
cannot be brought from singing this note of the Pharisee, they thank God they
never wronged their neighbor; and for God, they ever had an honest heart to
him; and herein they re^st, robbing Christ of his glory: So natural a thing is
it for men to go about to establish their own righteousness, and so hard it is
to get them convinced of sin, that afterward they may be convinced of
righteousness. And if they do confess themselves to be sinners, because they
hear all others saying so, yet is it only for the fashion: for though they may
take up some generals, but will they not be brought to particulars.

2. For thy wants, try thy self also in regard of them, whether thou be like
the Church of La^dicea, who thought it self spiritually rich, and increased in
all things; yea like the secure worldlings, who think the same thoughts. God
forbid, say they, but they have faith, but they love God, etc. Or if with Gods
children thou truly see thy wants to be great and many, and in the sight of
them have thy recourse to Christ, who counsels us to come and buy of him
raiment, fine gold, etc. for thus thou have interest in that comfort, Blessed
are the poor in spirit.

3. See what conceit thou have of thy best duties and performances, and try thy
self herein also, whether or no with the hypocrite, thou art pleased and
content (perhaps puffed up with them with the Pharisee) with them, for he rests
upon the outward work, he ponders not the heart, and therefore his ways seem
good in his own eyes; or otherwise if with Gods children, thou truly
acknowledgest thy best services to be but a menstruous cloth, and therefore
fliest to the pure righteousness which is by faith, for attaining of eternal
life, and art so far from thinking to merit by them, as that thou think it a
main mercy not to be punished for them; yea think that they cannot be so
much as acceptable testimonies of thy thankfulness in the Lords sight,
otherwise then as they be presented in the name of Jesus Christ: Col. 3.17. and
are performed with the incense of his intercession and merits. Rev. 8.3, 4.

In a word, see well to thy self on both sides, for if thou see, and art
sensible of thy own corruptions, wants, sinfulness of thy services in the
manner aforesaid; then although the matter and things be greatly to be disliked
and grieved at, yet nevertheless in this that thou see them, and that they
are discovered unto thee, thou have a ground of comfort and thankfulness, for
this must be somewhat more then nature; for the natural man thinks better
thoughts and conceits of himself, he flattereth himself in his own eyes until
his iniquity be found to be hateful: It is a token (...) some spiritual life
and sense, and that thou art nor altogether dead in sins and trespasses; for a
dead man is not sensible of his own diseases, wants, weaknesses^flesh and blood
has not revealed these things unto thee. But on the other fide, see thou not
thy corruptions, yea secret spiritual corruptions? and know thou not what
it is to be sinful? if there be a freedom from theft, uncleanness, murder,
and such other outward corruptions, which very natural and moral men see and
abstain from? Or have thou not been, and art thou not sensible of thy
spiritual wants, but either think thou have all spiritual graces faith,
fear, love, etc. or that they may be easily had, and did never find any
difficulty in attaining them? Or do thy services and religious exercises
please thy self, and think thou that God is pleased with them, and that for
themselves? art thou not sensible of the iniquity of thy holy things? do
thou not find many challenges this way, from the manner of thy doings, as well
as when thou commits a fin, or omits a duty, but when thou have posted over the
duty any way, yet thy mind is at rest? O then deceive not thy self: the eyes
of thy understanding are not yet opened, thou have not as yet gotten the
eye salve; go therefore, and seek it diligently from him who counsels thee to
come and get it: Ask, seek, knock for the Spirit of Illumination to convince
thee of sin, that afterward thou may be convinced of righteousness, and of
judgment.

III. The third main change wrought in a man by the work of humiliation, is in
regard of his taking to heart the work of his own salvation, and his great
solicitude thereabouts, being compared with his former security: What shall I
do to be saved? Act. 16.30. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling.
Philip. 2.12. what care, what fear, etc. Whereas before, his thoughts and cares
were taken up with the things of this life; the profits, pleasures, preferments
thereof, and altogether drowned in them; no serious, no settled thoughts about
his own salvation, of all other thoughts it was least in his mind: and if at
any time it did enter into his heart, it was but by starts or fits, being
choked with the cares and pleasures of this life. O but now all these things
seem to be but trifles to him, for what profits it (thinks he) a man for to
win the whole world, and loose his own soul? the thought that takes him up
most, that goes nearest his heart, that is always almost before him, is, how
to get his own soul saved, even as it was with the Jailer, What shall I do to
be saved? Before, he troubled himself about many things, but now he betakes
himself mainly and chiefly to the one thing that is necessary, seeks first the
kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof; yea, he wonders at his former
sloth, security, slacknesse, and great mistakings about this point, and thinks
he has hitherto been in a strange dream; he gets a new light and sight, and
this produces new effects and affections in him: Before he thought it an easy
matter to believe, but now he finds it (under the estate of humiliation) one of
the hardest things in the world, and if he had the whole world, would give it
to be sure of faith unfeigned, he would sell all that he has for that precious
pearl. Before he thought it but an easy matter to be saved, that the number of
these who were to be saved were many; that none but notorious sinners were
under hazard of damnation, that at least the most part of these who are in the
bosom of the Church should be saved; O but now he sees and considers, that
many are called and few chosen, that few there be that enter in at the gate of
life, this stirs and startles him, makes him to work out his salvation with
fear and trembling: Philip. 2.12. makes him give all diligence to make his
calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. v. 10. nor can he ever be quiet, or his
mind be at rest, until he get some measure of satisfaction this way, about his
Spiritual condition; and indeed to do otherwise is fearful security: Before
he thought it an easy thing to come to the Kingdom of heaven, that some
little time, some few words of prayer in the end of his life, Lord have mercy
upon me, Lord forgive me my sins, and such like, (for so think many) would
serve his turn; O but now he thinks all his time, and all that he can do in his
time, but little enough: he sees, and considers that the Kingdom of heaven
must be taken by violence, that there must be a striving to enter in at the
strait and right gate, that there must be wrestling, running, fighting for the
crown and prise, and therefore he bestirres himself to the purpose, he has a
respect to all Gods Commandments: Psalm. 119.6. keeps his precepts diligently,
ver. 4. makes haste and delays not to keep his Commandments: verse. 60. he
shunnes all sin whatsoever, declines no pains, no duty: what shall I do to be
saved? what will he not do to be saved? yea the truth is (in such a case) the
care, that a man has of his own salvation, has taken such an impression in
his mind, and his thoughts are so carried about it, that in all the means,
and duties of Religion, (although it should not be so) it goes nearer his
heart, then the very service of God; and until his fears be rectified by
faith and love, that which withholds him from sin, which puts him on to the
use of all the means, and of all holy duties, is, chiefly and principally,
fear and care of his own salvation. Now that the Lord puts such a fray, and a
stir, and an awakening in the hearts of his own, in the beginning of their
conversion, is not without good and special reason, to wit, that by this means
he may have them well fitted for the strait and narrow way, well buckled with
all the duties of obedience, well accustomed with Christ's yoke, and willing to
bear it, all which, unles this goade were in their sides, this prick in their
hearts, they could hardly be brought unto, want of custom, and averseness of
heart, being such mighty impediments, besides the tentations of Satan, and
general corruptions of our natures.

Appl. Try then thy self by this third Mark, and part of humiliation, if ever
thou have found such a change, or disposition as this, did thou ever come to
cry, What shall I do to be saved? did thou indeed, work out thy salvation with
fear and trembling? was taking of the Kingdom of heaven so pursued by thee,
that thou wast not quieted until thou had got some measure of satisfaction
about thy spiritual condition? whereas sometimes thou wast sleeping deeply in
security, in regard of this great and important point. 2 Did thou ever take
the matter to heart in such a measure, or manner, as that the care of it made
thee, and still makes thee, renounce every known sin, decline no known duty,
carefully, and conscienciously, frequently, and constantly go about the means
of thy salvation, private and public, what ever men shall think of thee. 3.
Did, and does the thoughts and cares of thy own salvation, and of Gods service,
more possess thee, then the thoughts and cares of this life, and of the world?
whereas before, they were taken up with many things, now thou art chiefly about
the one thing, which is necessary, and art ^eeking the Kingdom of heaven first.
So that in a word, thy desire of salvation is, and has been, 1. A serious
desire. 2. A settled desire and constant. 3. A diligent desire, then may thou
apply with comfort this Mark and point of humiliation to thy self; for the
desires of the hypocrite or unregenerate, they be not of this kind: for, 1.
They be not serious, but weak, faint and feeble desires, and therefore easily
born down, extinguished, and choked with cares or pleasures of this present
life. 2. They be not settled or constant desires, but starts, fits, and flashes,
or like the morning dew; so that if they work at all, yet do they not work out
their salvation. 3. and lastly, they be not diligent desires, but sluggish and
heartlesse wishes, with Balaam, they desire to dye the death of the righteous,
they would be at the kingdom of heaven, but have no mind to seek it and the
righteousness thereof. But by the contrary, foundst thou never such a change,
such a fra^, such a fear in thy heart and soul? 2. Does the thought of the
things of this life go nearer thy heart than those of the life to come? so that
thy thoughts this way (thy own conscience being made witness) have neither
been frequent and many, nor sad and serious. 3. Have thou truce with any known
sin, or declinest thou any known duty? Then thou wantst the comfort of this
Mark, and have never been sufficiently humbled; beg, therefore earnestly,
that the Lord would work this awakening in thee, especially if thou be
negligent in the use of the means, that prayest not in secret, read not,
meditatest not, conferrest not, repentest not, etc.

RESOLUTIONS for the weak.
1 THESE. 5. v. 14. Comsort the feeble minded, support the weak.


Q. But may not all these three main works and parts of (...) f^und in a
reprobate or (...)? 1 (...) the ^gu^tinesse dis^^ve (...) them, and fear (...)
jus^ice and (...) their (...) are they not many times deep^y (...) ed and
wakened in their conscience? 2. Have they not also discovered unto them their
corruptions, sinfulness and wants? 3. And have they not also their own desires
of salvation, as it fared with the young man in the Gospel, What shall I do to
inherit eternal life?

A. They have, but not in that measure and manner, degree and kind as Gods
children have; mark therefore the difference, and ye shall see the distinction
clear. And first of all to begin at the last point: The desires of salvation
that the wicked and unregenerate have (as has been already showed) 1. They
are not deep and serious desires; hence it is, that without satisfaction in the
point, they are easily stilled and put off with other things, with the trifles
and toys of the world, like little children, because their desires are not
deep, and sufficiently rooted; therefore is it that they are easily choked by
the cares and pleasures of this world, and so come not to perfection; and so
the things of this life go nearer their heart, and take deeper root in the
same, then any care of the things of the life to come: So if they seek the
kingdom of heaven at all, yet it cannot be said that they keep the rule, Seek
first (or chiefly) the kingdom of heaven. 2. They be not diligent, but
slothful desires, wishing to dye the death, but not willing to be at the pains
to live the life of the righteous; either they do nothing at all for it, or at
least not all that they should do: they may perhaps leave many sins, as was to
be seen in Herod, not do all that is commanded, as is to be seen in the young
man in the Gospel, notwithstanding he did seem to have a very forward and
fervent desire of salvation; still they stick and stand at something, and
howsoever they seek the kingdom of heaven, yet add they not this, and the
righteousness thereof. 3. They be not stable nor constant desires, but fits
and starts; unconstant motions, like the morning dew, so that if they work at
all, yet do they not work out their salvation; So that you have no reason to be
put by the comfort of this point, because of any desires in the wicked and
unregenerate this way, your desires being 1. deep and serious, such as could
not be put off, but with satisfaction in some measure in the point it self. 2.
You seeking first the kingdom of heaven, your heart running more upon this
point of your own salvation, and it going nearer unto your heart, then the
things of this (...) 3. You seeking the kingdom of heaven, and the
righteousness thereof, and that ye have a respect to all Gods Commandments,
declining no duty, entertaining no sin, and in thus doing ye shall not be
ashamed. Lastly, thy desires being stable and constant (although it may be not
in a like degree) thou working out the work of thy salvation.

Q. The time was sometimes indeed, that I could have said so much of the
desires of my salvation, that they were serious, that they were not slothful,
that I wrought out my salvation with fear and trembling; but now I find such
slacknesse, remissness, security, that makes me greatly doubt that my desires
have not been such as they should.

A. This is indeed an ill to be regrated, prayed, and striven against, even
this great and ordinary ill of security. But for your comfort understand, that
one and the same degree of desire and diligence, is not to be expected always,
no not in the best of Gods children, especially their desires being more sharp,
their care, their fear, their diligence more great in the beginning of their
conversion, that (as ye heard before) they may be well entered in the course of
Christianity, and well buckled with all Christian duties, but many times
afterward, there will be a falling away from their first care and diligence,
even the wise Virgins will slumber, Christ's own Spouse sleeped when her heart
waked; But herein stands the difference, betwixt the instabilitie and
inconstancy of the wickeds desires and of the godlies. That the godly,
although they remit sometimes somewhat of the degree of their desires and cares
this way, yet do they never altogether return to their former security which
they had before their wakening and conversion; they may fall from their first
care and diligence, but not from all care and diligence; the wise Virgins did
slumber, but were not dead; the Spouse slept, but her heart waked, there will
be ever something wakening and stirring the hearts of Gods children: whereas
the wicked grow altogether as secure and sluggish, yea more, like water heated
which grows colder then before.

This no doubt if you apply it to your self, will give you some resolution and
comfort. And thus far for this point.

2. Now for the second point, it is also true that the wicked and unregenerate
may have a sight of their own corruptions, wickedness, and sinfulness, but it
is also far from the degree and kind of that sight of sin and corruption which
the regenerate and Gods own children have, who have gotten the eye salve, the
special illumination of the Spirit, and are enlightened by that true light who
lighteneth every man that comes into the world: they see more then flesh and
blood can reveal unto them. The difference may be especially seen in these
four particulars.

1. The wicked and unregenerate, although by the light of nature, or a general
illumination they see some outward gross corruptions, corruptions of their
flesh, as, fornication, murder, etc. yet see they not their inward secret
corruptions, no less reigning and raging in them, and no less odious unto
God, their pride, their hypocrisy, their infidelity, their impatience, their
spiritual idolatry, and whoring after the creature, they see not the
filthiness of the spirit. 2 Cor. 7.

2. Although they see sin in the branches and fruit, yet see they it not in the
root and fountain, they see not into that original corruption of their nature,
the blindness, error, and vanity of their minds, the great averseness and
rebellion of their wills, the inordinatenesse and earthlinesse of their
affections, the deadness of their consciences, the hardness, whoring,
hypocrisy, and desperate wickedness of their hearts; they see not that body
of death. Romans 7.24.

3. They see not all their spiritual wants, but think themselves (as is to be
seen in the Church of Laodicea) to be rich, and to have need of nothing, to
believe in Christ as well as any, to love God as well as any, etc.

4. And lastly, they see not the manifold imperfections of their best services,
but with the Pharisee, rest upon the bare outward performance, not pondering
their own hearts, nor considering that the Lord ponders them; the ways of a
man seem good in his own eyes, but the Lord pondereth the heart: whereas, the
children of God on the contrary acknowledge all their righteousness to be but
a menstruous cloth. In a word, the natural and unregenerate man's light and
sight of sin, is but like an ordinary light, whether candlelight or daylight,
while entering into a room will discover any great or gross filthiness;
whereas the light of the regenerate is like the light of the Sunbeams, which
entering into a place, discovers the very small moats in it. This is clearly to
be seen in Paul, Romans 7. before his regeneration, and the coming in of the
light of Gods Spirit by the Law, he had a good conceit of himself, he saw not
concupiscence to be sin; but afterward he gets afar other sight of sin, and of
himself; For I was alive without the Law once: but when the Commandment came,
sin revived, and I dyed. Thou then who 1. see thy inward corruptions, thy
secret and spiritual ones, as well as the outward and grossest. 2. Who see
the corruption of thy nature, as well as thy actual transgressions. 3. Who
see thy spiritual wants, that thou art poor, miserable, and naked. 4. And
who see a great imperfection in thy best services, that they are but a
menstruous cloth. Thou, I say, who see and do acknowledge all these, art
not to deprive thy self of the comfort of this point for any sight of sin and
corruption the wicked have, for thus far thou should not have seen, unless
thou had gotten the eye salve, unless thy eyes had been opened, and
consequently thy spiritual blindness removed; unless the Sun of righteousness
had frined into thy soul, unless thou had gotten the Spirit of illumination,
and had been translated from darkness, and made one of the children of
light: Thou art in a better case, and have made a further progress then these
of L^odicea, who yet nevertheless are counseled and advised to come to
Christ, for all true spiritual graces; he that counsels thee to come, will not
refuse thee when thou come; thou art poor in spirit, and in the sight of thy
spiritual poverty do hunger and thirst for that which is wanting in thee.
Now blessed are such, as our Lord himself testifies; thou see the diseases of
thy soul, and so art in some sort fit for the Physician: The whole need not the
Physician, but they that are sick.

Lastly, for the third point, the wicked and unregenerate may be also, and that
greatly touched with the sense and sight of their own guiltiness, they may be
made with fear and trembling to feel the justice of God against their sins, to
have their woundings and wakenings, horrors, and terrors of conscience; and
yet not have a right work of humiliation; But yet herein is a difference
between the wicked and unregenerate, and Gods own children, and that in a
threefold respect.

1. The first (which is a very clear and sure one) is this, the wicked by their
terrors and horrors are further driven away from God, and do betake them to
the wrong means of remedy, sometimes to Satan and his instruments, sometimes
to other worldly delights and employments, thereby striving to benumnie and
lull asleep their consciences, striving rather to quench the work of
humiliation, then rightly to entertain it, and cure it, as is clearly to be
seen in Saul, and Cain; the one betook himself to the witch in Endor; the other
to the building of cities. Whereas Gods children by their horrors and terrors
draw the nearer to God, and are stirred up by Gods Spirit to betake themselves
to the right means which God has appointed, as Prayer, the Word, Gods
Ministers, and such to whom he has given the tongue of the learned, etc. as is
to be seen in Paul betaking him to prayer, and going to Ananias; the Jailer,
and those that were converted and humbled: Act. 2. they strive not to quench
and to smother this work of humiliation, but labor to entertain it, and
increase it so far as is necessary, and then to cure it by the right remedies.

2. Secondly, the horrors and terrors of the wicked in regard of their end
and issue drive them often to despair, because they are not mingled with any
measure of comfort or hope, as is to be seen in Judas and Cain. Whereas Gods
children in their greatest terrors are still upholden with some secret hope of
salvation, and conceive (at least) some possibility of pardon, as is to be
seen in Jonah, Chap. 2.4. I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look
again toward thy holy Temple. In David, Psalm. 31.22. I said in my haste, I am
cut off from before thine eyes; yet nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my
supplication. So fares it with all Gods children in their humiliations and
terrors, there is ever some secret thing upholding them, and makes them not
altogether to quit their hold.

3. A third very clear difference is, when the work of humiliation is over, the
natural and wicked man, if he escape despair, and his horror wear out, he is
so far from being bettered by it, that he grows sensibly worse; he returns with
the sow to the puddle, the unclean spirit enters with seven worse then himself;
he may well fear for a time, but he fears not always: Whereas the godly grows
sensibly better, and remains so after his horrors are over; the impression and
stamp which he had in his humiliation and sorrow, is not like the morning dew,
but being made by the seal of Gods Spirit it abides, he fears always, the
Lord puts his fear in his heart in such a sort that he never departs from him;
before he was afflicted he went indeed astray, but now he keeps the Lords
statutes; even afterward, and when his horrors are over, he brings forth the
quiet fruits of righteousness.

The Application of these particulars are easy: Have thou ever any work of
humiliation? and did it 1. chase thee to God and the right means? 2. Wast thou
upholden under it by some secret hope from despair? 3. Now after it, art thou
not worse then before, but on the contrary, undeniable better? Bless the Lord
for it, for thy humiliation has been of the right sort and stamp; especially
take comfort from this last clear mark, that thou searest always; for the
Scripture pronounces such a one blessed; that the Lord has put his fear in
such a sort in thy heart, that thou shall never depart from him, seeing thou
fear him when thy horror is over, as well as when it was upon thee, this is
a token that thou art in Covenant with the Lord; for this is an Article of his
Covenant: Jer. 31. Thy humiliation mu^^ be a sanctified humiliation, for it
does even afterward bring forth the quiet fruits of righteousness; thou can
say with the Psalmist, Before I was afflicted I went astray: But as for such
who have had any horrors and terrors this way, and have not betaken themselves
to the right means to cure them, but have rather labored to quench them then
rightly to entertain them, and remedy them rightly, and since the having of
them have returned to their former sinfulness and security, such have no
interest in this comfort.

Q. This may give some good satisfaction to any about the kind of their
humiliation, but as for me, to be plain with you, I have such fears about the
degree of my humiliation, that it makes me greatly to doubt of the kind of it,
that it has not been deep enough, that it has been but a flash, and that I am
far off from that measure thereof, that many of Gods children have had.

A. Understand first for thy comfort and resolution, that all Christians have
not, nor are to have (...) of them alike degree of humiliation, and that for
these reasons. 1. All have not sinned alike, but some by great sin^ and long
lying in them, have so ben^^^me their own consciences, that they require a more
sharp awakening; whe^eas others, not being guilty of so great sins, nor
continuing so long in the course of sin, but receiving grace in their tender
years, will not find such a measure of humiliation. 2. Some are to be put upon
more eminent employments, and therefore must be more thoroughly exercised and
polished for the same. 2 Secondly, consider that what perhaps thou have wanted
in degree and greatness, thou have had in continuance (the Lord wisely and
graciously giving out to thee at diverse times that, which would have
overcharged thee at one time) so that where the degree and measure of
humiliation has been great, there their continuance has been the shorter; as
we see in Paul, who was within three days comforted: the Jailer also his
horror very great, but ere long he rejoiced. 3. But thirdly and lastly,
compare it never with others, neither look to the degree of it, but see if it
be sufficient in it self; that is, to see if it has brought ou^, and wrought
in thee, the right effects and ends, for the which the Lord works this work of
humiliation in the hearts of his own children; for if a thing accomplish its
end it is sufficient, and who can complain or it. See to these two effects
especially, which be the main effects and ends for the which the Lord works
this work of humiliation in his own. 1. For thy bypast sins, look if it made
thee, and still makes thee humble, and heartily to confess them before the
Lord, and to fly unto his mercy and Christ's merit for forgiveness, at least
if it makes thee do it in sincerity, and in earnest even to fly to thy horn of
salvation: Luke 1.69. to thy city of refuge: Heb. 6.18. even the mercy of God
in the merits of Christ; See also if it make thee to prise these always in thy
judgment, and sometimes at least with the concurrence of thy affections, above
all things else, more then the gold, and the fine gold, so that they are
savourie unto thee, like ointment poured out, sweeter then the honey and the
honey comb, and thou in some measure art thankful for them; if it be thus
with thee, thy humiliation is sufficient for the degree of it, for this is one
of the main ends of it, why the Lord works it in the hearts of his children, to
wit, that they may be drawn to Christ, and chased to him; that they may seek
his mercy and the forgiveness of sins in such a sort as they may obtain it,
that is, in earnest, and in sincerity, that they may prise, relish, and be
thankful for the rich mercy of God in the merits of his dear Son. 2. See if
for time to come thou standst in aw, and sinnest not: Psalm. 4.5. and have by
this work of humiliation, the fear of God put in thy heart: Jer. 31. so that
thou fear always; See if thou have a tender conscience warning thee for the
prevention of sin, and checking thee again after thou have committed any sin,
even the least sin in thought, in word, in omission, in the manner of doing
(which is a warning to repent.) If I say, it fare thus with thee, then it is a
good and a sure mark that the degree of thy humiliation is or has bin
sufficient, for this is one of the main ends why the Lord works this work of
humiliation in the hearts of his children, to wit, that they may for ever
afterward fear him, and stand in aw to sin against him, Knowing the terror of
the Lord, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5.11. that as we use to say, like the
burnt child they may dread the fire of sin and Gods displeasure against it:
according to that of Moses to the people of Israel, Ex d. 20.20. when the Lord
had spoken in such a fearful manner unto them, This (says he) has the Lord
done, that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not. Once awakened or
a wounded conscience, and ever a waking or a tender conscience; and by the
contrary, a waking and a tender conscience is sometimes a wakened or a wounded
conscience. Behold what care, what fear, etc. 2 Cor. 7.11. Have thou then these
two main effects and ends of humiliation, trouble not thy self about the degree
thereof, for it is sufficient as having attained the ends thereof.

Further, the Scripture not only allows a comfort, but even a strong
consolation to those who fly for a refuge to the hope that is set before them.
Hebr. 6.18. There be also two other special ends and effects of a sufficient
work of humiliation, to wit, to produce in us true patience in adversity, and
true thankfulness for benefits and favors. You may also try the sufficiency of
your humiliation by these; A man not truly humbled, will never be patient, will
never be thankful: But on the contrary, one who has been truly humbled with
the sight of his own deservings, in his greatest adversity he will acknowledge
with Ezra, that the Lord has punished him less then he deserved. And again
with the Prophet, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him. And as for thankfulness, he is an admirer of the Lords
goodness, for he does heartily and humbly acknowledge with Jacob, that he is
not worthy of the least of his mercies; yea that it is unspeakable favor, that
he is free from deserved judgments: It is of the Lords mercies that we are not
consumed. Lam. 3.22.

Q. What you have spoken about the degree of humiliation, and the kind of it.
I acknowledge it to be good and comfortable; only this instead of all I would
say unto you: this I find to be my case, I see, (its true) my own sinfulnes
and manifold great corruptions, as also my gracelesnesse, and manifold wants,
and am humbled therewith; But as for to be humbled with the sense of my own
guiltiness (though I see it to be very great) I must confess that I cannot
come up to this, so that setting aside the kind or degree of my humiliation, I
fear that I have never been humbled at all.

A. This is a case that many of Gods Children have been excercised with, but
let us see what is to be said to it. 1. Thou accknowledgest a sight, and some
sense, a taking to heart thy own corruptions, well then, thou have some
interest in that, The while need not the Physician, but they that are sick,
thou confessest the like of wants, so that thou have interest in that; Blessed
are the poor in spirit: thou art in some better case then those of Land^^a,
well then, that thou art not altogether behind with it; bless the Lord for
what thou have. But to go on to the point in hand, observe diligently, that the
manner, and the means how the Lord works this first, and ground work in the
hearts of his Children, (by the experience, and observation of Gods Children
who have bin acquainted with it) is twofold. For first the work is directly
upon the conscience, touched with the sense of guiltiness, and troubled with
that especially; when a man's sins are set in order before him, and Gods wrath
and justice against them, his conscience writing bitter things against him.
Second ly, sometimes again the work is not so direct upon the conscience, nor
so violent upon it, but only reflects upon the conscience, to wit, when a man
is troubled, not so much with the sense of guiltiness, as with the sense of
want, which also comes back upon the conscience; for finding the sense of his
manifold wants, and seeing himself thereby in misery, and not sure of the
remedy as he supposed, he fears exceedingly, and is put to that, What shall I
do to be saved? so that the main thing indeed that troubles him, is the same
with the first, to wit, fear of guiltiness and punishment, though the thing
most sensible to him, is sense of want, for his wants would not trouble him but
for this, nor would he take them to heart but for this, to wit, because finding
by his wants that he is not in the estate of grace, as he supposed, he finds
himself, at least fears himself, to be under the estate of guiltiness and
misery, and this is it that troubles him. To bring the point then nearer unto
you, this your case is a very ordinary dealing of the Lords with many of his
own Children, to wit, to begin the work of them, wakening and humiliation with
the sense of want, more then with the sense of guiltiness, I say more directly
with the one then with the other: for the one (as the two) is included in the
other, the reason of this his dealing seems to be this, the Lord is wise, and
sees what is the main ground of men's security, and sleeping in sin, without
humiliation, and whence it ari^es, even from this, to wit, their presumption,
they think they are in Christ, and so leap over all that the Law can say to
them, or threaten them with, which otherways should be the mean of their
wakening, and then the Lord wisely fits the remedy to this malady, discovers
their wants unto them, and by them, their presumption lets them see that they
are not, what they thought they were, puts them out of this their starting
hole, and sends them back again to the School of the Law, even to the curses
of the same, and so works the work of humiliation in them. Now observe that
although the direct and immediate work be the sense of their wants, yet this
sense of want is not without the sense of guiltiness; for otherways, why
would the sense of thy wants trouble thee, but only because of this? thou
see that by reason of thy sins thou art guilty, and under the curse of the
Law: thou know that there is no remedy but by Christ, thou did sometimes
think thou had interest in him, but now by thy wants thou do think thy
self deceived: and hence i^ thy trouble and humiliation. So if thou will mark
well, the ground of all thy trouble and humiliation and that whereupon it
reflects, is, from the sight and fear, of thy own guiltiness, so that the
sense of thy want is not without the sense of guiltiness, for were it
otherwise that thou were not troubled with the fear of thy guiltiness, the
sight of thy wants would not trouble thee, nor would thou take them to heart,
as the case of the most part is, who are deeply fleeping in security; they are
never affected with this sort of doctrine touching the Marks and Evidences of
grace, they regard not whether they find or miss, have or want; this indeed
is a token of deep security, of utter want of humiliation, and that there is
no sense of guiltines at all. But when thou, not only see, but do take to
heart thy wants, art greatly affected with this sort of doctrine concerning the
marks and evidences of grace, nothing fears and grieves thee more then to
miss: nothing in the world rejoices thee more then to find. Here is certainly
some freedom from security, some sight and sense of guiltiness, and in a
word, an happy wakening: at least the case stands thus, What shall I do to be
saved? So to thee. Now to such who acknowledge their sight of corruption, and
wants, and their being affected in some measure therewith (which is called the
sense of want) but cannot find in themselves the sense of guiltiness, and so
cannot think that they are truly humbled. I would say three things to them,
laying aside the comforts whereof I spoke in the beginning, to wit, that in
regard of the sight and taking to heart their corruptions, they have interest
in that, The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick; In regard of
their seeing their wants their interest in that, Biessed are the poor in
spirit, they are in some better case, and further advanced then these of
La^dicea, for they acknowledge that they are p^ore miserable, wretched. But
laying aside these which thou ought to prise, and be thankful for, I say, I
have these three things to say unto thee for thy comfort in this point: 1. Thou
have the sense of thy wants, and under it of thy guiltiness, although thou
cannot see it, as I have been showing unto thee, so that (as thy being a^^cted
with thy wants cieerly evidences) then art wakened out of thy security, thou
art solicitous for thy salvation, working it out with fear and trembling, and
art come to this, What shall I do to be saved? and consequently art in that
same case of humiliation as was the Jailer, and those that were converted at
Peter's preaching: Act. 2.2. Have thou not that tender conscience before spoken
of, warning thee before sin, checking thee after the commission of sin, of the
very least sin, least omission, or failing in the manner of doing? Then a
tender conscience is awakened, and at some time, and in some measure a wounded
conscience; thou have one of the main ends wherefore the Lord works humiliation
in his own, and consequently have had humiliation it self, thou have thy
interest in that, Blessed is the man that fears always: Behold what fear,
what care, etc. 3. Tell me what it is that makes thee that thou dare not commit
the most secret and smallest sins, nor omit the most secret duties, what is it
that puts thee on, and holds thee in such a constant course of obedience, if it
be not at least the spirit of bondage and fear. Now the spirit of bondage is
the very spirit of humiliation, when thou dare not entertain a sinful thought,
dare not omit thy times or dyatts of devotion, make conscience of every known
sin, of every known duty, (possibly more then many others who have gone far on
in the course of Christianity, yea, and perhaps then sometimes thy self
afterward will;) what is it that holds thee so waking? but even thy wakened
conscience, the spirit of bondage at least, the spirit of fear, the fear of God
put in thy heart (a point and part of the Covenant) which is the very work of
humiliation wrought in thy soul. If it be any other thing that stirs thee up,
as the love of God, it is well, thou art further advanced in grace, but at
least, thou cannot deny that the work of humiliation is wrought in thy soul,
and therefore thank God for this, and go forward to perfection; get faith and
love which casts out fear, the Spirit of adoption, instead of the spirit of
bondage. Goon then to believe, for thou both may and should having the fear
of God thus in thy heart, and being in a constant course of obedience according
to thy ability; that faith was never boldness nor presumption, that is joined
with fear and obedience, and that keeps to the precepts as well as to the
promises. It is an ordinary policy of Satan (and we should not be ignorant of
his wiles, but observe his stratagems) that those who have no interest in the
Promises, as being void both of fear and obedience, these, I say, he puffes up
with Presumption, and makes them boldly to claim and lean to that, wherein they
have no right; As long as a man makes no conscience of his ways, he lets him
believe his fill (such a belief as it is) when indeed he should not lay hold,
nor claim to the Promises, as is clear by that Psalm. 50.16, 17. But unto the
wicked God says, What have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing
thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee?

When a man again has forsaken his wicked ways and thoughts, makes conscience
of his courses, and begins to fear the Lord, at which time he may and should
lay hold on the Promises, as is clear by that remarkable and comfortable place,
Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of
his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him trust in the
name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Here is a clear warrant, and a sweet
invitation for a person in such a case to believe and lay hold; and yet I say,
no sooner fares it thus with a man, but Satan and his own corruption
incontinently bear him back from believing. Observe this then, and resist the
devil, and the corruption of infidelity that is in thine own heart, and bear
back no longer: If bearing back and withdrawing were an allowable cause for
thee in such a course, thy heart would not be so much given unto it: we are
ever to suspect the way of our own heart, and to judge it wrong, that we are
most given unto, namely, the point in hand, infidelity, being so sibbe to us,
and which hangs so fast on thee, as thou wast given in the time of thy
security through the way of thine own heart, to presume and lay hold, when
thou should not, now this way of thy own heart was clearly wrong. So now the
way of thy own heart being to misdoubt, and draw back, why should thou not
suspect it, and resist it? Hold to thy comfortable warrant: thou fear the
Lord, at least thou desire to fear his Name (for even to such the Scripture
allows comfort) thou obeyest the voice of his servants, or art willing to obey,
so far as thou art able; then obey this also: Trust in the Lord, and go on in a
constant course of fear and obedience, and fear not to believe, this is the
Lords seal, to depart from iniquity. Make your calling and election sure by
well doing: If ye do these things, an entrance shall be ministered unto y^u a
undantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 2
Pet. 1.11. If thou fear, yea, desire to fear, if thou obey, yea be willing and
obedient, even willing to be obedient.

Finally, for thy further comfort, and for the comfort of all those who are
troubled because they are not satisfied in this point, about the sense of their
own guiltiness; let this be considered and examined: as toward the promi^es
there is a true faith, and believing of them without sense, which gives rest to
the soul, and produces good effects; So may there also be a t^^^ faith of the
threatenings, producing a true fear and c^re, and consequently a true
humiliation although it be not joined with sense. All this is spoken, not that
you ought to rest upon this degree of humiliation, for as you ought to go on
from faith to faith, and from grace to grace, so from humiliation to
humiliation. Moreover, the work of humiliation, namely, in regard of the sight
and sense of our own guiltiness and deservings, is the very groundwork of the
work of our salvation and sanctification; and therefore should be well laid,
greatly labored for, and we should strive to have it deeply seated, and
stamped in our hearts and memories. For (as any may feel by experience)
according to the lively sense of this point, goes on the liveliness of all
other points of Religion, this point being lively unto us, to wit, the sight
and sense of our own deservings, it makes us accordingly hearty to confess our
sins, and humbly to walk with our God; it chases us earnestly to lay hold on
the means of our deliverie; to lay hold on the mercy of God, the promises, the
Covenant, etc. It makes us fly in to the very bosom of Christ for shelter, as
to our City of refuge, our horn of salvation. And lastly, (faith being on foot,
and lively withal) it is a whetstone, and serves to quicken and set an edge
upon our love, and consequently upon our godly sorrow, our zeal, our obedience,
etc. for then do we love most, when we are most sensible how much is forgiven
us, so great are the consequents of this point. So then I say, what I have
spoken for your comfort in this point, is not that I would have you rest
altogether upon the degree of humiliation already acknowledged by you: Only
this, I would not have it hid from your eyes what you have received, but that
you should see it, and acknowledge it, that the Lord may not want his
thankfulness, nor you your comfort; And that Satan may not prevail against you
by that great and admirable policy of his, as he has done with many, to bear
you back from faith, and laying hold on the Promises, without the which there
can be no comfort in a Christian soul; yea, no cheerful, no acceptable service
to the Lord, Without faith it is impossible to please him: yea the heart wants
courage to do it, either to p^e^se him, to praise him, or to honor him. Now
his policy is this, which is the doubt and hold-back to many.

Obj. I am not sufficiently humbled, and therefore should not believe, nor lay
hold on the Promises for humiliation going before faith and believing.

Ans. To this I say, thou art not indeed sufficiently humbled in regard of, and
in reference to the work of thy sanctification, nor ever shall be so long as
thou art here, but I say (the case standing so with thee as we were speaking,
that is, thou fearing and obeying, etc.) thou art sufficiently humbled to lay
hold upon the Promises, and to be bold to believe them, and claim thy interest
in them; thou fear the Lord, and obeyest the voice of his servants, and
therefore not only may but should trust in the Lord: Isa. 50.10. Thou
hate not to be reformed, and therefore may take his Covenant in thy mouth.
Psalm. 50.16, 17. Thou keepst his Sabbaths, and choosest the things that please
him, and therefore may take hold of his Covenant. Isa. 56.4. Thus far for
thy comfort.

But thou, who ever thou be, that want these things, whereof we were
speaking, be not deceived, thou have neither faith, nor that humiliation that
should go before it. 1. Was never thy conscience wakened directly with the
sense of sin? was never thy mind troubled with the sense of spiritual wants?
wast thou never solicitous for thy own salvation, and took it to heart above
all things else? Alas, it is too too evident thou art not right as yet. 2.
Want thou that tenderness of conscience? have thou no care, no fear of the
snares of sin, and Satan, nor watchest thou to prevent sin? art thou not with
the Apostle, herein exercised always to keep a good conscience? Again, and
ha^t thou no checks, nor accusations in thy conscience after the commission
even of the smallest, if known sins, but can ban and swear, speak sinful
words, think sinful thoughts, etc. and never be troub^ed a whit for the
matter, but do sin securely, and lie in sin securely without repentance,
and seeking after reconciliation, and so art every way a sleighter of sin? Then
assuredly no work of humiliation has ever been wrought in thy heart, and
consequently no work of grace: for this is the first work. 3. And lastly, look
how the matter is between you and God, how thy soul carries it self in regard
of secret sins, namely, of entertaining sin in thy thoughts, and in regard of
secret duties. If thou dare or do regard iniquity in thy heart, feed thy
thoughts upon ambitious and covetous pleasures or vanities, or sinful lusts,
without controllment, yea, and with delight, and dare omit or shuffle over thy
secret duties; have thou not some constant inward principle and secret mover
that lets thee not alone, but puts thee on to a daily and constant discharge of
Christian secret duties, daily prayer, nightly repentance, daily and nightly
meditation upon the Word of God, but do all these duties by starts, and
fits, or superficially, or not at all? then certainly, no right humiliation, no
true grace yet in thy soul; be earnest to labor for, and to pray for that
which thou want, for it concerns the damnation or salvation of thy soul.
Thus far for these Marks which be taken from the antecedents of faith, or those
things which go before faith, at least in order of nature.

Concerning these three Marks of a right and true work of humiliation, or of
that preparatorie work of the Spirit, which goes before faith; the way, I say,
to make these Marks clear, comfortable, and convincing, is, 1. To compare them
with our own former case and condition, and so to try them by experience which
we have already done. 2. To try them by comparing them with the case of the
ungodly and wicked, and so to try them by the Word of God, which now we are to
do; wherein although some things be coincident with things spoken before, the
labor will not be unprofitable.

I. The first Mark of right humiliation, and of the work of the Spirit in that
respect is this, to wit, namely, the right sight of sin, the Spirit of God,
when he comes first into the heart of a Christian, working by the Law or
Commandment, gives unto a man another sight of sin, then any natural man, how
qualified soever he be with humane literature and natural wisdom, can have:
This is clearly understood by the doctrine, and in the person of St. Paul, Romans
7. I was alive without the Law once, that is, in a good conceit of my self, and
of my own righteousness, but when the Commandment came, that is, the Spirit with
the Commandment or Law (for he had the Commandment or Law in the letter before)
sin revived, and I dyed: I saw another sight of my sinfulnes then before. To
speak more plainly and particularly of this note, when the Spirit comes and
works this sight of sinfulnes in him, it works this threefold sight in him. 1.
A sight of his sin and particular corruptions. 2. Of his gracelesnesse and
wants. 3. Of his unrighteousness and imperfection of his best actions. Now all
these be hid from the natural man, as is clear by example. 1. Of the Nation of
the Jews, who went about to establish their own righteousness. 2. Of the
Papists, who take upon them for want of this sight, to fulfill the Law, to
merit, to supererrogate. 3. Of our own ignorance, who till the point of death
cannot be brought to this sight of their own sinfulness, but ever are
justifying themselves, thanking God they never wronged any, instead of
confessing, and humbling; so that this is clearly the case of the natural man.
But to the particulars.

1. The Spirit gives to a man a sight of his sinfulness and corruptions; When
the Commandment comes, sin revives, that is, there is a further sight of sin:
Hence is it, that, 1. they are out of conceit of themselves, thinking
themselves to be the chief of sinners. 2. That they complain so heavily of
their own corruptions, Who shall deliver me from the body of death? 3. They
feel the flesh lusting against the spirit: Gal. 5. Now the ungodly or natural
man is not so: for, 1. He has not so evil a conceit of himself, as to think
himself to be the chief of sinners, or a great sinner, but quite contrary: I
thank God I am not like that Publican. 2. He is not sensible of his
sinfulness, whether of the body of death, or of his actual sins flowing
therefrom. But on the contrary, He flattereth himself in his own eyes, until
his iniquity be found to be hateful: as it is in the 3. Psalm. He feels no
such battle between the flesh and the spirit: for why, The strong man holds
the house, so that all things are at peace Hence the one sort is prepared for
Christ, the other not: The whole needs not the Physician, but they that are
sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Q. But you will say, Has the wicked or natural man no sight of his sins?

A. Some sight of some grosser discernable sins by the light of nature, but not
such a sight of sin as the Spirit gives to the spiritual man. They may see, 1.
outward corruptions of the flesh, as theft, fornication, etc. but not these
more inward of the spirit, pride, spiritual idolatry, unthankfulness,
infidelity, impenitencie. 2. They may see sin in the branches and streams,
that is, actual sins; but not in the root and fountain, the body of death, the
sinfulness of their nature, blindness of mind, backwardness of will,
unholinesse, and unheavenlinesse of affections, hardness, whoring hypocrisy
of their hearts. 3. In a word, they may know grosser sins, but not lesser; as
we may see by Christ's interpretation of the Law, compared with that of the
Pharisees, yea Paul says, I knew not concupiscence to be sin, but by the Law:
the natural man's light or sight of sin, is like an ordinary light which
discernes gross palpable filthiness, but will not discover moats; But the
spiritual man's light is like the light of the Sun which discovers very moats,
which an ordinary light will not discover.

2. The Spirit gives to a man a sight of his gracelesnesse and wants, they see
their faith, love, repentance, fear to be weak: I believe, Lord help my
unbelief: I love, Lord help my love; Lord increase our faith. Thus they be
poor in spirit. The wicked and natural men are not so, but as it is to be
seen in the Church of Laodicea, they think they have need of nothing; so look
to the ordinary course of men, O why fear I not, love I not God, etc.

3. The Spirit when he works he gives to a man a sight of his unrighteousness,
even of the imperfections of his best actions: Our righteousness is like a
menstruous cloth, says the Prophet: When ye have done all that ye can do, say
that ye are unprofitable servants; they know that the Lord pondereth the heart;
and they see so manifold imperfections, defects, corruptions, in their best
actions, ^o that instead of meriting by them, they think it a mercy not to be
punished for them: their heart rests not till they fly to the righteousness
which is by faith, to him who has taken upon him the iniquity of our holy
things; who perfumes the very prayers of his Saints with the incense of his
merits and intercession. The ungodly not so, the hypocrite pleases himself with
the work done, the form of godliness, cares not for the manner, according to
that, The ways of a man seem good in his own eyes, but the Lord ponders the
heart: As the Pharisee, not only pleased, but puffed up with good service, I
fast twice in the week, etc. The Papists think to merit no less then heaven by
them, and that to others.

Now the Application is easy, 1. for comfort. First of all have thou gotten
indeed a sight of thy sinfulness, corruptions of the flesh, and spirit,
corruptions of the several faculties of thy sinful nature, so that from the
heart and condiscending upon particulars, thou can say, that thou a^^ sinful;
O then thou art in case for the Physician, The whole needs not the Physician,
but these that are sick. And ^ee their spiritual sicknesses, thou art one whom
Christ calls, I came not to call the righteous, (in their own eyes) but
sinners to repentance: that is, that see themselves to be sinners. Be of good
comfort, beho^d he calls thee. 2. Have thou gotten a sight of thy own
gracelesnesse and wants; O then thou art poor in spirit, and so blessed, thou
art in a better case then those of Laodicea. 3. See thou the imperfection of
thy best services, thou art not like the natural man, or Hypocrite, who
contents himself with the work done; who, 1. Ponders not the heart, and
therefore his ways seem good in his own eyes. 2. A token thou res^s not upon
the form of godliness, but do labor after the power. 3. Thou worshipest in
spirit and truth. Now for c^nviction, O but thou, who 1. see not thy
sinfulness and corruptions, may well for the fashion confess thy self to
be a sinner, but can not condescend to particulars, or if to any, it is but
to outward gross ones, which the natural mind may see, but see not the
whoreing of the heart, unthankfulness, impenitency, etc. 2. Thou who think
that thou, beleevest, love, fear sufficienly, and did never find the
weakness of these, thou have not so much as attained to the very first degree
of blessedness, thou art not poor in spirit, etc. Thou have not the very
first work of the spirit, thou have not gotten the eye salve. And thirdly,
thou, who find no fault with thy services, for the manner of them, when thou
have done them, no great difficulty to get them rightly performed when thou art
about them. 1. Thou (I say) ponderest not the heart, and therefore thy ways
seem good in thy own eyes. 2. Thou have but the form of godliness, but
want the power thereof. 3. Thou worshipest not in spirit and truth, but in
show and in hypocrisy, and drawest ^eer with the lips, etc.

II. The second Mark of true humiliation, and of that preparatory work of the
spirit going before faith, is, from the sense of sin, and of ones own
guiltiness, and the fear of Gods justice, anger, threatenings, judgments
against him for them, fear goes before faith; the spirit of bondage, before
the spirit of adoption. The Lord he first puts his fear in the hearts of these
in whom he works effectua^ly by his Spirit, even the fear of his justice, for
otherways they would never prise his mercy, and the merits of his Son, they
would never be humbled for bypast sins, to fly to the mercy of God, and
merits of Christ, for forgiveness, and so could not be saved, according to
that, Come unto me all that are weary, and heavy laden. As also that, No man
can come unto me, unless the Father draw him. And also they would not stand in
aw for time to come, which is the other maine end why the Lord works this work
of humiliation, and fear in the hearts of men, according to that, I will put
my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me; See then if ye
have this fear which is a point of the Covenant, and so a token that one is in
the Covenant, Blessed is the man that fears always: but take heed that it be
the true and constant fear of God, spoken of, and promised in the Covenant,
for even a wicked man may have some fear of committing sin, and yet not the
right fear; Now try it by the two marks in the words of the Covenant; 1. If it
be Gods fear, I will put my fear; 2. If it be the constant fear of God, and
they shall not depart from me; the wicked man, (I say) he may have some fear
of committing sin but this his fear, 1. Is not the fear of God, but the fear
of man; and therefore he stands not to committ small sins (that men count small
I mean) as to ban, swear, be profane in discourse, miscall his neighbor, and
he stands not also to commit secret sins, entertaines sin in his thoughts, omit
secret duties, though both these be offensive to the Lord; who sees not then,
that this his fear is a fear of men, and not of God; do thou commi^ little
sins, do thou entertain any secret si^, though but in thy thoughts, thou
have never had this fear, which is a^m^ke going before faith, Then shall I not
be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments. Again, a wicked man
may fear God even for a time, when a judgment is upon him, for a fit or a
start; but, this is not the true fear of God: for when the judgment is over,
he goes to his wonted sins. So did Pharaoh, and Jereboam; thus he fears not
always, and so is not blessed, he has not gotten the Lords fear, as never to
depart from him, and so is not in the Covenant. But see thou, if thy
judgments, and afflictions, not only whilst they were lying on, but even
afterward, they have brought forth the quiet fruits of righteousness.

But that this Mark may be the more clear, comforting, and convincing, we will
lay it out in the particulars, to wit, their fear who have the true fear, and
withal let you see the quite contrary in the wicked, and that both from
Scripture. 1. They who have this true fear, they fear Gods justice and anger
against sin, as is clear, Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant:
Rebuke me not in thy wrath: Who knows the power of thy wrath? 2. They fear the
threatenings of the Word, and tremble at it. 3. They fear his judgments against
sin recorded in Scripture, or observed by experience. Psalm. 119. The contrary
of all this is true in the wicked. For, 1. in general they fear not God at
all, according to a notable place, Psalm. 36. (who if they were not strangely
besotted, and blinded, might see that they were wrong, when even others see it)
The transgression of the wicked says in my heart, that there is no fear of God
before his eyes, etc. Look and consider the place. 2. They fear not Gods
justice and anger, they never get a sensible and serious thought of his justice
before their eyes, but think he is all Mercy; and that therefore if they
should sin all their life time, and yet but at the very last bid the Lord have
mercy on them, that that will serve their turn. Whereas Gods children
howsoever sometimes they have had the like apprehensions, see the Lord in his
justice and holiness, and that in such a sort, as that hardly can they get a
glimpse or glance of his Mercy. 3. They fear not the Lords threatenings,
tremble not at his Word: but on the contrary, Deuteronomy. 29.29. They are ready,
when they bear the words of the curse, to bless themselves in their own
hearts, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imaginations of my
own-heart, etc. So that ye see there is a clear difference.

Now to the Application, and that first for comfort.

1. Have thou the fear of God, even that fear of God and not of man, that
right, and constant fear? rejoice. 1. Thou art in Covenant, for this is a point
of the Covenant, as ye heard. 2. Thou art blessed, for thou fear always. 3.
Thou shall not be ashamed or disappointed, for thou have respect to all his
Commandments. 4. Thy afflictions have been sanctified afflictions, for even
afterward they bring forth the fruits of righteousness; join faith with fear,
and let love cast out slavish fear: be bold to believe the Promises, thou that
beleevest the threatenings. Who is he that fears the Lord, and obeys the
voice of his servant? let him trust in the Lord, etc. Thou hate not to be
reformed, and so may take his Covenant in thy mouth.

2. Did thou, do thou, fear his justice and wrath, so that it makes thee
to fly under the wings of Christ, makes thee fly to the horn of salvation for
a refuge to the hope set before thee? Thou may be sure of a kindly welcome;
How often would I have gathered thee, etc. He that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out; There is allowed to thee A strong consolation, even to them who,
fearing the Lords justice, fly for a refuge to the hope set before them. Heb.
6.3. Did thou, do thou, tremble at his Word, at his threatenings? the Lord
looks upon, and dwells with such a one. 4. Art thou afraid of his judgments?
this will make thee judge thy self, and so not to be judged of the Lord: Fly
to him, in whom whosoever is, there is no condemnation for him.

2. For conviction. But for thee who have not this fear in general, but do
flatter thy self in thy own eyes, making no conscience of sin; Alas, if thou
saw sin as others see it, and were not miserably besotted, thou would see
thou had no fear, and so no faith, no salvation. 2. Wast thou never deeply
apprehensive of the Lords wrath and justice against thee? or never had any
serious and sensible thoughts thereof? Alas, I see not how ever thou have been
driven to Christ; No man can come unto me, unless the Father draw him. Come
unto me all ye that are weary and laden. Nor how thou can prise his merit and
the Lords mercy, or stand in aw for time to come, have a tender conscience,
etc. 3. Do thou not tremble at the threatenings of his Word? then assuredly
thou beleevest them not; and therefore thy belief of the Promises is but a
phantasse, a false presumption. 4. Does not the Lords judgments recorded
against the like sinners with thy self, affect thee? then surely thou know
not how near they be unto thee: thou art in a deep security. Had David need
for the flesh to tremble? and art thou less sinful? No: yet more secure.

III. The third Mark of a true humiliation is this: that from the sight of
sinfulness, and sense of guiltiness, or fear, there arises an earnest care
and solicitude in a man after his own salvation: Behold, what care, what fear,
etc. What shall I de to be saved? He works out his salvation with fear and
trembling. This is indeed a great and a clear change, being compared with his
former security. But that it may be yet more clear, we will set down the
difference in this point, betwixt the godly and the ungodly; betwixt a man thus
wakened, and quickened by the Lords rich mercy, and a man yet lying dead in
sins and trespasses; receive it then thus. 1. The ungodly, and not wakened or
quickened, they have (many of them) no cares or desires at all about heavenly
or spiritual things, or of their own salvation; their cares and desires are
about corn and oil. Psalm. 4. about many things: Psalm. 10. give them their
wishes and desires, they would run this way; as for grace and glory, they think
they have enough of the one, and that they are sure enough of the other. The
godly and wakened are not so, Lord give me the light of thy countenance, they
take care for the one thing necessary; give them their wish and desire, it
would be grace, and not goods. 2. If they have any cares or desires this way,
they be, 1. but sluggish desires, and not diligent; they may wish, and would
with Balaam, their salvation, but they do not work, much less work out their
own salvation. They may well seek the kingdom of heaven, but not and the
righteousness thereof; this is well seen by their conversation, they use not
the means in private, as reading, meditation, conference, etc. unless it be a
formal, posting, prattling piece of prayer which a superstitious Pagan possibly
durst not omit: not unlike the Papists telling over their beads; and for
public duties, as little of them as possibly they can, with their honesty, and
were it not for regard to men, would be as little about them, as they be about
the private; they are scorners of those, who take the kingdom of heaven by
violence, no violence use they themselves: whereas the quickened are not so,
they not only wish, but work; seek not only the kingdom of heaven, but also
the righteousness thereof; they use means in public and private, take the
kingdom of heaven by violence. 3. Their desires and cares are not settled, but
unconstant desires; if they work, they work not out, their goodness is like the
morning dew: what they do, is by fits and starts, as in the time of a cross or
affliction, as the Israelites were wont to do: or by others example and
instigation, or education, as Joash King of Israel did, or some such outward
motive the godly are rightly wakened, are not so for their cares, desires, and
endeavors, being from an inward motive, and principle, some incorruptible seed
are constant and settled, I will put my fear in their hearts, never to depart
from me. Herein am I exercised always, I have set the Lord always before my
face, not by fits and starts, their ways are established before the Lord, they
work, and work out their salvation, even when the affliction is over, they
return not to sin with Pharaoh, but afterward bring forth the quiet fruits of
righteousness, not by others instruction, but with Joshua, If all should
forsake the Lord, yet I and my h^use will serve the Lord; 4. Which is the cause
that their cares and desires be sluggish and not settled, they be not serious
enough. But you may say, how shall I know this? 1. Because if they were serious
they would not be put off without satisfaction in the point, for such are the
desires of the godly: whereas the desires and cares of the ungodly are not so,
but are choked with the thornie cares or pleasures of this present life; even
like a child if it be but some little small desire that troubles it, it is
easily put off and stilled, but if it be a serious desire, a pinching necessity
it will not be so soon quieted; Hence says the Apostle, As newborn babes,
desire the sincere milk of the Word, the desires of the godly, be like the
desires of a child new born, or in necessity not to be stilled without
satisfaction in the point; whereas the desires of the ungodly, be like the
desires of a child, who not being under such pinching necessity, is quieted
with some one toy, or other, choked with some worldly pleasure. 2. If they be
serious cares, or desires, they will make one to do any thing for attaining of
salvation, to abstain from all sort of sin, to decline no sort of known duty;
Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved? what shall I do, says the
Jalor; Lord what will thou have me to do, says Paul; what shall they do what
will they not do to be saved, no sin will they entertain nor allow, some sin may
well give them their handful, may lead them captive to the Law of sin, may
hang on them, Iniquity may prevail against them: Psalm. 65. but they allow no
sin; the evil they would not, that they do, they regard no iniquity. So also
they decline no known duty, no certainly known duty; this is a sure Mark, Then
shall I not he ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments. Whereas
the ungodly may, with Herod, leave many sins, but some there be they will not
leave; they may well pretend they will decline no duty, with the young man, and
say, What shall I do to inherit eternal life? yet with him, when it comes to
the point, they stick on something, and in some duty. 3. If the desire and
care of their salvation be serious, it will be that which takes up the chief
room in the thoughts, heart, affections of a man or a woman, that wherewith
one is chiefly taken up with all the day long, to wit, with cares to please,
and fears for displeasing; and that partly (and indeed mainly should be) in
relation to God, partly in a relation to themselves, to make their calling and
election sure by well doing: this is the chief of their care all the day long;
this is the ground of their contentment, or coffeehouse at night; Herein am
I exercised always to keep faith and a good conscience: I set the Lord always
before me. So as they seek first the kingdom of heaven, 2. and the righteousness
thereof. With the ungodly and natural men it is not so, their cares are
otherwise taken up all the day, the Lord is not before them; their contentment
and coffeehouse arises from other grounds at night; either they seek not the
kingdom of heaven at all, or not it, with the righteousness there of, or not it
first with the righteousness thereof; there goes ever something nearer their
heart, and it fares with them as with the young man in the Gospel, though he
seemed to have great care for, and desire after it, even after salvation.

The Application follows, and first for comfort. See first whereupon thy cares,
and desires, and endeavors do run, and with what they are taken up, whether or
no upon the salvation of thy own soul, and the serving of God, the two main
ends for which we are come into the world; or upon other inferior transitory
trifles, whether upon the many things, or the one thing that is necessary;
whether thou seek the kingdom of heaven, or other things; whether or no thou
have embraced this present world, or in effect uses it as though thou usedst it
not, as knowing that the fashion thereof perishes; usest thou this world as if
thou usedst it not; car'sts not greatly for it? It is well, it is like thou
do believe that there is another, even a more dureable substance. Have thou
chosen the better part, and art still seeking; fear not, it shall not be taken
from thee. 2. Be thy cares and desires after this kingdom not sluggish, but
diligent desires, so that thou not only wishest, but workest thy salvation;
thou not only seek the kingdom of heaven, but also the righteousness
thereof, and do take the kingdom of heaven by violence; give all diligence
to make thy calling and election sure, usest the means in secret, and in
public, etc. Then be of good comfort, thou keep the precept, and so shall
not miss the promise, which is, The vio 'ent take it by force; thou usest the
recommended mean, and so shall not miss the end. If ye do so, Entrance shall
be ministered to you abundantly into the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. 3.
Are thy cares and desires stable or constant, not for a fit or a start, but
thou workest, and workest out, and that not only in the time of affliction,
but even when it is over thou bring forth the fruits of righteousness; thou
have ground of comfort, for this is surely a sanctified affliction, and
consequently thou art not a bastard, but a son: yea even although it be not
possible in the like degree, as in the very time of thy affliction; yet seeing
thou art more fruitful then before, it is well: for the wicked return to their
former, yea oftentimes, greater sloth and coldness, his last estate is worse
then his first. Does thy conscience bear thee witness, that although all
others would break the Lords commands, yet thou with Joshua wilt serve him?
Then assuredly thy obedience flows from some inward principle not subject to
change; and not from any outward respect of example, education, etc. Lastly, is
thy desire and care a serious desire, was there ever such a wakening a fray
upon thee, that indeed it made thee to work out thy salvation with fear and
trembling, take the kingdom of heaven by violence, wast thou indeed at that,
What shall I do to be saved? what shall we do? what will thou have me to do
Lord? etc. Here then is the ground of comfort, for this you see is the way of
the Lords working with his own children; this agrees with the Scripture both in
the precepts and examples thereof: Now all Scripture is written for our
edification and comfort, especially if thy care, 1. was not stinted without
some satisfaction in the point, was not otherwise put off, or choked with the
thornie cares, but like the desire of the newborn babe, as ye heard before.
And, 2. if this care and fray has made thee to eschew all sin, to decline no
duty; O then thou shall not be ashamed, for thou have respect to all his
Commandments. And 3. Does this care of thy salvation, and pleasing of God take
up the chief room of thy thoughts, heart, affections, so that upon this runs
thy care all the day long; and from hence arises thy special contentment or
coffeehouse at night, this again is like Gods children and the model of
Scripture. Herein am I exercised always to keep a good conscience, says the
Apostle; it was his exercise all the day long: thou have set the Lord always
before thee, and therefore thou shall not be moved; this is indeed not only to
seek the kingdom of heaven, and, 2. the righteousness thereof, but even to
fulfill the precept, to wit, Seek first and above all the kingdom of heaven and
the righteousness thereof, this is not only to work, and to work out our
salvation, but even to work it out with fear and trembling, that is, with great
diligence and care, and so to fulfill this precept also. Thus far for comfort.
Now for conviction.

Secondly, 1. But as for the man that is all for this present world, that as
yet took never to heart the salvation of his own soul, and has no care or
solicitude this way, but while the Scripture is bidding him work it out with
fear and trembling, he, I say, never knew what it was to give obedience to this
exhortation, and so cannot be right, especially the Scripture telling him what
reason he has to do it, and to take to heart the matter, telling clearly, that
many are called, but few are chosen; how that strait is the way that leads to
life, and few there be that enter therein: and therefore we are bidden, strive
to enter; how that many shall be deceived; Not every one, that says Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; how that many shall say, We have
preached, cast out devils in thy Name, etc. and yet be disappointed, so that we
had need to see to our selves. If for all this, I say, thou have had few
thoughts, and those not earnest ones of so main, so near, so concerning, so
important a point, thou art clearly lying in security, and not yet awakened,
not quickened from being dead in sins and trespasses.

2. Be thy cares and desires sluggish desires, the public means thou usest
them for respect to men; but as for the private means, where is thy reading of
Gods Word, meditating on it day and night, laying it up in the midst of thy
heart, thy holy conference, thy nightly repentance? etc. thy prayer being but a
mumbled pater noster: if thou do no more, alas, thou usest not the means, and
so can not attain to the end, thou workest not thy salvation, thou seek
not the kingdom of heaven with the righteousness thereof; thou take it not
by violence. In a word, thou walk not in the strait way, but in thy own
easy, lazy, sluggish way; and so assuredly art not in the way that leads to
life and salvation.

3. Be thy desires, and cares, and endeavors not settled but unconstant, I
presuppose thou have done something this way about the righteousness of the
kingdom of heaven, about the working of thy salvation; yet has it been but by
starts, and fits, upon some solemn occasion, as, Communion, Fast, etc. or when
Gods hand was upon thee, the wicked will do that; Thy goodness is like the
morning dew; thou workest, but worksts not out: what thou do is but from an
outward principle; the Lord has not given thee his true fear, to wit, to fear
always; to fear so as never to depart from him: And even afterward to bring
forth the quiet fruits of righteousness. In a word, thou keep not the rule,
and so art not right; thou should serve him in righteousness and holiness,
not for a day, or a time, but all the days of thy life; take heed to this ye
that are so easily broken off from a good course, and from good duties.

Lastly, be not thy cares and desires serious. 1. Wast thou never at that fear,
that care, that wakening, never at that, What shall I do to be saved? did
never work out thy salvation with fear and trembling? Could thou never say,
thou have used violence to the kingdom of heaven? Surely to say no more, thou
art unlike those of, and to whom the Scripture speaks, both in regard of
precept and example; I grant all are not dealt with alike, or after the same
degree or measure: but, I say, if thou have not found it in some measure and
degree. 2. Or if ever thou had any such wakening, see how got, it was stilled
and pacified; gottest thou no satisfaction in the point, wast thou never the
nearer to thy salvation, and yet art stilled and quieted? Sure this was no
serious desire, or care, but has been stilled by the thornie cares or
pleasures of the world, or else has dyed out of its own accord, and so has
not been of the Spirits kindling. 3. Did not, and does not this care and
wakening make thee renounce every known sin, and cleave to every known duty,
but still thou harbourest some sin, and wilt not submit thy neck to the yoke of
some duty or other: O then thy desire, thy care, thy wakening, thy wound has
not been serious, has not been deep enough to bruise out all corruption; thou
shall be ashamed, and disappointed of the Religion thou have, because thou have
not respect unto all Gods Commandments. He that offends in one, is guilty of
all; thou regardest iniquity in thy heart, the Lord will not hear thy prayer;
thou art but counterfeit coin, for thou want the Lords stamp and seal, to
wit, to depart from iniquity, even every iniquity; thou give not all
diligence to make thy calling and Election sure by well doing, even every sort
of well doing: Add to thy faith, virtue, etc. which thou would do were thy
desire and care but serious.

Lastly, be thy thoughts, heart, affections, otherwise taken up all the day
long, and run more upon other things, then upon the plealing of God, the making
of thy own calling and Election sure, the keeping of a good conscience? And
does thy contentment, or coffeehouse, thy grief and joy, peace or
unquietness arise from other grounds at night? Then be sure, some other thing
goes nearer thy heart then God, or Christ, or thy own soul; thy care is not
serious, thou fulfillest not the rule, thou seek not first the kingdom of
heaven, thou art not herein exercised always to keep a good conscience; thou
do not set the Lord always before thee, and so can not conclude, that he
is at thy right hand, and so shall not be moved.

MEANS OF HUMILIATION.
WE have already spoken of the general directions concerning the working of
Gods Spirit in the hearts of his children, how we ought to carry our selves
upon the discovery of the want, or weakness of any grace or work of Gods
Spirit in our souls, to wit, not to give place to despair; but first of all, by
earnest and frequent prayer to have our recourse to God, who gives liberally to
all, and upbraids none, and who has promised not to deny his holy Spirit to
them that ask it. Now although this be a good and main way to obtain what we
want, yet we must not rest here, but, to prayer, must join the use of the
means, or else we shall not speed, pray we never so diligently. The Lord will
have us put to our hand, and therefore commands us work out, etc. And to this
we are commanded even to humble our selves, although it be the work of Gods
Spirit: I tell you that a point very much to be taken heed to, was, that in
using the means, it is not enough to use the means in general, the Word and
the Sacraments, but we should consider the particular means, the fittest and
nearest means to beget or strengthen such a grace; and for want of this, we may
take very great pains in general, and we shall hardly speed: and therefore we
should see how far the work is proceeded in, etc. And as what our wants be, and
where the stop lies, and then to pray, and to use means most diligently, and to
use the particular and nearest means: and therefore I thought it most needful
to lay out the nearest and most particular means of this work of humiliation,
that so we using them, the Lord blessing and concurring by his Spirit, those
who have not found this humiliation at all as yet, may have it wrought in them;
and such of us who have found it in some measure, may get it increased and
strengthened; and so all of us may be taught how to give obedience unto this
exhortation, Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God.

I. The first, and indeed a main mean to work humiliation in us, is, seriously
to miditat^ upon the law, and the threatenings thereof, and to apply them to our
selves in particular, considering withal the truth of him that has pronounced
them. This by the concurrence of Gods Spirit, will be a notable mean, both to
bring us to a right sight of our sins, and to humiliation for them; for, as
the Apostle says, By the Law is the knowledge of sin, it is the glass and
mirror that only can let us see the foul spots of our souls. And again to
consider the threatenings will bring us to humiliation, While I was without the
Law, I lived, but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed: would
you then take a course to get this work of humiliation wrought? First of all
get the clear knowledge of Gods Law, and examine thy self by it, lay the rule
of the Law to thy own heart, and so see how great a transgressour thou art: for
want of this, the most part of men and women live in sin, without knowing that
they sin, and so without either repentance or amendment, which is both
pitiful, and dangerous pitiful, in regard of the Lords holy will: dangerous
to your own souls: all will say, they are great sinners, but I fear they see
not wherein, and so can neither repent, nor amend. O but if thou would apply
the law to thy self, thou would see that thou have bin, and still art, an
exceeding great transgressour. Consider the first Command, and see if thou do
not sin exceedingly against it, if thy heart does not whore and commit
spiritual adultery with the creature, delighting and trusting more in it, then
in the Creator, God blessed for ever? and thou shall find also, that thou
put thy self most frequently in Gods place, making thy self the utmost end
of all thy actions, which how horrible sins they be, I leave to thy self to
judge: Was not this last Herod's fault, whom the Lord destroyed? Consider the
second Command, and thou shall see there be many points of Gods worship that
thou, I fear, do altogether neglect; as that of meditation and conference,
and that all of them, are for the most part superficially, and slightly
discharged by thee, and that thou come within the compass of that curse, Woe
be unto them, that do the work of the Lord negligently. Consider the third
Command, and not to speak of thy frequent profaning of Gods name, see what
either thou have done, or spoken, to the honor of Gods name, notwithstanding
it is the many things that thou wast made for; Look to the 4th. Command, and
see how thou have sanctified the Sabbath in thy thoughts, and discourses, yea
see if thou have not done in this point against thy light, and even refused to
return, and have hated to be reformed; chosen rather to displease the immortal
God, then mortal men; chosen rather to follow thy own will, then the will of
God: and that notwithstanding he has recommended it as a special point of his
will unto thee, and has bidden thee remember to keep it holy.

Consider the fifth Command ye that are superiors, whether ye render to those
that are under you that which is just and equal. And ye that are inferiors, if
ye give your superiors that honor and respect in your hearts that the Lord
requires: and if ye pray unto God for them. Look to the sixth Commandment, and
see whether or no thine heart does not often rise in anger against thy
neighbor, without, or for a very small cause; and thy mouth does not break out
into miscalling of him, yea perhaps in cursing him, which is the very height of
murder. And remember what our Savior says, He that is angry with his brother
without a cause is in danger of the judgment: Or whosoever shall say to his
brother, thou fool, (or any thing as ill as this) is in danger of hell fire.

Consider also the seventh Command, and remember how it also is to be extended
to thy heart, and to thy speeches; and so meets with all thy unclean thoughts,
and unclean speeches. And look how thou have carried, and do carry thy self
in the other points of sobriety, in thy drinking, in thy eating; a point
certainly that many fail in, and few consider; yea, and in thy wearing.
Consider the eight Command, and see if perhaps thou have not wronged thy
neighbor in his goods; but how have thou employed thy own? how will thou clear
thy accounts to him who will take account of the talents he has committed to
thee? have thou not spent much superfluously, and unnecessarily, when the
members of Jesus Christ have been like to starve for want?

Look to the ninth Command, which forbids thee to speak to the disgrace of thy
neighbors name, whether it be true or false that thou speak; for love
should cover imperfections, and we are commanded to do as we would be done to.
And see the propension of thy heart to break this Commandment, nothing so
incident to us, as in our discourses to fall upon our neighbors imperfections,
and to talk of them with delight: a sign we want that love which is the sum
of all. As for the tenth Command, those that see any thing, cannot but see that
body of death.

I have gone briefly through the Commandments, touching only these things that
I think people are most guilty of, so to lead you to the knowledge of sin,
without which there can be no humiliation, no repentance, no amendment; I
beseech you take heed to the particulars, and apply them to your selves, and
pray the Lord more and more to give you the eye salve, and to open your eyes,
that ye may see the wonderful things of the Law, that ye may see what is
displeasing to him, and dangerous to your own souls.

II. Secondly, having thus applied the Law to your selves for the knowledge and
discovery of sin: Then in the second place apply the threatenings and curses of
the Law to your self for your humiliation; and to this end consider the
severitie and greatness of them, the universalitie and extent of them; they
are certainly exceeding great and fearful; they extend to the body, to the
mind, to the temporal and spiritual care of a man, to this life, and to the
life to come; and they are very fearful in all these respects. Consider
chiefly the universalitie of these threatenings in regard of their object, every
one, great and small, young and old, he or she, are liable to the curses of the
Law; we should consider this, for we are exceeding prone to make an exception,
and to bless our selves in our hearts when God curses, and to slip the
choler. But what says the Scripture, Cursed is every one that abides not in
all things, etc. And tribulation and anguish is on every soul that does evil,
etc. We should also consider the truth of him that has pronounced these
threatenings, even God, that cannot lie: Heaven and earth shall pass away, but
not one j^t of his Word shall pass away. Now all this is little enough to move
us, for we are wonderfully given to this, to shift the threatenings of the Law
off from our selves, although we cannot deny that the Lord is true that has
pronounced them, yet indirectly our unbeleeving shifting hearts do it, like
those of whom the Prophet Jeremy speaks, Chap. 5.12. They have bolyed the Lord
(says he) and said this evil shall not come upon us. What else do they, that
walk in their sins, and yet think that the threatenings of the Law shall not
over-take them, but even give the Lord the lie?

And again, although the threatenings and curses of the Law be so general, and
univerfall, as ye may see, Deuteronomy. 29. the Lord fore-sets that there shall be
some (and, alas, would to God that the most part were not so) who, when they
hear the curses of the Law, shall nevertheless bless themselves in their own
hearts, and shall say, I shall have peace though I walk in the imaginations of
my own heart; how many are there of this kind, that ban, and swear, and drink,
and rail, and break the Sabbath securely, and yet nevertheless bless
themselves in their own hearts, and think that no such thing shall overtake
them, all secure sinners are of this sort. O but what says the Lord to such a
soul? The Lord will not spare him, but the anger of the Lord and his jealousy
shall smoke against him; and all the curses of his book, shall come upon him,
and the Lord shall blot out his name under heaven. O that secure finners would
consider this! But what shall I say of the slownesse of men and women to
believe the Lords threatenings, the curses of the Law, they are so senseless and
stupid, that when they see them executed upon others, yea when they feel them
upon themselves, diseases upon their bodies, grief upon their minds, etc. yet
they conceive not, they consider not that it is by virtue of the Lords
threatenings, that this comes upon them, so to humble themselves under the
mighty hand of God. This the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 5. sets down to have been
the senseless condition of the people of his time; Thou have stricken them, but
they have not grieved; thou have confumed them, but they have not received
correction. And he concludes, Surely they are poor, they are foolish, they
know not the ways of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. This is a
lamentable case, and yet a common case, we should pray the Lord to save us from
this senslesnesse. They are happy, that when adversity comes upon them, get
grace from God to acknowledge it to be for their sins, and so humble
themselves, and are not condemned with the wicked world; for so they prevent
the wrath which is to come. But happy were we, if we would believe Gods
threatenings without feeling of them, for then we should prevent afflictions
also; would we judge our selves, we should not be judged, etc.

Now there be two things especially that stand in the way, and hinder the
threatenings of Gods Law from having their due operation upon the hearts of men
and women, and makes men and women to be secure, notwithstanding of the
peremptory threatenings of the Law. And I beseech you take heed unto them, that
ye be not also lulled asleep by them, in such a sort that the trumpet of the
Law, and thundrings cannot awaken you.

1. The first is, that people do not consider duly of the patience and long
suffering of the Lord, and therefore they come to mistake and misdoubt his
justice and the truth of his threatenings, they see no such thing, they have
been living in their sins so long, and never found that things went otherwise
then well with them, no dint of any such threatenings; yea they see others so
also, none living more pleasantly, nor more prosperously, then those who take
very great liberty to themselves to break the Law of God; and this certainly
hardens the heart of many a sinner, as the Scripture bears witness: Because
sentence is not executed against the wicked speedily, therefore the hearts of
the children of men are fully set in them to do evil; because men are not
presently punished, and taken out of hand, as we say, but get leave to go away,
and escape with their sins for a time; therefore both themselves and others
take the greater liberty to sin: and surely we have need to take heed to this,
for we have all a tang of it, were sin but instantly punished, we would stand
more in aw to offend then we do. But this the Apostle meets with exceeding well
and peremptorily, Romans 2. at the beginning: first he lays down a peremptory
conclusion against such persons, Think thou this, O man, that thou shall
escape the judgment of God? No, think thou what thou will, says he, we are
sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against them who commit
such things.

O but, says the other, I feel, I fear no such thing, I have lived long, but
have not found it so, and others have lived out their life, and dyed peaceably,
and have had no bands in their death?

To this he replies two things: the one is, the reason that thou art not dealt
with according to Gods justice, and judgment, and threatenings, is not from thy
deserving, but from the riches and the goodness, long suffering, and patience
of the Lord, waiting upon thy repentance: which if thou despise, when the date
of it is run out, thou shall find the truth of his threatenings, and the debt of
his justice so much the greater. The other thing he replies, is this; although
thou should escape the Lords justice and judgment all thy life time here,
what of that; is there no other place for justice, for judgment, for the
accomplishment of Gods threatenings, then in this life? is not the chief in the
life to come? Alas, thou considerest not (fare it with thee here as it will)
that yet thou art treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, and the
revelation of the just judgment of God.

O that you would consider this now, that ye are not a hairs breadth further
off, or at least the freer from the curses of the Law, that they are not
instantly powered out upon thee, what of that, yet surely as the Lord is true,
they do abide thee: and when the Lord has given a sufficient proof of his
patience toward thee, they shall come upon thee, when thou least expectest, as
pains on a woman in travel, if not in this life, yet in the life to come; and
therefore be not the securer for this, that they are not yet come upon thee, but
if thou will prevent this, humble thy self, under the mighty hand of God. The
other main impediment hindering the Law, with the threatenings of it, to have
the due operations of it, upon the hearts of people, as any may see, is, their
presumption, both in misapplying the Lords mercy, and Christ's merits to
themselves, when as indeed they have no interest in them, and yet this is it,
that makes them secure against all the threatenings, and also mistaking the
manner of obtaining mercy. First then I say they presume and misapply Gods
mercy, and Christ's merits to themselves, this is the thing that makes many a
soul to perish, and therefore I beseech you take heed unto it, they
acknowledge that they are sinners, and that the curses of the Law does belong
to them. O but they believe in the mercy of God, and in the merits of Christ,
in him who has freed them from the curse of the Law, and so they leap over the
threatenings of the Law; O but deceive not thy self, this is the way, that many
perish in; see that thy relying upon Christ, and the mercy of God, be upon good
grounds, and sure warrants, do all believe, that say or think they believe?
come to any almost, will they not say, they believe as well as others? but the
Scripture says, that Many are called, and but few are chosen: it says, that
many are deceived; and why may not thou be deceived among the rest? Indeed
if thou have ever been humbled for thy bypast sins, and so have fled unto
Christ, and striven to rest upon him; If thou have broken off the course of thy
iniquity, and turned thy back upon thy sins, and art endeavoring to repent of
what is past, and to abstain for time to come: if the Spirit of God has made
any work in thy soul, then thou may be bold.

O but if none of these be, no work of the Spirit in thee whereof I was
speaking, have thou not broken off the course of thy iniquities, but still
walk according to the imagination of thy own heart, and yet do bless thy
self, notwithstanding the curses of the Law? Be thou sure, it shall be true
which the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 29. all these curses shall come upon thee. Walk
thou in darkness, that is to say, after the dictates of thy own corrupt heart,
and the courses of the wicked world? do thou, as thou see others do, and
as thy own heart gives thee leave, and take no heed to order thy ways
according to the lantern of Gods Word; for this is to walk in darkness? then
beguil not thy self, this shift will not serve the turn, it will not free thee
from the curse of the Law; Christ, it is true is able to do it, but thou have
nothing to do with him as yet; What says the Apostle, He that says he has
fellowship with him, and walks in darkness, he is a liar, and the truth is not
in him. For these again who deceive themselves by mistaking the manner of
obtaining mercy, they think, that when they have sinned all their life time,
that a God have mercy upon them shall serve their turn, and then think that
they may believe, repent, and get mercy when they will, and for a word: O but
let me tell such, these things are not so easily gotten; and none so far from
getting mercy, as they that presume upon it: yea, did not many of Gods children
find it hard enough all their whole life to get faith, repentance, and mercy,
and will thou come so easily by them, and think to get mercy for a word of
thy mouth?

And finally to end this point (for thy self) suppose that thou were sure of
mercy, and that thou had already obtained mercy; yet thou have need
nevertheless to humble thy self under the mighty hand of God, thereby to
prevent the sharpness of the Lords chastisements, and to be corrected in
measure; thou have need to judge thy self, that thou may not be judged; for
even where the Lord is merciful, he takes vengeance for transgression, he may
well correct in measure, but he will not leave altogether unpunished. Upon
David's first confession it was said to David, Thy sins are forgiven thee: and
yet ye see what he suffered both in regard of spiritual and temporal crosses;
as the 51. Psalm, and the History can bear witness.

This should startle all sinners, and make them to haste out of their sins:
suppose thou get mercy and repentance, which is but a peradventure, yet
nevertheless thou shall find that is an evil, and bitter thing to depart from
the living God; the Lord will have thee to find some dint of his threatenings
both upon thy temporal and spiritual estate. Look what ever pleasure thou
tookest in sinning, the Lord will have thee one way or other to taste as much
bitterness by his chastisements: and therefore that these may be in measure,
we have need to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, and to walk
humbly with our God all the days of our life.

To conclude this point then, which I have insisted on the longer, because it
is a main one: Would ye then attain to the groundwork of humiliation, and obey
this present Exhortation? Then take the threatenings of Gods Law and lay them
before you, and meditate often and seriously upon them, and crave earnestly the
Spirit for that end, apply them to your self, and suffer not your heart to
shift them, and strive to fear the Lords threatenings, and to tremble at his
Word; for our deceitful hearts are very ready to shift them, to make a
covenant with hell, and to put the evil day far from us; they have no will to
hear such harsh tidings; our souls shun this work of humiliation mightily; and
the devil he is very busy to steal out the fear of the Lords threatenings out
of our heart; for he knows that if he obtain that, he has then made sure work.
He did so with our first parents, and prevailed; God threatened they should dye;
the devil said, Ye shall not dye: and he was better believed then God. None of
us but we will condemn our first parents in this, but fares it not even so
with every one of us? The Lord has added this threatening to every one of his
Commands; If thou do this, thou shall surely dye; if thou swear thou shall dye;
if thou whore thou shall dye; if thou lie thou shall dye: and yet we stand not
to commit these things: which thou durst not do, did thou not believe the
devil and thy own heart whispering into thee, that thou shall not dye: thou
beleevest the devil, and belyest God. But I entreat you, beloved, still
believe the threatenings of Gods Word, that so ye may humble your selves under
the mighty hand of God, as did good Josiah when he heard the book of the Law,
and that ye may stand in aw for times to come, and not sin.

II. The second main and chief mean to bring us to humiliation, is, to consider
and meditate upon the Lords judgments set down in Scripture, adding withal the
consideration of Gods unchangeablenes, and how, as the Apostle says, he is not
an accepter of persons, this surely is a notable mean: David says, My heart
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid because of thy judgments. And did
we consider that we are guilty of the like (if not the same or greater) sins,
how would our hearts tremble? There is no sin almost but the Lord has left a
registrate punishment for it in his Word, the more to humble us; seeing that
his bare Law and threatenings without execution would not affect us. How are we
bound to him that teaches us in this manner by others harms: 1 Cor. 10. The
Apostle brings in a number of instances of the Lords severe judgments against
diverse sorts of sinners, against unbeleevers, murmurers, fornicators,
intemperate, lusters, etc. and concludes, saying, Now all these things befell
them for examples, and they are written for our instruction, upon whom the ends
of the world are fallen. The Scripture is full of other examples; and surely
now were not the hardness of our hearts so extremely great, I know not what
could be more effectual (the Lord concurring by his Spirit) to bring us to
humiliation for our bypast sins, and to cause us to stand in aw to sin for
times to come, then a deep and due consideration of the judgments against
sinuers guilty of the like transgressions and sins with our selves. Adding
withal, the consideration of the unchangeablenesse of the Lord God, who dealt
thus with them, and inflicted those judgments upon them; for he being the same
yesterday and to day, and for ever; there being no variableness nor shadow of
turning with him: he being no accepter of persons, especially thy sins being
greater. Then certainly how can the Lord but have the like quarrel with thee,
as with them, as the Apostle says, Think thou, O man, that do the same
things, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? how can thou think it,
unless thou think that thou have not to do with the same God, or that he is
changed from that he was, and that he is not so offended at sin now as he was
of old, or that he is an accepter of persons? all which, or any of which to
say, is very blasphemous.

Was the Lord so offended of old with the infidelity, and with the
impatiencie, and murmuring, and repining of his people, and did he punish it so
severely; and shall thou for thy manifold delinquencies notwithstanding thy
bypast experiences, and thy frequent repining against the Lords will, escape,
unless thou repent it, and humble thy self, and amendi Did the Lord punish so
sharply Nadah and Abihu for profaning his worship, and offering up strange fire
to him, and not sanctifying the Lord when they came before him, and near him?
And does not that same guiltiness lie upon thee, and has not the Lord the
same quarrel with thee, who so often have profaned his worship with hypocrisy
and sloth, drawing near to him with the lips, but thy heart being far from him,
but set upon thy vanities, and doing his work negligently, rushing in before
him without sanctifying thy self when thou drewest near him; yea coming with
thy sins upon thee, and so offering strange fire to him many ways; shall not
the Lord punish thee also? Unless thou humble thy self and amend.

3. Did the Lord so peremptorily punish the man who blasphemed his Name, making
him to be stoned to death; and shall thou who have so often blasphemed the holy
and dreadful Name of the Lord thy God, think that the Lord has no quarrel
against thee? and shall not punish thee? is he now less offended then before?
No: he has told thee, but thou will not believe it, that he will not hold thee
guiltless, thou shall not escape, unless thou humble thy self, and amend.

4. Was the Lord so zealous of keeping his Sabbath, that he caused that man
that gachered some few sticks to be stoned to death? Is there not then great
wrath abiding thee, who so often have profaned his Sabbath, and do so still,
unless thou prevent his wrath by humiliation and amendment?

5. Did the Lord express his anger in such a degree against uncleanness and
fornication, that for it he made 23 thousand of his people to fall in one day
in the wilderness? and have thou not need to hasten and humble thy self for
thy uncleannes, or else the like anger is attending thee?

6. Was he so offended with the Israelites for their lusting and intemperance
in diet, and not being content with the sober diet the Lord had allowed, that
while the meat was in their mouths, the Lords wrath fell upon them? and have
thou not need to be truly humbled for thy manifold over-sights in the point of
diet and temperance, whether in eating or drinking?

7. Was Ananias and Saphira so fearfully punished for their lying? and will thou make but a jest of it? Surely thou would condemn the Lord of cruelty,
thou have need to esteem otherwise of it, to weigh it in the balance of the
sanctuary, and to be humbled under the mighty hand of God for it.

In a word, to conclude this point: Think thou, O man, that do the same
things, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? Is the Lord changeable, or
is he not as greatly offended now as then? or have we to do with another God,
or will he look to thy person more then to others? or are thy sins less then
others? Something thou must think, that thy heart trembles not because of
these judgments; what ever thy thought may be, assure thy self, thou shall
find that they have the advantage of thee; if thou will look either to
preeminencie of persons, or greatness of sins: for the persons, they were a
natural Olive, as the Apostle speaks, and thou art but the wild Olive: And if
he spared not the natural Olive, how little less will he spare thee who art
the wild Olive?

Again, if thou will compare their sins and thine, thou will find thy own to be
greater. For, 1. their sins were against the Law only, but thine are against
the Gospel; and for this consider, Heb. 2. If the Word spoken by Angels, etc.
2. We read for the most part in all their exemplarie punishments, that it was
but for one act of sin only; but which of thy sins have thou not frequently
committed, so that thou have contracted a custom of sinning: This may be
clearly seen, by comparing the particulars before spoken of, with our sinning:
He once brake the Sabbath, once blasphemed, etc. So that it is apparent thy
sins are the greater.

This I speak the rather, because we have all shifting hearts, deceitful above
all things, which are ready to think that the sins of those who were
exemplarily punished, were greater then ours are, and that they had some
extraordinary thing in them, which made the Lord extraordinarily to punish
them, and so their examples work not so effectually upon us; but on the
contrary, ye see our sins are clearly greater; Our Savior saw this corruption
and deceit of our hearts, and therefore he says to the Jews, Think ye that
these upon whom the Tower of Shiloh fell, were greater sinners then the rest;
No says he, they were not, But unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish; So say I to you, think not but thou art as great, yea a greater sinner,
and therefore unles thou repent, thou shall perish, unles thou humble and amend
Thou shall surely die the death; Was not the natural Olive spared, and shall
thou? Was one act of sin so severely punished; and shall thou who have
reiterated many acts of the same kind, pass unpunished, shall they who sinned
against the Law be punished, and thou who neglectest so great a salvation
escape? O but say thou, how comes it to pass then, that the Lord deals
otherways with sinners now a days then of old? for men do as it were get
leave to sin, and pass unpunished. The Apostle gives the reason of this, in
the words I cited before, saying, These things befell them, that they might be
examples to us, upon whom the ends of the world are come. The reason that the
Lord dealt more peremtorily with them, and more exemplarily was, not that their
sins were greater, and ours less, but because they lived as it were in the
beginning of the world, the Lord would make them examples for succeeding ages,
he would let us see in the persons of few, how he is offended with all, guilty
of the like sins; whereas with us living in the ends of the world, when
examples shall be of less use, and when the time of general punishment is at
hand, there is no reason that sinners should be precisely and exemplarily
punished, but yet thou shall be as surely, and as severely punished, yea and
more.

III. A third mean to help to humble us, is, to consider the greatness of
Gods anger against sin, and how odious sin is in his sight, and presence, we
should first lay this ground, that our sins provoke the Lord to anger and
wrath, and then we should consider, how fearful a thing the anger of the Lord
is, for the first, it is clear, I a. 1. They have provoked the holy one of
Israel to anger, the Apostle says, that For these things, the wrath of God
comes upon the children of men, yea every sin does provoke him, and that most
highly to wrath, although not all alike, yet certainly I say every one most
high, or else the punishment of every sin, would not be eternal, and
intolerable torment; but so it is, and therefore every sin, even the least,
provokes the Lord highly to wrath. Now this ground being laid for our
humiliation, we should consider what a fearful thing this wrath, and anger of
God is, that we may be the more humble, seeing we our selves are liable unto
it. The Scripture sets it down most fearfully, using strange and fearful terms,
not only of anger, and wrath, but of indignation, of fury; and putting both in
one, The fury of his indignation, the fierceness of his wrath The wise man
says, that the wrath of a King is like the roaring of a Lion: what then must
be the wrath of the King of kings? for even these kings are advised in Psalm. 2.
to kiss the S^n lest he be angry, and they perish in the way, when his anger
is kindled but a little: how fearful then must his anger be when it is kindled
to the full? The Prophet, Neh. 1. says, Who can stand before his indignation?
And Psalm. 90. Moses says further, Who knows the power of his wrath? When the
children of God who in their wakening of their conscience had but a taste of
that wrath, (for the dregs of it are reserved for the wicked) and who rather
apprehend and fear Gods anger, then feel it, when they say, they would give all
the world, they would suffer what can be devised, to be freed from the
apprehension of that wrath; what must the thing it self be? And therefore we
see how David cries out, Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me
in thy sore displeasure. It Is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God; the Lord is a consuming fire. But because that this point, to wit,
that the Lord is angry and wroth with some, is a point that we can hardly
comprehend what is the reason that we fear so little to commit sin, and are so
slenderly humbled for sin, therefore I will let you see his anger against sin
by the effects of it in some few examples.

1. Must not the Lord be very angry, and highly offended with sin, when for one
sin of our first parents he made whole mankind liable to eternal, and
intolerable torment, the most part of them without recovery; and even upon whom
he has showed mercy, he has ordained them to pass their pilgrimage here in
labor and sorrow: and has made all the creatures subject to vanity; Who knows
the power of his wrath? But this ye may think was against sin committed in
innocence, when there was such ability not to sin.

But secondly, behold afterward the Lords anger against sin how great it must
be; when for sin he who swears he delights not in the death of a sinner, and is
a God full of compassion, did destroy the whole world, the very young sucking
ones, and the dumb creatures, a few only being saved? But ye will say, sin
was here come to a height, and was universal. But I will give you one fearful
instance, of the one particular sin of one man Achan, for stealing the wedge of
gold, how fearfully was he punished, and not he only, (as ye may read in the
History) but his sons and his daughters, his oxen and sheep, and all that he
had was stoned and burnt with fire; a fearful example of the fierceness of
Gods anger against sin, which should make us say as David did: My heart
trembles because of thy judgments. But ye will yet say, this was it is true,
but one sin, but a great one, sacrilege, but the Lord is not, perhaps, so
angry for all that, at every sin. O but consider if he be not, what are these
but outward judgments, has he not also even for the least sin ordained
eternal and intolerable torment? how great then must be the indignation and
abomination of the Lord our God even against the least of our sins, when it
does move so just a God (who surely would not make the punishment greater then
the fault) to adjudge the committer to eternal torment, and intolerable.

O! if this were well weighed by us, we would not be so careless in
preventing, nor so slight in our humiliation, even for, our least sins; we all
fail in this, we are not careful enough to prevent small sins, (so to speak)
nor careful enough to humble our selves for them; we have a cast of idolatry,
we ^ount them venial. O but the least deserves eternal punishment, the least
provokes the Lord to anger, the least cost Jesus Christ his blood; For the
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin: and therefore count not so
little of a sinful thought, or a sinful word; prevent carefully, watch
diligently, be humbled greatly.

And now to conclude this point: would ye see the Lords anger, hatred, and
severitie against sin, yet more clearly; add but this one consideration, to
wit, of his dealing even with his own children, his own darlings, after the
committing of sin, to whom nevertheless he has pardoned the iniquity; how
dealt he with David the man according to his own heart? how with Moses who was
so familiar with him? for one sin deprives him of his greatest worldly
contentment: he wounds them with the wound of an enemy, and chastises them
with the chastisement of a cruel one, as Job says; he makes their beauty to
consume as a moth, night and day his hand is heavy upon them, and he turns
their moisture into the drought of Summer. Now if the Lord for sin deal so with
his own dear children, how will he do with his enemies? if so sharply with
them, to whom he has pardoned the sin, how then with those who are still
guilty? if so to the green tree, how to the dry? If the righteous scarcely be
saved, how shall the unrighteous and sinners be saved?

IIII. A fourth mean or help of humiliation is, to consider seriously of the
justice of God; a point also that we can never sufficiently comprehend: people
apprehend the Lord to be infinitely merciful, and so he is; but for his
Justice they esteem nothing so of it, as if he were not infinitely just also:
every thing in God is infinite, and therefore he being just, must of necessity
be infinite in his Justice; and so his justice, think we of it what we will,
passes our deepest apprehension. Take heed unto this, ye that think the Lord is
all Mercy; the Lords mercy is wonderful great, God forbid it were otherwise,
His mercy (says the Psalmist) reaches to the heavens, and his faithfulness
to the clouds. But does not his justice and judgment reach as far? for what
says the Apostle, O the depth of the riches, etc. and adds the same of his
justice, for he says, His Judgments are past finding out. And as he speaks of
the glory of his mercy upon the vessels of mercy; so he speaks of his wrath,
even the power of his wrath upon the vessels of wrath: so that with whom he
deals in mercy, he is infinitely merciful; and with whom he deals in justice,
he is infinitely just.

And let me say to you, if we will look to the multitude of objects, Justice
has the pre-eminence; I speak this to humble you, and also that ye be not
deceived: for men and women think that Mercy has the upper hand of Justice in
this respect, but many are called, and few are chosen. Indeed Mercy bears it
away in this, that it has the first place, and Justice comes not in till
Mercy be contemned, patience and long-suffering abused, and toward Gods own
it is wonderful; for all their sins may well make him to visit them with the
rods of men, but never to take his tender mercy from them.

But for the point I was speaking of, certainly more shall find the dint of Gods
justice, then ever shall find the benefit of his mercy; which should cause
every one of us in good earnest to see to our selves. The Scripture is very
careful, that the consideration of Gods mercy do not eclipse his justice
from our eyes; and therefore in these two notable places, Exodus 34. and Nahum 1.
which two places speak very gloriously of Gods mercy, yet in both of them are
interwoven these two peremptory speeches of Gods justice: In the one, He will
by no means clear the guilty; in the other, He will not at all acquit the
wicked. Josh. 24.19, 20. when he was stirring up the Israelites to serve and
worship the Lord their God, he was loath that they should mistake the nature of
him whom they undertook to serve, that they should conceive (as people are
ready to do) God to be all good and gracious, and merciful; and therefore he
tells them what a one he is, not denying the former, but putting them in mind of
that which they were ready to forget: what says he, He is an holy God, he is
a jealous G^d; he will not forgive you your sins if ye turn from him; he will
consume you after he has done you good. But it may be alleged, he speaks this
to try them; He does indeed, but he would speak nothing but the truth for that,
and I entreat you therefore think upon the Justice of the Lord, and whereof
before I have been speaking to you, upon the extent of his Justice, both in
regard of time, and of persons: Men do think that Gods justice may be soon
satisfied, and his favor soon obtained, but ye shall see the contrary, in the
iniquity of Peor, we are not cleansed from it even to this day, and that
although there was a plague amongst the people. So Manasseh, a point very
considerable for thy continual humiliation. Moreover, men do scarcely
apprehend that the Lords justice and anger for their sins can reach to
themselves; but ye shall find it has extended to others: one man sinned, and
the Lord was wroth with the whole congregation. If this were considered, as I
told you before, we should take better heed to our selves then we do, and take
better heed to the repressing of sin. Woe is me, says the Prophet, for I dwell
among a people of polluted lips; strange is the contagion of sin. This makes
David to say, that he will take order with his family, No wicked person will I
know, and they that do evil shall depart from me.

V. A fifth mean of humiliation, is a setting our sins in order before our
selves, that is, to have a due and deep weighing of our sins in their
greatness, number, manner, and such other circumstances of aggravation. This
if we do not, the Lord has threatened to do: Psalm. 50. Whereas if we would
judge our selves, the Lord would not judge us.

First then thou should consider the greatness of thy sins, and withal call
to remembrance the ground I laid down before, and did prove to be true, to
wit, that the very least sin, that ever thou committedst does provoke the just
and powerful Lord, the good and gracious God to wrath, and that in so high a
degree, that he has ordained it to be punished with eternal and intolerable
torment; which should be a ground not of a slight and superficial, but of an
exceeding care to prevent even the least sin; and should make us see that our
humiliation, and our godly sorrow even for our smallest sins, be more deep; we
have need of this greatly. But to the point.

Consider now with thy self, if so be the least, even one of the least of thy
sins be yet so great that it deserves eternal, and intolerable torment; and
has provoked the Lord so highly to wrath, and cannot be expiated but by the
blood of the Son of God, for that blood cleanses us from all sin; and there is
no other name or mean under heaven to be saved. O then what must be the
deserving and degree of the punishment of thy great and gross sins, and what
meas^^e of wrath must thou lie under in regard of them? If thy flying and
passing thoughts deserve such a punishment, how then shall thou be punished for
thy entertained, and fostered, and delighted in sinful thoughts of
covetousness, revenge, ambition, uncleanness? etc. If for every idle word
thou must render an account in the day of judgment; what account is then to be
rendered of thy sinful, and so sinful words wherewith thou have blasphemed the
great and dreadful Name of the Lord thy God, and for thy stinking corrupt
communication, unsavourie to a Christian ear, but most abominable to the holy
Lord, who is purity it self, and so cannot but highly abhor such filthiness,
and which is an evident token that the unclean spirit has possession of thy
heart and mouth.

And finally, if thy words and thoughts shall be so punished, consider then
what thy actions will bring upon thee, for then sin is finished: and if the
least of thy sinful actions shall be so severely taken order with; O how
should thou tremble to think upon thy gross trespasses, and grievous
offenses, in thy actions?

2. Consider the number of thy sins, if one sin deserves so much, what will so
many procure? yea even thy great and gross sins, being so many in number, and
so often repeated? Ye heard how severely and exemplarily the Lord punished his
own people, the natural Olive for one act of one kind of sin: and what then
shall thou expect, for so many several kinds of sins, and so may acts of these
kinds? 1. For so often profaning his worship. 2. So often profaning his Name.
3. So often profaning his Sabbath. 4. So many acts of uncleanness. 5. And
which is worse then all this, for so many times and occasions neglecting that
great salvation. And further, by thy bypast great sins, what innumerable,
certainly innumerable sins have escaped thee, yea, and daily do escape thee in
these three respects, to wit, of thoughts, words, and manner of doing.

1. The heart is desperately wicked, and the imaginations thereof are evil
continually; whereby it comes to pass, that out of that foul fountain is
continually streaming out a source of sinful thoughts. 2. The tongue is also
an unruly evil, and it also makes us most frequently to sin against the Lord.
And, 3. Such is the pitiful corruption and pollution of our sinful nature,
that we sin continually in the manner of doing, even our best duties, our best
services are polluted, our righteousness is like a menstruous cloth: so that
we are, in regard of this corruption, as one makes the comparison, very like
the snail, that defiles all the way it passes through, and leaves a slime
behind it: Even so do we in regard of this pollution of our nature, defile all
the footsteps we walk in, there is the slime of sin to be seen in our best
actions; So that in respect of these three, our thoughts, our words, and the
manner of our doing we sin most frequently which is most pitiful. Now since
any of these deserve eternal to^ment: what then do they being all joined
together?

3. Consider the manner of thy sins, for this adds exceedingly to the
greatness of sin, and serves much for aggravation; see if thou have not sinned
against thy knowledge, and if thou have done so, thou art worthy of, and shall
receive double stripes. Know thou, and was it not often told thee, that thou
should keep the Sabbath in thy thoughts and discourses? that thou should
renew thy repentance, that thou should, what ever thy other employments be,
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ? that thou
should apply thy heart unto spiritual wisdom; that thou should not only
hear and read, but go apart, and meditate upon Gods Word, and as occasion
serves, and thy abi^itie shall permit to speak of it? I say, have thou known
these things, and have they been ofttimes told thee, and yet because they were
painful, thou have forborne to do them? O how many stripes may thou look
for? 2. See if thou have not sinned against thy conscience, for this is yet
more then to sin against knowledge, to wit, when not only one knows a thing in
general, but when by his general knowledge of it, his conscience gives him
particular warning to do or to abstain; the Spirit of God prompts him to it,
and yet notwithstanding he goes his own way; this is a most heavy sin, it is a
wounding of the conscience, and a grieving of the Spirit of God; yea, and in a
degree of that which the Apostle says, Hebr. 10. a despighting of the Spirit
of grace. See then if ever thou have sinned this way against the motions of
Gods Spirit, and warnings of thy own conscience; that the Spirit of God and thy
own conscience have suggested unto thee that such a thing was to be done, and
yet thou did it not; or such a thing, not to be done, and yet thou did it:
and certainly if thou have, thou have need greatly to be humbled; this is to
sin stubbornly, and rebelliously. 3. See if thou have sinned out of
presumption, that is to say, presuming upon the Lords mercy; many sin this way,
and conclude with themselves, the Lord is merciful, and easy to be entreated,
ready to forgive; and therefore although I sin, I shall get pardon; yea
although I should sin all my life long, I shall get mercy easily at last: this
is a grievous kind of sinning, and an uncouth way of conclusion, and it is a
dangerous conclusion for thy own soul; for none so ready to refuse mercy, as
those who have thus sinned presuming upon mercy, turning the grace of God unto
wantonness; for what says the Lord? Deuteronomy. 29. If any man hearing the words of
this curse, shall nevertheless bless himself in his own heart, etc. I will
not spare that man, says the Lord; and if ever thou get mercy think on it,
thou shall not find it so easy to be gotten, nor the Lord so easy to be
entreated. Gods children find it hard enough all their life time to get: and
will thou, get mercy for a word of thy mouth, as it were?

And as it is a most dangerous conclusion in regard of thy own soul, so is it a
most ungrateful and unnatural conclusion in regard of the Lord thy God: to
say, that because he is good, and gracious, and merciful, and ready to
forgive thee, that therefore thou will continue to sin against him to provoke
him to wrath: should thou not rather conclude? Is he so gracious indeed?
Alas, that ever I should offend him, I will no more do so by his grace and
assistance; were it not a wicked thing for a man to use another so, to wit, to
abuse his lenity and goodness, and clemency, and kindness; fie upon such a
conclusion. 4. See if thou have sinned scandalously, either by thy sin being an
evil example unto others, and strengthening them in their sins, whereby
certainly thou must not only be accountable for thy own sins, but for others
also. Or else by thy sin have given others occasion to think and speak ill of
thy profession, and so have been a scar-crow to Religion. Or else by thy sin
have made these thou have had to do with to take such a prejudice at thee, that
neither thy words nor thy works can any thing further their edification; there
is no sin more to be taken heed, to then this scandalous sinning, and therefore
be careful against it. And if thou have been guilty of it, humble thy self
greatly for it.

4. Consider the means against which thou have sinned. Now under means I
comprehend both the means of Gods Word, and of his works, whereby he labors to
reclaim us. See then how thou have sinned against his works, and that both
against his benefits and favors, and also against his judgments and
afflictions, whereby he studied to reclaim thee.

And first for the first: Certainly this is no small aggravation of thy sin in
Gods sight that thou have sinned against so many benefits and favors: Thus we
see the Lord by Nathan aggravates David's sin; I took thee from the sheepfold
when thou wast small in thy own eyes, I made thee king over my people, and have
given thee the throne of thy Master, and thus and thus have I done unto thee,
and yet thou have sinned against me. The like catalogue will the Lord present
thee with, unless thou prevent him, and judge thy self; he will say unto thee,
I have bestowed upon thee such gifts, and perfections of body and mind, which
I have denied to others, and such a measure of outward things appertaining to
contentment, as many would think themselves well dealt with if they should have
but the half of these things: I have kept thee from many grievous
inconveniences, which I have inflicted upon others; I have further delivered
thee from many distresses, and carried thee through difficulties; yea I have
done so and so unto thee, made thee eminent in regard of many others, and yet
for all this thou have sinned against me; thou would not for my sake
renounce thy pleasures to resist such a corruption, nor thy ease to discharge
such duties: what a just challenge think thou will this be, how will thy own
conscience subscribe to it, and thy countenance blush at it?

Consider also if thou have not finned against the Lords judgments and
afflictions, which he sent to reclaim thee, and fairly to warn thee, and so
have kicked against the pricks. Isaiah, or the Lord by Isaiah, makes this
aggravation, Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more.
And Jer. 5. Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved: thou have
consumed them, but they have not received correction. This is also a great
aggravation of sin. The Psalmist says, Be not like the horse, or the mule,
which cannot be holden in but by bit and bridle; but this is to be worse then
horse or mule, even us, to be holden in with bit and bridle: Both these
aggravations Ezra puts together, Chap. 9. v. 13, 14 And after all that is come
upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespasses, seeing that thou our
God have punished us less then our iniquities deserve, and have given us such
a deliverance as this: Should we again break thy Commandments, would thou
not be angry with us until thou had consumed us? As if he should say, Shall
we not regard both thy judgments and thy favors? And because some had done
thus, therefore he says, O my God, I am ashamed to lift up my face to thee, O
my God.

Consider moreover how thou have sinned against the means of Gods Word so often
calling upon thee, standing at the door and knocking, stretching out his hands
all the day long, and that thou have sent him away with a refusal. This
neglecting the Lords call, and refusing to hear his Word, and obey it, is a
most fearful sin, and fearfully threatened in Gods Word: Prove. 1.24. Because I
have called, and ye have not heard, and have stretched forth mine hand, and no
man regarded; But ye have set at naught my counsel, and would have none of my
reproof: I also will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes.
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me early,
but shall not find me. There cannot be a more fearful threatening then this,
and yet ye see it is but just and proportionable; which shows the offense to be
exceeding great. And indeed, how great a sin must it be, that the great God
should vouchsafe to speak to us, base creatures, and that thou in the mean time
should not daigne to hear him, or hearing him, refuse to obey him? Now this
thou have done so often as ever thou had the occasion of the Word, and either
slighted to hear, or did not do the thing thou heardst. Thou must not think
that it was a man only that thou did misregard to hear, or to obey, but even
God himself, whose Ambassador he is. O that we would consider this rightly,
that when we hear the Word, it is the great God whom we hear, or whom we
misregard, according to that of the Apostle; that they received the Word, not
as the word of (...), as it is indeed, the Word of the living God.

This would make us truly to acknowledge the greatness of our bypast
offenses, in this point, and for time to come, to hear with greater attention,
and to better purpose: but because this is not sensible enough considered by
us, therefore is it, that we cannot see the greatness of this sin, to wit, to
hear the word of God negligently. This sin is also fearfully threatened, Isa.
6. v. 12.66.4. Ier. 7.13. all which shows that the contempt, yea neglect of
Gods word, is not so small a sin as we apprehend it to be, how then should
thou be humbled, who have been so often guilty of this sin; See we not when
Malefactors are brought to the place of the execution, even for crying sins,
that yet this sin cries louder in their consciences, then all the rest, as is
to be seen by their confessions: further consider, how thou have sinned not
only in general against the light of Gods word, but even in particular
against the Gospel, against the offer of mercy, and have neglected so great a
salvation; Now this makes thy sins to be exceeding sinful, it is fearful to
sin against the very light of nature, as is clear by the testimonies of the
Lords wrath upon Belshazzar, Dan. 5. and upon these, Romans 1. They had but the
very light of nature, and yet because they abused, even but that light, because
when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful,
therefore he gave them over to a reprobate mind; and far more fearful is it
to sin against the light of the written Law, for that was a clearer light; and
so we see the transgressors of the Law were precisely and peremptorily
punished, every transgression received a just recompense of reward: But most
fearful and sinful of all is it, to sin against the most clear light of the
Gospel, and the offer of salvation in it, as is clear out of these two places:
Heb. 2.1. Heb. 10.28, 29. And our Savior says plainly, that it shall be
easier in the day of judgment even for Sodom and Gomorrah, then it shall be
for the neglecters of the Gospel. Consider then how thou have sinned in this
last kind, and so how great thy sins must be; Were the breakers of the Law
severely punished, yea even those who had nothing but the light of nature? O
what deservest thou? what need have thou to be humbled, that have sinned
against the highest light? if by humiliation thou do not prevent it, it shall
be more tolerable for Sodom then for thee.

Now the thing, that makes sins against the Gospel to be so sinful, is this:
because they are against, not only the Lords Commandment, but his most loving
entreaties, and that by his tender mercies, and the precious merits of his Son,
and therefore notwithstanding these, to disobey, and so to despise the offer of
grace, is and must be exceedingly sinful; for it is no less then, as the
Apostle calls it, to neglect so great a salvation, to tread under feet the blood
of Christ, and to count the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing: for by the
Law the Lord commands us indeed so to do, but the tenor of the Gospel is, by
entreating to win obedience out of love: I beseech you by the mercies of God.
Romans 12.1. If a just King should out of Authority command his Subject any
reasonable lawful thing, and he should disobey, certainly his disobedience
were great, and greatly to be punished; But if the Prince laying aside his
Authority, or with his Authority, should request, and allure with benefits,
and yet be neglected, what punishment think thou were that person worthy of?
Now the case is thy own, the Lord thy God has more interest in thee, then all
the kings in the world, and is more worthy to be obeyed then they all; also he
has been commanding thee, and not only so, but requesting, beseeching thee,
and that not by any common favors, but by his tender mercies, and the precious
merits of his Son, and renewing the offer of salvation and remission of thy
sins, to leave such and such sins, and to do such and such duties, but thou
would not: O then how great, and how just shall be thy damnation? is not
this to tread under feet the blood of Christ? O that this were considered: if a
Subject should rebel against his Prince, his punishment should be both just
and great; But if the Prince notwithstanding all that had past, would of his
free grace offer him a free remission and pardon, and entreat him to accept of
it, and no more to continue in his rebellion; and yet nevertheless he should
despise the pardon, and continue in his former rebellion, what punishment can
be devised sufficient for such a one? Just such is the case of such who sin
against the Gospel, the Lord offers freely to pardon all former sins, and
rebellions, whereas justly he might have punished them before: Let the wicked
man forsake his ways, etc. and yet for all this they neglect so great
salvation, they despise the offer of mercy, and sin against the Lords
clemency.

These be our own actual sins, that we ought to humble our selves for; but
there be other sins that we ought in no wise to pass by in our humiliation, to
wit, 1. for our original corruption, that loathsome leprosy, that ugly filthy
corruption, that falling sickness of our sins, the fountain of all our
natural sins, which defiles, not only our actions, but our very persons in
the sight of God; and is so much to be deplored, being a disease incurable in
the inward or noble parts, and is to be lamented above any out-breakings in the
outward parts of the body: we see how David, how Paul bewails it. 2. For that
first sin of our first parents we ought greatly to humble our selves; for this
sin if well weighed, we shall find to be an exceeding great sin, and that it is
our sin, and that the guiltiness belongs to us, is clear out of Romans 5.12.17,
18. 3. For the sins of our predecessors; for so we see did Daniel, Nehemiah,
Ezra, etc. We have sinned and our fathers: and the Lord says, I will visit the
sins of the fathers upon the children. 4. For the sins of the Land we live in:
so David, Psalm. 119. Rivers of tears run down my eyes, because they make void
thy Law. And Ezekiel. 9. they are marked who sigh and cry for the abominations of
the Land.

VI. The last and a notable mean of humiliation is, well to consider the person
against whom thou have sinned, and that both in his greatness, and in his
goodness toward thee. This did David weigh and consider, while he says so
emphatically, Against thee, even against thee have I sinned. And indeed without
weighing this point, we can hardly either be humbled in our selves, or can we
comprehend, or with our hearts acknowledge the justice of God. But seeing and
considering this point, to wit, against whom we have sinned, our conscience
will then exceedingly both condemn our selves, and justify the Lord in his
justice.

There is nothing that does aggravate an offense more then does the quality of
the person against whom it is committed; that which being done by a man against
an ordinary person, one of his neighbors, would be but an ordinary offense;
yet if he should do it to his father, it would turn to a heinous crime; and if
it were done to his Prince, it would be high treason, deserving and procuring
the utmost degree of punishment that could be devised; how great then must be
the offense, and what shall be the punishment of that offense which is
committed against the great God, and Sovereign Lord of all the earth, the King
of kings, who is able to cast both soul and body into hell fire? But especially,
I would have thee to consider the goodness of God, that so thou may see the
foulness and ingratitude of thy sinning against him, and so may justify
the Lord in his justice. If a man should go and wrong or offend his father that
begat him, and gave him his life; or one that at any time had preserved his
life; or one that had bestowed some great favor upon him, and had been
beneficial to him, we would abhor such a man for the foulnes, the
unnaturalness, the ingratitude of his offense; But what is this to the offense
of the Lord our God? he is our Father indeed, and the Father, not only of our
bodies, but, as he is called, of our spirits; it is he, that has made us, and
not we our selves; He has preserved our life, not once, but many times, yea
always; In him we live, we move, we have our being. And finally, he has
bestowed upon us favors innumerable, is so beneficial, that he loads us daily
with his benefits: what vile ingratitude then must it be to fin against him? I
pray thee, how mighty, and withal how just a challenge shall it be, when the
Lord shall accuse thee in these terms, I did make thee, who might have denied
thee a being, and I made thee according to my own Image; whereas I might have
made thee a beast, or a senseless creature; and I made thee, and brought thee
into the world, with all the perfections of thy body and mind, and have
continued them with thee; this I have not done unto many others; I have
preserved thee from innumerable inconveniences, which befell unto others by day
and by night; I loaded thee with benefits, which I denied to others; thou never
enjoyedst any thing useful or profitable, whereof I was not the bestower; I
made the rest of my creatures serve thee, my Angels guard thee, my own Son
redeem thee; for all this, what did I require, but that such things thou
should do, and such and such things thou should not do; earnestly I
besought thee to obey as a matter of eternal concernment to thy self, and of
high displeasure to me, and yet thou tookest not the matter to heart, thou
would not obey, do thou thus requite me, O foolish person, and unkind? how
can thy own conscience but concur with the Lord, and say, Thou art just when
thou judge?

MARKS THAT ACCOMPANY FAITH.
Q. What be the Marks that accompany faith, or are taken from the concomitants
of Faith?

A. I. They be these three especially, the first is this: true Faith leans to
the means, and is grounded upon them, even upon the Word of God, and in
special upon the promises of forgiveness of sins; the new and everlasting
Covenant, the passages of Gods merciful nature, Christ's readiness to receive
sinners, the oath, that ground of strong consolation, and such like grounds and
means of confidence laid down in the Word, it is begotten and bred by these at
first; it is fed, cherished and strengthened by these. And lastly, it is
defended by these against all assaults, doubtings, and tentations of the soul;
so that the Word, and these things in the Word, be the seed, the food, the
fortress, or refuge of faith, whereunto it retyres; so that faith altogether
stands by the Word: Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God: Romans
10.27. So then, would thou know whether thy faith be of the right stamp, or
no: 1. Was thy faith at first begotten by the Word, and the foresaid means
either heard, read, or meditated upon? 2. Do thou find thy faith to be
strengthened, cherished, and cheered by using the same means; so that upon your
diligent using and feeding upon them, you find your faith more lively and
strong: and again, upon your neglect of the means, you find it more dead, weak,
and remiss? this is very considerable. And, 3. when your faith is put to it,
and assaulted, does it and thy heart fly to the foresaid means and passages of
Gods Word? all this evidences thy faith to be of the right stamp. And
especially if thou know the very particular passages and clauses of the Word
which did first beget faith in thee, which strengthen thee in thy weakness,
and whereunto thy faith retyres in time of assaults, (for this Gods children
do) but on the contrary, 1. know thou not, rememberst thou not, how or by
what means thy faith was begotten? 2. Find thou thy faith all alike when
thou usest the means, and when thou usest them not, or never usest any at all?
And 3. if thou should be put to it, have thou no other warrant for thy faith,
but thy own fantasy, apprehension, or imagination, that sandy foundation,
but do want a particular warrant from Gods Word? then be sure thy faith is
but counterfeit, it cannot be well come, that we cannot tell how it is come.
And it is strange for a man to conceit, that he shall have such a thing for
such a man, and yet has never had his word, nor hand for it: So is it with the
point in hand. Thus ye see the first Mark, true Faith always leans to, and
holds by the Means; whereas Presumption neglects the Means.

Q. Let me have another of these Marks.

II. A. Another is this: true Faith is accompanied with frequent doubtings;
whereas Presumption never doubts.

Q. How prove you this Mark, and how is the truth of it evidenced and cleared?

A. Thus: if faith be true, then sure the devil envies so precious a pearl,
and is evermore casting his fiery darts at it, so to rob us of it, or at least
to impede our comfort: Whereas on the other side, if it be but presumption, he
knows it will not do the turn, he lets it alone; When the strong man holds the
house, all things are at peace. Secondly, the Lord will have his own exercised;
will a man plant a vineyard, and not eat the fruit thereof? The application is
easy. Art thou, or have thou been subject to doubting? this is a token thy
faith is true, and otherwise Satan would not trouble it: but certainly have
thou never doubted, thou have never believed.

III. A third Mark is, whereas Faith or believing is A receiving of Christ,
Joh. 1. To so many as received him, etc. even to those who believes in his
Name. True faith receives Christ rightly upon the terms that he offers himself,
that is, as it casts over upon Christ the burden of it is sins, so it is
content to take up the easy yoke of his obedience, in doing or suffering; to
take up the cross and follow him: for these be the terms whereon Christ
offers himself. Matthew. 11. Now presumption makes terms of it is own, thinks to
have Christ to take the burden of their sins, but never thinks upon the taking
on the yoke of his obedience. The application here also is very easy.

Have thou with thy cleaving to Christ for the remission of thy sins, resolved
to take on also the yoke of his obedience, in doing and suffering, and do
thou it, in fighting against thy most pleasant sins, and cleaving to the
hardest duties, with denying thy self; then be sure thou have rightly received
Christ, and consequently rightly believed; thou have made him thy Lord, and he
shall be thy Savior: thou have made him thy King, and he shall be thy Priest;
thou make conscience of the precepts of the Word, and therefore thou have
interest, and shall have thy comfort in the promises. But on the contrary,
thou, who ever thou be, who think that thou beleevest in Christ, and in the
mean time live as thou please, following the broad and easy way of thy own
heart, and the customs of an evil world, and not the strait way of Christ's
obedience; thy faith is but presumption: Go seek true faith, seek it earnestly,
and thou shall find it; but it will not be easily gotten: how thankful should
they be, who have found the way unto it?

Q. Which be the Marks that follow faith?

A. Sundry. Though the Spirit of God insists upon two especially, to wit, the
love of the brethren, and obedience unto Gods Commandments. 1. Then, obedience
unto Gods Commandments is set down most frequently in Scripture for a mark of
faith and regeneration: this is the Lords seal, to depart from iniquity, says
Paul; Show me thy faith by thy works, says James. And our Savior, He that
has my Commandments, and keeps them, etc. And in John's first Epistle, it is
often inculcated, Chap. 1. If we walk in darkness, and say we have fellowship
with him, we lie, and do not the truth. But if we walk in the light, as he is
in the light, then we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all sin. Now what is it to walk in the light, but to
walk according to the rule of Gods Word, which the Scripture calls a lantern to
our paths, and this is to obey Gods Commandments: So Chap. 2. Hereby we know
that we know him, if we keep his Commandments.

Obj. But the natural man, the hypocrite, will go far in the point of
obedience, and every one has some measure of obedience.

A. This is true, and therefore we must be careful to see the soundness and
rightnesse of our obedience by these Marks, which are not to be found in the
natural man's obedience. 1. He whose obedience is sound, makes conscience of
secret sins, and secret duties, betwixt God and him, as well as of public
sins, and of public duties; he is as loath to intertain a sinful thought in
his heart, as to commit a sinful deed before the eyes of the world; is as well
careful to discharge those duties which are to be done secretly in his closet
between his God and his own soul; as of the public which are to be done in the
Church: this is a token of the true fear of God, and of true respect to him. 2.
He whose obedience is sound, makes conscience of small sins, (I mean that are
small in the eyes of the world) as of great; for he knows every sin highly
offends God, and deserves eternal damnation: he knows he who said, Thou shall
not kill, he said also, Thou shall not swear; whereas the unsound obeyer, uses
to weigh sin in the balance of man's estimation, and not in the balance of the
Sanctuary; from whence it is, that he makes small account of many sins, as of a
small ordinary oath, to speak corrupt communication, to let it slip in
merriment, to lie for recreation, etc. this is not to walk according to that
rule, Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently. 3. A sound obeyer
makes conscience of Gods Commands, even those which most controuls his profit,
pleasure, or credit. But the unsound obeyer he will with Herod, do many things;
but when the duty comes once to cross, control, or be in competition with any
of these, there he sticks, namely, if it come in competition with that of
these, that is his god, his idol, which he most looks to; How few sanctify
the Sabbath as it ought, or takes pains in private exercises of devotion? why,
these controull their pleasure, and laziness: How few are charitable? why,
this controuls their profit. How few will suffer or sit down with a wrong
without repaying, though the Scripture be most express? O this touches them in
their great Idol their Credit. And for this same reason, how many decline good
duties, not making their light shine before men? He that is ashamed of me
before men, etc. all this is against the rule, Then shall I not be ashamed when
I have respect to all thy Commandments.

4. He whose obedience is sound, makes conscience not only of the doing of a
duty, but also of the manner of the doing of it; and is humbled for his
failings in the manner, as well as for the omission. But the hypocrite so he do
the duty, he regards not the manner, he cares not for it; so he pray, hear,
read, he rests there, but cares not to do all these, with that reverence,
cheerfulness, diligence, humility, sincerity which the Lord requires in the
discharge of his worship; he remembers not the rule, The ways of a man seem
good in his own eyes, but the Lord pondereth the heart. But especially in the
manner of our obedience we should look to the motive and end of our obedience,
to that which puts us on to do it, and which we set before our eyes, that it be
not a wrong motive, but the fear of God, yea the love of God; and the end, to
please God, and not our selves, or others: But of this hereafter.

A second Mark of Faith, is, the love of Gods Children. By this we know that we
are translated from death to life, if we love the brethren. And if it be a
real love, hereby we assure our selves before him; David says, all his
delight was this way; this is a Mark which has upholden many when they have
been at a very low ebb, and when other Marks have not been sensible to them;
those who are truly renewed, they have this wrought in their hearts by Gods
Spirit, a secret disposition to love goodness, and those who are good, an
evident token they are in some measure so themselves, for like, loves like, so
they love those who are holy, and the more holy they love them, the better they
love them; yea they more account of a spark of holiness, then all other
natural accomplishments. Whereas the wicked, though they may carry a fair show
to the godly, yet indeed they hate them, they are thorns in their eyes. Now
this Mark should be rightly considered, lest any that have not interest should
deceive themselves, and lay hold of it. One may love some good men, because
they have been some way obliged to them; but see, if thou love all goodness,
and all good men, yea those whom thou never knew, but by report.

2. One may love good men, because of their natural and moral endowments, as
kindness, courtesy, wisdom, affability, etc. but look if thou love them for
their piety, and holiness; look if thou love holiness where it wants there
natural and moral indowments and recommendations; if thou love not only a
wise good man, but even also a simple good man, not only a good man of some
place and reputation in the world, but even also a mean good man, and the like:
yea look if thou love holiness, and goodness not only when, and where it
is without the advantage of natural accomplishments, but even also where it
has great disadvantages in regard of these, as when a man wants that measure
of natural wisdom that is requisite perhaps to have, through the weakness of
his mind; and wants that measure of affability and amiablenesse that were
requisite through the natural temper of his body: look, I say, if in such a
case thou love his goodness, piety, and holiness, and not take prejudice
against it, but art such a one, who do love and honor them that fear the
Lord: this Mark in the Psalm is set down somewhat differently; we must try our
selves by this. It Is true, great men must have the outward respect, their place
speaks honor to whom honor; but for the inward respect of the heart we should
see, whether greatness or goodness carries it away. Certainly those who have
gotten their judgments rectified and renewed, to discern things that differ,
or have their hearts set upon the pursuit of grace, will esteem more of it
where it is, then of all the greatness in the world.

A third Mark is this: faith purifieth the heart, which may carry with it a
double meaning, to wit, either this, that whereas the hipocrite looks only to
the outward man, but not to the hidden man of the heart, true faith it does far
otherways; for knowing, that it has to do with the alseeing God, the tryer of
the heart, and the searcher of the reins, he strives to keep clean his heart,
and to take heed to the thoughts of his heart, as well as to his outward
actions; every one that has this hope, purifieth himself.

But, secondly, This is not all, faith purifieth the heart, that is, makes a
man not only make conscience of the thoughts and disposition of his heart to
purify them, but even also helps him to purify it, and purge it from the
several corruptions, of it, for through faith we get victory over al
corruptions, this is our victory, even our faith, and by it we draw virtue from
Christ to cure our corruptions, so that faith by little, and little, purges
the heart throughout.

Obj. O then I cannot have faith, for I find my heart swarming with wicked,
and impure thoughts, many great and gross corruptions, and some of them very
strong and indeed predominant?

A. 1. That thy heart, as thou think, is so full of corruptions, is not that
thy heart is more impure then others, but that thou have a cleerer light, and
better sight of the corruption of thy own heart, then others have; thy heart
was once more unclean when thou saw it not' to be so; now when thou see
these small moats, it is a token the Sun of righteousness has shined upon
thee.

2. That faith purifies the heart, must be rightly understood, for the meaning
is not, that faith does altogether purge, and free the heart from sin, who can
say his heart is clean? but this faith puts a clean purifying disposition into
the heart so that it either resists it, or rejects sin, or works it out,
although there be much of the filthiness of sin, yet it still fights against it,
gainstanding it, working it out, even as clean liquor does every unclean thing,
honey for example, or as oil will be uppermost, or as wine above the dregs,
when faith is in the heart, the heart will not harbor sin, thus it is said, If
I regard iniquity in my heart, if there be never so much sinfulness in the
heart, yet if thou would be quit of it: dislike it, loath it, cry against
it, judge thy self for it: thou have reason indeed to sorrow for it, but not to
despair or be discouraged; yea rather get more faith, that thou may get a
further victory and purification.

And, thirdly, For that predominant corruption, that thou can not get ridd
of, but in all thy doings it cleaves unto thee, pollutes thy best services,
this should not discourage thee: for, 1. This is the case of Gods children,
they have sin that hangs fast on them, yea even Paul says, When I would do
good, evil is present with me, and cries out against the body of death. And 2.
But if thou fall out with, and loath thy sin, if thou regard it not, if thou
judge thy self for it, fear not, thou shall not be judged for it: if thou cry
to God against it, thou shall not be found guilty no more then the woman under
the Law; it is not thou, but sin that dwells in thee. If thou think it
strange that the Lord should exercise thee with such strong corruptions, so
displeasing to himself, he does it for good ends.

1. To cure a more dangerous corruption, to bring thee out of conceit of thy
own righteousness, to chase thee to his Christ for expiation, and to the holy
Ghost for mortification of corruption, to exercise thee in prayer, and in thy
Christian warfare, were it not for this, we would not so often, and so fully,
feel the necessity, and sweetness of Christ's sufferings, intercession, and
righteousness; we would not make so much of the sanctifying, subduing power of
the holy Ghost, nor have so often recourse unto it, where would be the exercise
of our faith and patience, about the performance of the promise of
sanctification? what would stir us up to fervent and sincere prayer, where
should be the matter of our Christian warfare?

Obj. I do not find the hatred and loathing of sin, and this does puzzle me in
this point, I find indeed, that I do not entertain it, but I think it to be
more out of fear of punishment, then out of hatred of sin.

A. Does not thy heart rise against sin, even in others, to whose sin thou art
not accessarie, which cannot flow from fear, but from hatred? yea, do thou
not hate those who are profain, and wicked, although they have other
recommending and insinuating parts? as on the contrary, thou love those who
are good, and holy? say not then that thou art altogether void of this point of
the hatred of sin; further, though we find not all that we would have, yet
should not we fail to be both thankful and encouraged, in regard of the
things that we find, the Lord gives us to find many things, that we may be
exercised in thankfulness, and to miss some things that we may be exercised
in prayer, pray then that the Lord more and more, would make thee partaker of
his divine nature, and of his holiness, that so the hatred of sin may grow
more and more sensible in you, for he is of purer eyes then that he can behold
iniquity, Hab. 1.13. He loves righteousness, and hates wickedness; Psa.
55.7.

A fourth Mark, faith works by love: Wherefore observe two things of faith.
1. That it works, it is operative, and not idle, it brings with it a
spiritual life unto the soul of man, and this spiritual life brings out
spiritual operations; when faith is put in the heart of a man, there is a
stirring disposition put in his heart also, he is not his own man, in his own
element, finds not quietness in his mind, unless he be sometimes working, and
well employed: Faith ever works toward God (I mean, immediately, for all our
works are to him as to our last end) in being about the points of his worship,
in obeying his acceptable will, in glorifying his Name, advancing his kingdom,
seeing to the doing of his will by others, so far as opportunity and our
callings permit. Sometimes toward our selves in that great work of our
salvation: Sometimes toward our Neighbors in the works of charity, yea of
spiritual charity, so necessary, and so often recommended, Exhort, instruct,
edify, comfort, admonish one another, and yet neglected, much want of
compassion to the poor soul; So their faith is ever working, which clearly
cuts off those who please themselves, that they abstain from ill, yea from some
few gross ills, that they are no thieves, murderers, adulterers, etc.
although they never do a good deed, not remembering the doom of the unfruitful
tree, and unprofitable servants.

But secondly, as it works, so it works by love: there is much working upon
wrong motives, which is all lost labor, like building without a foundation;
there is nothing we should look more unto then this, what is the motive of our
obedience, for it is the thing the Lord looks most unto; He pondereth the
heart: yea, does not man so also, if he can know it? Now the motive most
acceptable to God, the disposition and affection of the heart which he
requires, which is here a Mark of Faith, is the motive of love; the Lord cares
not a whit for our obedience if it come not from love, yea he reckons it not
for obedience; therefore Love is the sum of the Law, it fulfils the Law; it
is the end of the Law, Even love out of a pu^^ heart, etc. He shows mercy unto
thousands of them that love him, and keep his Commandments. If I give my body
to be burnt, and bestow all my goods upon the poor, without love, it profits
nothing. Love is the soul, the salt of all obedience; and without it it is but
a dead unsavory carcass. Hence is it, that the Lord does begin his Law (the
sum of all our obedience) with the remembrance and the rehearsal of a main
temporal favor and deliverance, typifying a far greater, even that great
salvation which shows that he would have the obedience rendered unto his
Commandments to flow from love. This is also the way of the Gospel, even the
way of love, and the commands thereof are rather requests then commands. I
beseech you by the mercies of God, Romans 12.1. We beseech you, exhort you by the
Lord Jesus, etc. and in sundry other places; So that the Gospel does require a
lovely obedience, and would draw us by the cords of love. And this certainly
makes our obligation of obedience the greater, and our guiltines the greater if
we obey not: If one who may command, will yet entreat, the disobedience is so
much the fouler, and more odious. And this is indeed to sin against the Gospel,
and to neglect that great salvation, to wit, when we are entreated and besought
by him who has all power and right to command us, and that not by common
favors, but by the mercies of God, and sufferings of Christ, and yet refuse to
obey. But to the point.

Would thou then render an acceptable obedience, let the sense of the Lords
great, and many temporal and spiritual favors and deliverances, be ever
fresh and firm in thy mind, but especially the sense of that great
deliverance, that great salvation so dearly purchased, that these may stir up
thy love, and love may be the motive of thy obedience; And by reason that love
flows from faith, above all labor to hold thy faith stirring, and in action.
Thus did David, Psalm. 26. Thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes, and I
have walked in thy truth. Thus does Paul: The love of Christ constrains me:
to this end, be earnest with the Lord, that according to his promise, he would
circumcise thy heart, and cause thee to love him with the whole heart, that by
the holy Ghost his love may be shed abroad in thy soul. Romans 5. that he would
give unto thee to be rooted and grounded in love. Ephesians. 3.

Obj. I find not my self right in this point, for I find not this love and
cheerfulness, but rather do, because I dare not do otherwise.

A. This Mark indeed should be wisely considered by weak Christians, who are in
their beginning especially, or under tentation, desertion, affliction. Nor is
it a sensible Mark for all Christians at all times; but a mark of Faith
somewhat strengthened, when the heart is beset with tentations, desertion, or
affliction. This working by love will not be sensible, although it be secret:
further, especially in the beginnings of Christianity, it is not sensible; for
the understanding whereof, consider, that there is three sorts of motives of
obedience.

1. One altogether wrong, having no eye to God; So to eschew the ill opinion of
man, many do sundry good duties, and become neighbor like in outward duties
of outward obedience: Others to win the praise of man, will go beyond their
neighbors; yea possibly beyond good Christians. There be sundry other
by-respects, and many by-roads in the hearts of natural men and hypocrites.

The second sort of Motives is that which is in the hearts of beginning
Christians, which is not altogether right, and yet some way right, as
introductorie to right, as having an eye to God, and as joined with some weak
faith, and some insensible love; this is the Motive of fear flowing from the
spirit of bondage, which having taken a deep impression in them, and their
faith being but weak and staggering, as yet prevails with them, and is the most
sensible motive that puts them on; they do, because they dare not do otherwise,
because they fear Gods justice, and have a wakening in their own conscience.
And yet this is not altogether wrong, for the respects aforesaid. For why does
the Lord denounce so many threatenings and judgments but for this, and that all
these should have their own place with us? yea, why is our obedience so often
wakened up by rods, crosses and afflictions, if this sort of fear were
altogether wrong? But as faith and love grows strong, by little and little they
cast out fear: And so comes the third Motive, even that acceptable motive of
love. This is that which St. John 1.4. v. 18. has, P^^fect love casts out
fear: and again, He that fears, is not made perfect in love. So that to work
out of fear does not argue no love, and so no faith, but only that thou art
not made perfect in love, because of the weakness of thy faith: Labor then to
strengthen thy faith, that it may have more love, for it flows from faith, and
is according to the measure of thy faith, grows as faith grows, and do not give
place to that main policy of Satan, and ordinary and incident weakness of
many Christians, to darken thy faith, because thou find thy love weak. But
as for thee, that either workest not at all, or if thou do any thing, it
arises from wrong motives and ends, from custom, and not from conscience; to
please men, and not to please God; neither fear him, nor love him; thou
have no faith, and so art in a miserable condition.

A fifth Mark and effect of Faith, is spiritual peace and joy; for peace,
being justified by faith, We have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
For joy; In whom believing we rejoice with joy unspeakable, and glorious. And
both together, Romans 15.13. Now the God of hope fill you with j^y and peace in
believing.

Q. But has not the wicked and the natural man peace?

A. True, but it is far unlike the peace of the believer, and of the godly, and
may be discerned by sundry Marks; but clearly and plainly by these two. 1. The
peace of the believer is after great unquietness and trouble, and much hard
war (as we say) ere he get unto it, as we see in Paul, the Jailer, the Converts
in the Acts, and these sayings, Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden.
The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick. Thus fares it with
many, yea in all there must be something of this kind, else this peace, and
Christ the Prince of peace, and purchaser of this peace, could never be either
sufficiently sought to, or prized. But the natural man's peace has been a
continual peace, a token that the strong man is not yet cast out: for he will
not be cast out, without some sensible unquietness; a token that the New birth
has not been, for it will not be without some pain.

Q. But may not even a natural man have a touch of conscience, and afterward
fall into security, instead of a true peace?

A. He may: and therefore a man should look how his peace has been purchased,
how he carried himself in the time of his unquietness, if he betook him to
wrong means, and by them did strive to smother and drive away his unquietness;
and not to the right means of the Word, and Prayer, to cure his unquietness,
and wounded conscience: then certainly his peace is not a right peace, he has
but smothered the fire which will afterward break out more violently; he has
but skinned over the wound, which will afterward break forth more fearfully.

But on the other side, if a man in the time of his wounding and wakening has
not striven to drive away his humiliation, but rather to entertain and increase
it, in so much as he did conceive it to be a wholesome work of Gods Spirit, and
did not tend to infidelity and desperation, and did labor to cure it by the
right means, and did come by it by the Lords means, this is a safe and a well
grounded peace.

But moreover, for the further clearing of this point, take in the other
difference between the natural man's peace, and the believers peace. The
natural man as he has always peace, so he has altogether and in all
respects peace. But the believer is not so, he has peace with God, but not
with the devil; peace in regard of the guiltiness of sin (I mean in regard of
the main battle, but wants not skirmishes which the wicked have not, for he
has a tender and so a combating conscience) but has not peace in regard of
the corruption of sin; for the flesh warreth against the Spirit, he has a
continual Christian warfare. The natural man wants all this, and has peace
in all these respects. As peace, so joy is the effect of Faith; not a worldly
joy arising from the abundance of corn, and oil, or considerations of that
kind; but a spiritual joy, a joy that cannot be taken from him: Rejoice not in
this, but rather rejoice that your names are written in the book of life; a
rejoicing that he is in favor with God in the light of his countenance. There
is a joy of sanctification arising in the heart after the victory of
corruption, or the spiritual and lively discharge of a duty; And there is a
joy of justification, which is, when we find nothing in our selves but
corruption and unrighteousness; and in regard of these great failings,
nevertheless that we have nothing but matter of sorrow in our selves, we rest,
repose, rejoice in the sufferings of Christ, believing in him who justifies the
ungodly; Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through Jesus Christ.
Thus we glorify Christ. It is the fault of many Christians that they are not
as much affected with this joy, as with that of sanctification; but we are
never right, but when we feel something in our selves. Surely it is a matter of
great repentance, and of godly sorrow for the offense of God, when we are not
right in our selves; But for the point of Faith, although we be destitute of
the joy of sanctification, yet should we not cast away the joy of justification
also, but trust in him who justifies the ungodly.

There be joys that occur in the particular actions of a man's life. There is a
spiritual joy arising from a man's case in general, which he retains often times
when he is deprived of particular spiritual joys; for a man upon his
particular failings is not always bewilded in the point of his justification,
and being in the favor of God in general; Rejoice in this, that your names
are written in the book of life: to see a man by the means of faith, by the
evidences of faith, by the testimony of Gods Spirit bearing witness to his
spirit that he is the son of God, that he is in favor with God. This
spiritual joy, especially the last joy concerning his case be the joy of
believers, and Marks of true Faith. The matter of his joy and sorrow does not
chiefly and principally arise from worldly respects, as the natural man's joy
and sorrow does; but from the aforesaid respects: when night is come, and a
view of the day is taken, the matter of his joy is according as he has found
the Spirit of sanctification keeping him from tentation and sin, or
strengthening him to the discharge of any good duty; Or if there have been
failings this way, according as he finds a relying and resting upon the
righteousness of Christ for remission and reconciliation, and acceptance.
Moreover, his joy is from his spiritual case and estate, if this be clouded,
all the contentments in the world will not make him to rejoice. And again, if
this be made sure, and he sensible of that surenesse, he cares the less how it
fares with his outward estate, he can glory in tribulation, rejoicing in the
hope of the glory of God. See then if thou have these spiritual rejoycings,
and having them, conclude thou have Faith.

Obj. If this be a token of true Faith, I have need to fear, for I find not
there rejoycings, specially that joy unspeakable and glorious, I am far from it.

A. 1. Yet if this be the axtree of your affections about which they roll, that
you fetch your joy and sorrow from spiritual things especially, it is a good
thing, when you conceive any good hope rejoicing, and when otherwise sorrowing;
this is a taking of the matter to heart. 2. The temper of the body it may be
melancholic; and for the temper of the mind, it may be yet somewhat under the
spirit of bondage. 3. This of rejoicing is a Mark of a strong, of a triumphing,
of a victorious Faith not to be always expected (as we said of love) in
beginners whose faith is weak, and are ever weakening their own faith, through
Satan's subtlety, the tree of faith in some measure must have ceased from
shogging, before it can bear this fruit of Joy; it may be well rooted not in
the time of tentation, desertion, and weighty affliction. 4. The mind of man
is narrow, namely, when it comes to spiritual things, it cannot contain many
things at once, specially in weak Christians; before one impression be wrought,
another vanishes, when the impression of humiliation is wrought, and one goes
on to get the impression of faith, the other vanishes; but let the sense of
humiliation, and of the wages of sin, and then the impression and act of faith
be both together in the soul and mind of a man; this third act of joy will not
but follow in some measure even according to the measure of the two former
acts. If one shall at one time be persuaded of his deliverie, and withal see
and be sensible of the greatness of the danger, and punishment from the which
he is delivered, how can he but rejoice? Get then these two acts, senses,
impressions of humiliation and faith, and thou shall not fail to rejoice: but
if thou fail in any of these, thy joy will abate accordingly. 5. For that joy
unspeakable and glorious, which seems to be some special and peculiar
manifestation. These be the Lords delicates, reserved as cordials to be given
to his children in great temporal straits, especially if they be suffering for
the Name of Christ.

Appl. But if thou be one of those who never had yet any unquietness, and have
not found the pains of the spiritual birth (which is not in all alike, no more
then the natural: some come off with more ease then others, going presently to
their work, as Lydia, and the Jailer) or if ever thou had any unquietness,
yet did not betake thee to the right means of a true peace; or have thou not
a daily Christian warfare with the remnants of sin; or know thou not what
spiritual joy or sorrow means, but have thy affections taken up another way,
thou have not true faith at all.

This last Mark of faith is from the carriage of it in time of adversity, it
makes no haste, betaketh not it self to despair, or utter discouragement, with
Saul and Jehoram, or to any unlawful shifts; but with some measure of
confidence and hope, of quietness and patience, it waits upon God according to
that, It is good for a man both to hope, and quietly to wait for the salvation
of the Lord: this is a notable mark and proof of faith.

The goodness of gold is best tried by the fire and furnace; and even so is
faith, whether it be upright or no, fained or unfeigned, by the fiery trial of
affliction; according to that, 1 Pet. 1. That the trial of your faith may be
much more precious then of gold that perishes, though it be tried with the
fire, may be found to praise, and honor, and glory. The sufficiency of an
Anchor is only known in a storm, if it hold out in a great tempest; Even so is
the sufficiency of the anchor of hope, which flows from faith, only best known
by it is holding out in the time of great adversity; for at such a time as this
the fleshly presumption of the hypocrite does fail him, his hope does perish,
it is like a Summers brook which dries up when there is most need. Will the
hypocrite pray always, when it comes to this, his faith proves to be but
fantasy. Whereas the faith of the true believer though it be in such a case
much weakened and over-layed, yet it fails not altogether, it may make a great
halt, but his faith does not fail him, it stands out, and carries him through
the storm of adversity: See then if thy faith has been a standing-out faith,
a carrying-through faith in the time of adversity; if it did not make thee make
haste, that is, put thee upon unlawful shifts, but that thou still did
cleave to God, and the means that he has appointed, that is, the Word and
Prayer? did call upon God always, never giving over, and depending upon the
Word? Were it not for thy Word, I had perished in my affliction: and so in some
measure of hope and patience did wait the Lords will and leisure? this is a
token of true faith, a tried faith, a faith that makes not haste.

Obj. I find much diffidence and impatience in time of adversity, much haste.

A. So does all Gods children: No tentation has overtaken you, but that which
is common to men; and therefore I said in some measure of trust and patience. We
see even David had his haste; Psalm. 116. I said in my haste all men are liars.
And Job had his great impatience; and yet the Spirit of God says, Ye have
heard of the patience of Job: the Lord pities his own in their infidelities and
impatiencies, when they are sore assayed as it were above strength, and above
measure, and as it were in their raving fits he imputes not these unto them; he
counts not narrowly with them, he sees this is their infirmity, and that when
the fever is over, they will come to themselves: and therefore when they, as
it may seem both to themselves and others, have lost their hold, yet he looses
not his hold, so gracious is he. Psalm. 3. When I said my foot slipped, thy
mercy, O Lord, upheld me. My heart and my flesh fails, but God is the
strength of my heart, and my hope for ever. So then even the best of the Saints
have had in adversity their own great haste, infidelity, and impatiency,
which the Lord did pity, and pass over; So will he thine, if thou have done
as is aforesaid, not giving total place to infidelity nor impatiencie: but
ever have had some hope, and trust, and wrestling against it, like that of
Jonah, I said in my haste I am cut off from thy presence, yet I looked again
toward thy holy Temple: We know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee.
So then, in a word, although in thy adversity thou have found great diffidence
and impatiencie, yet if thou have been striving against it, and wrestling with
it; if thou have been calling upon God always; if when thou could not pray,
sighing and sobbing to him: Romans 8. If thou have been ever looking toward his
holy Temple through faith, when through infidelity thou have thought thy self
cast out of his presence; If thy soul has been cleaving to the Word, which
upholds us that we perish not in our afflictions, even when all sense is gone,
yea when sense is to the contrary, hoping against hope; and has thy faith thus
wrestled and brought thee through; then be sure it is an upright faith, a tried
faith, that has abided the trial of affliction, a faith that makeeh not haste.

Of the Means of Faith, following the Doctrine of the Marks of Faith.
Q. O Happy, most happy, is the case of that Soul, whose conscience bears it
testimony, that it has these Marks of Faith; it has certainly great matter
of rejoicing, yea were it in the hardest condition that can befall it; for what
are other crosses which are to be but for a moment, and what are other
comforts, so long as the main is wanting; that soul has more then good reason
cheerfully and carefully to serve the Lord, who has bestowed so precious a
pearl upon it; but alas I miss all or the most part of these Marks, and so my
case is most doleful.

A. I told you how you should carry your self upon your missing after trial,
to wit, not to give place to despair and utter infidelity, but by constant and
earnest prayer to go to the Anchor and finisher of faith, who counsels us to
come to him, and for our counterfeit wares, promises to give us fine gold tried
in the fire; who has promised to draw all men unto him, yea who has made many
precious promises (whereby we are made partakers of the Divine Nature)
concerning all these things thou missest, as repentance, the love of God, the
fear of God, etc. Now what he has promised, he is both willing, able, and
faithful to perform. Faithful, He is faithful who has promised; Willing, He
gives liberally to all, and upbraids none; yea so willing that he counsels us
to come unto him. Able, Able to make all grace to abound toward us, to do
exceeding abundantly above all that thou art able to think or ask. If ye being
evil, will not deny good things to your children, how much more will be who is
good, yea goodness it self, give his holy Spirit unto those that ask it? Now
having his Spirit, we get the supplyer of all our wants, when he prevents us
with his temporal blessings, and bestows them many a time unrequired upon us;
shall we think that he will deny unto us spiritual things, tending to the
advancement and fulfilling of his glory, kingdom and will? We may see by the
acceptablenesse of Solomon's suit, that he is far more ready to bestow the one
then the other. Let these notable props then uphold thy heart, until the Lords
good time come of working these things in thee; Seek earnestly, for the Lord
will be sought for these things. Ezekiel. 36. and then wait the Lords good time,
for by faith and patience we must inherit the promises; do this and be not
discouraged: I am glad how well thou art wakened by thy sensiblenesse of thy
security, which is the main misery of all souls, even of Gods own children,
for the most part: but let not this drive thee to despair.

Q. Indeed I may justly accuse my self, that my praying has not been so
frequent, nor so fervent, so constant, nor so earnest as it ought to be, yea I
cannot get it done, but I have often prayed, and as earnestly as I could, and
yet find but little increase either of faith it self, or of these Marks of
Faith?

A. Whereas ye say, that ye have not prayed so frequently, nor so fervently, as
ye should, this is a great and ordinary fault, and should be helped, for the
Lord does greatly require fervency, James 5. in praying, seeking with the whole
heart, asking, seeking, knocking; yea the matters themselves requires it also;
for these things concern both the Salvation of our own souls, the making of
our calling and election sure, the good, holy, and acceptable will of the Lord
our God, and can there be matters of greater consequence and importance?
Whereas you say, that you have thus prayed, and so fear that seeing the Lord
will be sought for these things, and that he has promised them upon the
condition of seeking, and of fervent seeking, that therefore ye shall want them;
consider that the grace of seeking he promises it also, Zach. 12.10. I will
power upon them the spirit of grace and supplications, and Romans 8. The Spirit
helps our infirmities; yea for thy comfort, he is found of them who seek him
not, much more will he be found of thee who seek him, though weakly. But
for the last, a main point, that you say you have prayed often, and fervently,
but finds no success; Remember that thou must not limit the holy one of
Israel, how often did he call, and ye did not hear; By Faith and patience we
inherit the promises. But one thing I would inquire, If with praying, thou have
joined the using of the means, for otherwise, pray thou never so much thou
shall not obtain; for as in things, that concerns the natural life, it were
but idleness and scorn to pray, and in the mean time, not to use the means,
even so is it in things concerning the spiritual life, the Lord will no more
work without means, in regard of the one, then in regard of the other; to
pray, and to neglect to use the means, in either of these, is to tempt God,
and to put him to the working of wonders and miracles: It Is true that prayer is
the main thing, and brings a blessing upon our using the means, use we the
means never so diligently, unless by prayer we get the Lord to bless them,
he that builds, builds in vain. But on the other side, as our using of the
means cannot serve the turn without the Lords blessing and working of his
Spirit, obtained by prayer; So the Lord, although he can, yet will he not give,
any grace without we use the means, for ordinarily he works by means. Hence is
it, Work out your salvation: Plough up the fallow ground of your hearts: Edify
one another in your most holy faith: which is the point in hand.

Q. If I did not with prayer use also other means, I were greatly to be
blamed, but I use them according to my power, I frequent the word, Sacraments,
etc.

A. This is good and commendable to use the means in general: but if thou
think to speed in that great work, thou must not only do so, but should in
special take heed to this point, to wit, not only to use the means in
general, but to observe what be the proper, peculiar, particular most fitting
and convenient means of that grace that thou do want, to beget and entertain
it, and carefully to be meditating about them, and feeding upon them,
especially so feeding your self with food convenient, for every grace both the
own proper and peculiar means, this is to be, as the Apostle speaks, a wise
master builder; As we had need of wise master builders, so we had need our
selves to be wise builders. One that is building an house or wall, he will not
take any stone that is nearest by him; but he will look what stone will fit
such a place, and this he takes: Even so we should not think it enough in the
working of the work of our own salvation, we should not think it enough, I say,
to use the means in general; for thus want of wit may make much work, and we
may be long enough ere we come to the point: but we should use the nearest,
most commodious, and most convenient means for the begetting of that grace we
stand in need of. For example, feel we want or weakness of the love of God,
then should we meditate upon his goodness, kindness^, bounty, patience,
pity, truth, mercy, and the rest of his amiable properties; his favors,
deliverances, benefits. In a word, how good he is in himself, and how good he
is toward thee: Or do thou find the want of the fear of God, or of
reverence toward him? meditate seriously of the glory, majesty of God, and
the rest of his (awful) properties, especially if thou have found any touch of
his justice. So find we, that the work of humiliation is but small and weak
(this is the groundwork and should be well looked to) you feed upon the
threatenings and curses of the Law, the severitie of them, and their
universalitie, how none escape them being guilty of the same sins: My heart
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid because of thy judgments. Upon the
fierceness of Gods anger against sin, who knows the power of his wrath; the
infiniteness and strange extent of his justice, His judgments are past
finding out; especially have thou found a touch of these by experience?

And to come to the point in hand, fear thou the want, or feel thou the
weakness of Faith? then betake thy self to the particular means of faith, as
namely, the precious promises of the remission of sins, the sure invitations to
accept of mercy, the pregnant passages of Gods merciful nature, the Covenant,
Oath, etc. this is properly and wisely to work out the work of your salvation;
to work, and to work it out, even first of all, to search and try how it fares
with thee in regard of this work, whether this work be at all begun in us or
not; if the ground work be laid or not, the groundwork of humiliation; and if
that be laid, how far is it gone on, whether we have gotten faith, love, etc.
and where we find it at a stand or stay, there, I say, we should set too
carefully, and advance the work, then we should pray most earnestly, and use
the means most diligently; I mean the proper, and particular, and most
convenient means, as wise builders: And as in building, so in repairing our
spiritual building we are to take the same course, for what we have got
before, the stamp of them will be ready to slip out of our hearts and memories;
and we are not busier in building, then Satan is in breaching; and therefore as
we are builders, so we must be repairers also: And surely, whosoever will keep
this course of diligence, using, feeding, and meditating upon the particular
means, not leaning to them, but upon the blessing of the Lords Spirit procured
by prayer, no doubt shall find an happy progress in the work of his
salvation. But above all, we should remember not to lean to the Means, but to
the Lords Spirit; for if it be true of the temporal, much more of the
spiritual; Unless the Lord builds the house, he that builds, builds but
in vain. True it is that the Lord pities our foolishness; and as he has a
gracious care and providence of the salvation of men's bodies, so much more has
he a gracious providence over the souls of his own, though they be not so
thriftie and wise in their own generation as they should, making them meet with
such doctrine, books, conference, that is most suitable to their present case:
but for all this the rule of the using of the particular means is much to be
observed.

Q How then would you have me go about the particular means of Faith, to get to
the promises, the Covenant, etc. and to apply them to my self? For this I would
gladly do, but while I am about the doing of it, I dare not apply them to my
self, I think they do not belong to me (although very sweet in themselves) and
that because I find not these Marks in me which are in Gods children; now the
promises only belong to such, I see no thing in me but corruption, wants, etc.
and miss all these Marks that you were speaking of, that flow from Faith?

A. This is one of Satan's greatest stratagems and wiles, as is to be seen by
the experience of Gods children; for exceeding many are born back from laying
hold on the promises, and other grounds of confidence, upon the very same
considerations, and all by the subtlety of Satan, and their own ignorance, not
considering the order and nature of things, and so very dangerously and
preposterously run first to the Marks of Faith, which they will not fail to
miss, and so be discouraged; or else if any do seem to find, do build upon a
wrong ground, and so are ready to be deceived: Whereas indeed they should
first betake themselves to the Means, that so they may get both a sound, and a
strong faith. First, I say, then that this preposterous running to the Marks
and effects of Faith (so incident to many) instead of the Means, it comes from
not considering rightly what is the very true nature of faith, to wit, that it
is a resting upon the word and promise of the faithful, and powerful God
alone; Faith is by hearing, and hearing is by the Word of God: Even as
believing of a man, is a relying upon his word and promise. This is an easy
point, but for all that, not duly considered by many, which makes them take
this wrong course; for let sundry be posed, especially those who run so
hastily to the Marks of Faith, and so discourages themselves to look to the
Means; let sundry, I say, be rightly examined, it shall be found, that they
make not their faith to rest upon any thing in God, his truth, etc. but upon
something in themselves; Or to give it the most favorable expression, they
make their faith not to be a resting upon Gods word, but upon his work; should
some be asked what did first induce them to believe, and consequently what is
the ground of their faith: They would answer, Because they did find such a
change in their life, and so forth. Now this is a very dangerous mistaking, for
this sort of faith that leans only and primarily to such a ground, must be a
very unstable faith, man's life being so changeable, but also if this be the
first and only ground of their faith, it must be a very false and unsound
faith, and not partaking of the very nature of faith, which is to rest on Gods
Word, and not on his work; upon the faithfulness and power of God, and not
upon any holiness in us.

Obj. But you will say, Is not this a very good ground to strengthen our faith
and assurance, to wit, by our good works and sanctification of life?

A. I grant it is a good way to strengthen faith in it is own place; but, I say,
that this assurance is not the assurance of Faith and believing properly, and
that it is not that to the which, in the first instance, we should betake us,
and that it is not the chief prop of our confidence, much less the only, and
that those who make it the only, have not true faith at all. For the further
clearing of this, consider that Divines have well observed, that there is in
the point of considence a twofold assurance: one of adherence, the resting on
Gods Word, which is faith. Another which they call the certainty of evidence,
taken from the Marks and effects of Faith: By the one we believe; by the other
we know that we believe. The one is an act of faith, whereby a man believes and
is justified; the other is an act of experience in an old believer, whereby he
sees and knows that he believes; the one is a direct act of the soul, the other
is a reflect act of the soul, whereby looking back upon it self, it finds by
clear marks and effects, that this Mark of faith is wrought in it, and greatly
rejoices therein. Both these assurances the Scripture recommends unto us, the
one, while we are commanded to believe and rest upon Gods Word; the other,
while we are enjoined to try whether we be in the faith or not; to make our
calling and election sure by well doing. And further, the Scripture is written
to beget both these assurances in us: Joh. 20.31. And again for the other, 1 John 5.13. Now if ye would ask, which of these assurances has the
pre-eminence? surely the first, in these respects. 1. Because that is it alone
that makes up faith (for it is a resting upon Gods Word) and so that which
saves the soul, and glorifies God most. 2. It is most sure as leaning to the
most sure grounds immutable, strong consolations, to wit, divine testimony,
even the promise of him who cannot lie; whereas the other being deduced by way
of application, assuming conclusion, reasoning all, which all being subject to
be deceived, cannot be so infallible. 3. And lastly, the first is the more
constant assurance, for it leans upon the truth, mercy, goodness of God, and
upon his promise; all which admits no change. Whereas the latter assurance
being taken from some effects in us, which are very changeable, it cannot
choose but vary also; so that it is the first that holds out in the storms of
tentation, desertions, and afflictions; and that is our surest anchor in all
these storms: Were it not for thy Word I had perished, etc.

It is the first assurance then that both saves the soul, and that can make a
man most constantly to have comfort in himself, or to go on in the service of
God; and which is chiefly to be marked, that it is the first assurance only
that makes faith. Now although the first assurance in these respects have the
pre-eminence, yet nevertheless the other is not to be neglected, but greatly
to be labored for, for being joined with the former, it fortifies, it
strengthens the anchor of the soul, it fills a man with Christian courage,
comfort, and cheerfulness, and makes him fruitful in good works, as is
evident, 2 Pet. 1.8. and 10. Only about these two assurances, we are to beware
of these two things. 1. That we betake us not to this last assurance only, for
thus we will deceive our selves, for it cannot be upright, unless we have the
other first; we may well have a show or form of it, for we may have some change
of life without faith, but no true change without it; we should not then betake
us to it only, for then we both mistake the nature of faith, and, as I was
saying, cannot but deceive our selves, which is most dangerous.

2. We should also beware, that we betake us not to this second assurance in
the first room, for then we mistake the order of things, and shall but
discourage our selves, and bewilder our selves in the point of our first
assurance, and hold our selves back from believing; for the first assurance
being to believe, and the second to know that we believe, how shall we know
that we believe until it first be? and yet this is the course that many take,
they will first know that they believe, before they do labor to believe; they
will needs have the second assurance, before they have the first, though it is
evident, that they must first have the first, for the second flows from the
first; yea, and not at the first, but from it, being somewhat strengthened;
they will not have the first assurance unless they have first, or at least
with all, the second; whereas they shall never have the second, until first of
all they have the first, and that in some good measure. But this point of
mistaking the order of things, will be clearer, being spoken of in the terms
we did propose.

You say, that you miss many of the Marks of Faith, feel not your heart
purified from corruption, find not the love of God, repentance, and so forth?
and therefore this troubles you, discourages you, and weakens you that ye
cannot, or dare not apply the Promises or Means of faith unto you?

I answer: this comes from mistaking the order of things, if these Marks, ye
miss, were of things that either go before, or accompany faith, you had it may
be some reason for this complaint; but seeing they come from these things, that
follow faith, and are the effects of faith, why should the want of them
discourage you to believe; yea rather they should stir you up to believe, that
so you may come by them; for they being the effects of faith, how shall ye
think to obtain them unless ye first believe, that is, take and apply the
promises? I pray you wherehence flows victory over corruption, but from faith?
Is it not faith that purifies the heart? And wherehence flows the love of God?
but even also from faith apprehending the love of God toward us, according to
that of the Apostle, We love him, because he loved us first. And for repentance
or godly sorrow, it flows from that love, and is according to the measure of
that love, as our love is according to the measure of our faith; so outward
acts of obedience, faith works by love: so then to suspend our faith and
believing till we get these, is the high way never to get faith.

Further, whence are all these things to be gotten, the want whereof
discourages us to believe, are they any other where to be gotten but from
Christ? or any other way to be gotten from him but by faith? can we get the
bloody issue of our corruptions any otherwise cured but by drawing virtue
from Christ, and the power of his death? Can we get our spiritual wants
otherwise supplied then out of Christ his fullness; or our spiritual
weakness otherwise helped and strengthened? I am able to de all things
through Christ that strengthens me. So then, I say, we must not delay our
believing, (that is, applying of the Promises to our selves) till we find these
things redressed; but on the contrary, we must believe that we may have these
things helped: thou will not believe, and apply the Promises until thou
find these things, but thou shall never find these things until thou first
believe and apply: we would rather have some worthiness in our selves, then
come by faith to Christ, but we can have none. Further observe, that these
things do not only flow from faith, but from faith somewhat strengthened. A
tree cannot bring forth fruit at the first, until the time it be well fastened,
and take some rooting: Now these things ye speak of, being the fruits of faith,
how think ye shall they be produced without faith somewhat rooted? how shall ye
expect them as long as ye hold the tree of your faith thus shaking and tossing,
and through your own default suffer it not to take root?

So then to conclude, I would advise all those who feel the want or weakness
of Faith, not to run presently to the Marks of Faith, I mean those which are
taken from the effects of Faith, for this will but encumber their faith, and
weaken their applying; this will also make them to stagger at the promise, but
I would advise them, I say, to fly to the Means, and to apply the Promises,
what ever their corruptions or wants be; even to do as Abraham the father of
the faithful did, he looked not to any insufficiency in himself, but to the
power and faithfulness of the promiser; he considered not the deadness of his
body, etc. and therefore staggered not at the promise; but being strong in
faith, he gave glory to God, being fully persuaded, that what he had promised
he was able to perform: Even so should we, we should not at first look to these
discouragements, that present themselves unto us from the deadness and
diseases of our own souls, for then we shall never believe, for these will
never cease, until we first believe; But let us look to the promise of a true
and powerful God, that he is both faith full who has promised, and that he is
able to perform what he has promised. This was the ground and prop of Abraham's
and Sarahs faith, the parents and patterns of the faithful: Romans 4.21. Heb.
11.8. And these should be the props of our faith; But we will have a way of
believing of our own, and such is our mischievous infidelity, that we cannot
rest upon God alone, his promise, his power, and his truth, unless we find
something in our selves: It is both remarkable and comfortable, Heb. 6. that
the Spirit of God there, allows us not only confidence simply, and
consolation, but even a strong consolation, and that from no ground in our
selves, but only from God his great truth, in his oath and promise.

Further, let this be added to the advice, to wit, that those who find their
faith weak, not only betake themselves to the means of faith before-named, but
do dwell upon them, feed upon them, meditate upon them, until their faith be
well settled and strengthened, and then the Marks will of their own accord
follow; for as seed does not grow unless it be first harrowed, and lie a while
in the earth; and as meat will not strengthen unless it be chewed, and have
time to digest; even so unless we insist and dwell upon the Means of Faith,
the Promises, Covenant, etc. by frequent and earnest meditation feeding upon
them, and hiding them in the midst of our hearts, they cannot produce any
settled faith in us; and faith not being produced and settled, it cannot produce
these effects and marks as are requisite thereunto. I have insisted the longer
on this, because I find it is one of the greatest depths of Satan, thus to
toss in a wind as it were the children of God, whereby many are held back from
believing; and we our selves are in every thing backward, but especially in the
point of believing. O ye of little faith, slow to believe! The point of faith
is a main point, and going out of the way in it, is no less then the hazarding
of the soul, especially we should take heed that the nature of Faith be not
mistaken, it is a fundamental error to err in the point of Faith.

In a word, then what shall one do when he is in such a case, that he can find
no Marks or evidences of faith; pray for them, that is true: but for the point
of means using, there is no other course or help to strengthen his faith but
this, to strengthen his faith by the means; that so faith may bring on these
evidences. As in the building, so in the repairing of Faith.

Q. I would gladly hear of some of those special particular means to beget and
strengthen Faith.

A. First of all, a notable Mean, is duly and diligently to consider of the
merciful nature of the Lord our God, who is our party with whom we have to
deal; as it is most sweetly and richly set down to us in Scripture, and all to
draw our unbeleeving hearts to rest upon the same. This is a mean and prop of
Faith that Gods children have had great recourse unto; So we see, Psalm. 25.
Remember O Lord thy tender mercies, for they have been of old. Remember not the
sins of my youth; but according to thy mercy remember me, etc. So Psalm. 5. Have
mercy upon me, O Lord, according to the multitude of thy tender mercies.
Sweetly says Daniel of this, Mercy and forgiveness belongs to thee,
although we have sinned against thee. So sweetly, Psalm. 65. Iniquity has
prevailed against us, but thou will be merciful to our transgressions. So
Psalm. 130. If thou mark iniquity narrowly, who shall stand? but there is mercy
with thee, or forgiveness with thee. And again, With the Lord is mercy, and
plenteous redemption. Thus has Gods children against the greatness of their
sins have comforted and upholden their faith by the consideration of Gods
mercy: The Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous run unto it, and
are saved. Now the name of his mercy is above all his names, as is clear from
Exodus 34. where the Lord proclaiming his Name to Moses, takes so many styles of
mercy to him.

But to the point: the Lord in his word has been pleased, having a regard to
our slownesse to believe, to set down his mercy very richly, largely, pithily,
and pregnantly to us, he is said to be plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 103. to pardon
abundantly, or to multiply pardons, Isa. 55. To delight in mercy, Micah. the
last, To delight in these that trust in his mercy; Psalm. 148. To be rich in
mercy, Ephesians. 1. That his mercy endures for ever. Is he not infinite in his
mercy? The Lords mercies be most pithily, and pregnantly set down in these
places, Ex^d. 34. Micah the last, Isa. 1.44.55. Deuteronomy. 4. Psa. 103.116. So that,
does the greatness of thy sins trouble thee? he is infinite in mercy, though
thy sins were as scarlet, etc. He forgives iniquity, transgression, and sin;
for his Name sake he pardons iniquities: so that now the greater thy sins be,
the greater shall be the name of his mercy. So David, Psalm. 51. For thy name
sake pardon my iniquity, for it is great; the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
us from all sin, though never so great; and no wonder, because it is the blood
of Christ; of God; not with corruptible things, but with the precious blood,
and that his own blood, Acts, 20. Does the number of thy sins trouble thee? he
has multitudes of tender mercies, for the number of thy sins, he does multiply
pardons, if thou have multiplied thy sins, he is rich in mercy, he has a
treasure of mercy, if thou have treasured up wrath: notable is that, Isa. 43.
Ye have wearied me with your transgressions, yet come, and I will pardon you,
I, even I am he, who for my own names sake, etc. He who bids even us to pardon
seventie times seven times, how often then will he himself pardon?

Obj. O but I have spent all my days in sinning, so that justly I may fear
that the day of grace is expired, that the door of mercy is shut up?

A. O but the Lords mercy enduereth for ever; he is long suffering, if thou
have been long in sinning, and that the day of grace is not expiered, is
evident, because the means is yet continued, and the offer of mercy in them;
for the Lord he is yet beseeching thee, by his Ambassadors, to be reconciled,
so that it is yet the acceptable time, the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 5. toward
the end, and Cap. 6. at the beginning. And he is yet standing at the door and
knocking, ready if thou will open to him, to come in and to sup with thee, and
thou with him; So then, While it is to day, harden not your hearts, neither
despair, the Lord and thou art yet upon parley, under speaking terms, and so
the bargain is not quite broke off; consider the similitude of a besieged City,
as long as there is any parley, there is possibility of peace; consider also
how it is said, At what time soever a sinner repents, I will do away his
iniquities.

Obj. O but I cannot find this repentance.

A. The Lord will pardon and show mercy, upon a very small measure of
repentance, he will accept of the smoke, instead of the fire of repentance. It
is not our repentance, but Christ's merits that the Lord looks at, he will not
quench the smoking flax, yea he will show mercy upon the very first motions
and beginnings of repentance. I have sinned, says David, and The Lord has
taken away thy sin, says Nathan. The prodigal child was met a far off, yea
upon a purpose of repentance, I said I will confess my sins, and thou
forgavest, etc. yea such is his mercy, that when Adam did extenuate and shift,
and hide his sin, his great sin, yet the Lord gave him pardon, intimating mercy
to him, The seed of the woman shall tread down the head of the serpent. Lastly,
whatsoever thou do want in this point, the Lord has promised it, even to
take away the stony heart, and to give the spirit of mourning, Zach. 12.10.

Obj. O but I continually slide back to the same sins daily.

A. It may be so, through the power of sin, leading thee captive, and sin
that hangs fast on, yet this is not thou, but sin that dwells in thee. 2. He
has said, that he will heal our backslidings. Psalm. 65. Iniquity prevails
against us, but thou will be merciful to our transgressions: Do thou sin
daily? he gives thee liberty, yea he commands thee daily to crave the remission
of thy sins, yea as often as thou cravest daily bread: but you will say, how can
this be, what man would deal thus? O but my ways are not like your ways, no^
my thoughts like your thoughts, Isa 55. But to apply the point, and to draw to
an end.

A due dwelling upon the meditations of Gods mercy, thus laid down in
Scripture, is a notable prop and mean of faith: for a Christian soul may reason
thus, does the Lord set down his rich mercy, so richly and amply in his word,
and will he not be as good as his word, will he fail when it comes to the
point, and proof, as men sometimes use to do, who will speak fair, and fail
when it comes to the deed and performance? will he not be as good as (his word)
he gives himself out for? Yes certainly, has he not set out his mercy in this
kind, that our mistrusting, doubting, and withdrawing hearts may be made to
rest upon the same; according to that in Psalm. 26. O how excellent is thy
mercy, O Lord, therefore under the shadow of thy wings shall the children of
men put their trust.

A second notable Mean of Faith, is to consider duly the mercifulnes and
faithfulness of our high Priest our Mediator, especially, his readiness to
receive sinners, as we have a merciful and gracious party, so also a
merciful Advocate: Hebr. 2. A merciful high Priest, and faithful in things
pertaining to God, to make reconcilement for the sins of the people. This the
Scripture makes also a notable prop and mean of Faith and confidence, as is
clear from Hebr. 4. Seeing we have such an high Priest, let us come boldly to
the throne of grace to obtain mercy. Now for his readiness to receive poor
sinners, certainly it is exceeding great. It is well observed by one, that he
never refused any who came to him here on earth for the cure of their bodies,
although this was not his main errand, yea he prevented some, as the man at the
Pool; he encouraged others to come forward, when others would have discouraged
them, as the blind man; much less will he refuse any who come to him for the
salvation and curing of their souls: this being his main errand, and principal
office, even to save his people from their sins. 2 Behold how sweetly he
invites, Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden: I counsel you to come
unto me: He that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Ho every one that
thirsts; How often would I have gathered you: Behold, I stand at the door and
knock: Rev 3. He beseeches us to be reconciled by his Ambassadors: 2 Cor. 5.
Now may not a sensible soul reason, He that invites us so kindly to come, will
he not welcome us as kindly when we come? He that beseeches us to be reconciled
unto him, will he not, when we entreat him, be reconciled to us? Stands he at
the door and knocks, and will he not open unto such as not only are willing
to let him in, but stand at his door and knock? He that so often would have
gathered these who came not, will he refuse to any chased soul a shelter under
his wings flying for refuge, and to the horns of salvation?

Q. O but I am not worthy to come, there is gno^race in me.

A. There is worth enough in him for you and him both. 2. He invites thee to
come, and that freely, and he will accept of thy small measure, he quenches not
the smoking flax.

Obj. If I could come unto him, but I cannot do that.

A. O he will help thee, I will draw all men unto me: Joh. 11. He is the author
and finisher of our faith.

A third notable Mean of Faith, is to meditate upon, and confider of the
manifold motives, persuasions, and inducements the Lord God uses to draw us to
believe (O it is not an easy matter to believe) for the first Command is to
believe: 1 John 5. this is his Commandment, and he threatens us if we believe
not, and that most fearfully: Joh. 1. and 3. Chapters, to drive and scar us
from infidelity, Whosoever believes not, he is condemned already, he has made
God a liar.

3. He does request us to believe: We as the Ambassadors of God beseech you to
be reconciled; bids us trust, and trust perfectly to the grace that shall be
revealed unto us: 1 Pet. 1.4. He sometimes cheers us to believe, and encourages
us, Come, and c^m^ boldly to the throne of grace to obtain mercy Hebr. 4.5.
Sometimes the Scripture chids us to believe, so that as he says of the people
of Israel, so may I say of this point, O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? O
Ephraim, how shall I entreat thee? Now may not a Christian soul gather great
grounds to believe from these inducements, reasoning thus with himself; Does
the Lord command me to believe, and shall I doubt whether I ought to do it or
not? Carry I my self, or would I do so in regard of his other Commandments?
question I whether I shall do this or no, and shall I draw back from this his
most acceptable Commandment? 1 John 5. Does the Lord threaten me so to believe,
so to chase me, and scare my heart from infidelity, and shall I think that it
will displease him to believe? No: I can see nothing, can be either more
dangerous to me, or more displeasing to him, then not to believe, as is to be
seen Joh. 7. and 3. Chapters. 3. Does he beseech me to be reconciled (yea many
never do regard his entreatie) and will he refuse them who beseech him, have
besought him, and by his grace will beseech him to be reconciled? Is he not
found of those who seek him not, and will he not be found of me who seek him,
though weakly? 4. Does he bid me come boldly to the throne of his grace, and
will he then count it over great boldness in me to do so? 5. Bids he me trust,
and that perfectly, and complains he of the slownesse, of the smalnesse of my
faith, and shall I be of little faith, slow to believe?

Further, as these Motives and inducements be notable to work us to believe,
and to drive us from infidelity; so do they clearly testify the Lords great
willingness to have poor sinners saved, which is also a great encouragement
to believe; for not only, says the Lord, I will not the death of a sinner:
but here is our fault, about this point of the Lords willingness to save us,
we will not rest upon the Lords revealed will as we ought to do, but run to his
secret will, so weakening our confidence, for which his revealed will affords us
such plentiful grounds, and so needlessly perplexing our selves; for secret it
is, and secret it must be. We should hold our selves then to the Lords revealed
will, and not pry into his secret: this seems to be enjoined by these two
places especially, to wit, Deuteronomy. 29. v. last: Secret things belong to the Lord,
but things revealed to us, and to our children, even all the words of his Law,
that we should do them. As also Romans 10. cited out of Deuteronomy. 30. Say not in
thine heart, Who shall go up to heaven? etc. But what says it? The word is
nigh unto thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, even the word of faith,
which we preach. So that in the point of our believing, or persuasion
concerning our election and salvation, or of the Lords willingness to save us,
we should not look to the secret will of God, thus perplexing our selves; but
we should betake us to Gods revealed will and Word, and that two ways, to wit,
1. to the word of faith, Romans 10. or of promise, cleaving unto it, for it is
the ground and warrant of our faith. 2. To the word of the Law, Deuteronomy. 29. thus
making our calling and election sure by well doing, and evidencing to our own
conscience the truth of our faith, it working by love: 2 Pet. 2. For if ye do
these things, entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, etc. Would you
then be wise to salvation, this is the way of it; the way to be saved is to
believe the word of promise, Whosoever believes in him, shall not be ashamed;
the way to know if thou believe is by some effects of faith; Whosoever calls
upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved: Look if thou be such a one. Both
these two be set down in the former place, Romans 10. This is also clear, that
such a course as this is to be taken to leave the Lords secret will, and to
hold us to his revealed will: 2 Timothy 2. where the Apostle says, The Lords
foundation stands sure, the Lord knows who are his.

Q. But you will say, the Lord knows, it is true, who are his, but how shall
I know this also my self, if I be one of his?

A. This is his seal, Let him that loves Christ depart from iniquity: try thy
self by this his seal; so then perplex not thy self with the Lords secret will.
But, 1. beleevest thou the word of faith which is near unto thee? then thy
faith has saved thee, be of good comfort. Would thou again know whether thy
faith be true? see if thou call upon the Name of the Lord. 2. If thou depart
from iniquity, for then thou art a sealed soul; but if thou castest off fear,
and restrainest prayer, Job 15. then thou art not right.

A fourth notable Mean and prop, and seed of Faith to obtain it, and to
strengthen it, are the plentiful promises of mercy and forgiveness of sins,
set down unto us in the Word, even as the Apostle calls them, Exceeding great
and precious promises: these well considered, should mightily strengthen our
faith. Have we but the promise of an honest man for any business, will we not
rest and repose upon it, and will it not breed in us, and beget a great measure
of assurance about the thing promised? and shall we not then be made sure of
this point, of the remission of our sins, by so many promises, so often
renewed, of the faithful and true God, who is truth it self, and not only
will not, but cannot lie, as the Apostle speaks: will we rest upon the Word of
a faithful man, and will not we rest upon the written Word of the true God? So
that we have both his Word, and his writ for it, he is a God of truth, so
called by Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.4. and 7. v. 9. says emphatically, Know that the
Lord thy God is a faithful God, who keeps Covenant, and mercy: he styles
himself, abundant in truth. Exodus 34. Great is his faithfulness and love, who
keeps truth for ever. Psalm. 46. He is a God of truth; Christ is called Truth
it self, The Way, the Truth, and the Life; the faithful Witness, the holy
Ghost, the Spirit of Truth, the Word of Truth: And shall we doubt of the
performance of these promises? No: let us with Sarah, judge him faithful who
has promised, that so we may by faith also with her obtain the thing promised:
his truth shall be thy shield and buckler. This might be sufficient for this
Mean, but for the further stirring up of our backward hearts of unbelief to
believe, let us consider these two things about the promises of forgiveness.
1. Their pregnancie and pithinesse. 2. Their largeness and extent.

1. Then the promises of mercy and forgiveness of sin be very pregnant and
pithie, the more to persuade and win upon our untoward hearts of unbelief; for
not only does the Lord simply promise to pardon our iniquities, but he
promises to blot them out. Isa. 43. and Col. 3. The same phrase is used to blot
out the handwriting of ordinances, which was contrary unto us, that he is not
only content to give us a discharge of the debt of our sins, but because that
may seem not sure, for that may happily be lost, therefore he will destroy the
bond it self, that it be not brought forth against us, even blot it out.
Moreover lest blotting out should not seem sufficiently sure, for some letters
may remain, and the whole purpose may be taken up by these few, he has
promised to wash away our sins, Ezekiel. 36. I will cleanse you from your
filthiness, etc. Isa. 1. I will make you as the wool. Further, lest even
after washing, some stain should remain, in the third room he is said to cover
our transgressions: Psalm. 32. as also 85. O but, will ye say, he has a
piercing eye, and will see through any covering; therefore the Scripture
speaks, of his casting our sins behind his back, that is, out of his sight.

Obj. But you will say, what cannot be seen, may yet be remembered; what cannot
be seen by the eye of the body, may be seen by the eye of the mind.

A. This he promises, and it is a part of the Covenant, that he will not
remember our iniquities; the words are very emphaticall, lest we should think,
that faults once forgotten, may be again called to memory, therefore he says
expressly, I will remember their sins No more. Once forgot, and ever forgot; In
that day, the iniquity of Jacob shall be sought for, and shall not be found: a
sweet place. Micah the last: He will cast them into the depths of the Sea.
Psalm. 103. As far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our
transgressiens from us. We are not to think, that it is for naught that the
Spirit of God uses so many, so different, and so emphaticall phrases, even
because all is little enough to bear up a cast-down soul, and to make it fasten
upon the Promises; and our hearts being as weak powder, whereinto many sparks
may light, that some one of them at least may kindle the fire of faith, at
least raise the smoke thereof: Now the Lord will not quench the smoking flax,
but blow upon it by his Spirit.

Q. These be indeed very pregnant, exceeding, great, and precious promises:
were I sure that they belong unto me, but, alas, what warrant have I for that?

A. This is another of Satan's depths, and fiery darts, whereby many are holden
back, many hearing of the pregnancie of the promises of forgiveness, and how
that there is forgiveness for great and many sins, conceive some hope, but
still they fear, that these precious promises belong not to them, that the
offer of reconciliation is not made to them, and so stick in the application of
the promise to themselves.

Now a notable help for this, is to consider in the second place the
largeness, the indefinitenesse, and the extent of the promises; for they are
conceived in such general terms, that in effect there is left room sufficient
for every one to come to subscribe his name, and to set to his seal that God is
true; by so doing, to honor God, and save his own soul: so that none is
excluded to whom the offer is made, unless they exclude themselves, and that
it be through their own default. The Promises, I say, and offer of
reconciliation is set down in very general terms, although men's names be not
set down, which were needles: God so loved the world, that whosoever believes,
etc. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Behold, I
bring you tidings of great j^y, to all people. But above all, pressing and
notable is that place, Acts 2.29. even answering as it were your objection,
viz. I know not that the promises belong to me? Yes (says he) To you, and to
your seed, to all that are near and afar off, and to as many as our God shall
call, even by his outward calling: for else the words were to no purpose. And
indeed were it otherwise with the Lord, we should make him a mocker, did he
offer that to any, which did not belong to them: this generality of the offer
is the very ground and warrant of faith, and therefore should be well looked
unto.

Obj. But the Scripture is clear, that all who are called, shall not have the
benefit of the promises; for directly, Many are called, and few are chosen: and
why may not I be of the number of these?

A. This shows indeed that all shall not reap the benefit of the promises, to
wit, through their own default, but not that the promise and offer did not
belong to them. Further, thou make the wrong use of this sort of doctrine,
for it is set down in Scripture, not to feed thee in thy infidelity, but to
terrify thee from the same, and to stir thee up to believe. All this I will
clear to you by a familiar similitude. Suppose a number of prisoners being
imprisoned for some great crime, there were a general Proclamation and offer
of liberty made unto them all, who would before such a time make use of it,
from the free and gracious favor of their Prince; suppose likewise that it
could be foreseen and conjectured, that for all this general and gracious
offer, that yet there would be sundry, that would not make use of it, some of
them through azi^esse and sloth, drinking, or playing, or sleeping, losing the
opportunity. 2. Others again despising it, as thinking by their power and
ability to get free when they please, or leaning to former merits or good
service done, which they think may well counterpoize any fault they have
committed. And, 3. others (a thing to be took notice of) quite contrary to the
former, through the conscience and greatness of their fault, should misdoubt,
and misbeleeve the truth of so gracious an offer: Suppose, I say, that all this
could be foreseen, that all these sorts of persons, upon several
considerations, should loose the opportunity of the offer, and that therefore
for the further weal of the prisoners, and the prevention of all this, with the
general Proclamation an intimation were made to them, that there would be such
persons among them, that so they might, being fairly forewarned, sly such
impediments; would we not in such a case, think him a very foolish person, who
either would not accept of the Proclamation in general, because his name was
not set down expressly? or who because of the intimation (made for his further
weal and fore-warning, and avoiding of such inconveniences) would, through
their own default, loose the opportunity of the offer, would upon groundless
suspicions conclude, that he may be one of that number, and so keep off and
loose the benefit of the offer; and so indeed make himself of that number:
whereas being fairly forewarned, he should labor to beware of all these lets,
that may hinder him from embracing the opportunity of the offer: Even so (to
apply this) the Spirit of God in Scripture has made a gracious general
Proclamation, and promise of our liberty, from the prison and punishment of
hell, through the Lords tender mercy and free grace in Christ Jesus; and not
only so, but foreseeing that for all this gracious and general offer, many
will not reap and take the benefit of the offer, some slipping and neglecting
it, being loath to quit their sloth and sinful pleasures; of whom speaks our
Savior, Mat. 7. Many are called, and few are chosen. Strive to enter in at the
strait gate: Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, etc. Others again leaning
to, and going about to establish their own righteousness, slight the
righteousness which is by faith: And, 3. (which thou should take heed to)
others through the great conscience and sense of their own guiltiness are made
to misbeleeve so gracious an offer; and what through the power and wiles of the
devil, and their own bad heart of unbeleef, greatly prejudice themselves
through infidelity; of them speaks the Apostle, Heb. 4. Take heed lest there
be in any of you, an evil heart of unbeleef departing from the living God. And
more clearly, let us fear that lest a promise being made, etc. The Spirit of
God, I say, foreseeing all this, with the gracious general offer and
proclamation, for our further fore-warning, does also intimate unto us, that
notwithstanding of the gracious and general offer, yet many through their own
default, upon the aforesaid impediments, shall never reap, nor enjoy the
benefit of the offer. Now all this is for the advantage and good of those that
would believe and accept of the offer, and to drive them from infidelity, and
to stir them up to believe, and eschew the lets thereof; and not (as you make
wrong use of it) to suppress your faith: will you therefore be so foolish, that
either because the proclamation, and offer of mercy, though conceived in
general terms, yet because it has not thy name expressly set down in it, to
think that therefore it belongs not to thee? Or because there is an intimation
made, that many through their own default, in regard of the forementioned
impediments, shall neglect the opportunity, and loose the benefit of the offer
of grace; For the further fore-warning of thee, and those who would believe, to
eschew these impediments, will thou therefore, I say, upon groundless
suspicions say, O what if I be one of these, and so fly back, and fall into one
of the impediments; or should thou not rather shun all the impediments, and
this of keeping back among the rest? for, for this end and use is it, that the
Spirit of God in Scripture has set down these sayings and fore-warnings; Many
are called, and few chosen. etc. Not to hinder, but to put thee on to believe;
and indeed in so doing, ye make a wrong and quite contrary use to that of
Scripture, the promise, the offer, the proclamation is made unto all whom God
does call. For the benefit of it, all shall not enjoy, through their own
default, and they be of two sorts, to wit, such as set either light by the
offer and promise, who perish in their presumption and security: Or such as
keep back and distrust the promise, who perish through desperation, and
infidelity. Now those that set lightly, they be of two sorts; some leaning to
their own righteouinesse, and will not quit it, these justly perish in their
presumption. 2. Others that will not leave their sins and pleasures, which is
the condition of the offer, Matthew. 11. will not take on Christ's yoke; these
perish in their security. As for those that keep back, they be such who
through Satan and their own hearts are holden back from believing; and these
perish through despair.

Seeing then thou art not one that does set light by the promise and offer, for
thou renouncest thy own righteousness, and do or would renounce thy fins
and pleasures, regardest not iniquity in thy heart, desire to fear his Name,
Neh. 1. Then see thou be not one that keeps back, yield not to Satan, and thy
own bad heart of unbelief; remember the saying of the Apostle, Let us fear,
lest a promise being left unto us, any of us come short of it through unbelief.
Mark the words, there is a promise left unto us (so doubt not but the promise
belongs to thee) only beware, thou come not short of it through unblief: and
indeed if it were but this, it shows that the promise belongs to those, who
through their own default may come short of it. The benefit of the promise it
is true belongs only to the elect, and those who are inwardly called; but the
promise it self, or the offer of the promise belongs to all that are outwardly
called.

In a word, thou fear that the promise belongs not to thee, but the Apostle
bids thee fear least a promise being left unto thee, or belonging to thee, that
thou come short of it through unbeleife, Heb. 4.1. and therefore let this
rather be thy fear, I mean care, to prevent it. But to go more succinctly and
clearly to work with you, you say you fear such gracious offers and promises,
do not belong to you, and how shall you know that they do belong to you, they
be indefinit say you, but not universal or general? 1. I propose to you that
same place, Acts. 2.29. answering in direct terms to your doubt, you doubt
whether it belongs to you? Yes, To you, and to your seed, and to as many as God
shall call And the former place, Heb. 4. does clear it, that the promise is to
those who come short of it; the Lord indeed offers that which in his
foreknowledge, he sees will not be accepted, nor made use of, and to whom he
purposes, not to give that grace to make use of it, for though he is not
obliged, yet the offers nevertheless is real, and the refuser justly
punished. 2. Ought ye not to be content with that same measure of security,
wherewith all Gods children have bin content, and have reposed and rested, even
from the beginning, and still unto the end of the world, even the word of
promise; they had no other ground of faith, nor security for their salvation,
then this same indefinite promise? One says well, It would have made too large
a Bible, if all the names of the elect had been written therein. Be content
therefore; and be ye followers of those who through faith and patience
inherited the promises, and do as they did, they saluted or embraced the
promises, met them midway, as it were, and so took hold of them: so should ye
not withdraw from, or keep back from them, but run and meet them as it were,
and get unto them, and having gotten them, hold them fast with both thy arms,
and not faintly lay hold on them. 3. I say, thou art commanded to apply the
general promise to thy self, and therefore thou may be bold to do it, and
of necessity it belongs unto thee, 1 John. 5. this is his Commandment, that
thou believe in his Son, not only that thou believe the promise in general,
but also that thou believe in his Son, which implies application of the
promise to thy self, and so saving faith. Now I reason thus, the Commandment,
does surely belong unto thee, even all Gods Commandments, thou will not, I
hope, exempt thy self from any of them, but so it is, that the Commandments
commands thee to believe in his Son, therefore the promise belongs to thee
also: further, thou art threatened if thou beleevest not, John 1. and 3. Chap.
4. The Spirit of God in Scripture, from whom we should learn to apply, and
whose example if we follow, we cannot err, for he leads into all truth, does
not only apply the general and indefinite promises, but even special
promises, (so to speak) made to the people of Israel, to the Corinthians, 2
Cor. 6. and 7. Chap: Yea, even singular promises made to singular persons, as
Heb. the last, the promise made to Josuah, to all the Hebrews; now if the
Scripture thus teach us to apply special and singular promises made to a
peculiar people, to a singular person, to ourselves; All Scripture is written
for our use and conselation, that through faith and hope, etc.

And lastly, I say, let it be so, that the Promises are only indefinite, in
regard of all sorts of persons and conditions, yet I am sure there is one sort
of persons to whom they are merely universal, to wit, the seeking sensible
soul, Ho, all ye that hunger and thirst: all ye that are weary and laden; Every
one may have a strong consolation who has fled for refuge, etc.

Obj. O but I fear I hunger and thirst not, I am not weary, and laden, I have
not fled for a refuge, and so want this condition?

A. This very fear of wanting the condition, shows that there is in thee a
desire, an hunger and thirst for mercy, as also a fear, and consequently a
flying for refuge to the hope that is set before thee, a wakening, a seeking, a
What shall I do to be saved? for otherwise thou would never be affected, nor
take to heart, nor fear the want of the condition; wherefore art thou so
troubled and feared for want of the condition, but because thou art hungering
and thirsting for that which (thou think) is the condition? would make
belong to thee, to wit, mercy, and forgiveness, and fear, and art troubled
for want of the condition, to be deprived of it; So then thou who art troubled,
and fear to want the condition, required in those to whom mercy is offered,
do indeed hunger and thirst for mercy, do indeed fear, and would fly
unto the refuge; for were it not so, there would not be all this fear with
thee, thou would even be as the rest of this secure world, and as perhaps
sometimes it has been with thy self, never care how it went with thee in so
principal a point, whether thou had the condition or not. Now then to such
as thou art, who fear, who do hunger, and thirst, the Promise is clearly
universal; it does belong to all such, none is excepted, as ye heard in the
places before cited: Ho all ye that hunger and thirst, etc. Who is he that
fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his servant? let him trust in the
Name of the Lord, etc.

A fifth notable Mean to beget Faith, or to strengthen it concerning the
remission of our sins, it is to consider the gracious and precious new
Covenant, wherein the Lord has covenanted with us, even with us, who be the
seed of the faithful, I am thy God, and the God of thy seed. And, 2. who have
received the seal thereof in Baptism; that he will be merciful to our
iniquities, and remember our fins no more: this new Covenant was first made
with Adam, Genesis 3.15. and renewed with Abraham, Genesis 17.7. But is most sweetly,
and at length set down, Psalm. 85. Isa. 55. as also 42. v. 6, 7. and 16. Chap.
39.21. So Jer. 31. repeated, Heb. 8. Chap. 32.39.40. and 50. Ezekiel. 36. Now this
very thing in general, that the Lord has made a Covenant with us, to pardon
our sins, should greatly strengthen our faith concerning the remission of them;
for so it is, that we have not only the Lords promise for this point, (which
certainly in it self is fully sufficient) but we see he has gone further on to
draw us from infidelity, the which we are so prone unto, and to move us to
believe; he has made a sure and solemn contract and Covenant with us, to
forgive us our sins. If we have an honest man's promise concerning any thing, we
will in some sort, yea even in a good measure rest upon it; but if he has
indented with us, and has by contract bound himself unto us, etc. this puts us
out of all doubt concerning the matter, especially where there is no doubt of
ability and power: How much more then should we confide, when the business is
between us and the Lord God of truth, Who keeps truth for ever? Psalm. 146.

Now there be three properties of this new Covenant serving greatly to
strengthen our faith, to wit, 1. The surenesse and steadfastnesse of it. 2. The
freeness of it. 3. The compleatnesse and absoluteness of it. 1. Then it is a
most sure and steadfast Covenant, unchangeable, unalterable, everlasting; what
can be more comfortable? this is clear, Isa. 55. where it is called, The sure
mercies of David. 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God; yet has
he made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure:
whereupon he rejoices, and adds, This is all my salvation, and all my desire.
Psalm. 89.34, 35. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone
out of my mouth. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto
David. And certainly how can it be but a sure Covenant, when it has Christ the
Son of God for the surety and cautioner? Heb. 7.22. Surely of a better
Covenant, how may we be sure, who besides so sufficient a principal, has so
responsible a caution? And also to be the witness of it: Psalm. 55. Now he is
the faithful witness; the Mediator of it: Heb. 9.15. Mediator of the new
Covenant; and has sealed it with his own death and blood, and in the history
of the Sacrament. Further, to show us the surenesse of it, the Lord calls it the
everlasting Covenant, never to be made null, nor broken on the Lords part. Genesis
17.7. Isa. 55.3. Jer. 32.41. Ezekiel. 16.6. as also Psalm. 89. 2 Samuel 23.45.

Q. But you will say, although the Lord will not be the first, yet when we
break with him (as we do continually) will not the Lord then, as he may most
justly, break with us, and so alter the Covenant?

A. No: for it is an everlasting Covenant; and surely were it so, it should not
be everlasting, but of very short continuance. But this is the point, when we
break the Covenant on our part by our daily transgressions, the Lord
nevertheless, with whom there is no varying, nor shadow of turning, is not
like the son of man, that he should repent, but keeps still his part of the
Covenant, being a God who keeps Covenant and mercy, and gives unto us liberty
to renew our part of the Covenant by faith and repentance; so that happy is the
soul that once does get within this Covenant: this point is evident by that
which I have spoken of the greatness of Gods mercy, notwithstanding the
renewing of our sins, he bids us pardon seventy times seven times, in case of
repentance, how often then will he pardon, who is infinite in mercy? as far as
the heaven is above the earth, so much are his ways above your ways: thou
sinnest daily, it is true, but he has allowed thee daily to crave pardon, and
so to expect forgiveness of sins, as well as to pray every day, for our daily
bread. Iniquities prevail against us, but thou will be merciful to our
transgressions, says David. Mercy and forgiveness belongs to thee,
although we have sinned against thee. This point is also notably cleared and
confirmed by that, 1 John 2. If any man sin (says he) even after he has
entered into the Covenant, what shall become of him, shall he be cast out of the
Covenant again? No: but the same who is the Mediator of the Covenant, and by
whose means he first entered into the Covenant of reconciliation, even he shall
intercede for him, that he be not cast out of it again. Jesus Christ our
Savior is the Mediator of the New Testament, in such a sort, not only to
enter us once in the Covenan with his Father, but which is most comfortable,
when we fail, he is ready to intercede for us; He sits at the right hand of the
Father making request for us. And hence is it that this Covenant is so sure,
and so everlasting a Covenant. This point is also notably and clearly set down,
and made good, by that style that Daniel, Nehemiah, Ezra give unto God, O Lord,
who keep Covenant and mercy: A sweet saying and style; for both on his own
part he keeps Covenant; and then for us when we break and sin, he has mercy
for us. So in the Scripture we have it more then once, that sweet combination
of mercy and truth, Psalm. 57. He will send out his mercy and his truth: Psalm.
25. all his ways are mercy and truth, etc. His truth is to perform his
promise; his mercy is to cover our sins, and to pardon them that they be no
impediments for him to perform his mercy toward us: Had he only truth, our
comfort would be but small, for we make the first breach, and fail in the
condition; so that the Lord may without any breach of his truth and justice,
break his promise with us: but when he joins mercy with truth, and is a God
that keeps Covenant and mercy, in this stands our comfort and happiness, and
this is it that makes it an everlasting Covenant. As also in that notable Psalm.
89. My faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him. And again notably, v. 28.
My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my Covenant shall stand fast
with him: His mercy endures for ever. How often repeated in Scripture, a
notable comfort against our renewed sins. But of all most notably, clearly, and
expressly is this surenesse and everlastingnesse of the Covenant set down in
that same Psalm, where the Lord professes (which is indeed most wonderful and
sweet) that although sin and the devil should have so far prevailed against
us, as to make us forsake Gods Law, that though he may well visit our
transgressions with the rod, and our iniquity with stripes, so to bring us to
repentance; yet His loving kindness he will not utterly take from us, nor
suffer his faithfulness to fail: so that he will not break his part of the
Covenant for all this. O the wonderful goodness of God in his Son Christ! who
although we change every moment, yet he changes not; whom he loves, he loves
to the end; his gifts and his graces be without repentance.

Q. I hear that upon my repentance I shall have access to this precious
Covenant, though after seventy times seven times, yea infinitely often; for
Gods ways are not like man's ways, but are above them as far as the heaven is
above the earth; which is very comfortable: and also that the Lord will take
pains with me to bring me to repentance, will visit me with the rod, etc. O but
what if I continue in sin without repentance, if I be not to be reclaimed, no
not by rods, and so fall away altogether?

A. Thou shall not get leave to do this, for this is a part and a clause of
this precious and sure Covenant: Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear into their
heart, that they shall not depart from me: to wit, altogether, or without
returning; this puts on the very topstone of the surenesse of the Covenant.
That place is worth the noting, for in it the Lord undertakes both his own part
and ours. This point is also notably and clearly set down, Heb. 8. where the
Apostle setting down the difference between the old Covenant and the new, he
says of the old indeed, they abode not in that Covenant: but for this he
says, I will write my Law in their hearts, and put it in their inward parts.
So Ezekiel. I will put my Spirit within them, and cause them to walk in my
statutes to do them. So ye may see that this is still a most sure and
everlasting Covenant.

Q. But may it not be objected, that this doctrine of the surenesse,
everlastingnes, and steadfastnesse of the Covenant is ready to faster security,
and to prove an obstruction to Christian obedience?

A. It may well make one relent of that slavish, or at the best selfish,
obedience, flowing from fear, and arising from selflove, and self-respects; But
as for that acceptable obedience which flows from Faith, and from the love of
God, The love of God constrains me: surely it does greatly advance and
fortify it; for why as ye see, it fortifies faith exceedingly this point of
the surenes of the Covenant, and everlastingnesse on Gods part; now faith
produces this acceptable obedience, faith which works by love, the more
faith, the more working, and that by love; the more hearty and cheerful
obedience. So whatsoever doctrine serves to increase faith in us, to breed in
us the full assurance of faith, is so far from rendering us carnally secure, and
so sluggish, as on the contrary it renders us spiritually secure, it makes us
the more working and diligent, it adds spirit and life, heart and courage to
work: Faith which works by love, it both increases and rectifies our
obedience; whereas faith, which is the tree, being weak, good works, which are
the fruit must be few: as the assurance of Faith rouses up the soul to go on in
a cheerful and right course of obedience with an eye to God; whereas otherwise
all our obedience is at the best felfish, if not slavish. Do ye fast unto me,
says the Lord, and even for this restraint of fear to stand in aw, and not to
sin? This Covenant for all the sweetness of it, has sufficient ground; for as
ye hear, although the Lord for the main take not his loving kindness away, yet
nevertheless he visits with the rod, and with stripes, even with sad and sore
chastisements; even where he is favorable, he takes for all that vengeance for
transgression, even where he corrects in measure, he suffers not altogether to
pass unpunished. Hence is that complaint, Thou have wounded me with the wound
of an enemy, and chastised me with the chastisement of a cruel one. And
again, The Lord has chastised me sore, but has not delivered me over to
death. There was never so much pleasure in thy sinning, as thou, who ever thou
art, shall find bitterness in thy chastisements for sin, even although the
main thing and the punishment be remitted: so that thou have need to stand in
awe and not sin. So that this Covenant, though full of confidence, yet has
some place also for fear and aw.

Obj. When I consider this surenesse and everlastingnesse of the Covenant,
surely I must think them happy that have propriety and interest in it; but I
fear that I have none, that it belongs not to me.

A. For this, I give no other Answer but what I gave to that doubt concerning
the Promises; for what is the Covenant but a bundle of Promises? As ye heard of
the Promises, they are to you, and to your seed: Even so the Covenant, I am
your God, and the God of your seed. Consider the other Answer.

Q. O but I am so unworthy guilty, sinful, graceless, I cannot think that it
belongs to me.

A. For this, consider the second property the freeness of this Covenant, it
is altogether free, from the Lords free favor without any respect to any thing
in thee, it looks at nothing in thee, no worth in thee can procure it; no
unworthiness in thee can hinder it: so that whatsoever thy condition be, thou
needst not fear to lay hold on it. Now this freeness of this new Covenant, is
clear, and may be specified by these particulars. 1. It is free, because it
does not require any prevenient grace or worthiness in us, Isa. 55. where this
Covenant is set down, Ho every one that thirsts, come and buy without money,
etc. So Rev. last, Drink of the water of life freely. Rev. 3 the poor, the
miserable, naked spiritually, are invited and counseled to come. H^s. 14. I
will love them freely. Romans 3. All have sinned, and come short, etc. being
justified freely by his grace; Nothing the Lord stands more upon then the
freedom of his grace, that all the glory and the thanks may be to him. 2. It is
free not only because it does not prerequire or presuppose any worthiness in
us, but it does also take off former guilt; we should remember, that it is made
for the behoof of sinners, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance. We are saved by believing in him who justifies the ungodly. But, I
say, this Covenant takes off even exceeding great bypast guiltiness, as is
clear from Isa. 55. where the Covenant is mentioned, I will abundantly pardon,
Isa. 1. although they were never so great, though as red as scarlet: Isa. 43.
although they were never so many: Ye have wearied me with your transgressions,
etc. Yet I am he, etc. This is a worthy saying, and by all means to be received
by thee, that Jesus Christ came to save sinners: yea and the chief of sinners;
and not only Paul, but him to be a pattern to others, who afterward should
believe in him. Now all these tends to the further manifestation of the riches
of his grace and mercy. Hence it is said, Isa. 43. For his Names sake be
pardons iniquity: now the greater, and the more thy sins have been, the
greater shall be the name of his mercy, and the freeness of his grace. 3. This
Covenant stands not only with bypast guiltiness, but (which shows the
freeness thereof) with much present sinfulness and wretchedness, if felt and
mourned for. This is clear from Ezekiel. 16.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. When I passed by
thee, and saw thee polluted in thy blood, etc. Yet even then I spread my skirt
over thee, and covered thy nakedness: I swear unto thee, and entered into
Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest mine. Then I washed
thee with water, yea I thoroughly washed away the blood from thee, etc. So we
see, how that sinfulness of disposition does not let the Lord to enter into
this Covenant with us, and should not discourage us to lay hold on the
Covenant. See Ezekiel. 36. where there is mention of the Covenant more then once:
Not for your sakes, O house of Israel, be it known unto you: Be ashamed and
confounded for your own ways, but for my Names sake. And he tells them, that
they were a stiff-necked and a rebellious people, rather worse, then better
then other people; And surely there are not more rough pieces of work, and
greater sinners then many on whom the Lord bestows grace; that so the glory of
his mercy, and power of his grace, even divine power may be better known: So
then neither thy works, nor thy bypast guiltiness, nor thy present
sinfulness of disposition ought to hinder thee from laying hold on this
Covenant, seeing it is in all these respects a free Covenant; but, as ye shall
hear, it is the only way to get all these redressed.

Obj. O but this Covenant promises, that I shall have a new heart; be cleansed
from my filthiness, etc. these things I find not: hence is it that justly I
doubt, that the Promises of remission of sins belongs not to me, seeing the
other Promises of sanctification be not accomplished.

A. Thou will not believe that they may be accomplished, think you, that all
the conditions of the Covenant shall be performed to you, or can become yours,
until by faith you lay hold on the Covenant, until by faith you subscribe the
Covenant, and set to thy seal, that God is true, thou have not entered into the
Covenant, nor cannot be said to have done it, until thou subscribe it by
believing, and so no wonder thou have not reaped the benefits of the Covenant;
go to then, and enter thy self in the Covenant, subscribe it, seal it by
believing, and then shall thou find the virtue and benefit of these promises of
Sanctification, and go not to suspend thy believing, because thou find not
the accomplishment of the promises: for ye heard, it is faith that brings forth
holiness, and Sanctification. But the next and last property of this Covenant,
is able to give you satisfaction, and it is the absoluteness and compleatnesse
of this Covenant, I call it a complete Covenant, because the Lord has
undertaken in it to fulfill, both his own part, and our part; what could be
wished for more? so that whatsoever it requires of thee, it promises to give
the same unto thee, as faith, repentance, the grace of prayer, the fear of God,
victory over corruptions; and finally strength to walk outwardly, in the ways
of the Lords obedience. Hence I call it an absolute Covenant, because it not
only has conditional on all promises, promising eternal life, remission of
sins, such and such things to those who believe, repent, love, fear God, etc.
But it has in it, absolute promises, (which properly be the new Covenant)
promising even these very conditions, to wit, faith, repentance, etc. What can
be more sweet and comfortable, certainly, there is not any point in Christian
Religion, more comfortable, or more considerable by us, then is this of the
absolute promises, and of the compleatnesse of the new Covenant, and how that
the Lord has undertaken both for his own part, and our part herein; for want
of considering of this, many poor Christian souls are holden back mightily,
and are discouraged, for they think with themselves many things, and amongst
the rest remission of sins, to be promised to those that fear and love God,
that believe and repent, that seek by prayer, etc. But alas, I want these
conditions, and so have no interest in the promises. Now would such persons
consider, that these very conditions be promised to be wrought in them, and
that so the Lord has undertaken to do them for us, both his part, and ours,
and has undertaken and promised that we shall believe, repent, fear, love,
seek by prayer, so that we have no more to do, but by faith and patience to
cleave unto it, and to wait for the inheriting of those precious promises, when
it shall please the Lord to accomplish them unto us, and in us: what can be
more comfortable then this it gives rest to the soul; and indeed were it not
thus, what should be the excellency and comfort of the doctrine, and tenor of
the Gospel? for it is as hard and impossible, as far without the compass of
our power, as is the tenor of the Law, it is as hard and impossible for us to
believe and repent, (this being the condition and tenor of the Gospel) as it
is to fulfill the whole Law. But herein stands the comfort of the Gospel above
the Law, of the new Covenant above the old, that the Law promises upon
condition, but does not promise nor give strength to perform the condition:
Whereas the Gospel and new Covenant, not only promises upon condition, but
also promises and gives strength to perform the condition it self, to wit,
faith, repentance, the grace and gift of prayer, the fear, the love of God, and
these be the absolute promises. Hence it is that it is said, Heb. 8. to be
established upon better promises, to wit, because here in this new Covenant the
Lord gives unto us absolute promises, not only upon condition, but even the
very condition it self, promises not only to do his own part, but our part
also; these be indeed better promises. And hence is it, that in the same place
he says, they abode not in that Covenant, to wit, in the old Covenant, and
why? Because they undertook fairly for themselves, We will do all that the Lord
commands us. But what says the Lord, knowing their weakness, and the rather
of their undertaking, O that there were such a heart within them! but for this
Covenant, it shall not be so, with them, for I will do their part also, they
shall abide in it, They shall not depart from me, I will write my Law in their
hearts. And hence is it, that Christ is the Mediator of a better Covenant; this
so main a point, should be more taught, and more considered, for it is the very
upholding of a Christian soul, a notable encouragement in the course of
Sanctification, for now thou have no more to do, but to look carefully, what
grace thou want, and then to look for the promise of such a grace; and
having found the promise, thou should labor with all humility to believe
it, and then with that measure of faith that God bestows, thou should
present thy daily Petitions to God, in the name of Jesus Christ, for that grace
to be given unto thee, out of the fullness of Jesus, by the operation of the
holy Spirit, patiently, confidently, fervently, and constantly, prosecuting thy
Suite, from day to day, until the Lord satisfy thee, which he will not fail
to do, if thou thus continue; only thou should be careful to do these two
things, to wit, to believe, and fervently to seek, for these two the Lord
requires, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 18.10. to wit, in an
enlarged desire. And, 2. by faith to receive it, as I conceive it, Ezekiel. 36.37.
I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them:
this is subjoyned to all these precious promises, of the new Covenant, in that
Chapter. So that it is not enough for us to have the Promises, but we must use
the Means of earnest Prayer and seeking; Ye receive not because ye ask not, at
least not so fervently and uprightly as ye should: The prayer of the faithful
avails much, if it be fervent; If thou believe, all things are possible.

Obj. O but I fail in these two, I cannot believe nor pray as I should; and
therefore I fear to come short of these precious promises.

A. Indeed we fail all too much in the fervencie of our seeking, and it is hard
to believe miracles and wonders; for so indeed is the performance of these
Promises, whether it be the subduing of our strong fast hanging on corruptions,
or the supplying of our wants, especially to those who are sensible either of
the one, or of the other, and have continued long under such a sense: O when
shall I get such a corruption subdued, when such a grace wrought? not
considering that God is able to do execeding abundantly above all that we are
able to ask or think: Able to make all grace to abound toward us for his
power. And then for his willingness, more willing to bestow, then we are
ready to seek; gives liberally to all, and upbraids none: counsels thee to
come to him, and get fine gold, etc. These be the two notable props of thy
Faith, in this point. But for the point in hand, thou can not come to
believe, nor to seek as thou should, and therefore thou fear thou shall
come short of the Promises; Even these two, amongst the rest, are promised, to
wit, the grace of faith, and the grace of prayer. Prayer is clearly promised,
Zach. 12.10. Jer. 29.12. A sweet place also, Psalm. 10.17. So Romans 8.26. Faith
is promised, Joh. 12.32. I will draw all men unto me: this drawing is causing
them to believe, for he is the Author and finisher of our faith. No man can
come unto me, unless the Father draw him So Psalm. 89.26. He shall cry unto me,
Thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my salvation. So Jer. 3.19. Thou
shall call me, My Father, and shall not depart from me. Repentance is promised,
the godly sorrow, Zach. 12.43. turning with the whole heart, Jer. 24.7. the
fear of God, Jer. 32.39.

Further, in this Covenant is promised what thy heart could wish for
sanctification, or for strengthening of thy Faith, and making thy calling and
election sure. Thou find and feel an hard and unsound heart, the
sinfulness of thy nature, and this holds thee back from believing; here a new
heart is promised. Feel thou strong corruptions? I will cleanse you from all
your filthiness, etc. Thou feel and fear thy want of outward obedience;
it is promised also, I will put my Spirit within you, etc. And so we see it to
be an absolute and complete Covenant, the Lord in it undertaking both for his
own part and ours; and in it promising, not only upon condition, but even the
very condition it self, which is very comfortable.

To conclude then this point of the Covenant: Go to then, O thou of little
faith, what hinders thee to believe the remission of thy sins, seeing the Lord
God has not only promised it to thee, but even solemnly covenanted with thee,
and then has made with thee for it such a Covenant, so everlasting, so free,
so complete and absolute a Covenant, able to answer all thy doubts.

Obj. O but I am so unworthy that I dare not believe it belongs to me so
graceless and full of wants; so full of bypast guiltiness, of present
sinfulness.

A. In all these respects it is a free Covenant, dispensing with all these
three as ye heard, the Lord undertakes and promises to redress all these
things in thee, so thou will by faith subscribe and enter into this new
Covenant with him: he knows thou art such a one, or else why should he make
such promises to thee, to pardon, to give a new heart, to cleanse thee, etc.
and yet this stays him not to enter into Covenant with thee.

Q. O but I want the condition that should be on my part, I cannot believe, I
cannot repent, how shall I then lay hold on the Covenant for remission of sins,
seeing it is at what time a sinner repents, the Lord will do away his
iniquiti^t?

A. Even these conditions are promised for us, as ye heard; It is an absolute
Covenant, has absolute promises, a complete Covenant, wherein the Lord has
undertaken both for his own part, and for ours.

Obj. But I break the Covenant daily, and how shall I think but that the Lord
will also break with me?

A. It is an everlasting Covenant, although thou break, the Lord will not
break, for he is a God that keeps Covenant and mercy; If thou break, he may
well chastise thee with the rods of men, but his everlasting mercy, his loving
kindness will he never take from thee: yea even in this point of chastisement,
he will give thee leave to prevent him by holding an Assize upon thy self, if
thou will judge thy self, thou shall not be judged; yea although thou fail even
in this, yet he will correct thee in measure, both for degree, laying no more
upon thee, then thou art able to bear: and also for time, his anger indures but
for a moment; O how gracious a God, how gracious a Covenant! And whereas thou
say, thou breakest, thou shall not make a final, nor a full breach: He that
is born of God, sins not. I will put my fear into your heart, that ye shall
not depart from me. Thus far for the comfort and strengthening of faith in this
new Covenant; only a word for caution, and it is this. If ever we think to
find the benefit of this Covenant, we should embrace it fully, that is to say,
not only to be saved, but to be sanctified by it; we must make use of the
Promises, not only of Justification, but of Sanctification also, or otherwise
we shall miss both; we should take heed that we fail not in this, for then we
shall divide what the Lord has conjoined, we shall prove our selves to want
both thankfulness, and sincerity: we may see how the Lord puts these together,
Isa. 56.4. For thus says the Lord, Unto the Eun^^hes that keep my Sabbath, and
do the things that please me, and take hold of my Covenant; these two must go
together. And most clearly; Psalm. 50.16, 17. What have thou to do to take my
Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and eastest my words
behind thee? Our Savior also, the Mediator of the Covenat, he tells us upon
what terms we are to receive it and him, Math. 11. Come unto me all ye that
labor, etc. Stays he here? No, but if he has cased thee of one burden, thou
must take on another; has he eased thee of a great burden, that would have
pressed thee to hell, thou must take up for him a light one; and is it not most
reasonable, to obey him in doing and suffering? take upon you my yoke, My yoke
is easy, and my burden is light; O that we would consider this when we are
about the crucifying of corruptions, the discharging of duties! This also is
clear, Isa. 55. where the Covenant is mentioned, Let the wicked man forsake his
ways, etc. see the place.

The last Mean of strengthening our faith, which I shall propose unto you, is a
very notable one, to wit, to confider the oath of God, concerning this purpose:
this oath is set down, Psalm. 89 Once have I sworn by my holiness unto David:
But most pregnantly, and in most pathetick terms, Heb. 6.16, 17, 18. For (says
he) men swear by a greater, and an oath to them is the end of all strife. As if
he should say, so should it be in this point betwixt God and you, this oath
should put an end to all the strife of our infidelity, which so much opposes
the truth of God. We are very backward to believe, even like an incredulous
body, that will give no trust, he will not believe his neighbor, until he
swear to him, and then he rests satisfied. Even so deal we with the Lord, we
are so backward to believe, so slow to believe, as our Savior speaks, that we
will not believe the Lords bare promise, and yet the Lord of his infinite
goodness, rather pitying, then punishing our infidelity; he condescends thus
far, for willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of Promise, the
immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge unto the hope that is set before us.
There be here many strengthening and confirming words, and greatly comfortable;
and therefore by any means, seeing the Lord has gone so far on with us, let us
not distrust him, let us not strive any more by infidelity against him; but let
this oath be the end of all strife betwixt our infidelity and the Lord: Let us
with Abraham give glory to God by believing, and take to our selves the comfort
of this abundant and strong consolation; yea, let us be afraid to do
otherwise, for, we may see, how fain the Lord would have us to believe, and
how acceptable a thing it is to him to believe, he delights in those that trust
in his mercy; As also how prone we are to infidelity, and how hardly we are
brought to believe; So likewise, we may clearly see, how heinous a sin
infidelity is, for it does not only make the Lord a liar, who cannot lie, but
it is also to make him a Covenant-breaker, who is indeed the faithful one.
Therefore seriously weigh, and effectually improve the Means prescribed; so
shall God be greatly glorified, and thine own Soul eternally saved.

FINIS.

