ASHREA: OR, THE GROVE OF BEATITUDES, Represented in EMBLEMES: And, by the ART
OF MEMORY, To be read on our Blessed SAVIOR Crucified: WITH Considerations and
Meditations suitable to every BEATITUDE.

Hoc pro Beatitudine mea.

Genesis c. 30. London, Printed by J. M. for W. Place, at Grayes-Inn Gate in
Holborne, 1665.

To the Lady M. B.
Madam,
IT is but just, this little Treatise should be particularly addressed to you,
since I am to acknowledge, that the publishing of it, at this time, is, partly,
an effect of that encouragement, which you sometime gave me to do it. The
GROVE, into which I invite you, is the same you thought pleasant, even upon the
first view of it. In one respect, it is indeed but a little one, as consisting,
in all, but of Eight Trees; but when you shall consider them, representing to
you the Eight great Lessons of Christian Resignation, and those again
exemplifi'd upon that Tree, whereon the great Work of Man's Redemption received
its period, you will happily think it a place, where though you retire into it
every day, you may find new and fresh delights, which you may so improve here,
as to attain eternal ones hereafter.

I know, Madam, how constant a practiser you are of the Virtues here
recommended to you, and to what a height of pious exercises you are arrived
thereby; and consequently, that your Apprehensions of Sacred Mysteries need not
the assistances of visible Objects, so much as those of some others may, who,
moving in a lower Sphere, derive from what they see, a deeper and more lively
reflection on what they do not. If these Endeavors of mine may have an
influence only on these latter; if these Emblematical Representations be of
some benefit and advanttage to any, though the least of God's Servants: I shall
neither think them mis-bestow'd, nor be ashamed of their meanness; since what
is done tends to the Acquisition of future BEATITUDE, the End, in order to
which, we have our present Being. That Beatifical State ought to be the Object
of our Thoughts, Wishes, Words, and Actions; How much I wish it to all, let
this little Work; how particurarly to your self, Madam, let the addressing of
it to you, be my Witness: with this further assurance, that I am,

Madam, Your most humble Servant, E. M.

THE PREFACE, Giving a Particular account of the Design and Title of this
little Work; as also of the advantage of Artificial Memory therein.
Courteous Reader,
I Do here present thee with a little Grove of Beatitudes, or Happinesses,
which may be Entitled ASHREA, a word, in the Hebrew Tongue, signifying a Wood
or Grove; derived from Ashar, which signifies to Beatifie or make blessed. May
it be God's good pleasure, that this our Grove may produce the like effect, in
all those, who shall devoutly walk into it.

Man and Beatitude are correlatives; for Man was created for happiness, and
this pre-ordain'd for him. These two are so reciprocally linked, that the word
Ashre (in the sacred Tongue and plural number) signifies both happy Men and
Beatitudes. So that, not only in character and sound, but also in substance
these two seem, as it were, inseparable.

Now whereas this word Ashre (Beatitudes and Happy Men) is sometimes translated
Beatitude or happy Man (as appears in the two first words of the first Psalm)
we may collect a mystical sense, which is, that Man, happy in the plural
number, may (at least in a Cabalistical way) denote, as it were, two men; the
one, in this World, blessed in hope, the other, blessed in Heaven by fruition;
the one, blessed amidst tears, mourning, persecution, etc. the other, blessed,
amidst joy and eternal repose; the one, by Grace, the other, by Glory.

In fine, the verb Ashar (to beatifie) has two other significations; the one
(in Pihel) to conduct, the other (in Kal) to go or proceed. For, where God
conducts by his grace, there man goes forward, and makes some progress, toward
his final Beatitude; in order to the attainment whereof, all our better actions
ought to be done. So that when we have performed any good action, we may say,
with Leah, at her Maid Zilpah's delivery of a Son, HOC PRO BEATITVDINE MEA, May
this, and every action I produce, tend to God's glory, and contribute to the
acquisition of my Beatitude.

I foresee an Objection which some of my Readers may make; and therefore I will
endeavor to satisfy it. It may be questioned, to what end Artificial Memory
should be inserted here, to render a man mindful of Beatitude, since Aristotle
affirms it to be a Good, which all men desire; nay, so great a one, according
to S. Augustine, that both good and evil men are desirous of it? So that being
a thing so connatural to man, how is it to be imagined, he should forget that,
which he so much desires? My answer is, that it is one thing to desire
Beatitude, and another, to know what it is, and wherein it consists.

Whosoever, says S. Augustine, burns with the flames of Avarice, hoards up
wealth to no other end, then to be happy. The like does the ambitious man to
acquire worldly dignities; and the voluptuous, pleasures, wherein they place
their several Beatitudes. But their happiness is such as may be consonant to
their vicious and depraved desires, and consequently inconsistent with that
true Beatitude, which can be pursued only by the good and virtuous.

To open therefore the eyes and ears of mortals, that they might hear and
behold true Beatitude, the Son of God incarnate is said to have opened his own
mouth, when he preached to his Apostles the Eight Beatitudes.

The place, where he pronounced these eight divive Sentences, was, as S. Hierom
thinks, Mount Thabor; and Mount Calvary that, wherein he exemplified them in
himself. So that, as good Examples speak in silence; so our Blessed Lord and
Savior crucified, 1. By his Nakedness; 2. By his Head meekly bowing down; 3.
By his Eyes weeping; 4. By his Mouth, saying, I thirst; 5. By his Side
bleeding; 6. By his pure Heart pierced; 7. By his Hands nailed; and lastly by
his Feet; does teach us what we ought to do in order to our attainment of
eternal bliss.


Behold here the eight places for exercise of this pious Art of Memory, wherein
the devout Reader may find, as it were written, the Eight Beatitudes, in a
Book, which lies always open, to be read, with such large Characters, as the
shortest sight must needs reach, and the weakest memory retain; so lively set
forth, that Beatitude, as in a Crystal-Mirrour, shall still present it self
unto us.

1. For, how can I behold Christ naked, and not remember how poor he was in
Spirit, Will, and Desire, who, living and dying, had no place whereon to rest
his Head?

2. How can I view his dying Head humbly bowing down, with infinite patience,
and not call to mind that, Blessed are the meek, who of this meekest Lamb, may
learn patience and humility?

3. Can I look upon his Eyes, distilling tears (for he wept on the Cross) and
be unmindful, amidst the jollity of a life spent in delights and vanities, that
they are blessed who mourn?

4. Can I fix mine eye on his sacred Mouth, crying out, I thirst, and not be
presented with a remembrance of that true happiness which he pronounced to
those, who hunger and thirst after righteousness, as he himself did, while he
conceived himself straightened, and thought the time tedious, till his hour was
come, to suffer, and satisfy for us, in all rigor of justice?

5. As for his wounded Side, streaming forth blood and water, how can it but
revive and rub up the memory of the dullest and most unmerciful man? How can he
behold that side pierced, and not be wounded with pity and commiseration
toward the necessitous? How can he see that side exhausted of its last
treasure of precious blood for his redemption, and yet forget the poor, and not
relieve the miserable?

6. But when he passes further, and by the rift, comes to behold his Savior's
wounded Heart, O what a copious and fertile place is there for a devout Art of
Memory! Who reads not there, Blessed are the pure of heart? Who finds not there
the Urim and Thummim, words which were inserted in the High Priest's
Breast Plate; but now, in a more perfect manner, enclosed within the pure heart
of our High Priest Christ Jesus? What illuminations! what ardors, which Urim
signify; what perfections! what integrities (expressed by Thummim) were
confined within the narrow limits of that divine heart; which, still open,
still invites the sinner to cleanse with that sacred water, and purify with
that precious blood, his spotted and defiled heart? which must be, by receiving
a wound of true compunction in his own, for the cleansing whereof the most
innocent and pure heart of his Lord and Savior was so pierced.

7. Now for as much as there is a secret sympathy and correspondence between
the heart and the hand, who can elevate his eyes to Christ's right hand nailed
to the Cross, and not call to mind, that Blessed are the peacemakers; and
among them, that great Peacemaker, who, being our Mediator, interposed himself
between God and us, and received the wounds and heavy chastisement, which our
heinous sins deserved? Who can behold both his hands lifted up to heaven, and
not call to mind our innocent Abel, whose blood cries to heaven for mercy, to
reconcile us to his Father? Who can see those sacred hands fastened to the
Cross, and not reflect, that he ought to be so far from inciting others to
dissension, that it should be his main endeavor, to fasten their hands, by an
amicable composure of their differences, and a charitable mediation between
them?

8. Lastly, inasmuch as Persecution belongs to the Feet, either to fly, or stay
and suffer, descend from thy Savior's sacred Hands, to his Feet, in like
manner transfixed with nails. Who is it that can humbly kiss the right foot,
with a kind of hope to be placed on Christ's right hand, and forbear to do the
like to the left, with a compliant heart, ready to suffer persecution for
righteousness sake? Can our memory so far fail us, as, when we fix our eyes on
these tender feet, to be forgetful, how they were blister'd with long journies,
in the search of lost souls; and at last, how, with weary and feeble steps,
they ascended Mount Calvary, to that extreme persecution, thereby to
enfranchise us, and make us capable of admission into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Thus may we behold our second Adam, naked, yet encompassed with Beatitudes,
that he might cloth the sinful naked Adam, who was environed with miseries! If
to remember the last things be not to sin; certainly, to be versed in this Art
of Memory, will be, not only to eschew evil, but also to do good, and to
acquire that Beatitude, which makes a man eternally happy.

And whereas I have so often mentioned this Art of Memory, I now come to bestow
some few lines, by way of direction, to satisfy their curiosity, who are
lovers of it, in order to the advantage they may make thereof.

LOCAL MEMORY depends on several places disposed at a certain distance one from
the other, purposely consigned to quicken the Memorative power. And this is
wrought, by presenting one thing to it by the representation of some other,
accompanied with a reason, why that other was there placed. (...) this means,
Remembrance, or Reminiscence (which is an attendant to Reason) presents us with
that which we had otherwise forgotten. Nay, to use S. Augustine's words, We had
forgotten it in some sort; yet by that part of the thing, which we remembered
(which was the reason why) we seek the other part, which we remember not. For
the Memory being at a loss for want of a full notion, desires what is wanting
may be added, which is the Reason left in the place, and the thing which I left
there, that at my return, I might find it by Reminiscence.

To render what has been said the more easily comprehensible by example; My
place (which, like the first matter, stands in an indifferency as to all forms,
or as soft Wax, susceptible of all impressions) shall be, Jonas swallowed up by
the Whale, which I seem really to behold. Now if I am, for instance, to commit
Usury to this place, I give my reason to my self, to wit, because it devours
men in their Estates.

Again, if the word, or matter, of Obedience occur, I place it on the Whale,
which, commanded by the power of Heaven, was ready to receive Jonas cast
overboard by the Mariners. If afterward, at some other time, Innocence, either
in word or matter, is to be placed on or about the Whale, I dispose it in the
jaws of that Monster, with my reason, because they did not crush or so much as
hurt Jonas, in the reception of him.

Nay, to be short, what is there, but may be, according this Art, placed on the
Whale swallowing Jonas? For instance, If solemn vows or promises; if prayers
and repentance, I place them on Jonas. If I would remember Pride, I place it on
the Nostrils of the Whale, spouti^^ out water into the air. If Humility, I
place it on Musculus, a little fish, which, as some affirm, always goes before
the Whale. If Arrogance occur, or Ambition, I lay it on the Mountain of Water,
which its vast back raises up. If Strength and Impetuosity, I place them on the
tail. In fine, if Combination of little ones to confront the greater, I place
it on a shole of Herrings, attempting to encounter the Whale. The like Method
is to be used as to other heads. And this is a summary account of Local, or
Artisicial Memory.

Now if the Prophet David doubted not to say to God himself, Why do thou turn
away thy face? Why have thou forgotten to be gracious? And, Lord, remember
David and all his troubles; Why may not I (and that, I hope, without offense)
affirm, that a kind of Local Memory may be attributed to God? Nay, why not much
rather remembrance then forgetfulness? The Rainbow shall be in the clouds,
says the Text, as spoken by God himself, And I will look upon it, that I may
remember the everlasting covenant. Here we may say, the place consigned was the
Rainbow, on which the Covenant, to be remembered, was placed; and by that
Rainbow was prefigured Christ, on the Cross, whom his Father beholding is
moved to mercy, and compassion toward sinners.

And why should not we wretched sinners, whenever we behold, or represent to
our selves this Rainbow (to wit, Christ crucified and fastened to the Cross)
diversifi'd with the several colors of red, and white, and black, and blew,
etc. immediately call to mind what he suffered, and for whom he suffered? And,
why may we not, upon that representation, according to the foresaid Art, assign
eight several places, at certain distances, for our better remembrance and
practice of the Eight Beatitudes? And whereas the Lord said, that the Rainbow
should be seen in the Clouds, why may not the representation of our Saviors
bitter Passion be our Remembrancer, how that he was encompassed, not only with
a cloud, but with a total eclipse of heaviness and grief? In fine, if God said,
that he would look upon the Rainbow, that he might remember his Covenant;
ought not we frequently to imagine to selves a sight of him, who is the Angel
of the Covenant, the Prince of Peace, and the Mirror, and great Exemplar of
patience and meekness? When we reflect on his nakedness on the Cross, shall we
not thence derive a certain memento, how poor he was in spirit, and so of the
rest; with a reason, why each Beatitude is consigned to its proper place.

It will not be impertinent, in this place, to bring in what S. Augustine says,
in his Boook of Confessions, lib. 10. as having reference both to our subject,
Beatitude, and what we have delivered concerning our Art of Memory. All of us,
says he, would fain be happy: which if we did not apprehend with a certain
kind of notice we could not all desire it with so resolute a will; which
certain kind of notice may be understood of the Memory, wherein the knowledge
of Beatitude is renewed.

AN INVITATION To the Grove of BEATITUDES.
Emblematically represented by Eight Trees.
HEre no Sylvanus haunts our Grove,
Here no profane wild Satyrs rove,
Nor in our glades,
And blissful shades,
Diana and her Nymphs resort
To chase the nimble Deer, and sport.
A fairer wight,
More pure and bright.
Than rosy morn, that sweetly breathes,
Appears, crowned with immortal wreathes.
The Starrie skies,
With radiant Eyes,
Are not so beauteous, clear, and fair,
Nor, for the night and day, a pair,
That glorious shine;
She Is so divine.
I
Beatitude! whom you may see,
Or (...) with a Cornel Tre^,
Which forward Springs,
And blossoms brings,
Ere levy erests, to shroud appear,
To wanton with the winds, for here,
Unknown before,
In spirit poor,
Beatitude, in her retreat,
Poor in desire has sixth her feat,
In Heaven whose store,
Lasts evermore.
II.
Hence pass along, that you may be
Blessed by your sight, when you shall see
This fair one sit,
Whom never yet
Blind mortals found. Then for her seek,
A Lady humble, gentle, meek,
Whose powerful Hand,
Does seize the Land;
Like is this Arched Tree, which sends
A thousand shoots, for so she bends
Down to the Earth,
Blessed by the birth
Of humble thoughts, which deeply take
Firm root in Heaven, and happy make,
For ever blessed,
When she is possessed.
III.
The weeping Myrrh-Tree next in fight,
Is shading this sad mourning wight:
for as this Tree
Distills, so she
Drops Orient Pearls, which shining, are,
Then Indian Gems, more precious far,
Which never soil:
Sad Grief's the foil.
IV.
Move farther yet into our Grove,
And view the Tree which bears the Clove,
Bloomed like a nail,
You shall not fail
To find her, where, upon the ground
She (thirsting) sits encompassed round,
Midst such a plot,
As yet could not
Admit a nanghty weed to grow;
The sap of Grace she is thirsting so,
Which does impart
Life to the Heart.
V.
She Is gone from thence, fly, fly, make bastes
To follow her, and find her placed
Under the shade,
A Tree has made,
Bears Adam's Apples: No time's lost,
To split them, and behold how crossed
Is every fruit,
Which well does suit
With her, who, wounded deep with Grief,
Feels others wants, and gives relief.
And when you see,
Upon this Tree,
Large spreading leaves, know she is blessed,
Finds Mercy, cause she joys to vest
The naked poor
Tangment her store.
VI.
Yet f^^ther chase this glorious wight,
Be sure to keep her still in sight,
Whom if you lose,
Your Hearts repose
In bliss is gone. See where retired
She ((...)) fits, by Heaven inspird,
With Silver Breast,
To take her resh,
Where Figgs upon the Tree were green,
And hard; until a Gnat was seen
To be so kind,
As wound the rind;
Whose (...) drop descends (...) were,
In Aemulation of a Tear,
Fallne from her Eyes,
Which you may prize,
By blessings which each does impart,
To wash and cleanse an ordur'd Heart,
And purify
The affected Eye.
VII.
She Is risen thence, pursue her still,
You shall, you must, y^^ (...) nill,
Nor covet less
Than happiness.
Behold this active Virgin sits,
Where the sweet amorous Wood-Bind knits
With clasping Arms,
And powerful Charms,
A neighboring pair of Stands which fought
Blown by the winds, till round about
It guirdes, and binds,
And clings and winds;
Like her who never does surcease
(Beatitude!) to link, make peace,
Unite with bands,
Both Hearts and Hands.
VIII.
In fine: This Lady yet removes
Unto a streading Vine, which loves
(That it may bear In time of year)
To have her branches pruned, and gyves
To bind her Arms, for so she thrives,
Fixed to a wall.
But seeming thrall
Is Persecution, which, who takes,
And (patient) hears, be muck forsakes,
And leaves his hold
Of dross, for Gold.
What then is he, so gross, and rude,
That covets not Beatitude?
1. In Spirit poor,
TO abound with store?
2. Meek to possess,
True happiness?
3. Mourn midst annoy,
To reap with joy?
4. Thirst, Hunger still,
To have his fill?
5. Pittiful-kind,
Mercy to find?
6. Pure-hearted, see,
And Blesled be?
7. Peaceful in Life,
Composing strife?
8. Suffer, and take
Affliction, make?
A Crown on Earth, in Heaven of Light,
When fair Beatitude, more bright,
Shall be complete in God, the Abyss
Of joy, and everlasting Bliss.
ASHREA: OR, The Grove OF BEATITUDES: Represented in EMBLEMES.
THE Eight BEATITUDES.
Blessed are the poor in Spirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed
are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for
they shall inherit the Earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
Righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they
shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.
Blessed are the Peacemakers: for they shall be called the Children of God.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for Righteousness sake: for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven.
The First BEATITUDE. Blessed are the poor in Spirit: for theirs is the Kingdom
of Heaven.
EMBLEM I. The Cornel-Tree.
Tam nudus natus homo-1
So naked (Blossom-like) you see
A Man is born. Ah! but if he
In Spirit were as poor! Then which
Amongst Mortals here could I term Rich?


THis Cornelia, or Cornel-Tree, in February begins to bloom, and bears blossoms
long before there is any appearance of Leaves, to secure and shroud them from
the injuries of Wind and Weather. This is the true Emblem of Man, who is born
naked, and springs forth like a tender Blossom; As Job says, Naked came I
from the womb of my Mother, and naked shall I return.

From which we may learn this Lesson, That as man is born poor and naked in
Body, so should he be in Spirit; that is, in Will and Desire; seeing that as he
brought nothing into this World, so shall he not carry any thing out of it.

Now forasmuch as man is naturally too apt to be over-sollicitous for the
things o^ this World, he may learn from this Cornell-Tree, That if he make it
his first Endeavor to bud, and blossom, and fructify in Virtue, a short time
will furnish him with all the consequent Advantages and Conveniences of Humane
Life. For, this Tree does afterward plentifully bring forth Leaves, to shelter
and shadow its Fruit: As if it should say, according to our Blessed Savior's
expression, First seek the Kingdom of Heaven; first bloom in Virtue, nourished
by the sap of Grace, spreading it self from the Root of Christian Humility,
into all the Boughs and Branches; that is, into all your Actions; and all other
things shall be added unto you. Leaves shall not be wanting, that is, Clothes
to cover you; besides other Necessaries, which are all in fine but Leaves: Nay,
Honors and Dignities, what are they but withering Leaves? What, Wealth or rich
Apparel, but Leaves, whereof Man is soon despoiled, and left poor and naked?
What, voluptuous Pleasures, but Leaves, which so soon as enjoyed shrink up and
vanish?

Oh! what a bleak Autumn and Fall of the Leaf (sudden, and unexpected) is that
we find in this our Vale of Misery! Who then would not be poor in Spirit, and
naked in his Affections to the leafy Creatures of this transitory Life, that he
may bloom to Eternity?

This is the poverty, which lightneth the heart of Man, formerly clogged with
too much care and follicitude. With this poverty of Spirit a Man runs freely
toward Heaven his Country.

With this is accompanied Humility, which lesseneth Man to himself, that he may
lie hidden and secure, like a Blossom, under the Leaves, never to be blasted
with Pride.

On this Humility Patience attends, and enables a Man to suffer with Christ. It
is the Enemy and Self-love that surcharge Man with worldly cares, riches, and
vices; which are but Leaves, without the Blossoms of Virtue. These are they
which puff up Man with ambitious thoughts, that he, high aspiring, may find a
precipice. These incite great Spirits to toil and labor; yet so as that, out
of breath even to the World, they may happily at last reflect on Christ
crucified, and, in his nakedness, read, Blessed are the poor in Spirit; for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Might not he be said to be poor in Spirit, that lies gasping and laboring for
breath, while every minute he apprehends Death at his Elbow, ready to stifle
him? To be as poor in Spirit in another sense, is to conceive the like; That
death is neighboring as near unto us, which when it comes, dismantles the
covetous Heart of Man, as well as his Body. Why then shall not I prevent him,
by being disengaged from the extreme desire of Riches, and verify what S.
Jerome assures us to be true; Caput jam canescit, prope est aest as vitae, falx
acuitur, instat messor terribil^. Gr. Nazianz.
That He easily contemns all things, who is always thinking that he shall die:
That, if his Body be a flourishing green Meadow, Death, the Mower, is at hand:
That, if it be a beauteous Flower, in an instant it is cropped: And finally, If
his Life be but a vapor, it is soon dispelled.

Ah! what an earthy substance interposeth 'twixt the Heart of Man and the Sun
of Justice! And what a dark Eclipse is thereby caused in their Souls who are
not poor in Spirit?

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE I. BEATITUDE.
Of our Blessed Savior's Nakedness upon the Cross.
THe Crucifix, or Representation of our Blessed Savior crucified, is a Book,
wherein may be read the Eight Beatitudes, preached by him when he was upon
Earth, as some conceive on Mount Thabor; and afterward exemplifi'd in him on
Mount Calvary.

At first aspect, as your eye reflects on Christ crucified, you behold him
naked, by which you may read the first Beatitude, Blessed are the poor in
Spirit; that is to say, poor in Will and Desire of having any thing of this
World; and therefore he would die as naked as he came into it: Teaching us
hereby, how naked we should be in our Affections, ready to be despoiled of
worldly Riches for his sake; And so poor in Spirit, as to lose our last breath,
rather then deny our Faith, or him, by preferring his Creatures before him.

Consider how poor our Lord and Savior was in Spirit, who did annihilate and
evacuate himself, taking upon him the form of a Servant; And how, for thy
Redemption, he gave himself unto thee, and for thee; to restore thee to thy
self, who were lost and utterly undone by sin.

Now seeing he may wholly claim thee by right of Creation, whereby he gave thee
to thy self; what have thou left to render unto him for thy Redemption? In the
Creation of the World he spoke the word, and it was done; but to redeem Man, he
spoke, did, and suffered that for which thou art infinitely indebted.

Say then with the Prophet David, What shall I render to our Lord for all that
which he has given me: He desires but my self, poor in Spirit, and naked in
mine Affections to the transitory things of this Life; which cannot be, till I
abandon my self, whom while I cherish and pamper, through disordinate love, I
shall still be coveting the pelf of the World, pleasures, dignities, and
self-esteem; so far from being poor in Spirit, Will, and Desire, that I am
involved and clothed, as it were, with a burden of earthly Cares and
Concupiscences, which having cast off by poverty of Spirit, we walk more freely
toward Heaven our Country.

A Beggar, the more naked he appears, the more he moves to pity and compassion,
and with more confidence intrudes to receive an Alms then another in better
Apparel. So, to beg an Alms from God, from whom every good and perfect gift
descends, present thy self as naked and poor in Spirit as thou can:
Acknowledge thy self to have been hitherto an unprofitable servant; naked, as to
all desert; poor and abject in Spirit, not having served him with alacrity in
time of afflictions, crosses, or desolations of soul.

Then make a generous resolution for the time to come, with a humble
resignation, to desire or have nothing but with conformity to his holy Will and
Pleasure, and say;

O most poor, and most enriching Lord, who do invest and cloth all, yet on
the Cross art naked: Bounteous in thy spiritual Graces and Favors; yet so poor
in Spirit and Desire, that thou have no place whereon to rest thy dying head;
yet have promised a Kingdom to those who, with thee, are poor in Spirit.
Behold, I renounce here whatsoever the flattering World shall allure me with: I
abandon all rather than forsake thee: Nay, not only these exterior things; but
I also desire to be so naked and poor in Spirit, as not to have a Memory, but
to call to mind and think often of thy infinite Mercy and Love toward me; no
Understanding, but to ruminate and seriously ponder thy manifold Sufferings,
and Benefits conferred on me; no Will, but to love thee, and my Neighbor in,
and for thee: In such sort, that being entirely resigned to thy holy Will and
Pleasure, I may say with thine Apostle, I live; now not I, but Christ lives in
me.

Were not he in some sort poor in Spirit, that should (if it were possible)
live and breathe move and speak, by (...) own? Such was S. Paul's, in whom
Christ (I may say) lived and breathed, moved and spoke.

Contrariwise, How rich were he in Spirit (in Will and Desire) whose Soul
should be wholly addicted to Self-love, and proper Interest? That breathes
nothing wherein Christ is concerned, but pursues only Ambition, (a Spirit that
swells and puffs up the heart?) That moves not but by the agitation of a
coveting Spirit: Like a Silkworm; in fine, to involve it self in a web of
darkness and oblivion:

It is a great and shameful abuse (says S. Bernard) for Man (a poor and abject
Worm) greedily to covet Riches, for whom the Lord of Majesty vouchsafed to be
poor. A shame to be always toiling and weaving like a Silkworm; which as it
shrowds it self more and more, is the nearer death, to leave to Posterity a
silken web for Pride; as a Parent does often-time his Inheritance, after a life
unhappily consumed in avaritious Desires, which, like a gloomy Cloud, had so
darkened the eye of the Soul, that she (which had been infused into the Body
like a ray from Heaven) was even obscurity it self: As S. Augustine complains;
The blindness of man's heart is so great, and the inward ear of the Soul so
deaf, that he desires to have all things but himself; which must be such a
Self, as he may truly say with David, What is there in Heaven for me? and
(being poor in Spirit) what do I desire on Earth but thee? My flesh and heart
faints and languisheth; my Spirit is poor and enfeebled, to all that which this
World presents me with; Thou (O Lord) art the God of my heart, my portion, my
God for ever.

Unhappy then are the avaritious, who have a god (Gold their Idol,) but not for
ever; rich in the desire of earthly trash, but unhappily poor in Spirit; that
aspire not to the possession of that Treasure which no rust shall canker, nor
length of time consume.

How can I behold the naked Blossom springing from the Cornell-Tree in cold
February, and not remember how I came into this wretched World, exposed to
Hunger, Thirst, cold, heat, weariness, Infirmities, Death? Poor Blossom Man!
How soon blasted, how suddenly withered! which all thy leafy Riches cannot
prevent. Who then would not rather be poor in Spirit? as naked in his
Affections to worldly pelf, as his Savior dying naked on the Cross? But naked,
to enrich me; hungring and thirsting there, but to save me; cold, to infuse
into my Soul the ardors of his Love; exposed to heat, but to quench my
immoderate Desires; weary, to refresh me; weak, to strengthen me; and finally,
dying, to give me a life of eternal Beatitude, in a Kingdom which he has
promised to the poor in Spirit.

I will consider why King Danid is said to have swept his Spirit, meditating
with his heart in the night. Was it not by sweeping, to cast out of doors the
dust of worldly cogitations, and terrene desires; which, like dust, obscures
and even blinds the eyes of the Soul? Was he not poor in Spirit, when he had
swept together and cast out the dust of transitory things, that he might
contemplate the eternal? Therefore he said in the precedent verse, That he had
thought of the ancient days and time of Man's life, wherein he enjoys Riches and
worldly felicity; to which he opposing the Riches of Heaven and Eternity, says,
He retained in mind the everlasting years.

If we have our several rooms in the vast habitacle of our Soul, none is so
often to be swept as that where intrudes solicitude to be harbored,
accompanied with care and anxiety of mind, together with fear, that presents us
with the future losses or crosses which may occur: And therefore, for
prevention, all the powers of the Soul are summoned to be vigilant and
cautious, for the safeguard and increase of wealth, by which poverty in Spirit
and Will is cast out of doors.

The Second BEATITUDE. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the Earth.
EMBLEM II. The Indian Fig Tree.
Sic suvat esse tenacem-2
So do the Meek, to fix their Roots,
Humbly let down as many Shoots,
As good Desires, which spring from Love,
Take root in Heaven, the Land above.


THis Tree, above all others, may be said to be possessed of, or to inherit the
Earth: For the Branches of it, bending downwards to the ground, no sooner touch
it, but they immediately take root, and grew up into other Trees, which
afterward produce others; so that in time they spread over all the ground they
meet with; and yet all, though straggling over a great quantity of ground, way
be sold to be but one Tree. Another thing commonly observed of these Trees is,
that they afford a secure retreat, not only to the wild Boars, and other
Beasts, but also to the Inhabitants of those Countries where they grow, who,
having garrisoned themselves within them, defy all Enemies.

In like manner, a pious and fructifying Soul, in order to her possession of
the Land of the Living, produces many active thoughts, diffuses her self into
good actions; which yet obeying the check of Humility, descends, to be more
deeply rooted. Thus the Meek (...) on and lay hold of that which is their
heavenly Inheritance, de virtute in virtutem, passing from one Virtue to
another, and saying with S. Augustine, As yet I follow; yet I profit; yet I
walk; yet I am in the way; yet I dilate my self yet I arrive not.

Behold, how like this Indian Fig Tree, the devout Soul makes her progress, and
advances forward, still taking new root, still laying faster hold, never
accounting her self secure, or that she has done enough, as submitting to the
advice of the same S. Augustine, to wit, this; Let that which thou art always
displease thee, if thou will arrive to what thou art not. For (says he
elsewhere) wherever thou make a stop, without proceeding any further, there
thou please only thy self. A man must not therefore six a Ne plus ultra to
his better thoughts and Actions, but go on, like this Tree, and be continually
supplied with good Desires, as that produces new shoots, which as it were
grasp the Earth, to take a firmer and fuller possession thereof.

Moreover, we find by experience, that when a Tree is slightly planted, or its
roots decayed, there needs no great storm to overthrow it. Such is that man who
is not humbly meek and patient: One violent puff of anger is able to dispossess
him of the Land; yea, and of his own Soul, which cannot be possessed but by
patience, nor by any but the meek and humble.

Now if you demand why the meek are rather said to possess the Land, than any
other Element; I answer, While our Savior was mortal, he appeared to his
Disciples walking on the waves of the Sea, to intimate thereby the mutability
of man during this life: But after his Resurrection, having a glorified Body,
he stood on the firm Land, to signify (as S. Gregory expounds) that after this
life man shall enjoy a permanent tranquillity and repose in the Land of the
Living.

The Earth patiently (as I may say) supports all, and continues immovable: So
does the meek and humble man; while the haughty and impatient are inconstant,
like the Air; turbulent, like the Sea; and crackle and sparkle, like the Fire.

When the like happens unto thee, reflect thine eye on the sacred Head of thy
Redeemer meekly bowing down, while the ungrateful Jews revile and blaspheme
against him, where he says, Learn of me, for I am meek and humble of heart,
and you shall find rest in your Souls, tranquillity in your though is, and, in
fine, that solid land that shall render you for ever happy; the Land of the
living, which I now purchase for you; the Land of Promise, into which I am your
Joshua to conduct you; from Egypt (the World) a Land of Servitude, to a Land of
Freedom and Immunity; from feeding on Garlic and Onions, to taste the sweet
Repast of Angels.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE II. BEATITUDE.
Of the bowing down of our Blessed Savior's Head.
HAving in the precedent Beatstude learned a lesson of Poverty, by the
consideration of our Saviors nakedness on the Cross, behold here his sacred
Head meekly bowing down, whereby is expressed the second Beatitude, Blessed are
the meek; for they shall inherit, or possess, the Earth. Now as those Waters
which lie next the Shore, may be said to possess the Shore, at least during a
Calm, so it can only be affirmed of the meek and patient man, that he
possesses his Soul; according to the words of our Savior, In your patience
you shall possess your Souls; and, Learn of me, for I am meek and humble of
heart, and you shall find rest to your Souls; a quiet calm, and sweet repose.

To be meek, is to converse without giving offense, and to bear injuries
without thought of Revenge, or perturbation of Mind; as our Lord did, with head
meekly inclined, while the Jews uttered Blasphemies and Contumelies against him.

Having this Precedent still before my eyes, I will resolve in this Book to
study meekness and patience, not rendering evil for evil, but by good to
overcome evil.

And the better to conceive the excellency of Meekness, I will make a lively
representation to my self of the Vice which is contrary thereto, by a swelling
and tempestuous Sea, whose Billows, raised by the Winds, violently beat against
the Rocks on the Shore. Foaming thus with fury are the wrathful and impatient.

Then reflect thine eye on our Lord meekly bowing down his Head, like a calm
Sea, or like a Sheep despoiled of his Fleece, naked on the Cross, opening not
his mouth, but to pray for his Enemies, saying, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do.

Think what Land it is which the meek shall possess. If the Earth thy Body,
thou shall have possession of it, and dominion over it by meekness, while thy
Passions are subject to reason. Contrariwise, the wrathful are so transported,
that losing as 'twere themselves, they are cast out of possession of
themselves, while the Heart swells with Envy, the Eyes sparkle with Fury, the
Feet are running, and the Hands ready to execute Revenge; like one fallen into
a deep River, who not able to swim nor touch ground with his Feet, is
overwhelmed, and in danger of drowning.

Behold the state of an angry and revengeful Man, who possesses not the Land
of solid Patience, being wholly drowned in his turbulent Passions; loses
himself utterly for a time, as a man distraught; whom by meekness God should
here possess in the Land of the Dying, that he may be possessed of God for ever
in the Land of the Living, which is promised to the meek.

Let him therefore who is become so absolutely a slave to that passion, make
this short Ejaculation to the great Exemplar of Meekness.

O patient Redeemer and meek Lamb, who take away the sins of the World; If by
beholding the brazen Serpent, the poison of Serpents was expelled; how can I
behold thee, the pure and unspotted mirror of Meekness, and yet retain enmity
and rancor in my heart? If no storms and blustering winds are predominant at
Sea, while the Halcyon is nestling and brooding near the shore, grant all
stormy Passions may be allayed by thy powerful presence in my heart; by thee
only, who art the solid Land, and my total happiness; which I beseech I may
possess here on Earth by Grace, and afterward in Glory.

Let Worldlings contend, and vex themselves about recovery or possession of
Lands, of which they must in fine be dispossessed; It is good for me to adhere
to God, and seek him in the Land of the Living, where the humble, meek, and
patient (whose Hearts on Earth were a place of sweet repose) enjoy him in
eternal tranquillity.

The Kingdom of Heaven is within you (says our Lord:) And consequently, that
firm and complete tranquillity of Heaven begins on Earth by Grace, to be
perfected by Glory. Within this little Kingdom of ours, what a commotion is
raised by wrath! what a perturbation by enmity! what a rebellion, when Meekness
and Patience is banished out of the Soul by Passion!

When such mutinies therefore arise within me, whither shall I hasten for
redress? To whom shall I seek for assistance? but to the wounded Head of my
Savior, meekly bowing down to give me the kiss of Peace, and infuse meekness
into my Soul! But now (alas!) he is not able by words to command the storm to
cease, as he did when his Apostles feared drowning. No. But will it not suffice
to pacify thee (O my Soul) enraged, to behold thy Lord and meek Lamb more
firmly fixed by patience and meekness, then by the nails that transfixed his
hands and feet? What a commotion was then in the Universe? the Earth opening,
Rocks splitting, the Temples Veil rending, the Thief reviling, and the Jews
blaspheming. And if at that time the Stars were shining, they were like so many
Eyes to admire the wonderful meekness and patience of our Redeemer.

In fine, If the corporal Eye, dulled and dazzled with a long and tedious aspect
of glittering objects; If (I say) that be refreshed by looking steadfastly on a
green Emerald, shall not the sight of his sacred Head meekly inclining, be as
powerful to banish from the inward Eye that dark cloud of passionate wrath that
circumvolves and stupifies the intellectual part?

I will go (said Moses) and behold this great Vision, why the bush that burns
consumes not. For could he expect less than a crackling noise from a thorny
Bush environed with Flames? If this were miraculous, what is it to behold that
very God of Abraham, God of Isaac, and God of Jacob (which appeared in the
Bush) with a Head meekly bowing down, wreathed with a Crown of Thorns, amidst
flames of Love, burning, but not consuming; meekly hearing the Jews, and
patiently suffering, while they blasphemed, reviled, and scorned him? O my
Soul, what a great Vision is this to iuvite thee to meekness and patience! Thou
likewise art enclosed as in a thorny Bush, (thy Body) where for a light injury,
or small affront, thou do not only burn, but art even consumed with the flame
of wrath and indignation, sparkling and crackling like a Fire amongst Thorns.

To prevent the like flames of fury, go sometimes to see this great Vision, the
Head of thy Savior crowned with Thorns, meekly bowing down, and as it were
beckning unto thee, to come and learn of him, to be meek and humble of heart;
learn to possess thy self, and thereby take possession of the Land which he
has promised to the meek and humble of heart.

God placed in the Clouds his bended Rainbow that he might be mindful of his
Covenant; and on the Cross he has fixed his only begotten Son, whose head
meekly bending while he beholds, he becomes a meek and merciful God to man, who
by his manifold sins provokes him to wrath. How then, can thou elevate thine
eyes sparkling with wrath against them that injure thee, and not be pacified,
when thou beholdest this meek wounded Head, bowing down to give thee the kiss
of Peace: meekly hearing, and patiently bearing blasphemous words and wrongs
that were so outrageous and injurious to Innocence? What then should a guilty
soul patiently suffer for his sake? If His sacred head be crowned with sharp
thorns, would thou have thine (notwithstanding) be encompassed with Roses? If
his head meekly bow down, shall thine be raised up by pride? or threaten
revenge to them that offend thee? Finally, if his brow pierced with thorns, be
not any way contracted with wrinkles against his enemies, smooth thy furrowed
brow by meekness, and, for his sake, and according to his example, love even
those that hate thee.

The Third BEATITUDE Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.
EMBLEM III. The Myrrhe-Tree.
Tam lachrymosus homo -- 3
So of himself, as soon as born,
The tender Bahe begins to mourn;
But after, pierced with griefs and sears,
He Is more and more distilling tears.


THe Myrrhe-Tree, of it self naturally distil's, and, as it were, sheds tears;
but more abundantly when it is pricked and wounded. Behold the Emblem and Type
of Man, who is born weeping, as being ( to use Saint Austin 's expression) a
Prophet presaging his own future calamities.

Man likewise naturally weeps for the loss or death of a dear friend; so does a
Parent for his lost, or deceased Child; as Jacob did for Joseph, and David for
his Son Ahsalon. Such tears ought to be moderate, according to the saying of
the Son of Sirach, Modicum plora super mortuum: Weep not much over the dead.

Temporal losses and afflictions do also force tears, from those who suffer
them, as they did from Job cap. 24. v. ult. My harp also is turned to mourning,
and my organ into the voice of them that weep.

But when a man sheds tears out of remorse and compunction, he is wounded like
the Myrrh-Tree. Thus was David wounded, when he said, In the nightime, I will
wash my bed with my tears. What sins how great and enormous soever, but may be
swallowed up in such a flood, as Pharaoh and his Army was in the red Sea? Or
what Flames can be so great, as not to be extinguished by such a fountain?

There are likewise tears of Compassion, as Job says, I wept over him that was
afflicted, and my soul took compassion on the poor. After this manner, David
weeps for Saul; and Tobias for his Country men, oppressed with miseries.

With like tears of Commiseration, we may mourn with our Lord, while we
meditate on his bitter Passion: for, as S. Agustine says, He is not a true
member of Christ's Body, that weeps not with the Head.

There are likewise tears of Devotion, which issue forth out of an ardent
desire to enjoy the happy Vision of God. Or, when a devout Soul, replenished
with the sweetness of God, mourns for the absence of her beloved Spouse. For,
Love (says S. August.) is impatient, neither is there any moderation in tears,
unless the Lover may enjoy that which he loves.

Tears likewise are shed by devout persons, when they behold grievous sins
committed, which are so injurious and offensive to Almighty God. After this
manner Esdras wept, and the Apostles for their Lord, when he was so cruelly
treated by the Jews, as he had foretold, saying, you shall mourn and weep.

Moreover, tears are shed by those, who, out of Devotion, and excess of
spiritual joy, even melt with the contemplation of heavenly Mysteries. Which
kind of joy, S. Augustine had experienced, when he assures us, that the more a
devout Soul is filled with holy and fervent desires, the more abundantly he
weeps in Prayer; and mourns, as David did, crying out, Ay is me that my
sojourning and abode on earth is prolonged: I have dwelt with the inhabitants
of Kedar; my soul has been a long time a stranger. Therefore my tears have
been bread to me day and night, while it is said unto me, Where is thy God?

Our blessed Savior speaking of his Passion, calls it a Baptism, by which his
sacred body was bathed in blood, and his face in tears, like the Myrrhe-tree
wounded on all sides and parts of his body with thorns, whips, nails, and
spear. Behold him in this sad and heavy plight, mourn and weep with him, while
he exemplifies in himself the third Beatitude, Blessed are they who mourn, for
they shall be comforted.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE III. BEATITUDE.
Of the Eyes of our Blessed Savior weeping.
IN this third Beatitude, consider a happiness opposite to flesh and blood,
viz. to weep and mourn; which our Lord did many times, but never was seen to
laugh. He mourned and wept on the Cross, and was comforted; seeing by the
effusion of tears, and blood, he was to redeem us from the tyranny of Satan.

Mourning is an attendant as unseparable from man, as the shadow from the body.
He that condoles the death of a dear friend, mourns in black for a year. How
long then, shall he mourn that lives as an exile upon earth! If he call to mind
his manifold sins, how can he do less then mourn? Or, if he seriously think of
the dreadful day of Judgment, how can he but fearfully consider what he shall
be, and mourn, not knowing the event. Or, if he fix his thoughts on the many
miseries and dangers of this Life, should he not mourn, considering where he
is? Or finally, elevating his eyes from the residence of mortality, can he
contemplate the joys of Heaven, and not aspire and sigh with David, because
his sojourning is prolonged? not mourn, because he is not where he would be?

O my Soul, What have thou been? Sinful. Where shall thou be? As yet it is
unknown. Where art? A Prisoner in thy Body, in a vale of tears. Where art thou
not? Not in Heaven; not with God thy Center, but in the way a Pilgrim going
toward him. Run, then, that thou may comprehend; And seeing to be dissolved,
and he with Christ is thy happiness, weep with him, that with him, and by him,
thou may be comforted.

Here pause a while, and then consider; To contemn the world, is to be poor in
Spirit. To have Repose of Mind is to be meek; after which follows Mourning. For
if a Man attend to himself and others, he shall find nothing but what is
lamentable, while he beholds his own, and all the enormous crimes of the world,
which is altogether bent to malignities; Who then can be so insensible as not
to mourn? so dry as not to shed one tear?

O my Soul, Is it thou which art so barren? If to suffer with Christ be to
reign with him; to be comforted, thou must weep with him. If he call thy sins
his own, if he mourn for thine, as if they were his own; if he shed tears, to
wash away thy sinful blotts: can thou forbear weeping? Can thou be so
stony-hearted, as not to be transfixt with grief, seeing his tender Heart
wounded, and his Eyes shedding tears for thy sins? Not one tear for thy self,
while he showers down so many to purify, and cleanse thy festering Heart,
soyl'd with so many Crimes!

O blessed Savior! Thou art the true Moses, and have a Rod to strike, as well
as to guide; wound (I beseech thee) this stubborn Rock of mine, this obdurate
Heart, that it may bleed with grief, and sorrow for my sins; That mine Eyes may
gush forth with tears: for this is the only grief which I desire; this, the
mourning which produces Consolation: for thou have said it, Blessed are they
that mourn, for they shall he comforted; in this Life, with spiritual solace,
given to true penitents; and in the future, with perpetual joy, in perfect
Beatitude.

Perfect Beatitude! Complete Happiness! O! shall I not mourn to find comfort
there? Or shall I rather seek the fleeting Pleasures, and transitory
Consolations of worldly felicity: which to enjoy, is instantly to be reduced to
mourning. Shall I not (then) mourn, and sigh after those Comforts, which, once
obtained, shall exempt me from all mourning?

Alas! Whither can I cast mine Eye in this vale of tears, and not behold an
Object that extracts tears, and invites to mourning? Here I behold manifold
diseases; There dysastrous and untimely deaths; In this place, mortal Hatred
accompanied by Revenge; In that, I hear Detractions, horrible Oaths, and
Blasphemies, with infinite miseries and calamities. And if I reflect an Eye on
my self, what mutinies of rebellious Passions and disordinate Appetites I
discover in my own bosom, which made even Saint Paul himself mournfully to cry
out, Ay me! unhappy Man, Who shall deliver me from the body of this death, that
is, from a body which causes a spiritual death to the Soul.

Notwithstanding all this, shall I think to transform this our vale of tears
into a Paradise of delights? This our gloomy shade and shadow of death, into a
solid substance of joy and contentation? Do I not know that Enosh (a Man, in
the Hebrew Tongue) signifies one subject to diseases, infirmities, and
miseries? What then is this wretched world, but an Hospital for the sick, and a
House of Lazars; with which, what suites better than mourning?

How can I (then) but reflect on my self, and bewail what I am; a Child of
Adam, born of a Woman (says Job) and living but a short time, subject to many
miseries. Amongst which, shall I live in jollity, with the Voluptuous; sport,
with the Libertine; gourmandize, with the Epicure; joy in worldly pelf, with
the covetous; or in honors, with the ambitious? No: I have reputed laughter an
error, (says the Wiseman) and to joy, I said, Why art thou in vain deluded?
The end of joy is seized on by sorrow and mourning. And it is better to go to
the house of mourning, then to the house of banqueting. Better is it, amidst
of afflictions to mourn with our Lord weeping on the Cross, than amidst vain
joys and transitory delights, to exult with the impious. Better to shed one
tear with thy Redeemer, drenched in a briny flood, than a thousand for temporal
disasters.

Ah! methinks I see dropps of blood distilling from his Head, wounded with
thorns, and from thence descending to his weeping Eyes, to make a mixture, such
as was in his Heart, of blood and water. Tears from his Eyes trickling down his
pale cheek, to ascend from thence to the Throne of his Father, to speak in my
behalf. As David said, (it may be in the person of Christ) Hearken unto my
tears. And shall I join with him in this Petition, exhibited for the washing
away of my sins, and yet not distill one tear? Shall the Master of Requests
present to his Majesty, the Humble Petition of some great Del^nquent, with
tears in his Eyes; and the party (guilty) stand by, not only tearless, but
also with a merry countenance? Nay, should he second it with laughter, what
were it but to make expression of the little (or no) resentment and feeling he
had, of his crime and present peril?

Such is the state of voluptuous sinners, who are so far from mourning, that
they rejoice in evil-doing, spend their days in mirth and jollity, and in an
instant descend to Hell.

Oh! rather let us sit with the Israelites by the Rivers of Babylon, (fleeting
delights of the world), elevate our Eyes to our Heavenly Country, and mourning,
say, How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange Country, the world, into
which we came weeping, surcharged but with one sin, and shall we not mourn
here, overloaden with many? Not return to Earth, (from whence we came) pouring
out (if it were possible) a flood of tears for the expiation of our manifold
crimes?

The Myrrh-Tree wounded, distills abundantly tears; so may the Sinner, pierced
to the heart by compunction. The Turtle mournes for the absence of her Mate; so
may the Soul of the just Man, to be united to her beloved Spouse. The Heart
transfixt with an Arrow dies weeping; so may the sinner wounded by true
contrition, dye to himself, and live to Christ. A fish lives by waters, and a
Christian was born again by water; And, living in a vale of tears, should be
like Ros Solis, a plant which even in the heat of Summer is always replenished
with dew; like a Magdalen, who obtained remission by tears, and by tears was
accompanied by our Savior weeping: And finally, by tears, had the prerogative
to see him first risen from death.

The Fourth BEATITUDE. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness: for they shall be filled.
EMBLEM IV. The Clove-Tree.
Sicamor attrahat ardens 4.
Be so attractive that no weed,
(Pernicious) near the Soul may breed:
So Thirst and Hunger, not in part,
Virtue 's the Clove bloomes in the Heart.


THis Tree may in an especial manner be said to hunger and thirst, as having
such an attractive power, that it draws to it self all the heart and moisture
of the ground where it grows; insomuch that for a considerable distance round
about it, the Earth is so far from hearing any thing of Grass or other Plants,
that it is absolutely smooth and bare.

When the fruit is come to maturity, it is not gathered, but beaten down upon
the said bare plot; and having been left there a certain time to wither, it is
brought into Europe, and is one of the most advantageous Commodities brought
from the East Indies.

In the Spanish Tongue it is called, Clavos, in the French, Cloux, that is to
say, Nails, from its near resemblance thereto; and thence in English, they are
called Cloves. At first they are white, afterward they become green, and at
last they turn red.

Nay, it has been lately discovered as a cheat of the Inhabitants, who have
the management and disposal of this precious Spice, that, some time before they
look for the arrival of the Ships out of Europe, they carry up into the
Storehouses, where they keep their Cloves, several great vessels full of
water, which in a short time is attracted by the Cloves, and adds much to their
weight, yet so as that neither the Sight nor Feeling can make any discovery of
the imposture.

Behold here the pertinent Emblem of a truly-Christian Soul, hungring and
thirsting after righteousness; and so earnestly attracting the nourishing
moisture of Heavenly Grace, that there is no entertainment for any pernicious
weed of sin, so much as to take any root near her.

But possibly, some one will say, that this Tree draws all to it self. It Is
true, it does so: but not to the advantage only of it self. For that moisture
and strength which it draws from the Earth, is diffused into the several parts
of it, in order to the production of blossoms and Fruit. And so it should be
with the devout Christian, who hungers and thirsts after righteousness; what
juice he extracts out of the root of spiritual Contemplations, ought to spread
its vigor into his Life and Actions, as he stands accomptable to his Creator,
his Neighbor, or Himself; whereby the great Author of all Gifts and Graces may
be glorified.

Again, if it be said that the Clove-Tree is so attractive, as to draw all the
moisture to it self for its own benefit; In like manner, the hungry and thirsty
Christian should make his advantages of all things, in pursuit of the Kingdom
of Heaven and the righteousness thereof.

Moreover, whereas it is the design of Nature, that this Tree as well as all
other Plants, should bring forth their several fruits for the service and
benefit of Man; he may thence learn, that he also ought to render to his
Neighbor what in justice is due to him.

In fine, Whereas the Cloves are first white; next, green; and lastly, red; May
they not instruct us (confidering our best fruits are but Blossoms) that our
intentions should be candid and sincere, and relate only to Gods glory?

And when green, may they not as aptly signify, that our better works are but
green blossoms, not perfect Fruits, for want of maturity?

Lastly, what are our works but red Cloves, when they are dignified by Christ's
precious blood? Cloves on the Tree must be beaten down to come to perfection,
and after gathered; So must all our works, to be humbly presented to the Eye of
Mercy; not of Justice: In whose fight who can be justified?

The parched Clove is for the use of Man; And the work that shrinks up with
fear, is grateful to God. But how shall a Soul have her fill by hungring and
thirsting after Justice? What satiety, what full content can there be in this
world? Certainly none, till it enjoyes the sight of God.

Hence we may infer, (with Saint Thomas) that in Virtue there is only a
resemblance of future Beatitude. Say, our righteousness like a Clove appear
white; how pure so-ever, it is but a blossom, which receiving a tincture of
green, (the symbol of Hope) we are thereby enabled to proceed; For Hope may be
termed a Clove, or Nail, by which we are fixed to God in his promise, and
fasten in his mercy, while the red Clove, or deep-piercing nail of Justice
penetrating the Heart, produces fear, to which likewise being as firmly fixed,
we freely serve God with fear, and exult with trembling. Mean while, let us
seem to hear our Savior say, I thirst, whereby is exemplified the Fourth
Beatitude; Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they
shall be filled.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE IV. BEATITUDE.
On our Blessed Savior's sacred Mouth, saying, I Thirst.
FRom our Savior's Eyes, I descend to his Mouth, and seem to hear him say, I
thirst, whereby is expressed this fourth Beatitude. For he did hunger and
thirst after righteousness; not for himself, but for us, that we might be
justified by his Death and Passion. And to that end would (to satisfy for our
sins) suffer in all rigor of Justice, that it might be satisfied to the full,
and we endowed with righteousness, that we might more and more thirst after
Grace, never satiated till his Glory appears.

Consider what Saint John Chrysostom says: That, he hungers and thirsts after
righteousness, who desires to live according to the Justice of God, and wishes
this justice and rectitude of life as well to others as to himself. That
Justice is called distributive, which gives to every one his due. To God I must
render three things, viz.

Honor, as to my Creator, Love, as to my Redeemer, and Fear to him, as my
Judge.
To my Neighbor likewise I must render three things:

Obedience, to my Superior, Charity and Love, to my equal, and Charitable
Benevolence, to my inferior in want.
And three things I must procure for my self:

Purity of my Heart, Government of my Tongue, and Order and Discipline, in
subjecting the body to the Spirit.
This threefold Justice must I hunger and thirst after, and examine my self
wherein I am defective: Remembering what Saint Jerome says, That it will not
suffice to desire Justice, but we must hunger and thirst after it; Yet never
think our selves just enough, but must more and more thirst after Justice, as
our Lord commands, He that is just, let him be more just; and he that is holy,
more holy.

Consider what a hunger and thirst that is of the Worldling, who still covets
more and more Wealth; The Voluptuous Man more and more Pleasure; And the
Ambitious Man more and more Honor. Neither of these can have their fill,
because the Soul is of infinite capacity; and therefore cannot be filled with
all the world can pour into it. Unhappy then are those Men who hunger and
thirst, yet never are satisfied. And contrariwise, Blessed are they that hunger
and thirst after righteousness, to whom is promised such fullness as shall
wholly inebriate and satiate the Soul and Heart; whose Capacity is immense,
and, being created to enjoy God, is insatiable and restless, till it enjoyes
his sight: As Saint Augustine says, Because thou (O Lord) have made us for
thee, our Heart is never at quiet until it comes unto thee.

O my soul, be ever languishing and thirsting after this complete happiness. Is
it possible thou should have such a drought, that, naturally desiring to be
blessed, and filled with the glory of God, thou should notwithstanding hunger
and greedily desire things upon earth, and not those above?

O blessed Savior thou did thirst, and they gave the vinegar and gall: but,
to quench my thirst, thou have promised me the water of life, so that I shall
never thirst more. Give me (O Lord) of this water; for hitherto I have dug
and sought it in the broken and leaking Cisterns of thy Creatures; or in
riches, dignities, and pleasures, which never satiate.

Thou were hungry after a fast of forty days, and the Enemy presented thee with
stones to be turned into bread. But for me, if I truly hunger after
righteousness, thou have and do give me the bread of life, thy real body, to
feed and strengthen my soul to life everlasting. This is the daily and
supersubstantial bread which I should hunger after, and for which I daily beg,
and without which I cannot subsist. This was prefigured by Manna, which
relieved the Israelites in the Wilderness, without which they had been
famished. Such is the desert of this world, such thy true Body, which unless a
man eat, and worthily eat, he shall not have life in him.

Jesu! be unto me a Savior, and redeem me from worldly vanities, which, like
air, never fill or satiate an hungry soul Thou art the Way, lead and direct me;
Thou the Life, revive and quicken me; Thou my greatest and only Good, make me
hunger and thirst after thee; Only after thee, because all that can be desired
may be found in thee, which may incite to love. If beauty, thou (O God) art the
fairest: If benefits, thou daily and liberally conferrest them on me: If love,
(to invite to love again) thine is the greatest: As my Creator, thou gav'st me
a being: As my Redeemer, thou freedst me from thraldom; as a Preserver, thou
did and do deliver me from perils spiritual and corporal. Therefore thy
Prophet David said, My soul has thirsted after thee the living fountain: To
thee he thirsted, who art the most amiable, the most noble, and most excellent
Good; a God, and all things. To thee he thirsted, a strong God, a good
permanent, immutable, and eternal. To thee a living God, operative, vigorous,
intellectual, loving, and conferring on me innumerable benefits. How then can I
do less then hunger and thirst after thee who art so good, so gracious, so
bountiful, so loving? Nay, how can I contain my self within the limits of thy
Creatures, that was created to so noble an end as is the blisful sight of Thee?
How can I forbear from crying out with thy servant David, When shall I come and
appear before thy face. If I am a pilgrim, thou will conduct me to my desired
Country: If I am hungry and thirsty, thou will satiate me with the fruition of
thy sight; If I am naked, thou will there cloth me with glory.

These things have I called to mind, (said David Psa. 41.) and thereupon I
poured forth my soul within my self like a streamling to return to God my
Ocean, as a river does to the sea whence it was derived; I have dilated my
soul, and extended her thirsting desire, which nothing can satiate and fill,
but God only. Nay more, I have poured out my soul upon my self: And there
(alas) what could she find, but one so poor as not any way able to quench her
thirst, who is capable of a Good immense.

Or when I poured out my soul upon my self, as water streaming on the
superficies of the earth, I suffered it not to be sucked and swallowed up by
self-love, but to stream sorth toward that River which makes joyful the City
of God. Because I will (said David) pass on to enter into the place of the
admirable Tabernacle, even unto the house of God. Even as a poor Beggar
traveling on the rode in the heat of Summer, being very weary, leaves the high
way, to find some good Gentleman's house, to be refresht, and to quench his
thirst; so does David, thirsting, say, He will pass through all difficulties
and obstacles whatsoever, to arrive at Gods house, there to quench his thirst;
and lodge in that admirable Tabernacle.

But his arrival at the house of God being deferred, he resolves to make use of
local memory. And to this end designs two special places, the River Jordan, and
Mount Hermonijm. When he beholds the first, it puts him in mind of the River
above, which makes joyful the City of God, and of the Torrent of delight, of
which the blessed are given to drink. And when he casts his eye on the second,
he calls to mind the holy and blissful Mount of Heaven, where God manifests
himself to his Angels and Saints. Therefore (says he) I will be mindful of
thee (O God) from the land of Tordan, while I behold this river, and likewise,
when I see the little Mount Hermonijm.

Who (then) fixing his eye on Mount Calvary, can forget his Saviors
sufferings; or who can but remember how he hungered and thirsted after
righteousness, when he hears him cry out, I thirst, that is to say, the
salvation of mankind, and that righteousness for us sinners, whereby we are
adopted, and made the children of God.

The Fifth BEATITUDE. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
EMBLEM V. Adam's Apple Tree.
Dum detrahis, exigis, auge:
Man merciful, to augment his store,
So clothes and feeds the naked-poor.
For, giving less, he more receaves:
Such Trees are known by fruit and leaves.


THere has such a particular notice been taken of this Tree, in the several
Countries where it grows, that it is accordingly called by several names, which
yet we shall not give an account of, in regard it is not so much the
denomination, as the Virtues and Qualities, that make it contribute to our
design. And therefore we shall, with Gerard; call it, Adam's Apple-tre.

The merciful man (which in the Latin Tongue is called Misericors) is he who
has a sorrowful and compassionate heart for another misery, a heart inclining
him to relieve and succor such as stand in need of his assistance, in their
extreme wants. Such a merciful man may be designed by this Tree, whose Roots
being as it were but small threads, or fibers, do shoot forth leaves that are
five or six foot in length, and near three in breadth. Insomuch that they serve
for Table-cloaths, and Napkins; and, being dried, they may serve for Mattresses
and Quilts, very convenient and soft to lie upon.

Behold here the Emblem of a merciful Man, who parts with his leafy substance,
to cloth the naked, to relieve the poor, to supply the wants of the needy, to
succor the necessitous. This is the man, who, by his charitable endeavors,
conceals the miscarriages and imperfections of his Neighbor. For mercy, when
it is the issue of Charity, has the same prerogative with the Parent, which is
(as St. Peter says) To cover a multitude of sins.

Moreover, this Tree (which grows above the reach of an Elephant) would
continue a low shrub, and the Leaves would bend downwards to the ground, if
they were not cut off from time to time; by which means, the Tree grows up
higher, and the Leaves become larger.

What can more pertinently denote the Merciful man, who, by a voluntary
defalcation of the things of this World, is raised so much the nearer Heaven; I
and the more freely he parts with the transitory goods of this life, the
greater treasure does he lay up for that hereafter? By these advantages, does
he still ascend higher and higher, while others keeping all to themselves, do,
like shrubs, lie grovelling on the Earth, in their covetous desires.

There is this further Remark made upon this Tree; that it needs be planted but
once, though it bears but one year. For it continually shoots forth new
stalks as the old decay; and in some Countries they are soon ripe, after they
spring, and the Inhabitants will have ripe fruit, from some of the Plants at
all times.

The case is the same with the Merciful man; who, as soon as he has done one
act of Charity, is ready to do another, and so successively, as if he were
obliged to exhaust himself, to supply others; and this from time to time, till
his own be come to its period, and that he leaves the young shoots of his
posterity to succeed him in his good works.

Hereto we may add this further observation, that besides this Tree, there is
only one other, that has a strange property, to wit, that, which way soever
their fruit be cut, when it is come to maturity, the meat thereof, which is
white as snow, represents in the midst of it, the figure of a Cross, especially
if it be cut in thin slices; as commonly we do Cow-cumbers. Thence is it, that
the Spaniards and Portugueze think it a crime to put a knife into it, and are
extremely scandalized, to see it broken otherwise then with the teeth.

Has not this some resemblance to the heart of a Merciful man, who has a
certain fellow-feeling of the miseries and calamities of the poor whom he views
with affliction of mind. Which way soever, he casts his eye of pity, and
beholds the distressed, he compassionates them, as if the like cross of
adversity were fixed in his heart. If he behold his Savior on the Cross, his
heart is wounded with pity as if the passion were figured in it.

Again, if he view his Neighbor oppressed with wrongs or miseries, he is so
sensible thereof, as if that very cross of affliction were engraven in his
heart. In a word, he sees no man poor, whom he pities not; no man miserable,
whom he does not compassionate; still (like the fruit of this Tree cut) bearing
in his heart a cross, by which he suffers with him.

Nay more, while he beholds Christ in a poor man (whom he pities and relieves)
he bears Christ's shape in his heart, whom he likewise relieves.

Happy, therefore, is the merciful man, that bears such a cross, as renders him
for ever blessed, who (no doubt) may say with St. Paul, God forbid I should
glory in any thing, but in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now fix thine eye on the bleeding side of Christ, whose blood issued from a
wounded heart, where was always engraven a cross, not only the instrument of
his passion; but as many crosses as were the sins of the World: And as many as
were the acts of mercy and compassion which he produced toward sinners; Vere
pius, vere misericors.

And shall he evacuate not only his veins, but likewise his heart? Shall he
disburse all the treasure of his most precious blood, and yet will thou be so
penurious and pitiless, as not to relieve the necessitous with part of thy
dross?

Ah! view, and view again, that bountiful, and pitiful heart, that streameth
forth at his side, and proclaims them blessed, who are merciful, and promises
they shall obtain mercy.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE V. BEATITUDE.
On the side of our Blessed Savior bleeding.
FRom his sacred Mouth descend to his pierced side; which may be likewise
termed a mouth, as were all the wounds of his body, that speak and proclaim him
a bounteous, and merciful Lord; who, having given all the blood of his body and
veins for our Redemption, would finally suffer his heart to be pierced, that
the last drops of his precious blood might stream from thence, for a fuller
satisfaction, or rather expression of his infinite Love. Whereas the least drop
thereof might have redeemed many Worlds, and reconciled to his Father, as many
Nations as he shed drops of blood.

Consider what a merciful giver was God the Father, who so exceedingly loved
man, that he gave unto him his only begotten Son; a Son likewise so good,
bounteous, and merciful, that he would annihilate and lessen himself, by taking
upon him the form of a Servant. And after (as the Factor did for one precious
Pearl) gave all his precious blood, and life, to purchase and redeem thy Soul,
and thereby obtain mercy for it.

Which, notwithstanding, thou shall never find, unless thou also be Merciful.
To whom? To thy self, and thy Neighbor. To thy self, according to the words of
the Son of Syrach, Take pity and compassion on thine own soul, pleasing God.

Think, how many Souls are languishing in sin; How many starve for want of the
food of Life, the Blessed Sacrament; How many groan under the heavy burden of
sin: And how merciless they are to themselves, that rescent not the dangerous
estate of their own souls.

To these thou art merciful, when thou prayest for them; or by word, or example
endeavourest to reclaim them. Thou art merciful likewise when thou forgivest
injuries, or when thou do commiserate and condole the defects, and
imperfections of others.

Contrari-wise they are cruel, who unbraid and deride them, or expose them to
the derision of others, by discovering their sins, to whom they should be as
merciful and charitable, in concealing, as if they were their own, not
forgetting the severe sentence of S. James, Judgment without mercy be unto him
that does no mercy.

Consider how God is so pleased with mercy showed to our Neighbor, that to
such only as do it, he has promised mercy. And withal has commanded us to
beg for pardon and remission of our sins, as we remit and fully forgive them,
who trepass against us. And that so freely and absolutely as not to retain the
least rancor or malice in our hearts.

Which to accomplish, when any enmity or uncharitable thought is slily creeping
into thy heart, reflect thine eye on Christ crucified, who (as says S.
Bernard) to heap mercies on mercies, gave his life, and out of his wounded side
brought forth the price of satisfaction, whereby he fully pacified his Father,
according to the words of David, With our Lord is mercy, and plentiful
redemption.

Hereupon thou may infer, that whosoever seek for mercy, and security in
Christ's wounded side, must come, like Noe's Dove, to the window of the Ark,
that brought an Olive Branch in his Beak, which is the type of mercy and peace;
To signify, they must be merciful and charitable to others, who expect to find
mercy there.

O my soul, arise, and shake off those dull cogitations of enmity that
surcharge thy heart, that thou may nimbly fly, and be like the Dove, nestling
in the hole of the Rock, the pierced and patient side of thy Savior. That when
thou art pursued by the Enemy (like a Dove by the Hawk, that shrowds himself in
the hole of a rock) here thou may find succor, and secure thy self. Here is
the gate of mercy and pity, which always stands wide-open, where at all times
thou may find harbor in the secure calm of mercy.

To be merciful, is to have a grievous, and pitiful heart. Ah! how pitiful was
that wounded heart of thy Savior, which for thy sake was pierced through with
a Spear. Compassionate, and have, with him, a heart wounded with grief and
pity: Commiserate the distressed members of his mystical Body in him, and then
thou can not but be merciful to thy self, and find mercy for thy self, being
one of his.

O merciful Redeemer, I behold blood and water streaming from thy heart, and
issuing out of thy wounded side. By that precious blood I was redeemed and made
one of thine: And by the water of Baptism I was purified and made one of thine.
To persevere still and continue one of thine still, may that door of mercy (thy
wounded side) be open unto me. May I be dead to the world, and sin, that
wounded (as with a Spear) with true love and charity, I may never by sin, cause
this gate of mercy to be shut against me.

Thou (O Lord) did vouchsafe to give freely the last drops of blood (which
were in thy heart) for a more complete Redemption. Grant (I beseech thee) that
I may spend the remnant of my days in thy holy service, in works of mercy,
spiritual and corporal; that finally I may obtain mercy, through thee my Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

O my soul, consider what it is to find mercy through Jesus Christ, to which
thou so often say Amen, or So be it. It is to find mercy by the virtue and
merits of his bitter Passion: Yet this will not suffice, if thou be not
merciful to him likewise in his.

So great is the virtue of Mercy (says S. Leo) that without it all other
virtues will not profit thee. No, though a man be faithful, chaste, and sober,
and endued with singular ornaments; yet if he be not merciful, he deserves not
mercy.

And remember that thy works of mercy must be done through Christ our Lord, to
be dignified by virtue of his Passion, and for his sake, otherwise they shall
have no reward. The right hand must not know what the lest hand does: No
sinister or by-intention must intrude. A charitable work must be a work of
justice, when we render to God the glory only due to him, and to our selves
reserve the reward, which (promised) we expect. Nay more, an Alms has the
honor to be called Justice it self. For our Savior advises us to beware that
we do not our Justice before men, that we may be seen by them, and have the
applause and praise of men.

In fine; Who would not in this manner be merciful, that knows in the old Law,
no Sacrifice (Ox or Sheep) might be offered in the Temple, that had not a tail:
which in a mystical sense might prefigure, that, even in the Law of Grace, no
work of mercy (which is a kind of Sacrifice to God) can be acceptable, which
has not an end, that is, a right intention tending to Gods honor, and for his
sake. If we cry, out with Zachaeus, Ecce! Behold (when he gave so great an Alms
as the moity of his Goods) it may seem to savor of ostentation, till we add
farther, with him, Domine, Behold, O Lord, I give to thee what is thine; as to
Caesar, what is his, in respect of his figure stamped in it. So in my Alms I
behold thee, and contribute thine for thy sake: like Zachaeus, little
considering my poor ability, yet present a work (like the Widow with her Mite)
great, in regard of a free and willing heart. Should I give it to be magnified
by others, What could I behold therein but mine own shape? like a Narcissus,
enamored with himself, court the shadow, and lose the substance. An Alms is a
work of Redemption. Redeem thy sins by Alms, works of mercy. It is an entire
Expiation; Give Alms, and all shall be pure unto you.

The Sixth BEATITUDE. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
EMBLEM VI. The Fig Tree.
Nec Cornisi punctum. 6.
So pierced and pierced with sorrow's dart,
Compunction from a sinners heart
And eyes, extracteth tears, while grace
(The opposite to sin) takes place.


OF this Tree, there are several kinds, differing, according to the several
Countries, wherein they grow; the name being generally attributed to all those
Trees, which bear a fruit that has some resemblance to the Fig. But that,
which is the subject of the present Emblem, grows commonly in Spain and Italy,
though possibly brought thither, at first, from some other parts of the World.
It bears a Fig, without the production of any precedent Blossom, which as it
should seem, has in it, during the time of its greenness, a raw humor; whose
crudity is such, that it ripeneth not, till a certain Fly or Gnat, gives it a
prick or wound. Soon after the Fig has received that wound, there distills
from it a kind of tear, which falls to the earth. After which, the Sun entering
in at that narrow passage, made by the Fly, the Fig by degrees comes to
maturity.

Behold here the Emblem of a Heart, truly contrite, wounded by compunction, and
pierced with sorrow; which before, while it was green, was not in a capacity to
receive the influences of the Sun of Righteousness; and consequently could not
be ripned, till a passage was made for the evacuation of the peccant humor,
that so the beams of grace might efficaciously work upon it.

Let us then consider, that if this delicate fruit does upon its piercing or
wounding distill tears, and that in order to its attainment of maturity; it is
much more requisite that the devout Christian should endure the stings of
remorse and compunction, in order to his being advanced to that perfection,
which is required in the pure of Heart.

To this end is it, that a Man ought sometimes (as Saint Augustine says) to
make his appearance at the Tribunal of his own Soul, where his own Thoughts
will be his Accusers, his Conscience the Witness, and Grief the Executioner, to
wound the sinful Heart. Then, says he, let the blood, as it were, of the Soul
f^w and issue forth by tears. Notwithstanding all this, Who (says Solomon)
will glory that he has a clean Heart? True it is, no Man should glory herein,
but give the Glory only to God. Yet since the pure of Heart shall only see
God, such purity of Heart is required, as is produced by the expulsion of sin,
and infusion of Grace. Therefore David humbly desired, that his sin might be
blotted out, and that within him might be created a clean Heart. Not a new
Heart created, but purity therein; which being produced, without any precedent
merit of the finners part, may be termed a Creation.

Therefore Saint Paul tells us, That Charity (which is the same spiritual
quality with Grace) is transfused into our Souls; which gives life and vigor,
in some sort, as the Soul created and infused, informs and gives life and
motion to the body.

Methinks a Fig, (when but green) pierced and wounded as it were by the Gnat,
lies exposed to the bright and hot beams of the Sun; as the Heart of a sinner
does to the Sun of Justice when it is plerc'd by compunction. Ah! what Light of
Faith, and heat of Love enters through those new ^ade passages of the Contrite
Heart, by which it becomes as it were a new Heart, ripened by Virtue, and
embellished by Grace?

Now elevate thine Eyes to behold the wounded Heart of our Lord, not with the
sting of a Gnat, but with a sharp Spear; not to receive any light or heat of
Consolation, but to lay out the entire sum of that infinite treasure of his
precious blood, besides water, to purify thy impure Soul, that thou may be
blessed and see God, thereby to enjoy eternal Beatitude.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE VI. BEATITUDE.
On our Blessed Savior's wounded Heart.
HAving in the Fifth Beatitude, (like a Dove nestling in the hole of a Rock, as
at the Gate of Mercy) entered by Contemplation into Christ's wounded side, now
make a step farther, or rather, with reverence stay and view his wounded Heart,
most pure and clean, where sin could never find entrance; and say, with the
Patriarch Jacob, Verily here is no other than the House of God, and the Gate of
Heaven. This is the Blessed One, pure of Heart, who ever had the happy sight of
God.

Consider what it is to be clean of Heart. It is to be the Temple of the Holy
Ghost: To be in the state of Grace, that is, not guilty of any mortal sin.

And since the Heart is the Source and Fountain whence our thoughts perpetually
flow; to suppress all impure cogitations, as they are rising, is to have a
clean Heart, when it is accompanied with a pure intention, directing all our
actions to the Honor and Glory of God. And as Saint Augustine says, Whatsoever
we do, whatsoever we laudably desire, must tend to obtain the Vision of God,
beyond which nothing can be desired.

Think of the Question propounded by King David: O Lord, Who shall dwell in thy
Tabernaele, or who shall rest in thy holy hill? And then attend to the Answer,
which is this: He that lives uprightly, and works righteousness, etc.

This is a hard saying. Must the Heart be so clean as not to have one spot? The
Child but a day old is not free, and in his Angels God found iniquity. Who,
then, shall be justified in his sight? Or who can be clean of Heart, while the
All-seeing Eye of Heaven beholds it.

Appeal (then) to the pure Heart of thy Savior; rely on his Innocence, not on
thine own; on his merits, not on thine. Seeing that Vessel of Election said, he
was guilty of nothing, and yet in that he was not justified; yet doubted not to
say, A Crown of righteousness was due unto him, which the just Judge would give
him.

I will therefore say with David, O Lord turn away thy face (of thy severe
Justice) from my sins.

And with him add further, Show me thy face (that is to say, of thy mercy) and
I shall be saved. According to thy great mercy, and multitude of thy mercies,
cancel my iniquity; wash me again from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my
sin; that I may be clean of Heart to enjoy thy sight.

O my Soul, Keep thy Heart (as the Wise man advises thee) with all kind of
custody; for out of it (says he) proceeds life. Keep it pure, let not in one
mortal sin to defile it; for then from the Heart would proceed Death,
destruction of Grace, and loss of the sight of God; for Grace is the seed of
Glory. Let thy Heart be ploughed by Contrition, harrow'd and cleans'd from the
weeds of sin, that this divine seed may be sown in thy Heart, which springs up
by holy desires, and is ripened by virtuous exercises.

O my God, thou have commanded me to love thee with an entire, pure, and
sincere Heart. Give me (I beseech thee) what thou command, by creating in me
a clean Heart, and renewing a right Spirit in my bowels; that I may love thee
with all my Soul, that my Will may be resigned to thine without any
contradiction, with all my Mind and Memory, always to think of thee; and with
all my powers, that I may employ them in thy service.

To perform all these things, I must observe four things: First, Seeing all I
am and have, Body and Soul, spiritual and temporal blessings, I have from God;
I must be always mindful of his benefits: Serve, honor, and thank him for
all, love him above all; and, for him, my Neighbor. Secondly, I must consider
the excellency of God; And seeing he is infinitely greater than our Heart,
though we serve him with all our Heart and powers of our Soul, yet are we
defective and insufficient, and must therefore think we never do enough.
Thirdly, We must not suffer the world to usurp the least corner of our Heart,
by disordinate Love; for that were injurious to God; as was the placing of the
Idol Dagon by the Ark. He is too covetous (says Saint Jerome) whom God cannot
satiate: And he loves God less then he should do, who loves any thing besides
him, according to Saint Augustine's opinion. Fourthly, He that is in mortal sin
has an impure Heart, and loves not God. Therefore to be clean of Heart, and
thereby blessed, and by Grace in the way to see God; I must imitate the pure
white Ermine, (a little beast) which rather chooses to fall into the hands of
the Hunter, than make an escape through a dirty place, and defile it self.


Methinks Christ our Savior, stretched, and nailed to the Cross, resembles a
Cross-bow, which while I behold, his Heart (darting forth fiery Arrows of Love)
a clean and pure Heart seems like the White placed in the midst of a Butt, at
which it is aimed; upon which representation, I shall here insert a short
Descant I long since made in Verse.

Tender Arms for our offense,
Drawn and stretched with violence;
Like a Bow-string now I see,
While upon the bloody Tree,
Cruel nails both long and rough,
Sacred Hands are piercing through.
Thus while tender Arms extend,
The string's fastened at each end:
Jesus Heart is like the Nutt
Of the Cross-bow, where are put
Nimble shafts with vigor sent,
Thus the Bow stands ready bent.
Sinners (then) prepare your Hearts,
From this bow fly wounding darts.
Stand his Butt, the Arrows glow,
As the are flying from this bow;
Midst the Butt, (to place the White)
Stand his mark and let him smite.
Let him pierce and wound thy Heart,
With his torments, pain, and smart,
Shafts of sorrow, grief, and pain,
For thy sins return again.
So thy Soul being cleans'd from sin,
And by Grace made pure within,
Stand Christ's Butt, that, (when contrite)
A clean Heart may be the White.
Such is a Heart disengaged and disenteressed from all inordinate desires that
may soil or streighten that habitacle designed and resigned to God. In such an
absolute manner is this to be imagined, that one may confidently say with King
David, Tuus sum ego, Lord, I am totally thine, not mine own, nor the worlds,
nor of the flesh, nor of sin; but entirely thine, by a full resignation,
submission, and oblation of my self. To thee I dedicate an entire Heart, with
all my senses and cogitations, all my words and works; And restore unto thee
what I had from thee, a Soul washed and purified by Baptism, and a Heart
contrite with Grief, and cleans'd again by true Repentance; Yet still again and
again to be washed, and more and more purified.

If by the least mote the corporal Eye be obscured, much more that of the Soul.
If I never cease till I have cleans'd and cleared the one, that I may have a
perfect sight of each object which occurrs, shall I not always be cleansing
and purifying that inward Eye which is capable (when clear) of the sight of God?

The Seventh BEATITUDE. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called
the Children of God.
EMBLEM VII. The Wood-Bind.
Pacis conjunctio firma.
Thus, while two foster deadly hate,
A third steps in to end debate;
Makes Peace, unites both Hearts and Hands,
How blessed is he who makes such bands!


TO make a better comprehension of this Beatitude, the Devout Christian is to
imagine, that he sees two limber Stands, or young shoots, hardly able to
support themselves on their tender roots, and in perpetual agitation, by reason
of the violence of the wind, which causes them to assault and injure each
other; till the Peacemaking Wood-Bind, gently twining it self about them, takes
away that opposition, and disposes them to a certain reconciliation and
friendship.

According to this representation, the Wood-Bind (which bears the Honey-Suckle,
a name derived from sweetness) may well be the Emblem of the blessed
Peacemaker, who, by the sweetness of his Couversation, and Amicable
Interposure in the Differences of his Neighbors, endeavors to reconcile them.

In the Latin Tongue, the Wood-Bind is called, Matter Sylvae, viz. The Mother
of the Woods. And peradventure it is for this reason; That, as a loving and
indulgent Mother huggs and embraces her Child, so this Plant clasps and twines
it self about every other Tree that it can fasten on: In like manner, is it the
endeavor of the blessed Peacemaker to dispose all those, between whom he
hears there are any differences, to Unity, Peace, and Concord; making all
other interests and concernments subservient to that grand one of bringing all
things to composure and quiet. And this is that whereto the Apostle, writing to
the Ephesians, exhorts them, viz. to walk with all lowliness and meekness,
long-suffering, and forbearing one another in love, endeavoring to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. For Peace is the Handmaid of
Charity, whose property it is to unite, and take away all animosities,
jealousies, distrusts, and heart-burnings.

Justly therefore has our Blessed Savior pronounced him Blessed, and the
Child of God, who, like the Hony-Suckle, by a sweet insinuation and affability,
endeavors to compose the Minds of the litigious; and like the Wood-Bind, is as
ready to unite the contentious and dissatisfied into Amity, as he is to make
Peace within himself, as in Charity he is bound. And to this is it that the
Apostle exhorts us, when he says, Have Peace, and the God of Peace and Love
will be with you.

But how comes it that the Peacemaker has this particular prerogative and
advantage, to be called the Child of God? We may imagine it proceeds hence;
that as God our Father is the God of Peace, so we may pretend to the title of
his Children, if we are like him, and look on it as our concernment to make
Peace between Men. We may also upon this further consideration, be called the
Children of God, that he who came into the world to reconcile it, and to bring
us that Peace which passes all understanding, has vouchsafed to call us
Brethren. Nay, that great Savior, and Peace, may seem to have their birth at
the same instant; for then was it, that there was a Proclamation made by
Celestial Heralds, to wit, the Angels, that Peace should be on Earth, and good
will toward Men. Then, like the cheerful break of day, appeared that beauteous
Peace, foretold by the Prophet Esaias, whereof there should be no end: inasmuch
as it came with that Son, whose other titles are closed with this, that he was
to be the Prince of Peace.

It is no other then our Blessed Savior Christ himself, who is the great
Peacemaker, and came like the Wood-Bind to unite a pair of shoots, as I may
term them, to wit, Justice and Mercy, which were opposite, while the wrath of
God, like a violent wind, incited Justice to Revenge, which Mercy opposed. What
a conflict was between these two, till our Lord on the Cross, like a Wood-Bind,
united them in one? As David (by a prophetique spirit) said, Mercy and Truth
(that is to say Justice) have met together; Justice and Peace (or Mercy) have
kissed each other; like two branching shoots, surrounded by a Wood-Bind, which
only Christ could do, the great Peacemaker and Son of God, who fully pacified
Justice, by suffering death for Man; by which redeemed, Mercy likewise had her
desire, embraced with Justice, then pacified, when she beheld from Heaven our
sins severely punished in Christ.

Never could Man have fully conceived the wrath and hate of God against sin,
had he not expiated the same by the death of his only begotten Son. Nor could
we have apprehended his infinite Mercy, had he not given this his only Son for
our Redemption.

Behold his Hands nailed, and thereby know, how the Hand of Justice being
fastened, Mercy and she embraced, and kissing were united by Christ, our
Wood-Bind, whose design was to make our Peace, saying, I leave you my Peace, I
give you my Peace, not as the world gives, I give you Peace. For the world
charms and enchants a Soul slumbering in the conceit of a sweet repose, even
when she is amidst the harsh discords of impiety, yet hears them not, nor sees
her present danger: Which made David cry out: Englighten mine Eyes, (O Lord)
that they may not at any time sleep in death.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE VII. BEATITUDE.
On Christ's Hands pierced with nails.
FRom his Heart, ascend to his Hands tran fixed with Nails, that he might
thereby fasten and stay the Hand of Justice, (ready to chastise us for our
sins) while he himself suffered in his Body, what our enormous crimes deserved.

Imagine you see a King enraged against his Vassal, for some heinous offense,
with his sword brandished and ready to kill him: Which the Prince, his Son,
seeing, (notwithstanding the injury as near concerned himself) comes in; and,
to save the Delinquent, receives the thrust in his own Body, pacifies his
Father, begs his pardon, and restores the Criminal to the King's gracious
Favor. How infinitely obliged (you will say) was this Subject to the Prince!

Thus did God the Son (incarnate) interpose himself betwixt his Father and
sinful Man; And on the Cross wounded by the Hand of Justice for our manifold
iniquities, pacified his Heavenly Father, and thereby was our Peacemaker.

Consider now if this Subject, reconciled to the King, should by the Princes
means be made a Viceroy of some petty Kingdom, with charge given him to
govern, and preserve Peace with Subordination to his Majesty; Notwithstanding,
should this Viceroy (forgetting all favors and former Clemency) rebelliously
conspire against both King and Prince, What punishment would you think too
great for such a Traitor?

Is not every Man a kind of Viceroy to manage a petty Kingdom, which is within
him? What, his Passions? Are they not (at least should be) his Subjects?
Together with his Appetites and Concupiscences, which rebel against Reason.
And as often as Man sins mortally, is he not guilty of High Treason against the
Majesty of God, his Dread Sovereign? Who being every way infinite, it follows,
the punishment due is infinite.

Hence I will conceive a great hatred and detestation against sin and
ingratitude to the great Peacemaker, my King and Savior: under whom, as a
Viceroy, I must govern and be a Peacemaker.

And that I may the better preserve Peace with^n me, I will set a Guard over my
outward Senses; over mines Eyes, that they may not behold vain and curious
impertinencies; nor curiously pry and search into other Men's Actions. Over my
Tongue, that it may not entrench upon my Neighbors Reputation. Over mine Ears,
shutting them against Detractors, etc. Thus being outwardly guarded, I may the
better preserve inward Peace, by suppressing inordinate thoughts and desires.
In such sort, that having within me a peaceful Kingdom, subordinate to Reason,
God may quietly inhabit in my Soul, whose place (as David says) and residence
is in a peaceful Heart, not disturbed with worldly cares, nor embroyled with
the Passions of fear and wrath, which ordinarily raise a tumult in our little
Kingdom.

But to be a perfect Peacemaker indeed, one should be so totally united to God
in his affections, as not to desire any thing with out him, and only repose in
him the only center and support of the Soul. And remember what Saint Augustine
says,

That they are Peacemakers in themselves and for themselves, who subject all
the tumultuous motions of the Soul to Reason, that is, to the Mind and Spirit.
For, by subduing and suppressing carnal Concupiscences, they become the Kingdom
of Heaven on Earth. Where, being Peacemakers, they are likewise the Children
of God, and resemble their Heavenly Father, to whom it is proper to enjoy
himself, who is Peace and tranquillity it self, extending from end to end
strongly, and disposing all things sweetly.

O my soul, thou feast what thou should be; Now consider what thou art. How
soon is the little Kingdom within thee disturbed! How suddenly anger disquiets
it! What perturbations of mind are caused, when but a lighter cross or slight
affliction lights upon thee. Yea even an unkind word from a friend breeds a
great discontent and trouble within thee. And when all succeeds not according
to thy expectation, thou art so far from being a peacemaker, that, distracted
in thy thoughts, thou art vexed and perplexed within thy self. How then art
thou the Child of God, in whom he desires to repose? Art thou not rather like a
whining Babe that for every trifle is crying, and thereby disquieting the whole
house.

O blessed Savior, though I daily say, Thy Kingdom come, I am yet like that
Regulus, that little King; little in the knowledge of my self, and, like his
Son, I lie infirm and weak, and subject to my disordinate passions. I can do
all in thee, who strengthen'st me. Enable me (therefore) I beseech thee by thy
powerful grace, that thy Kingdom may come, that thou may reign in me, and
over me, the true Solomon, and peaceful King; that I, with all the powers of my
soul, may rest in peace, and be wholly resigned to thy will.

Therefore I daily say, Thy will be done. What is it (then) can disturb my
peace of mind? If affliction, if sickness, or whatever else happens, be
according to thy will or permission, it must be done. Nay I daily pray, it may
be done. And, should I otherwise desire; yet, if it be thy holy will and
pleasure, it must be so. Why then should not I be a peacemaker, and qualify
all passions and disordinate desires? which when I have performed internally, I
may (and not before) make peace amongst others externally.

O Jesu! it was the Will of thy Father which thou did punctually observe. And
that which thou did teach was humility in conversation, stability in faith,
modesty in words, justice in deeds, mercy in works, discipline in manners, and
not to do, but to suffer injuries. This is to be a peacemaker, and the Child
of God. This is the peace proclaimed by the Angels at thy birthday. This is the
peace thou did leave us, and with this peace we desire to depart, and rest in
thee, that our peace, and Kingdom begun here by grace, may by thee be perfected
in glory. Amen.

O what a happiness it will be, in the last slumbers of a dying life, to say,
with the Prophet David, In peace will I sleep and rest, because thou (O Lord)
have singularly put me in hope, to see an accomplishment of that peace which a
soul enjoys, or should enjoy, on earth: Which to acquire, a man should imitate
the Prophet David, who swear and vowed to the mighty God of Jacob, that he
would not enter into the Tabernacle of his house, nor go to his bed, nor give
sleep to his eyes, nor slumbers to his eyelids, until he had found out a place
for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob: So great was his
desire to build a Temple! And as great should be my care and solicitude to
build, at least, prepare a place of repose for my Lord, which must be in a
quiet and peaceful conscience, without which, who can give sleep to his eyes,
or slumber to his eyelids?

O my soul, when shall thou be so happy, as to say, with that peaceful King
Solomon, Arise, O Lord, into thy rest, thou and the Ark of thy strength? Where
is that repose of mind? Where that tranquillity of conscience, to which thou
should invite him to arise and come into his rest, he and the Ark of his
strength, which is his powerful grace, whereby enabled thou may silence and
pacify thy mutinous thoughts that rise up against thee, to disturb thy peace.

Here I will seem to behold the Kine yoked, drawing the Ark toward Bethsames,
while their Calves shut up were bleating. To which they, as it were, shut their
ears, and went on, not declining to the right hand, nor to the left. Thus must
he do that bears the Ark of strength. What are our brutish appetites? what
disordinate concupiscence? what avaricious desires? what are injuries that call
upon us for revenge, but calves, that would be suckled and pampered? These are
they that disturb our peace; these, that are so obstreperous, as to disquiet
the soul, never ceasing to allure her to return, with loss of that peace and
rest which is acquired by bearing the Ark of strength, and sanctification,
which is the peace of God, that overcomes all sense, fortifies the heart in
such sort, that it resents not injuries and temporal losses, or at least bears
all with such patience, as if it were insensible.

Such a heart may be both Altar and Sacrifice, resembling the Pacifique
oblation in the old Law, which was an Ox, or a Sheep, or Goat, being a figure
of a triple peace, with God, our Neighbor, and our self. With God, who by our
submission and hearty contrition is instantly pacified. With our Neighbor
(resembled by the Sheep) who (when good) is soon appeased, if bad, (figured by
the Goat) when moved and exasperated continues a long time as remote from peace
and charity, as the Goat leaving the fertile Valleys, to climb and graze on
barren rocks.

But when Man is such to himself, still in motion, unquiet, anxious, timorous,
and pensive, what is he but a Goat skipping to and fro, from a barren rock of
distaste to a precipice of desolation?

O my God and merciful Savior, thou art my rock, my safety, my peace, and only
refuge. From thee proceeds the Holy Ghost, from whom springs the fruit of
Charity, Joy, and Peace. Send forth, I beseech thee, thy holy Spirit; and these
three shall be created, and established in my soul. Charity, to love, and have
peace with thee, and with my Neighbor for thee; Joy, and alacrity in serving
thee; and Peace in thee the rock, and support of my heart, my God for ever, in
heavenly Jerusalem the vision of peace; where to see thee, is to enjoy eternal
tranquillity, which thou (O Lord) have purchased with thy most percious blood.
Amen.

The Eighth BEATITUDE Blessed are they that suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
EMBLEM VIII. The Vine.
Sterilis nisi falce putetur. 8
So, pruned, a Christian brings increase.
To branch too far, were to surcease,
Grow barren, when unprun'd. What harm
(Impaired) to spread a larger arm?


THe Catholic Church, in diverse places of Scripture, is called the Vineyard of
our Lord; where every good Christian is a flourishing and fruitful Vine. And if
any Plant or Tree cut or lopt may he said to suffer persecution, much more may
the Vine (the Emblem of a Christian). For as the one is pruned in February, a
cold and blustering Month, not impaired thereby, but enriched both in branch
and fruit; So is the other in a time as rigorous, when he suffers persecution
for righteousness sake.

Let the Vine dilate it self from year to year in branches, without pruning,
how soon does it become barren? Such would a man be that never suffers loss of
goods, nor feels any grievance or affliction, neither in body (by sickness) nor
in worldly substance, by persecution or otherwise.

For, seeing it is certain, that all, who will live piously in Christ Jesus,
must suffer persecution (as S. Paul assures us) it follows, that they, who,
like a Vine, are never pruned in their branching estate, nor otherwise
afflicted, can hardly be numbered amongst the virtuous, and devouter servants of
God.

When I behold a Vine in a sunny place pruned, and despoiled of its branches,
and the residue supported and orderly nailed, and fixed to a wall, it presents
unto me a man persecuted and deprived of branching superfluities, yea, and
liberty, whereby he becomes (like a Vine) more fruitful, not wanting the
Sunshine of heavenly grace, to render him as plentiful in Merits, as the other
in Grapes.

Now if the Vine, to secure it self, extend here and there a winding tendrel
that clasps about the neighboring boughs, a devout Christian wants not the
like, while, for his support, and constant perseverance, he produces (like so
many tendrels) several acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity.

All which clasp and wind about the Cross, whereon Christ crucified is the Vine
of vines. Naked like a Vine in the fall of the leaf, and pruned in February.
Wounded, like a Vine bleeding, and, in Vintage, like Grapes in the Wine Press:
like a Vine, with branches extended and fixed to a wall, with his Arms and Feet
stretched forth, and nailed to the Cross; where he lay exposed to the scorching
beams of most severe justice.

And when I observe the many riffs and chincks in the trunck of the Vine, out
of which issue the branches, I seem to behold my Saviors body full of wounds,
out of which issued forth his most precious blood.

But if the Vine have tendrels, to twist and wind about what bough or branch
soever is neighboring by, what tendrels had our Savior, but rough and sharp
nails? what support? what to lay hold on, when he cried out, My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Ah Sinner! it was want of will and desire in thee to
suffer with him, that made him complain in this manner. This he foreseeing
(notwithstanding all he had suffered) was cause of this heavy and sad
complaint; as if he had said; Father, why have thou forsaken me so soon? If it
be thy will, I desire to live and suffer more pains, more injuries, and
reproaches for man, who to requite me for all I have endured, will (I foresee)
repine at the least oppression, and be dejected with the least cross and
affliction, which he undergoes for my sake: Why have thou forsaken me so soon?
yet I desire to survive, and suffer more, the more to attract and incite the
hearts of men, to love and suffer with me, as branches united to me, the Vine,
that being pruned by suffering with me, they may become fruitful and be
glorified with me.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE VIII. BEATITUDE.
On the wounded Feet of our Blessed Savior.
LAstly, from our Blessed Savior's sacred Hands, descend to his wounded Feet,
and there read, Blessed are they who suffer persecution, etc. Which properly
belongs to the Feet, either to fly, as our Lord advised, from one City to
another, or to stay and suffer, as he himself did, till his hour was come.
Wherefore, when any affliction or cross happens unto thee, be assured that thy
hour is come for thee to suffer persecution, and consequently to be blessed, if
thou bear it with patience.

Now since it is decreed, and recorded in holy Writ, that all who will live
piously in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution, one way, or other, Consider in
particular what tribulations thou heretofore have, or now do suffer; which,
were they far greater then they are, or have been, yet thou may say, with the
Apostle, The passions and sufferings of this time are not worthy of the future
glory which shall be revealed in us. And therefore we ought to be willing and
ready to suffer more for his sake, who, for us, suffered so much persecution.

Consider that in the end of this last Beatitude, our Savior intimates a
triple persecution, proceeding from the Heart, Word, and Deed. You are Blessed
(says he) when men shall revile you and persecute you, and speak all manner of
evil against you, or persecute you by casting you out of the Synagogue, etc.

Against these three sorts of persecutions a triple patience is necessary. The
first, to forgive them that hate me; The second, to compassionate and pity them
that revile me; The third, to pray for them that persecute me by any corporal
or temporal affliction.

The better to put this in practice, often call to mind our Saviors
persecutions on the Cross, which began in the hearts of the Jews for whom
notwithstanding he prayed, Father forgive them. Next it was expressed by word
in Blasphemies, whom nevertheless he pitied, saying, For they know not what
they do. Thirdly, his manifold persecutions caused by the Jews, were made too
apparent by the many wounds they inflicted, and ignominious death they put him
to; All which notwithstanding, his first care on the cross was to pray for them.

Consider what King David says, Thy rod and thy staff (O God) have comforted
me: That is, the Rod of affliction and persecution, which (that we may
patiently bear it) is accompanied with a staff, to wit, his all-strengthning
grace, to support and bear us up, that we may go on with alacrity.

Here be confounded; for that, in light sufferings and slighter afflictions
thou have been dismayed, and dejected, though this staff were not wanting to
support thee. And so out of heart, that thou have desired to be freed from
them, before thou had tasted the least drop of Christ's bitter cup. Whereby
in suffering with him, thou might have tasted and seen how sweet our Lord is
in his consolations, to them who suffer persecution.

Call to mind what God says by his Prophet Zachary, Chap. 11. ver. 7. And I
took unto me two staves; one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bands, and
I fed the flock. All Christians are his flock, and have all straid. If, to
recall, or try us, he with his rod chastise us, or suffer us to be persecuted
to refine and purify us from the dross of sin, it is in our power (assisted by
his heavenly grace) to bear all with patience; which if we do perform, the rod
of chastisement is called Beauty, because it beautify and purifies our souls.
But if we murmur and repine at every cross and affliction, that falls upon us,
and think we deserve not to be punished; the other rod is ealled Bands,
wherewith we are faster tied, and more and more entangled in our sins.

O my soul, why droopest thou! Christ suffered for thee, leaving thee an
example, that thou may follow his steps. It a little wind of persecution
penetrate thy tender heart, remember where thou art, where thou sailest, what
thy vessel is. In a stormy and dangerous Sea, where winds bluster, surges rise,
both within, and without; passions and persecutions which disturb the crasie
Ship thy Body, and as much afflict thy Soul the Passenger.

Thou art traduced or derided. It Is a wind: Anger is the billow and thou art in
danger. Thou preparest to render scoff for scoff, malediction for malediction,
and one revenge for another. Now thou art in danger of shipwreck.

Christ in the Ship (thy Heart) is asleep; awake him, and he will relieve thee,
and keep it from sinking. Thy Lord hears and patiently suffers, yet thou his
servant art angry; Thou must suffer with me, if thou will reign with me: The
kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.

The body of Christ, that is to say, his Church, says S. Augustine, is
detained in the wine press of persecutions and oppressions. But in this
wine press affliction is beneficial. While the Grape is on the Vine, it suffers
not, it appears sound and whole, nothing then distills from it, until it be
put into the press, and there crushed and trampled on. This might seem
injurious to the grape but not without benefit. Nay, were it not thus handled,
it would remain but to it self barren and grateful to none.

A SHORT RECAPITULATION OF THE VIII. BEATITUDES, By way of MEDITATION.
O Blessed Savior, thou have left for us a Ladder of eight steps, to ascend to
Heaven. If by thy assisting grace I ascend but to the first step, mine is the
Kingdom of Heaven; and being arrived at the highest step, by suffering
persecution for righteousness sake, I can asceud no higher, I end where I
began, for to suffer persecution, is to be poor in spirit, ready, rather to
lose all, then deny thee, ready to be deprived of transitory things, then lose
the eternal.

I. Thy Nakedness tells me thou were poor in Spirit, and desire; coveting
nothing but me, and my Salvation: What then would I have on earth but thee? II.
By thy Head inclined I understand thou were Meek, and humble, humbled even unto
the death of the Cross. So may I, assisted by thy powerful grace, bear all
afflictions with patience, and be angry with none but such as seek to deprive
me of thee, my God, and all things. III. On thine Eyes distilling tears, I
read, Blessed are they that mourn. May I never mourn but for my sins, nor
grieve but for the loss of thee. IV. On thy sacred Mouth, crying out, I thirst,
I read, thou did hunger and thirst. after righteousness, that I might be
justified by thy Death and Passion. Grant (sweet Jesu) I may ever hunger and
thirst after this. V. By thy wounded Side I find thou were merciful, giving all
thy precious blood for my redemption. May I be merciful to thee in thine, that
I may finally find mercy. VI. Let thy pierced Heart, most pure and exempt from
all fin, teach me to prepare a pure and clean heart for thee. VII. By thy
sacred Hands nailed, I understand, thou were the grand Peacemaker Vouchsafe to
infuse into my soul true and perfect Charity, that I may have peace withal for
thee, and during this life make my peace with thee. VIII. Lastly, By thy Feet,
pierced with nails, I read, they are blessed that suffer persecution, which
thou did, even unto the death of the Cross. Grant me grace to suffer for
thee, to bear afflictions patiently, that, with thee, I may reign. eternally.
Amen.
O good Jesu, to reign with thee is to suffer with thee. On the Cross thou art
surrounded with the eight Beatitudes. Here I must seek them exemplified in thy
self, on Mount Calvary, to find them perfected on Mount-Sion, the heavenly
Jerusalem.

I. I behold the Cornel-tree, where, without leaves to shroud it, the blossom
lies naked, and exposed to the blustering winds; And on the Tree of the Cross,
as naked I behold my Savior, poor in Spirit, poor in Will and Desire: as naked
dying, as born, for us.

Uncloath thy self then, O my soul, and be as naked in thine affections to the
leafy vanities and riches of this life, which is but a so journing for poor
mortality.

II. I see the arched Indian-Fig-tree, greedy to possess the Land with a
thousand shoots, which descend to take deep root in the earth. And on the Tree
of the Cross, I behold our Lord meekly bowing down his Head, humbled even to
the death of the Cross, to take possession of the Land of the Living, for me an
exile, by as many shoots, as sighs, prayers, tears, and drops of blood, as he
shed for me a lost sinner.

O my soul, where are thy humble shoots that should descend, that they may
ascend to the Land of promise? where are thy submissive thoughts that should
lowly bend to the earth, by acknowledgment of thy unworthiness and ingratitude,
to so good and merciful a Lord? Thou art now in possession of a barren Land,
thy body; where thou can not, nor must not, take deep root. Heaven is thy
Land, this thy place of banishment. Thither let thy thoughts ascend to be
deeply rooted, by an eternal possession.

III. I view the Myrrhe-tree weeping drop after drop, but when pricked and
wounded, it more abundantly distills. Thus came I weeping and mourning into a
vale of tears, like a taper by the wind soon extinguished; like a spark in the
Sea, as soon swallowed up; like a froth, suddenly vanishing; and a vapor,
scattered in the air. Have I not then cause to weep, to prevent a future
mourning, and acquire a happiness and consolation, which is promised to
Mourners?

Then I cast mine eyes on Christ crucified, and weeping on the Cross, why? for
my sins. Why like a Myrrhe-wee wounded over all his body, distilling blood? To
give light to my glimmering taper, fire to my spark, substance to my frothy
soul, and purer air to my dusky vapor.

Thirdly, I will summon my heart, and expostulate with my soul, why she would
be ushered by her eyes to the aspect of vainer objects, yet never made use of
them to bewail her sins with tears? And if the Myrrh tree stabbed or launc'd
with a knife dissolves it self into tears, why does she not procure by her
sighs and prayers, that my heart, woulded with true compunction, may be
liquified into tears of grief?

IV. I seem to behold the Clove-tree hungring (as it were) and thirsting after
the strengthening moisture of the earth, which it continually attract; Then I
seem to hear my Savior cry out, I thirst, to express his ardent desire of our
Salvation. And then, O my soul, (say I) can thou hear thy Lord crying out, I
thirst, and yet present him with no other potion then a cup full of absinth
(thy sins) which are more bitter to him then Vinegar and Gall; of which he
tasting would not drink.

O my soul, taste and see how sweet our Lord is, who, to revive and refresh
thee (which were like dry and barren earth) showred down his precious blood,
from his wounded body, veins, and heart, till it was totally exhausted.

O what an excessive thirst did this cause in thy Savior! what a Consummatum
est was this? what bounty, when hereserv'd not to himself so much as one drop
of blood?

O my soul, if he gave thee all that was most precious, doubt not to say with
his royal Prophet, What shall I give unto our Lord for all he has given me?
what less then an entire heart and soul, with all her powers, to love, honor,
and serve him?

V. Next I imagine I see the fruit of Adams Apple Tree cut in two, which
presents us with a cross, which bare the Savior our of the World, in whom I
behold as many crosses, as stripes, and scourges, enterlac'd in his tender
flesh.

It was the fruit of the forbidden Tree, wherein (being eaten) were included as
many crosses as miseries, now incident to wretched man; As hunger, thirst,
cold, heat, infirmities, etc. which render him miserable, and consequently to
be pitied.

O my soul, commiserate at least thine own self, encompassed with so many
frailties, casualties, and anxieties of mind. Turn which way thou will, thou
can not be long exempted from one calamity or other

Wherefore, seeing to be Misericors (that is to say, merciful) is to have an
agrieved and pitiful heart, as it were, always bearing a cross, let thine he
dolor, sorrow and compunction for thy sins.

VI. Imagine you behold the green Fig, picked, and pierced by a little Gnat or
Fly, whence distills a drop, as it were, of honey. And then say, O my green,
hard, and immature Heart, where is that compunction that is requisite for thee?
O that thou were thus pierced and wounded with grief for thy fins; that sweet
delight, like a honey-drop, might issue forth: for while it resides within
thee, thou can never come to maturity; for where sin predominates, Grace must
needs be an Exile.

Then reflect your Eye on our Savior's Heart wounded with a Spear, and say,
Lord, Were not thy larger wounds in thy Hands and Feet sufficient pledges, and
testimonies of thy excessive Love? Why then, after thy death, would thou
receive so deep a wound in thy Heart?

Ah! If Death were stronger than Love in thee, when by him thou were vanquished,
he seizing by Heart, Love again, even after Death, was more powerful by opening
that sacred rift, whence issued the Sacraments, and where the Gate of Heaven is
as it were opened to such as truly repent.

VII. Sometimes I reflect mine Eye on the Wood-Bind, which, wheresoever it
grows, is always binding, and uniting branch with branch, or winding round
about a Tree; to teach me, that Peace, Unity, Union, and Concord, are the
special Objects at which I must aim, both in respect of God and my Neighbor.
Love must be like a pair of Wood-Bind shoots, issuing from the same stock which
lay hold of two neighboring boughs or branches. If by Love I unite my Heart
and Soul to God, by Love I must likewise be united with my Neighbor. And, in
like manner, if I have made my Peace with God, I must do the like with my
Neighbor offended. For as I forgive, so I desire to be forgiven: And
consequently, as I have Peace with my Neighbor, so I desire God would be
pacified: So shall I have inward Peace accompanied with outward Charity and
Love; like a Honey-Suckle odoriferous, that breath snothing but sweetness.

Then I reflect on the Wood-Bind, Christ Jesus on the Cross, the grand
Peacemaker, stretching forth his Arms, and pacifying his Father justly
incensed against Sinners. O what an amorous far-spreading Wood-Bind was our
Lord! Stretching from end to end strongly, by fastening the Hands of Justice,
and disposing all things sweetly; like a Honey-Suckle, breathing nothing but
sweetness of Peace, even for his greatest Enemies, crying out, Father, forgive
them; for they know not what they do: And to the penitent Thief, This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise. As if he had said, I have made thy Peace, and
prepared for thee a place of Repose. Thy remove shall be from a turbulent world
and stormy Sea, to a quiet and secure Haven.

O my Soul, Can thou yet be so unsettled in thy Resolves! So wavering and
inconstant in good purposes! Christ is thy Wood-Bind to fasten thee; and has
as many bands to tie thee, as pains he endured, and drops of Blood which he
powered out for thy Redemption. Consider seriously, how infinitely thou art
obliged. How innumerable the ties of his transcendent Love; like so many
Tendrels, or Wood-Bind wreathes, circling and clasping round about thee, to
attract and draw thee unto Himself; who, exalted from the Earth, promised he
would draw all things: But how? In the bands of Adam, and links of Charity.

VIII. When I walk into the garden, (where every Plant invites the Eye to
behold, and the Heart to consider) I oftener cast a glance on the Vine, which,
when I view pruned and despoyl'd of her branches, this (think I) would move an
ignorant Man to Compassion, to see a flourishing Vine so cut and mangled, and
fast nayl'd to a wall, that knows not that this kind of Cruelty, is Courtesy
and favor; for thereby it becomes more fruitful. The like happens to
Christians persecuted, who in the sight of the unwise seem to be wretched and
dye, and their departure destruction, yet they a little chastised shall be
greatly rewarded; for God prunes and proves them, and finds them worthy for
himself, says the Wiseman.

Then let the true Vine, Christ Jesus, occurr, pruned, and despoyl'd, humbled
unto death, for which God gave him a Name above all names, who invites us to
suffer with him that we may reign with him, in a Kingdom acquired by them who
suffer persecution for righteousness sake: In a Kingdom which is conquered, as
it were by force, and shatch'd by violence.

O my Soul, thou likewise art a Vine, and must be pruned: Nay more, if thy Hand
offend thee; if like a Vine-branch, it spread too far, by coveting earthly
things, it must be cut off. If thine Eye offend thee, by presenting thee with
objects of vain delight, it must be pulled out, and cast from thee. That is,
what ever Creature, or whatever delight, as dear unto thee as thy Hand or Eye,
must be deserted and cast off, if they withdraw thee from the Service of God,
or go about to betray thee to everlasting destruction.

O my Soul, there is but one thing necessary, the grand concernment, Salvation,
which relates to Jesus, that is, a Savior. O that thou could tru'y say, Now
I begin to be the Disciple of Christ, desiring nothing visible to the Eye that
I may find Christ Jesus. Seek him then in these ensuing Ejaculatories.

Upon Christ's Nakedness.
O Good Jesu, I read in thy nakedness, that thou were poor in Spirit, poor in.
Will, and desire of having any thing in this world: So poor in Spirit, that, as
thou came naked into the World, so as naked thou would depart hence. So
poor in this World, that living and dying thou had not whereon to rest thy
Head. What is then in Heaven for me, or what do I desire on Earth but thee? O
the God of my Heart, my portion, my God for ever!

On his Head inclining. Against Pride and Impatience.
O Good Jesu, I behold thy Head meekly bowing down, while the ungrateful Jews
blaspheme and revile thee. All which thou enduredst with infinite Patience and
Meekness, to possess the Land for us Sinners; who, transported by Pride and
Impatience, are tossed by the waves of violent perturbations. Ah! who can behold
thee on the Cross humbly inclining thy dying Head? Who can be impatient, that
beholds thee so meekly suffering? O my Soul, that thou may possess thy self,
and the Land of the Living, learn of thy Savior to be humble, meek, and
patient.

On Christ's Eyes. Against Excessive Mirth.
O Good Jesu, I behold thy sacred Eyes distilling bloody tears, and I hear thee
say, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. If thou (O Lord)
were comforted by mourning, because by thy tears thou were to redeem me a
Sinner: Great cause have I to mourn with thee, since my sins were the cause of
thy weeping and sorrow. Great cause have I to weep and bewail my sins, that I
may be comforted, yea, and rejoice, seeing by thy dolorous Passions, I obtain a
full redemption to my Soul.

On his Mouth. Against Fear and Pusillanimity.
O Good Jesu, I behold thy sacred Mouth, and hear thee say, I Thirst: Whereby I
learn that thou did hunger and thirst after righteousness, that my poor
sinful Soul might be justified. What then should my hunger and thirst be, but a
desire to suffer with thee, that I may reign with thee? Why then should I fear?
Why should I be so much dejected? Thou art my Captain, I must follow thee: Thou
art the Way, I must not leave thee: Thou art Life, and therefore I cannot live
without thee. O my God and all things! As the Heart thirsts after the fountain
of waters, so does my Soul unto thee.

On his Side. Against Unmercifulness.
O Good Jesu, I behold Blood and Water issuing from thy wounded Side, and seem
to hear thee say, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall find mercy. Thou (O
Lord) were so merciful, so bountiful, that thou gave the last dropps of thy
precious Blood, which streamed from thy wounded Heart for my redemption. O hard
Heart of mine! Should I behold thee in the poor, and not commiserate thee; or
behold thee in the naked, and not cloth thee; or in the sick, and not visit
thee; or in the hungry, and not feed thee! Thou gave all, even to the last
drop of Blood, to redeem me a vile Sinner. O that I could give, and surrender
all I am and have to thee, my God and Savior! O that I could love thee with an
entire Heart, and with all the powers of my Soul!

On his Heart. Against Impure Thoughts.
O Good Jesu, I behold thy tender Heart pierced through with a cruel Spear, and
seem to hear thee say, Blessed are the clean of Heart, for they shall see God.
O that my sinful Heart were transfixt with sorrow for my sins, by true
compunction, that I may have the happiness to behold my God, by having a clean
Heart, and purified Soul by true Contrition. Jesu, be merciful to me a Sinner,
that I may have a Contrite Heart, deeply wounded and transfixt with sorrow, as
often as I behold thy wounded Side and Heart, whence flowed Blood and Water:
With which, thou (O Lord) shall sprinkle me, and I shall be clean; thou shall
wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow.

On Christ's Hands. Against perturbations of Mind.
O Good Jesu, I behold thy sacred Hands pierced through with nails, and seem to
hear thee say, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God. Thou (O Lord) were the great Peacemaker, who did interpose
thy self betwixt thy Heavenly Father and us Sinners. Thou have made our Peace,
yet still I find disquiet of Mind upon slight occasions, vain fears, and
worldly respects. Therefore I appeal to thee the great Peacemaker, and Son of
God, and beseech thee to assist me with thy powerful Grace, that I likewise may
be a Peacemaker, not only externally amongst such as are at variance, but
likewise inwardly, that I may pacify my own Soul, and thereby become the
peaceful Child of God, who seeks repose in a Soul free from anxious thoughts
and worldly perturbations. Amen

On his Feet. Against Fear of Persecution.
O Good Jesu, I behold thy sacred Feet pierced through with nails, and seem to
hear thee say, Blessed are they that suffer Persecution for righteousness sake,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Thou (O Lord) were persecuted unto death,
even the death of the Cross: For which God gave thee a Name above all Names. O
Blessed Savior, since thou have promised a Kingdom to them that suffer with
thee and for thee; I must not, I cannot, presume to reign with thee, unless I
suffer for thy sake. And since no Man shall be crowned but he that lawfully
fights for thy Honor, and suffers for thy Glory, why should I be so backward,
so timorous, so unwilling to undergo whatever Persecution it pleases thee to
send, or to permit, which I should receive as a Favor from Heaven, and certain
pledge of thy Love and Favor; who, being a Loving Father receivest no Child
whom thou do not chastise. Under whose Rod of Correction, may I humbly,
through thy powerful Grace submit, and fully resign my Will, to be a chosen
Member of that Kingdom, which thou have promised to them that suffer
Persecution, for thy Names sake. Amen, Amen.

Part of the 143. Psalm paraphrased, concerning true Beatitude.
O Rescue me out of the hand
Of such as thy behests withstand,
Degenerate Children, they, wholly,
And utter naught but vanity.
Whose powerful Arms in my distress,
Were Arms stretched forth to wickedness:
Whose Youthful Sonns, like to a Spring,
Of vigorous shoots, are flourishing;
Whose Daughters, dressed, their Pride display,
Decked (Temple-like) in rich array;
Whose store of Corn abundant lies,
Heapt up in their rich Granaries.
Whose Ewes are fruitful, flocks, that go
Mantling the Earth like drifts of snow.
Whose Oxen prosper, fat, and fair,
And in whose Walls no ruins are:
Nor noise of Thieves, or Rogues, that meet,
Or hideous outcries in the Street.
Such some admire, and Happy call,
Cause they have blessings temporal;
But I him Blessed have understood,
Whose Lord to him is God, all good.
FINIS.

