REASONS DELIVERED By the Right Honorable the Earl of MANCHESTER: FOR Nulling
the forced VOTES, And against the high and visible insolences of those that
forced the HOUSES.

WITH A DECLARATION OF The House of Peers acquitting themselves AND Other
papers delivered at a Conference of both Houses, on Wednesday, August 18. 1647.

ALSO An Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, appointing a secret Committee
for the sending for, and examining of Parties and Witnesses.

Aug: 20th Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.

REASONS Delivered By the Right Honorable the Earl of MANCHESTER FOR Nulling
the forced VOTES.
AND Against the high and visible insolences of those that forced the Houses.
Die Mercurii August 18. 1647.
AT a Conference of both Houses, the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester
delivered from the Lords to the Commons, these ensuing particulars,

That their Lordships had commanded him to put them in mind, that August the
6th. Instant, the Lords sent a Message for their concurrence to an Ordinance
making Null those Orders which passed July 26th. by force, set upon both
Houses. And all other Orders, Votes, Ordinances, and proceedings, from thence
until the sixth of August following, by any pretense of Parliament, or power.

II. That their Lordships had likewise commanded him, to put them in mind that
they likewise sent to them two Declarations for their concurrence, One from the
General his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army: The other from the
Lords and Commons and the Speakers, who went to the Army for safety. Both which
declared the proceedings of the Members in their absence to be forced, and
invalid.

III. That their Lordships had commanded him to acquaint them that they had
received their Expedite, sent up by a Message this day, by some of their
Members, (which was for Nulling the forced Votes and Proceedings by a Repeal)
And that their Lordships had Voted to lay it aside, and adhered to their former
Votes.

IV. That their Lordships had commanded him, to deliver to them Certain Reasons
of the great dangers that are like to follow, if the Parliament be not
Vindicated and righted, by a speedy course herein.

The Substance of which Reasons was thus:

First, That if a speedy course be not taken herein, there is no provisions can
be made for the safety of a free Parliament sitting, because in these things
the Houses were forced in a most insolent and visible manner. Secondly, That
the Parliament should be hereby liable to do whatsoever they shall further
force them to hereafter in the like manner. Contrary to the freedom and
privilege of Parliaments; And hereby they gain the Authority of Parliament,
to make good what they force. Thirdly, That whatsoever force shall be set upon
the Parliament, to oppose their proceedings; and thereby force the Houses to
Act what they please; There can be no po^er obtained to punish them for so
great insolences.
V. That their Lordships had commanded him to deliver to them a Declaration, (
whereby their Lordships do declare, That they have used all possible means
that the Houses of Parliament, may be righted and vindicated herein, against
the insolent, and visible mutinings set upon them to force them and disturb
the proceedings of a fre^ Parliament, in which their Lordships do acquit
themselves, that they have done, what in the^ lies to vindicate and right the
Parliament herein.

VI. That their Lordships have now passed an Ordinance for the making of the
Votes null, passed on Monday July 26, and so on till Friday August 6. And
declaring against the same, to which Ordinance they desire the speedy
concurrence of the House of Commons,

Die Veneris 13 August, 1647.
IT is Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament. Assembled, That the
Earl of Denbigh Earl of Malgrave, Lord Gray of Warke, Lord Howard, Sir Arthur
Hazlerigge. Mr. Solliciter, Mr. Gurdon, Mr. Miles Corbet, Mr. Alderman
Pennington, Mr. A^^in, Mr. Humphry Edwards, and Colonel Ven, or any three of
them be a sub-Committee of the Committee appointed by both Houses on Friday
last: And that they have power to send for parties and witnesses, and to
proceed (under secrecy) at all times when they think fit in preparing the
examinations of the businesses committed to the said Committee: And that they
or any three of them may administer an oath unto any persons in such things as
shall not render the parties criminal that are so sworn.

Henry Elsyng Cler. Par. Dom. Comm^.

FINIS.

