A MANIFESTATION DIRECTED To the Honorable Houses of Parliament in England,
SENT From the Lord Inchequin, the Lord Broghill, Sir Will. Fenton, Sir Percy
Smith, Lieut. Col. Will. Brocket, Lieut. Col. Thomas Serle, Serjeant-major
Muschamp; Containing the reasons of their now opposing the Cessation with the
blood-thirsty Irish Rebels; and their resolution to live and die in defense of
the Parliament and Protestant Cause in that Kingdom.

As also, The joint and unanimous Declaration of His Majesty's Protestant
subjects in the Province of Munster, showing to the whole world the many
inhumane, cruel, and unheard of perfidious dealings, treacherous conspiracies,
and horrid combinations of Friars, Priests, and Jesuits, to betray the Castles,
Forts, and Garrisons, and their murdering many Protestants in that Province,
contrary to the Article of free Commerce, and other Articles of the late Treaty.

Die Veneris, 9 August. 1644.

ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That this Letter and Declaration
be forthwith printed and published.

J. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum. Corrected, and amended.

LONDON, Printed for J. Wright in the Old Bailey, August 14. 1644.

TO THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT at Westminster.
May it please the honorable Houses,
IF the miseries which we have suffered in the Province of Munster could be
described, they would be as far short of what they are, as our ability to
right our selves is short of our desires; and though our past sufferings have
been extreme great, yet we are like to be much more oppressed, unless the
honorable Houses of Parliament do take us into their protection, and send us
some speedy relief.

The several Agents we employed before we submitted to the Cessation did often
acquaint you with the heavy burden we groaned under; and when we saw our
lamentable condition did only produce your pity, but could not your relief,
which was diverted by the War in England; we esteemed it far more
advantageous for the cause to submit to the Cessation, and by that means
preserve our Garrisons, then by a ruinous obstinacy to continue in a War, which
we knew not how to maintain ten days. Neither can this action be imputed to
any desire of having a peace with our bloody enemies; for if we had had any
such design, upon the first or second failing of our supplies, we might have
embraced that opportunity; but we saw Gods glory and the honor and advantage
of our Country too deeply engaged to condescend to any thing that had the face
of a peace, as long as possibly we were able to maintain a War.

If we thought the honorable Houses had any greater ^terest then the
protecting of the oppressed Protestants, ^e might represent diverse great
advantages unto them; ^ more then a probability of the Adventurers gaining ^eir
purchased right, which otherwise is utterly lost, ^d many other advantages
which we will not specify, ^cause we know your justice to be so great, that
no^ing can add to your pious care, where the Protestant ^eligion is so deeply
engaged.

But if through your great necessities we should fail on your relied on aid,
the World shall see how much we value the vindicating of Gods glory, and the
honor of the English Nation above our lives and fortunes.

Neither is the payment of this duty the only advantage we propound unto our
selves by this action, for we firmly hope, and humbly desire this honorable
assembly, that our unexpressible wrongs and miseries might be a rise for you to
send unto his Majesty for the concluding of a happy peace in England, without
which we apprehend this War cannot be prosecuted as it ought to be. We have
likewise sent our most humble des^res unto his Majesty to the same effect, whom
we hope God will direct in that way which will so much conduce to the
establishment of the Protestant Religion, and the happiness of the English
Nation.

We will not trouble you with an over-tedious Letter, since this enclosed
Declaration which we humbly present unto you will acquaint you with our actions
and intentions. We have likewise sent our humble desires, which we make no
doubt will be found as just as our designs; since both shall be for the
settlement of the true Protestant Religion, and the maintenance of our Laws and
Liberties; for the defense of which we have vowed to sacrifice the lives and
fortunes of those which for your absolute security (if you should doubt the
reality of our intentions) do offer, when any of your ships shall arrive before
our harbor, all, or any particular person of us will go aboard, till you have
secured your selves of all or any our Garrisons. But we strongly hope this wise
Assembly will distinguish betwixt the effects of necessity and dishonesty; and
impute our submitting to the Cessation to the first, being too miserable
already in our sufferings, without increasing them by a needless jealousy of
the last.

These our miseries and infinite sufferings we most humbly submit to your
judicious considerations, not doubting but when you have well weighed them you
will send a speedy redress to

Your most humble and affectionate servants, The Lord of Inchequin, chief
commander of the Protestant forces in Munster. Lord of Brohgill, governor of
Youghall. Sir William Fenton, Knight. Sir Percy Smith, Knight. Lieut. col. and Deputy
governor of Youghall. Lieutenant-col. Will. Brocket, Governor of Kinsale.
Lieutenant-col. Thomas Serle, Governor of Bandon, etc. Serjeant-major
Muschamp, Governor of the Fort of Cork. etc.

Cork, July 18. 1644.
The Unanimous Declaration of HIS MAJESTY'S Protestant Subjects of the Province
of of MUNSTER.
IF in the undertaking of a just design, it were only requisite that the
hearts, and consciences of the undertakers were satisfied, we should not need
to publish this Declaration. But lest our Enemies should traduce the candor of
our actions, and intentions, we have made this manifestation of them, which
will acquaint the world with their malice, and our innocence.

We are confident that all Christendom has heard of the bloody Rebellion in
Ireland; And we are as confident the Rebels, and Popish Clergy have so
palliated and disguised it, That many are fully persuaded they had reason for
what they did; but we believe all men of judgment will change that opinion,
when they shall know that though they were a conquered people, yet the Laws
were administered unto them with as much equity as to the English; That they
enjoyed their Religion, though not by Toleration, yet by Connivence; That their
Lords (though Papists) sat in Parliament. And that the election of the Knights
of the Shire and Burgesses was free, and though of a contrary Religion were
admitted into the house of Commons, yet for all these, and many other vast
favors and privileges, when every one was sitting under his Vine and
Fig Tree, without any provocation, they resolved upon a general extirpation
both of the Protestants, and their Religion, which without doubt they had
effected, had not God been more merciful then they were wicked, and by a
miracle discovered this divelish design; Whereof, though we had notice just
time enough to secure our maine Magazine at Dublin, yet we could not prevent
the butchery of multitudes of innocent souls, which suffered at the first in
the Province of Vlster, and since they have continued this Rebellion with such
perfidiousnesse, and bloudinesse, that though we had been as guilty, as we are
innocent; yet the prosecuting of the War with that barbarousnesse, had rather
been a sin then Justice. But by Gods great providence, when the Rebellion
brake out first, the Parliament of England was sitting, unto whom His Majesty
communicated so much of his power over this Kingdom, as we shall hereafter
mention, and gave them great encouragement to prosecute the War against the
Rebels by granting lands unto such as should adventure money for the
maintenance of the War. Whereupon the Parliament (who were most willing to
advance so good a cause) sent us at first large supplies, which had so good
success that the Divine as well as humane Justice did proclaim them Rebels,
for indeed God Almighty (since the deliverance of the children of Jsrael from
the Egyptians) never appeared to visibly as in this War. But the unhappy
misunderstanding between the King and Parliament did so hinder the continuance
of those supplies for this Kingdom, that all we received in nineteen months
amounted not to five weeks entertainment, so that the Army which was sent to
relieve us, lived upon us. And truly we may with Justice profess, That the
forces of this Province did feed as miraculously as fight, being never able to
prescribe any certain way of subsistence for one month together; But when the
poor Inhabitants were absolutely beggered, and no means for the forces to
subsist on, left, a cessation of Arms was made for a twelve month with the
Rebels, which our necessity (not inclination) compelled us to bear with, and
the rather out of a firm hope that the Almighty out of his infinite goodness
would within that year settle a right understanding between the King and
Parliament, That then they would unanimously revenge the crying blood of so
many thousands of innocent souls; And until God blessed us with the sight of
that happy Union, we might keep our Garrisons (which otherwise we could not)
the better to enable them to prosecute so just, and honorable a design. But
the Cessation was as fatal to us during the time of Treaty, as afterward it
was ill observed; or they knowing what agreement they would enforce us to
condescend unto, did privately send one or two persons to every Castle that we
had demolished, which under pretense of being by that means in their
possession, they ever since detain, though it be contrary to the Articles. And
which is more injurious, they have at all times since entered upon what Lands
they have thought fit, and detained them also; and their devilish malice having
no bounds, they ^id place guards upon the high ways to interrupt our Markets,
and punished diverse of their own party for coming with provisions to us,
thereby to deter all from bringing any relief to our Garrisons* that so they
might statue us out of those places, that neither their fraud, or force could
get from us; which that they might the better accomplish, they murdered diverse
of the poor English, that presuming on the Article of free commerce, went
abroad to buy victuals, which certainly would have caused them to have
declined that course of seeking food, if hunger threatening them with more
certain death had not forced them thereunto. And whereas we trusted that these
notorious infidelities in them and infinite sufferings in us, would have been
so visible to His Majesty, that nothing could have induced Him to make a peace
with so perfidious a people, who through their fawning and insinuating with His
Majesty, and by the counsel of some who represent, that there is no way left
for the securing the remainder of English, but by a peace. We find His Majesty
being deluded by the first, and believing the last to be conducing to the
preservation of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, is concluding of a Peace
which will again admit those Irish Rebels to be members of Parliament; so
that that Court which should afford relief for our grievances, will by their
overswaying Votes be our greatest grievance.

Moreover we are too truly informed by diverse of their own party (whose names
if we should publish, would be as great an ingratitude as folly; The first, in
betraying those that obliged us, The last, in depriving our selves of all
future intelligence by them) that they have vowed never to submit to an
English, or Protestant Government, except they have liberty to exercise their
Religion in Churches; That the Forces of the Kingdom may be Trained-Bands of
their men; And that likewise those of their own Religion may be admitted to
places of trust in the Commonwealth, which they call modest, and moderate
demands, though we hope they cannot seem so to any but themselves, and their
Clergy, who, we find do not think them enough, being they may not have all
the Churchlivings. For we have certain intelligence that they have made a
strong Faction, as well among my Lord of Castlehavens Soldiers, as in all
other parts of the Kingdom so that they are five parts of six, who will fly out
into a new action, when they see a convenient time to execute, their design,
which as yet they determine to forbear, until they see a peace concluded,
supposing that then the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland will intermix Irish and
English without distinction, to oppose the Scots, and that by that means there
will be a sufficient number of their party in our garrisons to master them,
which, when they find an opportunity for, they will certainly seize into their
own hands; Upon notice whereof the Faction abroad will with all expedition
apprehend the English in all parts, and having accomplished this part of their
design, they will manifest that they are weary of the King of Englands
Government, and that they will trust none of his Protestant Subjects among
them; For we are certainly informed that they will invite a foreign Prince to
take them into his protection, Unto whom they will deliver possession of what
he pleases, and will become his Subjects.

And lest that Princes Treasure should be exhausted by wars in other places
the Clergy have with the Popes assistance, raised amongst those of their own
calling, and diverse of the Gentry in Italy, one hundred thousand pounds in
money, and a quantity of Arms, and Ammunition, that are now ready to be (...)
hither^, And they have employed one Doctor Daye^ to go forthwith thither for
it, As also to get his holiness to settle a course for the raising of more
money, to be employed for the advancement of that which they call Catholic
cause.

Therefore out of a true sense of our injuries already suffered, and
unredressed, with a right apprehension of inevitable ruin, not only to our
lives, and estates, but likewise to the English Nation, and Protestant
Religion, we have reassumed our Arms, according to our duty to God, our King,
and Country, with inviolable resolution to dye, or frustrate this divelish
design.

And since those that dye acting for the Gospel, are as perfect Martyers, as
those that dye suffering for it, We cannot but with joy embrace any effect
that proceeds from so glorious a cause.

Neither can this act be esteemed a crime in us, since his Majesty upon the
Rebels first insurrection his treasure being exhausted, gave his Royal assent
for the passing of an Act of Parliament, wherein he granted (to all his Subjects
that would adventure money toward reducing of the rebels) Lands proportionable
to the sum adventured, which would fall to the Crown when the conquest should
be finished; and the better to secure the adventurers, his Majesty obliged
himself to make no peace with the Rebels, but with the advice and approbation
of the Parliament of England; And by that Act communicated to the Parliament
that power, which before was solely in himself, So that they not condescending
to this peace, Our employing of their Aids, and reassuming of those Arms put
into our hands by King and Parliament jointly, cannot be esteemed contradictory
to his Majesty, in regard that their joint Act is so absolutely binding, that
neither of them severally can annull it, as is evident in the Laws of the
Realm.

Therefore if this war were only offensive, yet even slander it self must
acknowledge us innocent, having so just a cause, so pious an intention, and so
lawful an authority, much more it being defensive and the Law both of God and
nature allowing every one to defend himself from violence and wrong.

Moreover, the King must never expect any obedience from the Irish, but what
proceeds either from their Interest, or fear. Through the first of these,
neither His Majesty, or we can hope for assurance, for not granting them all
their desires, their Interest (which is more powerful with them then their
loyalty) will make them throw off their subjection and to become absolute, not
scruple to destroy us: then to expect any security by their fears, were
frivolous; for though we have found their hearts as ill as their cause, yet
they cannot be apprehensive of two or 3000 ill armed, and unprovided men,
having all things necessary, and so numerous a people at their devotion.

And lest our Enemies should scandalize us with breach of faith, in violating
the pretended Cessation, or with cruelty in expelling the Irish Papists from
our Garrisons, who hitherto seemed adhering to us.

Concerning the first, we declare, That although our necessities did induce us
to submit, supposing the Cossation would have produced other effects, as is
before mentioned; yet that we had no power, (without authority from King and
Parliament jointly) to treat or yield to it; or if it had been in our powers,
yet by the Rebels daily breaches of it, we are disengaged from it.

Concerning the second, We declare, That our Garrison cannot be secured, whilst
so powerful and perfidious Enemies are in our bosoms; Powerful, being four
to one in number more then the English; Perfidious, in their constant designs
to betray us, some whereof we will instance, to convince their own
consciences, and satisfy the world of our just proceedings.

One Francis Matthewes, a Francisean Friar (being wonderfully discovered in an
enigmaticall Letter, and as justly executed) before his death confessed, that
he had agreed to betray the City of Cork to the Lord of Muskery, which must
necessarily infer, that the chiefest and greatest part of that City were
engaged in this conspiracy, for otherwise he could not so much as hope
the accomplishment; And if this had taken effect, it had consequently ruined all
the Protestants in the Province of Minister, that being our chief Magazine,
and greatest Garrison; Besides upon this occasion, other Friars being examined
upon Oath, confessed that in their daily Masses within that Town, and all
other of our Garrisons, (where Papists did inhabit, they prayed for the
advancement of the Catholic cause; which they believed the Rebels fought for.

And lastly, We have lately discovered, that the now Major, and Corporation,
had conbined with the Rebels to betray the Town to them and for that purpose
an Army was drawn to all the parts adjoining to our Garrisons. In the three
chiefest whereof, we are confident, the Rebels had their party; but by divine
providence, before the Plot could be executed, the Major presuming on his
speedy success, contemned the Lord of Inch^quins authority, by opposing the
levying of the monyes granted by the English, for the maintenance of the
Soldiers, just about the nick of time that the treachery was to be effected.

And he being committed upon this occasion, The Rebels apprehending their
design to be discovered, with drew their Forces, And lest this should be
judged as an act of the Major only, as a private person; We desire the world
to take notice, that as soon as our Army, which forced their obedience, was
removed into England, the Papists generally resisted what ever could be
propounded for our security, and would have disenabled us to continue our
Garrisons had not the poor stripped English taken all that burden upon
themselves.

Nay, they were so insolent, that they labored to get Arms into their hands,
and to cause us to disband our Soldiers, which they affirmed to be kept as an
unnecessary charge upon the King, that so they might with more facility
receive the Irish and ruin us.

In a word, since they pretend the ground of this War to be for Religion, and
that this is confessed by those who seemed to adhere to us; what faith can be
expected from such a people, whose Religigion permits them to hold none with us?

By this preceding Relation, it is evidently seen, that unless we reassume
our Arms, we betray the trust committed to us by God, the King and Parliament,
and become slaves both of bodies souls. And therefore we have resolved to
perform our duty though with apparent hazard of our lives: And likewise
maintain that which is a thousand times more dear unto us, our Religion, and
also defend our Garrisons for the Kings just use.

These we take God to witness are our Intentions, and we beseech him to punish
us as strangely as his (...) he has preserved us, if we decline at all from
these loyal and religions resolutions; And we firmly hope that the world will
by this declaration, be as fully satisfied of the justinesse of our
proceedings, as we our selves are; Then though we all lose our lives in this
cause, we shall give o^ friends occasion to rejoice; and our Enemies to envy
at so blessed an and.

FINIS.

