THE SPEECH Of the right Honorable EDWARD EARL of MANCHESTER, Lord Chamberlain
of His MAJESTY'S HOUSEHOLD.

Delivered at the Guild Hall London, on Thursday, being the first day of
December, 1664. at a Common Hall there held.

Where were also present The Earl of Bridgewater. Lord Bishop of London. Lord
Berkley of Berkley. Lord Moon. Lord Ashley Mr. Vice-Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary
Bennet. Viscount Cornebury. Sir Thomas Clifford. Colonel Popham. Mr. Waller.
Colonel Fretzvile. Sir Philip Warwick. Sir John Berkenhead. Mr. Ashburnham. Sir
George Reeve. Sir William Lowther.


Members of the honorable Houses of Parliament.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted, 1664.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

THE SPEECH Of the Right Honorable, EDWARD, Earl of MANCHESTER, Lord
Chamberlain of His Majesty's Household. Delivered at the Guild Hall, London, on
Thursday the first of December, 1664. at the Common Hall there held, etc.
My Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, and you the worth Citizens of this great and
famous City of London.
I Hope our coming hither this day, and upon this occasion, will be as
satisfactory to you, as it is grateful to us: Some of us have formerly
addressed our selves unto you, by His Majesty's Command, for the Loan of
several and great sums of Money, and we found such a ready compliance with
His Majesty's desires, as we can give testimony to the Nation, that in your
duty and affection to your King, you have outdone all other Cities, even the
greatest Cities of the Christian World; and let this honor remain with you,
and be entailed to your posterities for ever.

But we come not now to ask, but to give a return of thanks, hearty thanks,
from the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for your forwardness in
assisting the King.

What you intended as a private and personal duty and kindness to your King,
the Parliament owns as a public service to the Kingdom; and that upon a just
account: For His Majesty borrowed not these sums to convert them to His
private expenses, but to employ them for public use, to prepare and set forth
a Fleet, able to contest for victory against all the naval powers of His
insulting and injurious Neighbors: And in order to this design, His Majesty
has impaired His own Stock, by exhausting His own Stores; He has improved his
own Industry, and not spared His own Personal Labor and Diligence: and to
complete and perfect this Design, His Royal Highness, His Majesty's dear and
only Brother, has exposed Himself to hazard and danger. And this Prince is of
such an accomplished Gallantry, that, through the blessing of God, you need not
question a happy Success under so good a Conduct.

All this His Majesty has done as the Father of His Country, not consulting
His own Interest, but for the Honor of the Nation, and to secure and advance
the Trade and Commerce of His Kingdoms, in which this City has so eminent a
concernment and advantage, as probably we may conclude this Prophecy will not
only be fitly applied, but truly fulfilled in your days, unto the City of
London; The Harvest of the Rivers is Her Revenue, and she is become a Mart of
Nations.

Thus you see the happiness and advantage of living under such a King, whose
generous nature prompts Him to remember and to acknowledge benefits, as well as
to receive them.

His Majesty declares to the Parliament what the City of London had done for
Him, and what He had done for the Safety and Honor of the Kingdom, by their
kind and cheerful assistance; and expresses Himself in such a phrase, as makes
you partners with Him in all the happy consequences of this great Expedition.

The Parliament having received this account from the mouth of their King,
return you their Thanks, with the full consent and the unanimous Votes of both
Houses, the Lords and Commons, which I here deliver to you as a Record of their
acknowledgements of your Services done to the King.

And now give me leave to offer our Well-wishes to you, That this City may
never want the Favor, Countenance, and Protection of such a King; and that His
Majesty may always find the Fidelity, Affection, and Assistance of such a
City.

And after a great Shout of GOD SAVE THE KING, the Lord Chamberlain having
presented to the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR an order of both Houses of
Parliament, the same was delivered to Mr. Avery, Deputy Town Clerk, who then
publicly read the same, and follows in these words, viz.

Die Veneris, 25 November. 1664.
ORDERED by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament
assembled, That the Thanks of both Houses of Parliament be given unto the City
of LONDON for their forwardness in assisting His Majesty; and in particular, by
furnishing Him with several great sums of Money toward His Preparations for
the Honor, Safety, and Trade of this Nation.

Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliament.

Edinburgh, Reprinted, 1664.


