ENGLANDS Spiritual Languishing; WITH The Causes and Cure: Discovered in a
SERMON Preached before the Honorable House OF COMMONS, On their Solemn Day of
FAST, at Margarets Westminster, June 28. 1648.

BY THOMAS MANTON, Minister of Stoke-Newington.

London, Printed by R. Cotes for John Clarke at the lower end of Cheapside, in
the entrance to Mercers-chappel, 1648.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS NOW Assembled in Parliament.
YOU were pleased to require my service on your late day of Fast, as you had
done on the same occasion, just a Twelve-moneth before: I desired to speak
seasonably then and now too: The Lord directed my thoughts then to a subject of
peace, our distractions were great; and now to treat of Zeal, our destruction
(we fear) draws nigh. These two things may well stand together, Love and
Zeal; and if men were wise James 3.18.
, the fruit of righteousness might be sown in peace, and such concord effected
between Brethren, wherein Religion may not suffer: I know there are two Parties
that will never be accorded, the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent; there will be enmity: But is not there a wise man among us? not one
that shall be able to judge between Brethren? I speak not this to 1 Cor. 6.5.
flatter with a general offer; I have always disliked general invectives
against Error, and general Proposals of Peace Qui pacem tract at non
repetitis conditionibus dissidii, is magis animos dulcedine pacis fallit quam
aequitate componit.
; This were to deal in names rather then things, and to seduce the Soul into
an hope of that, which is far enough from being accomplished. Neither do I
speak it to cool any man's zeal, the drift of this Sermon is to kindle it;
Godliness cannot be without an holy heat: those that suffer under persecution,
will contend against delusion; that is but a duty; and 'twere to be wished it
were more done, and more regularly: Certainly some have been too silent whiles
the truths of God have been made void (...), etc. Naz. Orat. de moderat. in
disput.
; therefore we are far from condemning any such vigorous opposition of the
present Errors. I only mention it as an expression of my desires and hopes.

For the present Discourse, the style of it (I confess) is too turbid, and has
too much of inculcation in it, to be fit for the Press, and therefore I should
have adjudged it to keep company with some other neglected Papers; But that in
obedience to your Order, and condescension to the requests of some Friends, I
have now made it public, and (my employment being much) am forced to send it
forth without refining: I do not know what blessing the Lord (whose power is
usually 2 Cor. 12.9.
perfected in weakness) may ordain by it, I desire to wait upon him, commending
it to his Grace.

In many things I have freely expressed my self, and, possibly some may think,
uncovered our own nakedness; the mouth of iniquity is soon opened, and it is
hard to speak against the Sins of religious persons, without giving some
advantage to religions enemies. All that I shall say to this, is, That
offenders give the scandal, not the reprover: I confess, I like rouling in the
dust at Aphrah Micah 1.10.
, that Gath may not know it; but when offenses are public, 'twere an injury
to religion to be silent; we cannot do it a greater right then to declare and
witness against such miscariages; and therefore when the house of Jacob
offends, it must be told its own with a Isa. 58.1. opened to this purpose by
Mr. Richard Vines in the morning.
full throat; 'twill be our honor to shake off the Vipers upon a discovery,
though they would still stick on: But for the enemies, Horatius.
Nullane habent vitia? immo alia haud fortasse minora: are they so innocent as
to be able to John 8 7.
cast the stone at us? shall they that have wounds, (...), Nazianz. de inimicis
Ecclesiae, Orat. l. 13.
upbraid us with skars? and they that halt downright, charge us with tripping?
or the Blackmore object spots to a fair woman? Let them first pluck out their
own beam, and then possibly they may understand what an injury it is, and a
wicked malice to throw personal guilt in religions face; and out of a dislike
of one Mordecai, to seek the destruction of all the Jews, Esth. 3.6. and to
charge that upon the order, which is but the just blemish of some persons
sheltred under the name and pretense of it; As Nazianzen speaks of some,
(...): Naz. Orat. 14.
That for some Bishops sake accuse Christianity it self as an evil law.

For your selves, (Right honorable) I beseech you remember Religion
flourishing will be your defense; and that it is better trust God with your
protection, then to fly to Admonendi sunt pa^is Authors ne dum pacem nimis
diligant and cum omnibus quaera^t, consentiendo perversis ab Authoris sui se
pace disjungunt, ne dum humana foris jurgia metuant, interni foederis
discussione feriantur, Ambros.
ill Counsels, or condescensions, whereby you may gain the respects of men: The
Lord grant that you may live up to such a principle; and in these Times of
violence do nothing unworthy of God, or of his Oath that is upon you: So
prays

Your meanest Servant in the Lords work, THO. MANTON.

Englands Languishing, WITH The Causes and Cure of it, discovered in a Sermon
Preached at Magarets Westminster before the Honorable House of Commons on this
Solemn Day of Fast, June 28. 1648.
Revel. 2.3. Be watchful and strengthen the things which remain that are
ready to dye, for I have not found thy works perfect before God.


IN Scriptures wherein the expression is any thing more difficult, wits are
most rank and luxuriant, every one taking a liberty to affixe his own sense
there, where the true and genuine sense is not so obvious and easily found out:
and because two or three false interpretations may be asserted with equal
probability, the Scriptures have suffered as an uncertain rule, or nose of
Wax, ('it is the blasphemy of the Papists) which is ductile and pliable to every
fancy and purpose. The truth, is we are more happy in discovering falsehood,
then in clearing truth, and those which come after can more easily discern
wherein others have halted and are defective, then reach the truth themselves:
I have always looked upon that as a grave observation, Observatum seapius a
Wendilino in lib. de caelo.
Facilius est aliorum convellere sententias quam stabilire propriam, Men are
always better at confuting then confirming. In which thought I am strengthened
by the censure of Hierom on Lactantius, Lactantius quasi quidam flunius
Tullianae Eloquentiae, utinam tam nostra potuisset confirmare quam facile
aliena destruxit.
who observed that his arguments were more valid and strong which he brought
against false worships then those other by which he confirmed the true; and
Hieron. Tullius lib. de not. deorum.
Tully wished he could as easily find out the true God as disprove the false.
Whether it be through that natural desire that is in us, to blemish others, or
from the weakness and imperfection of our apprehensions, or from an obstinate
prejudice against Divine Truths, or from Gods hiding and reserving many things
till the age next their accomplishment, I will not now dispute: I only hint
it, to show that therefore it is why men have disputed so unhappily, and with
such variety about some difficult places of Scripture, always acquitting
themselves with more honor, success, and satisfaction in disproving the
opinion of others, then in vindicating and clearing their own.

As this has been the Fate of other Scriptures, so especially of this Book of
the Revelation, wherein there are as many Quot verba, tot, Sacramenta. Hieron
in praeif, ad Bib.
mysteries as words, and all matters (as is usual in Prophesies) veiled under
expressions which are of a mystic sense and interpretation. Above all other
parts of the Book the three first Chapters are most plain and easy to be
understood, though here also difficulties want not: for my part I shall not
trouble you with the several thoughts of men about these Chapters, the noise
of Axe and Hammer should not be heard in the Temple, these discussions better
become the Study then the Pulpit.

Let it suffice to note that the main contents of them are several Epistles
sent from Jesus Christ by John to the seven Churches of Asia. But here a doubt
arises, why a Catholic prophecy, such as is calculated for the Church in
general, and all ages of it, should begin with Epistles to these particular
Churches, what may be the reason of this? Answer, it is so partly, because the
Gospel did here first eminently flourish, Foxius in Romans page 21. 14.
and the Spirit of God foresaw that the malice of Satan would also first
powerfully invade and overrun these Churches, and so engage them to the wrath
of God; partly because of John's particular relation and Apostolical presidency
over these Churches, wherein the spirit of God condescendeth to that natural
inquisitivenesse and desire that we have to know what shall become of our
own, and therefore being about to reveal to him the state of all the
Churches, he begins with those to whom he stood in particular bond and
relation.

But why to the seven Churches in Asia, See Aug. de civit. dei lib. 11. cap. 13.
since there were more planted in that tract and country? I answer again, it
may be partly because of the prophetical perfection of this number which is
every where in Scripture solemn and sacred, and with which the spirit of God
seems most delighted in this Prophecy, and therefore we hear of seven Stars,
seven Spirits, seven Candlesticks, seven Lamps, seven seals, seven Angels,
seven Trumpets, seven Vials, seven thunders, of the Dragon with seven heads,
the City with seven Hills, the Beast with seven horns, and therefore that the
beginning of the Prophecy might carry proportion with the rest of it, wherein
all things are set forth under the Typical figure of this number, he writes
to the seven Churches in Asia: and partly because in these seven Churches
(which were the most eminent) there was found enough to represent the state,
Graces, evils of all Churches in all ages, and indeed the pattern and Type is
so complete and perfect, that by an easy and fair accommodation, it may be
applied to all other Churches that are not named here, for in them God was
pleased to give the World a Document and experience of all those judgments and
dispensations which he would exercise toward other Churches offending and
declining in the same manner.

One question more, and we have done with this general view, and that is, Why
all these Epistles are directed to the several Angels or respective
Ministries of the Churches, since the drift of them concerns the whole body
of the people. I answer, either because they were notoriously guilty of the
offenses charged, and so by example propagated their own taint and
profaneness among the people; or through oscitancy and carelessness suffered
corruptions to creep in upon others, or else because all dispensations from
Christ were to pass through their hands to the Church, and so the regular way
of transmitting these Epistles, was by means of the Angel or Eldership.

Other general Observations there are, but I quit them, desiring to fall upon
the Epistle we have in hand. The Text is a part of the Epistle to the Church of
Sardis, which was a flourishing and rich City, the Seat of the Kings of Lydia:
in it you have.

To the Angel of the Church of Sardis, write: you see it is inscribed as all the
rest are, to the Angel of the Church, that is, to the Ministry: who, because
of their subserviency to the salvation of the elect, and that resemblance that
is between their function and the Angels Office are expressed by that term, and
though they were many, yet they are expressed in the singular number Angel, to
note their Union and combination in a body and society. To this Angel write, in
which word he produces his warrant and authority. We cannot threaten
Churches in our own name, See Mr. Iesops Sermon on the Angel of the Church of
Ephesus, page 12.
Christ must first say, write; the Priests under the Law were to have their
ears tipped with blood, Exodus 29.20. Christ must command and inspire as he
does John here, write.

These things says he that has the seven Spirits of God and the seven Stars;
the seven Spirits, that is, the Holy Ghost, who is called so, because of the
plenty, perfection and variety of his gracicous operations and influences; and
therefore in the old Hymn of the Church, 'twas said to the Holy Ghost, It Is
septiformis munere; and it is said Christ has these seven Spirits, that is,
has power to send the Holy Ghost, who always acts as Christ's Spirit with
reference to his merit and intercession, therefore it is said Ioh. 14.15. He
shall take of mine and show it you. Christ takes this title upon him now to
show that he had Spirit enough, to quicken dead Sardis, seven spirits, when he
writes to a languishing Church. The next part of the description is, and the
seven Stars, these are expounded, Revel. 1.20. And the seven Stars are the
Angels of the seven Churches, so that the stars note the subordinate
Ministeries, which Christ is said to have, because he appoints them, gifteth
them, assists them in their office and functions.

I know thy works, a phrase that is used to all the rest of the Churches, but
is most proper to Sardis, whose crime objected is Hypocrisy and pretense: Oh
how should it startle Hypocrites to hear God say I know thy works! it
implies Christ's strict and severe observation of what is done among his
people, his eyes are every where, but he observes the Church, Cant. 6.11. He
goes down into the Gardens to see the fruits of the valleys, to see whether
the Vines flourished, and the Pomegranates budded; phrases which imply a narrow
inspection.



By its repute and renown among other Churches, they did judge and speak well
of her; Thou have a name that thou live, (i.e.) thou art reputed to be
eminent for Faith Piety, and the power of godliness, and go for an
excellent Church in thine own conceit and the opinion of others; a Church is
then said to live, when it receives the grace of life, and expresses the life
of grace; and name is taken for repute and renown.

But art dead, thy condition is not correspondent to the report that goes of
thee, the Churches that judge well of thee are deceived, for though there be
much profession, yet very little of the power of truth and godliness is found
in thee, which is here expressed by death.

Be watchful and strengthen the things that are ready to dye, etc.

In which Counsel of Christ to his Church you may observe,

1 An excitation, Be watchful. 2. A direction, Strengthen the things which
remain, which are ready to dye. 3. A conviction to set on both the former
parts, For I have not found thy works perfect before God.
The maine duty is in the middle, the first part being laid down by way of
preparative to it, and the third by way of reason and enforcement: therefore
though I shall explain the whole verse, yet I shall single out the middle
clause, for larger and more special discussion.

Be watchful, (i.e.) look to it, see whereunto these things will grow; such
sad beginnings, should make you consider and observe your sins, and provide
against your judgments; holy-watchfulnesse and observation is the first step
to amendment, and when people begin to understand the approaches of wrath, they
are in a fair way to prevent them, there cannot be such a gray hair, or a
sadder intimation of swift destruction, then a secure and careless
madvertency; the first thing pressed is, be watchful.

for I have not found thy works perfect before God: whatever men think of
them, they are not so holy and entire as to be able to endure my trial; things
in a Scripture sense are said to be (...) full and perfect, when they are
sincere and sound, without hypocrisy and guile; and therefore Calebs integrity
is expressed by fulfilling after God, or following of God fully, Numb. 14.24.
he understands such a perfect and full growth, as keeps things from
languishing or dying away.

Strengthen the things that remain which are ready to die; there were (...)
some sorry remains of Religion and godliness, to quicken or strengthen;
which, he adds a reason (...) which shall die; the same kind of Greek
expression is used concerning the Centurions servant, when he was at the point
of death, which is expressed by (...) Luke 7.2. they are even languishing and
expiring, unless you strengthen and repair them, they are utterly lost and
gone: the word that expresses their duty is (...) settle or establish them;
which implies, not only a care to keep them from expiration, but to recover
them to their former height and radiancy; and therefore a like matter is
expressed by the Apostle Paul in another word, for he bids Timothy (...)
stir or blow up the gift of God in him, 2 Timothy 1.6.

There is nothing of difficulty in the clause, only it does not so easily
appear (since they are not specified in the Text) what are those (...) those
remains of Religion, which he urges them to strengthen.

How shall we know what they are? Answ. It cannot be meant of persons, as some
would have it, understanding it of the weak of the flock, for it is (...)
things, not persons; and truly it must be something concerning the vitalls of
Religion; such which if revived, would make them live and flourish again in the
sight of God and of the Churches; now Doctrinals it cannot be, for the reason
rendered in the latter part of the Text, for I have not found thy works perfect
before God, it is some decay in practicalls, thy works (...), and if they had
decayed in Doctrinalls, they could not have so much as a name that they lived.
And then mere discipline, it cannot be, for howsoever that be a great
preservation to godliness, and a considerable stake in Religions hedge, yet
the corruption or intermission of discipline, cannot so properly be termed the
death of the Church, it is I remember (if Brightman in Cant.
some expound the place right) called the sleep of the Church. Cant. 6.2. I
sleep but my heart waketh. Brightman applies it to the Church about the third
century, which was watchful over doctrine, the heart waked, but carelessly
digested the corruption and degeneration of discipline, and therefore she is
said to sleep, but its no where called death; or so it cannot be mere
discipline, though some regard may be had thereunto. And therefore principally
it is meant, Restaurantes zelum ardorem que pietatis quae in vobis effrixit and
paene jam extincta est. Iac. Rex in Apoc.
of some few poor relickes of languishing godliness, like sparks under the
ashes which needed blowing up; the sum of all is, I hope you will be stirred
up by this admonition to prevent your death, and utter languishing in Religion,
that decayed godliness may have its former power, efficacy, and glory. I look
upon the Text as a Counsel to a Church, not to private Christians, I confess
it is applied to them by most, because it yields conceptus praedicabi^es as
they call them, much preaching matter concerning the languishing and decay of
grace in Christians.

I cannot say this is excluded, because the part follows the reason of the
whole, but I rather look upon it (and so shall handle it) in a public regard.

The Point is,

That a special way to save a Church and people from imminent and speedy ruin
is the repairing of decayed Godliness.

It Is Christ counsel to Sardis, lest he should come upon them as a thief,
that is, bring a sudden and unthought of destruction: give me leave to
parallel it but with one place, and then I shall proceed to the reasons; it is
the counsel to Ephesus, Revel. 2.5. Do thy first works, or else I will come
to thee quikly and remove thy Candlestick, etc. recovering Religion to its
former height is made a means of preventing Gods coming in judgment, and
it is there expressed by first works, because Religion at the first coming is
entertained with more genuine simplicity, and zealous earnestness (as stuffes
in their first making are strongly wrought) and is full of life and power,
therefore do thy first Works.

Reasons,

outward estate to carry proportion with the inword, as we decay in godliness,
so our outward happiness languisheth, and the hand of mercy is slackened; How
easily may a wise Christian read his guilt in his condition, and from his
outward decays understand his inward? and truly it is so in Commonwealths too,
their fate follows the state of Religion, God meets to us in our own
measure, instances want not, Ye have forsaken me, and therefore I have left
you, 2 Chronicles. 12.5. Rulers rebel against God, and their people rebel against
them, therefore is there a tumult among thy people, Hos. 14.10. Friends are
alienated and estranged from them, because their hearts are first estranged
from God, there are confusions in the Church, and then what follows?
destractions in the State Metuendum erit ne qui Magistratu connivente res novas
in Ecclesia moliri caeperint, eodem etiam repugnante cum oceasio ferat idem
quoque in republica mo liantur. Theol. Mag. Brit. sub fine sent. de 5. Art. in
Hist. Syn. Dor.
. 'Twas grave advice which the English Divines gave the Dutch Magistrate in the
Synod of Dort: that they should take heed, lest by their connivence at Church
disorders which they could help, they did not draw on State-tumults and
factions which when they would they could not help. Truly this is Gods course
to retaliate with the creature; and (as I said before) to make their outward
condition answer their inward. Religion is as it were the Soul of the
Commonwealth, now the state of the body depends much upon the good temper of
the soul, it being lincked to it by the affections, as so many pinnes and
nails; a troubled soul discomposeth the body, but a cheerful mind cures it:
so Religion and godliness, as it thriveth, makes us thrive, God challenges
his people to avouch one instance when ever they lost by it. Ier. 2.5. What
iniquity have your fathers found in me? and Verse 13. O ye Generation, have I
been a Wilderness or a land of darkness to you? Did ever godliness do you
hurt? If you can, do but produce one experience. If you will believe Polycarp
upon his own trial, and let me tell you he was an old Mnason, and had much
trial of God; he will inform you, Eusebius Eccles. Hist. lib 4. cap. 14.
(...), etc. For my part says he, I can speak of 86. years, I have been his
servant so long, and he never did me harm. And truly (notwithstanding the
prejudices that are abroad) we may come in with the like attestation,
Godliness never did us harm, when it thrived and was vigorous, we thrived,
and sensibly felt the benefits of the power of it. See how God appealeth to men
in this matter, Micab 2.7. Are these his doings? do not my words do good to
him that walks uprightly? see the meaning of that place a little; are these
his doings? speaking of the troubles, do you think these are the fruits of
Religion? Or of your endeavors for the advancement of it? No, your own souls
know that my words have done you good, yielded you much comfort and
deliverance, you were happy as long as you kept in that way. And therefore now
if you would take away the cause of ruin, and redress the disorders of the
Commonwealth, repair the decays of Religion, do what you can to restore that
to its former power and efficacy.

sets his beart to bless and prosper such a people, who set their hearts to
repair decayed Religion: and God does it the rather; partly, because of the
prejudice that is upon godliness, as men cast most honor upon the parts most
uncomely, so does God most blessing and comfort upon a despised grace, men
accuse it as the only makebate, and in the worlds eye it is the cause of want
and sword and famine, Ier. 44.18. and therefore God attesteth and witnesses
from heaven that it is the only pledge of a blessing, the more we are
prejudiced, the more free is God in honoring it: and partly, because of his
own delight in it, it is a grace that gives all to God, and therefore God does
all for it, he deals with it as Caleb with his dear daughter Acsah, he
gives her the upper and the nether springs, the blessings of this life and
that to come, Joshua 15.19 1 Timothy 4.8.
for as all the motions and tendencies of godliness are to exalt God, so all
Gods aims and dispensations are to exalt godliness, and therefore is it that
we do so often hear of a blessing upon all endeavors, (especially such as
are eminent and public) that look that way: see Haggai 2.19. From this day
forward will I bless you, that is, from the day that they took care of the
Temple, God would have them observe if their hopes and happiness did not
thrive from that day forward. So 2 Chronicles. 7.11. All that came into Solomon's
heart to make in his own house and the house of the Lord he prosperously
effected. Those two cares thrive the better for one another, the Lords house
made him prosper the better in building his own, for God is resolutely engaged
to let the World know what shall be done to the grace, which he will honor;
so see Isa. 4.4. Upon the glory there shall be a defense, Compare Exodus 15 9.
with Ehes. 5.27.
by the glory is meant the Church reformed or made more holy, for that is the
excellency and glory of it; God and his people being both glorious in
holiness, now upon this glory there will be a covering or defensive shelter,
as there was of Badgers skins over the glory of the Tabernacle.

Religion is but policy, but it is as it should be, when our policy is
Religion; though the troubles are by men, yet out work does not so much lie
with man as with God, we begin at the right end, when we begin with him,
for by making God a friend you may the better get in with men. To set on this
reason, take a few considerations.

rather then men, they are weak and faithless, and so will fail you when
there is most need, the people are unstable as waters, and their respects are
dispensed with much uncertainty, to day they cry up, and to morrow they cry
down things; to secure themselves they will desert them that have done those
most good: as the Keilites were ready to give up David after he had delivered
them, as soon as Saul had any force in Israel, 1 Samuel 23.11. if they keep true,
their power to help may be gone, God kindles courage and quenches it at
pleasure, Ezekiel. 7.14. They have blown the Trumpet to make all ready, but none
goes to the battle, for my wrath is upon all the multitude thereof; there
were great preparations, but their hearts failed them: Truly there is nothing
preserves States so much as Gods power over the spirits of men, and nothing
which you ought to regard and heed so much as that: bodies without hearts are a
disadvantage, and their hearts are in Gods hands; all outward strength and
support lies in the moveable respects of the people, for so they are in
themselves, it is God only that can fix and make them sure.

Chron. 28. there is a story of Sennacheribs coming up against Jerusalem, in
the first verse, the time is specially noted, after these things and the
establishment thereof, that is, after Hezekiah had established the Worship of
God, which circumstance is mentioned chiefly to note the occasion of Hezekiahs
confidence, for see how he disvalues him upon this, Verse 8. With him is an
Arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God. When ye are thus for God, God
will be with you, and then, what is dust to the wind? Briars and thorns to a
devouring burning? An Arm of flesh to the Lord our God? All the
discouragements of the creature come from these things, want of care to get
interest in God, and want of skill to improve it; your Grand design should be
to get God with you, and truly then you may slight the most daring attempts.
Isa. 8 chap. 9, 10. verses, Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall
be broken in pieces, and give ear all ye of far Countries, associate your
selves and ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your selves and ye shall be
broken in pieces, take counsel together and it shall come to naught; speak the
Word and it shall not stand, for God is with us. In a triumph of faith the
Prophet laugheth at their vain attempts. He challenges not only single
adversaries that might sooner be dissipated, but such as were strengthened by
a combination of interests and twisted into a league and association, but all
will not do; ye shall be broken in pieces; again he speaks to them, call
in more strength, come with more advised care, yet ye shall be broken to
pieces; if you will adventure once more and try the other 50 (as that wretched
King did) and see if heaven will smile on a third endeavor, yet still the event
shall be the same, ye shall be broken in pieces; he adds again, 2 King. 1.
chap.
take counsel together; that is, recollect your selves, summon your best wits,
that you may know wherein you have failed, and play your game the more wisely
the next time, yet (says the Prophet) it shall come to naught, your deliberate
and mature consulations shall have the same event with your rash and heady
enterprises, that is, all shall be disappointed. The Prophet goes on, speak
the word and it shall not stand, that is, when you have prepared the business,
so that you think all the devils in Hell cannot disappoint you, yet God can,
for he suposeth their presumption grown so confident, as that they speak the
word, that is, give out threats and boasts, and yet then it shall not stand,
the reason is rendered in the close of all; for Immanuel, for God is with us.
Indeed there is the ground of all: God never made a creature or any combination
of creatures that should be too hard for him, God with us is enough, you do
but spit against the wind when you oppose those with whom he is, the drivell
will be returned upon your own face, Isa. 54.18. Surely they shall gather
together, but not by me, whosoever shall gather together against thee shall
fall for thy sake, there may be tumults and confusions, but being without God
there is little hope, and against God there is certain ruin. The Heathens
were convinced of this, they would not war against a Nation till they had
called out their Gods from them, Macrobius in his Saturnalia has a chapter, de
ritu Evocandi Deos, 'twas upon this errand that Balaam went to Balak to get
away the God of Israel, Numb. 23. Certainly nothing goes so near to the hearts
of Gods people, as the insultations of their adversaries, when they have lost
their shadow and the defensive presence of their God, as when David had fallen
scandalously in the matter of Vriah, his adversaries boasted, now there is no
help for him in God, Selah. Psalm. 3.2. and this went to his soul, so still
our scandalous miscarriages give the adversaries hope that our shadow is gone,
etc.

Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the Lord, his enemies shall be at peace
with him; remember Gods power over the spirits of men, and then you will see
that your maine work lies with him, Jacobs hardest task was with God, he
wrestleth with God and finds Embraces from Esau, reconcile your selves to
God, and take hold of his strength, and then he can take away the enmity of
the crea^ure; God can recover lost hearts, preserve the respects of subjects
entire to the supreme powers; it is very notable that in the 34. Genesis the 30.
verse, compared with 35. Genesis 1. When the miscarriages of Simeon and Levi had
made Jacob stink among the Inhabitants of the Land, and he was afraid the
Canaanites and Perizzites would combine against him to slay him, God bids
him go to Bethel and pay his vows. Such dysasters should put him in mind of
his Covenant; the performing of which was the best way to support him against
his present fears: O consider, if any have made you stink in the land, your
business is to go to Bethel and pay your Vows: Force will not be so great a
security as godliness; Armies make long work, but God can soon still the rage
of the people, and when he does it, it is done in a more kindly way: the door
is more easily opened by a Key then an Iron bar, and men's hearts sooner gained
by the power of God then men. God can clear up your renown, recover your
glory and esteem again, calm the people and cause all to be still. There are
two things that are of great difficulty, and they are joined in one ver. Psalm.
65.7. He stilleth the noise of the Seas, and the tumult of the people, in the
accomplishing of either of these things, man is at the greatest loss, either
in asswaging the natural or the met aphoricall waves, and therefore 'twas well
done of that King, who to disprove his flatterers, Carut^s.
that had soothed him with the greatness of his command and Empire both by Sea
and Land, caused his chair to be set near the Sea side, and the waves beating
upon it without any reverence said, Lo as great a King as I am I cannot rebuke
one wave: truly no more can Princes of themselves, still the tumult of the
people, for they are both of an equal difficulty, and must be left to the
overruling power of God, the noise of the Seas and the rage of the people.

I come now to apply the point, we have found that getting in with God, Main
use, which is exhortation.
by establishing Religion, and repairing the decays of godliness, is a
special means of preservation.

Oh then let us consider this with reflection upon our selves, we are concerned
in it, England heretofore was compared to Laodicea for its lukewarmnesse, See
Brightman in Apoc. cap. 3.
it may be compared to Sardis for its languishing.

We have a name that we live, our renown is gone into all lands, for savory
and practical Truths, but alas our Crown is like to be taken from us, and
our glory laid in the dust! Religion of late seems to have lost all life and
spirit, and godliness to degenerate into a cold form, the Ordinances that erst
while were wont to open heaven and break hearts through the abundance of
spirit that was in them, seem now to have lost all their converting power,
Visions are open and few gained, Christ is crucified before our eyes, but some
fatal enchantment and effascination seems to abide upon our Congregations,
for few hearts are broken, few brought in to the obedience of the truth. The
English Christians heretofore were famous for their severe innocence, strict
walking, constant Communion with God, undaunted zeal, sweet experiences, holy
conferences and communications whereas now we meet with few, but such as are
(like the vain men of Israel) of a light spirit, loose conversation, given to
vain ranglings and disputes more then to practice, and holy life, and measuring
Religion not so much by the power of godliness, as by form and faction and
siding with parties. God knows how unwilling I am to lay open our ownn
kednesse, and to declaime against the times to which he has disposed me, I
know the nature of man is querulous and complaining, the unthankful good one
will always be commending the former times, and accusing his own, it is often
the voice of discontent and peevishness, the former times were better then
these, Eccles. 7.10. Besides, every trifling zeal vents its self in loose
invectives and flings, it is easy to rake in this puddle, and to reproach our
times with such crimes and allegations, Tacitus.
quae quisque suis temporibus objicit, (as he observed) with which every one
upbraideth his own age, therefore I shall endeavor to make out the conviction
more particularly for our humiliation and instruction, my method is this. First,

I will show you wherein Godliness is decayed. Secondly,

How it came to pass, what may be the occasions or causes of such a
languishing. Thirdly,

What we shall do to repair it, every one in his place, the people in their
way, the Ministry in theirs, and you in that orb and sphere that is proper
to you.

partly that it may help us to put our mouths in the dust, and to lie low in
the sense of our shame this day; partly because we are all apt to call our
design godliness, every party like the old Rogatians ingrosse it to
themselves; for my part I look upon it, as the highest sacrilege and
peevishness in the world for men to do so, to measure Religion by their
private interest and opinion, and as they thrive more or less in the world, so
to judge or cry out of the rising or fall of Religion: private conceits do not
deserve so glorious a name, and the godly party is of a larger extent, then to
be appropriated or confined within any one Sect and faction; alas! how often
do we mistake self-love for zeal, and out of a blind dotage to our own
opinions, think Christ stands or falls with our private misconceits and
interests! It was but a presumptuous arrogance in Nestorius, Disperde mecum
haereticos and ego tecum disperdam Persas, etc.
to promise heaven and victory so lavishly to Theodosius the Emperor, if he
would do as he suggested; therefore to prevent all partial claims, and to
wave the suspicion of any such drift, I shall first show wherein the power of
godliness is found to decay and languish even unto death, I mean that
godliness which is commended to us in the word, and is the glory of our
Religion and profession, the gasping of it is many ways discovered, but
especially by these things.

zeal, and the neglect of public duties. Zeal is a grace so rare, that we
scarce know the nature and working of it; for alas, to what a stupidnesse and
cold indifferency in Religion are we come! though God be dishonored, truth
violated, the Sabbath profaned, yet men are neither hot nor cold, Rev. 3.15.
we content our selves with a lukewarmnesse and mambling of profession, midling
it between Christ and the world, neither suffering, nor doing any further then
will suite with our interests, as if in hazardous cases we should lock on
rather then interpose: Jude 3. Non amat qui non Lelat. Aug. c^ntra Adimant.
cap. 13.
Where are those that do (...) contend earnestly for the faith of the Saints?
the glory of God? that mind Relion for Religions sake? if we had more love, we
would have more zeal, if the heart were gained to Religion, we would have more
heat and power, and not give up our selves to such a secure oscitancy; the
iniquity of the times should put us forward, not make us worse; A godly man
should be like fountain water, hottest in cold^st weather; dead fishes may
swim with the stream, and every carnal heart walk according to the trade
of Israel: it deserves no thanks to be earnest in duties, when there is no
opposition against them, but alas, as soon as danger comes, how are men
discouraged! it should not be so, when the wicked prevail, it is said of the
godly man, Job 17.9. that he shall hold on his way, and he that is righteous
grow stronger and stronger: true grace and true zeal by an Antiperistasis is
best in the worst times, but it is otherwise with us, for our Magistrates, some
of them, when the day of God is profaned, his name dishonored, his truth
questioned, are like careless Gallio's, troubled with none of these things,
do not come forth to the help of Christ; for our Ministry, many act no
further then they are encouraged, and put on by an outward power, and will not
engage till all difficulties be first removed by a secular arm; others leave
themselves at a loose liberty and indifferency to comply with all parties, and
launch forth no further, then they may get to shore again if a storm arise; our
people are in an unsettled hesitation ready to draw back upon every trouble,
pleading for the stumps of Dagon, and revolting in their hearts to the old
ways: and truly as yet the evil days are not fully come, so that this grace
is not thoroughly exercised, however a cold ind^fferency in such times, will in
very evil times be a flat Apostasy; certainly this is clear already, that we
are much gone off from our first love: At the first breaking out of
Reformation, what heat and violence was there offered to the Kingdom of God?
what zeal against the little foxes? every modest appearance of error? what an
holy sorwardnesse? Metuendum est in postrem mundi aetate magis hunc errorem
grassaturam esse, quodaut nihil sint Religiones eut differant tantum vocabulis,
Melanc. postil. de Bapt. Christi.
whereas now we are at a stand, the old world (like old men) every day losing
more of its heat and fervor; Melancthons prophecy is almost verified, for he
(though he were a sober and meek man, and indeed his fault was too much
connivence, for by his silence Consubstantiation prevailed) was so sensible of
the decay of zeal in his time, that he feared the world would come to account
Religion a matter of nothing, or a word-strife not worthy men's regard and
engagement, and truly it is even brought to that pass.

insipid formality and dead heartedness, that is found every where, we are
without life in the ways of God, little beauty of holiness, little
circumspection and strictness in life and conversation: Religion is like a
river, it loses in strength what it gets in breadth, now many come in, to
profess, their walkings are not so awful and severe; when it is a shame not to
have some form in Religion, many have but a form, and do debase the holy
profession, by mingling it with their pride, lust and avarice, so that it is not
so daunting and has no such Majesty with it as formerly it had; a truly godly
man is to be the worlds wonder, the worlds reproof, the worlds conviction, the
worlds wonder, 1 P^t. 4.4. they think strange, etc. you are to hold forth such
mortification and self-denial, that the world may wonder; you are to weane
your selves, and bind up your affections from such objects as do so pleasantly
and powerfully insinuate with them, and ravish their affections; he should be
too the worlds reproof, Heb. 11.7. by building an Arc Noah condemned the
world, you should be Mirrours to kill Basiliskes, and in the innocence of your
lives, show them their own filthiness; in short, your lives should be a real
reproof and upbraiding to them; and then the worlds conviction, 1 Cor. 14.25.
you should walk so, that they may see God in you of a truth, your conversation
should be nothing else but a walking rule, and Religion exemplified; but alas,
how vain, carnal, sensual, are most men, discovering nothing of the power of
grace, the beauty of holiness, and the efficacy of the new-nature, we may see
much of man, but nothing of God in them, its even our description, 2 Timothy 3.5.
having a form of godliness but denying the power thereof: denying the power,
that is, refusing and resisting that inward virtue and force of godliness, by
which the heart should be renewed or the conversation rectified. Possibly there
may be more light but less heat, what Seneca observed of his times is true of
ours, Boniesse desierunt, sicubi docti evaserint, they were less good when
they were more learned: for now we rather dispute away duties then practice
them. Oh! it is sad, this, when knowledge shall devour good life and notion
spoil knowledge; that of Hugo is but too just a character of us, Amant
lection^m, Hugo lib. 2. Miscel. cap. 52.
non Religionem, immo amore lectionis in odium incidunt Religionis, mul^os
video studiosos, paucos religiosos, etc. many desire to know, few to live, yea
knowledge seemth to make men less strict and holy, for they dispute away
Religion, the more they understand of it.

Loathing of heavenly Manna, there cannot be a more proper discovery of
spiritual languishing, sick persons loath their food, and feed upon ashes; See
Shepards Sound beseever. page 250.
surely godliness is in the Wane when a people are Christ-glutted, and
Gospel-glutted, and are all for ungrounded subtleties, quintessentiall extracts
and distillations: Oh how welcome were the first appearances of light! it is a
blessing we know by the want of it; when we came newly out of darkness, whose
heart did not say within him (...), welcome sweet light? when it was a new
thing, how strangely did it affectus? but it is the unhappy fate of the Word to
be despised upon acquaintance, John 16.35. Ye rejoiced in his light, (...) for
a season, 1 Cant. 26.
some small time, when first he began to shine in their borders; to a gracious
eye truths bed is always green, as fresh and flourishing at the last as at the
beginning, but most look upon it with an adulterous eye and heart, love it
whilst it is new, nauseate it after some acquaintance and knowledge of it; with
what fastidious disdain do men despise sacred truths, if discovered in their
own native beauty and simplicity? 1 Cor. 2.6. we speak wisdom among those
that are perfect (says the Apostle) that is, among grown Christians, who can
discern beauty in a plain ordinance, wisdom in an Evangelicke simplicity;
though there be no enticing words, sublime speculations, and exoticke conceits;
but now carnal men are all for (...) depths as they say, 2 Rev. 24. that is,
they account them great and deep mysteries, whereas the Spirit of God
accounts them illusions of Satan; surely God will meet with such a wanton
people. The Continuator of Sleidan shows, that before the great Massacre in
France, the Protestants were for a luscious wanton kind of preaching; truly we
cannot absolutely determine what will become of us, only we have cause to fear
that Conscientious Sermon^, as much despised as they are, may be a commodity
dear enough in England ere long, 1 Samuel 3.4.
and Visions may be less open, that they may be the more precious.

Arminian, Antisabbatarian doctrines, etc. which heretofore were made the
characteristick note to distinguish good persons and bad; I would not be
understood, as if I did think a thing simply evil, See Paulus Diaconus.
because held by such men, opposition of image worship, was never the worse,
because the Monothelites first stirred in it, nor is the cross the more holy
because the Messalians despised it, neither is every thing evil because taught
by persons whom Religion makes justly odious; I only speak now, as supposing
other grounds, by way of aggravation, and to show how inexcusable it is for us
to judge others, for the same things which we now do our selves, Romans 2.3. And
truly it is observable, that many, when these corruptions were set on by
violence, did stubbornely enough bear up against the heat of opposition,
whereas now by erroneous insinuations, their revolt is made facile, so as they
may come off from truth with the less shame and regret, and therefore do now
allow in themselves those errors, which formerly with so much heat and
sharpness they opposed in others. Deuteronomy. 12.29, 30. you shall see there, of all
sins the Jews were to beware of the way of the Heathens, whom God had cast
out before them; hear the words, When the Lord thy God shall cut off the
nations from before thee, and thou go and dwell in their land; take heed
thou be not ensnared by following them after they be destroyed before thee.
Truly we have the same nature, and having the same possessions, may be easily
tempted to the same sins; as pride, looseness, ease, and error, etc. You
that see that is brought as a great aggravation, 2 Kings 17.8. they walked in
the way of the Heathen, whom the Lord had cast out before them, these opinions
and practices have proved destructive to others, and they will be fatal to us
too; such Apostasy is a sin of a double dye, as being against former
experience of Gods judgments on others, and the former judgment of our own
Consciences, why were we so keen against that in them, to which we are now
revolted our selves?

By the wounds Religion has received in the house of her friends, many have
acted of late under the name and color of Religion, as if they went on purpose
to make godliness odious, and Religion stink in the land, engaging themselves
in all unwarrantable practices, odious and gross heresies, prostituting the
holy profession to all kind of impurities and injuries, whereby the mouth of
iniquity is opened, the hatred of enemies justified, their reproaches made
good, and a great occasion and advantage given to wicked men to speak evil of
this way; 'twas the glory of Christianity heretofore to be hated unjustly, Vide
Tertull in Apol. Tali dedicatore damnationis nostrae gloriamur: qui enim
Neronem scit in^elligere potest non nisi grande bonum a Nerone damnari. Vide
notas Francis. Zephyri ibidem. Divina providentia effectum ut Christiana
Religio eos haberet hosts, qui aliis virtutibus infensi, etc.
and that only of the worst men, which was an argument of the goodness and
purity of it. That which Nero hates must needs be excellent, and the only
fault that could be charged upon the primitive Christians, was their
Christianity, they were just and honest, good subjects and good neighbors
(says Pliny the younger;) only they had their hymnos Antelucanos their morning
meetings to praise their God; and Tertullian says, the Heathens were wont to
say Cajus Sejus vir bonus nisi quod Christianus, Cajus Sejus was a good man,
all his fault was, that he was a Christian: you see still their profession was
their only crime. Nay, to come nearer home, the Bishop of Aliffe in the
Council of Trent, confessed that we had orthodoxos mores, but haereticam
fidem, a good life but a had belief; and truly this was our glory when no
evil could be charged upon us, but our private opinion and profession; but
alas now it is otherwise, many of those that profess Religion, have done that
which a moral Heathen would scarce do, oh what a dishonor to Christ is this,
that those that pretend to him should be less civil, just, discreet etc! oh
how is the holy profession exposed to the shame and reproach of the
adversaries! how is Christ crucified and put to shame again in your scandals!
(a) (...). Naz. orat. 14
how will the Chams of the world laugh to discover this nakedness! thus it
has been of old; the Apostle Peter speaks of some impure deceivers, by whom
the way of truth was evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.1. thus the ancient Christians
were loaded with all kind of scorn and contempt, and hated for the Heretics
sake, because of the Gnostickes they were called luminum extinctores putters
out of the candles, (b) Tertul. in Apol.
and doers of obscean things in the dark. The unclean conversation of the
Priscillianists made Pagans detest all Christians, and by the rage of Maximus
they fared all alike, malice will know no distinctione Alas, (c) Dicimur
Ch^istiani (...). opprobrium Christi.
what a sad thing is this, that Religions own friends should betray her, that
you that are called Christians, should be called so to the disgrace of Jesus
Christ, that you should give occasion to them that desire occasion, and make
good all their reproaches!

(d) Nunc male audiunt castiganturque philosophi nostrae sectae quum tuemur,
quod aliter qua^ sapientibus convenit vivant, and vitia sub obtentu nominis
celant. Lact. lib. de opificio dei sub initio.
to get preferment and honor in the world or some opportunity to enrich
themselves with the public spoils: and truly this is very sad, that every
malicious, covetous or ambitious project, should be clothed with this glorious
pretense: thus the Apostle Peter speaks of some in his days, that abused
their profession, by making it a cloak of maliciousness, 1 Pet. 2.6. And
Lactantius observes the same also of many in his time, who wounded the
Christian name and honor by using it as a cover to their sinful and corrupt
practices: and others show what prejudice was done to Religion, by the pride,
desire of greatness, and contention, that was between the Pastors and
Professors of it; insomuch that Dioclesian thought that Christianity was
nothing else but a wretched device of wicked men, (e) Eusebius. lib. 8.1.
set a foot out of some private aims; thus also Ignatius speaks of some that
were (...), not Christians so much as Christ-sellers, (f), Ignat. Epist. ad
Trall.
like Judas that followed Christ only to make gain of him. I have brought
these instances, because they do but give us the description of many in our
age, who make God to serve with their sins, Isa. 43.24.
and godliness to be only the specious outside of every unclean intent, and
worldly design: thus poor Religion that delights to breath in the air of
self-denial is made the usual stale to selfe-seeking, and godliness that
checketh carnal projects, by a vile submission is forced to serve them.

among their neighbors? Magistrates in the Kingdom? or Masters in their
Families? for private Christians, they spend the heat and strength of their
spirits in lesser matters, and let the weightier go, through division and
strife, forget edification, many renounce all care of them without, and whereas
they might have strengthened the hands of their brethren, that have acted in a
public Reformation, what have they done? have they joined as far as their
private principles would give leave? endeavored to bring the Kingdom onward
to the way and will of Christ? And then for Magistrates, have they been so
zealous as they should be to propagate a religious Ministry throughout the
Kingdom, to inlighten dark corners? there is not a better work, nor more for
your safety. Aug. lib. nov. de Civitate dei.
Austin observed that the Christians tasted the violence of the Goths and
Vandalls, for that they were not careful to bring off the Heathens from their
Idolatry: Such endeavors would be your defense, and in the business of
Religion nothing concerns you more then this, but my chief aim under this
head is to speak of the neglect of Family duties, which is the great reason why
Religion is decayed abroad, these are the springs and fountains of the
Country, Churches were first in families, where the master of the house was the
Priest, and the beauty and power of Religion is still preserved there, and
therefore next to Churches they require a chief care; Oh how excellent is it,
when Churches are like to heaven, the Assembly below like the great
Congregation above, and families like Churches for their Religion, Heb. 12.29.
order and comeliness! You read of a Church in Philemons house, Phil. 1.
verse. Melanet. in prf at. 5 Tom oper. Lutheri.
Melancthon said of George Prince of Anhalt, Cubiculum ejus templum, Academia,
Curia: that his chamber was an University, a Court, and a Church, the latter
because of the instructions, Prayer and Worship that was there: Religion first
decays in Families before in Churches, therefore when the order of houses is
subverted, duties neglected there, how soon does godliness decay abroad? I do
not know any one thing that God expects more from a religious householder, I
mean, in that capacity and relation, then the establishment of Religion in his
Family, Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham that he will command his children and his
household after him to keep the way of the Lord. Mark, God reckons upon it as
a duty that the godly will perform, I know, etc. and remember disapointment is
the worst vexation.

piety and purity, as the purity of Reformation, men are afraid to be too
heavenly, and reject Government, because it would cross their licentiousness,
and so the purity that shines forth in the life's of Gods servants, From Master
Richard Vines of the Assembly.
you heard in the morning how apt an English Spirit is to hate godliness under
some other name, and how men that have but a Form, are wont to snarle at the
power, and indeed the Apostle Paul observes the same thing, 2 Timothy 3.3. with
verse 5. having a form of godliness, despisers of those that are good: these
two descriptions are usually coupled, Cain and Abell both sacrificed, 1 John 3
12.
only Abells offering was the better, and therefore Cain maliced him, men do
not love to be upbraided by others righteousness; they would feign have their
laziness justified by the common defects, (...), as Nazianzen speaks, (l)
Nazian. orat. in med.
they would have none zealous and excelling, therefore those that are contented
with a form will hate those that have the power, we can look for no other, Gal.
4.27. He that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
Spirit, even so it is now. We may also add, and so it is now, and so it will
be; carnal Christians will have some pretense or other, to persecute those
that are more godly, one great design is (as you heard in the morning) to cry
up a name under which this hatred may be carried on the more covertly and
secretly, and usually it is taken from the party most discountenanced, or which
is most publicly odious, or which has most dishonored their profession: thus
when the Priscillianists were generally hated, and indeed they deserved it,
other Christians shared in their miseries. Sulpitius Severus speaks of one
Ithacius a Bishop whose hatred against the Priscillianists did so far transport
him, that if any were of good life, studious of the Scriptures, he would
suspect and blast him as a Priscillianist. I have read of one Sanpaulinus a
French Martyr, who when he reproved one for swearing was presently suspected
of Lutheranisme; and Bonner, if any did but mention the name of God with
reverence, took it for ground enough to call him Lollard: and truly it is even
thus among us, the world has gotten some names and pretenses, under which they
carry on their hatred against the power of godliness the more securely, and
with the less dread, so that it is to be feared, that if any be of godly
Conversation, it will be enough to make him a Sectary, etc. an enemy of the
Kingdoms peace and quiet, when the name is once gotten up, mischief and
malice (as I said) will make no distinction.

scandalous sins, times of trouble are usually l^centious, and when penal
laws are suspended by force, wickedness grows impudent, and truly it is
even so among us to the confronting of authority, whoring, and swearing, and
drunkenness and Sabbath prophanations abounding every where, yea more then
formerly. We looked for purging the land and it is more defiled, when the pot
boyleth the scum is discovered, Baths bring forth corruption (if it be in the
body) into the skin, God has been reforming the Land, and our wickedness
appears the more, Hos. 7.1. When I would have healed Israel, then the
iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria. God has
been correcting and amending us, and we have been the more vile and sinful.
Oh then how may the Kingdom fit down like the Church in Micah and mourn,
Micah 7.1, 2. I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grape
gleanings of the Vintage, the good man is perished out the of earth, there is
none upright upon the earth, they all lie in wait for blood, and hunt every
man his brother by a net. Zeal is decayed, the power of godliness gone, the
Word despised, and we are even grown as the people, whom God has cast out
before us, Religion has received wounds in the house of her friends, and is
made a pretense to every base design, few seek to propagate it, and it meets
with much snarling and opposition every where, and iniquity is now grown
impudent.

And thus I have done with my first work, which was to show wherein Religion is
decayed.

occasions and causes, how we came thus to languish and decrease, that so the
guilt may lie at the right door; and truly we need not contend about that,
but may every one of us smite upon the thighs, and bear the shame of our own
iniquity.

Briefly then,

us, with our unthankfulness, they are two.

One is the late prosperity which God of his mercy had given to his people, the
Church, Ecelesia haeres Crcius. (...). Nazian. orat. 3. de pace.
who is the Heir of the Cross, is seldom able to manage and wield an outward
happy condition, I remember, (n) Nazianzen observes that it has ever with
more honor endured misery then with safety improved happiness and success, that
makes us always degenerate or divide; sometimes degenerate, when Constantine
favored Religion, poison was sown in the Church, Christians began to loose
their ancient severity, and to look after ease and honors and pleasures in
the World. When we have any thing in the World, we neglect out high hopes, and
so by little and little holiness decays and degenerateth into a mere
pretense, which is only retained, the better to color over some carnal
pursuits and projects, whereas those Christians that meet with nothing but hard
things in the world, and from the world, are more heavenly and holy: for the
inward exercises of Mortification are much advantaged by their outward
condition, and the world being crucified to them, they are the better crucified
to the world, as Paul speaks, Naz. ibidem.
Gal. 6.14. (i. e.) it neither smileth upon them nor they upon it: and as
success makes us to degenerate, so to divide, (...) as he said, as soon as
the Church grew prosperous it grew factious; like timber in the sunshine we
are apt to warpe and divide from one another, or like Quam reportassent tandem
coronam si perstitissent in eadem m^litia, nec ut efferati Elephantes ab
hostibus conversi contrivissent suos. Brightman de Luthero and Melancthone.
Elephants returning from the heat of the battle, we tread down our own
troops; prosperity begets wantonness, and wantonness novelties, and so the
people of God come to be scattered, and to go into distinct herds and
divisions, an evil ever fatal to Religion, and yet it seems connaturall:
the Apostles themselves, though Oracles infallible, could not wholly prevent it
in their days; outward prosperity then was a great occasion.

opennesse of Visions, carnal hearts are soon cloyed, I cannot tell how it
comes to pass, but so it is, the Word has less power when openly preached,
a Gospell-glutted stomach does often force God to provide sharp remedies,
either some great outward misery, accompanied with the want and famine of the
Word, and then any little thing is precious, as see two places; one is Zech.
7.7. Ye should have hearkened to the former Prophets, when Jerusalem was
inhabited and in prosperity, and the Cities thereof round about her, and men
inhabited the South of the plain. Mark, there is their full condition
described, the Temple stood, the City flourished, the Suburbs was great, but
then they hearkened not, but despised the former Prophets, that is, the
Prophets that prophesied before the captivity, but now look upon them in their
emptiness, the other place, for that is Ezra 9.8. And now that the Lord has
showed us such grace to give us a nail in the holy place, etc. Mark how
welcome every little thing is to them then, a nail in the holy place, is such
a mercy, that is, to see one pin or nail driven into the rafters of the
Temple, whereas before they would not know their own mercies, whiles that
stately Edifice stood in all its glory and beauty: times may come when these
dewes will be precious, and Sermon showers sweet to thirsty souls, or, if this
be not, God may send a dark Ezekiel, when a plain Jeremy is despised,
Ordinances may be carried in such an obscure notionall aerie way, as to yield
no efficacy and comfort. These are the occasions, but what are the causes of
the languishing and decay of godliness? I Answer,

language was divided, the building ceased, when Religion is controverted, it
loses its awe and force; it is observable that Acts 4.32, 33. when the people
were of one heart and of one mind, then with great power gave the Apostles
witness to the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Mark that, with power; the Word
came with command and authority upon the hearts of men, the World easily
stumbleth at this rock of offense, the Assent is more loose and doubtful when
things are committed to the uncertainty of disputes, and so does not
commandingly check vicious inclinations: when the ways of flesh and blood, are
backed with wit and parts, and made to seem a valuable opinion, men are hardly
gained.

Besides, godly men themselves while they engage with too much heat and zeal
in their particular opinions, grow cool in piety and practical duties, the
strength of their spirits being diverted, and carried out so disproportionably
to the lesser matters; God placed the Flaming Sword about Paradise, and the
Gospel calls for violence in the matters of the Kingdom, Matthew. 11.12. but
we usually mistake our object, and misplace our zeal upon such matters as
have more of interest in them then godliness, and are rather busied in
disputing much, then doing much.

hunger seeks food, but lust dainties and quails; when Preachers provide for
men's lusts rather then their consciences, Religion is embased, and loses
power. A Ministry that stays in the paint of words will beget but painted
grace, when we come in the demonstration of the Spirit, we come in power, 1
Cor. 2.6. (...) with plain and solid conviction, this is the sin, this the
curse and misery. When the thread of the Gospel is so fine spun, 'twill not
cloth a naked soul, notion eats out all saving knowledge, the Apostle
speaks of a (...) 1 Timothy 6.20. oppositions of science falsely so called, by
which they thought to better the Gospel, but did indeed debase it: such
niceties enervate godliness, make it weak and less in power; we must take heed
then of debasing this Ordinance to an effeminate delicacy, it should still be
masculine and generous, full of Spirit, and power from on high. I would not be
mistaken as if I did plead for a lazy carelessness in managing the Word, I know
that God concurreth with man's diligence, and if we would not have the people
loath the Word, we should painfully provide it for them; every Scribe that is
instructed for the Kingdom of God, that is, that would do service in the
Church of God, must bring forth out of his treasuries things both new and old,
Matthew. 13.52. that is, although not new truths, yet (...), old Truths in a new
way, otherwise represented to the imagination or fancy, to take of that taedium
or natural satiety that is in us, that we may not loath them as Coleworts
twice sod, but that truths may still have a fresh look upon the conscience and
affections. This may be done, but we must take heed of ungrounded niceties,
subtle notions, that beget only speculation and do not stir up to practice.

undue preaching of the Gospel, poison conveyed in so sweet a wine, makes the
cup the more deadly; by this means, Religion it self is made to be of sins
side, and the grace of God pliable to carnal conclusions; and indeed when the
truths of God that should convince of sin, are debauched to so vile a purpose
as to countenance sin, men can the better overcome remorse of conscience, and
do sin with the less regret, out of a presumption, that the Gospel is of
their side, Jude Verse. 3. They turn the grace of our God into wantonness,
they debauch the grace of God, that is, the Doctrine of grace, make that yield
countenance to their lusts, and so men father their Bastards upon the Spirit,
and sin cum privilegin by a license from heaven. When those that should have
been Prophets cried peace, peace, see what Jeremy says, Jer. 4.10. Ah Lord
God, surely thou have greatly deceived this people, in saying they shall have
peace. 'Twas done in Gods name by the false Prophets, and they were as secure
as if God himself had said so: We would willingly have the Gospel over
Gospeld, and hear in the ear of liberty, therefore I am persuaded there is no
one thing has hindered the power of godliness, care of duty, humbling of
souls, so much as this, undue preaching of the Gospel.

more common and so less odious, outward restraints keep men that are evil
from discovering of it, and though it be the privilege of divine precepts to
convert the soul, Psalm. 19.7. yet the commands and authority of men may much
hinder the diffusion and dissemination of sin and error; it is good to observe
the several guards that God has put upon a man to keep him from sin (so
prone are we to it:) there are inward guards, Spirit, Word and Conscience;
there are outward guards, the Ministry, the Church, and the Magistrate; all
which are as in his stead to be an awe to sinners, more especially it is said
of the Magistrate that he is the Minister of God to be a terror to evil
doers, Romans 13.3, 4. Now when their sword is sheathed up, and nothing is
settled, wicked men lose all awe and restraint, and do what is right in their
own eyes, Judges 21.25. as it is said there they did, when there was no King in
Israel, that is, no exercise of Government to restrain public disorders, (for
as yet their Government was not Monarchical) then all goes to wrack, iniquity
grows impudent, and Religion is borne down, Solomon says, Prove. 20.8. A
King that sits upon the throne of judgment scatters away all evil with
his eyes: that is, when Magistrates employ and draw out their power, they
scatter evil, as the Sun scatters mists.

Catechizing, by which means truths would be more revived, and kept fresh and
savory in the thoughts, and so have the more awe upon us. Martyrology and
Catechizing were two of the most successful engines against Popery. Truths
work most when we discern that Cognation and kin, by which they touch and
respect one another; indistinct knowledge does but dispose to error or
looseness; Sermon hints, an hint here, and an hint there, does not so much
good, for men of weaker conceits cannot so easily discern how one truth is
inferred from another, and what analogy and proportion there is between them,
and so are easily overcome by more subtle and stronger wits; or else not
discerning that fair compliance that is between practical and comfortable
truths, grow loose: certainly Religion would be more propagated if this
exercise were revived. We are debtors to wise and unwise, Romans 1.14. and Christ
that bade Peter feed (...) his sheep, bade him also feed (...) his lambs, John
21.15, 16. For want of this pattern of sound words, and these condescensions to
weak ones by this exercise, many mischiefs have abounded amongst us to the
great damage of Religion and godliness.

These are part of the causes, others might be mentioned, but I shall
forbear: you will say then, What remedy? therefore I shall proceed to the next
thing, which is to show you,

strengthen the things that are ready to die, or to repair decayed godliness;
give me leave to speak a word,



quasi manu facta ('it is Tertullians word) in an holy conspiracy to befiege
heaven by prayers, until more Spirit and life be powered out, and in greater
abundance; God has said, Acts 2.15.
that he will power out his Spirit upon all flesh; oh beg it for England, go
to him that has the seven Spirits, to look upon another dead Sardis. God must
offer violence to us, ere we can offer violence to the Kingdom; it is the mighty
quickening Spirit, that must revive us in our languishings; that which carries
the soul to God, must come from God, waters can arise no higher then their
spring: Religion is like the pure Vestall flame, which if it went out, was to
be kindled only by a sunbeam; oh then let us go and wait before God, for
those seven Spirits, those mighty and quickening operaions! the Spirit came upon
Christ in the appearance of a dove, to show his meekness, but upon the
Apostles in cloven tongues of fire, to show the might and force that is in his
operations.

Christian should be the Gospels ornament, as an Hypocrite is the Gospels
disgrace, Tit. 2.10. adorn the doctrine of God our Savior: let the world know
there is more in Religion then pretense and policy, whiles hypocrites and such
as seek themselves betray the honor of Religion, do you advance it, let them
see there are true stars as well as glaring mete ors, your lives should make
God glorious, 1 Pet. 2.9. hold forth the praises (...) of him that has called
you, let them read God in you of a truth, and be not distinguished so much by a
party and profession as by holiness, Tertullian says of the ancient
Christians, Non aliunde noscibiles quam de emendatione vitiorum, their
distinction was their innocence. When diverse Libertines had dishonored
Religion, and walked unworthily in their relations, Peter presses the true
Christians to good conscience and more honest walking, 1 Pet. 2.12. and 1 Pet.
3.16. indeed both those Chapters are to this purpose, this will be a real
confutation, and then God will give you praise in the land of your shame; hair
cut will grow again, if the roots remain, Zeph. 3.19.
and though the razor of censure has brought baldness and reproach upon the
head of Religion, yet its good name will grow and flourish again, and they will
be ashamed that falsely accuse your godly conversation. Oh, brethren at such
times we should walk with more care! it is a smart question that Nehem. 5.9.
Ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the repreach of the
Heathen our adversaries? when your lives are thus sleek and innocent, this dirt
will not stick.

Heb. 10.24. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and good works;
this is (...) an holy contention, when we contend who shall be most forward in
the matters of God; we often provoke one another to carnal strife, to excess
in vanity; oh when do we sharpen and whet each others graces? the sons of
the coal, how do they inkindle one another, and strengthen each others hands
in wickedness? see how the Idolaters are described, Isa. 41.6, 7. They helped
every one his neighbor, every one said to his brother, Be of good courage. So
the Carpenter encouraged the Goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the hammer,
him that smites on the Anvill, etc. the prophet speaks of the time, when the
Gospel was sent to the Isles, ver. 1. that is, to the European Countries which
are usually expressed by Isles in Isay. Now as soon as they listened to this
Doctrine, down went the pictures and the images, but there being some hope
offered of their re-erection, they come and strengthen one another hand, Be of
good courage, they hoped to bring up their craft and way again with pomp and
triumph: Oh when they strenghthen one another, will not you? (...) Naz. orat.
13.
Nazianzen was wont to call the enemies of the Church (...) the common
reconcilers; because when they unite and support one another against the
Church, it does but invite the people of God to a more close union, and free
communion with one another; this would be an excellent way to prevent the
decays of love and piety.

The prophets prophecy lies, and the people love to have it so, Ier. 5.31. A
vain people do but encourage a vain Ministry. Do not delight then in a
glozing dispensation, 'twil be successelesse, frothy speculations, moral
strains do no good, the people begin to grow weary of savory and sound
knowledge; the testimony of the Witnesses, was a torment to the dwellers on the
earth, Rev. 11.10. powerful preaching is their burden. The lazy world would
feign lie upon the bed of ease, draw the curtains and rest, and therefore light
is troublesome, men begin to thirst and pant for the old unsavory moral
strains, which remain in wary generals, and do not irritate, the Lord may
give you your desire, but remember that is a carnallitch that must be clawed,
and the times will be sad, when men cannot endure sound doctrine, 2 Timothy 4.3.

I have do with my address to the people.

to direct others, only I shall take the liberty in all humility to suggest my
thoughts. Much may be done by you to the repairing of decayed godliness.

Christ must still be preached, that is the main truth, that keeps in the life
of Christianity; the more Evangelicall dispensations are, the more powerful;
our beloved must still be kept as a bundle of Myrrh next our hearts, 1 Cant.
13. still fresh and fragrant in the thoughts, all the comfort and support of a
Christian depends upon that, this is the very spirit and flower of any
Ministry, and therefore it is said Apoc. 19.10. the Testimony of Jesus is the
Spirit of prophecy, it is not only the beauty, but the life of any
dispensation; I know many think this needless, for as I said before, the
indistinct, and undue preaching of Christ, is the cause of all the looseness
and vanity into which Religion is degenerated. I but I add here, that this
dispensation is still needful, the foolish world is apt to fly into
extremes, some are all for doctrines of Christ, others will hear nothing of
him, because these sweet truths have been so much misapplyed. Popery got up by
this pretense, they would not open that gap of free grace to the people; Paul
would preach the righteousness of Christ though many did abuse it, Romans 3.8.
some slanderously report that we say, Let us do evil that good may come
thereof, whose damnation is just; the meaning is, some gave out that Paul
taught that they might sin freely, that God might have the more glory in
pardoning; which is expressed there, by doing evil that good may come of it;
now says the Apostle their damnation is just; that is, if they undo
themselves with such a vile conceit, they may thank themselves, they never
learned it from me; if poison be sucked out of the flower, thank the spider,
and if precious liquor be sowred, it is because of the uncleanness of the
vessel. Musculus in one of his books had said, That no places were so profane
and irreligious, as those where the Gospel had been preached; or words to that
effect. And Contzen a Jesuit cries out upon this, Hi sunt Evangelici
Doctores, Adam Contzen in Mat. c. 24.5.
see the fruit of Protestantism and Gospel-preaching! Many are of his spirit,
malign and slander a Gospel Dispensation; Alas, we are not in the place of
God, to prevent misapprehensions; it is our duty to keep this truth fresh in
the thoughts, to offer it as a bundle of Myrrh to the Spouses bosom.

John Baptist levelled mountains, and in his days much violence was offered
to the Kingdom, Mat. 11.12. and indeed, still John must go before Jesus; like
the day star before the sun, Moses led the people in the wilderness, before
Joshua led them into the land of Canaan; we must awaken first by a sense of
wrath, or else they will not care for a sight of mercy; the people did not
desire a Mediator till they heard the thundering, Exodus 20.18.19. and it is Gods
usual method to suffer us to be dead to one law, ere we are alive to another,
Gal. 2.19. first to make us understand the severe obligation that is upon us by
the Covenant of works, ere we are brought into a better hope by Jesus Christ;
God is never truly exalted in the soul till man be humbled; Dagon must fall
and be broken, if the Arc be set up. The Lord diggeth deep, when he means
to raise the building high, and when he will bring off the soul to Christ
powerfully, he brings them out of themselves by godly sorrow. This is the
drift and scope of the whole Scriptures, and therefore I use the less of
argument in this matter.

duties of relations: I say, to press Christians to carry themselves holily in
their civil relations: no way provideth for the discharge of the duties of
relations, so much as Christianity, or Religion, and none have failed in them
so much as religious persons of late, so that a great deal of dishonor has
come to God, and a great deal of prejudice to Religion, Dent exercium talem
qualem doctrina Christi milites esse jussi, tales Provinciales, tales Parents,
tales Dominos, talet Filios, tales Servos, tales Reges, tales Iudices, tales
denique debitorum redditores, and exactores ipsius fisci, etc. Aug. ad Marcelo
ep. 5.
by our unworthy walking in our civil relations, the Gospel or law of Christ
requires that these civil respects which we owe to men, should be discharged,
as in and to the Lord, and that we should turn duties of the second table,
into duties of the first; that is, perform civil respects upon a religious
ground. So that it has been the glory and honor of Religion heretofore, to
yield the best children, the best subjects, the best Kings, the best husbands
and wives in the world. Therefore Augustine makes a challenge to all the
world, Dent exercitum talem quatem doctrina Christi milites esse jussit, Let
all the world (says he) yield such Children, such Subjects, such Soldiers,
such Servants, such an Army, such Provincialls, Judges, Kings, such faithful
ones, when they have been entrusted with the public moneys; (but alas, the
case is quite otherwise, of late none worse then they, none more apt to
dishonor God in relations, to disturb civil peace, to resist Magistracy upon
every dis-satisfaction, and to make every discontent the ground of commotion
and disobedience, therefore to teach men to improve their relations for the
glory of God and good of Religion, must needs be seasonable, that if it be
possible we may repair that incomparable loss, which Religion has sustained
this way.

compounding peace wieh purity, that neither may lose its due respect, that we
may neither hazard Religion by silence nor eager contention; Holiness and
peace are daughters of the same spirit and may be reconciled, you find them
often coupled in Scripture, James 3.17. The wisdom that is from above is first
pure and then peaceable: purity must have the precedence in your endeavors,
but peaceablenesse must not altogether be shut out; so Mark. 9.30. Have salt
in your selves and peace one with another, Salt and peace be savoury, but not
too tart and austere. I will not direct my Brethren, I do only suggest it.

to strengthen things that are ready to dye, to repair decayed godliness,
this challenges a chief care, yea the first place in your debates; as in the
Commandments, Spiritual duties have the precedence of Moral. In the name of
Christ then let me beseech you,

own persons, Oh how sad will it be for your souls in the day of the Lord, if
you should be employed in the Reformation of others and not be reformed your
selves, that you should be like Noah's shipwrights that frame an Arc for
others and perish in the waters your selves, or like the Jews that directed the
wise men to Bethlehem, but went not themselves thither to worship Christ! O
consider you are the first sheets of the Kingdom, others are printed after your
copy, if the first sheet be well set, a thousand more are stamped with ease:
see then that the power of Religion prevail over your own souls: that after
you have done good to others you may not be castawayes: How can men think you
are sincere in establishing of Religion, if it has made no impression on your
own hearts? Scandalous Ministers and wicked Magistrates do but pull down with
one hand what they set up with the other.

Angel, Oh let there be an Angel in every Church, Christ's strength lies in
his mouth, Isa. 49.2. That Is the Sword by which he overcomes the World, it is
the weapon he uses against Antichrist, the Spirit of his mouth, as Gideon
overcame the Israelites by lamps in pitchers, 2 These. 2.11^
so does Christ by lamps and pitchers, and therefore the Apostle calls it
light, or treasure in an earthen vessel; Oh then maintain the lamp that they
may be a means in the hand of God of maintaining godliness in the Kingdom,
let there be (as I said) an Angel in every Church, a light in every socket, a
star in every orb, if you look abroad you will find many continued through
favor and mediation of friends, Brightman in L^c.
Qui nihil babent in vita Angelicum aut in doctrina Evangelicum, that have
nothing Angelical in their life or Evangelicall in their doctrine.

order and discipline is the fence of Religion, and a Church well governed is
terrible as an Army with Banners, Cant. 6.4. that is, full of beauty and
strength, Armies ordered are comely and in a capacity to fight, the present
decays are by confusion, it is said Psalm. 68.35. Thou art terrible out of thy
holy places, in the order and beauty of the Church God is most terrible, when
worship is pure and regular it impresseth a dread and a reverence upon men.

Zech. 12.5. and the Governors of Judah shall say in their hearts, The
inhabitants of Jerusalem are my strength in the Lord of Hosts their God. Mark,
you should call them your strength, they engage a blessing; when Lot was in
Sodom, Sodom was in Lot, this is one of your chief duties, to see that
godliness live peaceably, we are bound to pray for you upon this ground, Pray
for them that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life
in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.4. Oh look to it then, that religion
may have a quiet abode, or else you will not.

Ier. 44.17. We will burn incense to the Queen of heaven, for then we had
plenty of victuals, and were well and saw no evil. They measure Religion by
their outward concernments, and judge of ways by their burdens and troubles.
The oppression of some Protestant princes in Germany was a scandal to the
Reformation, nothing stirs up vulgar hatred and introduces violent changes
so much as this: the people are like the read of Egypt, if we lean too hard,
they do not support but pierce, and oppression is like an iron in the fire,
'twill burn their fingers that hold it: I confess this is somewhat out of my
way, therefore I was the more loath to speak in it, but it being for Religions
sake, I hope you will pardon an humble motion.

I shall but hint two Motives to set on all and conclude,

come as a thief, oh consider Christ may steal upon you, when he takes off
his restraint from a people, and they break out into tumults, it is a shrewd
sign, you know what faction was ruined by tumults, it is an unhappy presage.

Thou have a few names that have not defiled their Garments. God takes notice
of those few names that are zealous for him in dead times, that mind the
advancement of piety whilst others debase it, they shall walk with me in
white; either God will provide an Arc of safety for you, for the present, or
give you heaven, which shall make amends for all.

FINIS.

