Stoa Triumphans: OR, Two sober Paradoxes, VIZ. 1. The Praise of Banishment. 2.
The Dispraise of Honors.
Argued in two Letters by the noble and learned Marquess, Virgilio Malvezzi.
Now Translated out of the Italian, with some Annotations annexed.

Felix exilium quod talem meruit Praeconem. LONDON, Printed by J. G. 1651.

To his truly honored friend, David Gwin, Esquire
THis ensuing Translation with the whole dress and Equipage of it was the
production of some spare time, when I was debarrd from better employment, to
wit, the exercise of my function and ministry. I found contentment in the
Reading, and therefore have committed it to the press for the public use in
a more intelligible language.

I send it forth upon the Reputation of the Author, which is very eminent in
the Commonwealth of Learning: which will commend it to the world and your
reading, without any other Bush at the door, -- Nec Phoebo gratior ulla est
Quam quae Virgilii praescripsit pagina nomen.


His pen upon paper is like a Prince his stamp upon coin, which makes any thing
current and sterling, what ever the metal be, and how small soever the model.
Hereupon I am induced to believe that these Letters (which I may call the
Marquess his Parva Moralia) will find as good acceptance with the Judicious,
as his Parva Politica did, I mean his Romulus and Tarquin, and other small,
but well-wrought pieces.

I have prefixed your name (Sir) before this Tract, that those that shall chance
to see and read it, may also read my Gratitude, and the Title which you have
in me, and whatsoever I can call mine; which you have purchased by manifold
kindnesses and seasonable favors, whereof I shall retain a grateful memory
while I am master of one.

Since the death of your honored Brother (whose name is like ointment powered
forth) we find that of the Poet verified in you, -- Uno avulso, non deficit
alter
Aureus, and simili frondescit virga metallo.


One golden bough being lopt off, another (of the same metal) succeeds in the
room of it. For his Benignity, Candor, and other Noble and virtuous Habits
survive in you; so that the loss of him is (in a good measure) recompensed in
your Succession.

God bless you with health, and the fruition of many and happy days: which
are the hearty wishes of

Your very affectionat friend, T. P.
June 3.
An Advertisement of the Translator to the Reader.
THese two Letters (gentle Reader) like those two mites of the Widow, may
serve to increase thy Treasure, if thou have any; or to be thy Treasure, if
thou have none. The one is a Philosophical Lecture of Patience and
aequanimity, to an Exiled friend: The other is a D^fiance to all worldly
Honors and Dignities. Both were written by the Lamp of Epictetus, and do
breath that virilem Sapi^ntiam Consolat: ad Helviam c. 12.
Stoico^um, which Seneca does so much extol, that masculine and Heroic
bravery of the Stoics, whereby they did put off man, and tread above the stage
of humane chances.

In both, the Authors pen drops Balm as well as Ink, sovereign oil to
assuage inward griefs, and invisible wounds: As the tongue, so the pen of a
wise man is health, says that Proverb of wisdom Solomon, Prove. 12.18. And
therefore these lines may be of good use for the Sons of Benoni's sorrow in
this Kingdom. For though the sacred Scriptures are the best Nepenthe and
Lenitifs of sorrow (whose Leaves are for the Revel. 22.2.
healing of the Nations;) Yet think it not amiss to use Exoterick writers
withal, whose Receipts have oftentimes proved cordial and effectual to
fortify the weak hearts and feeble hands of some that would wisely apply them.

The Author is Malvezzi, a man above his Titles Noble; whose Works have carried
his name and fame as far as Learning has spread her wings.

Malvezzi, he whom it is as hard to praise
To merit, as it is to imitate his ways Sir Jo: Sucklin of the Translat. of
Romulus and Tarquin.

They that studied him in his own Language have thought him worthy the
acquaintance of more Nations than his own, so that most of his learned Labors
have been translated, some into Latin, and some into English; and that by Noble
hands. The Earl of Monmouth and John Kruusse a noble Suede.


And because any Essays and delineations of his pen are worth Volumes of
some other writers; as Giotto's Circle (which he drew perfunctorily and in a
trice) did surpass the labored pieces of some other Artists; I have attired
these smaller pieces and diversions of his studies, in English livery, that
they may serve as Pages to wait upon his other works in this kingdom.

His style is right Laconick, strict and succinct; so far, that his brevity
does sometimes cloud his sense, and makes each period a Riddle to some
capacities; so that I am bold (now and then) to enlarge the room for to let in
more light; for his own words do scarce bring us home to his meaning: And I
may say of him as A. Gellius said of Salust; that he was Exquisitissimus
brevitatis Artifex.

But he is as rich in matter as he is frugall and parcimonious in words, as
though his fullstor'd soul desired to stive as much good matter (as he could)
in a little room. The Rags which are added in the margent may be useful for
some Readers; And the Annotations annexed may serve to show that some
Paradoxes, and singular streines that are found in the Text, are suitable to
the doctrine of the autient Sages, especially those that have Commenced in
Porticu Zenonis.

The greater letters refer you to some Annotations at the later end; and the
lesser to the marginall Notes.

The occasion and Argument of the first Letter.
IN the Commonwealth of (A) Genoa, as in that of Athens of old, the device of
(B) Ostracisme is put in practice. Hence it came to pass, that the Illustrious
Signor John Vincent Imperiale was adjudged to banishment: A Cavalier of much
renown and fame in the world, no less for eminency of learning, and the
glory of a great Commander, than for noble Extraction, and gentle deportement
and behavior.

The pretense was, That by an order from him a certain Musician was put to
death, who is yet alive. The innocent and noble Gentleman refused not the
occasion to aprove himself an obsequious Commonwealths man: For he (to give
content to his dear country, as well by his absence, as he had faithfully
served her by his presence) did withdraw himself (though old and infirm) into
the City of Bononia; Where as he is greatly honored by all, so is he dearly
beloved of the Noble Marquess Virgilio Malvezzi; Who out of his love and
friendship, being moved to a compassion of so strange an Accident, frames this
Letter to his undaunted Friend, with an intention rather to express (with his
pen) the Resentments of a soul that honored him, than to administer
Consolation to a mind which always appears greater C. Marius mihi in secundis
rebus unus ex fortunatis hominibus; in adversis, unus ex summis viris
videbatur. Cic. Parad. 2.
in Adversity than in Prosperity.

To the Noble Signor, JOHN VINCENT IMPERIALE.
VIRGILIO MALVEZZI His most devoted Servant, and affectionate Friend.

WHen I had the happiness (Noble Sir) to see you at Bononia, and to enter my
self in the number of your Servants, I conceived you Triumphant, though you
told me you were an Exile: I knew you Innocent, though you cried Guilty. I had
scarce departed out of Bononia, but our Reverend Archdeacon Paleotti (I know
not whether to comfort me, or undeceive me) did send me a Letter fraught with
clear and irrefragable Demonstrations of your Innocence.

If I had not cause so much to grieve for your Nobleness, I should grieve for
Him: Let him send his Remonstrances and Apologies to those that never saw you;
your very looks and the lineaments of your Countenance are more convincing
arguments to me (than any other) of your good abeare and innocence.

He that has eyes which can penetrate beyond the Surface and outside, may (by
discoursing with a man) find that speech of the Wiseman true; A man is known
by the eye, and the face discovers wisdom: Ecclus 19.29.
not that we can read in that Vultus animi janua and tabula. Cic. de pet.
Consul.
Tablet what a man shall be, but what he is: He speaks not (sure) of the
superstitious art of Metoposcopie, he intends (perhaps) Natural philosphie.
Man is an harmonious organ; the heart tunes and plays it, the tongue sings,
and every part and particle in it (though never so little) yields a distinct
sound, and varies the effect according to the variety of affections: because
all the parts are sustained by the spirits, and all the spirits are the Issue
of the heart: Omnis motus animi suum quendam a natura habet vultum, and sonum
and gestum: totumque corpus hominis and ejus omnis vultus o^esque voces, ut
nervi in fidibus, ita sonant, ut a motu animi sunt pulsae. Cic de Orat. lib. 3
As this is affected with Joy, or Sorrow, love, hatred, or fear; so it does
strike a different note or sound: when the Heart touches one string, and the
Tongue sings to another, the Speech and the Countenance do not make consort;
and he that cannot perceive this soloecism, and observe this dissonantie, must
accuse his senses of much weakness, and fly to that unsavory (though much
seasoned) maxim, written for blind men only: That it is necessary to eat a
bushel of salt with a man, before you can well understand him. Your Lordship
must subscribe to my opinion herein: for having seen many Provinces of the
world; been made known to Kings and Princes; and having conversed with so many
Cavaliers of Honor; it will be no small comfort unto you to have left so
little need of justifying you by other men's writings, that your very Dominatur
maxim vultus, hoc amamus, hoc odimus, hoc plurima intelligimus Quintil.
Instit. Orator.
visage has already excused and acquitted you among all that have seen you.

I have taken (indeed) my pen in hand with an intent to solace you with a few
lines, which discover rather my affection than your necessity: to write Letters
consolatory unto you were to go to cure a man in perfect health; though it is
true that healthful men (sometimes) have need of Physic, though not to
restore, yet to preserve health. Yet I do not write to solace you but my
self: your mind has no need of cordialls, but my heart has. I that had a
breast of proof, and could bear my own disasters without perturbation, do
find my heart most relenting and tender toward yours. (C) A Stoicall indolencie
does not well consist with frienship: A friend that undertakes to comfort, is
not like a Physician that undertakes a cure: A Physician cannot heal others
except he be in health himself; but a friend is so much the fitter to
administer Physic (if I may so speak) by how much the more affected and
diseased he is himself: I am sensible of your Lordships innocence and
banishment, I cannot entertain any joy, except I show my self impious; and
yet I cannot be sorry, except I should wish you culpable: yet I am not grieved
for that you are innocent; but I am sorry for that you are banished: and now
since you are banished, I am glad you are innocent. There be some of such weak
minds that bear their troubles with the more impatience, when they know
themselves to be innocent of the crime that is laid to their charge; whereas
(indeed) they might bear them the better, because they know themselves such.
Virtue is not restrained or confined, it has a place or theater to show it
self in all fortunes: A man that is condemned, (if he be innocent, and does
not vex) he does exercise the virtue of Patience: if he be guilty and does
acknowledge himself so, he does cooperate with that of Justice. When a
subject complains of some unreasonable pressures and molestations, he is
unjust, because he would be so: but when he complains of just and deserved
punishment, he is not only unjust, because he is so, but because he grieves;
And because he grieves that others are not so too. To complain of sufferings
is either to complain of an occasion given to merit thereby; or (at least) to
complain of a punishment inflicted for having demerited. To grieve for the
one, is weakness, and not to grieve for the other is perverseness: such a one
has cause to complain, not of Fortune but of himself; not for what he
suffers, but for what he has committed. (D) There is no evil in the world,
but what is committed: that which is inflicted, rather seems evil than is so,
because it comes to pass by the Quicquid patimur mortale genus, quicquid
facimus, venit ex alto. Senec. Herc. Oeteo.
will of God, which is always good, and eithe permits it, or is the Author of
it.

Whereas men should stoop and strike sail to Fortune, they revile and
blaspheme it: if there were not some cause to bear with their ignorance, there
would be just cause to chastise their rashness: for we call that (E) Fortune,
which happens, or falls out we know not how, nor why; or else quite without,
and beyond our expectation: wherefore to complain of Fortune, and not to blame
our own ignorance, is to complain of the Divine providence. Such things as
happen unto us, and not by us, we should rather adore, than censure; because
there Gods wisdom has a greater stroke and share, where ours has the lesser.
A man should take care to deserve that which is good, though not to obtain
what he deserves; And yet he has (in effect) obtained it, when he has
deserved it: For the greatest good that we can have, is Est quidem vera
felicitas felicitate dignum videri. Plin. Paneg. ad Trajan.
to deserve that greatest good that we can enjoy. He that studies to merit that
he may enjoy some good, makes merit become interest, and cannot arrive at good
which is purely so; because he has adulterated and tainted the good, when he
has tainted the merit. Fortune has no share in meriting, it has in
obtaining: and he that has obtained, is not now secure (altogether) because he
is not altogether in the condition of merit.

It is a high way saying, That we are Faber est unusquisque fortunae suae Cic.
in Catone Maj. Aedeplol Sapiens fingit fortuna^ sibi. Terent.
Architects of our own Fortune: He that said so, said not well, because he
meant not well: he that builds Fortune, does demolish it; it cannot be wrought
or framed but with the tools of Virtue; and so it becomes a statue of Virtue,
which was carvd for the statue of Fortune: yet is it true that though we be
not Authors of its entitie, yet we are of its quality; it is never that which
we make, yet it is always such as we make it; It does not consist with merit,
if it be not a sorry one: merit-doth destroy it where it finds it; but where
she does find merit, she does increase it: if she be good, with moderation; if
bad and wretched, with patience; she would stand and stay with your Noble
Lordship, and therefore returns to you in your disasters, that she may improve
that merit which in your felicity she did impair.

An adverse fortune is rather to be wished (in my opinion) though we deserve a
prosperous one: In this vast Ocean men are oftener shipwrakt in the haven of
tranquillity, than amidst the surges and billows of disasters: miseries do
humble us, and therefore we hold under them, but prosperity swells us with
pride, and therefore they Miseriae tolerantur, faelicitate corru^pimur. Verba
Galbae apud Tacit l. 1. Histor.
spoil us. If every man has his Fortune, and every Fortune its wheel, how can
we complain that our wheel descends? since one part of the wheel does not
descend so much one way, but it ascends another way: those men only complain of
Fortune, who have their souls so tackt to their bodies, that when one falls and
praecipitates, the other does so too: but those who possess one part of the
wheel with their souls, and another with their bodies, do wish always the
adverse or contrary part of the wheel; and if they have it not, they make it
so: because one part mounts toward heaven, when the other hurries down toward
hell.

A wise man bears his head above the Talis est sapientis animus qualis mundi
status supra lunaa^, semper illic serenum est. Sen. Ep. 59.
clouds: tempests cannot reach him, he is not shaken with winds nor battered
with thunder: Princes and States may well be Lords of our bodies, but cannot of
our Servitus non cadit in tot^^ hominem: pars melior ejus excepta est. Sen. de
benefi^ l. 3. c. 20.
souls; or if they be of any souls, it is of such souls as were (before) made
by their owners, slaves of their bodies. He that is immerst (both soul and
body) in this puntilio or narrow point, such as the Globe of the Earth is, does
live always in the center of this point, both soul and body: when he does (by
his better part) raise himself to higher speculations, he lives happily with
the body, wherever his mind enjoyes any felicity.

If all the circumference of the earth be but Punctu^ est in quo navigatis, in
quo bellatis, in quo regna disponitis, etc. Sen. Not. quaest. l. 1. Praefat.
a point of the Universe; If all times that were, or shall be, are comprised
under one instant of Eternity: what thing is man, who is but one point of that
circumference? And what is his life. but one moment of that eternity? Shall
then your Lordship complain that you are secluded Genoa, which (though of a
good bigness) is but a little little point of a little point? and that you are
secluded for a certain day? which is but a short instant of that time which
cannot be termed (well) an instants?

Your Lordship is sent out of your Country, not cashierd; by the Fathers and
Senators of it, not by the Judges; and that to reward, not to banish-you:
Malefactors are used to be banished Nescis exilium scelerum esse poena^? Cic.
Parad.
; so that banishment must lose its name where it finds innocence. A man is born
with an obligation to serve his country, he is borne a slave; and the more
slave, by how much his country is the more free: but to manumise a slave is a
reward, not a punishment; it does testify how well he has merited by his
service, when it makes him a freeman.

Time has been, That in Republiques, banishment has been (in a manner) their
chiefest guerdon: it was often bestowed upon (F) the best deserving: if the
Citizens be slaves, the Republiques could not free any of them from their
slaverie, but they must fall (themselves) unto it: But when they found a
subject of (G) great worth, beign a shamend to see him a slave, and not willing
to make him a servant, they cashierd him; being content to see him a free man,
though not to make him a (H) Master. He that said that he would be either an
Exile our of his Country, or a Consul in it, Aut Consul aut Exul, Some read it.
did believe (perhaps) that a person of worth, could not contain himself in a
Republique, if he did not obtain to be a Consul in it, or did not banish
himself out of it. You have taken pains (Noble Sir) a long time, that others
might take their rest: and you could not betake your self to your rest,
without losing all the glory that you have acquired by motion. He that has
performed brave exploites, and then retreats voluntarily, seems to have
performed them out of heat and fury, not love; to have served his own
ambition, not his country. It is not the part of a valiant man to take pains
that he may take rest, as it is not the part of a stout man to fight that he
may live: Even plebeian Spirits will rashly hazard their life's, that they may
not lose it. To bestow upon thy Country the prime of thy youth, and to deny
it the fruit of thy age, is to sacrifice the arms and deny the brains: Those
that are weak of body are exempted from the wars, and they that are weak of
understanding from the Senate: The danger of shortning our life by cumbring old
age with businesses will not serve for an excuse, no more than the danger of
blows will excuse a soldier from fighting: He that (being young) did expose
himself to danger by serving his Country by his arms, why should not he
(being old) expose himself to the like danger, by the service and labor of his
Nullis annis vacationem damus canitiem galea premimus. Sen. de vita beata cap.
28.
brains? wherefore banishment (Noble Sir) is a great reward bestowed upon you:
Quietness, which is ever desired by all, when it is the period of glorious
motions or actions; and is not always laudable, when it is voluntary, cannot
be reprehended in you, when it is become necessary. It is a great felicity (no
doubt) to be now at leisure to recount with your self the honorable
memorialls of former exploits, the applause you have received, and the honors
you have deserved: This is like Gods own joy, to rejoice within ones self,
and of himself: High and noble actions that have been performed, are dainties
kept in store, and companions prepared for to solace and Conscientia vitae been
actae multerumque benefactorum recordatio jucundissima est. Cic. Cast. Maj.
sweeten old age, and make retiredness a blessing.

But what do I talk of banishment out of ones Country? it is true that your
Lordship is exiled out of Genoa, but not form your Country: I must not
contract the bounds of that; it has not so small a circumference as Genoa:
Every place pretends to be your Country, and every Country is ambitious to be
that place: But it was the Country that you were borne in, you may say: if
that place be your Country where you were borne, it is but a small plot of
ground: if it be a City where this plot of ground is, why not rather the My
City and Country as I am Autoninus is Rome, as a man, the whole world. Anton,
de vita sua l. 6 Civitatis nostrae terminos cum sole metimur. Sen. de vita
beata, c. 31.
world which contains this City? You will say again that it is your Country
because your Ancesters have there inhabited; if your Ancestors either had not
been banished or had not banished themselves from their first habitation where
they were born, Genoa had not now been your Country: wherefore banishment does
not make you lose your Country but gain it rather: It is your Country (you
will say) because there lies your estate and your goods; alas! those you mean
are not your (I) goods: you have found them, and you must again leave them:
The goods of a man are his understanding, yea his Country is his understanding.

That man is not banished, who being excluded one City, can live in any Exilium
illis terribile, quibus quasi circumscriptus est habitandi Locus; non iis qui
omnem terrarum orbem unam urbe^ esse ducunt. Cic. parad
other climate of the habitable world: But he that cannot live in any other
portion of the world, but in the circle of such a City: to expel the other
out of such a City is not banishment but an enfranchisement: But how many men
does an ambition of greatness, and a desire of lucre detain there as Exiles,
who never complain, and yet live in a harder condition than the other? you
live under a good commonwealth, to which by nature you ought, and by choice
you do render obedience. But those men do live under two Tyrants, Avarice
Libido honoris, imperii, provinciarum, quam dura est domina, quam imperiosa?
Cic. parad.
and Ambition, which by nature they ought to command and not to obey. Your
Lordship is transplanted from the Country of your Fathers into your Mother
Country: For how can you be any other then the son of this City, if this
City be the mother of studies and arts? surely you are her son, and a
pregnant one too, the many births and conceptions of your brain do approve
you so: send forth those that are not yet published, bring them (I pray) not to
the light, but to be a light to the learned world, let them come abroad both to
solace Quid jucundius est Senectute stipata studiis juventutis? Cic. Cat. Ma.
your self and others.

Though wise men reside among the vulgar in this elementary world, yet they
have another within them full of various images and noble Ideas, springing from
the purer spirits of the heart, and inhabited by the noblest parts of the
Intellect. It were a great unhappiness and disparagement to mankind, if those
men should dwell in the same Commonwealth, that have not the same brains.
Ignorance is a veil that hinders us to know this truth: he that should have
the happiness to remove this veil, but for a moment, would be astonished to
see a strange Metamorphosis, he should see a new heaven, and a new world: but
since ignorance is dispelled but by degrees, that which is clear in it self,
does not presently appear so clear. From this Country your Lordship can
never be banished, in this, you can endure no trouble.

The Philosopher has left it recorded, That stones do not make a City but
bones, not walls but men: Pompey could say, that Rome Me exulem putas cum omnes
meo discessu exulasse Remp. pu^ent? Cic. de seipso. Parad. 1 Veios babitante
Camillo illic Roma fuit.
went along with him when the better part of the Citizens went. Your Lordship
has carried away a great part of your Country with you, when you carried away
your self: I may say that you carried away all of it, not all the walls, but
all the hearts therein: Who can say, that he is an exile that is so great a
part of the admirable frame and building of his own Country? you are not gone
to banishment, but have left your Country in banishment: because all those
remain Exiles that have made you one. It cannot be believed that Caesar did
chase Pompey from Rome, but rather that Pompey did chase Caesar out of it, if
he carried with him the City, when he was exiled. The Inhabitants of seven
caelestiall spheres, which convey their influence by motion and light into
this nether world: which in the number of the second causes are the first, or
certainly next to the first, are never fixed in their own Country, but are
erratick, and itinerant: they have their proper houses (it it true) but where
thy have their house, they have not their habitation; only Mercury the God of
wisdom has his Terms of judiciary Astrology.
House, his exaltation and his triumph in one and the same sign: nevertheless
he has the greater force and efficacy in his unfortunate house, than in his
own: To show that wisdom does then show her virtues and power most, when she
is most unfortunate.

Let no man wonder that I make here a Panegyric of banishment, I am not a
little obliged unto it, it has created me your friend, servant, slave, it is
enough that I have said Friend, since he is not a friend who is not a servant,
yea a slave; though there be those that are servants and slaves, that be not
friends: for there are some in this age that name themselves by no other style
than slaves, who notwithstanding know no other friendship than that of profit
and interest.

I would farther expatiate in commendation of this your banishment from your
Country, if (by being not allowed stay at this time in my own) I were not
banished out of your Lordships sight: otherwise I do so far like and wish
your banishment, that if I had your worth and innocence, (if this were not to
wish my master guilty) I would wish my self banished. But since I live under a
Prince, who crowns merit with reward, and never punishes the innocent, since
I cannot be an Exile, I would make my self one; and I do not know whether I
do not make my self one at this present, or am not made so, but I am
innocent, and therefore I do make my self: I should glory rather to be made
one, because it would be a glory to be made like to your Lordship.

When worthynesse does not advance a man higher, he gains the more favor, if
it casts him lower, than if it moved him not at all: if he be not gracious with
a man, or if he be out of his favor, there is no better way to make him
gracious than to be Quos injuriae invisos faciunt, gratioso, miseriae reddunt.
Val. Max. lib. 5. c. 3.
disfavoured. Men's tongues run in his commendations, and their hearts melt in
compassion of him: great worth is not without reward, even in this world: for
it is found sometimes among men, who always promise that it shall be rewarded:
if those men do not reward it, who are the principle debtors, those men will
that have any share in the benefit. Payments do cancel the obligation, but he
that is not paid is still a creditor, and feels the debt still to grow,
because the merit still increases: So that rewards are then most ample, when
they are never received.

There is nothing that man (...). Xenoph.
affects more than praise, and there is nothing hinders it more than envy, nor
does increase it more than pity: he that desires the one without the other,
let him make himself deserving, and let him wish himself unfortunate: merit
in distress does produce the greater compassion, by how much in felicity it
produces the greater envy: we are moved with compassion, because we love the
worth of him who is our inferior, and because we fear the like chance, by his
example, who was our equal. Ego Pompeii casum deploro and meam fortunam metuo:
The words of Caesar when Pompey's head was brought unto him. Suet.


Your Lordship has with your resolutenesse of mind amidst adversity, united
two things, which were not wont to be at great ods and distance before, to wit
Envy and Compassion; and has brought misfortunes into credit, and has
rendered them even desirable, whilst in the midst of them, you have rendered your
virtues even to envy glorious. It was the saying of Si vis me flere, dolendum
est primum ipsi tibi. Hor. de art poet.
a Poet, that he that would draw tears from others, must show his own: I know
not whether he spoke well, because I know not whether affection moves the
greater compassion: this I know, that behavior moves a better: whatever
circumstances are used to bewail the chance, are turned to the admiration of
the person. Some Authors believe and teach (though perhaps amiss) that the
carriage and courage of a man do take away compassion, because they take away
the appearance and likelihood of misfortunes, as though men cannot believe a
disaster, if they do not see tears; this appearance of fortitude (drawing all
to the admiration of the person) makes the acerbity of the disaster to be
forgotten: it does not make it not to be truly believed, but not to be well
considered: but admiration is not without delight, nor compassion without
grief: weeping proceeding (most commonly) from a mixture of sorrow and
delight, and behavior uniting these passions together, will make us (perhaps)
to thaw into many tears; whereas affection will rather make us to nauseate
than to weep.

The recompense of those troubles which your Lordship has sustained for the
Republique is to be troubled by it, but I believe that the Republique is
troubled more for you than by you: a few men can never make a body, they can
mar it, and often do: and I believe also that your noble Lordship is more
troubled of the Republique than by it.

(K) I have heard you speak so honorably and respectfully of that Senate which
has banished you, and so affectionatly of your Country, that you would desire
(in a manner) to be reputed culpable, that she might not be thought unjust: But
noble Signor, he defends his Country, who defends his own innocence: It is
easier to demonstrate that they have not once consented to banish your
Lordship, than to go about to make men believe that they have been so often
overseene in advancing you: as if their prudence did neither let them foresee
and know the vices of his younger years, nor direct them how to curb those of
his riper age: But had so often entrusted the helm of their vessel to the
valor and prudence of a young man, who in the maturitie of his age must be
cashierd, as unworthy of those favors.

Republiques do often give way to calumny that they might not take away the
trade of Informers: they had rather banish an innocent man, than suffer damage
by not punishing a guilty man. I say not that the Commonwealth of Genoa is
unjust, such thoughts are far from me: I am not so uncivil nor so
disrespectfull. I honor it much: and I would be as good to serve it, as I am
ready to respect it; and if I would not respect it for any other reason; I
would for this, that it is your Lordships Country: otherwise in lieu of
obtaining your love and favor, I should purchase your hatred: I should not
comfort you but exasperate you rather, since you that are innocent, will needs
be innocent, only because you are condemned and judged to be so.

It is no contradiction to be justly condemned and to be innocent: How many
offenders are acquitted by justice without injustice? If that saying of Seneca
be true, that thunderbolts are never more just than when they are adored by
him that is thunderstruck; This most just Commonwealth was never more just
than when it fulminated your banishment, who does so much commend it, and with
such expressions of honor discourses of it. Thrice happy Commonwealth! were
all the Citizens like you, she could never commit an error: banishment should
never be thought unjust, nor the banished innocent: if at any time, she were
not just, such men would make her so, when they affirm and teach that the will
of their Fathers or Senators is their Law: In Tyrannical Governments the will
holds the place of Justice; But in a Republique where Optimacy bears sway and
rule, she may well enough stand with Justice.

Another Letter in dispraise of Honors.
BY the same Marquess.

I Have been at a long debate with my self, First, Whether I should write
unto you; and then What I should write; to condole you had been dangerous; if
grief had possessed your mind already, it would have increased its strength:
if it had not, it would have given it a beginning: To comfort you raised these
doubts within me: either there were reasons for so doing, and then it would
have been supposed, that I had done it long sine; or there were no reasons,
and then it would have been an undertaking as unnecessary in the one case, as
fond and vain in the other: you have lost your dignities, nay you lost none,
if your virtues adhere to you; and they do so, if you can despise and scorn
that which sticks not to you: that circle of friends, that did compass you
round and applaud you, were so many enemies; they rather besieged you and laid
wait for you: The friends of Honors swarm to the place where they reside,
because they affect those Honors: they hate those that do enjoy them, because
they would enjoy them themselves: He that feels the weight of Honors, thinks
them insupportable, and too heavy for him, and he that feels them not is
insupportable to them: He that is not burdened with them is a burden to them:
should a Courser that is dect with trappings of gold and purple, and carries a
General in triumph to the Capitol, take a pride in the Arches, the shoutes
and acclamations of the people? or rather complain of his accoutrements, which
are a burden rather than an ornament unto him; when gold as it is glorious, so
it is ponderous too: Alas! there are few that talk with you, but with your
fortune only: Pauci Reges non regna colunt. Sen. Herc. Oct.
few that make obeisance to you, but to the dignities which you bear, and
therefore no share remains to you, no more than to the steed, but the pains
and the burden.

If by the divine goodness and clemency, ambition were once quite exterminated
or rooted up out of the hearts of men, it would be a greater difficulty (I
doubt not) to persuade men to bear rule, than to obey: O unhappy and wretched
command then, that is thus foold by ambition, which makes men believe, that
they command others when themselves are slaves both to it and others. He that
commands, commands only for to Magna servitus est magna fortuna: ex quo Caesar
orbi terrarum dedicavit fibi eripuit. Sen. Consol. ad Polyb.
serve, and to serve those which stoop to him only that they may command him:
Behold the shepherd, who is an emblem of him that governes people, and tell me
whether the flock serves him or he the flock? To squeeze their milk, and their
wool, does not make him not to be a servant: it makes him not to be a free
noble servant, but a mercenary one: if a man must seek out dainty viands for
food, if he must be clothed with gold and purple, if armed with sword or
firebrarnds, he has no cause to complain of nature, that she has left him
(alone) among all creatures, as it were without clothes, or food, or arms: But
if he would bear rule and dominion over men, he has some cause to complain
of her, because to him (alone) of all other creatures, has she assigned
dominion and sovereignty over all other creatures. Have you lost your
dignities? you have not lost them but Laudo manentem fortunam: si celeres
quatit pennas resigno quae dedit. Horat od.
surrendered them: they are the favors of Fortune, being seldom characters of
merit, but of audacity: what other goodness have they in them, but what he
stamps on them, that does enjoy them? if he be not good, they are not dignities
but indignities, you have not then lost your dignities, but they have lost him
that gave them that denomination, and made them Epaminondas honores ita gessit,
ut ornamentum non accipere sed dare ipsi dignitati videretur. Just. 1. Hist.
dignities.

(A) Some men are borne to command, and some to obey. Principality should be
measured by the intellect, not by Cities and Provinces: He is not always a
master of others, that has others under him; it is Fortune that confounds the
works of Nature: our Lord God has stamped the Character of the worthiest man
in the noblest and worthiest part of man: In a play the Actors habits and
disguises may well deceive those spectators that are below, but not those that
see them near hand. The wise man was upon the stage to behold the Comedy,
when he said, Prove. 10.7.
I see the master walk on foot, while the servants Ride on horseback. Our
world here below is (for the most part) Antipodes or Counter to that of the
Inteligences, there they argue the greatest dignity from the greatest measure
of knowledge: and here he has the greatest dignities (often) who has the
least portion of knowledge; when a man is borne in a higher degree or
condition, and is inferior in brain, he is an error or oversight of nature, a
monster: or if so be she had an intention to make him such, it was either to
chastise, or to instruct, to show that all that are borne in this world are not
borne for the world.

Would you know what kind of things those dignities were which you enjoyed?
consider what those are that do enjoy them: with how many would you change
conditions, if you were to change persons withal? wherefore they are not good
of themselves, since they do not Quidquam nc Bonum est, quod non eum qui
possidet, meliorem facit? Cic. parad. 1.
make men good: I have seen them more apt to corrupt goodness than to beget
it: our nature is too frail to attain to perfection in goodness: it is
rashness to seek an augmentation of virtue from temptation; for they do
(oftentimes) change it, but always impaite it: To subdue our own affection is
a difficult task: But to vanquish both our own and others too is almost
impossible: what mind will bound its contentment with a little that enjoys
much? what humility that meets with obsequiousness and homage, does not turn
to pride?

Dignity is like a purple attire which does embellish dirt because it hides the
ugliness of it, but disgraceth gold, because it hides the splendor of it.
Every thing is bright where the sun shines: but a car buncle, if you will have
it glitter and sparkle, place it in the dark: remove it out of another light,
if you will see its own. Virtue desires to be naked, dispoyld of dignities,
and sequestered from wealth, it is a gemme that shows all its worth, when it is
all discoverd, it cannot be so neatly enchac'd, but the beauty of that part
will be conceald that is enchaced.

You are come down from the hill, not thrown down thence: and now since we
are all upon the plain, and level, we will measure them together. The
distance of the eye deceives it: in figures that are handsome, it perceives
not all the beauty of them, and in those that are misshapen it discovers not all
their defects: a little statue becomes not greater by being placed on a hill,
nay statues being placed on high do lessen, or (at least) seem lesser to the
eye of him that beholds them, though not to him, who taking the basis with the
statue does measure both the other.

Men are not therefore nearer heaven because they are advanced above us: he
that mounts higher has the more need to descend; the way to climb high is not
to climb: you may see one exalted upon the throne above others, who is far
below others; the thoughts of that man who seems to you to touch the Stars,
are oftentimes as low as Hell: that body which you see is not the body of him
you see, it is his carcass, Scito t^ mortalem non esse, sed corpus hoc: nec
enim is es quem forma ista declarat; sed men's cujusque is est quisque. Cic. In
somn. Scipionis.
there man is where his best part resides, or if he be not there, he shall go
thither.

Heaven is made for humble men, not for the great ones; he that is sometimes
nearest unto it, sees it least; he that stands on the top of a mountain,
sees nothing else but the sun, whereas he that is in the bottom of a well,
can thence number the stars also. You may (perhaps) be agrieved that your
command is taken from you: Nature which has planted in man that most Cupido
dominandi cunctis affectibus flagrantior. Tacit. 2. Hist
ardent desire of command, would have showed her self an envious mother, if
she had not also given something to command. There is no man but has (B) a
kingdom within himself, and he is not worthy to be a king over others, that
is not first a king over himself; rejoice that you are a commander over your
own affections, to see your passions so good subjects. This Harmony brings you
to hear that of the spheres, and to contemplate that of God himself, and in
this most delightful Symmetrie, you shall taste that peace and tranquillity of
mind, which was by ancient sages reputed the felicity of the Blessed. If you
may not come in place to right the oppressed, and do them justice, yet you may
procure it to be done: if you have nothing left to relieve men withal, yet you
have whereby to pity them, and that poverty which you cannot relieve, you can
support and bear: In all places there is a place for the exercise of virtue,
for one that would exercise virtue and not ambition, and there it appears
greatest, where the least reward is expected by it.

What availes it a man to be a commander over others, if he be Si vis omnia
tibi subjici, teipsum subjice rationi. Sen. Lib. 1. Ep. 36. Multos reges si
ratio t^ rexerit. Idem.
a slave of his own passions? what avails it to dwell in palaces (to whose
sumptuous frabricke even the remotest provinces of the world are tributaries)
if in the mean while the soul inhabits a sordid nasty body? what harmony can
recreate that man that is composed of naught but discord within himself? and
what food can nourish him that labors with a thousand diseases, and is upon
the rack of torments? Is not this body of clay enough to press down the
soul, except we clogge it also with the weight of Cities, and provinces and
kingdoms? the greatness of dignities is a circumstance which does always
add weight unto our faults, but never to our services, and this is sometimes
men's reward in the world, that have deserved well of it. It is very true that
this transition from a place of eminent command, unto a private life is not
easily Infelicissimu^ infortunii genus est aliquando fuisse felicem. Boet. de
consol. l. 2.
concocted, except only by those, who do not change their intellect by
changing their condition; if a painter blot out a picture that was drawn in a
table, and makes a new one in its place, that table is not the same though it
be the same, because the table does not give the name to the picture, but the
picture to it: our understanding is a (...), velut tabula rasa. Arist. 3. de
aima.
sheene tablet wherein no lines are drawn, the pictures and fantasmes of great
ones, which are imprinted in it, are not the same with those of private men,
therefore the same man's intellect, is not the same when he becomes a private
man: the change of a man's condition is the death of one man, and the generation
of another; and a good death it is, if it be the generation of a good man.
Troubles, my friend, are (when we err) the rewards of our errors, and when we
do not err, an augmentaion of our merit, either they abate and expiate the
ill, or augment the good: they are always good themselves, because he is
always good that sends them; if they appear Evil, it is because he is evil
that suffers under them.

You are not unforuunate because you have lost your dignities; rather you are
happy if you look not after them: he obtaines enough who obtaines this, even to
desire nothing: those men are happy from whom Fortune cannot take away, not
they on whom she may bestow: she is not unpleasing, but to him, who was too
much pleased with her: she cannot take away but from him that was her Almsman:
we call her unjust, when we our selves are so. We complain of her for taking
that which she had bestowed, in stead of giving her thanks that she had
bestowed it: she does not rob but reassume: our worldly felicities are but
borrowed; when they are not restored back, they leave us of themselves: Death
is aminister of He means Fate or Providence.
Fortune, and see what arreares of debts are unpayd unto this, they will be
exacted of that other.

He that (in misfortunes) loses not the string of virtue, is like an arrow
which (when it loses not the string of the bow) does fly so much the more
forward, by how much the more it was drawn backward: Fortune does not retreat
with an intention to forsake, but to prove us, and where it finds great
spirits, there it returns with the greater equipage. He deserves not to
entertain Fortune at her best, when he cannot bear her company at the worst:
whilst we seek her unseasonably before the time, we often times meet our
death, and whilst she returns to us at her own leisure, she does often find us
dead. He that hoiseth sails and displayes them upon the saileyards when the
sea is rough and boistrous, either sinkes the vessel or splitts it: we must be
content to keep below when our being higher may endanger our sinking. He that
cannot obtain a calm, and yet by all means will needs sail in a tempest,
does not sail, but run a ground, and does (many times) make himself unfit
to entertain calm weather when it comes and smiles upon him, because it finds
him either already splitt or drowned. Adversity has not the power to disturb
much, but such a Quem res plus justo delectavere secumdae, mutatae quatient.
Horat. ep. l. 1.
mind as was enervated by prosperity. If the Stoikes had not confounded
together the pains of the body with the passions of the mind, they had not
(perhaps) fancied an (C) impassibility, when they fancied an indolencie: for as
in one case, it cannot consist with a sound mind; so in the other case it may
be imputed (perhaps) to the greatness of wisdom: Disasters are light or Ad
opinionem dolemus: tam miser est quisque quam credit. Sen. Epist. 78. lib. 1.
heavy as we are pleased to make them; for they have no other being or
existence than in opinion: if they were real things they would be alike in
all. Nemo aliorum sensu miser est. Salvian. de provid. l. 1.


Consider in your case how many men there be who have not those dignities which
you possess, and yet do not complain. If you reply that they do not complain
for not having them, because they have not had them; you complain (it seems)
not for what you are, but for what you have been, and so you grieve for good,
and not for evil; nay tell me also how many infirm men, how may beggars other
sorts of people would deem themselves Null a^ tam miser a^ nominabis domum
quae non inveniat in miseriore solati^m. Sen. Cons. ad Marciam cap. 12.
happy, if they were in your condition? and do you call it an unhappiness to
be that which so many men would account happiness to arrive at? if you be upon
those terms (which I scarce believe) you are no way unhappy but that you
understand not your own happiness.

All estates and conditions of men in the world are Mihi videtur rerum natura
quod gravissimum fecit, commune fecisse: ut crudelitatem fati consolaretur
aequalitas. Sen. Cons. ad Polyb. cap. 21.
equal, if a man will not change crosses with any other when he sees what
comes to every man's lot and share: much less will he change felicities with
any: for those also are equal if not in the scales of weight, yet (at least)
in the balance of justice: and if (at any time) the freshness or noveltie
make a difference, it is the difference but of a few days; assuefaction will
presenly produce it to a Geometrical equality. The felicities of this world
are not in things themselves, they subsist in opinions only, and so become
great or small, according as they are apprehended, and they have the greatest
share of them, that believe they have it: Sovereignty is like a mountain which
seems to the subjects (who are at the foot of it) with his towering head to
touch the sky, but to those that are at the top, it seems with his basis to
reach hell,

There is no degree or condition of man but is subject to satiety: we ever
desire what we do not possess; and our will (since it lives under those
spheres, which are in perpetual motion) can never be at rest; private persons
do envy the greatness of Princes, and Princes do envy the quiet repose of Si
non ess^m Alex and. Diogenes esse vellem. Plut. de Fortuna Alexand.
private persons: yet they will never descend or reduce themselves to this
state of life; but rather still fear what they (sometimes) desire; As though
they are ashamed to become such as they would seem to desire to have been at
first. Be not therefore troubled that you are arrived at that state of life,
which you have often envied in them that did enjoy it. There are some sort of
maladies incident to men that the party must be well beaten before he can be
cured. What things do men use to wish to souls departed, that they may be
happy? not incessant motion I trow, but everlasting rest: behold you are this
day invested in that bliss which you shall enjoy in eternity, if you can bear
it well in this temporal life; Every man that has his quietness is not at
ease, but as that motion is best, the Author and cause whereof is ever quiet:
so that quietness is worst, which has within it an active principle that
loves no rest.

Rest you quietly my friend, under the cover of that harbor to the which that
wind of Envy has driven you, which thought to drown you: avoid the angry and
unquiet Ocean, that sea which has swallowed even (D) Palinures and expert
Pilots, or when they could not break them with a storm, have lulld them fast
asleep. You have already buried Envy under your ruins, and over them you may
build Colossuses, or monuments of glory; you are not fallen, you have only
laid your self down, not by any fever or malady, but with a purpose to take
your repose. Envy is left behind to wait upon those dignities which you
enjoyed, which are no way good if they be envied: Envy is a worm which breeds
only among corruption, it does not fly at true worth and goodness, if it
does not find it wrapped in secular affairs which are attended with profit and
glory.

There is no other way of goodness than to be good in Gods eyes, and he that
is such is so secure from envy, that he oftentimes falls within the compass of
compassion. Consider those who live like wild beasts among craggy rocks, and
horrid woods, who being full of grace and celestial virtues, and being
sequestered from men, do mix conversation with the Angels in the contemplation
of their Creator: and then tell me, I pray you, whether any does envy their
condition? either they are pitied or commended. Moreover let us regard those
virtues rather, which make a man good, than those which make a man great, so we
should live safe from the envy of men, who measure goodness by greatness, and
think him the better man who is the higher; leave friend these walls which
hinder your prospect, and contract your Horizon, these walls which take away
the prerogative which God gave unto man, to contemplate heaven without
discomposing his head: what other thing does those black habits import (which
at first entrance do greet our eyes) than grief and sorrow, for the loss of
liberty which unawares they are deprived of? To live in a great City, what is
it but to live in a spacious prison where men are so wretched, and lost, that
they know not their own natural necessities, except the senseless clock
(which is in perpetual motion) put them in mind of them? as though all things
here depended upon the wheel of Fortune or of the clock: Leave (I say) my
friend these walls which can never so defend you, but they (at the same time)
may oppress you with their fall. Come with me under the cool shades of Cedars
and Beech: come where no other enchantment shall fill your ears than the
chanting of the nightinggall, nor any other murmurs than that of the crystal
brooks: where all favors and benefits are expected from the bounty of heaven,
not of men; Here you shall see the Philomel innocently displaying her wings,
and freely roving in the woods from tree to tree, and with the air of her
wings, mingle the sweet air and warbling notes of her voice: not like the
City birds which are constrained to make their voices mercenary, to beg their
meat in tune, and earne it with a music lesson, so that I know not whether
these prisoners (being also bewitched with these walls) do lament or sing the
loss of their own liberty. Here the waters run under the harmless laurel
with chaste and undefiled beauty, and (sometimes running gently out of their
chanells leaving pearly drops upon the golden flowers, and sweetly kissing the
enameled herbs, do make them teemingly fertile with their amorous embraces:
There (in the Cities) you may see them forced from their natural course, and
defloured, and (being conveyed through close prisons and chanells) taught to
aspire proudly toward heaven, to fall (afterward) more violently to the
earth. See how these matters do instruct us that in the Cities, men cannot (in
their own natural state) be advanced, that have not first lost their native
liberty; and that the end of their exaltation and mounting up is to Tolluntur
in altum, t^ casu graviore ruant. Claud.
fall with the greater precipitation.

THe Learned Abbot Lancellotti in his work called L'Hoggi dis-inganno, makes
it his aim and design to vindicate the present age from the vulgar error and
imputation, that it is degenerated from the glory of ancient times, and that
the world (Mandrabuli more) the older it grows, the worser it is. To encounter
the torrent of popular Opinion herein, he demonstrates both by artificial and
inartificiall arguments, that present times are nothing inferior to those of
our Forefathers, either in Virtue or Arts, Learning or Manners.

For Learning, he produces instances (of several kinds) to confront
Antiquity, and to beard the Zanzummims or Giant-wits of former Ages. Among
others, he musters this learned Marquess, (the Author of these Letters) and
places him in the front and among the Primi-pili of that Learned army of pen
men, which he does array and marshall in that work; He says that the Ancients
need not boast of their Tacitus or Seneca where Malvezzi is, for those two are
contracted and blended into this one person, and he inherits the perfections of
them both.

It is most certain that our noble Author here, is a personage that deserves
all these Commendations, except the obscurity of his style chance to obscure
his worth, and make him less valued, because less understood. Like the
Cuttlefish, he hides himself too much in his own ink: his draughts or
pictures have too much shadow, and his Tablets seem like so many night-peeces:
He is another Heraclitus, so dark and obscure, that even his own Country men
are thought wits when he is understood by them.

I have therefore (upon better thoughts) considered that a pedantick and
straight-lac'd translation was not sufficient for this piece, but that some
passages (at least) required more light and larger Illustrations, which I have
endeavored to perform, and annexed them in the subsequent pages; which now
present themselves to the Readers view and Candor.

Some Passages illustrated in the first LETTER.
GEnoa..] A Free State or Commonwealth in Italy; called by the French Genes:
It is governed in chief by a Duke, whose office is annual, and whose authority
(during his wardship) is regulated by eight Governors and so many Protectors,
whose office extends to the space of two years, as Mons: Bodin informs me;
These are all chosen by the Grand Council of four hundred which is termed the
Signory. There is also besides these, a Senate which consists of a hundred
select persons, who are chosen into that dignity by balls, as at Venice. So
Bod. lib. 2. de Repub.

There is a standing army belonging to this Republique, consisting of four
thousand horse and foot, under the Command of some expert General. In which
quality this noble Signor Vincent Imperial was, as may be easily gathered from
the Tenor of this Letter.

Ostracisme.. This was a banishment used among the Athenians and Ephesians;
which has its name and denomination from (...) which signifies a shell:
because the humorous Citizens did use to write their votes upon fish shells
when they had a mind to banish any out of their society: And that was as often
as any qualm of fear came over their stomachs; If they began to fear any man's
wealth, or power, and favor with the people. In Alcibiade and Astide.
Hoc genus Exilii civibus potentia and gloria praestantioribus irrogatur, non
malis ant obscuris hominibus, as Plutarch has recorded. This banishment was
for the space of ten years, and did not extend to confiscation of goods.
Hereof Aristotle makes mention, Polit. lib. 3. cap. 9.

Of this nature was the Petalismus in Siracuse, practiced by writing the name
of the party to be banished upon an Olive-leafe, without expressing his crime,
or a reason of his proscription; for it was frequently done without any reason.

Stoicall indolencie.. This is that Apathy, imperturbation, and constant tenor
of mind that is imputed to the Stoics; as though they taught that a discreet
wise man should be never affected either with other men's disasters or his own:
But they that took their meaning so, mistook them. They teach (indeed) that a
wise man is so good a Commander of himself and his own passions, that he is
never transported by them, or (like Phaeton) hurried headlong: But his Reason
does still possess the throne and scepter, and holds the golden reigns of
Soveraignety in her hand; And does exercise her Jurisdiction, not by killing
these Gibeonites, Josua. 6.21.
but by keeping them in obedience, and making them serviceable.

A wise man is a man as well as other mortals: Seneca (who was germanissimus
Stoicus, as Cicero calls him, Acad. qu. 1.
a true bred Stoic) did confess as much: Epist. 71.
non educo sapientem ex hominum numero, etc. And Antoninus sirnam'd the
Philosopher, (who had imbided as much Stoicisme as any other) did betray as
much by the tears that the shed for this foster father: and when he seemed to
some severe gravities to lament beyond decorum, his father Antoninus Pius,
ingeniously excused him: permit illi ut homo sit, etc. permit him (says he)
to be a man: for neither Philosophy nor Empire takes away affections.

Seneca also in his consolatory Epistle to Polybius Cap. 37.
is so far from condemning him for his sorrowing, that he condemns those
that did condemn him, and calls them durae magis quam fortis prudentiae Viros,
rather hard-hearted than valiant men.

An unchangeable tenor and temper of affections is not only above the
conditions of men but of the holy angels also: for they have an alternation of
joys and sorrows; as they rejoice over penitent sinners, so they grieve and
mourn for the fall of a holy man, or some bright star in the firmament of
Gods Church, below.

There is no evil.. Among the writings of the Stoics there are many singular
streins which we usually call Paradoxes, and what Cicero Praefat: ad Paradoxa.
calls mirabilia Stoicorum the rare and wonderful Cabal of the Stoics, of
which kind, diverse are scattred by the Noble Author in the preceding letters,
whereof this is one: That the evil of sin only, and not the evil of
punishment; that which we do, not that which we suffer, deserves the name of
evil. And this doctrine has been delivered from an eloquent Father Chrysostom.
from the pulpit, saying: Apud Sixtum Sen. 4 Bibl.
Maximum fieri ex tribulationibus lucrum; and supplicia mortalibus a Deo
immissa, esse divinae pietatis beneficia: which is as much as to say, that our
greatest foes are our best friends; that sufferings are blessings, and that we
often gain by our losses. These may seem Riddles, but (upon serious
deliberation) they are found sober truths: Poverty, exile, imprisonment, bodily
infirmities, and the like (which most men account the chiefest of evils) are
not evil indeed, but partake more of good than evil.

Poverty is the harbor of peace and security: where undisturbed sleeps and
undissembled joys do dwell, fidelius rident tuguria; some rich men have
abandoned their wealth, and some great ones have degraded themselves of their
greatness for to enjoy the blessings that attend the low estate of the poor:
low shrubs are not annoyed with thunder-strokes; and Envy, Cares and turmoiles
do not haunt the Cell. If a man can match his mind to his means, and level
his desires with his fortune and make them commensurate, he may dispute
happiness with the Gods, says that brave Roman, Seneca. Epist. 23.


imprisonment, if it be not just, there is no evil in it, no disgrace at all,
since Socrates was prisoner at Athens: and since Phocion and Miltiades (the
ornaments of their Country) died in a prison; The very presence of their
persons did purge away the infamy of that place, and made it sacred, and far
more honorable than the Court where their Judges sat. (...). I
A goal was made for malefactors, but if innocent and good men be thrown
therein, it must lose that appellation, and be rather any thing else than a
goal: as it is true, that Causa non poena facit martyrem: so it is as true
that causa non poena facit carcerem.

Banishment: none need to fear it or startle at it: it has been the lot and
fortune of the most virtuous and deserving men that ever lived amongst men:
they that have often preserved their Country from ruin have been (by their
Country men) driven out of it: This was the reward of M. Cicero, Qui
conservatae patriae pretium calamitate exilii tulit, as V. Paterculus speaks
of him. L. 2. Hist.
And thus have many other worthy Patriots been rewarded, as will be showed in
another Paragraph. If such noble examples will not serve to reconcile us to a
good opinion of banishment, sure this former Letter of Malvezzi will, which is
a persuasive Apology for the same, and is fraught with learned arguments to
that effect.

bodily infirmities: they have wrought much good, by fitting some men for good
arts and studies, and others for heaven, by a pious and holy life. Thucid. l.
1. Histor.
Plato did set up his Academy in an unhealthfull air, in Attica; which was as
barren for corn, as it was fertile in good wits and Arts: for an Athletick
habit of body is not so useful for the mind; the strength of the one is
perfected in the weakness of the other. Imbecillitas carnis (says Salvian In
Epist. ad Caturu^.
) mentis vigorem exacuit, and affectis artubus, vires corporum in virtutes
transformantur animorum and multis sanitatis genus quoddam esse videatur,
hominem interdum non esse sanum; this is very full and home to our business.
Eudoxius a famous orator in S. Basils time, and who had been converted to the
Christian faith by that holy Father, lay long under a languishing sickness,
but he was so far from murmuring and discontent under it, that he made an
excellent Grace or thankesgiving to God for the same, Gratias ago (says he)
tibi pater O. Conditor hominum tuorum, quod nos (etiam invitos) recte fingis;
and per externum hominem, internum purgas; and per adversa ad beatum nos finem
producis. Basil. Epist. 117.

Fortune.. If by this name and appellation of Fortune (so frequently mentioned
in these Letters, and in the writings of Ethnicks under the notion of a Deity)
is meant the supreme moderator of the Universe (who is capable of all names, as
Seneca tells us) it may pass current: Cui nomen omne convenit. lib. 2. Nature.
quaest. c. 45.
otherwise Fortune is but filia vulgi (as one says) a child of popular Fancy,
an Idol or figment of man's brain. For when the Philosophers were ignorant of
the true causes of some effects and events, they devized these terms of
Fortune and Chance to salve the Phenomenon of their doctrine, and their credit
from the suspicion of Ignorance. For (indeed) there is nothing that falls out
in this universe without a Providence, and a true and proper cause, which is
linked unto the first: from which it has its first motion and impulse, and to
which it has it last resort: though all men cannot see the dependencie and
Concatenation of the same. Some of the ways of Providence are full of Meanders
and Labirynths past finding out, proceeding in such a crypticall and involved
method that humane wit cannot trace them. And therefore Fortune (like Occult
Qualities in philosophy) is the Sanctuary of Ignorance: Propter ignorationem
verarum causarum aut obscuritatem Fortuna appellatur, ejusque vocabulo utuntur
philosophi: So the Orator ingeniously confessth in the second of his Acad:
Questions. Cic.


Bestowed upon the best deserving.. The Romans rewarded Rutilius and Camillus
with banishment, and many other Worthies, to whom Rome did ow not a little of
her greatness and glory: so they dealt with the African Scipio who was
Carthaginis horro, and cui Roma debet quod semel tantum capta est, as Seneca
expresses him: Epist. 91.
who was the terror of Carthage, and who rescued Rome from a second Rape, that
Annibal had not his will and pleasure upon her, as the Gauls once had. Cicero
and Seneca (two men that were the honor of the Gown) received the like
kindness, the former having by his great care and activity preserved Rome from
the fury of Catiline and his Accomplices: and the latter having been not only the
Emperor Nero's Tutor, but was also (for his personal worth) Romani nominis
magnus sol, as Lipsius styles him. In his Notes on Tacitus.
The Athenians cashierd not only their Miltiades and Themistocles, who had
often preserved their lives and fortunes, but also their Phocion and Aristides,
which are not so much names of men, as of Virtue and Goodness. Beneficia co
usque Laeta sunt, dum videntur posse ex^olv Tac. 4. An.
Some of these were proscribed, because their deserts were above requital: and
some others, not because they had done any harm, but for fear they should do
any, in regard of their power and greatness. Eminent men are always suspected
by the higher powers, whthere one or more sit at the stern: for the same
faults and Enormities are incident to popular states, as are to Monarchies.
Tacit.
Non minus periculum ex magna fama quam ex mala: and Sen. Thy.
multis exitio fuit incautus populi favor, are true maxims in both states:
Great merit and a high fame, are like a high wind and a large sail which do
often sink the vessel. And Machiavell in his discourses puts it to the
question, Whether the Prince or the people use to be more ungrateful toward
their deserving Ministers: and he concludes them equally guilty.

Of great worth.. neither Comparatives nor superlatives are allowed in the
Grammar rules of Democracie: A man may be good here, but not better than his
fellows, nor richer nor wiser, nor any way better qualified; we are all Peers
here, nemo de nobis unquam excellat, si quis extiterit, alio loco, and apud
alios sit: so the levelling Ephesians decreed, when they turned out Hermodurus.
Arist. 3. Pol. c. 13. Cic. lib. 1. Tusc. qu.
And this is the practice of the Venetian state at this present as Jovius tells
us: Lib. 1. de Ven. Repub.
neminem temere ex Optimatibus, qui vel insigni virtute vel spiritu in gerendis
rebus antecellat, nimio plus crescere, vel collecta gratia potentem and claru^
esse patiuntur. In these popular states no man may be popular, ir a minion of
the people: multis exitio fuit, etc. the unwary and undissembled love of the
multitude has been often fatal to their Favourit, and has cost him his life
or his liberty, as it did Petro Loredano a Senator of Venice, Match: Discur.
who because he had more discretion than his fellows, and so much authority as
to becalme a tempest by land, I mean a great commotion and tumult raised by
the Seamen, which threatened much danger to the City, was soon after this
good service clapped up in prison by the Senate, par ragion di stato.

It is a fundamental rule and maxim of state in these kinds of Governments to
suffer no man to grow (...) as Aristotle expresses it, 5. Polit. cap. 8.
ultra commensurationem, beyond his line and tedder: every man here has his
bounds which he may not pass, and his maximum quoad sic (for wealth and
dignity) beyond which dimensions and pitch he may not grow. The temper of these
bodies politic are stated ad temperamentu^, ad pondus aequale, and stinted to
an aequiponderation by the project and design of the first Founder: no element
may predominate here; this brings all to disorder and distemper.

But how agreeable this is to natures laws, and whether this be not a dwarfing
of a State and a damping of men's Spirits and industries I leave to others to
determine.

He that said.. Plut.
Suet.
This was Jul. Caesar, who when he stood in competition with Q. Catulus for the
Pontificate, and his mother diswaded him from it, told her that ere night he
would be either the greatest man in Rome, or be banished out of it; he would be
first, or none at all. So another time passing by a little town in Savoy, he
told the company that was with him, that he had rather be the chiefest man in
that Town, than the second man in Rome. Of this spirit was Caesar Borgia, as
his motto discovered: Aut Caesar, aut Nihil. The spirits of some men (by some
natural Elevation) are made for Rule; they are too high for the low roofes
they were borne in, and therefore cannot live in the sphere of privacie and
subjection. As Jul. Caesar could brook no superior: so Pompey could bear no
Peer,(...), as Dion speaks of him, being very ambitious of Rule and
pre-eminence, and of grasping all power in his own hands. Plut. in vit. (...).
Arist. Pol. 3. cap. 3.
Themistocles was wont to speak openly, that he was borne for empire and
command; and Jason Pheraeus would say that he could not live a Fool, that is,
a private man; and that he was hungry till he did bear rule, as Aristotle has
recorded of him.

These men did sweat (in a manner) within the narrow bounds that their fathers
had left them, as Alexander did, within the compass of the known world. Juv.
Sat. 10.
Aestuat infaelix angusto limite mundi. They were straightened and uneasy, and
therefore made way with their swords for more room to breathe in.

Are not your goods. This is another Inopinatum, or nice point of the Stoics
mirabilia; That the movables of Fortune are not to be reckoned any part of our
wealth, or among the number of our goods or good things: for the true goods of
a man are (say they) immovable and immutable; nec eripi nec surripi possunt,
can neither be plundered nor sequestered; a man's true wealth is always imbarqued
in the same bottom with himself: for extrinsecall and adventitious goods, non
simpliciter bona nuncupanda, says Apuleius, are not simply good: sed falsa and
adulterina bona, as Seneca styles them, Epist. 71.
things that have the gloss and luster of good (as counterfeit gems of true
ones) but are not so indeed. Helvid. apud Tac. 4 Hist.
Quae extra animum sunt, neque bonis neque malis annumeranda, says another
Scholar of the Stoa: they are neither good nor bad absolutely in themselves,
but relatively, (...), according as they are used and employed; bona unde been
facias, non quae bonos faciunt, instruments to do good, not to make men good:
for what is incident to bad men and never makes them better, and separable from
good men and never leaves them worse, does not deserve the name of good. Cic.
parad. 1
Quidquamne bonum est, quod non eum qui possidet meliorem facit.

I heard you speak. This noble Gentleman bore his banishment with that temper
and aequanimity, as Scipio did his; who upon his departure from the City spoke
in this gentle strain: Sen. Epist. 86.
Vtere sine me beneficio meo, patria: causa tuae libertatis fui, ero and
argumentum; exeo, si plus quam tibi expedit crevi. And that good man Aristides
being sentenced to banishment, said no more but this: I wish my Country no
more harm than that they may never have any more need of Aristides. Rutilius
also took his banishment so contentedly, ut sorti suae gratias egit, and
exilium complexus est, as Seneca tells us. Epist. 86.
And Seneca himself in his consolatory Epistle to his mother Helvia, touching
his own banishment, does not complain (one word) either of his banishers or
banishment, but seems as well contented with Corsica as with Rome.

These brave men, by this moderation and Composedness of mind, did rear them
Trophies out of their misfortunes, Consol. ad Helviam. cap. 13.
and miserias Infularum laco babuere, wore their disasters like holy vestmments
and robes of honor, as Seneca sets them out. They showed that they could not
only do, but suffer bravely: Et facere and pati fortia, hoc Romanum est. L.
Flo.
and that passive fortitude is as glorious as active valor. These men that
(carried so much intrinsique worth) thought they could live as well without
their native Country, as their Country without them, as Diogenes said of his
servant that ran away: Laert. in ^ita.
if my man (says he) can live without me, it were a shame if I could not live
without my man.

The second Letter.
BOrne to Command. It is nature that makes servants and masters says
Aristotle, 1 Polit. c. 1.
she imprints a character of servitude or command on every rational creature;
which impression is either outward or inward, in the body, or mind, or both:
when she designs men for rule she gives them (commonly) more decent limbs and
feature, and formam dignam imperio. (...). Eurip.
A handsome face in time of election is a letter of commendation, whose silent
Rhetoric prevails much with the people, and gains their voices without
canvassing, or any other arguments to persuade. Omnibus Barbaris in majestate
corporis veneratio est, qui magnorum operum non alios magis capaces putant qua^
quos eximia specie natura dignata est, says that elegant Historian Q. Curt. L.
1. Hist.
And therefore mosto nations were wont to choose their Rulers (as the
Jsraelites did Saul) by the eye. So the Indians and Aethiopains did in
Aristotle's time: (...). 7. Polit. cap. 14.
grounding their choice (perhaps) upon this account: that such fair mansions
should have (and usually had) Inhabiters and Guests suitable to their dwelling:
Fair souls should possess fair bodies.

But if it falls out so (as many times it does) that ingenium male habitat, as
Suetonius speaks of Galba, a fair soul is lodged meanly and unsuitably; or
on the contrary, then it is Natures intent (since Reason and understanding are
of the greatest use and moment in humane affairs, and matters of Government)
that those that had the greatest share of these (by Natures bounty) should
bear rule over them that had less, and were minors in understanding: The
fool shall be a servant to the wise of heart, says the wise Solomon. Prove.
11.29.
This was Diogenes his meaning, Laert.
who when he was taken captive by pirates, and was to be sold in the
marketplace, seeing a Gallant pass by, whom he conceived to have more wealth
than wit, spoke to the Pirates, Sirs, sell me (I pray) to yonder Gentleman, for
I believe he wants a master: he did not mean to be his servant (belike) but his
master.

But has a kingdom.. This position flowed from Zeno's school too, and the
Sophies of the Stoa ( quorum(...), whose words sound like wonders and eracles)
That every wise man is not only a freeman but a free-prince, a King: This
doctrine has passed current through many hands and pens. Qui recte faciet, non
qui dominatur, erit Rex, says Ausonius in his monosyllables; He that does well
is a King, though he be not a King: and Rex est qui posuit metus, etc. Says
Seneca, In Thyest.
he that has subdued his fears and perturbations, deserves the Crown; Regnum
and diadema deferes, etc. Lib. 2. Carm. ode 2.
Reach him the Crown and Scepter says Horace, and let him reign, in whom no
base covetousness reigns. But this kingdom (we speak of) is an invisible
one, seated in the mind of man: men's bona regnum possidet: every body natural
is a body politic, or a little commonwealth, where Reason commands in
chief, and the Passions (like dutiful subjects) obey her check and commands:
And though the territories of this little Republic seem but small and narrow,
being bounded within the circuit of man's breast, yet the command and Royalty is
great; imperare sibi maximum est imperium says Seneca, Epist. 113.
he that can command himself may command far and wide, yea farther than He
that wears the Moon for his crest, Turk.
or the other that wears the Sun for his helmet: King of Spain.
Latius regnes avidum domando spiritu^, qua^ si Lybia^ remotis Gadibus jungas,
and uterque Poenus serviat uni. As the Lyrick poet has divinely sung. Car.
lib. 2. od 2.


This doctrine is quadrate to that saying in the holy scripture, Revel. 1.6.
That Christ has made us Kings and Priests unto God his Father: which being
understood in a moral and not a literal sense, (as some fanatic spirits
would understand them, who would be all Kings and Priests) does aptly concur
with this maxim of the Stoics: As I have observd a great harmony and
conformity in many points both of doctrine and discipline, between the
Christians and the Stoics; and if Aristotle was Christ's praecursor in
naturalibus as the Divines of Collen affirmed, I may as boldly affirm and
demonstate it too, that Zeno and his successors were his praecursors in
moralibus; whose teaching did enlighten much the darkness of those times and
dispell their ignorance; creating a glimmering light, like the dawne before the
sunrising, and preparing the way for the Light which enlightneth every man
that comes into the world: though Saint John (that bright Phosphorus) did it
in a higher degree and measure, yet these had a share in it, and seasoned their
minds with previous dispositions to receive the lively Oracles of Christ and
his Preachers.

Fancied an impossibility.. This is another placitum or haeresie of the same
school: that as no outward misfortunes can make any wound or bruise in the
mind of a wise man: so neither can bodily pains make him miserable, or bereave
him of inward joy and felicity: si uratur sapiens, si crucietur in Phalaridis
tauro, dicet, quam suave est hoc? Cic. 2. Tusc. qu. the inward peace and
contentment of mind, which he enjoyes, does stupifie the sharpest torments, and
rebate the edge and sense of them. Invictus ex alto dolores suor spectat, as
our Seneca tells us, Epist. 85.
he looks with an undaunted spirit upon his own torments and tormenters, as
though he were a spectator and not a spectacle; and as though his body did not
belong unto him, or that were not his own that he carried about him. Tunde
Anaxarchi follem, etc. so Anaxarchus jeered him that belabourd himself in
tormenting his body.

Though our noble Author seems not to approve of this Paradox, concluding it
under an impossibility, yet the great Saint Basil, does not stick to commend
it: Laudo animi dexteritatem (says he Epist. 180.
) and praestantiam in Stoicis, qui nihil little quae extra hominem sunt a
felicitate impedire dicunt: sed felicem eum esse qui virtutis studio incumbit,
licet in Phalaridis tauro cremetur. And the ready willingness of the primitive
Christians to be Martyrs, and their wonderful constancy and cheerfulness
under those witty and exquisit torments that were inflicted on them, may acquit
this doctrine of the Stoics both from arrogancy, and from a seeming
impossibility.

Palinures.. Palinurus was ship-master or Pilot to Aeneas in his Navigations
from Troy to Italy: who (one night) while he was viewing the stars and the
sky from the deck of a ship, was by a strong gust of wind thrown overboard,
and -- Dum sydera servat,
Exciderat puppi mediis effusus in undis.
Vir. Aen. 6.

These Palinures in the Text are some prudent and experienced Statesmen and
Pilots, that have sat at the sternes of Commonwealths; whom the breath of
the people (who are as inconstant as the wind) has in some paroxisme and acute
fit of anger or jelousie, which they are frequently subject unto, many times
cast overboard, even such as have steered and guided them safe in all their
courses through many Civil tempests; and whom they (once) esteemed their
Dioscuri and Tutelar gods; so fickle and uncertain a tenure, is the love of the
vulgus -- neutrum modo, mas modo vulgus. There is no Euripus so lunatic and
unquiet, and so full of reciprocations and countertydes; or so suddenly changed
from a calm to a tempest as the populace; Nullum fretum tam procellosum, and
tantos ciet fluctus quantos multitudo motus habet says Quint. Curtius, lib 10.

The people is (...) as Plutarch characters them, De Repub. gerenda
a suspicious, humorsome and Skittish beast, that is often restif, and does
cast off his rider: and a man may as soon shape a coat for the changeable
Moon, as make any Government or Governors to please them long.

FINIS.

