THE Affliction and Deliverance OF THE SAINTS: OR, The whole book of Job
composed into English Heroical Verse Metaphrastically.

By Thomas Manley Iun. Esquire

Psalm. 34.19. Many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers
them out of all.

Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn
thy Statutes.

LONDON, Printed by W.H. for John Tey, at the White-Lion in the Strande near
the New Exchange, 1652.

To the Honorable Thomas Challoner Esquire A Member of the Parliament of England:
And one of the Right Honorable, the Council of State.
Honored Sir,
It is not ambition but duty which makes me thus bold to entitle you Jobs
Patron, your Charity being so great to all who oppressed, make the arms of
your virtue and humanity their Sanctuary. It is your honor to be great, your
happiness to be good: by the one you are made famous, by the other you will be
immortal.

The troubles of the Times are so great, and all men by them such sufferers;
that England had need to be a Nation of Jobs, that with patience they may run
through the extremities which daily begin to coast us. And truly, if we would
make Jobs example our Precept, it is to be believed we should endure our
sufferings with more Christian-like alacrity, and have a more Saint-like
deliverance our of all our troubles.

There are many material points in the History which are peculiarly worth our
observation: For first, we find him possessor of as much riches as his heart
could wish, and immediately by Satan's malice robbed of all. Oh never let
prosperity make us so secure, as to think our selves immovable; for then is
danger greatest, when we suppose our selves safest: for quos perdere vult
Iupipiter, hos dementat; an overgreat security is an infallible sign of
ruin. If we stand, let us take heed lest we fall; again, he is not only
afflicted outwardly in body, but is tormented inwardly in his mind by the
temptations of his Wife, and his other friends who came to visit him; wherein
we may see the subtlety of that malicious enemy of mankind, who makes even our
dearest friends his instruments to drive us to despair: This shall suffice of
much more which might be said, for my work is an Epistle, not a Comment.

Therefore not to interpo se in your more serious affairs; if your Honor will
daine out of your innate benignity to stoop to the perusal of this Metaphrase
at your times of leisure, and grace it with your Patronage, I shall then rest
assured that all hazards are past, and that it will go current through the wits
of this our too curious and censorious Age, though clothed in a dress so
mean as it is.

However, my hopes persuade me, that your perfect maturity will wink at the
faults of my immature Youth, and that you will not be so curious to mark every
failing, lest my blossoms, being nipped in their spring, for ever lose their
hope of ripening; In confidence whereof I shall hereafter lay no more claim to
this Book, but wholly resign it into your hands, and together with it my
self, to whom it has been a laborious recreation: but if it attain the
honor of your test, I shall triumph in the happy success of my presumptuous
ambition; the reward so much exceeding the proportion of my mean labors, that
I have no way sufficient to express my gratitude, but in imitating those
birds, who having nothing else, brought their feathers to Apollo's Temple to
adorn it: here are my endeavors; And in things we would, if in our power, the
Will must be taken for the deed; In hopes whereof I assume the confidence to
subscribe my self,

Sir, Your Honors in all humility and service to be commanded, T.M. Jun.
West. Oct. 29. 1651.
To the Reader.
AFfliction is the only true touchstone of Christianity, driving one to lay
hold on God by faith in hope of comfort; which consideration made me pitch on
Job, in whom may be found the very pattern of Christian patience, my aim
being to make his example our pattern, we living in times wherein we know not
how soon we may be reduced to Jobs condition.

I know not how pleasing things of this nature may be, but their profit I am
sure is very great; which if the Reader find according to my desire, I shall
think my labors very well satisfied.

The reason of my Metaphrasticall Translation was, that I would not, as near
as I could, deviate from the very Letter of the Text, which I have as little as
possible; yet where the sense was dark, comparing sever all Translations
together, and all with the original, I made them easy to the most illiterate
understanding: conceiving it better than a Paraphrase, they often losing, or at
least darkening half the sense in their circumlocations, whereas this wholly
keeps the sense, and avoids its prolixity.

Yet though my endeavors be never so Christian-like, I expect not to please
all, even assured to find the envious jerks of some malicious tongues, it being
impossible to do any thing in this age with all men's approbation.

All I desire of thee (Reader) is this, that thou would bring a good will and
cheerful disposition, void of all malicious envy, which at this day is
commonly practiced of most men (who like severe censurers) busy themselves
rather in seeking what to bite at, and to reprehend in other men's works, then
to commend what is good, or assay to make them better, thereby verifying that
old Greek Proverb, (...), it is easier to play Momus then the Mimicke, to
carpe than to imitate; all I shall say to such is this, Zoile, ne carpas
nostra, sed ede tua.

Thy friend T.M. Jun.
West. Oct. 30. 1651.
JOB.
Chapter the first.
Hz, for zeal whose fame
Merits beyond an equal, Job by name:
Perfect and upright, such the world never knew,
Who feared God, and evil did eschew.

The fruitful offspring of his lively youth.

Three thousand Camels, and seven thousand sheep;
Five hundred yoke of Oxen, both for store
And work; Shee-asses too as many more,
And a great household: So that as the best,
He also was the greatest of the East.

Their Sisters to them to partake of all.

Job sent and cleans'd them, when he found them out
And in the morning early up he rose,
And offered off^ings as their number was;
Lest (said he) they have sinned, and should curse
God in their hearts, this was Jobs constant course.

Before the Lord; Satan came also there.

Whence come thou? whence is this freedom strange?
He answer straight, from walking in the earth
Where acting mischiefs is my only mirth.

Observed in Job my servant any crime?
Do but consider, and thou wilt never find
His equal in the world, so pure in mind:
Eschewing evil, fearing God, upright,
In goodness constant, with a pure delight.

Does Job, replies he, serve the Lord for naught?

Rampar'd his house and kept his Cattle sound?
Blessings flow daily on the work of's hand,
His stock too is increased in the Land.

Touch all be has, diminish but his store:
And if he do not curse thee to thy face,
Upon me light worse suffering and disgrace.

Satan this to thy malice open lies;
Do with them what thou will, thou have power so far,
Only from him himself thine hand I bar.
His power is scarce granted, when, lo, he
Qnick from the presence of the Lord does flee.

In the eldest brothers house to drink and eat.

The sad beginning of his crosse-grown Fate;
While some (said he) were with the Oxen plowing,
The Asses feeding, other servants sowing,
Sabaeans' came and took
The Herds away, nor did their fury brook
To spare the Servants lives, them all they slew,
And I alone escaped the news to show.

As sad a story, fire from heaven has swept
Away the Sheep and servants (Oh sad fate!)
And I alone came off this to relate.

How three picked bands of armed Caldeans bold
Fell on the Camels, taking them away,
Yea and the Servants with the sword did slay;
I only scaping from among the rest,
The news of this misfortune to attest.

Sad news fit only for o'rflowing eyes:
Thy sons and daughters as they lately were
At their loved eldest brothers making cheer,

On the houses corners, and it overthrow:
The sudden ruin killed the young men all,
And I alone escaped from the fall.
Job arose, not able more to bear,
He rent his robe, and tore his beard and hair:
But yet in midst of this extremest grief,
He only seeks to God for some relief;
Just like an humble child he kissed his rod,
He cries and worships to his angry God.

I must return, naked shall go again:
The Lord did give, and taken has the same,
Blessed and honored be his holy Name.
Job did no offense commit,
Nor was so foolish to charge God with it.
CHAP. II.

Themselves present, who is the great three-one;
The all-daring Foe, brazing his hateful face,
Among them also came and took a place.

Has brought thee hither Satan? or from whence?
He soon replies, I have the world o'r-run,
The Earths vast Globe surrounding with the Sun,
Gilding with specious shows my deadliest baits,
That win poor souls from thee by their deceits.

Or upright as my servant Job has been?
All vice abhorring with a deadly hate,
Helping poor souls pressed with a direful fate,
Keeping my Statutes with devout est zeal,
Earth never yet brought forth his Parallel.
Experience tells us the sweet Camomile
The more it is trodden will the better smell:
With the same zeal lo he still keeps my Laws,
Though thou would have me kill him without cause.

All his possessions to his skin to live.

Thine arm, inflicting pains from head to heel,
He will with raylings thy high power disgrace,
And with repining curse thee to thy face.

Torment him as thou will, but let him live.
Job all over
With boiles, his body is but all one sore.

To scrape with pieces of a broken pot
His boile-inflicted body, in the ashes
Enduring meekly these soule-trying lashes.

His wife comes to him, thus in soul oppressed;
With sharp rebukings, says she, do thou still
Keep thine uprightness though thou bear this ill?
Away with this preciseness, will thou lie
With patience under this? curse God and die.

Thouspeak'st as foolish women use to speak:
Shall we take blessings from the hand of God,
And shall we not with patience bear his rod?
With lowliness submitting to the Lord:
In all this Job uttered no sinful word.
Jobs three friends heard of his changed estate,
By Satan's malice and inveterate hate:
With grief they trembling as 'twere in amaze,
Each by appointment came from his own place,
With sweetest comforts to revive his soul,
And with their grief his misery condole:
Bildad the Shuhite, Zophar from Naamah came
With Eliphaz the Temanite by name.

With more impatience for it look and tend:
So these three friends look ere they yet draw nigh,
The object of their pity to espy;
But when they see, yet know him not, they weep
With bitter lamentations, not can keep
Longer their tears, as messengers they flow,
Their height of love and pity both to show;
They rent their robes, and sprinkled on their heads
Dust toward heaven; so them their sorrow leads.

Seven days and nights, before that any found
One word to speak of; for they saw his grief
Was very great, almost beyond relief.
CHAP. III.
Job, as one forlorn,
In speaking cursed the day when he was borne?

In very anguish of his heart he cries:

For ever quite perish from off the earth;
And let that night be in oblivion put,
Wherein 'twas said, there is a man-child got.

Let not the Lord regard it, nor the light
Afford it but one comfortable ray,
Whereby it may be known to be a day.

Yea, let death bringing darkness it distaine.
Let clouds dwell on it, let it fearful be,
As a most fatal day of misery.

Let it not joined be among the days:
Nor come among the Months, to make them less,
Happy by its most omious access.

Of joy be heard therein, or pleasing voice.

Renew, on it lay their most heavy curse.

Be darkened through the lowrings of the Skies.
Let it expect the light, but none enjoy;
Nor let it see the dawning of the day.

Enclose my body, and make it my tomb;
But clothing my frail flesh with life, me brought
Of this sad cup to drink a deadly draught.

As Soon as I was born did I not die?

Or why for nurture did I suck the breast?

I had been quiet, lying void of breath:

I had enjoyed a quiet resting place;
Whose living works to memorise their fame,
To desert places gave a lasting name.

Were filled with silver and refined Ore.

Or as poor Infants which no light have seen.

With irksome labor have a welcome rest.

No voice of the oppressor do they hear.

The abused servant's from his Master free.

Whose soul is lost in miseries long night?
Or why to them the torment of a life,
Whose souls are bitter through oppressing grief?

Then hidden treasures, and the Earths whole store.

When they the quiet of the grave can find.

Is as a Labyrinth, leading him astray:
Whom God as with an hedge has compas'd round,
That to come out of's woe, no way is found?

I am perplexed that I cannot eat.
My roarings are so loud, all may them hear;
Like water poured out so flow my tears.

I ever dreaded this my sudden fall.
Which now is come with such a deadly stroke,
As it to pieces all my bones has broke.

Yet trouble came, which has my soul oppressed.
CHAP. IV.
Job: the Temanite began.

Will thou be angry? who can patience have
By foolish ^ilence thus to let thee rave?

To superstitious Vanities a Bar.
Thou art the same, whose comfort and relief,
Gave strength and joy to souls oppressed with grief.

So were the words which thou did daily speak:
Weak knees even bowing under burdens great,
To thee for strengthening comforts did retreat.

Help with divinest comforts and relief.
But thou do faint, now grief does thee assail,
Thou art afflicted, and thy heart does fail.

Thy upright dealings and thy patience?

If ere the innocent you falling find.
Or in your long experience can you say,
The upright dealer ever did decay.

Plowing and sowing evil, reap the same.

They are consumed by the Almighties breath.

The teeth of fiercest Lions whelps are broke.

And the stout Lions whelps abroad do stray.

Some little of it formerly did hear.

Poor mortals hood-winked in a veil of sleep.
First entered thoughts, then visions overspred
With displaid banners, my sleep-drowned head.

Such an impression, all my bones did shake.

Which frighted me into so great a maze;
A dreadful horror in me I did feel,
My hair stood upright, all my blood was steel.

At least discern its form, what it might be.
An Image did appear before mine eyes,
When lo, thus speaking, I did hear a voice;

More just then the All-judging Deity?
Or shall frail flesh esteem it self more pure
Then the All-good? Can he such thoughts endure?

No true faiths luster shining in their mind:
Nay the Angels were impure, whom once he dight
With his own glorious livery of light.

Whose hope consists in a house of clay?
Whose chief foundations but in dust are laid,
Which are before the moth again destroyed?

They once regarded with one moan or tear.

Even without wisdom as the fools they dye.
CHAP. V.

That will return an answer to thy mind.
Or will thou turn to any Saint? no Age
Can garb a pattern fitting to thy rage.

And wrathful envy kills the void of wit.

Yet at him never did repine or grutch.
I cursed his dwelling, for I knew that God
Had destined him to his destroying rod.

Of fatal danger to attend them here.
By public judgment they are condemned to dye,
And without help or pity crushed lie.

Yea they shall take it from among the thorns:
And who are thirsty shall their drowth so slake,
For drink their substance yet remaining take.

Nor yet affliction from the ground does grow:

So do afflictions daily on him press;
He Is borne to travel, and in grief to dye,
As sparks are upwards from the coals to fly.

And unto God would I commit my cause;

And wonderful, whose number none can scan.

To fill the earth with fruits, the fields with grain.

Mourners from sorrow to Halcyon days.

But their devices he does disappoint;
TO effect their purpose though they beat their brain,
Yet still they find their enterprises vain.

And he their foolish wisdom countermines.
He makes their plots be their own catching-baite,
Whereby they others thought t'infatuate:
But headlong counsels ever do attend
The foolish, who to vice their courses bend.

And grope at noone as in the darkest night.

And from their tongue, whose mouth's an open grave;
And from oppressors violence, whose law
Is only lucre without shame or aw.

Her growing bud and vice her mouth shall stop.

(He chasteneth most that Son he best affects)
When he by trialls shall thy soul refine,
Be not cast down, nor at his rod repine.

He makes sore, and does assuage the pain.

Yea, and in seven he will maintain thee free.

Nor shall the sword of war once touch thy head.

Nor coming ruin thee to terror urge.

Nor shall the fiercest beast thy rest annoy.

The beasts against thee enmity shall cease:

With sure foundations, and eternal rest:
Thine habitations thou with joy may see,
Yet shall at crosses not offended be.

Thy seed too shall increase as does the grass.

In season gathered comes into the Barn.

Then do thou know and hear it for thy good.
CHAP. VI.
Job; Oh that my grief were weighed,


That I want words convenient to my woe.

Whose poison drinks my spirit, and flesh tear:
And which is worst, my conscience does me fright,
The terrors of the Lord against me fight.

Or do the Oxen low when they have hay?

Without tast-giving salt unsavory meat?
Or in the whites of eggs can any find
A taste so good to satisfy his mind?

Were, as are sorrows, my continual meat.

And that the Lord would give what I require:

And cut me off from living in the Land.

Harden my self in sorrow, though he should
Dash me to pieces, for I still have shown
And not denied the words of the Holy One.

Or length of days why should I seek to assure?

Of brazen hardness is my flesh and bones?

In me? And Wisdom driven is away?

And friendly help to such as sigh and groan.
Now friends afflictions cannot draw one tear.
Of the almighty men have left the fear.


But when rain gives enough, are overflown,
So have my friends deceitful been each one.
And as the stream of Brooks they pass away,
Giving nor help, nor comfort by their stay.

Then dry with heat, and are consumed so,

They vanish, losing both their name and force.
Tema, look the now-lost flood,
And those of Sheba, seek the Watery rode.

They came and sought, but Water find they none.

And fear, or hope to give me, or relief.

Or of your substance a reward desire?

Or from the hand of Tyrants set me free?

Wherein I erred, my error I le forgo.

For in me what offense can you reprove?

With desperate speeches fault, which are as wind?

And dig a pit for your distresled friend.

And if I lie, it is evident to you.

Return and see my righteousness herein.

Cannot my taste discover things perverse?
CHAP. VII.

By Heavens decree to man upon the Earth?
Are not his days as those of hirelings are,
Who for their wages must no labor spare.

Some cooling shade whereto he may retire.
And as an hireling daily does attend
For the reward due when his work has end:

And nights returning to renew my pain.

And lowering night forsake the darkened skies.
And I am full of tossings to and fro
Unto the dawning of the day through woe.

With Worms and dust, no case is to be had.
My skin is broken and in such a plight,
That it is a loathsome eye fore to the sight.

And without hope are spent, or shortest stays.

I shall no more see good, or pleasure taste.

Thy eyes are on me, and I am no more.

Yet when disgorg'd of moisture, fade away;
So he that goes to'th' quiet of the grave,
No more the pleasures of this life shall have.

Nor to the place of his abode return.

I will in anguish of my spirit speak.
My catalogue of woes I will unroule,
In bitterness of my perplexed soul.

That thus with watches thou besetst me round?

My couch shall ease my plaints and me relieve.

And fearful visions all my solace are.

Rather then draw in my so hateful breath.

Let me alone, my days are all but vain.

And that upon him thou thine heart should set?

And moment-tryals tell him, not forlorn?

Till I my spittle may but swallow down.

My passed sins, what shall I do to thee?
Why have thou as thy mark set me vile else,
So that I am a burden to my self?

And take away my sin from out thy sight?
I shall sleep hidden then within the ground,
And if thou seek me I shall not be found.
CHAP. VIII.
Bildad speaking did this answer make;

And shall we still thy vainer speeches find,
As are the quick-gone puffes of mighty wind?

Or does perverted justice God abide?

And he their trespass has with death repaid.

Thy prayers up to him, and his will attend.

Would now awake, to help and comfort thee;
And with continued happiness would bless,
The habitation of thy righteousness.

Should crown thy latter end with great increase.

Of our Forefathers, search the former Age.

Draws but from yesterday its longest date:
We are unskilful, nothing know, alas!
Our days on earth do as a shadow pass.)

Things secret to thee from their knowing heart?

Or flags where water does not use to flow?

It before other herbs we withered see.

And hypocrites false hope their joy shall let.

Shall be swept down as spiders web or dust.

But it shall fall and not endure the test.
Fast he shall hold it as a guard secure,
But it shall fail his hope and not endure.

And in his Garden shoots forth his bough.

And in the place of stones appears his shoots.

Then none shall know that ever there it was.

And others shall grow there another day.

Nor help the wicked in their sad annoy.

And make thy lips rejoice to see his truth.

Shame shall their clothing be, and woe their mate.
And who their hands with vicious folly stain,
Their dwelling places never shall remain.
CHAP. IX.
Job, I know that this is sure,


He cannot answer of a thousand one;

And powerful in strength, rending the skies:
Who e're has prosper'd, or with wealth been blessed,
Which has against the Lord hardened his breast?

And in his anger does them overthrow.

So that the air its shaking pillars beat.

And seals up the Stars within the Skies.

And on the seas impetuous billows tread.
Arcturus and Orion make,
And Pleiades from him their being take:
The chambers of the South his power own,
With both the torrid and the frigid Zone.

And wonders works, whose number none can scan.

Yet do I neither him perceive or see.

Who shall control him, or but say him nay?

The proudest helps stoop under him with aw.

My words with him an argument to hold?

(For it is presumption such a thing to dare)
I such rash foolish courses would not take,
But supplication to my Judge would make.

And to my calling he had straight replied,
Yet would I not my tried faith once cheer
With hopes that to me he had bent an ear.

And multiplies without a cause my wounds.

But fills my soul with bitterness of death.

Lo, he is strong; a bow of steel he will break.
Or if of judgment, who shall ever dare
To bring me ^o a pleading at the bar?

My condemnation my own words should be;
If I should think perfect or just to seem,
He me perverse and wicked would esteem.

Would I not seem so; I Would my life despise.

He does the wicked and the good destroy.

He Will laugh at trial of the innocent.

In it the Scepter and Dominion sway;
The faces of the Judges he does hide,
They cannot justice see, but go aside:
Or if not so, where then, or who is he,
That can a reason show why these things be?

They all are vanished, and no good do see.

Or as an Eagle hasting to the prey.

Leave off my mournings, and some comfort take:

Knowing thou will not innocent me hold.

Thus do I labor, lingering in my pain?

And make my hands most clean from sinful trash:

I shall appear, yea my clothes me defile,

Like me, vile Creature, who in sin am min'd;
That if in judgment we together come,
Should I him answer? nay, I should be dumb.

On's both to lay his hand and intervene.

Let not his fear my soul thus terrify.

But since it it is not so, I hold me still.
CHAP. X.

I my complaint upon my self to leave;
My catalogue of Woes I will unroule,
And speak in anguish of my troubled soul.

Wherefore it is with me thou strivest so.

Without a cause, and heighten my dirtress?
Or without pity that thou should despise
Thine handiwork? is that thy wonted guise?
Or will thou let thy shining favor crown
Perverse men's counsels, and yet cast me down?

As erring mortals, who unknowing be?

Or are thy years denoted in a span?

And of my sin a view so narrow take.

Restrained from sinning by my misery.
Thou also know, none can so mighty be,
Who may out of thine hand deliver me.

Yet thou destroy'st me and my life do take.

That thou have made me as the brittle clay;
And will thou scourge me in thy wrath with pain,
And into dust convert my flesh again?

And into curds converted me as cheese?

And all my joints and bones and sinews made.

Thy providence my spirit did relieve.

That this is with thee, know I for my part.

And wilt not hold me guiltless of my sin.

If I be righteous in the worlds conceit,
Yet dare I will not to lift up my head.
Both of confusion I am full and dread.
See thou therefore my misery and grief,
And of thy mercy send me some relief.

With the uprising Sun; thou do pursue
Me as a faging Lion, and again,
Show thy self wondrous to prolong my pain.

And wilt not let thine indignation cease.
I am unsettled, yea and full of change,
Sorrows against me do an army range.

Would I had di'd, or it had been my tomb;
And that no mortal ever had me seen,
That it might not be said, I once had been.

And from the womb been carried to the grave.

That I by comforts may assuage my moan,

Unto a land of gloomy misery.

Or like that darkness which did Egypt fright:
And of the shadow of most dreadful death,
Whose light is darkness, and no order has.
CHAP. XI.
Naamathite,

Tax us of folly, and you upright be;
But words their speaker cannot justify.

Or thy devices make men hold their peace?
And when thou mockest, do thou think no man
Should for thy floutings make thee blush with shame?

And I my cleanness in thine eyes assure?

And now at length his long-kept silence break.

Of sacred wisdom, which his treasures keep,
That they are double to that ford of thine,
From which thou boastest to be so divine:
Then would thou know thy sins did merit far,
More heavy plagues then laid upon thee are.

Presume on such a thought as God to find?
Or can thou tread the Dedalaean maze
Of his perfection in thy span of days?

Deeper then lowest hell, what can thou know?

And broader then the world-surrounding sea.

Who can him let his purpose to fulfill?

Will not he then give it his guerdon due?

Yea, he is borne like a wild Asses colt.

And stretch out hands which purified are;

And let it not dwell in thy house of clay:

And thou shall stand and no more terror see.

And it remember as a bypast Flood.

And shine as bright as does the morning Sun,

And thou in safety shall thy self immure.

Yea many thee shall call their suits to hear.

They shall not escape, terror shall them assail:
Yea all their hopes shall be cut off by death,
And fly away as does a puff of breath.
CHAP. XII.
Job; yea, you the people are,

No doubt but you do understand alone,
And wisdom too shall dye when you are gone.

As well as you, I Will never give the hand
To the most selfe-conceited among you:
For who such things as these are does not know?

Upon my God, who answers me in all;
The wicked Atheist laugheth him to scorn,
Whose mind pure justice does with grace adorn.

Is as a Lamp scorned by one at ease.

Who to provoke the Lord themselves enure.

The fowls shall teach thee from amids the air:

The very fishes will the same thing do.

That God does this with mighty power indu'd;

And every living soul comes from his hand?

Does not the palate taste before it eat?

With long life understanding mounts the Stage.

He counsel has, and understanding both:

He shuts up, and who can open then?

He sends them out, and o'r the world they fly.

Both the deceiver and deceived are his.

And in their folly does the Judges foil.

And round about their loins a girdle brings.

The mighty ones in an Abyss of woe.

And from the aged understanding stay.

And brings the strength of the most mighty down.

And brings the very shade of death to light,

Now he will enlarge, anon he will make them less.

And makes their hearts in midst of mirth to fail;
Making them wander in a desert maze,
Where neither paths are, nor frequented ways.

He makes them stagger like a drunken man.
CHAP. XIII.

The same did daily understand and hear:

I am no whit inferior unto you.

With God to speak, and reason I desire.

Ye are Physicians all of no esteem.

More than this babbling: Oh that 'twould be so.

And to my pleadings give attentive ear.

And talk deceit of him with confidence.

Think you he wants your strength his part to take?

As for a man, lies for him will you make?

If ye men's persons do accept for gain.

Shall not his Anger make you quail with dread?

Your bodies liken bodies too of clay.

That I may speak, let come what will or may.

And put my life in peril every hour?

But mine own ways I will maintain and must.

And hypocrites before him sha'n't appear.

Attend my speech with an attentive ear.

And know I shall be justified by it.

Be forced now to silence, I shall dye.

Then I my self from thee will never hide.

Let not thy fear my soul thus terrify.

Or let me speak, and answer thou to me.

My past transgressions, and my sins forgo.

Me for thine enemy professed and bold?

Or to pursue dry stubble do thou mind?

My sins of youth now plagues upon me brings.

Thou narrowly observest all the day:
My heels thou markest and my feet epsy;
My steps thou notest if they tread awry.

As a moth-eaten garment does decay.
CHAP. XIV.

Though short of days, yet full of troublous strife.

But cropped before the time of ripenes comes.
And as a shadow he does fly away,
Either without continuance or stay.

And into judgment bring me with thee?

Out of an unclean mass what man can bring,

The number of his months and bounds do know?

Till as an hireling he make up his day.

Although cut down, that it will sprout again;
And that its tender branch yet will not cease,
But budding first, further at length increase.

And in the earth its stock decayed be found;

And like a plant, green boughs afresh shoot out.

He gives up the Ghost, and where is he?

And so the flood does dry up and decay;

Until the heavens no more be, or remain:
They shall not waken, but shall silence keep,
Nor shall they raised be out of their sleep.

Wherein to hide me till thy wrath to pass:
And that thou would appoint a time wherein
Thou would think on me, and forgive my sin.

Shall he yet live again and draw his breath?
The days of my appointed time I Will wait,
Until my change my pains abreviate.

Thou in thy workmanship wilt pleasure take.

Do thou not watch over my acted fault?

And my transgression sewed up thou have.

And from his place the rock removed is:

Thou spoilest, and man's hope do overthrow.

His countenance thou changest, and he is done.

They are dejected, but he knows it not.

And's soul within him shall for anguish roar.
CHAP. XV.
Eliphaz: Should wise men folly mind,


His arguing reasons, or with speeches vain?

And do restrain before the Lord thy prayer.

And thou the tongue do of the crafty use.

Yea, thine own lips against thee testify.

You a beginning, ere the hills were made?

Wisdom and policy to thine own brain?

Our knowledge? or wherein us can thou teach?

Yea much more aged then thy fathers were.

Is there with thee one secret thing at all?

Or whereat do thou wink with wicked eye?

And let'st such words out of thy mouth proceed.

And think themselves from wickedness to wean?
Or he that is of a woman born that he
Himself so righteous should esteem to be?

Yea and the heavens unclean are in his sight:

Who does like water drink transgression.

Only what I have seen I will declare.

And did not from their children it withold.

No strangers past among them in the Land.

And yet of years the number cannot gain.

In his most prosperous time shall on him flow.

The sword waits for him, yet he does not mourn.

He knows the day of darkness is at hand.

And foil him, as a King prepared for fight.

Against the Al-mighty he himself does band.

On his defensive bucklers bosses thick;

And makes fat collops on his flanks and side.

And in the houses where none habitate:
In places which so full of ruins are,
That nothing but deformed heaps appear.

Nor shall his gathered substance long continue:
Neither shall he prolong upon the earth,
Its small perfection, or for gain or mirth.

Shall dry up his branches, and burn up his name;
And by the breath which from Gods mouth does fly,
He shall consume, and go away, and die.

For vanity shall them reward again.

And his now-dying branch shall not be seen.

And cast his flower as the Olive tree.

And fire the place of brib'ries shall deface.

Their belly also does prepare deceit.
CHAP. XVI.
Job: I have heard many such like things,


Art thou emboldned, that thou art so high?

Were in my poor souls place, I could a roll
Of words heap up against you: and in stead
Of giving comfort, at you shake my head.

And with my moving lips assuage your grief.

And though I do forbear, I have no ease.

And my companions desolate has laid.

Which are against me in a witness place;
My leanness in me, through my grief and fear,
Even to my very face does witness bear.

And teeth he sharpning, does my hurt devise.

My cheek; to meet against me they delight.

And turned me over into wicked hands.

And by the neck, me, wretched me has took.
And has my afflicted body even slain.
And set me as the mark whereat he will aim.

Yet does regard nor my complaint nor prayer,
His Archers have about beset me round,
He powers out my gall upon the ground.

He runs upon me like a Giant fierce.

And have defiled mine honor in the dust.

And on my eyelids is the shade of death.

Aso my prayer before the Lord is pure.

My doleful cryings in thee no place get.

And my best record is above the sky.

But yet mine eye pour out to God my tears.

As for his friend another may at need.

The way whereby I shall return no more.
CHAP. XVII.

And for the ready graves I am a prey.

Too long within their provocations lie.

Who is he that with me his hands will strike?

Thou shall therefore them to honor bring.

His childrens eyes shall fail for such his wrong.

And as a tabret I aforetime was.

And all my members as a shade are vain.

And the innocent shall vex the hypocrite.

He that has cleansed hands shall stronger grow.

For I one wiseman cannot find with you.

The very thoughts within my heart are flown.

The light is short, darkness it drives away.

And in the darkness I my bed have laid.

Thou art my father: to the silly Worm,
Thou art my mother, and my sister too,
Whose weak simplicity my frailty show.

Who shall it see, and know his drift and scope?

Our rest together in the quiet grave.
CHAP. XVIII.
Bildad; see you make


And as most vile, reputed in thy sight?

For thee or rocks removed be, or cleft?

The sparkles of their fire shall dying lie.

His lamp shall fail too with his perished name.

And his own counsel make him fall and quail.

And walks on (laid to catch himself) a snare.

And against him the robber shall prevail.

And spread a trap to take him in the way.

And drive him to a hasty flight for fear.

Naught but destruction shall to him betide.

The firstborn of grim death shall eat his strength.

And it shall bring him to the King of Dread

It Is none of his; Brimstone shall on it light.

Yea and his branch above shall cease to grow.

Shall be no more remembered on the earth.

And driven into darkness out of light.

Nor ought remaining in his house to stand.

At this his day, then those who went before.

This is the place of them who know not God.
CHAP. XIX.
Job: How long will ye thus vex my foul,


Yet of your strangeness to me have no shame.

Mine error yet remains with my self.

And my reproach against me surely plead;

And has my feet encompas'd with his net.

I cry aloud, but judgment don't appear.

And he has set sad darkness in my place.

On me; He takes the Crown from off my head.

My long-lived hope has moved like a tree.

And he accounts me as his daring foe.

They do encamp about my dwelling place.

And my acquaintance will not know my change.

Forget my passed love for my amends.

I am an alient in my maidens sight:

And I entreated with my mouth my slave.

Though I did beg for mine own childrens sake.

They speak against me, when I did arise.

They whom I loved, do against me turn.

I am consumed with this cruel lash.

Has scourged me sorely with a heavy rod.

And are not sated with my fleshes fill?

That they were printed in the book of fame.

And laid in the Rock for ever to remain.

(Who just rewards to his true servants gives)
And at the latter day that he shall stand,
The wicked to condemn and judge the Land:

Yet in my flesh I shall see God with joy;

And mine eyes, not another, shall behold.
Although my reins consumed be with grief,
Within my bosom without least relief.

Seeing the chiefest matter's found in me.

That ye may know, a judgement's there upright.
CHAP. XX.
Zophar said: My thoughts no time will wast,


Which makes my spirit thus an answer broach.

From God received a created birth.

Yet in a minute grief will him annoy;
And the dissemblers mirth shall only last
A moment, and then perish like a blast.

And though his head aspire unto the clouds;

Which once have seen him, where is he? shall say.

And none shall find where such an one could be.
And as a sudden motion frights a way,
A mighty vision: so is his decay.

Nor in his dwelling shall he henceforth be.

And his own hands their taken goods restore.

For they shall lie down with him in the dust.

And though his tongue taste it as pleasant meat.

But keep it still both in his mouth and heart:

It as the gall of Aspes shall in him burn.

Has swallowed riches with a greedy maw:
But he shall them disgorge, though never so stout,
For from his belly God shall bring them out.

The vipers tongue him in the grave shall clasp.

That do with honey and with butter flow.

Of all his passed labors, and to heap
Rest to himself, he shall it not digest,
But shall restore thereof the very best.
As is his substance shall his payment be,
Yet to rejoice therein none may him see.

And after leave the poor in their distress;
Because by wrongful force he took away,
His neighbors house, his lively hood and stay,

That which he most desires he shall not save.

None therefore shall his wicked goods expect.

Of his possessions, he shall be in straight:
The wicked shall oppress him with their force;
And every hand shall vex him in their course.

To taste, God quickly him from the earth shall root;
The fury of his wrath shall on him rain
While he is eating, and does doubt no pain.

Shall strike him through, following his heel.

The glistring sword does come out of his gall.

Within his dwelling ever shall be bad.
A fire not blown shall him of life bereave,
And in his place quick ruin none shall leave.

And the earth against him shall a rebel grow.

Shall in the day of wrath fly thence apace.

Which as a living's given them by God.
CHAP. XXI.
Job replied: my speeches now attend,


If ye think good, ye may proceed to mock.

Should not my soul be troubled, yea, and cry?

Andon your mouth so silenced lay your hand.

My Flesh does tremble, and my hair does stare.

And aged grow through long continued health?

And in their sight their settled offspring thrives.

Or cross approaching once their fearelesse head.

Their Cowes bring forth no dead abortive young.

Who mirthfull meetings for their lusts do keep.

In measures tripping to the Organ-pipe.

No dread, till death does throw them quick in grave.

Depart, we have no will to know thy ways.

Have we to addict our service to his laws.
Suppose, we pray to this so talked a King,
What profit would our vain spent hours bring?

'Twas only lent by God, and not their own.
If so, their riches are a snare: O then,
Preserve me from the blisses of such men.

Their credit dying like a candles snuff.
God in his wrath will them divide and raze,
The wicked shall not live out half their days.

Like chafe by stormy blasts driven, so they flee.

He on their children often inflicts his rod.
This he shall know, this he shall plainly see,
When he to merit shall rewarded be.

And of Gods wrath shall drink the very gall.

Has he in's house, or late relinquish't treasure?

His acts as ill, who judges from above?

Dies, even choked with too much wealth and ease;

Which cares and crosses never did annull.

Drawing an irksome with a careful breath.

Their rotting bodies worms for meat shall have.

Where with you would wrong me; I foresee the plots.

Where is the dwelling of the wicked man?

And mark their tokens, hear what they will say.

That by the day of wrath they may be swept?

His sin to blame, or punish who shall dare.

And lie concealed in a tragic tomb.

Him some precede, some follow, some do meet.

Since in your answers falsehood does remain.
CHAP. XXII.
Eliphaz replied; may man indeed

In his affairs who is wise in worldly things,
Whose very action daily profit brings?

Profit the Almighty? can he gain by it?

Will he his judgments at thy will forbear?

Have not thy faults innumerable bin?

And from the naked ^a'ne their clothes a way.

Nor to the hungry of thy bread did give:

Thy hand and power encreast the rich man's store.

Thou have oppressed Orphans empty sent.

Thy soul shall be perplexed with sudden fear.

Afflictions shall like water cover thee.

And view the stars beyond our wonder high.

Can he judge through the clouds? tush, surely no.

Walking in heaven, what our offenses be;

Wherein of old the wicked went astray?

And their foundations swallowed by the sea.

What can the Almighty do, for which we care?

With sought-for wedges of refined Ore.
Yet never let me from thy truth so err,
As these men's counsels justly to prefer.

And who are guiltless laugh and scorn their fall.

The ruin of their remnant shall conspire.

So shall thou prosper, and thy trouble cease.

Lay up his words; thence let them never start.

And thou shall put profaneness from thy reach.
Ophir,
Even as with stones thou shall fill full thy Coffer.

Plenty of silver shall delight thy sense.

And in his presence lift thy face upright.

And in thy zeal then shall thou vow and pay.

And all thy ways his favor shall procure.

A lifting up; God will the humble save.

Preserved by the goodness that is in thee.
CHAP. XXIII.
Job replied: my plaints most bitter grow;


That I might be admitted to his seat!

And with my reasons make him know my case.

What he would say, or what he would command.

O no, an answering strength he will infuse.

Should from my Judge be made for ever free.

If to the West, yet will he not appear.

He Is hidden in the South, and is not found.
Forward and backward, he? e and there I spy,
Yet all my searches cannot him descry.

I shall come forth like silver purified.

I Have kept his way, and have not gone awry.

Nor from his precepts did my self withdraw.
I did esteem his words as far more good
Unto my soul, then to my body food.

He does his pleasure to the sons of men.

And something does, we can nor know, nor see.

When I consider, then I fear his frown.

And the Almighty has afflicted me.

Although I know not why I am annoyed.
CHAP. XXIV.

Days, times and hours, be ignorant how they
Do pass or circle? whence proceeds, if then
That those who know him not, most wicked men,
Can see his days, and think to force his will,
To bear their crimes, and luxuries fulfill?

The flocks, and feed upon them as their prey.

And take the widows Ox to pledge for naught.

Of Caves to keep them from a life more sad.

So to their business do these wretches go,
Rising for pr^y: they will not be withstood;
The Desert yields them and their children food.

And pull the vintage of their very crew.

And through extremity of cold to dye.

And they embrace the rocks for covering.

And take the pledge from men with need oppressed.

And take their gleaning from the hungry soul.

Tread in their presses, suffer thirst and pine.

They weep, and suffer, and unpittied, moan.
The crying blood of slain even preaches woe,
Yet God unpunish't lets their folly go.

And in the way of truth will not delight.

The poor and needy in his wrath does slay.
Among his consorts he is accounted chief,
And in the night he is a cunning thief.

Wastes his wished twilight to epsy.
No eye shall see me, in his heart he says,
And with disguises seeks to hide his face.

They marked in the day: they hate the light.

Such to these wretches is the dawning day.
For if one know them, they are straight in fear,
As if the pangs of death did then appear.

His portion on the earth is naught but woes.
His mind's so fraught with jealousies and fears,
That go the public way he never dares.

So shall the grave those men that go astray.

Of all their pleasures, worms shall on them feed.
They shall no more on Earth remembered be,
The wicked shall be broken like a tree.

Nor poorer widows with his goods relieve.

And when he rises none is sure of life.

If they but move, his eyes are on their ways.

Then are brought low, and have a sudden foil.
They are destroyed, cut off, yea in their prime;
As are the ears of corn in summer time.

And from my speeches their true value take?
CHAP. XXV.
Bildad said: Power and strength remain


On all things living does arise his light.

How can the sons of men be free from's rod?

The very stars are faulty in his sight.

Whose greatest worth does as a shadow fail.
CHAP. XXVI.
Job returned: Have thou the weak supplied

And such as through weakness void of might,
To help or strengthen have thou taken delight?

Or have thou shown the thing as it is indeed?

What or whose spirit in them does appear?

Under the waters, yet he knows the same.

Destruction is not hid; Hell open is.

The Earths vast body nothing does uphold.

The clouds not broken are under their weight.

He makes the heavens their glorious beauty shroud.

As long as day and night fulfill their rounds.

At his reproof the pillars of it quake.

Themselves into a storm: he smites the proud.

His hand a form to crooked Serpents gave.

How little of his power do we hear.
If this so little be, then Lord what man
The thunder of thy power can understand.
CHAP. XXVII.
Job proceeds,
And in his speech to's friends this Lecture reads.

I want my judgment, madness makes me roar.
So many sorrows daily on me break,
That I in anguish of my soul do speak.

Infused by God into me, being has,

Nor shall deceit my purer speeches stain.

Shall I applaud your sin? no, God forbid.
I under undeserved torments lie,
Yet will not leave my justness till I dye.

Shall not accuse me, while I live to start.

Against me; and my chastisement despise.
Oh let them as presumptuous sinners be,
Whom death cuts off, ere half their days they see.

When God takes from his soul his saving health?

Shall then his tears or cries with God prevail?

Or will he love him when he feels his rod?

What the Almighty does, I Will not conceal.

Why will you then so much your folly show?

This is the portion tyrants shall receive.

His growing offspring with a sudden blow;
And his surviving stock for want of bread
Shall travel deserts, yet be never fed.

Their relict Widows no complaint shall make.

Though he with raiment as with clay be stored:

But the innocent his clothes so got shall wear.

And as a Keepers booth at night's not found.

As had their fathers, a contented grave.

Tempests shall steal him in the dead of night.

It hurles him from his place, and he is gone.

He feign would flee, and falls into a snare.

And with derision hiss him from his place.
CHAP. XXVIII.

And there is a place the golden Ore to fine.

And Brass is molten out of stones for gains.

He binds up darkness and the vale of death.

The floud-forgotten waters are grown dry.

And fire (as 'twere) is turned up under it.

Its dust is of the purest golden Ore.

The Vultures eye its walks has never seen.

Nor have fiere Lions ever come into 't.

He does the mountains by the roots o'rthrow.

All things are obvious to his sight.

And hidden things he makes all men know.

Who can the place of understanding see.

Much less can flesh-clad mortals it attain.

Nor is it with me, answers the Sea.

Nor silver can its value counterpoise.
Ophir gold cannot for its worth prevail,
The precious Onix and the Sapphire fail.

Have worth this heaven-fetcht jewel to procure.

Nay more, the rubies of its worth fall short.
Ethiopian Topaz cannot hold
To purchase it no more than can the gold.

Does wisdom in its height of worth appear,

And from the fowls kept close that soar on high?

Has to our ear a frequent passage found:

And understands the place whence it does flow.

And knows all things that sublunary be.

And measures all the waters in survey.

And for the thunders lightning make a way.

He in his hidden thoughts did it prepare.

That you this sacred wisdom feign would know,
In fearing God consists wisdoms skill,
And understanding in eschewing ill.
CHAP. XXIX.
Job proceeded: Oh that now I were


And when I walked through darkness by his light,

My dwelling with his presence did appear.

And when my children came about my feet.

Poured out floods of oil to increase my stock.
I went, and judgment seat,
And when I made my station in the street.

The aged to my wisdom bowed their head.



The eye that saw me did my praise confess.

And helpful was to him that help did need.

And made the widows heart to sing for joy.

My judgment was a Robe and Diadem.

And to the lame I was as feet to go.

Made causes hard to know, I sought them out.

And from his ravening teeth I plucked the prey.

My days, even as the sand, shall be encreast.

Upon my branch all night lay pearled dew.

My bow was strengthened in my ready hand.

And when they heard it, kept a silent guize.

My speeches dropped on them from on high.

They opened their mouth as for the latter rain.

They did not let my mirth, or make me grieve.

Like him that comfort does to mourners bring.
CHAP. XXX.

Whose fathers I disdained should tend my flocks.

Who not for age, but did for famine fail.

Into the desert lately dark and waste.

And pull up roots of Juniper for meat.

Who cried at them, as at thieves, they use.

In rocks, in holes, on hills they shelter have.

Under the thistles they themselves convene.

Then is the mud, which does as pitch defile.

Of me they talk their villainies among.

Maliciously they spit into my face.

They Have loosed the bridle, are licentious grown.

And as destruction humbled me, they greet.

Nor wanted help to quicken them as slow.

And on my trouble heap they up disgrace.

So they pursue my soul, and vex my mind.
My welfare, which from storms the poor did shroud
Now daily passes as a scattering cloud.

I am from trouble into trouble lead.

In rest my sinews cannot have delight.

As with a coat, I Am clad with heaviness.

Contempt upon me: I, as dust, am naught.

I stand before thee, but thou stopst thine ear.

Thou to my weakness do oppose thy strength.

My substance thou dissolvest, and I dye.

And to the appointed house for all that live.

Though at his death they may lament his fall,

Was not my soul afflicted for the poor?

And in my hopes of light it was the same.

I am afflicted, and can have no rest.

I stood and in the Assembly made my moan.



My organs to the voice of them that mourn.
CHAP. XXXI.

Alluring beauties should no more survey;
And shall I wanton yet think on a maid?
Of such transgressions make me, Lord, afraid.

Or what reward? could I expect his love?

Do not strange judgments haste them to their end?

Does he not reckon all my fayles and trips?

Or if my foot has hasted to deceit;

Before the Lord be my uprightness laid.

Or if mine heart has followed mine eye:
If I have any but right gotten lands;
If any blot have cleaved to my hands:

Yea let my off spring fall before my foe.

If at my neighbors door I have laid wait:

Let other men their will upon her have.

As merits Judgment ere too high it clime.

And root out all increase and hope of joy.

And both their cause and grief I did not end,

And when he visits, what shall I reply?

Within the womb, fashion both him and me?

Or made the widows eyes fail through delay;

A share to Orphans, who to want were driven.

And I have helped Widows from my womb)

Perish, or any poor have naked been,

Was he not warmed with my fleece of wool?

And did not help him when I help might give:

Yea let mine arm be broken from the bone.

And from his Highness I could not be free.
Ophir were my scope;
If I made gold my confidence or hope:

And thought it good enough so much to get:

Or reverenced the brightness of the Moon.

Or that my mouth my hand in honor kissed.

For that I had denied God to have bin.

Or was well-pleased when mischiefs him annoi'd.

By wishing to his soul the smallest curse.)

To satisfy his faults that are so fresh.

My house was open for the strangers feet.
Adam, conscious have bin,
Concealing in my bosom secret sin;

Of greatness, or contempt, or height of pride,
That I kept silence when they did provoke,
And for revenge made no dissembling cloak?

That the Almighty would my cause enquire,
And giving answer, on my troubles look;
And that my foe had written but a book.

And bind it as a crown upon my head:

I would to him as to a Prince draw near.

Or if the furrows of it do complain;

Or if the owners prejudice I sought:

Instead of Barley let it Cockles bear.
Here Job set end unto his speeches sourse,
And adds a period to his friends discourse.
CHAP. XXXII.

Because Job seemed upright in his own eyes.
Elihu angry at the same,
The Son of Buzite Barachel of Ram;
Against afflicted Job his wroth was hot,
Who rather justified himself then God.
Jobs friends he angry was at them,
Because they answered not, yet did condemn.
Elihu having staid Jobs end to see,
Because in years they elder were then he.

And in his words his anger thus did show.

Which makes me doubt, lest I should slip my tongue:

The multitude of years shall wisdom teach.

Gives understanding b' inspiration.

Nor old men always judgment understand:

And my opinion I will show to you.

Your sought-out reasons with attentive ear.

And to Jobs speech find them a weak reply.
Job is by us convict,
It Is God, not man, that does him thus afflict.

Nor from your speeches will I answer frame.

They left the talk which they discussed before.

And as amazed would not silence break;

And show my judgment from my very heart.

The spirit in me does to words constrain.

That breaks the bottles if not quickly spent.

My lips I le open and an answer make.

Nor will I flatter any man that is here.

My maker will destroy me doing so.
CHAP. XXXIII.
Job my speeches hear,
And to the words which I shall speak give ear.

And mouth have spoke what to me did belong.

My lips shall speak what I from Heaven do know.

The Almighty's breath unto my life gave date.

Stand up before me, and thy self prepare.

I also from the clay am fashioned.

Nor shall my hand be heavy on thee laid.

Did I not hear the arguments you made?

I Am guiltless, in me does no crime remain;

He me esteems as his enemy.

On all my goings narrowly does spy.

I answer, God far greater is then man.

He of his matters does not give account.

Yet man perceives it not, he is not so wise.

Is full of sleep and slumbers on the bed:

First their instruction, then their folly heales.

Whose pride does in his judgment make a flaw,

And does forbid the sword his blood to spill.

And all his bones with pain are tortured.

His soul does loath both bread and finer meat.

His bones stick out, which never before were seen.

And for his body, it the mourners have.

Unto man his uprightness to declare:

Him from the pit: For I a ransom have.

As in his youthful days he shall befresh,

He shall see God, who will forgive his sin.

I have perverted truth and righteousness.
Yea, I have sinned, and all the gain I find,
Is Gods fierce anger with a guilt of mind.

And crowning's life with light make all things well.




To justify thee Job, is my desire;

CHAP. XXXIV.
ELihu further said: ye Wise men hear;


So does the ear all sounds and speeches try.

Let us, what is good, among our selves peruse.
Job has said, I righteous am this day:
Although my judgment God has snatched away.

My wound is greater then my sins deserve.
Job, who will not shrink;
But does like water bitter scornings drink:

And with the foolish seems to go astray?

Though in the ways of God he always stand?

Or in the Almighty can there sin remain?

According to their way they shall receive.

Nor will God judge amiss, or suffer it.

Who fixed the Word, or can its bounds enlarge?

And gather to himself his vital breath;

As made of earth, return again to dust.

And in thy mind my talk and lectures bear.

And will thou judge him wicked that is upright?

Princes to blame of sin, who will, or dare?

To whom the rich and poor both equal are.

Within the shortest twinkling of an eye.
The people shall be troubled and be gone,
The mighty shall be flain by God alone.

He all their goings marketh all their days.

Which wicked men can for their safeguard have.

That he in judgment should contend with God.

And raise up others in their wonted seat.

They are cut off and never see the light.

He strikes them in the presence of the Sun.

And would his ways nor keep, nor seek to know.

The afflicted cried, and he heard their cry.

He hides his face, and all the earth does quake:
Whether he angry be at one alone,
Or whether it be against a Nation done;

Then are the people led into a snare.

I do repent, and will offend no more.

I will no more do what I have done ill.

He will performe't, or whether thou refuse,
Although not I: speak therefore what you know,
And do not into further follies go.

First hear me speak, and show their judgment then.
Job without wisdom spoke, yea, like a fool,
Nor were his words framed by wisdoms rule.
Job may be tried again,
Concerning his replies for wicked men.

And aggravating words against God stands.
CHAP. XXXV.
ELihu further said; think you this right


Or what advantage if my sin I leave?

That do into like errors with you fall.

Whose height oft-times the Suns bright luster shrowds;

Or do thou hurt him by thy sins increase?

Or from thy hand what gain does he receive?

Thy justice may another state amend.

Variety of torments makes them dye.

Who in the night gives songs grief to allay.

And makes us wiser than the fowls of heaven.

But he to their requests gives no reply.

Nor shall it go unpunisht from the Lord.

Judgement's before him, put in him thy trust.

Thy torments do not s^te with thy desert.
Job speaks vainly as a fool,
He does dispute without discretions rule.
CHAP. XXXVI.
ELihu further said: Let me proceed;


And to my maker righteousness will give.

When I have spoke, my wisdoms perfectness.

Who are in courage valiant and wise,

But to the poor in spirit gives right:

He does protect them with observing eyes.
They are with Kings upon the Throne, their place
He fixes firmly, free from all disgrace.

If they be tide with cords of misery:

That in their life they have excessive bin.

And bids them from iniquity retire.

Their days in pleasure, years shall end in joy.

And in their folly they shall perish all.

Who, though afflicted, will not call on God.

And perish in their heat of blood, and prime.

In times of trouble he their help will be.

Putting thy feet into a broader place:
And not confine thee to a narrow straight,
Yea, all upon thy Table had been fat.

Therefore thy judgments all most righteous are.

No ransom frees from woe, if once decreed.

And all thy strength he does as nothing hold.

How he destroyed the people from their place.

For thou have rather trouble chose, than this.

Or, like the Lord, what man can wisdom teach?

Or, thou have erred, who to him can say?



The number of his years we cannot know.

It Is by its vapor powered down in rain;

And with great plenty upon man distill.

The thunders of his dwellings understand?

And hides the bottom of the swelling deep.

Meat in abundance for the poor to live.

By the interposing of commanded clouds.

The cattle also from the vapor go.
CHAP. XXXVII.

And is with trembling moved from his place.

And to his thunder give attentive ear.

Unto the furthest limits of the world.

He will not stay them when his voice is heard.

He does such things we cannot comprehend.

Both great and little rays obey his will.

For all the greatness of his power know.

Go to their Dens, and in their places stay.

And stormy gusts of cold blow from the North.

By him the waters on a heap do stand.

And scatters the cloud that holds fire.

And on the world his pleasure they fulfill.

For help, as mercies, or for punishment.
Job, (for what I say is true)
The wondrous works of God stand still and view.

Or when the lightning of his cloud did shine?

The works of the all knowing Deity?

When the earth is quiet by the Southern wind?

And as transparent as a molten glass?

Through ignorance we know not what to say.

Or can man murmr and not be cut off?

Yet if the wind but pass, they all are gone:

Gods Majesty is terrible indeed.

Repleat with justice, punishing by right.

The self-conceited man he will reject.
CHAP. XXXVII.

Out of the whirlwind answered Job at length.

Observes the counsel that before was plain?

I will demand of thee, do thou declare.

Where wast thou then? if thou have knowledge say

To stretch upon it do thou know incline?

Or of the world who laid the corner stone?

And all the Angels changed Roundelaies:

When it by force brake out as from the womb?

And as its swaddling bands the darkness laid;

And its tumultuous Waves with doors did bound:

Here thou must stay, but shall no further rome.

Or made the dayspring know its fixed place?

And shake those thence that have in sin bin bold.

And all stand up as with a garment clad.

The pride of their aspiring aim I Will bruise.

Or in thy search have thou the Ocean seen?

The vale of dreadful death did thou ere see?

If ought thou know of this, an answer give:

Or what is the place where darkness does abide,

And to its house that thou the path should know?

Or cause the number of thy days is great?

Or of the hail have thou the storehouse seen?

The day of trouble and increasing jar?

Which on the earth scatters the Eastern wind.

Or who the lightning in their way did guide?

And in the desert where there is none remain.

And that the tender herb may bud and spring.

Begotten has the pearled drops of dew?

Out of whose womb is Ice congealed given?

The surface of the deep condense is grown.
Pleiades restrain?
Or of Orion loose the bands again?
Mazeroth appear?
Or can thou with his sons Arcturus steer?

The stars over earthly things dominion take?

That they would hide thee with the water floods?

And say unto thee, we, behold, are here?

Or who has given knowledge to the hearts?

Or who the bottles of the Heaven can stay;

And all the clods are fast together grown?

Or of the Lions whelps the hunger stay;

Or lurking in the covert are espied?

His young ones cry to God and have their meat.
CHAP. XXXIX.

Or do thou mark when Hindes do calve their young?

To know when they bring forth, have thou the skill?

Thus they their sorrows to cast out do use.

They go abroad and do no more return.

Or to them who has given liberty?

His habitation is the barren land.

The crying of the driver he derides.

No green thing comes amiss for him to eat*

Will he himself to eat thy fodder frame?

Or after thee will he the valleys harrow?

And leave thy labor to his spoiling feet?

And gather it into thy barn indeed?

Did the Ostrich from thee his rich plumes receive?

And keep them warm within the heated sand;

Or that wild beasts may break them with their feet:

She cares not for them, nor them damage fears;

Nor does he understanding to her give:

The rider and his horse she naught sets by.

Or have thou clothed his brawny neck with force?

His nostrils dreadful are and full of might.

And does undaunted meet the armed man.

And from the cutting sword never turns his back.

He Is threatened with the glittering spear and shield.

Nor does believe it is the trumpets found.

The voice of Captains and alarm of war,

And stretch her wings South climates to come nigh?

And in the highest make her nest to stand?

And in the strongest place she makes her seat.

At a vast distance does the same espy.

And where the slain are there is her abode.
CHAP. XL.


He that reproves God does foolishly.
Job unto the Lord made this reply:

Yea, I my hand upon my mouth will lay.

Yea twice, no further will I now proceed.

Out of the whirle wind gave Job this reply.

I wilt demand of thee, do thou declare.

Will thou condemn me, that thou may be just?

Or can thou thunder with a voice like him?

And cloth thy self with glorious beauties light.

And by thy power him that is proud abase:

And on the wicked make thine anger flow.

Bind, if thou can, within the secret places.

That thy right hand thy self from hurt can save.
Behemoth, I did create
With thee; who fodder as an Ox does eat.

Is in the navell of his belly pight.

The sinews of his stones are wrapped together.

His lesser bones are as an iron bar.

Yet can his anger kill him with his rod

Where all the beasts within the fields do play.

And in the covert of the fens and reeds.

Among the Willowes of the Brook he is found.

He trusts Jordan in his mouth to take:

Through strongest snares his nose with ease does pierce.
CHAP. XLI.

Or can a cord against his tongue prevail?

Or through his jaws can with an angle cut?

Or for his freedom will he speak thee fair?

For ever as a servant make him bow?

Or will thou bind him for thy maidens trim?

Shall they among the merchants part the rest?

To strike his head with fish-speares have thou skill?

And then it is sure thou will no more do so.

Shall one mot at his sight amazed lie?

Who then is he can stand before my stroke?

Him to repay? All under heaven is mine.

His comely lineaments I will reveal.

Who can a bridle put his jaws between?

His teeth are all most fearful in their place.

All shut together close as with a seal.

That between them can come nor air nor wind.

That they can be divided by no blow.

His eyes are like the eyelids of the day.

Whose sparkles from his throat he does expire.

As from a coldron or a boiling pot.

Out of his mouth proceed flames bringing death.

Sorrow before him is soon turned to joy.

They cannot be moved by strength or valor either.

Yea as the nether millstone hard its grown.

They faint through terror, if he but appear.

He scorns the spear, habergeon, and dart.

Iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.

Sling-stones and stubble, hurt him both alike.

And laugheth at the shaking of the spear.

As much as mud, sharp pointed things him please.

One would the deep a pot of ointment deem.

One would suppose the deep did hoary gorw.

He is by God created without fear.

Over the proudest beast he is a King.
CHAP. XLII.
Job with terrors of his guilt afraid,
Unto the Lord this humble answer made;

Our very thoughts cannot withheld be.

Obscure that counsel that before was plain;
I spoke I knew not what, yea I did press
Things that I understood not, I confess.

I will demand, O Lord thy Scholar teach.

But now I see, I feel, I know thee more.

In dust and ashes I my sins repent.
Job had made,
To Eliphaz the Temanite he said,
Against thy self and friends my wrath's at height,
Ye have not spoke of me the thing that is right,
Job. Take now to you
Seven Bullockes, and seven Rams, and to him go;
And for your selves offer a sacrifice,
And Job shall pray for you, for him I prize:
Else of your glory I shall you disrobe,
Because you spoke not of me as did Job.
Bildad, Eliphaz and Zophar went
As God commanded, and to Job they sent;
Who prayed to heaven that they might mercy have,
And God heard Job, and the asked mercy gave.
Jobs Captivity gave end,
When he petitioned for his sinful friends;
And that his blessings might not want of store,
He doubled to him what he had before.

Who lately shunned him, now to make amends,
Came and eat with him in his house each one,
And all his past misfortunes did bemoane;
And gave him comfort over all the ill
God had brought on him by his secret will:
Yea, none from giving did their hand withold,
Each gave him money and a ring of gold.
Jobs latter days,
His end more blessed than his beginning was.
He had a flock of fourteen thousand sheep,
For work six thousand Camels did he keep;
He owned a thousand yoke of Oxen strong;
Shee-Asles too as many old and young.

Of those whom Satan formerly did kill.
Jemima first, bright as the Suns bright rise;
Kezia the next, pleasant as sweetest spice;
As third of these was Kerenhappuch borne,
The child of sweetness, and rare beauties horn.

Or so renowned as Jobs three Daughters were.
And that their fortunes he might more advance,
He gave them part of his Inheritance.
Job sevenscore years more spent,
And of his children saw the fourth descent.
Job replete with goodness as with days,
His soul to God, his flesh to earth repaies.
FINIS
A MEDITATION.
1.
IS then the way to Heaven so sharp? and must
Affliction be attendants to the just?
Must all that go
Heavenward, take in their way the veil of woe?
Cannot Israel win
Canaan, unless he pass the wastes of Sin?
Cannot we be pure,
Unless afflictions fire we first endure?
No, he orecomes that suffers, let us square
Thereby our actions, and our thoughts prepare.
2.
Bastards go free, he chastens whom he loves;
It Is granted silver which the Touchstone proves.
Though crosses may,
Succeed the other as the night the day;
Though seas of grief,
Present us to the World as past relief:
Though God make bare,
His arm against us as in open war:
Yet to's elect his mercy is most sure,
He will deliver, and their wounds recure.
3.
God is both just and loving, and his care
Will not afflict beyond what we can bear.
Even when'^ is sent,
He gives the issue as the punishment.
Raise then your hearts,
And when cast down, with courage act your parts.
The Prophets take, James

And your example the Apostles make:
Who held this rule, that many crosses bring
To heaven, where every Saint shall be a King. Acts

4.
Have ye not heard of Job, says James, how he,
With patience waded through his misery?
Do you not know?
Have you not read the end God gave to's woe?
Oh how therein,
Are the sure mercies of the Almighty seen!
He sorely tries,
Yet never forgets his goodness: O sweet prize!
When we by trouble this great good attain,
Him for our help, Heaven as our own we gain.
(...)
