Monarchiae Encomium EST Sceptrum sive Solium Justitia Stabilitum; OR A
Congratulation of the Kings Coronation, Showing withal, the right way of
Settling and Establishing the Kings Throne, and causing his Crown to Flourish
upon his Head.

By way of Explication of the five first verses of the 25 Chapter of the
Proverbs of Solomon,

With an Application of them to the Occurrences of these times, Published

By Tho. Malpas Preacher of the Gospel at Pedmore in Worcestershire.

LONDON, Printed by T. Leach, and are to be sold by William Palmer at the
Palm Tree in Fleetstreet, and by Joan Malpas in Sturbridg in Worcestershire,
1661.

OMnis Anima potestatibus Supereminentibus Subjecta esto; Romans 13.1. Super
Imperatorem non est nisi Solus Deus, qui fecit Imperatorem; Optat. Milev. Sic
enim omnibus hominibus major est dum Solo vero Deo minor est; Tertul. ad Stap.
Psalm. 45.
1.
My heart is inditing of a good matter, I speak of the things, which I have
made unto the King. 2.
My tongue is the pen of a ready writer. 3.
Thou art fairer than the Children of men: Tremelii nota.
Infusa est gratia labiis tuis; propterea benedixit tibi Deus in Saeculum, ni
mirum ut omnes Elegantia gratiaque Superares, ac potius in omnibus auctor esses
Elegantiae and gratiae. v. 4.
Accinge gladium tuum super femur, o Robustissime, gladium gloriae tuae and
decoris tui. v. 5.
Et decore tuo prospere Equita cum verbo veritatis and proloquere Justitiam,
etc. Ut sis Carolo magno major juxta praedictionem Grebneri de Carolo Secundo
Magno Magnae Britanniae Rege. To the most High and mighty Prince, Charles the
Second, By the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. The most unworthy Author of this ensuing Treatise,
wishes Grace, Mercy, and Peace, through Jesus Christ Our Lord.
MOst Dear and Dread Sovereign, In most humble wise, I prostrate, and present
my self with this slender ensuing Treatise before the Footstool of Your Sacred
Majesty; First craving pardon for this my bold and rash attempt: For although I
must ingenuously here confess, Non est meae humilitatis vestrae Celsitudini
dictare, It does not become nor beseem the meanness and obscurity of my place
and calling, to dictate or prescribe any thing to Your Highness; Yet as Philip
the King of Macedon, permitted and appointed a little Boy to come every morning
to his Chamber Door and to say these words, o (...), O Philip remember thou art
a Man: So give leave (I humbly beseech You) to Your poor Servant, and faithful
Subject, thus far to be your Remembrancer, as to say as David does, or rather
as God himself says by the mouth of David, Psalm. 82.6. Dixi Dii estis. I have
said ye are Gods, but ye shall dye like men, and fall like one of the Princes.

Pallida mors aequo pulsar pede pauperum tabernas, Regumque turres. Horace.
There Is no Estate or Calling of men, so high, eminent, or puissant, but as
they are called Stewards, so they must give an account of their Stewardship as
well as others. I pray then (most Gracious Sovereign) vouchsafe to hold out the
golden Scepter of your favor that I may touch the top of it; or at least have
the grace and privilege, Hest. 5.2.
to kiss your hand, and let Your Princely hand take this Enchiridion, as an
humble Advertisement and wholesome Admonition, which I here prefix and propose
unto you; Non quod de te dubitem, sed ut tibi Currenti Calcar addam cum fraeno;
Nosti deum imprimis Colendum, Colere sine fide non potes, and fides vera ubi
est, nisi ex dei verbo? Hoc scruteris Cavens de papismo ac schismate: It is the
duty even of Kings to be Conversant in the Scriptures, and to meditate and
delight in the Law of God: they are admonished so to do when they sit upon the
Throne of their Kingdom. Thus did Hezekiah, Deuteronomy. 17.18.
Thus did Josiah, and thus did King David, he made the word of God his
Counselor, Psalm. 119.
and in the 56 Psalm. ver 10. he says, In Gods word will I rejoice, In the
Lords word will I Comfort me, and in another Psalm he says, In the multitude
of the Sorrows that I had in my heart, thy Comforts O Lord have refreshed my
Soul: Psalm. 94.19.
he means the cordial and vital Comforts that he found in Gods word; if then
you can freely and thankfully acknowledge with holy David, and say it out of
your own particular and personal experience; Psalm. 119.21.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes.
Then you may also sweetly and joyfully recount and record with your self as the
same David does; Psalm. 18.35.
Thou have given me the defense of thy Salvation: thy right hand also shall
hold me up, and thy loving correction shall make me great. Yet here to shun and
avoid the prejudicate opinion of Censoriousnesse, which I ever abhorred both in
my self and others, let me borrow that pleasing Complement, or plausible
Acclamation and Insinuation of the Poet, Qui movet ut facias, quod tam facis
ipse monendo; Laudat, and hortatu comprobatacta suo. If then you do, that which
is an admirable thing, or a rare and singular thing for Kings and Princes to
do, viz; in Alto altum non Sapere, to be of an humble and lowly mind in a high
and lofty State; -- Regis Clementia virtus, A King is Gods Vicegerent and
Lieutenant on Earth; he must therefore be merciful, as our Father in Heaven is
merciful. Cominaeus lib. 6. c. ^.
It is the part of a Tyrant, in Imperio nil nisi Imperium cogitate; to glory
with Lewis the 11th. King of France, that he passed his time in making and
undoing of men, Contre faustum, lib. 12. c. 56.
as if he were placed in his Throne not ut prosit, sed tantum ut praesit, as
Augustine speaks; let them remember the saying of another learned man,

Magna Servitus, magna fortuna; Petrarcha
We read in History that wise men invented the game of Chesse to mitigate the
Cruelnesse of Governors, in which it is insinuated, that the King has need of
his Bishops, of his Knights, yea of the meanest peasant that tilleth or toyleth
in his Land. And therefore considering that He differs only from his Subjects
in use, not in stuff (as Your prudent Grandfather King James of blessed memory
was used to say: Basilicon Doron. lib. 2.
) He must become a Common Father unto the people, never unadvisedly provoking
them unto just Indignation and Anger. Which that You may prevent; hear once
again what Your pious and peaceable Grandfather says; speaking like another
Solomon in his Basilicon doron; Enrich not Your Self by Exactions, or grievous
Impositions upon Your Subjects, but account the Riches of Your Subjects Your
greatest or Your chiefest Treasure-Nulla alia re propius ad Deum accidere
possumus, quam Salutem hominibus dando. Tully pro Ligar.
But I need not urge this, much less insist upon it, for the general voice,
and unanimous report of the Country is, that You are rather too merciful; Let
me give a word concerning this, Facilitas multa docet mala, and licentia sumus
omnes deteriores; You must therefore show Your Self to be a just King; I hope I
need not to advertise You; for so the wisest of Kings tells You; a wise King
scatters the wicked, Pro. 20.26.
and brings the wheel over them (i. e.) the wheel of Judgment and Vengeance
for their evil deeds; for it seems it was a kind of punishment, which was then
used to be inflicted on Malefactors; for even as Solomon's stately Throne of
Ivory, was supported with two Lions, 2 Chro. 9.
on each side one: So the Throne of every good and pious Prince, is supported
and stayed up with these two Magnanimous and Lyonlike Virtues, Justice, and
Mercy. Therefore God made Thee King (said the Queen of Sheba to King Solomon)
to do justice and judgment; 1 Kin. 10.
and therefore Augustine said well to this purpose, Ablata Justitia, quid sunt
Regna nisi magna Latrocinia? And this Your discreet and mature Wisdom has also
done (for in this respect I may say to you as the Widow of Tekoah did to King
David, 2 Samuel 14.
my Lord the King is even as an Angel of God to discern right from wrong) This
You have done, by leaving it to those sage, and grave, and honorable Heroes of
this Nation, to make inquisition for blood, and to bring Just and Condign
punishment upon the heads of those Insolent and Rebellious Traitors, who spild
the Innocent Blood of Your dear Father, and put Him to death wrongfully: Even
as David left a Charge with his Son Solomon concerning Joab and (...). Do Thou
according to Thy Wisdom, 1 King. 2.
and let not their hoary head go down to the grave in peace; for why? blood
requires blood; That great Judge of Heaven and Earth, Genesis 9.6.
made it a Statute Law, which was never yet repealed. -- Neque enim Lex Justior
ulla est,
Quam necis Artifices art perire sua;
If You do but serionsly consider (as I confidently presume, and both hope and
trust that You do) how graciously the Lord has dealt with You, taking a care
of You, even ab Incunabilis and a prima lanugine, causing a Star to usher and
attend Your Birth, and to shine all the day long, on the day of Your Nativity
(as a certain Chronologer related it in his Anniversary Ephemeris, if I do not
mistake, or forget my self, it was so;) and this I hope did not presage or
prognosticate any ill Omen at all to Your Sacred Majesty.

If You do often ruminate and revolve, or call to mind the very great Mercyes,
the manifold Gracious deliverances, and miraculous preservations, wherewith the
Lord has blessed You, and compassed You about with his loving kindness, as it
were with a shield, preserving and protecting You both in Bello and in Exilo,
in Persecutione, and in proscriptione tua; Defending You in the fight at
Worcester, from the peril of the Sword, yea both from the Lion and the Bear, 1 Samuel 17.
as David was delivered; from the hands of that violent Man, and from the snare
of the Hunter, from the traps and plot of that perfidious Traitor, who intended
to have betrayed You; But the Lord being gracious unto You, You escaped out of
their hands, as Lot out of the fire of Sodom, or as David did out of the hands
of the Philistines: likewise in the pursuit, when those blood-thirsty men, the
men of Belial followed hard after You, even as one follows after a Partridge
upon the mountains, the Lord stretched forth his holy hand over You, he kept
You as the apple of his eye; As an Eagle stireth up her nest, fluttereth over
her birds, Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12.
stretches out her wings, and bears them on her wings; So the Lord alone led
You, and guarded You, and guided You, and put it into Tour royal heart to fly
to an hollow tree, to make it Your Castle, or rather Your Cave, to hide and
shroud Your self in, till the storm of their wrath, and indignation was
overpast; and this was nothing else but Digitus Dei, et Virgula Divina; nothing
else but the immediate hand of God, to deliver You. Afterward when a
convenient means and time for Your safe convoy, and departing hence out of the
Land, by his providential disposition, and dispensation, was thought upon,
contrived and concluded through the help of Your Handmaid, that virtuous and
fortunate Gentlewoman, though You were then in the condition of a poor exile,
Esaias 63.9.
and banished man; yet then the Lord made bare his holy arm again, and sent the
Angel of his presence before You, Sicut ^e^unt di^unt ai^nt, etc.
to conduct You safe away, and transport You beyond Sea; and when You could not
stay in France, by reason of the Implacable fierceness, and threatening of Your
deadly and damnable Persecutors; You were (it seems) forced to go into Spain,
where You kept Your heart perfect and entire to our sincere Protestant
Religion, and Your Conscience pure and untainted with any popish leaven,
notwithstanding the many strong persuasions, and the many great proffers and
promises of those rich, magnificent Spanish promotions, and advancements;
belike You were of wise Cassandra's mind; Timeo Danaos vel dona ferentes.
Virgil aenead. 10.
For behold Your heart was still firm, and entire, and upright with Your God:
constant and unmovable in that ancient Catholic faith, and sincere Protestant
Religion, wherein You were born and baptized; much like the heart of Reverend
and Renowned Cranmer.

Ecce Jnvicta Fides cor inviolabile Servat,
Nec mediis flammis corda perire sinit.
Cranmer, amid the fiery flames,
Thy heart unscorcht was found:
For why? behold undaunted Faith
Preserved it safe and sound.
Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for Your undaunted
Constancy, and Perseverance in the faith; And both my heart, and the hearts of
all Your true, loving, and loyal Subjects, have great and just cause to rejoice
in that behalf, and to bless God unfeignedly for You; As also we are likewise
even all of us bound to bless, and praise, and magnify his holy name, for Your
happy return unto Your Crown, viz. That it has pleased Almighty God, of his
singular goodness, and especial providence, to reduce, and restore Your sacred
Majesty, to be now Inaugurated, and Invested with the Crown, and Scepter of
Your ancient famous Progenitors, and Predecessors; And this has been effected,
and brought to pass, by the Sweet, Celestial, and Sanctified policy, of an
ancient, eminent, and renowned Worthy of our Nation, without the effusion of
blood, or without the help of a strong and potent Army (happy shall that man be
called, that our deliverance has wrought) O sing unto the Lord a new song;
Psalm. 137.8.
for he has done mavelous things, with his own right hand, and with his holy
arm has he gotten himself the victory; The Lord has declared his salvation;
His righteousness has he openly showed in the sight of the Heathen; Psalm.
98.1, 2, 3, 4.
He has remembered his mercy, and his truth, toward his poor distressed, and
distracted Church of England; And all the ends of the World have seen the
salvation of our God. Account I beseech You my poor service, and this small
present, which I tender unto Your Majesty, 1 Samuel 17.27.
even as Old Barzillai did his Barley, and his Beans, and his parched Corn to
King David, when he was at Mahanaim. Pliny writes, that the people did offer to
their Gods Milk, when they had no Frankincense; and Salt, that had no Milk, and
were well accepted. Namque erit ille mihi Semper Deus.
Great men give great gifts; Sinetas a handful of Water; the Scholar, Books; I,
such as I have. The Lord hear You in the day of trouble: The Name of the mighty
God of Jacob defend You; send you help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen You
out of Sion: make Your days long upon the Earth, and Eternal in the Heavens,
grant You according to Your heart, and fulfill all Your mind.

Sic vovet, Serenissimae Majestatis tuae humillimus Servus, et Subditus. Tho.
Malpas.
Ex musaeo meo Primo Die Martij, 1660.
TEXT Prove. 25.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1. These are also Proverbs of Solomon, which the
men of Hezekiah King of Judah copied out.

2. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, but the honor of Kings is to
search out a matter.

3. The Heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of Kings is
unsearchable.

4. Take away the dross from the Silver, and there shall come forth a vessel
for the finer.

5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be
established in righteousness.


SERMON.
THAT peerlesse mirror of wisdom King Solomon, as he was the richest and
wisest King, that ever reigned in Jerusalem, or in any part of the world
beside; and in this, a true type and figure of Christ our blessed Savior, who
is the uncreated and eternal wisdom of the Father, in whom, even as he is man,
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, says the Apostle ( Col.
2.3.) The holy Ghost also giving this rare testimony; and singular commendation
of his excellent knowledge and incomparable wisdom in the Scripture, namely,
that it was such, and so excellent and transcendent and unparalleld, as it
exceeded and excelled the wisdom, of all the children of the East, and all the
wisdom of Egypt; for he was Sans peer, wiser than any man, etc. 1 Kings 4.29.
He was famous for his wisdom indeed, throughout all Nations round about him,
and he spoke three thousand Proverbs, and his songs were a thousand and five;
and he spoke of trees from the Cedar that is in Lebanon even unto the Hysop
that springs out of the wall (which manuscripts or writings of Solomon for
the most part are thought to have perished, and to have been lost in the
captivity of Babylon, and great pity it was that such wise and worthy Sayings,
had not been preserved from the injury of times, for the benefit and comfort of
succeeding ages, and for the generations of men that were to come after him)
now as he was thus copious, judicious and sententious both in his sayings and
writings, which are both extant and continue current among other Canonical
Scripture; So amongst the rest of his writings and proverbial sayings, he did
not forget to set down some grave and prudent Rules and Precepts wise and
worthy documents, observations and Instructions, touching the high and eminent
place, office and calling of Kings and Princes, witness this 25th. Chapter of
his Book of Proverbs, wherein he first affirms, Honor Dei est abscondere rem,
honor autem Regum est pervestigare; It is the glory of God to conceal a thing,
but it is the honor of Kings to search out a matter.

It is the glory of God to conceal a thing; and why? The Apostle renders a
reason of it: Quia inscrutabilia sunt ejus judicia, and viae ejus
impervestigabiles incognita men's and consilium ejus, his judgments are
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out: for who has known the mind of the
Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Romans 11.33.34. verses, Moses that man
of God, that was so familiar with God, was permitted only to see his
back-parts, he was licensed to see him, But how? not a priori, but a
posteriori, ex postico tergo licet non ex antica facie, My face thou shall not
see, says God, Exodus 33. This is the right stamp and character of his Deity,
of his individual and incommunicable property, and by this he will be
differenced and distinguished from men, and made known to be God; thus it is
the glory of God to conceal some things from man. As first he does the decree
of Election and Predestination, so says Paul 2 Timothy 2.19. the foundation of
God stands sure, having his Seal, (Dominus novit qui sunt sui) the Lord
knows them that are his: For as it is reported by Herodotus, Diodorus,
Sicolus, and diverse other Historiographers, that the head of the River Nilus
could never yet be found, so the depth of that secret decree could never yet be
faddom'd or found out, which made the Apostle cry out with more than ordinary
admiration and astonishment, (...), O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! Secondly he conceals the date and times of the
execution and expiration of his judgments, as our Savior told his Disciples (
Acts 1.7.) It is not for you to know the times and the seasons which the Father
has put in his own power. Thirdly he conceals the hour of our death, to make
us every hour to prepare and make ready for that last hour. It was then good
counsel which a learned Jew gave to his Scholar, be sure that ye repent one day
before death, when answer was made that the day of death was uncertain, he
replied, then repent this day, yea, repent every day.

Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum. Fourthly and lastly, he conceals
from us, the day of that last, and great, and general Assizes; for of that day
and hour knows no man; no, not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father only says
Christ, Math. 24.30. Namque ideo latet ultimus dies, ut observetur omnes dies,
says an ancient Father; God would have us ignorant of the last day, to the end
we might be circumspect and vigilant every day, and still to be provided (like
the five wise Virgins) with Oil in our Lamps, [i. e.] with faith and grace, and
true repentance in our hearts, with joy in the Holy Ghost, and the sincerity of
a good Conscience, as Carthusian glosseth that place in the Gospel. Thus you
see, it is the glory of God to conceal a thing; Honor autem Regum; But it is
the honor of a King to search out a matter; namely to search out the causes,
and examine the controversies and differences betwixt man and man, and also to
administer true justice and judgment to the people.

This is the proper Office and Duty (as I may so term it) that belongs unto the
Regal Scepter or Diadem; yea this is the right honor and glory of Kings; and I
prove it thus. First out of Humane Story. Secondly by Divine Testimony. First
out of humane Story; It is repotted. That when Phillip the King of Macedonia,
did reject and cast off the earnest suit of a poor Widow, with this slender
answer, Go thy way, for I have no leisure to hear thee now: She replied thus,
and why then have thou leisure to be a King? as if she had said; Have thou
leisure to be a King: and have thou not leisure to do Justice, and to hear the
Complaint of a poor Widow, that comes before thee for Justice? God has given
thee time to Reign, and power to Rule and Govern, that thou might Apply
them, and Employ them both unto that, Prove. 20.28.
and wherefore they are given thee; For Mercy and Truth preserves a King: and
with loving kindness his Seat is upholden, or his Throne is upholden by mercy,
as our last translation has it. Even as Solomon's stately Throne of Ivory, was
supported with two Lions, on cach side one: so the Throne of every good and
pious Prince, 2 Chronicles. 9.
is supported and stayed up with those two Magnanimous and Lyon-like virtues,
Justice and Mercy. Therefore God made thee King (said the Queen of Sheba to
King Solomon) to do Justice and Judgment, 1 Kings 10. And therefore Augustine
said well to this purpose, Ablata Justitia quid sunt regna nisi magna
latrocinia? Now for divine Testimony; We read in the (1 Kings 3.) when Solomon
prayed to God for an understanding heart, that he might do Justice among Gods
people, it is said that his prayer pleased God passing well, because Solomon
asked wisdom, rather than wealth: and knowledge, rather than honor; for
thereby he gave evidence, that his heart was set upon righteousness; For Ex
abundantia cordis os loquitur, Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks; Math. 12.34.
and did not his mouth speak righteous things? did he not truly discern between
good and bad, when he judged the two Harlots that came before him? when he
wisely decided and determined the matter betwixt them, and happily discovered
and found out, through his mature wisdom, and judgment, the right Mother of
the Child; which as soon as his wisdom was thus proved and perceived: it was
presently approved and applauded; for when all Israel heard the Judgment which
the King judged, they feared the King, for that they saw that the wisdom of
God was in him, to do Justice and Judgment, 1 Kings 3.28. Lo here was his
Honor, and here was his Crown and Glory, to pervestigate, and search out the
matter. As it is reported of King James, to his tare, and singular, and
perpetual Commendation, that he rightly interpreted those miscarried letters,
which discovered the Powder Treason, in a sense, and construction, differing
and dissenting from the Capacity and Understanding of all his Nobles; For as it
is the honor and glory of Kings, diligently to search out the truth of matters
that come before them, and uprightly and sincerely to administer Justice and
Judgment to the people committed to their Charge and Government: so may we be
assured, and persuaded likewise of this; that no less shall it make for their
Praise and Commendation, to have hearts like the Heaven for height, and the
Earth for depth (as it is in the next verse) Hearts like the Heaven for height,
and the Earth, etc. (i. e.) Infinite. boundless, bottomless, and unsearchable;
namely in regard of their profound learning and knowledge, their extraordinary
wisdom and understanding; It behooves them to have a large heart like
Solomon's; Even as the Sand that is on the Seashore, etc. For Solomon in saying
here that no man can show the Kings heart, shows, that it is too hard for man
to attain to the reason of all the secret doings of the King, even when he is
upright, and does his duty; God puts many things into his heart which are
unsearchable, and past finding out by ordinary men; which made David to
admonish Kings and Judges, thus saying, Psalm. 2.10. Be wise now therefore O ye
Kings, be learned ye that are Judges of the Earth; For (as one says wittily)
If the Judge, or Magistrate be not Wise, Judicious, and Perspicacious, to dive
into the Matter, and discern the Cause thoroughly that comes before him, words
may soon carry the matter away, through the glozing tongue of some eloquent
Tully or Tertullus, some Colluding, and praevaricating Lawyer, who may be a
Sophister in word, and an Ambadexter in deed.

That Christian Poet Prudentius, spoke prudently against Symmachus in his first
book. Publica res (inquit) tunc fortunata satis, si

Vel Reges Saperent, vel regnarent Sapientes. That Commonwealth (says he)
cannot choose but flourish, when either Philosophers are Kings, or Kings are
Philosophers; an admirable and remarkable saying indeed, and worthy to be
written in letters of Gold, and engraven with the pen, or point of a Diamond,
upon the Thrones of Princes; And the wisest of Kings speaks to the same
purpose, Prove. 20.26. A wise King scatters the wicked, and brings the
wheel over them. (i. e.) the wheel of Judgment, and Vengeance for their evil
deeds. Here note, that this saying has been partly fullfilled of late, by
finding out, and bringing some Egregious and Notorious Malefactors to just, and
condign punishment, who lifted up their hands against the Lords Anointed K. C.
the first, and embrued them in his blood; Ut paena ad unum sit terror ad omnes,
neque enim lex justior ulla est, quam necis artifices, etc. And how necessary
learning and understanding is for Kings and Princes, may be easily gathered out
of those words, Eccles. 10.10. Woe to thee O Land, when thy King is a Child.
(i. e.) Ignorant, unlearned, and unskilful in the affairs of State. Woe to thee
O Land when thy King is a Child, and thy Princes eat in the morning. (i. e.)
when they rise up early to Riot, and to Revel it. But (as it follows,)
Blessed art thou O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, and thy Princes
eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness; Where by the Son of
Nobles, he means one not only, praeclara prosapia sive progeny oriundus,
that is, one descended, and born of ancient, and famous Progenitors, and
Predecessors; but one virtuously educated, and brought up. Been institutus et
inforniatus in Administratione regni (as Tremelius well notes on the place) (i.
e.) one well instituted, and instructed, and informed, in the Administration,
and Government of a Kingdom. When a Prince is thus qualified, thus furnished,
and accomplished with this Basilicon doron, as learned King James entitled his
book, which he commended to his Son the Prince; when a Prince, I say, is thus
adorned, and accomplished with this royal Gift, and Accoutrement, this heroical
ornament, and endowment of the mind; when he has competent knowledge, and
wisdom sufficient, well to manage, and govern his Kingdom; and is also
studious, and solicitous, careful, and industrious, to have matters carried
with that Equity, Indifferency, and Sincerity, that Justice, and Judgment may
not be perverted, but that the poor should be sheltered, and defended, and the
people judged according unto right, as it is, Psalm. 72.2. Then as our Savior
says in the Gospel, Mat. 18.7. (...). Woe unto the World because of Offenses;
for it must needs be that Offenses come, but woe to that man by whom the
Offense comes. And if our Savior esteemed the offense so grievous, that was
offered to those little ones, how heinous then shall we think those offenses to
be, that are plotted, perpetrated, and committed against those great ones, who
are the immediate Lieutenants, and undoubted Vice-royes of Almighty God; (This
is properly termed by the learned, Scandalum Magnatum) then I say, pity it is,
yea, a thousand pitties it is (as, we say) nay more, a woeful, and lamentable,
and most abominable thing it is, and a thing much to be deplored, that either
the good mind and meaning, the virtuous, noble, and heroic spirit of such a
pious Prince should be poisoned, and infected with evil Counselors; or that
his ways and courses, should be hindered and diverted with wicked, corrupt, and
careless Officers, that should be Impartial Executioners of his wholesome Laws
and decrees; But they (as it has been lately proved, and happily found out by
sufficient experience, in the late Kings time) for the most part have been led
by favor and affection, by money, and bribery, and partiality, and the like
sinester means, to aim at their own ends, and their own Advancement, to set
their nests on high, and to load themselves with thick clay, as the Prophet
speaks, Hab. 2.6. Yea, more to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, to
connive at sin and wickedness, to oppress the poor and needy, to condemn the
Just and Innocent, and to wrong the Fatherless and Widow, and keep them from
their right; So that, that which Micah prophesied of, Micah 7 2, 3.
is now actually fullfill'd; They all lie in wait for blood, they hunt every
man his brother with a net; That they may do evil with both hands earnestly,
the Prince asks, and the Judge asks for a reward, and the great man he
utters his mischievous desire, and so they wrap it up. But concerning such as
these, howsoever they may sooth and flatter themselves in their own sight, and
in their own sinful ways; yet the Wiseman says, they commit a double sin, or
a twofold abomination; For he that justifies the wicked, and he that
condemns the just, even they both are abomination to the Lord, Pro. 17.15.
And against such as these, there is a woe denounced by the Prophet; Esaias 7.20.
Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light,
and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. This
is a woeful and shameful thing indeed, and woe is to that Land or Nation who are
pestered and vexed with such a perverse and praeposterous kind of people, who
condemn the innocent for bribes, and justify the wicked for rewards; These are
the Achans, and the Achabs of our time; these are those that are the only
molesters and troublers of Israel and Judah: the many disturbers both of Church
and State; Et utinam abscindantur; and I would to God they were even cut off
that trouble us (if I may so wish with the Apostle, Gal. 5.12.) for they are
(as one truly terms, B. Andrews.
the equivocating false-hearted Jesuits) Flagella Republicae, stabella
Seditionis; the Bellows of dissension, the Firebrands and Incendiaries of
faction and sedition amongst us; the very plague and scourge of the Republic
Pyoners of our peace, and Underminers of all our happiness: And it may
appositely be spoken of such pestilent Fellows, as Tully that Heathen Orator
said of Catiline the Traitor, Vivunt, et vivunt non ad deponendam, sed ad
Confirmandam audaciam; They live indeed, and are suffered to live, not to leave
off, or to lay aside, but to augment, and increase, and confirm their lewd
baseness, and Impudent boldness; questionless they are evil, and unprofitable
members to the Country, or Commonwealth wherein they live; They are to the
godly as the filthy unnatural Sodomites were to Lot, which vexed righteous Soul
with their worse than brutish behavior, and their most unmanly and unlawful
deeds; 2 Pet. 2.8.
or as the Jebusites were to the Israelites, thorns in our eyes, and whips or
pricks in our sides, Jos. 23.13. They are like to that disease in a man's body,
which is called the Cancer or Gangrena, which being in some parts thereof,
those parts of the body wherein it is, must of necessity be cut off, -- Ne pars
sincera trahitur, least they putrify and corrupt the whole; these are evil
humors in a body politic, which keep it from prospering; these are Tares in
the field of Gods Church, which hinder the good wheat from growing; these are
the clouds, and foggy mists, or vapors in the air, which obscure and darken
it, and intercept the Sun from shining; these are the dross, which hold the
silver from being purified; therefore as my Text says well by way of a sweet
and elegant allusion and comparison; ut auferendo scorias ab argento, etc. Take
away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a vessel for the
Finer; So take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be
established in righteousness: here we have three things to be considered of;
First, we must try and examine, who they are, and what manner of persons they
are which are here compared to dross, and these are the wicked and ungodly;
take away the dross, so take away the wicked. Secondly, we must show you who
they are that are here likened to silver, and why they are so assimilated and
resembled; and these are Kings and Princes, take away the dross from the
filver; so take away the wicked a conspectu Regis, from before the King;
Thirdly, the blessed issue or sequel which follows upon this exploration, the
thrice-happy fruit and effect which this seasonable and timely division, and
separation of the dross from the silver produces and brings forth, and this
is, Solium Justitia stabilitum (i. e.) a Throne. established inrighteousnesse,
and this is also likened to a fit vessel for the Finer; Take away the dross
from the silver, and there shall come forth a vessel for the Finer; So take
away the wicked, etc. First, by dross is here signified and represented unto
us, the wicked in general (i. e.) all ungracious, unregenerate, and ungodly men
whatsoever; all the Sons of Belial, as they are styled in the old Testament;
all the Children of Disobedience, as they are so called in the new; especially
all perfidious Servants to their Master, all treacherous and rebellious
Subjects to their Prince, that either secretly revolt, and subtly withdraw
their hearts from, or openly lift up their hands against the Lord Anointed,
against their Liege and lawful King and Sovereign; And touching this crimen
capitale, this crimen laesae Majestatis, this heinous and capital sin of
Treason; the Wise man both warily and worthily admonishes, saying Eccles.
10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, neither curse the rich in thy
Bedchamber, for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall declare the matter; these then with all other Mutherers,
Malefactors, all Mischievous and Blood-thirsty persons, must be abolished,
abandoned, and taken away from before the King, for they are but dross: so
likewise David compares them, Psalm. 119.119. Thou put away all the wicked
of the earth like dross, therefore I love thy testimonies.

Note here that some of these notes were preached in the late Kings time, even
in the beginning of that fatal and fearful and disasterous Insurrection, some
wondering at it, how I durst Preach so, when for the divisions of Reuben, there
were such great thoughts of heart.
But not to insist upon generalities (for the times and the iniquity of the
times requires us to instance in some sorts and kinds of wicked men, though not
to nominate or name the persons and patties (for that is extra lineam
praedicamentalem) that are here compared to dross, as you know they are
elsewhere compared to chafe, Psalm. 1.5. for David having spoken before of the
blessed and prosperous estate of the godly man, in the 5th. verse he says, non
sic Impijs non sic, as for the ungodly it is not so with them; but they are
like the chafe which the wind scatters away from the face of the earth,)
more particularly then, false prophets in the first place may fitly be compared
to dross, who are described in the 13th. of Deuteronomy. to have this odious and
damnable quality, namely to draw and entice us to Idolatry, and to go after
other Gods, or to worship the true ever-living God, in a false, erroneous,
idolatrous, and superstitious way; By the Law of Moses, such as these were to
be stoned to death, and good reason; because (says he) they have sought to
thrust thee away from the Lord the God, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, from the house of Bondage, and all Israel shall hear and fear, and
shall do no more any such wickedness as this is among you.

Secondly, covetous and unjust Judges, may likewise here be resembled to
dross, with all corrupt bribe-taking Lawyers, and inferior Officers that are
under them, or any way depend upon them; for these are like the Image which
Nebuchadnezar saw in his dream, whose head was of gold, Deuteronomy. 2.31.
his breasts and his arms of silver, his belly and his thighs of brass, his
legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay, and so the lower you
descend, the more vile, and corrupt, and degenerate are they.

In the third place, we may esteem wicked and seducing Counselors, no better
than dross, and therefore are to be carefully sequestered, weeded out, removed,
and taken away from the King, lest they should infect, and poison, and possess
his heart with base Tyrannical principles, and Machiavilian policies.

Fourthly, all fawning Sycophants and Parasites, I mean all proud, ambitious,
flattering, and aspiring Courtiers; therefore as Hamons face was covered, when
that great Monarch was offended and displeased with him, Hest. 7.8. so let
these, or such as these, not have so much privilege or favor to behold the
Kings face; for they are no true friends of his, I dare say it, no good
Sub^ects to the State; they eat like mothes into liberal men's coats; they are
the very bane and consumption of greatness, they rob many a great man of his
goodness, and make him rob and deprive the Commonwealth of her happiness;
therefore let us banish and abandon them, and away with them from before the
King.

Fifthly, all male-contented Humorists, all factious and fanatic Sectaries,
Seditious Scismaticks, and all hypocritical dissembling Professors whatsoever;
I mean those, who despise all kind of Ecclesiastical Discipline, and Church
Government, and account our Liturgy, to be meat Popery, for never was any poor
book so vilified, and reviled, as the book of Common Prayer has been of late
years, and yet those milites emeriti, that noble Army of Martyrs that composed
it, suffered death in Queen Mary's days, they dyed with it in their Arms, and
both loved and honored it, and highly esteemed it, some of them commending it
as the best token of their loves to their dearest Wives, and that late Reverend
and Renowned Prideaux Bishop of this Diocese, Dr. Boys in his Epistle
Dedicatory to K. James before his exposition of the proper Psalms, cum multis
aliis.
commended it as a Legacy to his two Daughters, and all ancient Orthodoxal
Ministers, have ever prized it and praised it as a second Bible.

Sixthly, all cruel treacherous and bloody-minded Papists, and Anabaptists, who
speak evil of Dignities, and do obstinately refuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance; who if they cannot prevail to bring their purpose to pass by secret
Plots and Conspiracies, they will not stick (like the other) to attempt it by
open Hostility and Rebellion, for these two the Catholic and the Scismatick,
are much alike in their faction, howsoever they be different and disparent in
their Faith; they hold as the Jesuits do, that (fides hereticis non est
servanda) which is a strange Thesis, and a dangerous opinion, the hatcher and
harbourer of Treason, the fosterer and fomentor of Rebellion: for as one says
ingeniously, every Pope is an open Scismatick, and every Scismatick a secret
Pope; these Foxes (as Luther tells us in his Preface to his Comentary upon The
Epistle to the Galathians) are tied together by the tail, though by their heads
they seem to be contrary; and what have they else in their tayls, but
firebrarnds like Sampsons Foxes, Judge. 15. ready to set the shocks of Corn, yea
the whole fields of Corn on fire, and without some prudent and timely
prevention, to bring the whole Christian World into a most facal and final
Combustion and Confusion.

Seventhly, all politic subtle-headed Projectors, insatiable greedy-minded
Monopolists, unreasonable and unconscionable Patentees; for these have been
proved sufficiently by woeful experience to be mere Harpyes to the State,
professed Horse-leeches, and Bloodsuckers of the Commonwealth; Non missura
cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo. These are like the Vultures that fed upon
Promethe us Liver: so these are Regum Sicarij, the very cutthroats of Kings,
such as make no other use of Princes favors, but by Monopolies, and
Impositions to enrich themselves; these are somewhat like those, of whom
mention is made in the life of Aurelian the Emperor; of whom it was said, that
by them the good and honest Emperor, who might only know what they pleased to
inform him, was even bought and sold.

Eighthly, and lastly, all unbelieving and misbelieving Athists, Epicures,
Libertines, who have no fear of God before their eyes, all impudent, audacious,
brasen-fac'd Liars; horrible, prodigious, and blasphemous Sweaters, and
for-swearers; vicious. and lascivious Adulterers, dissolute, deboich'd, and
irregular Drunkards; irreligious, and incorigible Sabboth-breakers, and the
like. -- Procul hinc, procul ite profani, let all such rude profane miscreants,
such wicked and ungodly people, be a far off removed, and taken away from the
presence of the King; the Poet describes such, and calls them, Ambubajarum
Collegia, Pharmacopilae mendici, mimae, balatrones and hoc genus omne. Here Is a
rabblement of rude profane miscreants indeed; a Catalogue, Induction, and
Indictment, (as I may so term it) of wicked and ungodly men, and dies me
deficeret, the time would sail me to innumerate and reckon up all the sorts of
them; let it suffice only for this time to instance in these, and to speak a
little more largely and freely of some few of these instead of the rest, and to
show you, that they are but Scoriae, and Quisquiliae hominum, the dross and
refuse of men, like salt that has lost its savor, and therefore must be cast
our, to be trodden under foot of men; for they are but sordes and purgamenta
mundi; Math. 5.13.
the very dregs and scum, and off-scowring of the world; therefore 'twere good
and necessary to have them sifted and searched out, yea to have them separated
and taken away from the silver; so the wiseman here advises; Take away the
dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a vessel for the Finer; So
take away the wicked, etc.

False Prophets dross.
First them false Prophets are but dross, as we shall soon find them so to be,
if we do but bring them to that Lapis Lidius, the touchstone of truth the
Scripture; and who are these pseuda Prophetae, these false Prophets? but those,
qui ducunt and seducunt, who should lead us, and they do mislead us, like
Stellae erraticae, or like that false fire which is called by the Philosophers
Ignis fatuus, which befools men, and leads them out of the way: so they cause
us to err, and wander, and go astray out of the way of truth and
righteousness; and such bring a curse upon themselves, and not a blessing; For
cursed is he that makes the blind to go out of his way, and let all the people
say Amen. Deuteronomy. 27.18. for if the blind lead the blind (according as our
Savior says in the Gospel) that is, if the wilfully blind lead those that are
ignorantly blind; it happens to them according to the Proverb, That both fall
into the ditch.

That our care therefore and vigilance might be great, to resist the mystery of
iniquity; Christ and his Apostles do often inculcate this Caveat, and bid us
beware of such Seducers; There shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets,
Math. 2.24 2 Pet. 2.
and there shall come false Teachers among you; which shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even Lupi rapaces, ravenous Wolves, not sparing the Flock, (...),
Even of your own selvos, shall such men arise (says Paul) speaking perverse
things, to draw away Disciples after them, Acts 20.30. Beware of false
Prophets, (says our Savior) which come to you cum vestimentis ovium, in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves; ye shall know them by
their fruits, Mat. 7.15, 16. As Teriullian glosseth that Text excellently;
quaenam sunt istae pelles ovium, nisi nominis Christiani extrinsecus
superficies? All these sheeps-clothing, what are they else, but mere precise
titles of holiness, and bare outsides, shows, and shadows of Religion and
Christianity? falfe Prophets (as another ancient Father observes) have
Linsey-wolsey garments; Intus linam subtilitatis, extra lanam Simplicitatis
demonstrat, the subtle thread of Hypocrisy and Deceit is withinside, but the
plain web of Simplicity without side; they may fitly be compared to those wily
Gibeonies who deceived Joshua with their clouted shoes, Jos. 9.
their old garments, and their dry fusty bread; They are Oves visu, sed vulpes
astu, said Bernard elegantly, their inside is of Fox-furre, their outside of
Lambs-wool; and so Inimici et proditores Ecclesiae, the Enemies and Betrayers
of the Church (as Cyprian said) are in ipsa Ecclesia contra Ecclesiam, that is,
they are in the Church against the Church; they live within the bosom of it,
and yet desire to exenterate and eat out the very Intrals and Bowels of the
same, these are cunning Impostors and juggling Jespited Heretical Doctors indeed
(such as Hugh Peter's was) taking England for their Country, and yet making Rome
the rule and randesvow of their Religion, pretending nothing so much as
Reformation, and yet intending nothing else but innovation and alteration of
Religion; they are like Janus Bifrons, looking with two faces under a hood; or
like a Barge-man, that looks with his face one way, and rows with his hands
another way; But you shall know them by their fruits, as that true Prophet has
foretold us how we should discern and discover these false Prophets; for as a
Wolf may be known from a Sheep, per unguem and ululatum, by his howling; and by
his claws; so may we discern the false Prophet from the true, by his words, and
by his works; ex malis moribus and malo dogmate says Melancthon: Some Divines
refer this only to bad manners, others only to false Doctrine; But the
Scripture (which is the best Umpire in points of controversy and the soundest
Interpreter of it self) shows expressly, that we may know them by both.

As first by their lewd life, for albeit these false Apostles, and deceitful
workers, like Satan, can transform themselves into an Angel of light, yet,
their Cloven-foot may be espied; which is a moral, 2 Cor. 1^.
to signify simulatam sanctitatem, their counterfeit holiness, which is duplex
iniquites a double unholinesse; therefore as Chrisystome says well to such
dissemblers; aut esto quod appares, aut appare quod es: albeit they can
prevaricate and equivocate, albeit they can dissemble cunningly for a time,
being in sheeps-clothing, yet if you be circumspect and wary, in the end you
shall know the Wolves by their Claws: Et si non ab omnibus fructibus, saltem ab
aliquibus cognoscetis eos, says Anselme; as they be (...), lovers of their own
selves, lovers of monyes, lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God, besides
this, they are for the most part covetous, proud, boasters, cursed speakers,
disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, 2 Timothy 3.2. the Apostle St. Jude
also describes them, and admonishes us to take heed of such deceivers,
telling us that they perish in the contradiction, and gainsaying of Korah: for
as Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, rose up and spoke against Moses; so do these
against them that are in Authority, Numb. 16.1, 2. Hi sunt in Agapis vestris
maculae dum vebiscum convivantur, secure se ipsos pascentes, Epist. of Jude 12.
nubes aqua carentes, and vent is circumactae; these are spots in your feasts
of Charity, when they feast with you, without all fear feeding themselves (i.
e.) feeding themselves impudenter, and absque ulla vel Dei vel Ecclesiae
reverentia, impudently feeding and feasting themselves, without any fear of
God, or Reverence to the Orders and Commanders of the Church, for instead of
bowing at the Lords Table, or receiving the Holy Encharist kneeling, according
to the ancient and decent Order of our Church, they allow men either to stand,
or sit, or lean, after an irreverent and unmannerly fashion, which they
themselves have devised; and they will not Administer or deliver the bread and
wine to the Communicants, but they must take it themselves, and so drink to one
another, as if they were in some common Inn or Alehouse, or the like;
wherefore to such as these, I say as Paul did to the Corinthians; do ye make
no difference betwixt the house of God, and your own houses? have ye not
houses to eat and to drink in? despise ye the Church of God? despise ye the
Reverend Order and Injunction of the Church, who ought only to appoint Decency
and Discipline, and ought to bear Rule and Authority in the Church: Despise ye
the Church of God, and shame them that have not? nay rather you shame your
selves in abusing the Lords Supper, and your love feasts, which were laudably
ordained by the Apostles at the first to be kept, partly to protest, and
increase, and preserve their brotherly love, and partly to relieve the poor and
needy, as Tertullian observes in his Apologet. cap. 39. shall I praise you in
this says Paul? I praise you not: And therefore they who contemn Government,
and condemn all ancient Laudable Customs, and Gestures heretofore used in the
Church, to introduce strange Whimzeys, and new devices of their own, do
Ixyon-like embrace a Cloud instead of Juno; St. Jude compares them to Clouds
without water carried about of winds, even led by the wind of their own Carnal
Lusts, and Sensual Appetites, 2 Pet. 2.17*18, 19. for there Peter tells us,
that they are Wells without water, and Clouds carried about with a Tempest, to
whom Caligo tenebrarum, the blackness of darkness is reserved for ever: They
are carried about with a Tempest (i. e.) they have some appearance outward, but
within they are dry and barren, or at most they cause but a tempest; for in
speaking, manem grande loquentiam sive vanes et praetumidus verborum ampulles;
In speaking swelling words of vanity, they allure through the lusts of the
flesh, or through much wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them who
live in error, while they promise them liberty, they themselves are the
servants of corruption; for of whom a man is overcome he is brought in bondage;
In a word the wind of ambition, and the wind of superstition, raised or stirred
up by that hellish Hagg, that infernal Acherontick Erynnis, that Machiavillian
principle or policy of granting liberty of Conscience to the people, has so
transported them beyond the rule of Reason and Religion, that their deeds are
manifestly and apparently known, and that Hydraes head of herisy and erroneous
Opinions is so multiplied, that to reduce our poor dilacerated and distracted
Church of England to that ancient uniform Discipline, and Ecclesiastial or
Episcopal Government which it once happily enjoyed, in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles of blessed memory, it will require now
a more the Herculian labor to effect it.

-- Fuimus Troes, fuit Iliam et Ingens
Gloria Dardaniae. --
But we may know them especially by the fruits of their Doctrine, look Titus
1.11. Where they are said to teach things which they ought not, Turpis lucri
gratia, For filthy lucres sake; And to preach fables, 2 Timothy 4. And that which
is worst of all to broach Doctrinas Damonium, Doctrines of Devils, forbidding
to marry, and commanding to abstain from meat, with the like beggarly
rudiments, 1 Timothy 4.3. In the 10th. of St. John's Gospel, and the 12th. verse,
The Wol^ is said to scatter and devour the Sheep. But in the 40th. of Esaias at
the 11th. verse, the good Shepherd does gather the lambs with his arms, and
carry them in his bosom; He does not show himself as a Lord, or as a Tyrant
over Gods heritage, but rather is a good Ensample to the flock of meekness and
humility, 1 Pet. 5.3. Memorable is that saying of an ancient Father, Boni
pastoris est tondere pecus, et non deglubere; A good shepherd should take the
fleece, but not flaw the Skin of his Sheep; The true Prophet binds up the
broken hearted, and comfort all that mourn, Esaias 61.1. Delivering doctrine
to Edification, Exhortation, Consolation, 1 Cor. 14.3. Such then as waken the
Spouse of Christ when she is at rest, such as cause devision and dissension in
the Church or State, and go about to dishearten and disparage, yea to disperse
and scatter the sheep of Christ, that great shepherd of our souls; Such as
rather trouble and consound, perplex and amaze, than relieve and comfort the
distressed Conscience: Such as build not upon the true foundation, and right
Cornerstone Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 3.11.
but bring Hay or Stuble, instead of Gold and Silver into the Temple of the
Lord; Such as are given over to Superstitious devises, and fond fancies or
surmises, Math 15.9.
to Antiquated obsolete Ceremonies, and Oldwives fables, Teaching for Doctrines
the Precepts of men, as the Old Pharisees did: and as the New sects of
Anabaptists, Independants, Presbyterians, and Millenarians do, some broaching
Pelagianisme, some Arminianisme, and some flat Papisme, and the like, I say,
such as are thorns in our sides, and thistles in our feet, are not current
silver, but Counterfeit coin, yea plain dross in the Finers shop; not good
plants in the Lords Vineyard, and therefore must be lopt and cut down, or
rooted up by the hand of supreme Authority; For they are as St. Jude speaks;
Arbores emarcidae, Infrugiferae, bis emortuae; Corrupt trees, unfruitful, twice
dead, and therefere must be eradicated, or plucked up by the roots; And so we
may easily discern, and know them by their fruits, For a good tree cannot bring
forth bad fruits: neither can a bad tree bring forth good fruits.

I could here give you some presidents and examples of diverse false Prophets,
which have been heretofore, as the Prophets of Baal, 1 Kings 18.
and of the Groves four hundred and fifty, which fed at Jezabels table, The
lying Prophets which deceived Ahab, 1 Kings 22. The Old Prophet, Act. 5. Act. 8.
that seduced the young Prophet that was slain by a Lion, 1 Kings 13. Theudas,
and Judas of Galile; Simon the Sorcerer, and that deceitful worker Mahomet,
which taught a Dove to feed at his Ear, wherein he had put grains of Corn. And
when he was in his fits of the Falling Sickness, he told his wife and the rest
of his followers that he was a Prophet, that the spirit of God fell upon him,
and that the Angel Gabriel in the form of a Dove came to his Ear, and revealed
to him secrets from God, whose presence he was not able to abide, and therefore
it was that he prostrated himself, and lay in a trance; Such a Prophet was one
George David born in Freesland, who boasted himself to be Gods Nephew, and that
he was sent from Heaven, to choose and to appoint who should be saved, and who
should be damned, Mr. Smith in his works so reports of him; Such a Prophet
also was James Nayler, Lang. Chron.
that great ringleader of the Quakers, who gave out these horrible,
prodigious, and blasphemous words, that he was the everlasting Son of God; Such
Prophets were Knox and Buchaman in Scotland, who were professed enemies, and open
opposers both of Monarchial and Episcopal Government; Such a Prophet was
Paraeus, and John Sleidan, or John a Leyden in Germany a Tayler-King, as he is
commonly reported an Arch-Anabaptist, and a mere effeminate and licentious
Nicolaitain, for he kept many wives together; Oh what havoc and desolation did
he and his Disciples bring upon that Church, by harboring and entertaining such
gross erroneous fancies in their brain, that a wicked and godless Magistrate
might be deposed and made away, For the ordinary preaching of Muncer was this,
God has warranted me face to face, he that cannot lie has commanded me to
attempt the change of those means, even by killing the Magistrate; and Phifer
his lewd Companion did but dream in the nightime of the killing of many mice
and presently interpreted, or expounded his dream of murdering the Nobles; But
these Prophets even all of them came to naught, as Theudas and Judas of Galile
did in the days of the taxing, of whom Josephus makes mertion, Lib. 20. De
Antiqu. Cap. 4. They all perished, and as many as followed them or obeyed them
were dispersed; For the Lord both checketh, Act. 5.37.
and corrects, and rejects such Prophets as these, saying, Jer. 23.21. I
have not sent these Prophets (says the Lord) yet they ran: I have not spoken
to them, yet they prophesied. And he says moreover, The Prophet that has a
dream, let him tell a dream, and he that has my word, Ier. 23.28, 29.
let him speak my word faithfully? What is the chaff to the wheat (says the
Lord) So what is the dross to the silver? Is not my word like as a fire says
the Lord? Thus the fire of Gods word does soon prove and find out those false
Prophets to be but dross, and therefore you see how needful it is to separate
them, and take them away from the silver; Take away the dross from the silver,
so take away the wicked from before the King, etc. I fear I have held you
overlong in talking of false Prophets, and in taking off the mask and vizard
from that dissembling hipocrite, that white-skind Devils-face, as Luther was
used to term the Traitor Judas.

2 Covetous and Unjust Judges dross.
Wherefore I hasten to the second sort that I named, viz. Covetous and Unjust
Judges; And whether they also may not well be compared to dross, judge ye; For
as the Prophet Esaias, Sophoclaeo Cothurne, in a lofty or in a Courtly style,
Esaias 1.21.
cries out and complains on the corrupt and degenerate Judges of Judah, that
were in his time; How is the faithful City become an Harlot? It was full of
Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it, but now Murderers. Here was a strange
alteration, and a most wonderful Innovation indeed, in respect of their life
and manners; When those that should execute Judgment and declare righteous
things to the people, did practice nothing else but the contrary; Nothing else
but mischief and murder, destruction and unhappiness were in their ways, and
the way of Peace, Truth, and Justice they did not know. Whereupon the Prophet
further upbraideth and accuses them thus, by way of similitude and comparison,
saying, Argentum tuum abijt in scorias, merum tuum Inspurcatum est aqua (i. e.)
thy Silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water, thy Princes are
rebellious and Companions of Theives. Unusquisque amat munus, et sectetur
retributiones, Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards; And that
you may perceive he speaks directly of coverous and unjust Judges, the words
following do intimate it unto us; They judge not the Fatherless, neither does
the Cause of the Widow come unto them. No, it seems they were all for money
and bribes, no just and honest or upright dealing was amongst them, no regard,
or pity, or Commiseration of the poor at all; The weakest went to the wall (as
we say) the poor Widow was despised, the Orphane and fatherless Children were
set at naught; Therefore says the Lord, the Lord of hosts, even the mighty God
of Israel; Eheu, ah, says he, (shaking his head as it were for grief at their
great cruelty and oppression, and deeply considering of it and laying it to
heart) Ah says he, I will ease me of mine Adversaies, and avenge me of mine
enemies; And I will turn my hand upon thee, Et defaecans scorias tuas, Justae
puritati restituam te; Whereby the Prophets comparison, the Lord takes upon him
to be an artificial Finer, and purifier of silver from dross, as Tremelius
tells us directly on the Text; Ut manu mea tanquam Artifex eos qui improbi sunt
a probis separem, refundendo totam Rempublicam velut Adulterinum nummum; I will
turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy
tin; Where by dross and tin, he means the wicked and ungodly, which are
indeed the grosser and the worser metal, and as it were the excrements of gold
and silver; Restituamque Judices tuos sicut primum; And I will restore thy
Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning; Afterward,
says the Lord, (i. e.) after all this, when I have separated the precious from
the vile, when I have thus purged thee from thy dross, and taken away all thy
tin, then thy silver shall appear, and give shine unto the world; For thou
shall be called, Civitas Justa, et urbs Fidelis; The City of Righteousness, or
the Faithful City. Jezabel shall lay aside her witty crafts and her paintings,
Rohab shall believe and receive the Spies with peace, Heb. 11.31.
the Harlot shall be metamorphosed or transformed and turned as it were into an
honest woman, Zion shall be redeemed with Judgment, (says Esaias) and her
Converts with Righteousness; And the destruction of the Transgressors, and of
the Sinners shall be together, and they that for sake the Lord shall be even as
dross is in the fire. For as the Lord says by the mouth of his Prophet Jeremy,
Behold I will melt them and try them. Ier. 9.7.
And Malachy places him, being Antiquus dierum, The Ancient of days, in the
seat of Judgment, Mal. 3.3.
saying, He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, he shall purify the
Sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the
Lord an offering in righteousness.

Now although (Exempla illustrant and non probant) yet to give you a president
or two for the clearing and illustrating of this point, and to single you out
some egregious and notorious examples of covetous, corrupt, unjust, and
unconscionable Judges; That one in the Gospel may be the first that shall be
arraigned in this Catalogue, and brought before the Tribunal of divine Justice,
because he is best known unto you, his bill of Indictment is drawn out,
delivered, and deciphered unto us by the exact pensil of the Evangelist St.
Luke thus; Luke 18.2.
and therefore is the more remarkable: There was in a City a Judge which feared
not God, neither regarded man; It seems by this he was guilty of the breach of
both Tables, a transgressor of the whole decalogue, peccant and delinquent he
was, in respect of all the Commandments; for he neglected his duty both
toward God and man, this was his general Obliquity, but his particular fault
and offense was this; There was a certain Widow in that City, and she came
unto him saying, Avenge me of mine Adversary, and he would not for a while;
Here was his obstinacy and injustice, joined with uncharitableness, by delaying
her suit, and protracting the time (a common fault of our cunning covetous
Lawyers in these days, to make a demur of their poor Clients causes, and hold
them in suspense Term after Term, till they have emptied their purses, and
brought them to want and penury. But according to that saying (Secundae
Cogitationes sunt meliores) Afterward this unjust Judge said within himself,
though I fear not God, nor regard man, yet because this Widow troubles me, I
will right her, and avenge, her lest by her continual coming she weary me; And
the Lord said hear what the unjust Judge says. As if he had said, do you not
mark the end of his speech? observe his aim and his drift, how that not for
fear of God, nor respect to man, not for love of justice to the poor Widow:
but merely for his own end, and his own ease, Ne tandem veniens, obtundat me,
Lest by her continual coming she weary me; Hear what the unjust Judge says
(says God) shall he avenge the Widow by reason of her Importunity? And shall
not God who is the Judge of all the Earth do right? Genesis 18.25.
shall not he avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night unto him, with a
Quo usque domine? How long Lord holy and true, as those souls do that lie under
the Altar, Revel. 6. Shall not he judge and avenge their blood on them that
dwell on the earth, even on them which Causelessly and Injutiously spilt it,
though be bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them and that
speedily; Nevertheless when the Son of man comes shall he find faith on the
Earth? No surely, for great Apostasy, false doctrine and heresy, and a general
corruption of manners shall then be praedominant, the love of many shall wax
cold, Faith shall scarce be found at Christ's coming; There must be a departing
and falling away from Faith toward God, and love toward man, an infallible
note of Antichrist and the last days Et jam recessit lex a Sacerdotibus, et jam
Terras Astraea reliquit, The Law is now departed from the Priest, and Justice
from the Magistrate, the foundations of the Earth are out of course, as the
Psalmiff complains; Yea all things are grown so naught, and there is such an
universal defection and corruption, both in the Civil State and Ecclesiastical,
that it begun of late years, even in the reign of the late King, through a
common fame to grow into a Proverb, Note that this was when they left the Law
of Magna Charta and set up a Law of their own like the Law of the Jews to put
Christ to death: so they set up the High Court of Justice to put the King to
death.
How that the Judges had betrayed the Law, and the Bishops had almost destroyed
and overthrown the Gospel. Horresto referens atque animus meminisse horet
lactuque refugit; O tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streets of
Askalon! I could here tell you of another unjust Judge, besides the former,
which is also recorded in the Gospel, and I cannot well pass over his name in
silence, although I cannot choose but name him with a kind of indignation and
disdain; it is Pontius Pilate by name, who was Governor of Judaea, as St. Luke
reports it, chap. 3. v. 1. Deputy and Lieutenant he was to Tiberius Caesar, the
Roman Emperor, under whom our Savior suffered; This was he who to humor,
content, and pleasure the people, he was indeed too popular and pleasing in his
dealings (For he knew that of envy they had delivered him) who though he found
no fault at all in that Immaculate Lanb of God Christ Jesus our blessed Lord
and Savior, yet contrary to all Law and Justice, contrary to his own
Conscience, yea conttary to that special Item, and serious Admonition which his
Wife gave him, being warned in a dream so to do, for she sent him this message;
Have thou nothing to do with that just man, for I have suffered many things
this day in a dream because of him, Math. 27.18, 19. Although his Wife (being
Divinitas Inspirata as it were) sent thus unto him, when he was set down on the
Judgment seat, yet he regarded it not, but pronounced the sentence of
Condemnation against that holy, and innocent, and just one; Who also though he
sent an Epistle to Tiberius to excuse the fact, and laid all the fault on the
Jews and their malice, (as Sixtus Senensis relates it) yet Stygma Injustitiae,
the brand and blemish, the spot and stain of injustice, of partial and wrongful
dealing, shall stick upon his name, so long as that superscription which he set
upon the Cross, shall remain to be read and recited in Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin, because all nations might understand it and remember it; Ioh. 19.20.
Or at least as long as that Gospel of our Saviors death and passion shall be
read and preached throughout the world. I could here produce and instance in
more such Judges, especially you would but give leave to the Ha^^maid to wait
upon her Mistress; For mention is made in humane story of one Verlenius, who was
in the days of the Roman Emperor Alexander Severus; He abused the favor of
the Emperor, and took much money of diverse to prefer their Suces, but deluded
them and did them no good: When the Emperor understood it, he caused him to be
hanged up in a Chimney (as some have it) or as others, he commanded him to be
tied in propatulo, in public view to a stake, and there to be suffocated, and
stifled, or choked to death with smoke, an Herald proclaiming to the people,
Fumum vendidit, et fumo punitus est, Smoke he sold and with smoke he is
punished; It seems that Justice is too much turned into smoke amongst us; we
have many sittings and meetings in the Country, which put us in mind, and both
pretend and promise some hope of reforming of disorders, and suppressing, or at
the least diminishing and decreasing that World of Alehouses, that is now
adays, but all turn into smoke, and vanish into nothing; the Cath-pole Excise
man goes away with all the gains, the poor Country man pays all, or else he
must drink sixteens; here is small Justice, and poor reformation of
Exorbitancies.

Another fearful example was read in Herodotus, that when a Judge for money, and
for lucre, had pronounced a false sentence; the King of the Persians caused him
to be excoriated and fleyed alive; and commanded that his skin should be nailed
over the Seat of Judgment, there to remain for ever as a terror to succeeding
Judges, and that the Son of the same Judge, should first supply the Seat, that
by his Fathers example, he might take heed of perverting Justice: A just
Judgment inflicted upon a corrupt Judge; which if it move you not, because a
Heathen was the Author of the story; yet hearken to the Law of God, against
which no exception can be taken; Cursed is he that takes a reward, to put to
death innocent blood, and all the people shall say Amen, Deuteronomy. 27.15.

Such Judges as these, our own Chronicles do afford us sufficient Testimony,
and Examples of, and they testify that there were such in the Reign of King
Richard the Second, namely Sir Robert Tresilian Lord Chief Justice, with six
more Judges, and diverse others of great places, who did not faithfully Counsel
the King; but advise him to do things contrary to Law, whereupon they were
censured in a Parliament holden at that time; some of them were Executed, and
some Exiled and Banished the Land for their Fasehood and Treachery; and such
Judges as these we have had of late years again, who have run into the same
Error, and fallen into the like praemunire, as they did, by deluding and
persuading the King against the Subject, and by alienating and exasperating the
hearts of the Subject against the King, and the like unlawful and ungodly
Stratagems and practices: Nay more than this, their wickedness and vileness
did not here cease, but they proceeded yet farther, and set up a High Court of
Justice (as they called it) and both Indicted and Arraigned the King himself at
their Bar, and made a Law among themselves (as the Jews did) to put that pious
Prince to death, and to divide his Head from his Shoulders, and this they did
contrary to Magna Charta; and contrary to all Law and Justice; and these were
Judge Bradshaw, Hacker, Harrison, Cook, and their Com-plices, who sat in
Judgment upon him, as Pilate and his Soldiers did upon Christ, and Condemned
him as a Traitor against the State; but these Judges for some part of them,
have of late been detected, and found out, and received Severe and Condign
punishment, for their Cruel, Heinous, and Bloody Offenses; and that blood which
was thus shed about twelve years since, is not yet expiated, neither is the
hand quite purged from it; therefore we may well say of them, as the old
Patriarch Jacob did of Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.6. In arcam eorum ne ingreditor
anima mea, in Caetum eorum ne adunator gloria mea; O my Soul come not thou into
their secret, unto their Assembly mine honor be not thou united; for in their
anger they slew a man (that was ten thousand times better than themselves;) and
in their selfwill, they dug down a wall; Cursed be their anger, for it was
fierce, and their wrath, fot it was cruel; I will divide them in Jacob, and
scatter them in Israel.

Thus when he makes inquisition fot blood he remembers it, and forgets not
the complaint of the poor, Psalm. 9.12. for although God revengeth not suddenly
the wrong done to his Servants, yet he suffers not the wicked always to
escape unpunished; So we read that God raised up the Holy Spirit of a young
Child, whose name was Daniel, to acquit and clear innocent Susanna from that
false and unjust accusation, which those two corrupt, vicious, and lascivious
Elders had brought against her, return again to Judgment said he, for they have
born false witness against her; and therefore such corrupt Judges as these, or
as Felix was, who kept Paul in prison, hoping that money should be given him to
let him loose, Acts 24.27, and such as the Sons of Samuel were, who turned
aside after Iucre, and took rewards, and perverted Judgment, 1 Samuel 8. they
must be removed and taken away from the King, for they are but dross, so says
my Text, Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come, etc. We
have showed you that false Prophets, and covertous corrupt Judges are but
dross in comparison of silver. III. Flattering Courtiers are dross.


In the third place we may observe, that fawning Parasites, that is to say,
flattering and aspiring Courtiers must be removed and taken away from the King,
for they are but like dross, in respect of pure silver, and to make us
abominate, abhor, and detest such, and to make us out of love with such dross
and refuse of men, David the King says, Psalm. 120.2. Deliver my Soul (O Lord)
from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue; and in the 12th. Psalm, he also
says, They that do but flatter with their lips, and dissemble with their
double hearts. the Lord shall root out all such deceitful persons; He means
the flatterers of the Court, which hurt him more with their tongues, than the
Philistines, or any open Enemy can do with their weapons; And Solomon says to
the same effect, and purpose Prove. 27.5, 6. Open rebuke is better than secret
love* fidelia sunt vulnera amici, Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the
kisses of an enemy are deceitful, even as the kisses of Joab and Judas were;
Let the Righteous rathersmite me friendly (says David) and reprove me, 2 Samuel
20.9.
but let not their precious balms break mine head; That is, Psalm. 141.6, 6.
let not their prosperities (like the Apples of Hippomane cast before Atalenta)
let them not allure me, nor entice me to be wicked as they are; yea I will pray
yet against their wickedness; or as some translations have it, within a while,
I shall even pray in their miseries: So that he could abides and take in good
part, all corrections, redarguitions, and represensions that came from a
loving, and tender, and friendly heart, and shows withal, that by a patient
waiting upon God, he shall see the wicked so sharply and severely handled, that
he shall even at the last for pity be fain to pray for them; howsoever in the
mean time he prays for him self, saying, ver. 10, 11. Keep me from the Snare
that they have laid for me, and from the Traps and Gins of these evil doers,
let the ungodly fall into their own nets together, and let me ever escape them.
Syracides also, or the Son of Syrach, speaks to the same purpose, advising us
to take heed of flattering, dissembling, and deceitful Companions, Eccl. 28.18.
Where he says, Many have fallen by the edge of the Sword; but not so many as
have fallen by the Tongue: He means a false flattering, and backbiting Tongue:
and he says further, well is he that is defended from it, and has not passed
through the venom thereof, for it is said of the wicked, the poison of Aspes is
under their Lips, Psalm. 14. and in Psalm. 5.9.10. There is no faithfulness in
his mouth, their inward parts are very wickedness, their throat is an open
Sepulcher, they flatter with their tongue; and according to this St. Gregory
says, plus nocet lingua Adulatoris, quam gladius persecutoris; the tongue of
the flatteter does more hurt, than the sword of the persecutor; and worthy
Bishop Babington, compares lying, flattering, dawbing, and smoothing, and the
like cunning, equivocating, and sophisticating tricks to theft, and calls it
(furtum linguae) the theft of the tongue; So we read that Absalom stole away
the hearts of the men of Israel, 2 Samuel 15.16. and so false Ziba stole the
goods of his Master Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 16. so these Sycophants, these
Parasites, and Flatterers, are great Theives both in Court and Country; they
are not only dominorum suorum arcisores, sed etiam arcosores, not only private
smilers upon, but open and manifest Cheators, and Couzeners, and beguilers of
their Lords and Masters, and therefore (as one says wittilly) let a Flatterer
be in your Pater Noster, but not in your Creed; pray for him, but trust him no
more than a Thief; albeit neither City nor Country be free from such
Cutthroats and Cut-purses; yet the Courts of Kings and Princes are especially
pestered with such kind of Thieves: indeed the saying is true, Exeat Aula, qui
volet esse pius, (i.e.) the Court is no place for the Practice of Piety, but
rather for the Exercise of Policy: And Barnard was wont to complain, that the
Court is wont to receive such as are good, but to make them bad; bonos facilius
recipere quam^ facers, nam plures in aula defecisse bonos quam profecisse malos
probavimus, and Budaeus says, all Courtiers must be like Chamelions,
accommodating themselves unto all Companies; ut assentioni and assentationi
site asserviatur, hilling and clipping, cringing and couching, and bowing to
all they meet; resembling the fish called Polypus, who applies himself to the
color of the Rock, against which it Swims, or whereon it lies; or much like
the Herb called Tripolium, which (as Antigonus reports of it) every day
changes his color thrice: being sometime white, sometime Violet, and sometime
Carnation: or if you will have it, they are like the flower called
Heliotropium, or the Marigold, which opens upon the Sunrising, and shuts
with the Sunsetting: so these time-serving Gnathoes, these flattering
Claw-backs, will follow you, and fawn upon you, whilst you are thriving, but
when you are declining and decaying, they will suddenly leave you, and forsake
you, gross and apparent Sycophants and Parasites, they are uno ore calcidum
and frigidum pro suis commodis efflare periti; creeping up to honor per mill
indignitates, through a thousand dishonours, and disgraces says Seneca, which
made Hippolitus to cry and say, In aula Regis, non est multum legis,
Si qui sunt boni, coguntur esse ovoi,
Si qui sunt mali, sunt in gratia regali.


And another to the same purpose speaks, quo quis Corruptior moribus, and
Corrumpentior munoribus eo beatire. The Court is all for money, making Oxen to
labor, and Asses to feed; It is a mint of Fashions, Job. 4.14.
and exchange of Complements, a shame to Shamefastness, an animator and
encourager of all Impudency and Impiety; omnis sceleris matter nutrixque
nefandi, the very Mother and Nurse of all pride and ungodliness; what was it
that made Haman so Haughty and Imperious, Proud and insolent, so full of malice
and mischief, and so desirous of revenge, but the Court of King Ahashuerus, and
the great honor and promotion therein, which by his insinuating subtilty, and
cunning flattery, he had aspired and attained unto? for he persuaded the King,
and solicited him against the Jews, telling him that their Laws were diverse
and contrary to all other, Neither keep they the Kings Laws (said he) therefore
it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them, Hester 3.8. Thus his flattering
and false suggestions, his envious and malicious Informations to the King, had
like to have proved the bane and ruin, and utter extirpation and destruction
of the people and nation of the Jews; So likewise those Presidents and Princes
of Darius, flattered and soothed the King exceedingly, when they procured him
to make that unreasonable and ungodly Decree, that whosoever should make or
ask a petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of him the King,
should presently be cast into the Den of Lions, and this they did to that very
end, that they might find occasion against Daniel concerning the Law of his
God, and so accuse him for neglecting and despising the Kings Decree, Dan. 6.5.
But afterward, namely in the 14th. verse, it is said, that the King was sore
displeased with himself, and why? because he was so seduced, and overruled by
his flattering Courtiers, to make such a strict and straight Law, which could
not be altered nor reversed: for though he set his heart on Daniel to deliver
him, and labored Usque ad occasum Solis, till the going down of the Sun, to
effect it, yet he could not prevail, because the Law of the Medes and Persians
was such, that no Decree nor Statute which the King established might be
changed; Therefore let Kings especially take heed of Flatterers, let them take
heed of rash Oaths, and of being led by their Favorites and Minions, to take
off the Head of John the Baptist, as Herod did, Math. 14. And to avoid this,
let all Flattering false-hearted Courtiers be taken away from before the King,
for they are but dross; Let their Faces rather be covered as Hamans was, when
that great Monarch was offended and displeased with him, Hest. 7.8. Yea let
them not have so much priveledge or favor to behold the Kings face, for they
are no true Friends of his, no good Subjects to his Majesty, or well-willers to
the State; For as King Priamus believing Sinons smooth Tale, Virgil L^b. 1.
aenead.
let in the Trojan Horse, which was a means of burning, and destroying that
ancient, and famous, and flourishing City of Troy, which was Columen pollentis
Asiae, as Seneca calls it in his Tragedyes, yea, as the Sirens song, is
sometimes the Saylors shipwreck, and as the Poet says, Fiscula dulce canil,
volucrem dum decipit anceps; As the sweet melodious pipe or whistle of the
cunning Fowler, entrappeth and ensnareth the silly Bird: So these kind of men
do eat like mothes into liberal men's Coats; They are the very bane and
consumption of Grearnesse, they rob many a Great man of his Goodness, and make
him rob and deprive the Commonwealth of her happiness; Therefore howsoever
these Sinons and Sirens may tempt us and alure us, let us not hearken to them,
nor regard them, but rather remember the good and wholesome words of wise
Cascandra, who said, Timeo Danaos vel dona ferentes.

And calling to mind what David says concerning such dangerous Charmers and
Inchanters, Psalm. 141.4, 5, 6.
Psalm. 141. O let not my heart be inclined to any evil thing, let me not be
occupied in ungodly works, with the men that work wickedness; lest I eat of
their dainties, or of such things as please them; Let the Righteous rather
smite me friendly, and reprove me, but let not their precious balms break mine
head, yea I will pray yet against their wickedness; And therefore let us
banish and abandon them, and both desire and endeavor to put away such dross
from the King. Take away the dross from the silver, etc.

IIII. wicked Counselors are dross.
In the next place, wicked and seducing Counselors may well be compared to
dross likewise; What is worse or more despicable than dross? So what can be
worse than evil Counsel, or more to be loathed and abhorred? Such a Counselor,
and wicked Prompter, and Suggester, was Satan, when he seduced our first
Parents, and tempted them to eat of the forbidden fruit; God said, In the day
that thou eatest thou shall dye; Eve being poisoned and corrupted by that Old
Serpent said; Lest ye dye; Satan himself said, Ye shall not dye at all, for
God does know that in the day that ye eat thereof, ye shall be as Gods, knowing
good and evil; A shrewd temptation and a subtle one, but he lied every word he
spoke; Job. 8.
being a Liar from the beginning and the Father thereof. Thus as Bernard
descants upon that place and passage in Genesis wittily and accutely; Deus
affirmat, Mulier dubitet. Diabolus negat; God affirms it, the Woman doubts it,
the Devil denies it, and which of these will ye hearken unto? Such a Counselor
was Achitophel to Absalom, when he advised him to rise up against his Father
David e and to thrust him out of his Throne and Kingdom, 2 Samuel 17. But the
Lord did defeat his Counsel and turn it into Folly, and so the saying was
verified, Consilium malum consultori pessimum, for it brought them both to
shame and confusion, the one hanged himself, and the other was hanged in a
Tree, Even in an Oak between Heaven and Earth, and they took him and cast him
into a great pit, and laid a mighty great heap of stones upon him; without all
question, that it might be an ensign and spectacle of terror to all Paricides
and Traitors that should either rebel against their Prince, or rise up against
their Parents, 2 Samuel 18.17. Such mischeivous, misadvised, and rashheaded
Counselors were those Youngmen who Counseled Rehoboam to play the Tyrant over
his people, and to chastise them with Scorpions; The old, and Grave, and Sage,
and Beaten Counselors advised him otherwise, saying, Show thy self kind and
loving to the people this day, and they will. be thy Servants for ever; But he
forsook the good and wholesome Counsel which the Old men gave him, and
followed the Counsel of the Young men, which was his own destruction, 2 Chronicles.
10. Even Kings going ^^ight are sometimes misled by naughty Counselors, as is
said of Joash one of the Kings of Judah, he did uprightly all the days of
Jehojada the Priest, but when he was dead, the Princes of Judah came, and did
reverence to him, and he hearkened to them, and so left the house of the Lord,
2 Chronicles. 14.
and served Groves and Idols; O well is it with Kings when they have such
Chaplains and such Priests as Jehojada; Such Prophets as Samuel was to Saul,
and Daniel to Belshazzar! O well is it with the Church, When Kings are nursing
Fathers, and Queens are nursing Mothers unto it, Esaias 29.13. And well is it
likewise with the State, if godly Ministers and religious prudent Counselors,
hang as a precious Jewel, or Ear-ring at the Princes ear! If Joseph a man that
fears God be a Counselor to King Pharaoh, he will advise him to lay up Corn
in the years of plenty, Genesis 41.6.
enough to supply his Land and sustain the people in the time of dearth and
scarcity. If Nehemiah be gracious in the Court of the King Artaxerxes, the
afflictions and distresses of his poor brethren in Captivity, shall be laid to
heart, Nebem. 18.10.
and the walls of Jerusalem, to the utmost of his power shall be rebuilt.
Worthily has Erasmus observed in an Epistle to John Alasto, that if we had
more Bishops like Ambrose, we should have more Emperors like Theodosius. If
Brentius the Divine be Counselor to the Duke of Wittenberge, Religion thereby
shall be better established and advanced. If Occam the Schoolman fly to Lewis
the Emperor, he may well say as he did Defend me gladio, et ego te defendam
Calamo, protect thou me with thy Sword, and I will defend thee with my Pen, as
Tritenhemius has observed. In a word, if the Kingdom be ruled, and governed,
and swayed by Gods Scepter, it will continue, and it will prosper, for that is
a right Scepter indeed as it is called, Psalm. 45. If the King himself make the
word of God his Counselor, as David did, Psalm. 119. and as he is admonished to
do, Deuteronomy. 17.18. Then shall he prolong his days in his Kingdom, and God shall
lengthen his life, and make his days as the days of Heaven; Then shall a
Crown of pure gold be set upon his head, and upon his head shall his Crown
flourish, maugre the head and hatred of all his enemies, if he shall purge and
put away this and the like dross that I have specified from the silver, then I
say his Crown shall be settled upon his head, and his Throne shall be
established in righteousness. The Gospel is the best Pearl or precious Stone
in his Diadem, the fairest Flower in his Garland, it is the only Ornament, and
chiefest glory of a Kingdom, the main and principal preserver and upholder of
a State or Nation next under Christ: But on the other side (as Solomon says)
Where there is no Vision, the people decay, Prove. 29. Yea both Prince and
People will soon rue it and go to wrack, if the Gospel of Christ have not free
passage amongst us, or if the sincere and faithful Preachers therrof, by the
divellish and malicious subtilty of some Popish, Politic and Pestiferous
Enemies of the Church; be silenced and suppressed. O then consider I beseech
you (beloved) how it behooves us to pray unto God, that he would be pleased to
endow, enrich, and adorn the Kings most excellent Majesty, with the undaunted
Courage and Constancy of Nehemiah, with the Zeal and Care of the good King
Josiah, for the reformation of Religion, and with the steadfast and pious
Resolution of King David, which he professes and protests that he would use
and observe in the Government of his own House and Kingdom, Psalm. 101.6, 7, 8.
Who so leads a godly life, he shall be my Servant, there shall no deceitful
person dwell in my house, he that tells Lies shall not tarry in my sight, I
will soon, destroy all the ungodly that are in the Land, that I may root out
all wicked doers from the City of the Lord. To this end also we had need
always to pray for him, not only that the name of the mighty God of Jacob may
defend him from all evil, and from all his enemies, O watch over him with the
careful eye of thy special providence, O prepare thy loving mercy, and
faithfulness that they may preserve him; But also it behooves us to pray, that
the Lord would be pleased to bless and furnish and assist his sacred Majesty
with good and wise Counselors, O such as are faithful to God, true to the
State, and loyal to their Sovereign. Parva sunt foris arma, nisi est consileum
domi, Where no Counsel is, the people fall; but where many Counselors are
there is health, Prove, 11.14. The wisdom of such is better than strength, yea
than weapons of war, Eccl. 9.16. Here let us pray for our King as Abigail did
for King David, 1 Samuel 25.27. Let the Soul of my Lord the King be bound up in
the bundle of Life with the Lord his God, and as for the Souls of his enemies,
let them be flung out as out of the middle of a sting. I will conclude this
passage with that prayer of David, Psalm. 72.1.

GIve the King thy Judgments O God, etc. Then shall He Judge the people
according unto right, and Defend the Poor; the Mountains also shall bring
Peace, and the little Hills Righteousness unto the People; He shall keep the
simple Folk by their right, and defend the Children of the Poor, and punish the
wrong doer; They shall fear thee as long as the Sun and Moon endures, from one
Generation to another; He shall come down like the Rain into a Fleece of Wool,
even as the drops that water the Earth; In His time shall the Righteous
flourish, yea, and abundance of Peace so long as the Moon endures.

Which Blessings the Lord grant unto Our King, and to all his Loving, and Loyal
Subjects whatsoever, and this let us all Humbly and Heartily, Jointly and
Devoutly pray for, and crave, and beg at His Hands for His tender Mercy Sake in
Christ Jesus Our Lord; to whom with Thee (O Heavenly Father) and Thy Holy and
Eternal Spirit, Three in One and One in three, one Immortal, Invisible,
Indivisible, Incomprehensible, and only Ever-wise God, be Rendered and Ascribed
(as of due belongs) all Honor and Glory, Power and Praise, Thanksgiving, and
Obedience, both now and for Evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

