Several Works OF Mr. JOHN MURCOT, That Eminent and Godly preacher of the Word,
lately of a Church of Christ at Dublin in Ireland.

CONTAINING,
I. Circumspect Walking, on Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. II. The Parable of the ten Virgins,
on Mat. 25. from ver. 1. to ver. 14. III. The Sun of Righteousness has healing
in his wings for Sinners, on Mal. 4. 2. IV. Christ's Willingness to receive
Humble Sinners, on John 6. 37.
Together with his Life and Death.

Published by Mr. Winter, Mr. Chambers, Mr. Eaton, Mr. Carryl, and Mr. Manton.

With Alphabetical Tables, and a Table of the Scriptures explained throughout
the whole.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in
Fleet Street, near the Inner Temple Gate. 1657.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Deputy FLEETWOOD, and the Lord HEN. CROMWELL.
My Dear and ever Honored Lords,
THough you love not applause, nor I can give titles to men, lest in so doing,
my Maker should cut me off; Yet must I perform my duty to God and to you, in
bearing witness to the truth as it is in Jesus, and effectually and exemplarily
dwells in you. Your piety, faithfulness, zeal toward God, tenderness to the
Saints, in whom is aliquid Christi, your ardent love to the faithful Ministers
of Christ, and to this our dear Brother departed, with his dearly beloved
consort and children, challenges no less at my hands; who was my Partner and
Fellow-helper in the work of the Ministry, an earthen Angel, and an heavenly
Mortal (that I may so speak;) of whom I may say, (as the Apostle of that
Brother) his praise is in the Gospel throughout all the Churches: I have seldom
known of his years a head better hearted, or heart better headed: The
enlargement of whose heart was the enlargement of his abilities: He was a
burning and bright shining star in the Firmament of our Church: holy for
Doctrine and Piety, but shining with a borrowed light from the Sun of
Righteousness, (which he was very sensible of.) For he did not offer to God
that which cost him naught, but gave up himself wholly to the Ministry of the
Word and Prayer, and the Lord was with him: Who did not only (as he said) lay
it on but with a warm hand rub it in. I have sometimes thought (when I have
come into the Congregation) that the Church-meeting-place was filled with the
smoke of Gods presence; such a power there was that went along with the word:
for he first did, then taught, and taught and did again. Acts 1. Mat. 5. living
over in the week time, that which he preached to others on the Lords day; (as
the Priest did of the Shewbread which was set upon the Table, which none but
themselves might feed upon) his life being a Commentary Non loqu(...)nur mag^a
sed vivimus.
upon his Text: and doubtless the Word is as efficacious to a gracious
dispenser, as to any of his hearers. This is that which made his Ministry so
efficacious, Mat. 21. John wrought no Miracles, but (acting in a way of
Righteousness) he was more prevalent than if he had wrought Miracles; for to
obey is more than to work a Miracle, (as Luther said:) Hence it was that in him
all Miracles (almost) met in one; the blind see, the deaf hear, the dumb speak,
the lame walk, the leapers are cured, and the poor are evangelized, (...), and
turned into the mould of the Gospel, not only the word delivered up to them,
but they delivered into the form of the word. His style did (piscatoriam
simplicitatem olere) savoured of Fisher-like simplicity, (as Chemnitius said)
he did not sore aloft in high expressions, shooting over his hearers, but did
condescend to the capacities of the meanest, which is an excellence in any: A
garish attire does not become a chaste matron, neither does the affectation of
humane eloquence become a grave sober Minister of Jesus Christ; as much
affection as you will, but no affectation, for nothing affected affects, nihil
affectationum afficit; aeger non querit medicum eloquentem sed sanantem.

We say of a Diamond, quicquid absconditur perditur, whatsoever is hid of it is
lost; those Rethorical flourishes are like the painted glass in the windows,
that make a fair show, but hinder the light: therefore (says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 3.) because the Gospel is glorious, we use plainness of speech.

But that which was the glory of all in this our dear Brother, was this (I may
boldly say) his labors were crowned with the conversion of many souls; which
is an evident sign of the truth of the Ministry by which they were converted:
He was sweetest (as Christ) toward his latter end, for he was not as a staff
behind the door, but being planted in the House of God, and enjoying Communion
with many precious Saints, he grew fast: whereas many with Thomas, Joh, 20. 24.
absenting themselves, have fallen short of that intimate Fellowship and
Communion with Christ they might have attained to. But he was not like
Joshuah's Sun that stood still, nor Hezekiahs Sun that went back; but like
Solomon's Sun, shining more and more to the perfect day; neither did he set in a
cloud (as many that have ecclipsed Gods glory, and therefore he ecclipseth
theirs) but sets gloriously in this world, and rises (I am persuaded) more
gloriously in another; therefore well may I cry out, (bitterly lamenting his
death) as that Prophet did, My father, my father, the chariots of Israel, and
the horsemen thereof; or as David concerning his son Absalom, O my son Absalom,
my son! my son Absalom! would God I had dyed for thee! O Absalom, my son, my
son! for I may truly say, it has been no small trouble to me, that the Lord
should take away this eminent instrument in the prime of his days, and leave
me behind (being a dry barren tree, and declining fast) as the dresser of his
Vineyard: but as in the means of grace, God grants them to some that will not
make use of them, but denies them to others that would, (for his ways are
unsearchable) even so he takes away some more hopeful instruments, and leaves
behind such as are less hopeful. -- To prevent that (...), incident to many,
that we might live above all, having our hand upon the stern of duty, and our
eye on the Star Christ.

My Lords, I present to your serious view, this piece of this our dear Brother,
transcribed by his beloved Consort, which (though it hold forth the state of
the Virgin-Church to come in the latter days) yet is it very suitable to the
present times, in which you may see, like Peter's Cock, he claps his wings, and
calls upon 2 Timothy 2. 26.
others to waken out of their drunken sleep. When the Cocks begin to crow, the
day begins to dawn, when the Cocks crow young and old, we say its clear day:
but when they hasten to their roost (with the sweet chirping birds, Cant. 2.)
night draws on: Now the Lord look back upon us as he did upon Peter: And give
us to remember our Rulers, even such as have been (as (...) est substantivum
(...).
appears by the words following) our Rulers; and have taught us the Word of the
Lord again and again, considering the end of their conversation, etc. for
assuredly, the living speeches of dying Prophets live for ever, Zach. 1. Their
word took hold, that is, it did pursue, overtake and seize upon that
generation. And so will the word of this our dear Brother fasten upon many a
soul (if not to his salvation) certainly to his eternal destruction, who if he
were alive again, would he not speak as now (though dead) in this present
discourse he speaks? Oh! rest not satisfied with the Lamp of profession, but
get the oil of saving grace into the vessels of your hearts, and go forth to
meet the Bridegroom, that when he comes, whether at midnight, cock-crowing,
or at the dawning of the day, you may not be found sleeping, but may enter in
with him. Its said of Arrius, that as his error, with the sad effects thereof,
spread after his death, so his torments were increased in hell; for the Lord
will render to every man not only according to his doings, but according to the
fruit of his doings: If so (as I believe it is a truth) O then! would we add to
this our Brothers Crown, and make it more massy, and fuller of those choice
pearls another day, let us remember, and forget not what by him was done and
taught; but say, (as she said) Lord lay up this for me, that whenever I have
occasion to make use of it, (as when not) I may so remember it, as that I may
practice, and be blessed in my deed.

But I detain your Lordships too long, I shall conclude with my hearty prayers
to the Lord, that as he has made you eminently instrumental, so he would take
pleasure in you both, to make you more and more instrumental in the hand of
Christ, (which next to our salvation, is one of the greatest privileges in
this life) and lengthen out your days, that you may return slowly to heaven;
which is the humble desire of,

My Lords, Your most devoted servant, Sam. Winter.

The Epistle to the READER.
Courteous and Christian Reader,
THou have here presented to thy view some Sermons os Mr. John Murcot, whilst
he lived, a precious Instrument in the hand of Jesus Christ, a Workman that
needed not to be ashamed: And now being dead, yet speaks by these and his
other labors.

Concerning the Author, he was (according to his years) of an exact judgment;
which appeared,

1. In the choice of apt Subjects, with respect to the persons and times
wherein he lived; as he aimed at the setting up of Christ's interest and the
welfare of his people, so he singled out arguments answerable, upon the
improvement whereof he spent his best thoughts: as might be instanced in these
and several other pieces of his.

2. In all his undertakings he labored to discover to poor creatures the
vileness of sin, Gods free Grace, yet ne^ (...) the prejudice of
Gospel-obedience: in the promoting whereof he labored very much, knowing the
great relactancy of flesh and blood thereto.

3. His wisdom appeared in his care and tenderness, in that with the discovery
of sin he always joined the nearness of Mercy: as he cast down with one hand,
so he raised up with the other: a Bonerges, and yet a son of consolation: and
oh how tender and humble toward poor troubled doubting souls!

4. In the healing and preventing of breaches among Brethren, he was admirable:
the Lord gave him wisdom above his years.

(2) As he was exact in judgment, so was he full of affections: how warm were
they, lying in the very bosom of his Master, which appeared in his melting
frame of Spirit ordinarily, and in his thirst to draw down notions, that
floated in the brain, to the heart and feeling, wherein he was exceedingly
successful.

(3) As for conversation, he was not only spotless, but active in good, in his
studies a^dlabours, wherein as he was abundant and unwearied (which probably
helped to shorten his life, that when his body came to conflict with the
disease, he had not strength to overcome) at all other times doing or receiving
good; of whom it may be truly said, that he did Epilcopum agere and vivere act
and live a true Minister of Jesus Christ: blessed Bradford connted that hour
lost wherein he did not some good with his tongue, pen or purse. It was the
commendation of blessed Hooper, that he was spare of Diet, spare of Words, and
sparest of Time.

These things being committed to another hand, we shall forbear; the scope of
this Epistle being to acquaint thee with the grounds of publishing these
Sermons, and to entreat thy candid interpretation and acceptance of our
endeavors therein.

First, The satisfying of the longing desires of several, some of whom eminent
not only in Place, but Piety, that their hearts may be refreshed, and their
memories strengthened by reading what they formerly heard with much delight.

2. The general acceptance of the Author, even with all sorts in those places
where he lived or was known.

Secondly, The seasonableness of the Subject: it being an Antidote against the
reigning of that most dangerous evil of the times, Formality: the most
satisfying themselves with the bare Lamp of Profession, not regarding the want
of oil in their vessels: and the best too apt to be nodding when the cry is
made: and with the Apostles, most sleep when it most concerned them to be
watching; which renders this Subject, not only of present, but lasting use and
benefit.

Thirdly, The manner of handling, which is solid and spiritual, so that the
ingenuous Reader may find in this Lamp, not only light to direct him, but heat
to warm him when he is a cold, and a Cry to awaken him, when he is asleep.

Fourthly, The Authors exactness in penning them: as if Providence, contrary to
his approved modesty, had designed them for public view, which thou have here,
as they were left in his own private notes: and you know, First, That writing
and speaking have their several Graces, they were publicly delivered with much
advantage. Secondly, They are set forth after his death, and you know charity
is due to Orphans: the Authors more then ordinary growth in a few years,
assures us, that had he lived to have revised this Work, it would have been
much more digested and refined.

Thirdly, Being left in Characters, in the transcribing whereof, by the most
diligent and exact, some mistakes are almost unavoidable, so that these may
challenge allowance, being transcribed by the Authors dearest relation, who
acquired the knowledge of his Character after his death.

Wherefore we entreat thee good Reader to bear with what might have escaped
upon that, or our own account, which we shall willingly own, judging it our
duty to prefer the Public, and eternal good of souls to our own names, for
whose sake as the Precious Author bestowed much of his oil in the trimming of
this Lamp, so we have set it up in view, beseeching the Father of Lights, to
bless and own it with like success and entertainment in the hearts of those
that shall read it, as he did when it was at first preached: Remaining
(Christian Reader)

Thy friends in and for the Truths sake, Samuel Winter. Robert Chambers.


Christian Reader,
MY Design in these few lines to thee, is not to commend the work that is here
presented to thy view; I suppose it will sufficiently commend it self. And if
it should be otherwise, it is not I, nor any other, who by a bare testimony can
add to the Merit of it. For though I must ingenuously confess, that since it
was left with me, I have not had time to read it exactly, nor could I keep it
longer in my hands, to satisfy my self that way, without some injury, having
been confined in my retaining of it with me, to a certain time. Yet so far as I
read, I have observed, that with much satisfaction to my self, which I judge
may be acceptable to others, both to instruct them, as also to awaken, quicken,
refresh, and comfort them; so that those who are wise, and will diligently
observe what they read, may be greatly edified thereby. My intent is rather to
speak of the man, (that precious servant of Jesus Christ, Mr. Murcot, who now
is taken to his rest, in that near Communion which he enjoyes with, and in his
blessed Head) then of any particular work of his. I first knew him when he
lived in Wirral, near Chester, and there was reason that I should be familiarly
acquainted with him, at that time, both because he was Preacher at a place, and
also to a people there, to many of whom my self in former times stood related,
till the violence of the then prevailing Prelates expulsed me thence; and also
because he took to wife from among us, Mrs. Hester Marsden, well reputed of by
us, and who now survives him, a serious Mourner, under the heavy loss of him.
He was while he lived there, the glory of that Country. A very quick, and
lively, and powerful Preacher he was, and mighty in prayer. Eminent for piety,
gravity, and holy innocence: warming and heating the hearts of the Saints by
his doctrine and life; a considerable part whereof, he spent in holy Communion
with them: And over-awing and silencing the rest of men where he lived, by his
wise, grave and harmless conversation. Dearly loved he was by some, and greatly
reverenced by others. But in Ireland, especially in the chief City thereof,
Dublin, (to which place he went, when he left Wirrall, and where he ended his
days) he became like Jonah his Gourd, he sprung up as it were in a night, his
growth was wonderful in that place: he filled that City, (I may say in some
sense) that Land, with his shadow: his fame went abroad through the whole
Country, and reached to many parts of this Nation also. And when the
Providence of the Lord carried me over thither (which was about twelve months
since, and about six months after he had finished his course, though my stay
there was but for a little moment, yet) I met with the sweet savor of his
precious name, which was like an ointment poured forth in all places where I
traveled. God was (doubtless) very remarkably with him, for a great work was
done by him in a short time, as it is clearly witnessed by all good people that
live there. He spoke the Word of God, as one who was much with God, and indeed
he had always much inward close Communion with God in secret, before he
revealed any thing of him or from him openly. He studied the peoples
distempers, and found out, that formality was the great epidemical disease
among professors, as indeed so it is every where in this declining age: And he
was wisely guided in the choice of such soul-searching Scriptures, by which he
might then separate the Sheep from the Goats, the wise Virgins from the
foolish, which will be Christ's work hereafter. In a word (for prolixity is not
so suitable for one who now presents all upon report, there being all the while
he lived there, a Sea betwixt him and me) he was a most industrious vigilant
Pastor, and a most austere and self-observing Christian. And this Crown of
glory the Lord put upon him, which few others have had the honor to wear; he
was like a rising Star, ever to his death in a rising State, increasing in
spiritual height and stature every day, and grew more eminent and excellent in
his gifts, graces, labors, usefulness and profitableness continually; and he
lived, not to be at a stay, much less to decline, but when he was nearest
heaven, the Lord carried him thither. He may be reckoned among the Lords
Worthies, of whom the world was not worthy. The Lord has taken him, but his
remembrance will not be so soon gone. He will live while any that knew him
shall live; and afterward also, if the Lords blessing shall accompany the
rehearsal of his life and death, and his Sermons Printed, in such sort as his
blessing has attended the passing and spending of his life, and his dying, and
in the preaching of such Sermons: All which were greatly sanctified to the
people that beheld and heard them. Now that it may be so, shall be the earnest
prayer of,

Thy real friend to serve thee in the Lord, Sam. Eaton.

Christian READER.
I Never knew the Author of this Work in Person while he lived, but being dead,
I know him by his Picture, and that the Picture of his better and more noble
part. The first Part of this Book is formally so, being a very exact draft of
his whole Life, and the image of his inner. Man in all the Divine Colors,
Lights, Lineaments and beauties of it. Few men have found such a Pen^il to draw
them, and few Pencils have found such a man to draw. He was but a little while
in the world, but he lived long, else he had never yielded true Materials for
so long a History of his Life. The following Parts of the Book are vertually
so, I mean the Picture of his better Part, or the image of his mind: in which,
though dead, he yet speaks, and breaths through every Page and Line, Truth
and Holiness, Zeal for God, and Compassion to the Souls of men, his own Tastes
that the Lord is Gracious, and ^is longing Desires to make others partake of
the same Grace, which himself had tasted. Read the Book, and therein you have
the Soul of a faithful Minister of the Gospel copied out.

It is an amazing Providence to see many unprofitable Drones, Idol Shepherds,
blind Guides, Men whose Graces are not at all discernable in their lives, and
whose gifts are sapless, Spiritless, and upon the matter useless in their
Ministry, live to old age, and wither upon the Stalk; while others of shining
Graces, of lively Gifts, and of unwearied Industry in the Lords Vineyard, are
cropped off in the very blooming, and as soon as showed to the world, called out
of it. But who may say to God, what do thou? He is in one mind, and who can
turn him? and what his Soul desires, even that he does. He performs the
thing that is appointed for us, and many such things are with him.

But though we have nothing to say to God, the most wise God, about this
dispensation; yet this says much to Man. This says much to Ireland, whither
God sent this burning and shining light; Have not they much cause to consider
how they prized it, how they improved it, seeing God put it out so quickly, and
gave them so short a season to rejoice in it? That he preached so few years to
them, should be to them an everlasting Sermon. And this question should come
thick upon the heart of that Church there, which was the Candlestick in which
God placed this light; why was it so? why was it so? why has the Lord removed
our Teacher into a Corner (the very Grave) so that our eyes cannot see our
Teacher (who was also a Pastor after his own heart) any more? Was he enough in
our hearts? or was he too much there? We may forfeit our enjoyments by too
high, as well as by too low an esteem of them; and by looking too much upon
means, provoke God to hide it from us. But whatever moved the Lord to take him
from you, it well becomes you to be thankful that you had him (though but for a
short season) in person among you, and that so much of him (this mant le which
fell from him as he was ascending) is gathered up, and left with you and other
Churches, as his Monument and Memorial for ever.

Joseph Caryl.

Good Reader,
IT is often seen that good men die soonest, our translation to heaven is
delayed only till our fitness to enjoy heaven, as soon as we are Col. 1. 12.
meet for that blessed inheritance, we are gathered in Job 5. 26.
like a shock of Corn in its season: some ripen for heaven apace, and are taken
out of the world sooner then others, now it is pity that all their fruit
should die with them; Christ says to his Apostles; John 15. 16.
I have ordained you to bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain:
Intending (I suppose) not only their reward in heaven, and the continuance of
Believers, begotten by them to God, who in a very commodious sense are the
surviving fruit of their labors, but also their Doctrine consigned to the use
of future ages by writing: The writings of the Apostles (I confess) are more
necessary then those of private men, as making up the Canon and rule of Faith,
but yet the explications of ordinary Pastors and Teachers have their use and
benefit, and it is a commendable diligence in them that gather up the fragments
of good men, that nothing be lost.

It pleased God to call up this worthy servant of Jesus Christ to heaven
betimes, it were pity that the Sermons coming from such a warm and
affectionate spirit, should die away with the breath in which they were
uttered; as his fruit remains (I hope) in the hearts of many that heard him,
so is it wrapped up in these papers by the diligence of his surviving friends, to
preserve it from perishing and forgetfulness.

Its an happiness, though not to be hoped for, yet to be wished for, that none
would write in this public way, but very holy, or very learned men, who either
from their profounder knowledge of the mysteries of godliness, or inward
acquaintance with the workings of the Spirit, are most likely to improve or
keep alive the Doctrine of God in the Christian world; this worthy instrument
thou will find to be a man by no means of dispicable abilities, but chiefly
excelling in a gracious heart, and much inward experience in the things of God;
and though deep speculations, and luscious language is not here to be expected,
yet many wholesome and heartwarming truths, delivered in a grave and unaffected
style, which (if my hopes deceive me not) will be of great use to quicken this
dull and carnal age to a greater study and vigor of holiness; and therefore
(being desired) I could not but recommend these Sermons, to thy best
acceptance; I am.

Covent Garden, this 19. of Jan. 1656. Thine in the Lords work, Tho. Manton.

De. Authore.
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
Per Tho. Gloverum, Warwicensis Scholae Ludimagistrum.
De Eodem.
FAllor? an ipse tuo Murcotte per omnia vives
Saecula, cum terris corpus inane jacet?
Dignus es aeterna, qui, laud, feraris ad astra,
Cui novi terras vix peperisse parem.
Mortuus es Murcotte, at saeva morte triumphas,
Quem non Lethaeis sors dare quivit aquis.
Membra licet jaceant tristi resupina sepulchro,
Facta tamen nolunt saecula sera mori.
Per Eundem.
CHristian come hither, read, and reading mind,
And thou shall here, a Directory find.
A light indeed, but borrowed from heaven,
Which will direct to keep thy footsteps even.
Whilst that a darksom wilderness we tread,
The fiery Pillar, will us safely lead.
See, here is a Pillar, on which who casts his sight,
Shall see a flame, out-shining all false light.
Through which, maugre the spite of mankinds foe,
He shall to the celestial Canaan go:
Where that Star shines now in perfection,
Which sparkled here for Saints direction.
per me, Tho. Glover Warwicensis Scholae, Ludimagistrum.

The Table of the Scriptures opened and explained in this Volumn.
Genesis. Chap. Ver. Page. 4 7 120 17 12 487 25 8 329 Exodus. 1 13 490 16 25
370 20 20 553 32 12 395 34 7 636 Leviticus. 19 23 89 25 41 517 42 ibid. 44 487
45 530 46 ibid. Joshua. 1 5 430 18 3 296 2 Samuel. 3 16 523 9 13 219 1 Kings.
11 13 394 22 29 159 Nehemiah. 8 10 341 Job. 2 22 393 5 26 326 8 07 558 16 00
066 19 27 137 21 from 7, to 9 133 31 1 364 21 236 33 26 182 Psalms. 1 3 245 4 3
091 18 23 235 36 08 340 40 6 532 51 17 281 75 8 344 76 5 193 84 7 561 92 12 560
94 7 402 111 10 p. 81 See this in the first subject, Circumspect walking. 119
59 76. See this in the first subject, Circumspect walking, etc. Proverbs. 1 26
315 3 14 367 4 27 61 See this in the first subject, Circumspect walking, etc. 9
1 353 2 ibid. 4 357 12 10 396 24 5 605 26 23 399 Eccles. 2 9 558 Canticles. 2 7
81 See this in the first subject, Circumspect walking. 11 419 4 10 350 5 1
ibid. 2 158, 168, 184 3 160, 161 Isaiah. 1 5 442, 443 6 ibid. 13 399 6 10 296
17 11 559 27 11 634 35 8 088 40 29 634 50 10 241 11 103, 225, 242 60 1 414 61 1
496 62 5 048 Jeremiah. 2 2 185 13 25 321 17 09 269 Ezekiel. 34 4 442 44 9 088
Hosea. 2 19 074 7 11 105 14 4 85, 86 5 633 9 115 Amos. 3 2 395 Jonah. 1 5 144,
151 Micah. 3 11 405 Zephaniah. 3 17 48 Zechariah. 9 11 506 Malachy. 4 2 411,
429 431, 434 436, 438 478, 558 Matthew. 2 8 62 See in the first subject,
Circumspect walking, etc. 3 3 7 5 16 242 9 15 035 13 6 415, 434 13 2 31, etc.
562 16 24 594 18 3 579 19 22 381 22 2 36, 53 19 497 24 28 672 37 173 45 3 25
from 1. to 14 Paraphrased. from 5 to 18, 33 3 103 5 119, 140, to 144 6 197 7
221, 240 8 262, 286, 9 301, 314 10 319, 325 338, 363 11 377 12 ibid. 391 26 29
342 40 145 45 176, 182 27 46 245 Luke. 1 78 415 4 18 528 7 47 610 11 21 493 22
ibid. 12 29 513 39 208 17 26 151 27 ibid. 18 17 582 19 42 273, 279 24 45 021
John. 1 9 417 11 678 6 37 655 38 669 39 ibid. 45 653 8 32 484, 566, 605 33 481
34 491 10 17 368 12 32 672 14 21 394 17 9 41 13 350, 533 20 23 401 Acts. 3 21 8
5 3 96 9 7 654 18 25 62. See in the first subject of Circumspect walking, etc.
20 26 679 26 18 270 Romans. 2 4 128 4 15 485 6 7 492 17 499 22 542 7 13 548 14
61. See in the first subject of Circumspect walking, 488, 512 15 394 25 239 10
18 438 13 11 167 1 Corinthians. 3 1 514, 612, 643 5 11 99 7 14 92 29 173 15 52
200, 202 2 Corinthians. 5 17 303 11 2 44, 68 Galathians. 1 6 483 3 2 485 23 500
4 24 486 5 17 238 Ephesians. 4 13 576 5 8 495 15 53, 55, 57 63 16 See in the
first subject of Circumspect walking. 18 355 2 6 667 3 2 363 14 253 18 022 20
056 4 10 243 Collossians. 1 24 127 2 4 250 15 493 19 569 1 Thessalonians. 4 16
7, 200 1 Timothy. 4 15 639 Hebrews. 1 2 416 3 039 2 24 502 4 16 62 11 40 433 12
13 665 17 285 James. 1 2 337 19 461 1 Peter. 2 2 630 16 540 3 19 436 4 18 309 5
5 249 9 619 2 Peter. 1 5 624 12 328 3 17 250 18 249, 604 1 John. 2 20 104 24 24
3 2 351 9 12 3 John. 2 618 Jude. 12 589 Revelation. 2 4 146 21 128 3 2 257 21 9
36 22 15 363

The Errata's following begins at The Parable of the ten Virgins. PAge 2. line.
30. blot out not; p. 3. l. 29 for fast you, read, as fast as you; p. 29. l.
last, for her own, r. our own; p. 71. l. 9. blot our for; p. 75. l. 22. for we
choose, r. will choose; p. 87. l. 5. for to fit loose, r. to fit loose; p. 105.
l. 10. for bidden arts, r. hidden parts; p. 106. l. 23. for fall, r. fill; p.
115. l. 12. for All proressions, r. All processions; p. 117. l. 13. for widows
case, r. widows cruse; p. 126. l. 34. blot out thou; p. 165. l. 3. blot out
and; p. 188. l. 37. for he asleep, r. be asleep; p. 225. l. 17. for i^ is, r.
is it; p. 561. l. 29. for decy, r. decay; p. 428. l. 7. for Maditation, r.
Moditation; p. 609. l. 32. for though be, r^ though he.

MOSES IN THE MOUNT: OR, The beloved Disciple leaning on Jesus, S bosom.

Being a Narrative of the Life and Death of Mr. John Murcot, Minister of the
Gospel, and Teacher of the Church at Dublin.

Written by a Friend.

Prove. 7. 10. The memory of the just is blessed.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in
Fleet Street, near the Inner Temple Gate. 1657.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THOU may happily be offended that I bring upon the Stage, and present unto thy
view the mere shadow of a man, and not the living substance: Sit but a while,
and thou shall see something pass before thee, worthy thy observation. I must
needs acknowledge a disparaging disproportion betwixt this Copy and the
Original: Had I drawn his Picture, whilst alive, I might have described his
perfections in more resembling Characters; but doing it since his death, it
cannot be expected I should draw him in any other, then dead colors. His
Graces were more lively, and sparkling in their exercise and operation, then in
this faint and languishing Representation. However, something I was willing to
do to revive the memory of our departed friend, and to make him known unto
those, who have not yet heard of him by the hearing of the ear. Reader, thou
have here a bright Torch, that had much flame and but a little smoke, and more
matter for thy imitation, then caution. Be a follower of him, who followed the
Lord fully, and having done his work, is gone to receive his wages, and to take
up his place about the Throne. Gods glory, and thy spiritual advantage are in
the eyes, and aim of,

Dublin, the 10th. of October 1655. thy souls friend, J. G.

Moses in the Mount; OR, The beloved Disciple leaning on Iesus's Bosom.
Being a Narrative of the life and death of Mr. John Murcot, Minister of the
Gospel, and Teacher of the Church at Dublin.

THE children of God are not without cause styled his Workmanship, his
Building. Ephesians. 2. 10. 1 Cor. 3. 9.
Every particular Believer is a little living Temple, and made the Habitation
of God through the Spirit, such honor have all his Saints.

Christian Reader, I am about to present unto thine eye a curious Piece, a
stately Structure, framed by the hand of Free Grace, in the Survey of which,
much of the wisdom, and goodness of God will be eminently conspicuous. I have
several wel-furnished Rooms to lead thee to, but must first pass through the
Porch and Preface, the grounds of my undertaking, and so make the fa^rer way
for the ensuing Relation.

1. It has not been a thing novel, and unheard of in the Church of God, in
such a way as this, to transmit unto Posterity the Names, Memories, Gracious
Conversations of eminenter Saints, especially Ministers, who in their several
Spears and Generations, have shined like stars of the first magnitude,
streaming and issuing* forth a more then ordinary and illustrious Light.

2. The lives of morally* honest Heathens are both recorded, and read with
profit, not only by fellow pagans, but by us Christians. Who knows not that
Plutarch^ lives have in them many things serving for Caution and Imitation?
More advantage doubtless will redound by reading the lives of the
Evangelically, spiritually, and really religious.

3 We have the warrant of sacred Writ, which (being not only Doctrinal but in a
great part Historical) does much encourage to a Practice of this Nature. The
11. Chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrews, you will find to be an Epitome of the
lives of the Fathers. Now where we have the Spirit of God going before, we may
well follow after.

4. The extraordinary strictness, exemplary severity, unwearied industry, and
activity of this man of God in the ways and work of the Lord do exceedingly
excite and strongly provoke to make him thus public, and to propose the
holiness of his life, and comforts in death, for the direction and consolation
of those, whose faces are set toward Sion, and to whom this account of him
shall come.

5. That God may have the glory of what he had done in him in a way of gracious
discoveries and manifestations, of what he had done for him in a way of clear
providence, and encouraging dispensations, of what he had done by him in
giving success unto his labors, and letting him see the travel of his soul, to
his no small solace and satisfaction.

6. That the Name of such a Pleasant Plant, and fruitful Bough might be
preserved fresh* green and verdant in the memories of Gods people, e^ough
himself be withe^ed, lopt off by the hand of death, and for a while laid in the
dust.

As Abel, so other Saints, though dead, may yet speak, and be made known. And O
what a glorious thing is it, when departed souls are lodged in Abraham's
blissful bosom, and dead bodies intombed in living Sepulchers, sending forth a
sweet and refreshing savor into the nostrils of surviving friends! A flower
may smell sweet after it is cropped, and a way made for the Sun to shine after it
is set.

Mr. John Murcot, (the History of whose life is now to be related) was born in
the ancient Town of Warwick, of Parents considerable for their Extraction, more
for their shining and pious conversation.

His Fathers name Job Murcot, who applied himself to the study of the Law,
which brought him in a competent and comfortable subsistence, though since
humbled by the calamitous inconveniences of these distracted times, whose
various revolutions have occasioned a wasting and undoing unto many.

His mothers name before her marriage with his Father, was Joan Townsend, of
raised parts, and eminent piety, the happy mother of an hopeful son, the
renowned Root from whence apppeared and sprouted up this fair and flourishing
Branch, planted by the Rivers of water, who brought forth his fruit in his
^eason, his leaves did not wither, and whatsoever he did, the Lord made it to
prosper.

His Parents were conscientiously careful of his education, made it their
business to season him with sound and solid Principles in his young and tender
years, which he greedily sucked in, as having an early thirst after God; and he,
who erst while hung on his Mothers breast for milk, now hangs on her lips for
instruction.

His Parents perceiving in this their young Timothy an ardent desire to be
intimately acquainted with the Scriptures, and in order thereunto, with
Academical learning were very prone to contribute their endeavors toward the
ripening of these hopeful Buddings and promising Beginnings, and therefore in
the first place committed him to the care and tuition of an able and godly
Schoolmaster, Mr. Dugard, who instilled instruction both with his lips and
life, desirous to make him not only a Scholar, but a Christian; Its hard to say
(...) which was more diligent, and industrious, the Master in teaching, or the
Scholar in learning. Time was not misspent and prodigally expended in the eager
pursuit of childish vanities; he ran at his first seting out, and did not
lazily loiter when he should be minding his work; yea, when other boys would
be sporting and playing, he would be studiously retired, solitariness and
meditation being unto him instead of recreation.

Being competently furnished for the University, his Father sent him to Oxford,
where he continued his former diligence in his studies, under the conduct and
oversight of Mr. Button, his faithful and religious* Tutor in Merton College.
About two years after his thriving abode there, the Kings Forces possessed
themselves of Oxford, put all things into an hurry, and engaged the students in
such perplexing snares, that Mr. Murcot, to disintangle himself out of these
uncouth inconveniences, fled from Oxford disguised, and repaired to the House
of Mr. Leigh of Budworth, an ancient, grave, able and learned man, and Minister
of that place; and there studied hard both day and night, allowing himself but
four hours for sleep, so intent was he upon his Book, and so wholly taken up
with religious Exercises. The cloud being blown over, he repaired the second
time to the University, and his former diligence which caused the eyes of many
to fix and fasten on him, as perceiving something more then ordinary in him,
and expecting more than ordinary from him. Though means and maintenance were
now very short, yet it did not discourage and cause him to de^ist. he did not
unbend the Bow and slacken the string he still stood an end to his Oar, and
with wonted diligence prosecuted his studies, it being his meat and his drink
to do his Fathers will. Having taken his degree, he returned to his old friend
Mr. Leigh, and was several ways useful to him, who now called upon him to
appear in public, which he did not without much fear, and trembling, as being
conscious to himself of his own inabilities for so ponderous an employment, and
loath to put to his shoulders, lest he should sink under the burden. But being
pressed and egged on by his friends and a Call from the Inhabitants of Ashbury,
he entered into the Lords Vineyard, put his hand unto the Plough, and was
ordained a Minister at Manchest^^ He professed (to use his own words) that he
was drawn as a Bear to the stake, How sparkling is knowledge, when set off with
the ^oll of a modest self depression? Ignorance checkered with Impudence, is
all the stock that many confident Predicants set up withal.
complaining, and often bewailing his want of a sufficient stock of University
learning.

The Lord was pleased to own him in his first attempts and endeavors, giving
him a seal unto his Ministry, by the conversion of two especially, who being
awakened by his sound Doctrine, smart expression, and powerful delivery, sadly
bemoaned themselves and mourned over their lost condition, even in public.

From Ashbury (a call being cleared up) he removed to Eastham in Woral, and
gained mightily upon the affections of many, especially* the godly, whose
hearts began betimes to be knit unto him, and here likewise the Lord was
pleased to water his labors with the dew of his blessing.

But me thinks I see a black cloud arising; this bright star, who shined full
clearly, and comfortably unto others, is now himself eclipsed, and He, who was
a skilful Pilot to direct others through the splitting Rocks and swallowing
Gulphs, is now himself plunged into the great deep; the Lord persecutes him
with his tempest, and makes him afraid with his storm, all his waves, and his
billows go over him. But what might be the occasion of so sad a desertion? 1. O
the stupendous stupidity, and dismal blockishness of those, who having
contracted the guilt of most monstrous and abhorred villainies, are yet as
sens^^ss as stocks, as hard as rocks, and complain not of any stirrings and
gripes of con science!
The folly and the vanity of his youth, though not stained wi^h irruptions into
grosser evils. 2. His too far yielding at Oxford, with those impositions, which
grate upon conscience and scourge it with severe remorse. 3 The Lord would
hereby ripen him, and make him the more fi^ for himself and service. He must be
frost-bitten, that so he may be the more mellow, and his fruit of a more
delicious taste.

There are no Preachers so experimental, spiritual, powerful, courageous,
awakening, convincing converting compassionate, comforting, as those who have
passed through the Pikes, and have been sorely bat^ered with showers of
Hailstones.

There are none so expert at binding up the broken bones, as those who have
been broken upon the wheel, and made to roar out by reason of the disquietness
of their hearts.

They know how to speak a word in season unto him that is weary, who have
themselves been weary and heavy laden, sighing full sadly, and groaning full
heavily under the cold, hill, clouding and cutting expressions of Gods
displeasure. They know how to speak peace unto distressed consciences, who have
themselves been soundly frighted with the sounding of the Trumpet, and the
Alarm of War.

There are no Trees so firmly rooted, as those that have been sorely shaken,
and made to bow and bend with the stormy wind and tempest of the wrath of the
Almighty. The scales many times stick so close even unto the Seers eyes, that
they will not be rubbed off but with a rough hand, and a sharp file.

But will the Lord contend for ever, will he be always wroth? Esa. 57. 16.
Surely no, and that lest the spirits should fail before him, and the souls
that he has made. There is a lifting up after a casting down. The Lord turns
for him his mourning into dancing, gives unto him beauty for ashes, and the
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, and with a soft hand wipes away
the tears from his swollen eyes.

The instrumental means of scattering the darkness and distress that lay upon
him and of restoring the former beams of light, with which he was wont to be
refreshed, were the reading of Mr Tho. Goodwins Child of Light walking in
darkness, and other of his Treatises: So that now we have the Lord shining on
him in a way of consolation, as he on others in a way of instruction, and
information.

About the 25. year of his age, being resolved to change his condition, and
discoursing with a friend about it, there was proposed unto him Hester, the
daughter of Mr. Ralph Marsden, (Minister of West-kerby, of note, and useful in
his generation) whom he afterward took to him to be the companion of his life.

But before the consummation of the marriage, the people of West-kerby, (Mr.
Marsden departing this life) gave him a call, which upon examination and
supplication, being found to be of God, was complied with.

The seed of Gospel: counsels being sown with a diligent hand, did not long lie
buried under the clods, but sprang up, and put forth it self in visible fruit,
which was a farther clearing of the ^all, and chearing of the heart of this
pains-taking Husbandman.

Its no new thing for external and bitter afflictions to accompany the sweet
honey of Gospel-consolations. How often do dashing showers fall upon
mellifluous Hives, and the fairest flowers that grow in Gods Garden? How often
are the laboring bees assaulted with a tempest whilst abroad, and bringing
home provisions against the ensuing winter? What more usual then Sun-shines,
mixed with blustering winds, and wetting rains?

Two Villages of the Parish of West-kerby are sorely visited So sparks fly over
from Dublin.
with the Pestilence, and the Lord scatters abroad the black tokens of his
displeasure, the product of which was many fasts, tears, prayers, importunate
requests, that the Lord would show unto his people, why he thus contended with
them.

Mr. Murcot has his ears opened to instruction. This thundering Providence
awakens him to a more exact scrutinie, and narrower search into his heart and
ways, and is now persuaded that he had been too lax and general in the
administration of the sealing-Ordinances, so that he resolves to forbear, and
draw back his hand unless the known godly will combine, which occasioned many
Fasts, Conferences, Debates: However he perseveres in preaching work, and waits
on Providence, to see how the Lord will dispose and incline the peoples hearts.

An Irish Lord quartering at West-kerby, being bound for Ireland, was observed
to be a prodigious swearer, belching out Zeal.
most horrid Oaths in great abundance. Tidings are brought to Mr. Murcot in the
morning as he is going to celebrate a solemn Fast. The work of the day being
over, Mr. Murcot being lately with God in the Mount, and now grown warm in his
cause Ex. 32. 19.
and quarrel, is impatient of brooking these high dishonours that were done
unto his Majesty. Wherefore taking with him a friend he rides the same night
six miles to a Magistrate, procures a Warrant; the trembling Constables at
first are astonished to think of approaching in such a way to guilty greatness;
but being animated by Mr. Murcot, they serve their Warrant, which provoked a
new rage to the multiplying of fresh oaths, even without number, to the great
amazement of the standers by. Notwithstanding the boisterous menaces, and
outrage of this great man, his horses were seized on, and kept, till he paid 20
which was employed as a stock for the poor of the Parish, so wickedly liberal
was this Lord unto them. This exemplary Act of Justice procured and prosecuted
by Mr. Murcol's active zeal, so danted and overawed his Lordship, that during
his abode there, he held his mouth and tongue, as it were with bit and bridle.

The prsence of a si^ punishing Magistrate has in it a co-ercive and
restraining virtue, so that the most debanched and profligate sons of Belial
are afraid, and confined with n some bounds of moderation; who, if remote, and
at a distance, they lift up their heads with a mighty confidence, and finding
the reins lie loose upon their shoulders, rush into all manner of wickedness,
as the Horse rusheth unto the battle. Mr. Murcot wanted the advantage of a
Magstrate upon the place, had no other sword to fight withal save that of the
Spirit, yet such was his Integrity, Gravity, Austerity, and his Activity in
informing and exciting Magstrates to punish Offenders impartially, that the
people round about him had an awe and dread of him, and durst not lash out into
public, extravagant, scandalous courses.

Great resort was had unto him to heal the Breaches and compose the differences
betwixt dis^enting and disagreeing Brethren; which grateful and acceptable
work, did exceedingly heighten him in the peoples esteem, and preserved them
from greater animosities, and distances, by going to Law. If the Peacemakers be
pronounced blessed, he must needs be so upon this account. Mat. 5. 9.


It was a common Practice in those parts; to have Ales, as they called them,
alias Good Fellow meetings, in which the night was consumed in rioting and
drunkenness: the creatures abused, God most shamefully dishonored, and men and
women there met together, drawn into singular inconveniences, which disorders
were a sword in the bones, and a sharp thorn in the tender eye of this waking
watchman.

One revelling night, he and a godly neighbor Cap. Johnson.
went to the Constables, engage their assistance, advance, and before them
entered the house, or rather the den of Dragons, at whose approach and presence,
the rabble rout scatters like a mist before the rising Sun. Some run affrighted
out of doors, and leave their! Ale behind them, others hide in secret places:
The flight was so full of confusion, you would have thought it occasioned by
the incursion of an enemy, and that their lives were rather invaded, then their
Purses and Reputations.

One only of the company assumes the confidence to stand it out, and having a
brow of brass, thinks to outface both sacred W. Fisher.
and civil Officers, and says, Shall I fear Murcot? Calls for more beer, and
in a bravado drinks to him, who pledged him with a stern silence, and frowning
aspect. The names of the Ringleaders and Capital Offenders are returned to the
Justices, and they constrained to pay their imposed fines.

But did this son of impudence (who dares thus affront Gods Minister) thus
escape? Though the sickness at that time was comfortably abated, and the family
to which he related, not in the least tainted, yet, this man is very shortly
after visited, and by that signal stroke from the hand of the Lord, hurried out
of the Land of the living.

The following Sabbath Mr. Murcot chose a subject to treat on, suitable to the
preceding tumultnary agitations and transactions, laid before them the
blackness of guilt contracted, and the dreadfulness of wrath deserved, (their
fines being but part of payment, and an earnest-penny of an after-reckoning)
and was so severe and cutting in his Rebukes, that they caused in the
Congregation strong pangs of affection, and unwonted transportations. The
guilty shrink down into their seats, like affrighted birds into their hollow
trees: many melted into tears of professed repentance.

A maid, by her ghastly countenance and trembling hands, gave cause to think,
that the arrow of conviction was shot through her liver, and stuck fast in her
sides; and indeed so it did, and proved the happy occasion of her
after-conversion.

Being still unsatisfied with the present constitution of his Congregation, he
had several meetings with the people, and plainly told them, that he could not
live without the Ordinances; nor administer them as formerly: to which some
(unwilling to be brought to the Test, and new-moulded) replied, that he might
then take his liberty, and be gone: Yet the godly are loath to part with him,
and he as loath to part with them; but an amicable accord cannot be
accomplished, and therefore he resolves to weigh anchor, and spread his sails
to the leading gale of Providence.

An invitation from Bellfast, in the North of Ireland, under many hands, as
also from Dublin, from the Commissioners of Parliament, urges him to a
removal, and draws forth serious considerations of the matter, whether it might
not be of God, and consequently to be followed with an obsequious prosecution.

A company of godly persons live in a Parish, who are desirous to enjoy the
Oridinances appointed by Jesus Christ, to be observed by his people, thereby
providing for their comfortable growth (while under imperfection,) being
convinced that the years past wherein they have lived without them, are more
then sufficient, and fearing the guilt of sinful neglect does already lie upon
them: But yet are not satisfied to hold Communion in them with such a
promiscuous Assembly, but only with a small number in comparison: the most
being such as they see not how they can be admitted by any rule of Christ; for
the Ministers subsistence there is also a particular dependence upon every one
in the Parish: And having good ground (from an earnest of the Spirits of the
most of the Parish, already much disrelishing any separation of them as the
vile from the precious, and from experience of most sad, unutterable, and
dishonorable breaches made by the like attemps elsewhere) to conclude, that if
all such as are unfit be deba(...)'d, they will be exasperated, at least so far
as to withdraw the maintenance; and such as are fit, will be found too few to
afford comfortable subsistence to the Minister: and therefore if they should
attempt to enjoy the Ordinances in such a manner, in such a place, it would in
all probability procure a sudden dissolution of them, to the great dishonor of
God, and triumphing of wicked men: The premises judiciously and impartially
weighed, the Question is, Whether it be more suit able to the mind of Christ
for such godly persons to look out elsewhere, where they may comfortably enjoy
these indispensable appointments of Christ, or to run so apparent and eminent
an hazard of dishonor to Christ, by their sudden dissolution upon enjoyment of
them in such a Parish.

Your judgment and spiritual grounds that most poise your own spirit are
desired.

This bright star has not long to shine in that part of the Firmament, where
he* was at present fixed, yet before his departure, and transfusion of his
Beams to the neighboring Provinces, there appears a formidable, and blazing
Comet at Chester, one Mr, Knowls, who exercised as public Preacher to the
Garrison there, and in public Sermons, private conferences, and by a
manuscript by him framed, denied Jesus Christ to be the most high God. Several
in the City, professing godliness, are dangerously ensnared, and swallow down
that poison, which will turn to gall and wormwood in their bowels. Mr. Marcot
with others, especially Mr. Eaton, labor to establish the people in the truth
received, and to pluck up that stinking weed, which began to spread and fasten
its contagious roots. Upon complaint made, the flaming firebrand is removed,
yet left behind him those unquencht sparks that break forth into fresh flames.

Some godly in Chester being embodied, and wanting a Pastor to take the charge
of them, express their desires of enjoying Mr. Murcot, who is sent unto, and
requested to preach among them by way of trial, and in order to his future
establishment, but withal, entreated not to intermeddle in the present
Controversy, or engage against Mr. Knowls, lest his settlement should be
obstructed, and the desires of the godly frustrated.

Yet such was his zeal for God, and love to the truth, and so transcending his
own private concernments, and the respects of men, that preaching on that Text,
Thou know all things, etc. he vindicated the Deity of Christ from those vile
aspersions, and abhorred John 21. 17.
calumniations that were cast upon it, and by the dint of argument, battered
down the blasphemous suggestions of contradicting Gainsayers, to the
exasperation of those that were tainted, and not as yet convinced of the error
embraced.

The day that he preached, Captain Whitworth invited him to dinner; some
contests arose by reason of his preceding smart discourse, insomuch that one in
a fury and discontent rose up from the table, and reproachfully reviled him
with the unbese^ming expression of foolish and ignorant. Mr. Murcot in
obedience to Scripture command; does not render reviling for revileing, but
seriously, and sadly said, I am so; but as for you, the Lord give you an humble
frame, which meek and mild answer so far convinced and silenced his Adversary,
that he quietly sat down at the Table again.

These harsh Ocurrences; and uncomfortable incounters, put a period to all
Overtures concerning his removal to Chester, so that now he says, I will be
gone to Ireland. I cannot live without the Ordinances at West-kerby, nor like a
Salamander in the fire at Chester.

His debate concerning a tranfretation to Ireland, is now ripened in to a
resolution. Wherefore, taking his leave of his people, he imbarques himself in
a small vessel, though others of considerable For^e and Burden presented, the
rather, because she was bound directly for Dublin, when others intended to make
an halt at the I Will of Man, which was now to be assaulted, and in order
thereunto, a Fleet, and soldiers prepared.

Being near Holy-Head, the wind, though not contrary, began to arise and grow
impetuous, and was but a degree below a downright storm; so that the master
thought it most* convenient to cast Anchor under the shelter of a rocky Island,
till the force of the wind should be somewhat abated. Mr. Murcot is desired by
some godly Passengers, to present their condition before that God in prayer,
who is the Hope of the ends of the earth, and of them that are afar off upon
the Sea, which he did, with enlarged affections and desired success. The wind
is presently confined and made a Prisoner to Omnipotency, and no wonder; A more
g^ateful Gale comes blowing into Gods bosom, from the Region of a devout heart.

Though the Ocean bubble and boil like a pot, yet the falling tears, of
con^^ite, self-condemning Christians do suddenly assuage the Seas rising
roughness, and check its mutinous, and menacing motions.
The groaning Gusts and swelling Surges are hushed into silence and calmness,
when once the soft, and sweet breathings of the Spirit approach the ears of the
Holy one of Israel.

Jonah's prayer was a line to pluck him up out of the deep; Mr. Murcots, a
bladder to keep him, and many others from sinking into it.

The night coming on, it was resolved to put to Sea, hoping by the
morning-light, they would be near the Bar* of Dublin, and by this means be
secure from those Piratical Rovers, who were now abroad, and much infested the
Coast.

As they are thrusting into the Bay of Dublin, a ship is espied near the head
of Hoath, and not without cause suspected to be an enemy, for it presently made
toward them, and as they prepare to fly, their Rudder is unhanged, and they
in danger of being made a Prey, but diligence being used, it is again fastened;
and before the Adversary approach so near, as to make them feel the force of
his sharpened claws, he has his Rudder also unhanged, which being set to right
again, the Lord took away his heart, that he ceased to pursue, and gave over
the chase; and this he confessed, being two days after taken by a Man of War,
belonging to the Parliament.

Drawing near to the Bar of Dublin, which as yet had not water enough to
warrant a safe passage over it; a small vessel which was there at Anchor
weighs, as fearing a surprisal, and flies, when none pursues. Much of God will
be seen by considering what this little bottom was, and in what condition its
trembling Passengers were. A vessel of four guns set sail from Lever-pool water
the same tide, with this Mr. Murcot was in, but did not cast Anchor at
Holy-Head as she did, but chose rather to keep to Sea, by which means they fell
into the hands of an hungry Pirate, who lay in wait to destroy. Their four guns
are not of force sufficient to beat off the assaulting enemy. In the contest
some powder is fired, several Passengers are blown up into the air, and fall
into the Sea, both Elements, as it were, conspiring their ruin, the one by
scorching, and the other by suffocation. Others are miserably wounded, rent,
torn, mangled, who being taken out, are put into this small vessel, which the
Man of War had by him.

How free is that grace that saves some, whilst others are destroyed; and
keeps their feet from running into that snare, in which others are entangled to
their undoing?

The Lord has more work for Mr. Murcet to do, and therefore he shall not dye,
but live, and declare the Name of the Lord.

Arriving at Dublin, he is hospitably and kindly entertained by Sir Robert King
in his own house, who conduced much toward his coming over.

A while after, observing with a strict eye the Church at Dublin, and approving
its soundness in doctrine, and severity in discipline, he assayed to join
himself unto them, and was readily embraced, they unanimously and cheerfully
giving unto him the right hand of fellowship.

And now like a slip placed in a rich soil, he sprouted up apace, which
appeared by a visible increase of Gifts and Graces. His leaves were not only
broad and beautiful, but his fruit was fair and full, and of proportionable
dimensions. His Spikenard sent forth the smell thereof to the refreshing of
many, and his smell was as the smell of a Field that the Lord had blessed.

Preaching on a Fast Day before the Commissioners of Parliament, he got cold,
and by a dangerous Feavour was brought to the brink of the Pit. Being in a very
great and ill-portending sweat, his Physicians gave him over, as thinking that
his life and sweat would expire and cease together, but the Lord had mercy on
him, and therein on many others, especially his absent wife, who was not yet
come to him. The means of his Recovery this: His Nurse seeing him in such a
deplorable condition, resolved to try her skill, and commit the success unto
God; wherefore mingling some Sack with his broth, she gave it him to drink,
with which his wasted spirits are refreshed, his sweat leaves him, and with it
his disease.

The Commissioners of Parliament having occasion to go into the West, take him
along with them, as knowing that he would be of use to them, and to the several
places through which they were to pass; and indeed so he was, leaving a sweet
savor behind him upon the spirits of many.

Being at Cork, his continuance and fixing there was desired and requested,
especially by the godly, who afterward employing Mr. Walter Cooper (whose
affairs called him up to Dublin) by him made a solemn address to the Church,
and importunately entreated a supply out of their store. The matter is debated,
the Lord sought in the thing, but no inclination appears of parting with him.
But above all, Mr. Murcot addresseth himself in private to a more serious and
penetrating consideration of the matter. Some few of those many particulars
which he spread before the Lord, and weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary,
are here presented, for the rest are unhappily lost.

Encouragements to continue still at Dublin. Discouragements. 1. ENjoyment of
the Ordinances. 1. VNsuitableness for so populous a place, by reason of his
youth and weakness. 2. Plentiful converse with many Fellow Christians, and
their watchful eye over him, which being young he needed. 2. Happily not having
an interest in the affections of the Generality of Gods people.

Encouragements to go to Cork. Discouragements. 1. THeir great need and extreme
want. 1. WAnt of the Ordinances there. 2. Their ardent desire to enjoy him. 2.
Unfitness to engage in matters controversal. 3. The pressing importunity of the
Commissioners. 3. His heart not inclined after seeking God. 4. Want of such a
Magistracy at Cork, as would publicly and professedly own the ways and
worship of God, and back the Ministry of the word by its Power and Authority.

In vain does a Minister preach up the morality of the Sabbath, and the
necessity of a religious observance, if the Magistrate draw not forth the sword
of Justice, and severely punish its profane violators, who either lie lurking
in blind corners, and swine-like prefer a little nasty puddle before the clear
and crystaline waters that-flow from under the threshold of the Sanctuary, or
like so many vagrants, and vagabonds in the earth, wander up and down the
highways, and fields, being more delighted belike with the singing of
hedge-birds, then with the tinckling of their feet, who bring the glad tidings
of peace.

What avails it to invade drunkards and swearers with a whole squadron of
Scripture arguments, if a Magistrate, seeing and hearing their villainous
outrage, be not presently awakened and startled into an holy indignation, and
unbended resolution to make them smart for their offenses, and by this means
preserve from future e^ormities?

Its sad, when a Justice of Peace shall take his denomination from holding his
peace, when he should speak and plead for God, and from being at peace with
sin, and sinners, whose whorish foreheads, and brazen brows should be battered
into a more modest softness, and whose unruly hands and feet should be bound
and hampered with the cords of the Law?

O, that Psalm 101. might be seriously perused, and conscienciously practiced
by men in power. I might then expect the savor, and face of Religion in those
Places that are now overgrown with unbounded Barbarism, and rooted
Profaneness.

The result of all is briefly this, a Resolution to continue still at Dublin,
unless taken off by a clearer Call then this.

Some time after Joseph Eyres came out of England to Youghall upon the account
of his own personal concernments, and rosolved after the expiration of some
months to return to London, but preaching occasionally at Cork, the
inhabitants desire his stay and exercise of his Ministry amongst them, and so
much the rather, because at that time the Ministers of the County of Cork were
generally articled against. A Petition was presented to the Authority there,
which to the sadning of the souls of the righteous, met not with a desired
compliance. However Mr. Eyres was engaged to continue there, till addresses
should be made to the superior powers at Dublin.

In order hereunto, a Fast is appointed, Dr. Worth, Mr. Hacket, and Mr. Eyres
preached and prayed, the product of which was, an unanimous Resolution in the
people to send Mr. Mark Tailor, (a man of known integrity, zeal for God, and
love to the Truth) to Dublin, with a Petition to the Commissioners of
Parliament, the tenor of which was an humble request, that they might have Mr.
Murcot and Mr. Eyres settled amongst them. The Commissioners are more
inclinable to Mr Murcots removal then the Inhabitants of Dublin, who are loath
to part with a clear and steady light in times of distraction, confusion, and
doleful defection from the Truth. Wherefore the City Petitions the Authority
for his stay, yet are willing to spare him for two months; so that Mr. Tailor
has his company down to Cork, and the people of that and other places the
benefit of his Ministry; whose doctrine dropping as the rain, and distilling as
the dew, caused a greenness, and verdure to appear upon some parched mountains
of Pride, Vanity, Prophanness, and a Reflourishing in such precious plants, as
were now in a languishing condition, for want of these refreshing showers,
which after a time of drought, were the more welcome to them, and the more
fruitfully improved by them.

During the time of his abode at Cork, and visible success there, an unhappy
Accident fell out, whereby the minds of the attentive people, (who now began to
look about them, and to mind the things belonging unto their peace) were
woefully distracted, and the free progress and passage of the Gospel impeded,
and that was his engagement with Dr. Harding about Infant Baptism, an account
whereof take under his own hand, sent in a letter to a friend in Dublin.

A brief Narrative of the discourse between Dr. Harding, and Dr. Worth, and my
self, and the occasion thereof.
FOrmerly. Dr. Worth and some others, had a conference with Dr. Harding and
some others touching infants Baptism, and being not satisfied herewith, Dr.
Harding did provoke Dr. Worth to a further debate about it. And to omit many
other passages not worth the mentioning, Upon Thursday, May' 19. after my
Sermon at Peter's, Dr. Harding publicly produced a Question, (which before he
had sent to Dr. Worth) and bore the people in hand; he was willing to dispute
it with Dr. Worth, and that Dr. Worth was unwilling; though indeed the Question
was such a confused heap, that it is no wonder if neither Dr. Worth, nor any
other rational man would undertake it: viz. Whether the practice of Dr. Worth
and other pretended Ministers of Jesus Christ in England, Scotland and Ireland,
in sprinkling of Infants, were according to the mind of Christ, and so be
proved and approved by the Primitive Churches; or to this purpose I am sure for
all the substantials of it. If Dr. Worth undertake this, then every rational
man sees; what confusion he is involved in; if not, then the people must
believe he declines disputing with him. It is doubtful Dr. Harding did not much
matter which way it had gone, he had his ends either way. I conceive Dr. Worth
declined his Question as stated by himself, and offered to dispute upon either
of these two: viz. 1. Whether any Infants ought to be baptized, holding the
Affirmative. 2. Whether persons duly baptized in infancy, ought to be
rebaptized, when adult, holding the Negative. Dr. Harding refused both, and
nothing would serve him but his confused heap of Questions in one; A known
fallacy. After much contest Pro and Con: I was grieved to see so little Candor,
as I conceived in Dr. Harding, and took the boldness to request of him to
satisfy the Congregation; that to the first of the two, he would say I or no.
When Dr. Worth pressed him to it many times, he would not answer, no sooner had I
spoken, but he said, To Mr. Murcot he would say No, that is, That no infants
were to be baptized; And to satisfy the Congregation, would maintain it
against me* though not against him. This much troubled me, it being so beside
my intention, and against my resolution, to turn aside from the main work to
any thing of this nature; And indeed it did, I doubt, (through the subtilty of
the wicked one) put that Sermon put of the Peoples minds, and prevent them of
another the next week; I did long refuse it, telling him, He did but now
challenge all men, and why not undertake Dr. Worth as well as me, except he
fought for Victory more then Truth? but at last I yielded to undertake it, with
Dr. Worth, though I must be the Forlorn* The next Thursday, that is, May 26. as
I remember, was set for it, the Question was agreed upon then a week before,
and the manner of managing it, by way of Syllogism, not long discourses, which
lead people into a maze. The time came, and yet (notwithstanding former
agreements in the face of the Congregation) there was so little candor showed,
as that two hours I am confident were spent before I could bring him to agree
to the Question and manner of disco^rsing it; A sad Omen what the issue was
like to be! All that he urged for the Negative (which according to promise, at
last I prevailed with him to defend) was, That there was no Command or Example;
or thus, No Institution, Warrant nor Example for it in the Gospel; ergo, It was
answered, There was express warrant for Baptism in the Gospel, and
consequential warrant for the circumstance of time, the age of the subject.
After a cavil (rather then an Arg^ment) that for the time, it must be in the
womb, or after Birth, and then before the eighth day, or upon it, or after it,
which were as easily answered as said; the result was, he denied my
consequential Gospel-Warrant for the time, and truly this was all he had to say
against us there.

Now I was put to prove a consequential Warrant for Infants Baptism from the
Gospel, I first laid down, Mat. 28. 19. to argue from a Scripture, and argued
that from thence there was warrant to baptize all Disciples whatsoever, and
Infants were Disciples. Ergo. I put not the Arguments in form in this
Narrative: much cavilling there was about Discipling; He would have it only
such Disciples as could learn, and that Infants were not made Disciples
according to Mat. 28. Dr. Worth urged according to that before, if the word
there (...), signify all Disciples whatsoever, then Infants are such as are
there intended, but the former is true; Ergo. Here Mr. Hacket unadvisedly tore
a piece of the paper upon which the Arguments were written, thinking he had
torn off only a Syllogism of his own which he had written, not willing to
appear in the dispute in writing; it seems some little of Dr. Hardings writing
was on the other side, or of mine, which Mr. Hacket saw not, else I believe he
would not have torn it. At this the Dr. takes occasion to break off, crying out
of Perfidiousness, which the Lord knows, was nothing but an Ignorance; I am
sure to me it was so.

He knew the best time to give over, even before we came to the pitch of the
Controversy, so the people went away as much unsatisfied as they came, except
it were of the want of ingenuity in carrying of it on. I am sure, I was not a
little troubled we should tire our selves and the people in six hours discourse
to so little purpose; I hope it will be a warning to me for the future. The Dr.
being full at stomach, the last Lords day in the morning at Peter's names a
Text, Heb. 6. beginning, lays it aside, instead of a Sermon, calls for ink and
paper, writes down the following 13. Arguments for Infants Baptism, professing
(I suppose, else I know not to what end he took that pains) to maintain the
Negative against all these grounds; thus he entertained the Congregation he
had, to the wearying of some of them, and sent the paper, either to Dr. Worth,
or in his absence to me, but with no intimation to what end, as I remember, the
Arguments are as follows.

Paedobaptis. Assert.
1. Circumcisi sunt baptizandi. At -- go 2. Discipuli ((...)) etc. At -- go 3.
(...) Oritic. S. 5.
baptizandi. At -- go 4. Familiae -- At -- go 5. Sancti. At -- go 6. Foederati.
At -- go 7. Sanctificati. At -- go 8. Filii Dei. At -- go 9. Christiani. At --
go 10. Haeredes Regni. At -- go 11. Privilegiati, seu privilegio peculiari
supra caeteros; the next word I cannot read. At -- go 12. Traditio seu
consuetudo. At -- go 13. Promissum ((...).) At -- go
These I received about half an hour before I went to preach in the afternoon,
which (though some di^traction to my thoughts) I resolved to say nothing to,
but to mind that I prepared for the peoples greater edification; only by way of
Preface, I let the people know I had received such a paper of Arguments for
Infants Baptism; some whereof. I owned, and some not, but in the General I said
what was said of Bellarmine, That he had brought more arguments against himself
then he could-answer, so I thought of these; and c^utioned the people to beware
what Doctrine they did embrace, and gave some other suitable counsel to them.
And so I fell upon my intended Sermon. This is the true state of the matter for
the substance, which I thought good to send, conceiving there might be occasion
for it there.

J. M.

The allotted time of his continuance at Cork being expired, he returned to
Dublin, to the great rejoicing of those, whose very hearts were glued to him,
and whose thirsty souls longed after him. A friend asking him in what measure
the Lord had blessed his labors as to conversion-work, and the gaining in of
souls to God; he answered, That at his first coming to Cork, he to his joy knew
some, and heard of others, whose faces were set toward Sion^, and began to
enquire after the Lord, till the bone of dis^^ntion was cast in, with which the
people were wholly taken up, and then with a sorrowful countenance, and with
eyes and hands lifted up to heaven, said, The Lord pardon me that ever I
yielded to that wrangling dispute.

Though Cork has not his personal presence, yet has it a large share in his
affections, supplications and endeavors for its good, which he manifested by
procuring an Order for the repairing of Christ-Church, and settling Mr. Eyres in
it.

The sickness beginning to break forth afresh at Dublin, the Commissioners of
Parliament send to the several Churches to humble themselves before the Lord,
and to return to them an Account of what lay upon their spirits as the
provoking and procuring cause of this smart expression of rekindled
displeasure. The society Mr. Murcot was related to, drew up their digested
thoughts in certain Queries; the most remarkable are here annexed.

1. Whether denying, neglecting, flighting, and countenancing of (...)ghters of
Mini^ters of the public Ordinances of God, be not an Achan? Exodus 4. 24. 5. 3.
Lev. 26. 15, 25.

2. Whether endeavoring to supplant the Ministry under pretense of all the
Congregation of the Lords people being holy, every one of them, Numb. 1. 6. 2,
3. 5. 21, 22. (in opposition whereunto, Aar^n is called the Saint of the Lord,
Psalm. 106. 16. so Deuteronomy. 33. 11.) and abusing the Ministry, be not a means to
bring wrath without remedy, 2 Chronicles 36. 15. which abuses are declared in the
defense of the Worcestershire Petition, especially in the Preface thereof: And
whether if Magistrates keep silence, they do not thereby make the sin their
own? 1 Samuel 3. 13.

Mr. Murcot is chosen with others humbly to present this Representation;
Courage.
which he did with a resolved, and clear confidenee, as knowing the cause was
Gods, and truth worth the owning.

Shortly after, the Church at Dublin (the Lord being sought unto by solemn
fasting and prayer) with extraordinary cheerfulness, and unanimity, nemine
contradicente, chose him to be their Teacher; which being proposed to him, he
at first expressed his loathness to bow with his back to so great a burden; yet
took time to consider of the matter, which he spent in private Fasting, Prayer,
and clearing up his Call by an impartial preponderation of all considerable
circumstances: an account whereof under his own hand you have here annexed.

Jan. 31. 1653.
The Question, Whether I should answer the peoples Call to be Teacher?

For the Affirmative 1. The Pastors weakness in body, and the peoples need
thereby. 2. The Church also increasing. 3. Their unanimous consent in choice of
me, after solemn seeking of God for it.

For the Negative 1. My being a man of such uncircumcised heart, and such
polluted lips, as the Lord knows, etc. 2. My being so weak and not able to
convince Gainsayers, a very child in managing controversies, if they arise in
the Church, especially in such a Congregation. 3. My ignorance what a Teacher
is. 4. My being but a Novice, as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 3. 6.

But doubts,

1. Whether in these former Objections I do not mind more the praise of men
then the praise of God, because of my weakness in parts.

2. Whether it be not the burden without any outward reward, which sticks so
hard? If there were a great outward reward, how would it then prevail with me?

3. Whether it be love to Christ, to indent as I may say, and thus much I will
do, and no further?

4. Whether God may not call first, and fit afterward. Yet it was so with
David, so with Saul at first, and so Solomon had his Spirit of wisdom given him
afterward; and have not we the like privilege to ask and have, as he had?
Mat. 7. 7. Paul was ready to go or do what God would have him, before he had
received the Spirit, Act. 9.

5. Whether God may not call, and I not see it? as Samuel, 1 Samuel 2.

6. Whether I may not be willing enough, and yet seem thus unwilling, which is
great hypocrisy?

7. Whether I could be willing to have another set up rather then my self, and
therefore as unworthy as I judge my self, yet I may judge my self better then
he?

8. Whether the evil frame of heart has not been upon me since my denial of
it? and the thoughts of yielding, are they not pleasing, and when any thing
produced to the contrary of my mind, does it make me smile and lighten my
heart? Whether out of pride, and delight to hear others good opinion of me, and
desire toward me; or whether out of a secret hankering after the thing,
notwithstanding my opposing it; or whether from the Lord, is doubtful?

9. Whether the people are not better Judges of my gifts then my self?

10. Whether all this discouragement be not through unbelief of the Promises,
as in Moses? Exodus 6. 12, 30.

11. Whether this be not hypocrisy: Before being called, forward enough, and
when called, how backward, even as Moses? Exodus 2. 13. 4. 10. 6. 12, 30.

12. Time was, when I entered upon this work with a very wicked heart, much more
wicked, blessed be his name for his present grace, and yet not humbled for this
to this very day as I ought I doubt.

13. Yet notwithstanding he has manifested himself to give a better heart in
some measure then before; as I hope, and why not now if I undertake more, may
he not do more as well as before? O he did not give me up as some others, who
in the like condition have undertaken this work!

14. I have been (as it were) checked, What, will thou not venture thy self upon
Jesus Christ? and then the Lord made me willing to do it.

15. To get strength against corruption* is not likely to be done by turning
the back upon any work of his.

16. And is it not better I should perish by corruption or temptation in doing
the work of Christ then not? But can any perish that in truth give up
themselves to his work?

Wednesday, Feb. 22. meditating upon that of Moses, that he said, Send by whom
thou will send, God was angry. Such Ex^. 4 13, 14.
thoughts I had, God might testify against me, by leavi^g me to blasphemous,
horrid thoughts, and an untoward frame of Spirit. When he had answered him that
Objection touching his want of eloquence. Now says he, when he was angry with
him, Is not Aaron thy Brother? he is a man of eloquence, and he will be glad to
meet thee.

So in this God has joined such an one as was able through grace to do that, I
doubted my sufficiency most in; that is to say, the managing controversies. And
then telling him they are dead that sought thy life, which was the Core. So,
who knows but this fear of opposition may be taken away*

So upon 1 Cor. 9. 17. If I do it will^ngly, I have a reward, etc.

And upon 1 Pet. 5. 2. Taking the overlight, not of constraint or necessity,
but a willing mind.

And John 21. Love thou me? feed my sheep; did somewhat bow my spirit to a
resolution to close with it.

Having (though with some reluctance at first) taken upon him the oversight of
the Flock of God, he led them forth into green pastures, by the sides of the
pleasant waters, and fed them, not with husks (as many do) but wholesome food:
Careful he was to preserve the poor Lambs of Christ from infection, and
depredation.

If any sheep ^as straggling from the fold, he would reduce, and bring it back
again; if weak, he would take it up in his bosom, and carry it upon his
shoulders. His bowels were rolled within him, and did exceedingly melt and yern
toward those for whom Christ shed his blood.

The Lord having fixed him in the Firmament of the Church, he proved not a
wandering star; his regular motion kept others within compass. He was not a
cloud without water, as appeared by the flourishing growth of many Christians,
who sat under the honey drops that distilled from his lips.

How did he thirst after the salvation of souls, and how anxiously inquisitive
after the success of his labors? It did not satisfy him that the seed was
sown, fruits must appear, or else his heart is mightily troubled within him,
and little comfort taken in the comforts of this life.

It was an heartbreaking unto him, that the hearts of sinners were no more
boken; their dry eyes would cause his to overflow with briny tears.

The Lord did not give up his Ministry to the curse of a miscarrying womb and
dry breasts. He was able to say, Lo here am Heb. 2. 13.
I, and the children whom thou have given me.

Surely in labors he was more abundant then many others, 2 Car. 11. 23.
as his Closet, Pulpit, besides many other places can well testify.
Recreations he declined, so loath was he to be accounted a loyterer, or idler
in Gods Vineyard. Having put his hand unto Luke 9. 61.
the Plough, he did not at any time stand still he looked not back he sat not
down in the cool and gentle shade, but was always in an erect posture, and
continually pressing forward, contented to bear the burden, and the heat of
the day, as knowing that the time of refreshing was shortly to come from the
presence of the Lord.

So eagerly bent was he upon his work, that when seriously settled to it, his
necessary and appointed food was frequently neglected, wife, children, and
other Relations not taken notice of. If any refreshing was urged, he would say,
This is not the way to get my Fathers work done.

The Subjects that he pitched on were usually adapted and accommodated to the
temper of the Times and his own condition, as Preaching both to others and
himself. It did not satisfy him that* Truth was Preached, unless it were
seasonable and suitable. The Sermons that he Prcached, he thoroughly digested
before hand, and made them his own by a deep impression of them, not only on
his memory, but affections; so that he still spoke from the heart to the heart.
They, who beheld him in a Pulpir, with a spiritually discerning eye, thought
the place to be (as it were) filled with smoke, and signal expressions of the
Divine Presence.

The growing and prevailing Corruptions of the Times he strongly opposed.
Errors, though countenanced by great Ones, were not basely baulked, and passed
by in silence. The miscarriages of those in high Places were sure to meet with
a severe and sharp rebuke.

He often bewailed, and greatly mourned for the evil, and dangerous consequence
of corrupt men called to the Ministry, who daub with untempered mortar, and
slightly heal the wound that is made with a faithful hand.

When secure and sleepy sinners are at any time awakned by a stirring and a
soul-searching Ministry, and complain of the terrors of the Lord that set
themselves in battle array against them; these miserably-mercifull men, with an
oily tongue labor to lick them whole again, and skin over the sore; they make
it their design to bind up the broken bone, without putting their patients to
any pain, persuading them that Ministers nowadays are too severe, sour, strict,
straight lac^, and fright silly folk (who do not understand themselves) with
Bug bears, and Sear* crows. For a Waspish and enraged conscience thy provide a
sweet and stupifying sop, and so lay it to sleep again. Thus are men flattered
into a good opinion of themselves, when in the mean time they are in the gall
of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity Woe and alas^ that ever men should be
thus contentedly cheated of their souls, and prefer their present ease before
their future safety!

He, who was chosen a Ruler in the Church, was so in his Family, 1 Timothy 3. 5.
which he ruled well, and diligently instructed in the knowledge of Christ. He
prayed twice a day with his Family, and expounded some portion of Scripture,
and in these exercises usually expended an hour and an half at a time. They are
great enemies to their own comfort, who live in the neglect of this Ordinance;
and whilst the Congregation is trumpeting out Gods praises, sit like mopish
mutes, with a discontented eye and cloudy countenance; as if the music which
they hear were howling rather than Singing.
In Singing he was much transported, and even lifted up, and delighted much in
Psalm. 63. and 103.

He was with Paul, in fastings often, and that, not only when publicly
required, for he was herein often engaged upon the account of his own personal
concernments, and condition.

In preparations for Fasts, as well as in the celebration of them, he was very
solemn and severe, as will afterward more plentifully appear. Food on such
days he tasted not till late at night; if any offered, it was entertained with
dislike in his very looks. In Prayer, at all times, especially then, he was
copious, enlarged, spiritual, powerful, to the melting of the Congregation
into tears and sighs.

His love to the Ordinances was very great, and his heart did even break with
longing after that of the Supper; and in preparation for it, he would unbowel
himself before the Lord, and be very strict in the duty of self examination. He
was far from the opinion and temper of those whom the very thoughts, much more
debates of having their poor Babes Baptized, do strangely transport with rage
and an high indignation (...)inst any that shall attempt it.
When his children were Baptized, and had the Seals of the Covenant impressed
upon them, he would wonderfully rejoice, thereby declaring a sweet refreshing
and full satisfaction.

With the Psalmist, he had rather be a door keeper in the House of the Lord,
then dwell in the Tents of wickedness. One day in Gods Court was better then a
thousand elsewhere.

He would cheerfully chirp, and sweetly warble out his highstrained Notes, when
(with the Swallow) near Gods Alta; but would mourn like a Dove, and chatter
like a Crane, when the waters of the Sanctuary were dammed up, and did not
freely flow forth; he would droop and hang the wing, though under the broad
spreading guords of carnal contentments.

He abridged and cut himself short in the use of the warrantable contentments
of the present life. He was unwilling to launch out too far, lest he should
lose the sight of his Harbor, and a storm arise ere he got in again.

He was loath to swallow down large morsels for fear of an ensuing surseit, and
dismal doleful distempers that might thence arise. He knew that the fairest
full-blown Rose was not without its grieving thorn, and that a scratching Bryer
lay lurking under the blooming leaves, and therefore he passed over the most
flowrie and fragrant walk with an hasty and trembling foot.

He was none of those whom the Apostle speaks of, that mind earthly things. His
work was his wages. His design was not to Phil. 3. 19.
spread his roots in the earth, and to secure a carnal interest by corrupt
compliances. His mouth was not gagged with a wedge of gold, or his lips sown up
with the silken thread of preferment.

Being poslessed of the pearl of price he thought himself rich enough; and
having food and raiment he was therewithal content. If any thing considerable
were providentially cast in, it 3 Tim. 6. 8.
was not greedily gaped after, and extorted by much pressing importunity and
incroaching crouching attendances.

The things which he possessed, he was ignorant of, as not willing to
intermiddle at all in the matters of the world, that so he might in a more
serene way and manner have his conversation Phil. 3. ^o.
in heaven, from whence he expected the Savior.

Christ was so fair and full in his eye, that in comparison of him, all other
enjoyments, though swelling to a mountanous bulk, were but motes and molehills.
He admired not the beauty of any Rose, save that of Sharon. The flower-planted
without hand was lovely in his sight, and sweet unto his smell.

He tasted such surpassing and heart-ravishing sweetness in communion with
Christ, that the edge of his appetite to the things of the world was
exceedingly blunted and rebated.

The love of God being shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost, he valued
not the favor or the frowns of the children of men. Whilst others had their
beilies cleaving unto the dust, he almost loathed to touch it with his feet; so
far was he from panting after the dust of the earth.

He preferred grave contentments, and solid delights before the fleeting and
transcient titillations of the exterior senses. How much better are the
wholesome severities of Religion, then the fulsome satisfactions of the flesh?

His heart and hands were mightily enlarged in a way of charitable
contribution, even to considerable sums, when the necessitous condition of
others called for speedy succors and supplies. 2 Cor. 9. 2.
What he gave was not grudgingly, but of a ready mind. He did not say, Come
again, and to morrow I will give thee, Prove 3. 28.
when he had ^t by him: He gave liberally, and sowed bountifully. He cast h^s
bread upon the waters, knowing that after Eccles. 11. 1.
many days he should find it.

His meekness was remarkable, as knowing it was his glory to pass by an
offense; the reproaches of railing Rabshak^hs he Prove. 19. 11.
thought not worth the taking notice of. He was not easily stirred up to anger,
but had a sweet calm in his spirit, though sometimes blown upon by the surly
winds of unhandsome provocations. Passionate expressions fell not from him
though naturally of an harsh and hasty temper. He would not say I will do unto
the man as he has done to me, but chose rather to Prev. 24. 29. Romans 12. 20,
21.
do good for evil, and melt (rather then exasperate) his adversaries, by
heaping up coals of kindness upon their heads.

Humility is not without cause styled the grace of graces, as being that which
adds a luster to them, and makes them the more orient, and resplendent. He who
is low in his own esteem, is high in the esteem of God and good men. Pride (the
prevailing sin of the Professors of this age) is that which does darken,
sulley, cloud our otherways laudable endowments; it is that worm which makes
the greenest gourd to wither, and the fairest flower to lose its native beauty.
Self-depressions (provided they be sincere) are always attended with
exaltations and plentiful 1 Pet. 5. 6.
supplies from the fountain of all grace and goodness.

Humility was Master Murcot* sh^ning grace, which though low in its self, it
was taller then the rest by the head and shoulders. So^e ex^ressions of it are
these that follow.

1. His mean thoughts of himself, though his gifts, graces, performances
rendered him considerable, yet the esteem which he had of himself was very
small. His face did shine as that of Moses, to the dazzling of others eyes, yet
he saw it not himself, nor could endure to be told by others that it did so,
but would cry out of a snare.

2. His high thoughts of others gifts and graces, though possibly coming short
of his. The proud man looks upon others enjoyments and seize with a
cloudy and discontented eye* which in Master Murcot drew forth commendations
and serious thanksgivings unto God.

3. His condescending to men of low degree, whose company and converse he
^i(...)dained not, especially if godly. He delighted not to be busily buzzing
about the Chambers and Tables of great men, but could sweetly solace himself
with the society of the meanest Christian.

4. His temptations to pride and puffings up, were not a few, having the high
and bosom respects of great and small; the applauses, commendations,
gratulations of the generality of the people, and great success of his labors.
When others would be lifting him up, he still croucht. and lay low. He was none
of those whom a freer access, and a more open bosom, a kinder glance, and a
more favorable nod from great men, swell with self-conceit and p^ff up into a
lofty disdain of their poor brethren, so that they must not be approacht
without much complementall observance, and cringing incurvations.

5. His garb had nothing of vanity and gaudry in it. The vile raiment was more
pleasing to him then silks, sattins and plushcoats.

He was none of those Court-preachers, whose extraordinary spruceness, gay
apparel, and bridling deportment are shrewdly suspected to be naught else but
the frothy ebullitions of a proud and vain spirit.

He was no Borderer upon Religion, dwelling only in the outfields, and confines
of godliness, but was admitted into its interior, and secret recesses.
Religion indeed was his business, which he prosecuted with all his might. The
world had but a small portion of his time and a very slender interest in his
affections. He was grown as dexterous in the exercise of grace, and in the
successful promoting, and carrying on of the holy life, as others are in
growing rich, greatning themselves, and providing for Posterity. He was afraid
of digging in the earth, lest a cold damp should arise to dimm his light, and
suffocate his celestial comforts. His constant commerce was with heaven, and
surely that trade which he drove was for rich commodities.

He adventured his all, and was blessed with daily returns, to his unspeakable
advantage

Though he were a stranger in this earth* yet he was not so to his Savior, or
himself, which will plainly appear, if you consider what his daily practice was
for some years before his death.

He kept an exact Diary of his own life, in which he was very curious and
methodical; in one Column, or side of the page he would set down the Good, in
the other, opposite against it, the Evil. His intention doubtless was, never to
make, either the whole or any part of it public, yet judicious Christians
apprehending that several Passages in it may tend very much to the edification
of others, some choice flowers growing here and there in this spacious and
odoriferous garden, I have picked up, made into a Posie, and do here expose them
to public view.

One day instanced in as a taste.
Good. Evil. In morning Closet duty not altogether without his presence;
studied my Sermons, not altogether without him, blessed be his Name. My heart
but in a listless frame this day. In evening Closet duty, by way of preparation
very sweet meltings, and outgoings of my soul after the Lord, blessed be the
Lord. Yet some distractions.

1. He was very observant, not only of the Out-breaches of sin, but of its
internal stirrings and more spiritual actings; The very thoughts of his heart,
if irregular, he carefully recorded, and bitterly bewaited.

Instance,

O my proud thoughts rising and bubbling up this day!

2. He set a watch, not only before the door of his lips, but before the door
of his heart also, with which he took unwearied pains, being indeed the
Fort-Royal, either of Christ, or Satan.

Instance,

1. This day I could not get my heart in tune, though I took an hour, or two
hours pains with it. 2. Endeavoring some hours with my heart, and yet alas, it
remained very untoward, I could do little or nothing. 3. Through mercy I desire
a clean heart.
3. Time he accounted precious, and improved it to spiritual purposes, and the
best advantage.

Instance,

This day up early -- or, This day lay long sluggishly. Read 4. Hebrew Chapters
with notes profitably. Read 60. pages in Dr. Preston. Studied my Sermons.
4. The sight of sin did exceedingly sadden.

Instance,

1. In examination of my self, March 9. 1652. Through mercy I have a sight and
sense of my sins, and am affected, and pained under the burden of my daily
wants. 2. In closet-duty much humbled for the sins of the day before, and
melted. 3. Many wanderings, to the burden of my soul.
5. The sinful adherences of the best duties he recorded with regret, and
sadness of spirit.

Instance,

1. Not altogether without him in duty, though but dry, and some wanderings of
heart in duty. At Supper-Ordinance, ah my wanderings, In prayer poor, and in
preaching! 2. In morning closet-duty I could do nothing, my heart very untoward
-- full of vain thoughts in the evening meditation, which put me out of order.
3. In afternoon prayer before Sermon but little affected, and though my self
had little enlargement this day, yet I perceive it was profitable to others:
God would hide pride from mine eyes. 4. Distracted, and formal in singing.
6. Powerful assistance in holy services he gratefully recorded.

Instance,

In Baptizing of my son Job, my heart much drawn out in prayer.

7. Yea, the least income and assistance was not passed by in silence.

Instance,

Not altogether left in evening closet-duty.

8. The ebbings and flowings of the Spirit he distinctly considered.

Instance,

In the morning closet-duty, not so much of his presence as in the evening
closet-duty, though indeed much melted, after some pains taken with my heart.

9. Diabolical injections he detested with highest indignation, against which,
he was a reverberating wall of brass.

Instance,

This day pestred with blasphemous and horrid thoughts, to my loathing -- to my
wounding -- O horrid -- O abominable!

10. To the distressed he gave friendly visits.

Instance,

Spent this day in visiting a condemned man, and diverse widows in sickness and
sorrow.

11. He made God the ultimate end of all his actings.

Instance,

Though much mixtures of self, yet I desire to make God the great end of all my
duties, preachings, prayers.

12. He was wholly at the dispose of God, contented to follow the conduct of
Providence, even through thorny ways.

Instance,

I hope I am made willing to come to him through any condition, any
tribulation, taking up the Cross.

13. When any spiritual distemper was upon him, he would presently inquire into
its causes.

Instance,

What may be the cause of my streightness and deadness now?

1. Happily, not being so thankful for enlargements, when I had them. 2. Happily,
because I cannot bear such enlargements, I have not humility enough. 3. Happily,
because I satisfy my self with them, and not follow that which I preach. 4.
Happily, a spirit of envy against others. 5. Happily, I more affect to have the
hearts of the people, there the heart of God. 6. Because I want love to poor
souls, and may mind more the setting forth my self, then edification. 7. Happily,
because I mind more enlargements, and gifts, then grace. 8. Happily, because I do
not take the fittest time, when my heart is in the best frame for study. 9.
Happily, because more troubled at the want of enlargement, then at all the sins
which have caused it. 10. Happily, for want of searching Scriptures, diligently,
constantly.
14. Success of labors; O how sweet and solacing!

Instance,

The 14. day; His presence with me in preaching and prayer very much, blessed
be his name: Several touched by that Sermon, as the Nurse and my maid, and Mrs.
Tailor, and my sister Hastings her maid, who came to me afterward. A sweet
pledge of his presence; and since I hear diverse others were stirred through
much mercy at that Sermon.

15. He was much enlarged in a way of thankfulness for mercies received.

Instance,

1. In my journey from Cork to Dublin; near the passage to the Long Island, not
looking to my horse, he was ready to step down a deep precipice, near the Sea.
Watchless over my thoughts that day. 2. Afterward at Clemell I had like to
have run up into an infected house, but the Lord prevented me. I had much
sweetness in Communion with God before. 3. Delivered from fire in my study,
which lay smothering under the harth three days undiscovered. 4. The maid
Elisabeth set fire on the bed with the child in it, which if the Lord had not
prevented, all had been consumed. Prevented by his coming out of his closet at
11 clock in the night.
5. My wife and children wonderfully preserved, two Bricks falling down the
chimney, they sitting by the fires side.
16. The Lord God he made the object of his ardent desire and delight.

Instance,

Before the Supper, upon examination, I could find none in heaven or earth, I
did desire in comparison of God.

17. He sought not happiness in himself, or any other creature.

Instance,

Through mercy I renounce my own merit, and all things in the world as an
happiness, and therefore resolve to seek the chief Good in Gods favor in Jesus
Christ.

18. Christ was high in his esteem, and the dearly beloved of his soul.

Instance,

Through mercy I desire to prize the Lord Jesus above all, that he may be
precious to me, 1 Pet. 2. 6.

19. In preparation for Fast-daies, he would unbosom and unbowel himself before
the Lord: He did not only skim off the uppermost froth of his heart; but would
search every nook and crany, and fetch up mud from the very bottom.

Instance,

1. O how proud, and apt to be lifted up upon all occasions! 2. How envious
against others! 3. Of late I have been very dead and formal in all services,
public and private. 4. Very backward to any service of God, not constrained by
love. 5. Very trifling away my precious time. 6. Very sluggish, Awake O sleepy
sl^ggard, and let not the rising Sun find thee fl^t on thy back, and when the
great eye of the world is up and open, let not thine be shut, me thinks its
bright and penetrating rays should scatter that cloud of sleep and security
that hangs upon thy dull and depressed brow. Know thou not O drowsy drone,
that thou have a great deal of work to do, and but a little time to dispatch it
in?
not up early about things of so great weight. 7. But negligent in preparation
to holy duties, public and private. 8. How empty and vain in discourses, and
unprofitable? 9. How distempered in hearing publicly, and in conferences with
the Church? 10. Vile thoughts, even in the time of reading, and meditation,
which are deep hypocrisy. 11. Yet back-slidden, even since the last Lords
Supper. 12. Yet little pure love to the Saints, as Saints. 13. Yet not a
sensible heart of the dishonor of Christ in these times. 14. Yet not a tender,
nor believing heart in holding out the word of reconciliation.
20. In preparation for the Supper-Ordinance he would bring himsels unto the
Test, and to say the truth, was very clear in the discovering, and making out
of his own condition, being well acquainted with the way of Gods dealing with
the soul, and with the way of the souls closing with Christ.

Instance, April 3. 1653. upon search I find,

1. My self an undone creature. 2. That the Lord Jesus sufficiently satisfied
as Mediator, the Law for sin. 3. That he is freely offered in the Gospel. 4. So
far as I know my own heart, I do through mercy heartily consent, that he only
shall be my Savior; not my works or duties, which I do only in obedience to
him. 5. If I know my heart, I would be ruled by his word and Spirit. Behold in
a few words the sum and substance of the Gospel.
21. The Lord blessed his enquiries with gracious returns, when he set himself
seriously to clear up his interest in him.

Instance, October 30. 1652.

As I was questioning and searching whether I were a child of God or no, me
thought this was suddenly spoken in me, or to me: If I be not thy Father, what
am I then to thee? Am I an enemy to thee? which did much affect and melt my
heart through much mercy.

In preparation for the Lords Supper, Jan. 1. 1652. as I was upon the same
Question within my self, whether I was a child of God yea or no, me thought
this was suggested within me: If I be not thy ^ather, why do thou follow me
so hard, and breath after me? which also did much affect my heart at that time.

22. He got ground on his corruptions, and his grave-cloaths fell off apace,
while he was yet alive. Several days I find good recorded, and no evil.

Instance, Good. Evil. In morning read a long Hebrew Chapter -- in closet-duty,
not altogether without his presence, studied for my Sermons, and the afternoon
spent much, what in preparation of my self for the Lords Supper, and not
altogether without his presence, for blessed be his name, he humbled me, and
melted me in the ^ight of my own vileness.

About 7. weeks before his translation, returning from London, he found his
Family in a languishing condition by reason of a feavourish distemper which had
crept in among them. It being the Lords wont to send some forerunning waves to
dash against, and wet us, before he send that mountainous one, with which he
will overwhelm us. His youngest child save one, departs this life on Friday
night, being the 11. of Nov. 1654.

How often are the little Lambs taken from the sides of their dams, from whom
they received life, and carried to the place, where they met with their deaths?
An hopeful branch must be lopt off, before the Root it self dry up, and wither.

Saturday morning that Chapter came to be read in course, which contains David's
Fasting and mourning for his child whilst it lived, etc. Comparing his own
condition with that of David, he said, David's mourning went before, but mine
must follow after. The duties of the Family being over, he retires again into
his study, keeps the day as a Fast, and being awakened by this affliction, is
put upon serious self-reflexions, and searching endeavors to find out the
cause of this smart-stroke of Gods hand, an account whereof, taken out of his
Diary, you have as follows.

God taking away my little babe Job, November 11. 1654. Searching my ways,
etc. 1. Not returning according to his multiplied mercies to us, not thankful
enough, the heart not endeared to him. 2. More lax in watching over my
thoughts. 3. A foolish stupidity, and security before this blow from the the
Lord -- far from waiting for changes -- Jonah-like, fast asleep. 4. An
unnatural heart to him, and the rest, -- insensible of his pains. 5. Grown very
slight in the Lords service; though woefully distracted, and dead in every duty
almost, yet not sensible of it, nor humbled under it -- had lost of that
spiritualness, and heavenly-mindedness, once I had through grace. 6. Partial
affection to the sons, more then to the daughters, therefore God took this
away, and smote the other.
His wife would have had the Funerals deferred till Monday, but he would not
give way, saying I have other work to do tomorrow.

At even the people being come together, he accompanied the Corpse unto the
grave, into which he was observed to look very wishly, as if he had been
curiosly looking for a resting, place for himself, shortly to lie down in, and
had thus bespoken his dead 2 Samuel 2. 23.
child, I shall shortly come to thee, but thou shall not return to me.

Coming home, he was very raised and cheerful, and comforted his wife, with
this saying among many others; Come love, he has but got the start of us.

It being my work to track him, and tread upon the print of his heels. I must
follow him, even through the valley of the shadow of death, which was not so
frightful to him in its approach, as to me uncomfortable in its description.

The time of his departure is at hand, and no wonder; He was ripe betimes, and
therefore gathered, and taken into Gods Granary. He had done his work, and must
therefore go to receive his wages; and this I may be bold to say, that he did
God more service in a little time, then many others, whose line of life was
twice as long as his. He cannot be far off from his center, because of the
swiftness of his motion.

He was always much upon the wing, but toward his latter end, he was wont to
soar very high, and took many a turn in Paradise every day, and would be often
hovering about the Casements of the Star Chamber; which having delightfully
peept and pryed into, he came down again, though not without much regret and
grief, yet solacing himself with this consideration, that he should shortly
meet the Lord in the air, and then be ever with the Lord.

During the time of his pilgrimage, and abode in the Lords Vineyard, he served
his God, and his Generation with all his might. He ran faster then others, and
was therefore sooner out of breath. He screwed up the peggs so high, that the
strings of his several faculties crack, and can hold out no longer. He did with
so much vehemence and contention of spirit, continually stir up himself to take
hold on God, and followed so hard after him, that he sunk under the burden of
his own endeavors.

His late journey to London heated his blood, and disposed his already-wasting
body to a dangerous distemper, which discovered Nov. 19. 1654.
it self on the Lords day in his forenoons Sermon, which (after his return from
the Congregation) he labored to conceal from his wife, by endeavoring to eat,
though it were much against his stomach: she perceiving some alteration in his
countenance, and carriage, said, You are not well, pray preach not again; to
whom he replied, away, away, hinder me not: Whereupon he retired to his study,
and adventured to preach again in the afternoon, though with some difficulty,
and apparent symptoms of sickness in his very visage. It was upon the spirits
of some, that this was the last time they should ever hear him: One seeing and
observing him in his return, said, Thou art almost in heaven, I shall never see
thee more.

The Text which he preached on that day, is considerable -- Psalm. 4. 6. There
be many that say, Who will show us any good? Lord, lift thou up the light of
thy countenance upon us. The former part, viz. the enquiry, Who will show us
any good? he finished in the fore-noon, and urged several arguments, why men
ought to sit loose from all things that are here below: His expressions argued
in him affections disingaged from matters dreggy and terrene: One foot is off
the earth already, the other will be so too shortly: He takes his flight from
earth to heaven, and in the afternoon made entrance on the latter part of the
verse: Lord lift thou up; etc. a suitable subject for him to speak to, who was
now about to enter into the gloomy horrors of the grave. Those bright,
refulgent beams of heavenly light, are never more seasonable, then when we are
upon the borders of the Land of darkness. Ten glorious fruits and effects of
the lifting up of the light of Gods countenance he held forth; the heads of
which, because of the spirituality of the matter, and being the words of a
dying man, and experienced* Christian, you will find in the 1. It produces a
calm, a quietness in the soul against all distracting fears O he is come, says
a Martyr, and death was nothing to him* 2. It is the most real good in heaven
or in earth, other goods are vain and empty, this is ^ound and solid, this is
bread indeed, and no delusion, as the world and Satan would persuade. 3. It
brings-with it all manner of good, which way soever God turns,, all the
creatures that depend on him, turn. 4. It seasons prosperity to us, it mel^eth
out the sweet* and gives us the marrow and fatne^s of it. 5. It will season
the bitterest cup of affliction; the valley of the shadow of death will be* but
as another place, Hab* 3. 6. It will work effectually deliverance out of
affliction. 7. It will make us more then Conquerors, Triumphers, Romans 8. 31. 8.
It is of a teaching nature, Psalm. 119. 125. When the Lord shines on our
Readings, Studyings, Meditating* then we are taught indeed. 9. It melts the
heart kindly in a man's bowels, though as hard as an Adamant, as the lightning
melts the sword, the scabbard being untouched. There is no standing before
the power of Gods anger, or his love, Zech. 12 10. 10. By this the ^oul grows
up from strength to strength; terror and sorrow does weaken the soul
exceedingly. The joy of the Lord is his peoples strength. Where will men ripen,
if not in the Sunshine?

Margin.

Judicious Christ^ans plainly perceived him at that time to be wonderfully
raised, and his spreading sails to be sweetly swelled with the powerful
breathings of the Spirit, for he spoke more like one near the Throne, and in
the company of Angels, then one in a Pulpit, and surrounded with mortals.

At even, the people (according to their accustomed manner) came crouding and
thronging to Repetition. His wife in vain persuaded him to dismiss the
Assembly: in repeating his Sermons, Singing and Prayer, he spent about two
hours time.

At Supper he did eat a little with his wife, and that cheerfully, yet
complained of an unusual heaviness in his head, and soreness in his eyes, when
endeavou^ing to lift them up, and took little rest the ensuing night.

The next morning seeing that he must be sick indeed, he blessed the Lord, that
he found him in his work. The Physician being sent for, and consulted with,
said, he had got cold, and was feavorish: the second night is passed over with
as little rest as the first.

A day of Thanksgiving in private for his own return from London, and his wives
late safe delivery, was designed to be celebrated about this time; the
consideration of which occasioned some sadness, whereupon to his wife he said,
This is sad love, this looks as if the Lord would not accept of an Offering of
praise from our hands: And then he called for the Notes of a Thanksgiving
Sermon, preached long before by Doctor Jones on that passage of Hezekiah, Who
rendered not unto the Lord according 2 Chro. 32. 25.
to the benefit.

The third day, as a choice Christian friend, who came to visit him, was
discoursing with his wife, he fell afleep, and two or three hours after
awaking, he called for his wife, who coming to him, and kneeling down upon the
beds side, he fixed his eyes on her, and said, do thou know that place, I will
give them the Hos. 2. 15.
Valley of Achor for a door of hope? Who said, yes. He further asked her if she
k^ew the meaning of it, who expressing her apprehensions, he said, yea, there
it is and then a little nodding his head, and pointing with his finger at her,
said, Rem^mber this Our valley of trouble shall be our door of hope.

About the fifth day, in letting blood he fainted, and with a low voice said,
What means this? it was not thus with me at Sir Roberts Kings. To his wife
looking upon him, he said, Now Love; it is a weaning time. He was more careful
of Gods Service then of his own attendance, causing the servants to leave him,
that so their duty to God in ways of worship might not be neglected.

The seventh day, being the Sabbath, he inquired who carried on the work, and
seemed to affect retirement, and secret converse with God upon his own day.
Most part of the second week was passed over in a silent submission, and quiet
waiting on the Lord.

The thirteenth day in the morning, being Saturday, his pains were very violent
for an hour and half, and extorted from him that doleful complaint, Lord how
long? Ah, my bowels, my bowels, I have grieved bowels, this speaks much; I have
wanted bowels, I have not been so pitiful toward others.

The Doctor being sent for, and staying longer then was expected, he said, Lord
give us help from trouble, for vain is the help of man. At night he was much
refreshed, cheerful all night Psalm. 60* 11.
and prone to discourse, and praised without any complaining, and withal said,
I would have given the whole world for so much ease in the morning.

The Lords day in the morning the Doctor coming to him, and looking on him,
wept, to whom Master Murcot said, How is it with me? Doctor: You may do well
Brother, I hope, if you can get any sleep. Master Murcot: Tell me true, how is
my Pulse? Doctor: I confess it is but bad, but you may do well if you can
sleep, which he endeavored a while, (though in vain) by closing his eyes. To
his wife looking sadly on him, he said, Love, can thou pray for ^leep for me,
what say thou? to which her swelling grief permitted her not to return
answer. The rumou^ of his weak condition being spread abroad, a Doctor was sent
from my Lord Deputy, to see if there were any hope of life, who speaking to
him, he said, Doctor, I am spent with sweating. To his Sister he said, and that
without any amazement and pe^turbation of spirit: Sister, I must now tell you,
I am not for this world and then lifting up himself, he said, Lord remember me,
2 King. 20. 3.
how I have walked before thee in sincerity, with all my might. He wished the
Sabbath were over, that so he might do something about his Will, though little
were to be done. His wife seeing and hearing these passages, said to him, Now I
see that you know that you must leave us. He answered, yes Love; whereat she
weeping, he exhorted her to a Resignation, to which she answered, The Lord has
enabled me to surrender you up heartily; at the ^ear^ng of which he lifting up
his hands, blessed the Lord. To h^s w^fe he said, haste haste Love, for my time
is very short, and withal told his Sister, I shall not reach midnight. Then
lifting up himfelf, he said, these raptures tell me I must be gone quickly. The
consideration of his approaching rest did wonderfully revive. The Messenger of
the Lord whispered him in the ear, and told him his Father had sent for him
home, which happy tidings made his heart to ^eap for joy within him. The
glimmerings of the white Throne, of the Lamb sitting on that Throne, and of the
glorious troops of Saints and Angels all in white about the I ^rone, with the
apprehensions and confident assurance of his bearing a part in the Music, of
their Hallelujahs, caused in him sublime elevations, and springing exultings of
spirit in a body depressed, and bowed down with pinching pains, and the agonies
of an approaching death. He is now in the Cutfields of Emanuels Land, and is
gotten almost to the top of the Mount, and his soul, impatient of delays, is
ready to leap out of the crazy and declining Cottage of mouldring Flesh.

Paper being brought, he began thus; I resign my spirit into the hands of the
Father of Spirits, and into the bosom of my dear Lord, etc. To this there were
but three or four lines more added, for he was in haste and longed to be at
home.

To his wife (having in a very short space dispatched his Will) he said, Bury
me in silence, without Funeral Sermon, I will have no manner of pomp; but was
persuaded to yield to the entreaties of his wife, as to a Sermon.

As his children were called for, Doctor Winter came in to visit him, who
unexpectedly seeing death in his face, said, with a loud and lamenting voice,
Brother Murcot are you leaving us? who with unaltered countenance, said, Yes,
and desired him to pray quickly. His children being brought, he said to his
eldest, Will Hester be a good child and serve the Lord? His son being
presented, he expressed himself thus, The Lord break thy stubborn heart. When
the little one hanging on the mothers breast was exposed to his sight, he lift
up his hands, and said, The Lord bless thee. Being put in mind of his servants,
he affectionately and even smilingly looked up upon one, whom he had been
instrumental to convert, and said, Bess has a better Master, the Lord be with
thee Bess. The children being taken away, and his wife coming to take her last
leave and final farewell of him, he alone lift up himself and kissed her. Dr.
Winter desiring an interest in his prayers, he said, The Lord strengthen you
for the double work that now lies on you, and withal desired him to pray with
him; which he did in a most pathetical and doleful manner, groaning out his
requests unto God. The people, though desired, are loath to leave the chamber,
and hang so thick on the curtains, bed-posts, hangings, doors, having not the
power to leave their dear and departing friend, so that he is in danger of
being smothered, and dying before his time.

Drawing near his end, his sister said to him, Are you in charity with all the
Lords people, though differing from you? Who lifting up his eyes
affectionately, said, Yes; She desiring him to manifest it by his last request,
he lifted up his hands and requested, that all the Lords people might be one,
as his way was one.

Then stretching out his arms, and lifting himself up, he said with a loud and
shrill voice, Lord Jesus draw me up to thee: which sweet expressions, by a
frequent and fervent repetition wasted his spirits, so that afterward he lay
in somewhat a silent posture, waiting for his change, which was now near at
hand.

About nine of the clock he breathed out his soul into the bosom of Christ, and
quietly slept in the Lord.

The Wednesday following, being the appointed time of his interment, great was
the confluence of people, who attended the corpse unto the grave. The Lord
Deputy Fleetwood followed the Body, after him the Council, then the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Citizens in such numerous troops, that the like has not been
usually seen in Dublin. Dr. Winter preached his funeral Sermon, on Heb. 13. 7.
Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word
of God, whose Faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. -- Upon
the face of the whole Congregation sat a black cloud of sorrow and
disconsolation, being not able to vent it on that doleful and uncomfortable
occasion into showers. The Body being brought unto the place of burial, the
sadned spectators and standers-by sighed him into his grave, and mingling his
dust with their moist tears, departed and left him in his bed of rest.

Relation I would willing back with Exhortation. A few words of spiritual
advice in the close of the whole may be of use, though from an inferior hand.

And first to you, my Brethren in the Ministry, I address my self, and
earnestly entreat you in the bowels of Christ Jesus our Lord to remember, That
you are not only Church Officers, but Christians. Spend not your whole time in
reading books, and studying other men; you will do well to study your selves,
and to be acquainted with the frame of your own hearts. The way which you point
out unto others, walk in your selves, and conscientiously practice the duties
which you pangatively press. Beware of beams in your own eyes, whilst you are
diligently Mat. 7. 3.
plucking motes out of your brothers eyes. Let not your own clothes be full of
dust, when you are brushing other men's backs. Its not handsome for us to be
always sweeping before the doors of others, and picking up the least offensive
straw, whilst huge heaps of dunghill filth lie before our own doors unremoved.
It Mat. 23. 4.
opens the mouths of opposites, when we are taken notice of, to bind heavy
burdens on other men's shoulders, we in the mean time refusing to touch them
with the least of our fingers. Know we not the pleadings of many at the last
day, Have we not preached Mat. 7. 22, 23.
in thy name, and in thy name cast out Devils? whom yet Christ will spurn from
his presence, and cast forth as an everlasting abhorring.

What though Judas had the grace of Apostleship, so long as he had not grace
with his Apostleship? It was a wise course that Paul took, and deserving
imitation, who did beat down his own 1 Cor. 9. 27.
body, lest having preached unto others, he himself should become a castaway.
What though Satan fall down from heaven like ^ightning before us, if he be not
cast out of our hearts? We have more reason to rejoice in having our names
written in the Luke 10. 20.
Lambs book of Life, then in having the Devils subject to us. O whilst we
passionately endeavor the salvation of others souls, let us have an eye of
tender regard unto our own. One hint more at parting, -- We cannot be too often
put in mind of that which is our proper work, and does most nearly concern us
to be busied about: viz. Reading, Exhortation, Doctrine. Let 1 Timothy 4. 13.
not our Sabbath-daies discourses savor of the tiresom distractions of the
preceding week; giving the People occasion to say, That if we were less earthly
and carnal, our discourses would be more heavenly and spiritual. The ungrateful
world many times puts us to our shifts to get a subsistence, yet let us take
heed of too deep and unnecessary engagements in matters secular, that are
heterogeneal and excentrical to our employment. Its inconvenient, and gives
occasion of disgust to be seen so often in the streets, and found so seldom in
our studies. It should not satisfy that something is done by us on the Lords
day, to stop the clamours of conscience, and the Congregation. It becomes not
those who should serve God with all their might, to offer unto him that which
cost them nothing. The more pains we take in private, the more rational and
methodical shall we be in public. Those Sermons are most affectionate, and
melting, that are written with sweat and tears as well as Ink. Sapless and
successless usually are those discourses, that are the blustering inforcements,
and yawning exactations of lusty lungs, and not the clear and elaborate
distillations of a judicious, and working brain. A loud sound of words may make
the ears to tingle, and cause a blind, and confused agitation of the affections
to little purpose; but the Understanding and Reason are not captivated but by
clear and solid arguments. As for disgorging that which lies uppermost, on the
top of a squezy stomach, under the notion of the immediate, and undoubted
dictates of the Spirit; that has been sufficiently exploded by able pens, as
being apparently repugnant to sound Reason and Religion.

Christians, I would likewise caution and advise in a few words.

1. Flatter not your selves with fallacious and ungrounded hopes of being saved
upon easy terms. Religion knows no reward without a preceding work. Expect not
to ride in a triumphant Chariot, unless you first tumble in sweat and dust.
Lazy Lozels shall be scourged, when conquering combatants shall be crowned.
Christ has told you, that the way is narrow, and the Gate is straight; and
therefore turn the deaf ear to the contrary Mat. 7. 14.
suggestions of those, who would fain persuade you, that the way is broader,
and the Gate wider then Christ has made it. The Saints of old took no more
pains then was necessary, who instantly served God day and night, in order to
obtaining the promised, Acts 26 7.
and purchased inheritance. Our way is up-hill, no coming thither without
panting.

2. Be not discouraged because of the unavoidable difficulties of Religion. Let
not the high hills, and the ragged rocks over which you must climb, fright you
into a benumming deadness, and irresolution. Lay not aside your Oars, though
the wind and ^ide be against you. Are not others safely landed, who were
assaulted with the like opposition, and therefore why should you despond?

3. Though I propose the exemplary life of this holy man, as worthy your
imitation, yet I would have you look higher: Follow him no farther then you see
him following Christ. It was a laudable height, and pitch in Religion which he
attained unto, and which the generality of Professors come short of; Yet I do
not urge you to sail after him, and steer the same course, with the neglect of
your Compass. Let your eye be upon the never-erring rule of the word. The most
Seraphical, and best of Saints on this side heaven, have some dross mixed with
their gold, some water with their most sparkling and generous wine. I would not
have you to be holy only, as this or that man is holy, whom you conceive to be
more then ordinarily excellent, and one of those who are in the highest form of
the School of Christ. Let Christ alone be Pattern, which you will exactly
imitate, and the Copy that you will write after. He was a Copy without blot,
and a Lamb without spot.

The most shining and spiritual part of Mr. Murcots life, is taken out of his
Diary, or daily account of himself in writing: The like Practice I would
passionately persuade. Its numerous advantages will recompense the present
toil. Me thinks such Arguments as these should be cogent, and constraining.

1. Self-acquaintance. A prime point of wisdom is the knowledge of a man's self.
If he be accounted wise, who is well verst in State Affairs, and has in his
mind formed characters of the most noted men of his times: If he be reputed
wise, who is acquainted with the nature of Angels, and elementary Bodies; who
knows the mysterious motions, and influential operations of the stars, and can
give a description of the several birds that fly in the air, of all sorts of
beasts that move upon the face of the earth, and of the unnumbered kinds of
Fishes that swim in the great and wide Sea; then much more wise must he needs
be, who by much searching has acquired the knowledge of himself.

The benefits of this self-acquaintance would be deservedly considered. 1. Its
of consequence to know what our condition is, as to life and death, and upon
what terms we stand in order to salvation. Being daily weighed in the Balance
of the Sanctuary, we shall find whether or no we are too light. Its good to
prevent those mistakes, which being not discovered, may prove the loss of our
souls.

2. When thou find lust prevailing, with apparent decaies and declinings in
grace, here is an occasion adminstred for godly sorrow to vent it self, by
pouring forth penitential tears before the Lord.

3. If thou see the pleasant plant of grace to thrive, and flourish, and
overtop the stinking weeds of thy corruptions; and if thou feel the Sunshine
of Gods favorable face in Christ, warming and chearing thy heart; here is fuel
laid in for the fire of thy joy to burn and blaze. These rare expressions of
mercy, provoke thee to thanksulness, and to sing aloud of Gods goodness.



2. Prevention of evil. The consideration of this, that the evil which falls
from us must be recorded by us, and that for this end, that we might thence
take occasion to loath and abhor our selves in dust and ashes, will lay a
restraint upon us, and be as a bridle in our mouths, to check the insolency of
unruly lust.

3. Accounts less confused when we come to dye. He that makes even with God
every day, will find his deathbed work to be comfortably lightened and
lessened. He that delays and puts off the remembrance of his ways; and
calling himself to an account till he come to be tormented with pain upon his
bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain, will find himself in an
unmeet posture for a work of that nature. If our sickness be not such, as to
extort loud outcries and hideous exclamations, yet it will be sure to oppress,
and bow down with a dull and heavy unchearfulness.

Self-examination is a solitary duty, and requires a calm, and undisturbed
retirement. Now the curtains of a sickbed are often opened, and the
languishing Patient seldom at rest. The weeping wife, lamenting children,
sorrowful servants, busy Physician, condoling visitants, must all be heeded
and hearkened to, and answers returned to their enquiries; so that our time is
taken up in meditating on our pain, and relating it to others. Doubtless,
health and a closet are most convenient for self-reflexions, which if
procrastinated till the last period of our lives, are rarely attended with a
real conversion, and turning to God in truth and sincerity. How seldom are
dying men newborn? and they added to the Church, that are going out of the
world? The sins of departing souls come crouding and thronging in so thick upon
them, so that a distinct consideration of them cannot be taken; and now men's
former golden dreams of heaven, and high-flown hopes of afterhappiness, vanish
like smoke, and leave behind them in their stead, despair, destraction,
confusion, consternation, and a certain fearful expectation, and looking for of
fiery indignation to devour.

O that men were wise, that they would remember their latter ends, and whilst
the light shines, provide for the days of darkness, for they are many.

The Devil has a jealous eye upon all Engines that might probably batter his
Kingdom, loosen his hold, and weaken his interest: besides, the flesh loves to
be abundantly favored, and therefore I expect that objections against this
course, of calling our selves to account daily, will be multiplied.

Object. 1. The work seems to be attended with many thorny, and inextricable
difficulties; hence men's loathness to take it up.

Answ. 1. He that withdraws his neck from the yoke of Christ because of its
pinching weight, is unworthy of Christ. In vain do men hope to be saved, who
provide for their own ease, when Christ is calling upon them for service. Never
expect to look him with comfort in the face, unless you resolve to be
indefatigable in his work.

2. Do not men upon a worldly score take abundance of pains in casting up their
accounts? Will not the practice of many merchants rise up in judgment against
themselves, and others at the last day? They can rise early, and sit up late,
and immure themselves in their closets and counting-houses, and there at large
set down their receipts, and disbursments. Mariners, when at Sea, set down in
their Diurnals, every turn of the wind, and when it began, how many hours, nay
minutes the ship sailed such a point of the Compass, and how many another; yea,
though they sleep but half the night, yet they must find time to do this,
because their lives lie at the stake, and the safety of the whole is concerned.
How come souls trow to be at such a low and cheap rate, that the safety and
welfare of the Body should be preferred before them?

3. It is better to take pains then to run the hazard of suffering eternal
pains.

4. The greatest part of the difficulty lies in the Porch: when you are once
entered into the House, you will not repent of the pains you have taken, but
find encouragement to take more. A clear discovery of a man's condition has in
it much of satisfaction.

Object. 2. Multiplicity of unavoidable worldly occasions by some may be
pretended for their omission of this duty: they have not time; and leisure
enough to do as others do.

Answ. 1. One thing only is necessary, other things are but convenient. Its
necessary that you have grace, and be saved; not so that you be rich, and
advanced to an high degree in the world.

2. Lessen your business, and contract your occasions within a narrower
compass. Have less to do in the world, that so you may have more time to spend
in a devout retirement.

Believe it Christians, Time is a precious Talent that must be reckoned for:
See therefore that you husband it to the best advantage. Be sure you reserve
the morning, and evening for converse with God, and communing with your own
hearts, not neglecting a watchful jealousy over your selves all the day.

Religion is not a little obstructed by unnecessary visits, frothy discourses,
unsaint-like gamings and Paganish pastimes. Take heed of being late abroad out
of your own houses. It becomes not those who profess they look for, and have
unto the coming of the Lord, to come stumbling home, and to be groping for
their doors at midnight, when they should rather be in the secret chamber,
dressing and making themselves ready against the marriage-Supper of the Lamb.

I am bold to affirm, that reading the Scriptures, instructing our families,
praying to God, and singing praises to his name, etc. make sweeter music in
his ears, then the rattling of Tables, and the shuffling of Cards, the bane of
great men's houses, and it were well if the infection had not diffused it self
to multitudes of inferior families.

The plain truth of it is, men and women for the generality of them, choose not
God for their chiefest good, they make not him the object of their delight,
their rejoicing is not in Christ Jesus; Religion is a sapless, yea a sour thing
unto them, and hence it is that they turn aside to vain sports, and sensible
delights.

If you find your hearts averse to the practice of a Diary, yet let me entreat
and engage you to make trial of it for a few days; do not obstinately decline
a course which you have no experience of.

But if you are resolved through grace to take up, and persevere in the
practice of the duty proposed, beware that it do not degenerate into a
customary and empty formality. Rest not in the bare doing of the thing, but
prosecute the work in order to its ends, which are spiritual and of unspeakable
advantage.

FINIS.
CIRCVMSPECT Walking, A Christians Wisdom.
Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. See then that you walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, Redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
THE Apostle in this Chapter, according to his manner, does build upon the
faith in Christ Jesus to justification, the Doctrine of good works, and a holy
conversation, and matters of morality. In this Chapter he devideth that his
Doctrine, as I may say, into Ethics, and Oeconomicks, rules more generally
concerning the framing, the conversations of all; and rules more special and
particular to Family ralations: This he had begun in the former Chaprer, ver.
17. This I say therefore, and testify, that ye walk not as other Gentiles
walk, in the vanity of their mind. The Apostle descends to many Particulars in
that Chapter, and carries on the Exhortation in this Chapter wherein our Text
is: The general Proposition still being supposed, That the Saints ought to be
adorned with all manner of virtue, and to keep themselves unspotted of the
world; he exhorts them to a freeness of pardoning one another, wherein thy had
the Example of God, and it would declare them to be his dear children, in the
first verse of this Chapter: then to love; and walking in love, not in heart
only, but it must be expressed actually, as Jesus Christ expressed his love to
us in giving up himself for us; then he dehorts them from several vices, as
fornication uncleanness, covetousness, filthiness, foolish speaking and
jesting, which are not convenient; yea, these are things will exclude from the
Kingdom of heaven. Let no man deceive you with vain words, as if there were no
such danger in such a loose walking; those are vain words believe it, says the
Apostle, For these things the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience, therefore it is no light matter I deal with you about; therefore
the Apostle concludes, be not therefore partakers with them; partake not of
the sins of the children of disobedience, lest you taste of the wrath which
comes upon their heads for these their iniquities. The Apostle goes on to
back this his Admonition, that they be not drawn away with the error of the
wicked, with many arguments. As because now their condition was changed, they
were men of other principles; no marvel if heretofore, while they were
darkness, they walked as children of darkness, and did work and had fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness; but now they were children of the light,
and therefore must walk as they were; and they were fruits of the Spirit now
they must bring forth; they were goodness righteousness and truth; besides, it
is the part of godly men, and good children to approve themselves to God, and
submit to him in all things; besides; the works of darkness are unfruitful, and
shameful; it is a shame to speak of the things they do in secret: they were
such in themselves, and they will at last be revealed to the confusion of the
authors of them; to all which he adds a testimony from Scripture, that God
does generally every where call upon men to arise from their sleep and death in
sin, and he is ready to enlighten them; he speaks no more but what the
Scripture of old did speak; some difficulty is in this Verse, but it is beside
our purpose.

Now the words of the Text are, as I may say, a Repetition, and re-inforcing
the general Proposition, That the Saints ought to have their conversation
adorned with every virtue, or grace, and the fruits of them, and to keep
themselves pure and innocent, and free from the corruption of the world: From
all the former Arguments, he lays down by way of Inference and Conclusion this
charge in v. 15. (...) therefore because so and so, as you have heard; See to
it, That you walk circumspectly; the Argument enforcing, it is in the following
words, not as fools, but as wise; It is a part of great wisdom to walk
circumspectly; And from the general in the 16. verse, the Apostle descends to a
particular and special piece of this circumspect walking, and a notable
evidence of this wisdom, and that is the redeeming the time, and backeth this
with a strong argument, because the days are evil.

Without any further stay in the Porch, let us now enter the House, and view
some of the rooms of it; there are many things note-worthy in the words; the
first that I shall take up at this time is this; It is a duty Christians are
strictly charged with, to walk circumspectly. Doct. 1.


Here it will be requisite to enquire what is meant by this Circumspect
walking; and then Secondly, to make it good, that it is a duty so strictly
charged upon the Saints; and Thirdly, why it is so; and then Fourthly, Apply it.

For the first, What it is to walk Cirrumspectly: Here we have the Ma^ter and
the Manner of a Christians conversation; the Matter that is expressed, by a
Walking, which indeed does comprehend all the actions of a Christian life, in
conformity to the Law and Will of Jesus Christ, which is the Way; nothing more
ordinary then to express a Christian course by a walking, and sometimes by a
running in a race: but by a walking here it is expressed, Genesis 17. 1. 2 Kin.
20. 3. Psalm. 1. 1, 2.
and indeed this does include all a man's actions; his spiritual actions toward
the Lord, they are a part of this walking, their praying, meditating, hearing,
receiving, conferring, living by faith, all these are his spiritual actions.

Secondly A man's civil conversation also comes under this walking; for the
Rule and Will of Christ has an influence over that, to bound it, and limit it.
There is no calling which is lawful but a man may therein abide with God, if
it be never so mean; and this is another part of the walking: while men are
diligently employed in their particular Callings, out of obedience to his holy
command, they are in their way, and walking to heaven as well as when they are
in the spiritual part of the walk, and so much the more, while they have
spiritual hearts in this walk, ever and anon taking a turn in heaven, and
having Phil. 3. 20.
their civil conversation in heaven, (...), as the Apostle says.

Thirdly, even men's natural actions are a part of this way also; of the Matter
of this walking as eating drinking sleeping* Eccles. 10. 16.
etc. when they are used with moderation, and an end to befit us only for our
spiritual and civil conversations; when men eat and drink for strength, and not
for lust, for drunkenness, and eat in due season, as to whet when the Sithe is
dull; so that even these actions are a part of the walk also, and that it is to
be taken in this latitude, will appear, if we consider the particulars the
Apostle presses them too here, as parts of that walking.

Now to walk, you know, speaks a motion; it is opposed to standing, or lying,
or sitting still; the whole world lies in wickedness, and moves not hand nor
foot; they have their grave-cloaths upon them, are bound hand and foot, and are
Psalm. 1. 1.
melting away in their lusts, and therefore they walk not toward heaven; there
is a sitting in the seat of the scornful when men have taken up their rest in
sin, and are at the height, that they scorn the Travelers Zion-wards, with
their faces thither; indeed there is a contrary walking to this walking in the
counsel of the ungodly, in the way of sinners, a walking with sinners hand in
hand, having fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; but that motion
is from other principles even the flesh, and this from the Spirit; and by other
rules, the custom of this world, to which they are conformed, the examples of
Ephesians. 5. 12. R^m. 12. 2.
sinners, the commands of their tyranical lusts, and for other ends, both of
the Walk, and the Walker in it; the Walk, the end of those ways is death; there
is a way which seems right to a man, but the end thereof are the ways of
death; and the end of the Walker is to cheer his heart, and to satisfy his
lusts: but this walk we speak of is a contrary motion to that Prove. 14. 12.
of the world.

2. There is a terminus a quo, from whence they walk, and that is from sin, and
self, and Satan, and sinners, and the wrath which 2 Timothy 2. 19. Ephesians. 5. 12.
(...) Cor. 6. 17.
is to come; but specially from sin they walk: this is the scope of all their
ways, to get above sin.

3. There is a terminus ad quem, and that is to God in Christ, Act. 26. 17.
as a holy God, and a blessed God, that we might enjoy him as such, from hell
to heaven; and therefore conversion (when men are first turned, their posture
is turned) it is called a turning them from the power of Satan unto God.

4. This motion is a progressive motion, that is to say, a man goes forward in
it, not round about, as a horse in a Mill, and is at night, where he was in the
morning, but as a horse or Traveller upon the Road, which rids his ground, he
gets 2 Cor. 7. 1. Psalm. 8. 4.
ground every step; and so should we go on toward perfection daily, die to sin
daily, get somewhat further off it, and to the world, and get nearer to heaven
daily; we should see to it that we grow from strength to strength.

5. It is a constant motion, for a man that walks to such an end of a Journey,
he gives it not over until he come to the end of it; so should we constantly
be moving until we come to the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls.

6. A pleasant motion to a man that is cured of his lameness, and is no longer
a Cripple, as by Nature we are; the way is pleasant, Prove. 3. 17. Matthew. 1^.
Walks are for delight, and sure the ways of Wisdom are pleasantness, and her
paths are peace, the yoke is easy, the burden is light, and so much, that
though the Saints by reason of the souls dependence upon the body in its
actings and its being bound up, as I may say, under senses which are weak, and
cannot hold out long. I say, by reason of this they are weary in the ways of
God, yet not weary of them, but they are pleasant to them, his commandments are
not grievous to them; but this is not the thing which I intend to speak to from
the words, but rather the exactness and circumspection in walking; See then
that ye walk cicrumspectly, (...).

First then to this exact walking, there must go a rule, he that walks exactly
walks by a rule, ad amussi^, as the Carpenter, if he work accuratly, does all
by rule and measure: when men walk, as I may say, in a frame, and cut by a
thread, not rove out their lives, they have a clue in this dark world, and by
that they walk, says the Apostle to the Galatians, As many as walk by this
rule, peace be on them, and on the Israel of God, (...) Gal. 6. 16.
(...); Hence the Scripture, the Law of God which is the rule of holy walking,
is called Canonical, being a strait rule, they are right words, words of
righteousness, given by one Shepherd, such as will not lead us crookedly; so
then this is the first, that of a man's own conscience at the best, is but
regula regulata, and at the worst is but a blind guide, and a leaden rule, that
is easily bowed, and set to countenance the crookedness of a man's own ways to
the Law and to the Testimonies, if he would walk exactly.

Secondly, There must be knowledge to understand and know this* Rule and
Wisdom, rightly to apply it to the direction of our ways, else we cannot walk
exactly; to walk exactly, is to walk wisely, as you have it here, not as sools,
but as wise, of which afterward; but for the present we may note That a fool
Eccl. 12. 10. Colos. 4. 5. Mat. 10. 16.
cannot walk cirumspectly, and therefore the Apostle so often presses it upon
the Saints, that they should walk wisely, Walk in wisdom, says he, toward
them which are without: be wise as Serpents, says our Savior: I say there
must be a knowledge of the way of the rule, else how shall our steps be
measured by it? how shall a man tred and keep to the path he knows not? and
therefore sottish ignorance of the Will and Way of Christ, is an ill
preparative to this exact walking; can a blind man walk exactly or
circumspectly that cannot see which way he goes? it is an hundred to one but
he turns and goes another course; but this is not all, there must be a right
application of the rule to our actions; it is not every one that has his rule,
that knows how to use it; it is a good part of the Architects skill to use
his Rule well and his Plum, and by them to discern exactly the frame of his
building, yea, to direct it when he is building; so here, there must be wisdom:
how sadly do men and women of lively affections for God miscarry for want of
wisdom? Zeal without Knowledge is no exact walking, it hurrieth a man violently
not giving time to consider whether right or wrong; so Saul had a zeal for
Israel and Judah, and in that zeal slew the Gibeonites. which were of the
Amorites, but now in Covenant 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2. Romans 10. 2. Phil. 3 (...). Eccl.
7. 16.
with Israel; his zeal out-ran his wisdom: and so the Jews had a zeal of God,
but not according to knowledge; and so had the Apostle himself concerning zeal,
persecuting the Church; he thought verity he ought to do many things against
that way, Acts 26* 9. and the time shall come, men shall think they do God good
service if they kill you; so then there may be a being righteous overmuch,
which is forb dden; not as if the Lord did in his Word allow a loathsome
lukewarmness, a detestable indifferency and neutrality in the ways of God, so
as that men should abate something of their strictness, and stoop and
accommodate themselves to the exigence of the hard times they live in; but the
meaning is, that a man should moderate his zeal, and temper it with godly
wisdom, whereby knowing how to apply the rule to his condition, and walking
with caution, he may avoid much danger, which otherwise he would unnecessarily
involve himself into; as some of the Martyrs that would thrust themselves upon
suffering, when they need not; they are as Sheep in the midst of Wolves,
therefore be wise as Serpents, and yet innocent as Doves; a hard lesson I must
needs acknowledge, Mat. 10. 16.
and great need of a more then ordinary help of Gods Spirit to discern their
duty here in particular cases and actions: you see how Paul insinuates into
Foelix, he would not make him his enemy if he could avoid it* keeping a good
conscience; and so Jacob to his brother Esau, how much Courtship he uses, he
stands not now upon the terms with him, but how humbly he submits himself to
him; and was it not better, then to have ruffled with him, and provoked him to
his hurt?

Thirdly, To walk exactly, circumspectly, is to keep close, and not to warp
from the straight path, because others do err.

(1.) He will not do as the most do, to follow the multitude is no rule to him;
though the greatest part of men run headlong to the pit of destruction, and the
way to hell be thronged as broad as it is, and some sinners can scarce have
room to go together in it; this is no warrant to him; he walks not exactly that
resigneth himself up to follow the steps of the most in his journey, whether
his way and theirs lie together or no; so far as their way lies together he can
walk together with them, but when they part, fare them well, he is for them no
longer; so may we in things civil, yea, and many externals of holy worship
which are common to Saints and sinners, walk together, have fellowship with
them, but when their ways depart, we must shake hands with them, if we would
walk exactly: it is careless, loose, heedless walking, when a man shall follow
his company more then his way; Noah was upright and walked with God, though all
flesh Gen, 6. 9.
had corrupted their way, that was no warrant for him to do it; Genesis 6. 9.
and though he was likely to be derided for his singularity, it matters not, he
must mind his way, though he be alone in it, rather Number. 14. from 6. to 10.
then wander for company sake; and so Lot and Caleb, a man would have thought
those many waters rushing as they did (I mean the peoples violence drawing one
way) had been enough, specially considering with what rage it was, threatening
to stone him, to have born one poor Caleb and Joshua down the stream; no, they
had another spirit, they must bear up against it, let the hazard be what it
will in such a case, they are called to it, this is exact circumspect walking;
except men be circumspect indeed, they are in danger many times to be drawn
aside by following the company of others.

(2.) Yea, exact walking excludes also the following the examples of the
Saints any further then they follow Christ: and here is yet more need of
circumspection, for when we have some eminent Saints persons in admiration, we
are apt many times to be pinning our faith upon their sleeve, and dancing after
their pipe, to take their examples in the gross, and by it to be led into gross
mistakes; so the weak brethren looking upon the stronger, the more knowing, as
fit to be their guides, and seeing them eat things offered to Idols, because
they knew an Idol was nothing, this encouraged them to do the same, though they
made a breach upon their consciences by it: here now through weakness they
mistook their way and warped; that might be lawful for the strong that might
not for the weak, which stumbled whether they might eat them or no, yet they
would venture upon it, leaning upon the examples of the strong, and so they
went aside: and you know what force the example of Peter had to draw Gal 2 12,
13, 14.
others in, when he dissembled, and did not (...), but halted, as I may say,
between two, he would eat with the Gentiles, but when some came down from
James, then he withdrew, and so many of the Jews, and Barnabas also was drawn
away by their dissimulation; but Peter was to be blamed, as the Apostle has
it; he compelled by his example, the Gentiles to walk as the Jews did, and yet
himself being a Jew, did walk with the Gentiles before; and they were to be
blamed for being drawn aside, they did not walk uprightly, as the word is
before; therefore Paul propounds his example, not without its limitation, Be
ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ; now this is exact walking indeed,
to follow the 1 Cor. 11. 1.
sootsteps of the flock, of the Saints, both before us, and contemporary with
us; yet where they run out of the way, and Cant. 1. 8.
over the hedge set about us, not to follow them, which requires much
circumspection indeed. This is the third.

Fourthly, Exact walking, is when a man minds not only the external part of
the rule, but the very inside and spirit of the rule; he minds, and eyeth,
and endeavors to come up to it, and so the word in its notion seems to
import, (...) from going from the bottom to the top of the rule: the Law is
spiritual, says the Apostle: It Romans 7. 14.
is spiritual brethren, reaching the very inwards of our souls, the frame and
disposition of our hearts, all the very first motions of the soul, before any
tickling by them, or consent to them; those come under this rule; and therefore
a man that walks exactly, he labors to answer the Law in this, and he is
laboring Isa. 64. 5. Romans 12 8. Gal. 6. 1.
with his heart to bring it to such a frame as this, and therefore he sets
not up his rest, as most do, in an outward conformity to the Law of Christ,
except he can get his heart framed by it, nor will an inperfection in the frame
of his heart satisfy him, and therefore nothing but the resurrection of the
dead will be his rest, this is to walk exactly, accurately indeed; and so in
duties, to mind not only the matter, but the manner and circumstances; it is
not enough to work righteousness, except he rejoice and work righteousness; to
give, except he do it with singleness of heart, simplicity and cheerfulness: it
is not enough to pray, except he do it in the Spirit, and with affection, and
faith, and fervor of Spirit: it is not enough to admonish, reprove, except he
do it in season, with bowels of compassion, and Wisdom, and discretion, so
tempered as that it may not miscarry through such a defect in them. O this is
to walk exactly indeed.

Fifthly, To walk exactly then, is to carry an even course toward heaven, not
to walk at peradventures; and by fits and starts, making many balks in our
obedience; it is to follow God, and to follow him fully; when we will not leap
over an hedge to avoid a foul step, but keep to the way that is set before us,
so in the Proverbs, Turn not to the right hand nor to the left; the meaning is
not, that no man walks exactly if he live not without Prove. 4. 27. Deuteronomy 5. 32*
sin (for in many things we offend all) but by such a backwardness we mean
some eminent; notable miscarriage, to the wounding of their consciences, or
dishonor of God, and offense of others, this is to walk exactly: indeed God
does not stand too strictly with his people, the tenure of whose course is
without such balks and notable turnings aside, though sometimes they may fall
in such a manner and degree, yet he acconnts them exact vvalkers, as David, and
Peter, and Moses, and Hezekiah, and the rest: the meaning therefore is, that
the tenure of a man's life is to be without such eminent fallings, or he cannot
pass for an exact walker with God; and when ever a man so falls in that
particular, he does not (...), as David was upright, except in the matter of
Vriah; so then this is the Fifth, an exact vvalking is an even vvalking; he
that ploweth exactly does not every foot make a balk.

Sixthly, He that vvalks exactly, does make it his work so to walk; if a man
be taken up with other things in his mind, and it be intent upon them, how
unevenly does he walk? he is sometimes upon this side, and then upon that side
of the way, up and down, and many times loses his way, and heedeth it not;
but now if a man make his Journey his business, he is intent upon it, and looks
about him at every turn, and every turning, lest he should go vvrong: so to
walk exactly then, does imply a vvatchfull eye, a trembling heart fearing at
every turning, lest he should miss h^s way; so David, I said I would take heed
to my ways, lest I should go wrong so then to walk exactly, is to lay our
Psalm. 39. 1.
strength, our might, our wisdom, and all to it, to keep our way, so the word
is used of Apollos, he (...) being fervent Acts 18. 25.
in spirit, diligently he taught the things of the Lord; there it noteh not so
much the exactness, and accurateness of his skill, but of his diligence and
industry, for he knew only the Baptism of John, that is to say, the Doctrine of
John and his Administration; and so Herod is said to inquire, Go and search
diligently for the young child, etc. (...), search exactly, diligently, pry
into every corner, turn every stone, use all means, search from Mat. 2. 8.
bottom to top to find him: so then to walk exactly, is to make it a man's
work, business, to lay out his industry in this work; if he can but keep in
the way of Jesus Christ, the way to heaven, it is enough.

Now for the second thing to make it good, that it is a duty so strictly
charged upon the Saints; me thinks this Scripture it self is a full
testimony, there needs no further proof but yet a word or two more: you find
in that of the Hebrews the Apostles exhortation, make strait paths to your
feet, strait steps, or make Heb. 12. 13.
strait, paths with your feet, which may appear to others that are to follow
you, as you follow Christ; tread with a strait foot, and by a strait rule;
and in that of the Proverbs, Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways
be established; weigh Prove. 4. 25.
your steps before you take them, weigh them every grain and scruple in the
balance of the Sanctuary: walk you Suspenso pede, Look before you leap, look,
and look again, this is the way to have your goings established; and here in
the Text, see how it is charged upon them (...), see to it, it is a word of
strict charge, as we use to say to men, Well, see you do such a thing, see you
fail not then: so says the Apostle, see to it, that you walk Ephe. 5. 15.
circumspectly; it is not an indifferent thing nor of small moment, but of
great concernment; see to it, look to your selves* and then that particle (...)
increases the charge also, See how ye walk exactly, or how exactly you walk;
it is not the reflect act that is here commanded, that they should view their
ways, and see how exactly they did walk, this is not directly here commanded,
and immediately; though more remotely, as it conduces to this exact walking, it
may be here commanded, but that particle does intend the charge and heighten
it; but so much for the proof.

The third thing is, why this duty is thus charged upon the Saints, to walk so
exactly, circumspectly.

First, because they are children of the light, and therefore should walk as
children of the light; they should walk exactly, without rolling out of the
way, without stumbling in the way, because they have light; they that are in
the darkness, and know not whither they go, no marvel, if at any time they
stumble into the way of God, yet they as easily stumble out again; it is but
suitable to them not to keep their way; but now ye are in the light, and
therefore see that you walk accurately; you have a light to your paths, and a
lanthorn to your steps, therefore order your steps aright, make them strait;
therefore says Erasmus, he well says videte, because nothing is seen in the
dark but; Beza thinks this is more subtly then need.

Secondly, Because their steps are more eyed and taken notice of then other
men's, both by God himself and by other men; first, the Lord himself; his eye
runs to and fro, beholding the evil and the good, but specially in his own
people, he takes notice of them how they carry it, and he takes notice of the
most inward spiritual part of their hearts; of the frame of their hearts, and
therefore let them look to it, walk circumspectly in regard of him. Secondly,
In regard of men, (1.) There are many out of the malignancy of their hearts, do
seek some advantage against the people of God, they watch for your halting, as
the Prophet Ier. 20. 10.
speaks, they would have somewhat to accuse the brethren with, to bespatter
Religion with, and therefore like their father the Devil, if they cannot be
(...), accusers, they will be (...), false accusers: But oh! how glad is Satan,
and what sport is it to sinners to trap the people of God? to take them halting
and walking with an uneven foot, though it is sport to none but devils, and
devilish sinners, take that by the way; they were enemies of the Lord that did
blaspheme, though: David had given 2 Samuel 12. 14. ^er. 20. 10.
them cause; report say they, and we will report it concerning Jeremy, some
evil or other against him; how much more if any thing fall from them which is
justly blame worthy; O, a Candle upon an hill cannot be hid, a spot upon white
is easily see^.

Secondly, in respect of men, who are scandalized by their uneven walking, and
those either good or bad men. (1.) Some of the Saints they are scandalized,
that is to say, there is a stumbling block laid in their way whereat they
stumble, either thereby they are encouraged and imboldened to follow their
steps, though they sin against the Lord, and so they fall: and this is 2 Cor.
10. 32.
sad, (though a child of God cannot sure be so wicked as to intend the falling
of others, or drawing others into sin) but his example (as Balam did) who put a
stumbling block wittingly and wickedly* before Israel, taught the King of Moab*
to entice Israel Rev. 2. 14.
by their women, and they would draw them to Idolatry, whereupon great wrath
came forth against them; this is hardly to be found but in a^^ Balaam, and
better a* Millstone were hanged about his neck that shall do any such thing,
and he sunk into the sea, never to rise again; or else the thing in its own
nature is matter of offense, and occasions them to sin, as the strong brohers
eating things offered to Idols in the presence of the weak hat made scruple of
it, yet thereby were imboldned to sin; but 1 Cor. 8. 9, 10, 11.
if it draws not to sin, yet it may be a grief to the hearts of them that God
would not have sadned: God is exceeding tender of his peoples comfort, and
therefore he has written so much; the Romans 14.
scope of all which is, that they might have consolation, and their joy might
be full, and therefore if we by uneven walking grieve the hearts of the people
of God, surely we are like to smart for it; it is a vexation to the righteous
soul of Lot to behold the unclean conversation of the wicked, but it is a grief
and bitterness, doubtless much more to the people of God to see the miscarriage
of a David, a Peter, and to hear the reproach wherewith 2 Pet. 2^
they reproach the way of Christ, which fall upon them continually.

Secondly, Not only good men, but evil men are endangered to be scandalized by
it, and to be prejudiced against the ways of strictness and exact walking with
God, because they that profess Col. 4.
it, do so miserably miss it: we should walk wisely toward them that are
without, left we fright them away from Christianity, as the Papists by their
Idolatry are an offense to the Jews to keep them off from coming in to Christ,
because they are exceeding tenacious now of the second Commandment (God having
purged that iniquity from them by a seventy years captivity, and much longer
since) and so by their cruelty to the Gentiles where they go to convert them,
they are an offense to them; and little does a child of God know, if he fall,
as David did, how many may stumble upon him, and fall headlong into hell,
never come to Jesus Christ upon this account.

Thirdly, Because we have all of us erring hearts, and naturally we love to
wander; and if the Lord have healed that affection, that now it is wrought out
of us, yet we are apt to wander, therefore so often compared to sheep, I have
gone astray like a lost sheep; O seek thy servant, etc. We all like sheep have
gone astray; and therefore it is the more needful to be charged upon us home
and deeply, because we are so prone to turn a side; it is a people that have
always erred in their hearts; though they were his people in Covenant external,
yet they erred in heart; who can say he Psalm. 119. Isa. 53. 6. Psalm. 95. (...)
does not find many inclinations in the heart bent to backslide and go out of
the way, and therefore it is needful to be pressed upon us so much, to walk
exactly, and see to it.

Fourthly, because there are so many bypath whereinto they may step awry;
truth is one, but falsehood is manifold, there is error on the right hand, and
error on the left, and but one strait path before them, therefore it is two to
one but they miss it, and therefore they had need to use double diligence, and
be pressed to it, to walk circumspectly, to see they be exact in their ways.

Now for the Use then; First, it is to show us, that among the Use 1.
much profession of Chirst that is in the world, there is very little power,
very little exact and circumspect walking; men profess to walk with God, but it
is at a great distance, they are strangers to him, and he to them, and no
marvel.

The second Use, and that I will a little insist upon, shall be a word of
Reproof, and that of diverse sorts; and as the Lord begins his rebukes for
sin at his own House, Judgment begins at the house of God; so will I first
give the alarm to them, a word of Reproof to them: Alas! how far short do the
people of God come of this duty? it is intolerable pride in the Papists, that
stand upon their tiptoes, and talk of their works of Supererrogation, as if
they had done more then God had commanded; and it is wretchless carelessness in
us, that we keep not nearer to what he has commanded; I speak not now of the
many errors the most vigilant and close walking Christian will, alas, to his
grief, find himself guilty of, when he makes a diligent measuring of his
actions by that rule, but I speak of the carelessness of Christi ans walking,
wherein doubtless they might come up nearer to God, if they did but stir up
themselves ever and anon, but we are idle, we are idle, and make many an idle
complaint to God that w^ are unable to do any thing; which is true, if we
consider our selves apart from Christ, Without me ye can do nothing, but Ioh.
15. 5.
through him we may be able to do all things, and if we be renewed in our
inward man, what is this but a powerful propensity of the Mind and Will toward
God, and that which is according to God? It is not to be doubted, but if Saints
would but take more pains with their hearts, they might have many a better
frame to serve the Lord, and they should not offer so many tattered sacrifices
to him; and if men would be but persuaded to the painful part of Christianity,
they may get their passions of lust more subdued, which break out, to the
dishonor of God, and shame of Christianity, and therefore justly are we to be
reproved; if men would a little better cast their occasions; and husband their
time, they need not be in such straits, so often to neglect, or slubber over
their prayers. And for civil things, do you walk circumspectly as you might, if
you made it your work and study in things lawful: might not Christians have
more regard then they have to the convenience or inconveniency? I am sure the 1
Cor. 6. 12.
Apostle had, and therein he followed Christ, and therein he is to be our
pattern, and so what is of good report and praise worthy; me thinks it is sad
when there is no care unto our hearts of these things: might not Christians
walk at a closer scantling in point of offense? the Apostle would deny his
liberty 1 Cor. 8. 13.
in things lawful (and happily we would think necessary too) as the eating of
flesh, rather then offend his weak brother; and we many times care not, so we
may have our wills, how many we offend: and so in natural things, eating,
drinking, sleeping. Christians, I doubt we generally too much indulge the
flesh, even to the loading of our minds, and dulling our spirits for higher
things; how comes it to pass Sabbaths are spent so sleepily, but because some
will not allow themselves nor theirs competent rest; the world incroacheth upon
God, or else they load themselves with the creatures, so that they cannot hold
up their heads, either they are over-worked, or overcharged with surfeiting
and drunkenness, doubtless, this is reducible to those great evils; well, the
Lord reprove us for it, for we are very guilty, we walk very loosely in
comparison of the examples of some of the Saints; yea, I do verily think there
is many a poor blind Papist will rise up in judgment against many of us that
are Professors, that have more light then they.

2. It is a word of Reproof of another sort, that instead of walking exactly
with God, following him fully, their hearts are divided; some there are that
have the name of Christians, and yet altogether neglect the honest and harmless
conversation among men, and are altogether taken up with some small duties of
Worship and shows of Religion; as the Proverb has it, Angels in the Church,
and Devils in the House, Devils in their Callings, such were the Idolatrous
Jews; the Prophets with one voice do testify against them, for this thy cried,
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, are these, etc. but considered
not that they made this Temple of the Lord a Den of Thieves, a Sanctuary to
defend them, a cover and cloak for their wickedness; and so the Prophet again,
This people draw near me with Ier. 7. Mat. 15. 22. Isa. 29. 13.
their mouths, honor me with their lips, but are far from me, and the
conversation also which answers more to their hearts then to their lips, it is
the very counterpane of their hearts usually. (...) this an exact circumspect
walking? do you think thus to impose upon the holy one of Israel? does not he
regard, think you, what your dealings are between man and man? and how you
carry it in your Families, in your Shops, as well as in the public altogether?
this is very reproof worthy; our Savior thought it so, and all the Prophets
thought it so; and O that he would speak this to every carnal Gospellers heart
this day.

Again secondly, There are others that are all for morality and honesty of
conversation, they give every one their own, they are not injurious, they are
no extortioners with the Pharisee, they are no drunkards; but for the worship
of God, they know nothing what it means, to worship in Spirit and truth; this
is not an exact walking with God, these things you should Luke 18. 11.
do, and not leave the other undone, else you follow not God fully; indeed
there is many a Moralist, that is rather an Atheist then a Christian; but I
will not stand upon this: Pour out thy, etc.

Again thirdly, There are a sort that neither fear God, not Ier. 10. 25.
reverence man, and yet will not endure but to be called Christians; for the
worship of God, if they come at it in the public, there are their bodies, but
their hearts are gone; they come to see, and be seen, to mind faces and
fashions, and so sin and trifle away the Ordinances of God; in their houses
nothing but hellishness, all their words full of deceit and poison, their
accents are oaths, it is all the emphasis and grace they think of; their
speech, their lives, what are they but rottenness, and fraud, and pride, and
overreaching? they have no regard to right or wrong, good report; or evil
report, all actions are alike to them, being past feeling, and under a
reprobate sense; they cannot judge of good or evil, but call evil good, and
good evil. Is Ephesians. 4. 8. Romans 8. 1.
this (...), to walk uprightly, exactly? Ah surely brethren, if it be
exactness, it is of the devils coining; when men teach their tongues to speak
falsely, as in Shops many do, and make nothing of it, and teach their hands to
work deceit and wickedness, this is to walk exactly with the devil, to walk as
other Gentiles do, whose hearts the God of this world does mightily work to
their Ephesians. 4. 17.
own destruction: the Lord rebuke this power of sin where ever it is.

Again, It may serve to reprove another sort, and those are they who are so far
from walking circumspectly or exactly, Psalm. 69. 12. Gal. 4 29. Genesis 21 9.
that there is nothing more the object of their scorn and contempt then this,
it is the drunkards song, as David was; and so preciseness and strictness of
walking is ordinary; the world cannot bear the burning and shining
conversations of some of the Saints; they are so cuttingly reproved by them,
that with those Heathens, they curse the Sun, that by its shining does scorch
them. It is no new thing, the seed of the Serpent did always persecute the seed
of the Woman; and he that was born after the flesh, persecuteth him that was
born after the Spirit; even so it is now, says the Apostle: and so it is now
may we say: Ismael mocked Isaac, and is it not so still? or if it be not so
bold a sin as formerly, it is because the times, not sinners hearts are
changed; they malign them still, watch for their halting; report, say they, and
we will report it: well, remember this. you that are scorners at strictness,
and circumspect and exact walking with God, you are set down in in the scorners
chair, the Lord Ier. 20. 10. Psalm. 1. 1.
be merciful to you; for few that arrive to that pitch, and take up their rest
in sin, that are therein settled, are brought on to Christ: you are the Ring
leaders in the way which leads to destruction; this is another.

The next Use then shall be a word of Exhortation to us all; If it be a duty so
much lying upon us, then to buckle our selves Prove. 19. 16. He that despises
his way shall die.
to it, to walk exactly: O see to it, I charge you all, and the Lord lay the
charge upon mine own soul: as you will ever lift up your faces without spot,
and with comfort at the day of your summons, and appearing before the Judgment
seat, so walk circumspectly; I know none of our hearts but they do, or may,
accuse us of much unevenness in our walking: do you know it brethren, and will
you dare to continue in it? I may not descend to particulars: but do not your
hearts smite you for looseness of spirit toward God? hanging back often,
neglecting, shuffling and cutting with God, putting him off with any thing? and
is not this a cursed thing, to do Gods work negligently? to bring a female when
he have a male, does not your hearts smite you for this? you do not take heed
to your ways, lest you sin with Ier. 48. 10. Mal. 1. 14.
your tongues; there is much falsehood therein, lightness and foolishness, (if
not poison and destruction there,) nor to your feet, they make haste to vanity,
you shun not occasions of sin, as you would an infected person or family: O
surely if it were not so an importunate duty, the Apostle would not so charge
it upon Christians, that make Christianity their business, to walk so exactly:
but a little to move us to it, I will add some few Considerations, and then
some words ^f Direction, which you may look upon as an Appendix of this Use, or
else as a distinct Application of this Point.

First Motive, Consider that the way wherein you walk is all overspred with
snares and nets to trap you, and that your ways. (1.) To trap you in sin. (2.)
To trap you for sin. First. To trap you in sin; had not the Bird need to he
wary and heedfull, and make good use of her senses to discover where she may
light without danger, when every place is full of Limetwigs? is there an hook
under every fair bait, and had not the fish need to take heed how she biteth
or nibleth, lest she be taken? this is the case, there is a truth, and a great
one in it; there is nothing we have to do with, either toward God, or toward
men, or toward our selves, but there are many temptations accompanying it, and
particular conditions have their particular temptations; and if we be not very
circumspect and exact, it is a thousand to one but we miscarry, we are snared
and taken, and carried away captive to some vain imagination, to some high
thought, to some base lust, and there kept in strong holds, and it may cost us
somewhat before we be released again; the world was never more full of snares
then now brethren; for beside the ordinary snares in our trading, profession,
or way of gaining; Lord, how many snares are there? it would be an infinite
work to trace them through in all our relations. Snares, they are apt to steal
away our hearts, if lovely and desirable, or else to occasion much sin another
way, if otherwise; in Reliligion never so many, never more seandall by the
falls of eminent Professors, never were there more various pretenses to the
Truth, more false ways, and every one pretending to the Truth, so that it is
somewhat difficult to find a solution for that Question, what is Truth? never
was the world more full of witcheries then now, more powerful in its
enticements then now; it is hard to bear the frowns of it upon the truth, but
more hard to avoid the embraces of it, and the smiles upon error and falsehood;
if they think it be the way to thrive, to be of this or Ier. 44. 16.
that opinion, men to whom gain is godliness, they will rather burn incense to
the Queen of heaven, and tell the Lord to his face, that his Prophet is a lying
Prophet to speak against their way of worship, which brought them in so much;
they had their corn, and wine, and oil then, and therefore they would not be
beaten off by a Thus says the Lord to the contrary; will the Silver Smiths let
Diana go upon easy terms? and will Acts 19. 24.
not men stickle for a way of falsehood, if thereby come in their gain and
preferments? and will not all the world follow that way almost? had we not need
to walk exactly then, to take heed where we tread? besides, if there were
nothing but our own hearts, they are as snares and nets to us; how easy is it
for us to be entangled in the cords of our own sins, our own pride, and
self-confidence, and self-love, doting upon our selves, and a world of
iniquities, each of them being a snare? Oh brethren, if you did walk among
pits, and pits covered from your eyes, if men did walk upon a bog ready to sink
every step, how would they walk Suspenso gradu?

Secondly, The necessity of it to the end; if we would reach the end of our
faith, the salvation of our souls, it must be by an exact walking, it is not a
little form of godliness without the power, spreading it self through your
lives will do it, else those in the 7. of Matthew had had a sufficient plea for
themselves; else the Pharisees had not been much out, when they under a Mat. 7.
24. Mat. 23. 14.
pretense of long Prayers devoured widows houses, but they were miserably
mistaken. Dear friends, be not deceived; let no man deceive you with vain
words, and tell you the way to heaven is brother then it is; it is a narrow way,
and it is up the hill, and if you will come to heaven, you must not think that
any by-path will bring you to it; that there is any nearer cut then the Lord
has made, Many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able, Luke 13. 24.
and what if that prove any of our cases, who never were sensible of such a
duty, in strict, close, exact, circumspect walking, how w^ful will our
conditions be? men seek to enter, but they will not strive, they will walk hand
in hand with the people of God' but they will not walk exactly, they will take
a liberty to their spirits, though their souls perish by it.

Thirdly The difficulty of the way should put us upon exactness; it is a narrow
way: there is a necessity, you heard before, if you Mat. 27. 13.
miss it, you sink and perish; but men think it is easy to find and keep, but
this is ignorance; our Savio^ur says it is a strait way, (...), an afflicted
way, or a way crushed close together: a man cannot tell almost how to miss the
way to hell, he may wink, and walk thither, he needs no light to his feet;
the way of the wicked is as darkness, and while they are in that darkness, they
may be sure they are in the way to destruction; and he that is but a fool and
bungler at the service of sin, is not ingenuous, may make a shift to come
thither; how easily to tumble down the hill? but to recover a man's self, to get
up the hill, this is the labor indeed. It is narrow, and then it is not such a
beaten path, and therefore not so easy found: some track there is, but it is
Cant. 1. 8.
not so beaten and beautified with the feet of the shining Saints, as to be
easily discerned, but it is rather a way in the air, and indeed none can see it
until he be in it, and therefore there is a necessity of exactness,
circumspection in walking; if a man have a hard way to find, be upon a great
plain, or a waste howling Wilderness, where there is no way beaten, and among
enemies, in danger to be destroyed, this man had need look well about him, to
walk exactly indeed.

A third Motive may be because Iniquity abounds, the love of Mat. 24. 12.
many waxes cold: and therefore from hence it is that there are so many
offenses, so carelessly given and so easily taken; if Peter and the men of
Knowledge have no more love then to walk so Gal. 2. 13. and 14.
offensively, have no more tenderness of others, what need had the weak then to
walk wisely, circumspectly, lest you be drawn away with the dissimulation of a
Peter, as Barnabas was, he looked not so well to his steps as he should: as on
the other hand, if you slip and fall, and walk not wisely, if thy foot slip and
thou stumble, there are few that are so spiritual and full of love, as with the
spirit of meekness to restore thee again; it is too too apparent even in the
eminentest Saints; they are rather Gal. 6. 1.
ready to a withdrawing, a casting off communion, and fellowship, and therefore
thou had need, who ever thou art, to walk wisely and circumspectly, else thou will be in danger of giving offense to some of the little ones, and woe be to
him by whom offenses come; or else thou may be ensnared and stumble upon
others miscarriages and so thy soul be destroyed, or in danger of it, as the
Apostle speaks; will not that man walk warily that Gal. 6. 1.
has stumbling block upon stumbling block, is in a rough way? and if he tread
aside, is in danger to put out a joint, or break his bones* so it is here.

Fourthly, How much honor has God by a circumspect conversation? hereby is my
Father glorified, if ye bring forth much fruit, Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven; has he Ioh. 15. 8.
put so much honor upon all the Saints, as to make them one with himself
through his Son, make them sons and daughters, Kings and Princes in all lands,
heirs apparent to the Crown of glory, and shall not we honor him? Oh how sweet
and comfortable a condition is it, when the ways of God are well spoken of by
reason of any of us? and how uncomfortable when they are evil spoken of by
reason of any of our uneven walking? O be tender of the Name of God, and be at
some pains the more to look to your ways, that he may be lifted up, and exalted
by you: O therefore cut off hereby all occasions from them that seek occasion,
as the Apostle speaks of himself, therefore he would abridge himself of his
liberty somewhat; and the Gospel is glorified much by such a circumspect
walking; an Art or Science is then honored, when a man is perfect and exact
in it; so is the Gospel, which teaches this holy walking; when we come up to
2 Cor. 11. 12.
it, we honor the Rule whereby we walk, that shining speaks the beauty of
the Rule, that ye may a dorn the Gospel of Christ.

Fifthly, You may by thismeans draw others to a liking of the vvays of God; the
beauty of holiness, the more visible it is, the more attractive; what makes
sinners think so well of their own condition, and so meanly of Religion, when
pressed upon them? they see nothing more in the Saints then in others they are as
careless of their steps, make as many balks as others, keep no stricter a vvatch
over the door of their lips, have no more command of their tongues then others,
there appears no more candor, ingenu^ty, self-denial then in others, but
visibly as griping, covetous, peevish, revengeful as others; this is not the
way to vvin any; this is the way to drive away the Roes and Hearts that are
looking toward a way of God, but quickly frighted away. What know thou, O
woman, but thou may by thy heavenly conversation, strict circumspect
vvalking gain thy husband? and thou husband thy wife, and parents your
children, and children your parents, and masters your servants, and servants
your masters, and one neighbor may gain another; and will not this add to the
weight of your crown? O therefore 1 Cor. 7. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 2.
I beseech you, will you resolve upon it.

Now in the next place, a word of Direction, what course to take; alas, we
are like children, must be taught to go, we know not what foot to set forward
in this great work. I shall therefore in the first place give you a word of
direction. First, beg of God to mix this word with faith in your souls, that
you may believe it to be so great, weighty, important a duty; labor to get a
heart sensible of your vvandrings, uneven vvalkings, how far you have been
vvide of this narrow way, both before and since you have vvalked Zion-ward,
and so to be humbled under them; for you must here plough up before you plant;
your course will hardly hold if you set forward with a purpose to walk more
exactly, except you be sensible how great the evil of turning aside, or loose
walking has been: well then, begin at the right end, and see how you have (it
may be) for a long time, Ier. 14. 10. Psalm. 95.
not only wandered from the way, but loved to wander; you have not only erred,
but you have erred in heart; you have had the Law of error in your heart, as
the Saints have the Law of Christ in theirs; and this indeed is the height of
Rebellion and froward walking; it is frowardness indeed this provoked the Lord
to shut them out of Canaan, yea, he, swear they should never enter; and if it
has not been so with thee, for this very cause, O how should this abounding
grace which has made the difference, melt thy heart to pieces before the Lord!
and that would be a good preparative to a circumspect walking for the future;
the Wormwood and the Gall remembered how evil a thing and bitter it is, that you
have so departed from the Lord; and the strait path will be a notable help to
keep you closer to him for the time to come.

Secondly, Set your selves always as in his presence, so the Psalm. 16. 8.
Psalmist did walk as in his sight; if ever the Scholar will write exactly, it
is while his Master is looking on; or the servant work exactly, it is when the
Masters eye is upon him. O if we could but have our eye ever up to the Lord
upon all occasions, as the Psalmist speaks, how circumspect would it make us?
the eye of a Psalm. 25. 15.
holy severe man, how would it awe us? we would not entertain such thoughts,
such ends as we do, if men were but privy to them; why, now we forget the
Lord; O therefore brethren, be you with God, abide with him in your hearts and
conversations 1 Cor. 7. 24.
what ever they be; and if we be with him, he will be with us, and this is
the way to walk uprightly, (...), as in Noah his case; and when did David
carry himself vvisely, but when the Lord was with him? and this was the
reason of it, he set God before him, and vvalked with God, and God vvalked
with him, and that pre^ence will be sure to keep us in the way.

Thirdly, Let the Word of God dwell richly in you, in all wisdom and
understanding; It is not enough to have the Col. 3. 6.
Scripture in your houses, except you have the Word hid in your hearts, that
you might not sin against God; without light a man cannot discover the
stumbling blocks, or the turnings and vvindings of his way, but it is a
thousand to one but he misseth it: a man cannot be an exact dealer, if he have
not the rules of his art, or trade exactly; men would be ignorant of nothing
therein, lest they should be overreached and deceived; and yet how contented
are we to be ignorant here of much of Gods mind, without which we cannot keep
his way, nor walk circumspectly. I hope you do, many of you, study as well as
read the Scriptures, and hide it in your hearts, for this end, that you may be
filled with a full assurance of understanding: this is another: how often do we
step out of the way and know it not? and how Col. 2. 2.
often do we stand pausing, and lose much time? when we should walk and work,
we are then to enquire, and to learn, and know not which way to turn, to the
right hand or the left, and all because we have not our senses exercised, by
reason of use, to Heb. 5. 14.
discern between good and evil.

Fourthly, If you would walk exactly or circumspectly, you must often apply
the Rule to your vvays, to see what suitableness there is between them, how
they correspond? it is not a measuring at the first setting out will serve
your turn, you must be often measuring, as an Architect, he will often use his
Plum-Line or rule, if you would make strait and exact work of it; Prove. 4. 25.
Psalm. 119. 59.
ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established; do you think
once for all will serve the turn? no, David did think upon his vvays, and
turned his feet unto his testimonies; the word there for thinking (...) notes
some accurateness in surveying a man's life; the word signifies, curiously to
devise, as cunning Artificers, because such devises are the work of the
thoughts: so then he did with great exactness think upon his ways, studied to
find out every error to an hairs breath, and so Job 19. 28.
to frame his course: and why should not the godly make as curious work of it
in holiness, as sinners do in sin? and this is the very reason why men do
often miss their way, they do not often inquire what the rule is whereby
they work, and for what end they do this or that: this is to look round about
us: as a man, if he go on, and there be many turnings, and never look backward
nor upward to see vvhither his course be strait, it is five to one but he
goes out of his way, ye should have said, why do we persecute him? so they
should have said, but so they did not say; they should have inquired for what
end they did it, by what rule; so the Jews in their blind rage against Christ,
Luke 23. 34.
alas, they knew not what they did: look to thy foot then in thy spiritual and
thy civil conversation: in thy spiritual, and offer not up the sacrifice of
fools, for they know not that they do evil, make rash vows, and then break
them, and think to put it off, by saying, before the Angel it was an error:
this is the sacrifice of fools, they inquire not before hand what they do; and
so in your civil conversation, inquire what, and why you do this, or Eccl. 5. 6.
the other action, that the end be holy, and the rule holy, even the Word of
the ever living God, and then there is hope you will go strait: A fools bolt
is soon shot, they neither mind the art of shooting nor the mark, and therefore
never hit the mark: how came it to pass the Jew swear so brutish in their
adultery and Idolatry, to worship Stocks and Stones? why, says the Text, None
considers in his heart, neither is there knowledge and understanding to say,
I have burnt part of it in the fire, yea, also, Isa. 44. 15.
I have baked bread upon the coals thereof, I have roasted flesh and eaten it,
and shall I make the residue an abomination? and shall I fall down to the Stock
of a tree? he feeds on ashes, a deceived heart has turned him aside that he
cannot deliver his soul, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand? so a
deceived, a bewitched heart, with some pleasant lust, or somewhat that men are
bent and set upon, turns them aside, they cannot deliver their souls, they
cannot say, is there not a lie in my right hand? and if they could but say
thus, and examine their ways, lay their steps to the rule, they would walk more
orderly.

Fifthly, In every serious undertaking, enquire of God, seek his face, in all
thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths; but indeed here is the
misery of it, we will first resolve what we will do, and then go and enquire of
God, which Prove. 3. 6.
is to mock him to his face. David went among the Philistians of his own head,
without inquiring of God, and what came of it we see; he was gotten out of the
way, and many a sna^e was he taken in, and many a stumbling block did he fall
upon, before he returned into the way again; how hard was he put to it, to 1 Samuel 27.
tell lies to Achish, to dissemble, and put hmself on to fight with them
against Israel; but that the Lord did wonderfully deliver him: never poor man
was in a greater strait; at other times he did beg of God to direct him, and
he did lead him, and upheld his goings, O that my ways were directed, says he,
to keep thy Statutes. Without his Spirit (though we have the rule of the Word
Psalm. 119. 5.
yet) we cannot rightly apply it to our particular cases and actions, and
therefore we had need to go to him.

Sixthly, Be sure we look to our humility, to keep our hearts low before the
Lord, for those are they he will teach his way; Psalm. 25.
the more humble a man is, and the lower thoughts he has of himself, the more
circumspect will he be; this humility is opposed to that confident rage of some
men; A prudent man looks well to his goings; but a fool rages and is
confident: This I say, says Prove. 14. 16.
the Apostle, that every one of you think of himself not more highly then he
ought to think, but to think soberly, according as God has Romans 12. 3.
dealt to every one the measure of grace: When a man is so confident, he
knows his way as well as any can tell him, and therefore he will enquire of
no man; this man of all other is most likely to go astray, therefore look to
this.

Seventhly, Take heed of Squint eyed ends, for they will draw aside the heart,
the affections, the feet of the soul; if we look not strait before us, but
always looking on one side, it is not likely we shall make strait steps to our
feet; therefore says the Wise man, Let thine eyes look strait on; and thine
eyelids look strait before thee; to the mark of the price, as the Apostle
aimed at that; look Prove. 26. 27.
strait before you, to the strait rule, it is to walk before you, and this is
the way to keep your selves right in the way, this is the way, not to turn to
the right hand nor to the left; they were Jehu his ends which drew himself*
aside: afterward, to countenance and set up the same Idolatry which he himself
had destroyed, or else to continue some Idolatry, though he destroyed some.

Eighthly, Take heed of halting between two, of going to a kind of neutrality,
as the Jews were guilty much in this kind; If God be God, follow him, and if
Baal be God, follow him; little better 1 Kings 18. 21. Heb. 12. 13.
were they that would reconcile us and the Papists together by a commission,
for this haltingwill draw us out of the way by degrees; make strait steps to
your feet, lest that which is lame be driven out of the way and not healed;
away then with complying with the times and parties, whose vvays we judge to
be false, any further then the Law of Christ, the Law of Love requires us to
own them, walk with them.

Ninthly, Forecast what temptations and snares you may meet with in the way
of God, lest if you meet with more then you Mat. 8. 20.
expected, you be overtaken by them; therefore our Savior tells the man what
he was like to trust to, The Son of man had not where to lay his head; you
must forecast to meet with many tribulations in the way to heaven: if you dream
of a way strewed with Violets and Roses, and find Briers and Thorns, what a
sore discouragement will this be, and a temptation to forsake the way, to
turn aside from following the Lord? expect then that you may be assailed by the
frowns, yea, and smiles of the world, which is more dangerous of the two;
that you may lose friends, relations, the love of all, and be hated of all men,
for the name sake of Christ, the more exactly you walk; for the world cannot
bear too great a luster and glory of holiness in any; expect this, it would be
no strange thing to you then, no more then you look for, and then it will not
be so dangerous to thrust you aside from following the Lord.

Tenthly, Labor to arm your selves with a strong persuasion of the
Al-sufficiency of God, to keep you in, and deliver you Genesis 17. 1.
from the threatening evils you may meet with in your vvays, and of the
Al-sufficiency of his goodness, to be your exceeding great reward, though you
have but little with righteousness here in this world; and then brethren, you
will hardly be drawn to the right hand, or to the left; what is the reason that
fear turns many men aside? and it is very ingenuous to find out diverticula, as
Calvin says; and as you see in the case of Peter and Abraham, when he lied to
save his wife; and so David when he spoke untruly to Abimelech the Priest
first; and then afterward to Achish King of Gath, as you have it in the Story,
in the first Book of Samuel, his fear overwhelmed him, he had forgotten his
rock, the Lord Jehovah: and so for God, would men be so full of self-seeking as
they are, if they did believe that God were able to make an abundant recompense
to them, though they had little in the world for their service of him? it is a
very plain case, Abraham Genesis 14. 23.
would not take from a thread to a shoo latchet of the King of Sodoms goods,
they should not say they had made Abraham rich, he had God was an all-sufficient
portion to him: O^if men were of this spirit of faith in Gods al-sufficiency,
the smiling world would very little prevail to draw any aside to the thriving
side, or opinion, as I doubt it is; well then, labor for this persuasion, and
you shall find it a wonderfnl support to keep us upright in our goings, which
is a great part of this circumspect walking.

Alas, But you will say, this is a difficult duty indeed to walk thus exactly,
and as I may say in a frame; and if this be so, who then can walk the ways of
God, if there must be this strictness? To this I answer.

First, Plead not the difficulty against a duty, for difficult duties must be
done* by how much the more difficult, by so much the more excellent; and what
else were the difference between the form and the power; between a Saint and an
Hypocrite, if the Saint did not take up the most strict inward spiritual
difficult services, as well as the more slight and outside, and overly? lay the
necessity then in the other* balance against the difficulty, and see which
will weigh down the other.

Secondly, Suppose thou be weak and find thy self far short of this duty, yet
there is no reason thou should be discouraged, Heb. 12. 12. (...)
but lift up the hands that hang down, and stir up your souls to it, and buckle
to the work, there is nothing so hard, but diligence will overcome, specially
if you consider the condition thou art in, if thou be in Christ, for then thou
have a fullness of strength in Christ, through him, says the Apostle, I am able
to do all Phil 4. 13.
things; and why not thou as well as the Apostle? is there not as much fullness
now, and is not Christ as free to communicate it now, as then only? thou
sit down discouraged, and wilt not go to the Fountain for relief. Again
(2.) In Christ thou have all the Promises, Yea and Amen; now how many such
promises are 1. Sam. 2. 9.
there? He will give the Spirit to them that ask, and he keeps the feet of
his Saints, and such as have no might he will renew their strength, and they
shall run and not be weary, and walk Isa. 35. 8.
and not faint, and the wayfaring man (though a fool) shall not err therein in
this way of God, which is cast up; you let these precious Promises lie dead;
why do you not improve them, plead them with the Lord? Say then with the
Psalmist, O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes: say to him, Lord,
thou requirest a circumspect, an exact walking before thee; Psalm. 119. 5.
there are so many stumbling blocks and snares within and without; and I am so
foolish and weak, I am ignorant of Satan's devises, I cannot order one of my
steps to avoid them thy promise is, the foolish shall not wander; thy Promise
is to give strength to them that have no might; I am the poor creature that
has no might, to will is present, I would fain walk thus circumspect, but how
to perform it I find not. O see if the Lord do not condescend to take you by
the arm, and to teach you to go, and to keep you close to himself in his ways,
and in every respect be as good as his word to you, and at the end, himself be
your exceeding great reward for your so walking before him.

We have done with the Apostles Exhortation to walk wisely, now we come to the
Argument he enforces it with; Not as fools, but as wise; Sapientia prim^,
stultitia caruisse; the Apostle setting the contraries one against another,
would make it the more clear and emphaticall, and therefore this manner of
speaking is often used in Scripture: If we spoke to one part, the other will
follow by the rule of contraries, and we shall in the enlargement meet with it
by way of Doctrine.

The Doctrine therefore is this, It is an Effect, and an Argument, Doctrine.
a Proof of Christian Wisdom indeed to walk circumspectly, exactly: If you
would approve your selves to be wise memas you profess your selves to be, then
walk circumspectly, exactly, this is one of the highest demonstrations of it
you can give,

I shall endeavor to prove this by some Scripture, and then show in some
particulars how it is apparently wisdom thus to walk, and then make some
Application of it.

For the proof of it, there are many Scriptures which make it appear: walk
wisely toward them which are without, redeeming Col. 4. 5.
the time: where exact and circumspect walking toward them which are without,
lest we offend them, drive them away from Christ, prejudice them against the
ways of Truth, is called a walking wisely; there is great need of wisdom then
to all other parts of this circumspect walking; it is of the like force with
that of the Spouse, I charge you by the Roes and Hearts of the field that you
stir not my beloved before he please; stir him not by any unseasonable Cant. 2.
7.
importunity, nor by any provocation drive him away, for if you do, this will
be offensive to the Roes, creatures easily frighted away* that are wild, and
but beginning to be tamed; now this is wise walking; and that of the Psalmist,
The Psalm. 111. 10.
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; and a good understanding have
they that keep his commandments, his praise endures for ever; the fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom; this is the head, the top of wisdom, the
principal part, for this comprehends the first part of the (...) or rule, that
is to say, that which guides us to a right worshipping of God in Spirit and in
Truth, which is the first thing; this is the (...) the godliness the Scripture
so often makes mention of; to be exact in this, is the beginning, the first
born of wisdom, and the end of wisdom is to keep his Commandments, all his
Commandments, respecting man and God; or else fear of God is put for the inward
principle of obedience and keeping the Commandments, for the real demonstration
of it in a holy and righteous conversation: which way ever you take it, a good
understanding they have that keep them; so that it is an effect and argument of
wisdom; Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the
earth; Psalm. 2. 10.
they are usually, or would be wise men already; I but there is one piece of
wisdom that the Laws of men teach not, but the School of Christ, and that is,
Kiss the Son, lest be he angry, and ye perish from the way, or in the way; and
so another Scripture says, This shall be your wisdom in the sight of the
Nations, if ye keep the Commandments of the Lord, they shall say, surely this
Nation is a wise and understanding people; I will beleave my self wisely in a
perfect way, says the Psalmist; if ye walked in a perfect Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
way and exactly, it would be wise walking indeed; and therefore you shall
find, that all grace and ability, and strength, whereby we Psalm. 101. 2.
are enabled to walk the ways of God aright, it is called Wisdom; Prove. 4. 5.
and 7.
get Wisdom, get Understanding; Wisdom is the principal thing, and what is
this, but an ability to walk the ways of God exactly? no more for proof.

For the further confirmation of this Doctrine, take these Considerations.

First, It is wisdom to propound a right end, to choose the chief good for his
chief end, is a principal part of wisdom: the Heathens professing themselves
wise, they became fools; they Romans 1. 22.
thought they were able by the creatures to run up to the first being, and so
the first and chief good; but woefully they were mistaken. A fool he is that
works for no end, as many men do, they bowl away the greatest part of their
lives, without any mark that they aim at that is good; this is the folly which
is Phil. 3. 13.
bound in all men's hearts; it is wisdom then to have a mark whereat men aim in
all their actions, and to have this mark the chief good, the right end whereto
all should he directed, to make him who is the Alpha the Omega; it is no small
piece of wisdom; The eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth, but Prove. 17.
24.
wisdom is before him that has understanding; here, and there, and every
where, when they should be fixed upon some mark or stop to which all should be
directed, as the Apostles were, he had his mark in his eye still, and they
should let their eyes look right on; this is wisdom indeed. Now this is one,
piece of exact walking and a main one too, thus to eye the first and chief
good, that is to say, God himself for our last end, to propound him to Prove. 4.
25.
our selves, as the center of our souls, wherein alone we can rest with
satisfaction; Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth I
desire in comparison of thee; this was a wise man Psalm. 73. 25.
indeed: this is the first: Wisdom consists in the provision of the end.

Secondly, To provide and make use of the right means to this end in general,
is another piece of this Wisdom; the wise man's eyes are in his head; if a man
have never so good an end, and yet know not which way to compass it, nor how to
go about to gain Eccles. 2. 14.
it, this is a fool* when a man has the mark in his eye, to set the byas the
wrong way, and so to go clear off this end, argues Eccles. 10. 2.
not skill but weakness, his heart is at his left hand; and indeed herein is
most evident the power of Wisdom, to discover the right means for such an end
as will make a man happy, and to know how to make use of them, and accordingly
to improve them for that end: the Wisdom of the prudent, is to understand Prove.
14. 8.
his way; now who is it that does this, but the circumspect exact walker?
others, they turn the byas another way, some to prophanness, others to heresy,
etc. they tread not the track at all, as if a man intending to go Southward,
takes his course quite Northward, clean contrary. So men intend heaven, but
their course bends hell-ward: sure this is folly: no, no, Jesus Christ is the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, and he alone, and therefore this is Ioh. 14. 6.
Wisdom brethren, to know who is the Wisdom of the Father, to come to him,
close with him, walk in him, as we have received him.

Thirdly, It is Wisdom, and great Wisdom for men then to take the nearest way,
and easiest way to a thing; Labor in vain is not the character of a wise man;
that does movere, and non promovere^; now it is labor in vain to go a further
way about, or a worse way to an end, when there is a nearer and better; frustra
fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora; how many miles does a Spaniel
run in his excursions to no purpose, whereas if he kept close after his Master,
he would not, nor need to tire himself so much nothing near; and so it is with
many a soul that does follow Jesus Christ indeed, but they follow him not
closely, do rove and ramble many times, and then are fain to come in again to
the way by the weeping cross, the bypath being rough and harsh, and full of
pricking briars and wounding thorns; no surely, brethren, the rule of holy
walking is the straitest path that leads most directly to heaven, there is no
nearer way then God has there chalkt out for us; and therefore the exact
walker that keeps closest to this rule, to walk according to this rule, he
goes the nearest way; men dream they have a nearer and an easier way then this
strict and strait path, but alas, it is but a dream, when they awake they find
they are far wide from the way, and therefore are drawn with much pains, much
Hos. 13. 13.
heartbreaking to return again, before they can go on in the way to God to
heaven; foolish children they are that stay long in the Hos. 13. 13.
place of breaking forth of children; we do obstruct our own mercies, and make
a great deal of work for repentance and tears, which might have been avoided
if we had vvalkt circumspectly with God; and then in that time which we
have spent, and that strength laid out upon our returning again, what a
considerable progress might we have made further in the way of God? as in the
case of David: was it his wisdom, think you, or his folly when he turned
aside out of the way, fetched a vagarie, a compass, I have done very
foolishly, says he in that place, I have gone out of the plain and pleasant
paths of wisdom into this 2 Samuel 24. 10.
rough and thorny way, and now I have gotten a thorn in my foot, a vvound to
my soul; and so he did in the matter of Vriah: Psalm. 107. 17.
fools, because of their transgression are afflicted; now the circumspect exact
walker, that keeps close to God, he avoideth all these excursions, much of
this trouble and sorrow; and is not this a notable piece of wisdom?

Fourthly, It is wisdom for a man to suit and shape his course according to
the exigence of his condition: Ye are, says our Savior, sent as Sheep among
Wolves, therefore be wise as Serpents; that is a wise Sheep, that being among
many Wolves, Mat. 10. 16.
so carries it as to escape their mouths and cruelty; the people of God do
walk among Lions, their way is full of Lions, roaring Lions, seeking whom
they may devour. Now for a man so to walk as to avoid these, and yet to keep
his way, this is wisdom indeed: you have heard before, how full of snares and
stumbling blocks and offenses there are in the way; this is the exigence of
every believers condition, some more some less; now is not this wisdom, so to
carry it, as in such danger, neither to give offense, nor take offense? to keep
his foot out of the snare when he walks among them? O surely, this is wisdom
indeed; had not a man need of much wisdom that has the eyes of so many enemies
upon him, watching for his halting, ready to blaz^n his infirmities, catching
at somewhat they may make a reproach, accuse him to the Powers, overthrow him?
this is the manner of the world, as to the outward man; and this is the
continual working of Satan by sin, and all his instruments, as to the inward
man; now he that carries his Cup so even in such a case, as to keep the favor
of the King, and avoid ruin, is he not a wise man? and so here in respect of
the favor of the King of Kings; and who is this that does it, but the exact
walker with God? Noah had as perverse a Generation to walk among, as any, and
doutless as many snares, a world full of temptation, and yet he walked with
God, kept his favor, was saved in the Ark, and brought to the enjoyment of
himself; this was wisdom indeed.

Fifthly, It is Wisdom for a man to do that in its season or time, which if
neglected, he will afterward wish had been done; and to omit that, which
aftterward, he will wish had not been done. It is a great part of Wisdom, to
know the season for an action, For every thing is beautiful in his season:
there is not a man that now lives and hears Eccles 12. 1.
this word, but would when he comes to die, wish he had remembered his Creator
in the days of his youth: much sin had been prevented then, some provision had
been made for his eternal state; do you think the young men that cheer
themselves in their own vanities, when they come to judgment, and to stand
before the consuming fire, ready to burn them up as stubble, they will not
wish, O that they had fled youthful lusts, O that they had lived more by rule
then by lust! but alas, then it is too late: now is it not great Wisdom, while
men have the day, to work and walk? because the night comes, Ioh. 9. 4.
wherein no man can work: Stultorum est dicere non putaram: I had never thought
that my day was so near to an end, as now I find it; now the circumspect walker
he has the light; and makes use of it while he has it, because he knows he
shall not always have the light to work by, nor walk by; He that gathers in
harvest is a wise son; that is the season for gathering; for a man to neglect
that time, and let winter Prove. 10* 5.
come on, which will spoil all his harvest, and to say, I had not thought this
year had been so far spent, is very gross folly: well, this is another.

Sixthly, It is wisdom to go through stitch with a work, if it be a thing worth
the while: what thine hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, (that is to
say) not by halves, carelessly: what folly is it for a man to take some pains
for an end, Eccles. 9* 10.
and for want of a little more to lose all? a man draws the bow, seems to
take aim, but for want of a little more care and exactness, misseth the mark
and loses all: this is the case of hypocrites, they take much pains for
heaven, they seem to run as fast as any, and keep as much ado in the way of God
as any, they pray often and much, and hear, and receive, and for want of a
little more, they fall short and perish, because they look not to the frame of
their hearts, their uprightness before God in it, and disallow not themselves
in their halting, and therefore they lose all, and their souls, and all, is not
this folly? who did more then the Pharisees for Heaven, and those in the
seventh of Matthew? But they wanted one thing more, they busied themselves
about many things, but the one thing more they neglected, and therefore
miscarried; for a man to run, and wrestle, and strive, and yet to miss the
prize for want of a little care, to strive lawfully, a little exactness and
acurateness in the manner as well as the matter of their working, this is
folly: alas, how many are there that seek to enter, as the foolish Virgins, but
because they add not a little more, and strive to an agony, therefore they are
not able thus to seek; this is to lose all their labor.

Seventhly, Another Argument is this: It is Wisdom that takes a course for the
fullest enjoyment of the last end, the chiefest good; there are, it is believed
degrees of Glory in Heaven; all the Saints shall shine, but some like Stars,
some like the Sun, one Star differs from another in Glory; every one shall have
a mansion, and unspeakably 1 Cor. 15* 41.
Glorious, but they are not every one that shall sit on the right hand, and on
the left hand of Christ in his Kingdom. It is a great Reward indeed that
diligent Ministers of Christ have, that are so indeed: Christ is said to have a
thousand, and they two hundred Sheckels, the Keepers of the Vineyard, (that is
to say) a fifth part of what he has* Cant. 8. 12.
Indeed in other goods, we have less good in them, and a mixture of snares,
specially in our time of flesh and weakness to weild them aright, they are not
so desirable in the highest degree. David was loath to be the Kings Son in-Law;
Seems it to you a light thing, to be (...) 1 Samuel 18. 23.
Son in-Law to a King? it is a greater burden then yo(...) are aware of, to
carry it answerably to such a condition; Favorites places are slippery and
dangerous, many envious eyes are upon them, to watch their halting, much ado to
keep the heart humble in such a case; but now this good, the chief good, there
is no snare in the fullness of enjoyment of him, but the more fully, the more
happy; the more Grace, the more Glory; and therefore for a man to take up with
less here, is not Wisdom, but folly and great weakness; therefore the Apostle
puts them on, That they should not lose any thing of what they had wrought,
that they might have a full reward; and so 2 I^h. 2.
neglect not, slubber not over your services, be exact in them, lose not so
many Prayers, so many Sermons, so many Sacraments as you do, when you do them
so carelessly, for want of a little acurateness you lose them, and lose of your
reward; for there is fruit redounding to your account in the day of Christ.

Eighthly, It is a piece of Wisdom also for a man to make sure his title to an
inheritance, if worth the having; who would be so fooled as to neglect this
among men, where the good is scarce worth the looking after? now here is an
inheritance incorruptible that fades not away, an inheritance 1 Pet. 1. 4.
of the Saints in light and glory: and is it not wisdom to make it sure, not to
be at uncertainties? sure you will all conclude it is: now this is the way, and
no other, circumspect, exact and diligent walking; do all diligence, it is 2
Pet. 1. 10, 11.
not an idle, loose profession Brethren, that is accompanied with assurance,
no, but a diligence there must be, a working, and working out, and with fear
and trembling; there must be an adding to Faith, Virtue, etc. for if you do v.
5, 6, 7, 8.
these things ye shall not fall, and an entrance abundantly shall be ministered
into the everlasting Kingdom. Now what wise Master of a Ship would come into
his harbor tattered, and torn, full of leaks, and ready to sink, if he might
come in with the sails filled, in a gallant manner, which he may do by an
acurateness of stearing a right course to avoid the rocks and sands? who would
choose to go through a narrow wicket, as it were, hard and sharp, when he might
have a wide door opened to him? O brethren, it is wisdom to make your calling
sure, every man in distrust will tell you so, and when you come to die and look
death in the face, your souls will say, that it is wisdom indeed then to have
assurance: well, an exact walking with God is that way to procure it: let men
say what they will of peace and assurance, while they walk loosly they must
give me leave to suspect all that I know, that sin will undo our peace, if we
carelessly fall into it.

For the Application of this then.

In the first place it may serve to wipe off that slandero^s imputation of
(...) the false accuser of the Brethren, and of the ways of God, and of God to
us, that he casts upon Religion, as if it were a thing that were besotting, it
made men fools; this is a slander the Devil has gotten much by, and therefore
he uses it much; men are loath to be accounted fools, and think that to take
upon them the strict course of Religion, is the next way to it; they could
never have the liberty, nor the free use of their wits, and wisdom, and policy,
nor the free use of the Creature, nor the good that is in them any more;
Brethren, this is false; it is the greatest wisdom in the world ^ure you will
say, to be wise to Salvation; to be wise to a little Popularity and Fame by
ostentation of Science, falsely so called, to be wise to get a good Estate in
the World, to grow rich, this is a poor thing; Brethren, but to be wise to
Salvation is that will stand a man in most stead, when for all his other
wisdom, and the effects of it, he shall be at his wits end; Beside, indeed this
is the way to be wise for a man's name, for a man's Estate; for his Posterity
also; for who is it that gives power to get wealth? is it not the Deuteronomy. 8. 18.
Lord? and is not circumspect walking before him to all welpleasing, the way to
be blessed? blessed in basket, blessed in store? and if he blow upon it, and
curse it, you may sow much, and it will come to nothing, you may put it Hag. 1.
6.
into a bag, but there are many holes, out of which it will run; so many lusts
unhealed, so many holes; and for his name, you are mistaken, it is to be
righteous, their name shall be had in everlasting remembrance, it shall be
embalmed; the name of the wicked rotteth, and stinketh, the remembrance of them
is loathsome; Wisdom it Prove. 10 7.
self is folly to a fool, and so is the Wisdom of God to Salvation, foolishness
to the wise men of the World; but this their way and judgment is their folly;
and no greater evidence of folly, then to judge the ways of God foolishness.
Well, the foolishness of God (as you count it) is wiser then men; you think it
is foolishness to spend so much time in the service of God, less ado would
serve the turn, as the Heathen Seneca 1 Cor. 1. 25.
derided the Christians, that they lost the seventh part of their time, (that
is to say) the Sabbath, because they spent it not in the service of the world
and vanity, as they did; and so do you, when a man is diligent and exact in his
times and hours, spends so much time in waiting upon God, you think he is a
fool, he will be a beggar, but when you and he come to lie upon a deathbed
together, then tell me, who is the fool: as very a fool as he was, thou will
then wish thou had been such a fool; and oh that thou might die his death!
So if some be tender, and scruple at the taking an unjust gain in his trading,
that which others can easily swallow, they think this man is a fool, he will
never do any good with his Trade, he will be a beggar. Alas, they know not that
a little with Righteousness, with a good Conscience, is better then great
Revenues without Right; a little with Gods Blessing, which makes rich, giving
contentation, and giving the sweet of Mercy, making them give down their sweet
to them, is better then much without it; and when thou have heaped up Gold as
the dust, and Raiment as the clay, and withal, have gotten a wound in thy
Soul, a worm in thy Conscience, the rot and canker eats into thy soul, James
5(...).
what have thou gotten? who will be the wiser man? when the sins whereby thou
have gotten this, begins, to stare like so many devils in thy face? though
thou have builded thee an house, a fair house and chambers Hab. 2. 11.
by wrong, and he that dwells in a tent, is contented with a meaner condition,
with a good Conscience, when the stone begins to cry out against thee, out
of the wall, and the timber out of thy chambers, and thy ears are full, and thy
heart full of the cry of thy sins and guilt whereby this has been gotten, who
will prove the wise man then? O surely Religion makes not men fools.

Secondly, It may be a word of retortion, and serve to fasten the folly then
upon the wisdom of the World; Wordlings think the people of God fools for their
preciseness, but the Saints know them to be fools; will ye believe when the
Lord speaks? do not harden your hearts now, and say, thou speak falsely in
the name of the Lord. Read that passage of the Apostle, and tell me what you
think then; The Wisdom of the World is foolishness with God; is not God the
only wise God, and do 1. Cor. 3. 19.
you think the Lord can be mistaken? though we that are poor weak creatures,
like your selves (may be) mis-judge, yet sure the Lord cannot; he is wisdom it
self, and it is foolishness with God, he judges it so; and believe it, they
are wise, whom he makes wise; and they are fools, and that is folly whom he
accounts so; by the rule of contraries it follows; if to walk
circumspectly, be to walk as wise men, then to walk loosly and at large, is to
walk as fools, according to our Text; I will give you but two or three
Demonstrations of their folly, it may be the Lord will convince some poor
creature of the folly of his ways.

First, It is folly for men to pitch upon a wrong end, to place their happiness
in any thing but the chief good indeed; now this is evident enough, too plain,
that men of the world they do place their happiness in worldly things, they
have their god to worship as well as the Saints; The lusts of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, and pride of life, 1 Ioh. 2. 16.
to which the Apostle reduces all that is in the World, their pleasures, their
riches, their honors, these are their ends, to which they drive on all their
designs, and here they rest and sit down, and look no farther many of them; now
is not this a gross mistake and grievous folly, to end so low as the earth, and
what the would can afford? which will appear, if we consider, 1. That Luke 12.
20.
none, nor all these things will run parallel with the souls to eternity;
therefore if they could make a man happy as long as he enjoyed them, yet
afterward they would then increase his misery, when they leave him, fuisse
faelicem miserum; It is perishing bread, uncertain Ioh. 6. 27.
riches, many times they make wings, and are gone, even he himself outlives
them; a miserable happiness that a 1 Timothy 6. 17.
poor mortal creature can outlive; if not, yet the soul out-lives them; he can
carry nothing away with him, says the Text; the poor soul must appear in its
nakedness before ^he Lord Judge at that day of appearing, after death, and soul
and body to eternity after the Resurrection shall never be the better for them;
alas, the remembrance then of your pleasures, and honors, and riches will be
but a sting to your souls to eternity, that such enjoyments you had, and used
them no better. 2. As they continue not, so while a man can keep them, they
cannot, they do not satisfy the soul; if any man could, Solomon might have
picked out an happiness out of them, when he had so much wealth to procure them,
so much wisdom to improve them, so gave himself to find out; but the sum is,
vanity of vanities; not only vain, but vanity; and vanity of vanities, and all
is vanity; the greatest vanity, they are empty, there is no substance in them,
they will not satisfy the soul; there is no sutableness between such earthy
things and a spiritual being, nor equality between their greatest vastness and
the largeness of a soul; they can never fill it, and therefore it can never
rest, but the more a man has, the more he Psalm. 73. 22.
would have still; drinking does but increase their thirst; and therefore well
might the Psalmist bebeast and befool himself for setting such an esteem upon
them. So foolish was I and ignorant, and even as a beast before thee, when he
thought them to have more in them, then they had, and therefore that they were
the happy men that flourished, and it was in vain for him to cleanse his heart,
etc.

Secondly, If they should, or do propound a right end, yet they miserably
miscarry in the means toward this end; For, First, There are some that are
wise to do evil: but to do good, they have no knowledge at all; and if men make
God and Heaven their end, is this Ier. 42. 22.
the way to it? will the way to the devil, and the way to hell bring a man to
Heaven? and yet this is the course that most men run, as if men would be saved
by contraries, and were Christians by antiphrases, because they are most
unchristian; surely Brethren, the Spirit of God and the Scriptures every where
has determined sin to be folly, and calls sinners fools, therefore we read
of working folly in Israel so much now; if one part of Wisdom be to aim at the
right end, surely Wisdom agrees notwith it self, if this be another part of
Wisdom, the Wisdom to do evil, which indeed is improperly called wisdom; but it
is a cursed skill and ingenuity which men have, whereby they are more
industriously wicked; this is so far from Wisdom, that it is the very height of
folly.

Again, Secondly, It is the Wisdom of the World to get a name of Christianity,
and therewith satisfy themselves; take the power who will, so they have the
name, and pass for Saints; gain is their godliness, and when they have gotten
the gain by it, the Godliness they care not to walk in, but in their pleasures
of sin; the 1 Timothy 6. 5.
show of Religion is profitable, but not the reality, it is burthensom; is not
this folly with a witness? can the Shadow be profitable, and not the Substance?
the Shell and Husk, and not the Kernel? can that be profitable, whose Praise is
of men, and not that whose praise is of God?

Again, As the top, and crown, and quintescence of their folly; they are wiser
in their own conceit, then several men that can render a reason, as he spaaks
of the sluggard; and such are all those that will not be at pains for Prove. 26.
16.
God and for Heaven: if men might devote all the flower of their youth, the
ripeness of their age and strength to sin, and when they come to die, have
Heaven drop in their mouths, many would be saved; but if they must be at such
pains for it, walk so circumspectly, strictly, in a frame, by rule thus, and be
exercised in mortification, renewing their repentance, so much ado with
searching and trying their ways, they think the wisest course is to sit still;
it is better sleeping in a whole skin, and seven men that can give a reason,
are not so wise Verse 12.
as they; let Ministers say what they will, they will not believe but they are
the wiser men of the two; O he that is thus wise in his own conceit, there is
more hope of a fool, then of him; well then, if the world pass for fools, they
are the fools indeed in grain; and when Saints and sinners, the strict walker
with God, and the formal Hypocrite shall appear before the Lord at the last
day; then (if before you will not believe) you shall know who were the wise
men, and who were the fools.

Thirdly, Then let Wisdm be justified of her children; Mat* 11. 19.
you that are the true sons of Wisdom, and not bastards, and pretenders,
justify Wisdom then, though all the world run a contrary course, and count it
folly to walk thus circumspectly; do you count it your Wisdom, as the Lord
counts it, to be strict and exact in your walkking; no matter though the
world stigmatize you for fools, that you neglect your concernments other ways
sometimes, to gain a nearer approach to Christ, if the Lord judge you wise men;
the argument is very strong: for what man can bear the imputation of folly;
indeed every man would be wise, Vain man would be Job* 11. 12*
wise, though he be born like a wild Asses Colt; but the Saints methinks, that
know in some measure what the Wisdom which is from above does mean, should
labor to approve themselves wise men indeed, by a circumspect walking with
God. And you that profess the Name of Christ, though it may be not all of you,
in truth you would be wise, though you walk not circumspectly; shall I bespeak
you in the Prophets words, how say you, we are wise, and we have the Law, etc.
when you Ier. 8. 8.
walk not by this rule; Ah take heed you prove not foolish Virgins when all is
done: it is not Wisdom to dally with Religion and with God, he will not be
mocked. Then you that are wise indeed, and do in a good part walk exactly,
shall I beg of you, that you would yet more and more labor to approve your
selves wise men and women, in a great exactness of your walking, avoiding all
appearance of evil; as the Apostle speaks, in following 1 These. 1. 22.
after whaever is comely, of good report; you know what the Wise man says, A
man that is in reputation for Wisdom, that passes for a wise man and a
close-walking Eccles. 10. 1.
Saint; a little folly is like a dead Fly in the Box of Ointment that makes it
stink; by how much the more the Lord has done for you this way, be so much the
more careful: O it is this Wisdom that will make your faces shine, Brethren: so
it did the face of Moses and Eccles. 8. 1.
David, but a little folly in a David, what a blemish it casts upon it, and
what a reproach and blemish upon the beautiful way of holiness?

O then, I beseech you Brethren, Labor to cease from your own Wisdom: for
indeed this is folly, and contrary to the Wisdom of God; He that hearkneth to
counsel, is wise: It is a sad thing when the People of God are not Prove. 12. 15.
advisable, are so full of self-will and self-wisdom that they cannot cease
from it; so David in numbering the people, he had good counsel given him,
though by a man far enough inferior to himself in spirituals, but was not
advisable, and what a blot did he bring upon himself? 2. Cor. 3 18.
we profess to give up our wills and wisdoms to him, and yet when it comes to
the pinch many times, we must have our wills, and we must have our own
contrivances go forward, or else we cannot aquiesce; I said in quietness and
confidence should be your rest, Isa. 30. 5.
but you would not.

Again, Then beg this Spirit of Wisdom more earnestly, greater measure of it,
for it is he that gives Wisdom to walk exactly; this Wisdom from above, which
is pure, and peaceable, and gentle, and easy to he entreated, so that a child
may lead such a man or woman, if Gal. 5. 16.
he present any thing of light and God to them: And then Brethren, when you
have the Spirit, walk in the Spirit, in the Power of this Spirit of Wisdom, let
it prevail over your own wills, and your own opinions of your own ways, subject
all to him, and you shall find that he will guide you by his counsel, and
afterward receive you to Glory. Thus much for this Observation.

These were his last Lecture-Sermons, the last words; viz. Redeeming the Time,
because the days are evil, He stayed not to finish.

FINIS.
The Parable of the ten Virgins.
Mat. 25. from the 1. v. to the 14. v. Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven be
likened unto ten Virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the
Bridegroom.

And five of them were wise, and five were foolish.

They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them:

But the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.

While the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbred and slept

And at midnight there was a cry made, behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye out
to meet him

Then all those Virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.

And the foolish said to the wise, give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone
out.

But the wise answered, saying, Not so lest there be not enough for us, and
you, but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

And while they went to huy, the Bridegroom came, and they that were ready,
went in with him to the marriage, and the door was shut.

Afterward came also the other virgins saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us.

But he answered, and said, verily I say unto you, I know you not.

Watch therefore, for ye know not the day, neither the hour, wherein the
S^n^fman comes.


A Parable is a representation of some truth to the understanding, under such
things as are obvious to to the senses, and familiar to us in our ordinary use,
and experience in the Gospel, yea the Scriptures Old and New, are full of them.
I lift not to trouble you, to speak much to their Nature, but I understand,
they be a kind of a similitude, as the Parable, Chap. 24. 32, 33. Learn a
Parable of the ^ig-tree, when it puts forth leaves and the branches are yet
tender, the Summer is nigh ye know, it was a thing familiar to them in
experience; so likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, know it is
near, even at hand. A metaphor is a simile contracted into one word, an
allegory, a continued metaphor, and a Parable much what of the same nature.
Sometimes they hold out a truth more clearly, and sometimes more darkly; if the
(...) only be given, or laid down, the truth is concluded more obscurely, and
lies hid under the broad leaves of the similitude. As, of the Sower, that went
forth to Sow, (which you know the Disciples understood not, until our Savior
had Mat. 13. 3. and 4.
opened it to them,) says he, to you it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom, but to them it is not given, therefore he speaks Verse 11. 13.
to them in Parables, in such a manner delivering them, as that thereby the
truth is more shadowed, though it be clear when it is explained, that seeing
they might see, and not perceive. It is a Judgment to a people, to have
teaching in such a manner as Verse 14 and 15.
darkens the truth, so as they cannot understand. Now he explaineth it to the
Disciples, and shows them what is meant by the several sorts of ground which
received the Seed, the same Seed; but none brought forth (except one) to
perfection. Now (say his Verse 19. etc.
Disciples) speak thou plainly, and speak no Parables? so (says he) I
have spoken to you in Parables, or Proverbs, but now I will show John 16. 25.
you plainly of the father.

Now this being delivered to his Disciples privately, (as you have it, Chap.
24. for they came privately to him to ask him the Chap. 24. 3.
sign of his coming, and when the destruction of Jerusalem should be, which he
had immediately before prophesied of:) he continues his speech to them
throughout that Chapter, and continues it in this, thererefore he speaks
somewhat more plainly, and clearly, not only laying down the proposition, but
the reddition. He not not only speaks of the ten Virgins, but tells them, what
it is that is compared to them, even the Kingdom of Heaven.

It is a field more large then ordinary, and therefore that we lose not our
affections in it, and be not out of breath before we get over it, I shall
endeavor to speak with more brevity, to the things therein couched, which are
doctrinal and practical; though me thinks the great variety that is in it,
should prevent a nauscating of it.

For the cohaerence of the words, you see they are a continnation of our
Saviors Sermon to his Disciples occasioned by their request, that he would
tell them, when those things should be, Jerusalem should be so ruined, as not a
stone should be left upon a stone; and what should be the sign of his coming,
and of the end of the world! Happily they might think they would not be much
separated in time, and thererore they wra^t them up in one question, to our
Savior. He answers them in this Chapter, somewhat to the one, and somewhat to
the other, I cannot stand at large upon this, I should detain you too long from
the Text. But he tells them whatever sign were given them, yet the day and hour
of his coming, no man did know. And therefore it lay upon them to watch, lest
Chap. 24. 37.
it should find him in a secure condition, as in the days of Noah, etc. And
therefore exhorts them all to watch. We know not Verse 42, 43.
when the thief will come, be ready for him always, watch, for he will come in
an hour, ye think not. And then shows them Verse 44.
the happy estate, of a servant, a faithful and wise servant, whom his Master
has set as a Ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season. Which
seems specially to concern the condition of the Disciples which were to be
set over the house of God, which is the Church of Christ, and to break the
bread of life to his people, happy is that Servant, whom his master when he
comes, shall find so doing, in the simplicity of his soul. When my Savior
comes, would ye have him find me idle (says Calvin) oportet episcopum
concionantem mori. Oh to be spent for Jesus Christ, (...) Master spare thy
self, was the envious man's counsel, when he whispers that into Ministers ears,
and can lull us asleep with such a requiem: he knows what he has to do,
while they slept he sowed tares. Surely brethren we have been very sleepy, else
there Math. 13. 25.
would not have been so many tares sown. And he shows them the sad condition
of them. if they presume upon the delay of his coming, and eat and drink with
the drunken, and beat their fellow servants, bite and devour one another. Ah
dear friends, if Jesus Christ should now come, would he not find many of us
thus doing? But now, as he had quickened them up to watch for his appearing, to
be doing their work, so now he inculcates the same not only Verse 13.
upon them, but upon all in the words of the Text, as appears (v. 13.) by the
application of it, watch therefore for ye know not the day nor the hour wherein
the son of man comes.

For, the scope of it which I think meet first to hint to you, I conceive it to
be this; To stir up all that profess Jesus Christ, and that have their hope not
in this world, but in the world to come; to look to their state and condition
that they be sure to be ready and prepared for him, that they make sure of such
a viaticum, as will carry them through life and death, and to persevere, that
they may be crowned, and when they have such a state, to continue watching and
waiting for his appearing; but the main is perseverance; that they be sure to
have such a work of grace wrought upon them, not to rest without such (I say)
as will hold, least they fall short of the glory of God. This is the general
scope, which being understood, we must know that every particular is not to be
squeezed too sore, least it give blood in stead of milk. And yet some
interpretation of the main things we may with sobriety (as the Lord shall
enable) expound. Our Savior is a President, expounding the Parable of the
sower, showing us what is meant by the seed falling by the highway side; the
stony ground, the thorny, and the good ground. And so in that of the tares,
telling us; who is the sower, and what is the seed; the good seed, and the
Tares, and the Reapers, the Angels, the harvest, the end of the world, and the
field, etc. And therefore by that little measure we have received of the same
spirit, we may humbly adventure to speak somewhat to the main things in this
parable.

Herein is held forth to us the relation and mutual deportment of Jesus Christ
to his Church, and his Church to him, both in this life which is the way, and
at death and Judgment which is the end; and therefore that which concerns
him, and that which concerns the Church toward him; being even as the warp
and wafe of the parable, we will consider them a little apart, and run each of
them apart to their end, as far as the Lord enables us, and not confound the
considerations of them.

Only before I proceed to that, we must know, that the parable or similitude is
taken from the manner of solemnizing Nuptial rites, which it seems by some
very learned to have been thus carried on, that is to say, When two persons
were espoused, and (...)de sure each to other, and the time of the solemnizing
the marriage come, the man came to the house of the Spouses Parents Plut.
Problem.
to take her; the time usually in the night, and aged men, and grave
accompanied the man, and Matrons the woman, and with solemnities of prayers,
etc. they did it wherein the Christians are said to imitate the Jews, and if
all things be sanctified by the word, and by 1 Timothy 4. 5.
prayer; me thinks that should be but an unholy marriage that is kept without
them; that by the by. Now when he returned and So Grotius.
took the Bride with him, then it should seem the younger men and Virgins did
meet them in the night with Torches, among the Romans and others; with Lamps
among the Jews, who had not the use of such Candles or Torches. And there is
somewhat seems to favor this of their meeting of him in his return, in that
place of Luke, Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning, and
Luke 12. 25.
ye your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord when he will return from
the wedding; that when he comes and knocks, they may open to him immediately;
there is a Simile of men waiting at night with loins girded and lamps burning,
that when their Lord comes from the wedding, to return home, to bring his
Bride with him, they may be ready to open when he knocks; a little difference
there is from this here, The Sir. and the vulgar Lat. here do add the Spouse,
to the Bridegroom; that they met her as well as him, and some others have so
read it, and of great name also; and if so, that would more make for this
understanding of the manner of the marriages among those people, whereto there
is a respect in this Similitude. I will not spend time about that, though
others do conceive that otherwise, they went to meet the Bridegroom
accompanying the Bride, as Psalm. 45. The Virgins her companions, shall be Psalm.
45. 14.
brought to the King in raiment of needle work; and so they meeting him,
brought him into the Bride-chamber, and young men I find (not old in Scripture)
to have been companions of the Bridegroom; as in Sampson his wedding, they
brought him thirty young Judge. 14. 11.
men to be his companions; these were children of the Bride-chamber, which
rejoiced with the Bridegroom; however it was, they met him it seems in the
night, and with Lamps, to light themselves Math. 19. 15.
and others, and this is the ground of the Simile, the protasis. Now the
Kingdom of Heaven is compared to this.

But that I may the more methodically open it, (leaving the Application of it
to be taken in, in the uses of some of the Doctrines, from the words) I will
begin with that which is spoken of Christ himself: And then that which is
spoken of the Church, and as briefly as I can, paraphrase it as I go, that I
may reach some point to be handled at this time.

First then, the Bridegroom Jesus Christ, is set forth by that relation Verse 2.
of one ready to consummate the marriage, with such as he has espoused, he is
the Bridegroom. T(...)e Lord Jesus (brethren) by the Gospel goes a wooing to
all the world without any respect of persons, be we high or low, rich or poor,
more or less sinful, leprous, poor, defiled, naked, indebted, imprisoned,
loathsome, nasty, never so; his ambition is to win our hearts, to gain our
consent, to espouse us to himself: Well, when he has done this, and has
obtained, then he comes to make up the marriage.

Secondly, Concerning him, it is said that he tarried; came not so soon happily
as ordinary. It is likely that their marriages were before midnight, usually
the beginning of the night; and to that, there may be a respect in this
expression, he stayed somewhat longer, for it is said, the cry was at midnight,
v. 6. So the Lord Jesus may Verse 6.
stay somewhat longer happily then is expected. It is said by them in the
Revelations, the souls under the Altar cry out, how long Lord, holy and true.
It may be the expectations of some of the Saints are for Rev. 6. 10.
his appearing sooner to take them to himself, they have a desire to be
dissolved and to be with him, and to them it is a tarrying long. And to sinners
it is a tarrying, they think Jesus Christ lingers his hour of a Judgment, and
a resurrection, but these are things afar 2 Pet. 3. (...).
off. And therefore they affected not them much, except a man could preach, as
if Christ in flaming fire to render vengeance, were at their backs, it
affects them not at all: All things continue with you sinners as they were,
and where is the promise of his coming? A promise to the people of God, a
threatening to sinners and hypocrites Genesis (...). 17.
it is, as Janus is said to have two faces, and as that in Genesis 3. the seed of
the woman shall break the Serpents head, a promise and a threatening both in
one. Now sinners they are bold, to eat and drink with the drunken, until he
come and sweep the second world away with fire, as the first was drowned with
water; this is the second.

Thirdly, the cry that goes before his coming, which Calv. says is
metaphorically put for the suddenness and unexpectedness of his coming, because
when any great thing comes upon a people at unawares, they use to make a cry
for tumult, and it may be so happily that then being unready they cry out, as
when people are surprised by an enemy, they cry out, O arm; arm, make ready,
prepare to meet them; but thinks it rather is a Voice that goes before the
Bridegroom, which indeed is a quickening to them that are his indeed, that were
not ready altogether, and it cries, make ready, prepare, for he is coming; and
this may be interpreted diverse ways. Whether there were any such thing in the
rites of their marriages, I know not, but for that it is not much material; the
comparison holds in the main.

(First) Then there is a cry by the Messengers of Christ: they cry, prepare the
way of the Lord; prepare your hearts to meet the Lord. We are exhorted,
commanded to cry, and cry aloud, that Matthew. 3. Isa. 58. 1.
we may awaken sinners, for that is the case here, as afterward you will find.
Cry with a Stentors voice, ut Stentora vincas, says Trap upon it. Alas all
will not raise lazy sinners, we may cry our hearts out, but who believes our
report? we tell you, the Judge stands at the door, Christ is at hand, it is not
long before you must appear before him, and if you be not ready, you are like
to be shut out; you believe it not.

(Secondly) A Cry of Affliction, especially that visitation which is the
forerunner or harbinger of death: that cry from the Rod has a voice, and that
voice is Gods voice, he speaks in it, and it is not an ordinary voice, but a
crying voice; the word, it whispers, the loud crying of the word, is but a
whispering, in comparison of the voice of God in the Rod: it cries, hear the
Rod and who has Mica. 6. 9.
appointed it: Mind it, if a Judgment be upon a City, (is there any evil in a
City, and he has not wrought it?) it cries to the whole City louder then
Jonah did, repent, repent, for you may perish and come to the tribunal within
less then 40. days, or hours: So every disease in a family cries to the
family, cries to the person, prepare, make ready, that we need not such a
message as the Prophet Isaiah brought to Hezek. the voice of God in the Rod
cries, prepare, make ready, for he is coming; here is a blow that the
Tabernacle of Clay is ready to tumble, and then soul, where will thou appear,
if thou be not ready? Or else,

(Thirdly,) by cry, it may be meant, as Chrysostom. Theophyl. Jer. Hilary, Aret.
and others understand it, of the last trump of the 1 These. 4. 16.
Archangel, Arise ye dead, and come to Judgment: this will be such a cry
Brethren, as will make all the world ring of it indeed; that will pierce to the
bottom of the deep, to make it give up its dead, to the bowels of the earth, to
make it give up its dead. Then shall all arise, the dead in Christ shall rise
first. Well this cry goes before, or accompanyeth this coming of the
Bridegroom.

Fourthly, Then he comes. For the heavens now must contain him until the
Consummation of all things, and then he will come to Acts 3. 21. Until the time
of the restitution of all things.
judge quick and dead; he that shall come, will come; though he seem long to
the people of God, he that shall come will come: then mockers shall know where
the promise of his coming is, they shall know their Judgment lingers not, nor
damnation slumbereth not. He will come soon enough for all, too soon for many
poor creatures: the Lord grant none of us be found in our sinful condition.

Fifthly, The time is at midnight: The Jews have a tradition, that the coming
of Christ to Judgment will be at midnight; and Verse 6.
hereupon the Primitive Christians, it should seem, did use to watch all night
the Eve of the Passover, expecting his coming, as Jerome reports, says Beza,
but to be wise above what is reason, you see whether it leads men in the dark,
for what is more directly against our Savior his own words; Of that day and
hour knows Chap. 24. v. 36.
no man; no not the Angels in heaven, but my father only. At midnight, with
respect to the solemnity of the marriage, that is to say, later then usually,
and therefore unexpected, when all was silent, nocte intempesta; when deep
sleep uses to seize upon men. The man of the house, at midnight his eyes are
sealed up with sleep, and when he least dreameth of the thief, then he comes,
and surprizeth him. So the Lord Jesus, like a thief in the night, when Chap.
24. v. 4^.
men usually are least aware, most uncomposed, and unfit for his coming for the
most part.

The rest of his actions in this Parable, will come in under the other part,
which is the Church, for you have in the general;

(First) the subject of this comparison, the Kingdom of heaven, and what that
is I shall not need here to speak much of, it has various expressions in
Scripture; It is not I conceive here taken for the Kingdom of glory, for there
are no foolish Virgins members of that Kingdom: No, nor the Kingdom of grace
which is within the Saints, for the same reason. Nor yet for the
Administrations of the Kingdom, as sometimes it is taken; But it is taken here,
for the visible Church of Jesus Christ, wherein some are wise, some are
foolish. Some hold out, some fall short of heaven, and the glory of God, and
some are crowned, enduring to the end; and thus much for the opening of that
expression.

(Second) thing in general to be noted, is, the time: Then shall the Kingdom of
heaven be likened, compared or shall be like; then, when? even when the Son of
man shall come, Brethren, to solemnize the marriage with such as he has here
espoused to himself; then, when we come to appear before him all together, it
shall most evidently appear to be so. But in a sort, it is so in every man's
particular Judgment at his death, or dissolution, there is a Specimen given to
the truth of this parable; and this appears from the connection of this Chapter
with the former; the last ver. of the former Chapter he speaks of cutting in
sunder that evil servant, that presuming upon the Masters delay, should beat
his fellow servants, and eat and drink with the drunken; he shall cut him in
sunder, Chap. 24. ver. 51.
and give him his portion with hypocrites; where is weeping and gnashing of
teeth for ever: Then shall the Kingdom of heaven be likened to ten Virgins. And
though then the spirits of many just men be already made perfect, and many
hypocrites already in the everlasting chains of darkness; yet because they have
been members of the visible Church in a sort, all such may come under such a
consideration, at the great and terrible day of his appearing, when the sheep
shall be set upon his right hand, and the goats on his left hand, as you have
it in the latter end of this 25. Chapter.

Now for the Church visible, compared to ten Virgins: There are two sorts
brethren in a visible Church, such as are Saints indeed, and do enjoy the Lord
Jesus, and have that Kingdom of God, even righteousness, peace and joy in the
Holy Ghost within them; and such as are only so, nomine tenus, they go for such
with men, who cannot search the heart, ought not to judge the heart
immediately, but tenderly, and always with the greatest favor, to judge of men:
Now such is this Kingdom of heaven here mentioned: And therefore we will
consider what is said of them two ways; cast it two ways, happily it may appear
the more clearly and distinctly to our understanding.

(First,) We will consider what in the parable is common to them both, to
Hypocrites, and Formal Professors, with real Saints, who possess and enjoy
Jesus Christ.

(Secondly) We will consider what is peculiar to either of them, and set
contraria juxta se, they will give light each to other, and this briefly.

First then for the things wherein they agree, or which are common to Saints
indeed, with Saints in appearance only, or seeming and real Saints. They are
all of them called Virgins, not in commendation of virginity, as Jerome did
childishly conceive, as Calvin notes. But to Virgins they are compared, either
only because in the marriage solemnity the Virgins used to go forth to meet the
Bridegroom, and bring him to his Chamber; So here they must go forth to meet
the Lord Jesus. Or else there is more in it, and I know not but we may consider
Virgins according to their state and condition here. Now the Church is so
called, or compared to Virgins, not in respect of their glorious unconquered
outward condition, as sometimes in Scripture, even strange Nations, yea
Idolaters are called Virgins, as Zidon, thou shall no more rejoice O thou Isa.
23. 12.
oppressed Virgin daughter of Zidon, arise pass over to Chittim, there also
shall thou have no rest. So Babel, Come down and sit in Isa. 47. 1.
the dust O Virgin daughter of Babylon; thou that as a Virgin have hitherto
abode in thy fathers house in a glorious beautiful condition, thy pomp and
glory now come down. And so Egypt, go up to Gilead and take balm O Virgin
daughter of Egypt, in vain shall Jer. 46. 11.
thou use many medicines, thou shall not be healed; (though the Papists make
this a note of the Church, the glory and outward splendour of it; that is quite
cross to that of our Savior, in the world ye shall have tribulation, and how
often have they been scatterd by Persecution.)

Nor yet are they called Virgins because of their priding themselves, and
setting forth themselves, as Virgins with their Ornaments.

Nor yet in respect of the first Constitution of the Church of Christ, when
they were all, or most of them Virgins. There were 12. and but one of them a
Devil: But I conceive, It respects the condition of the visible Church, as then
it shall be specially. And what is that? how are they compared to Virgins?
Specially in these two things.

(First) Because all that profess the Lord Jesus and become visible Sts, they
profess to renounce their Idols; the Apostle says, that he turned them from
Idols to the living God. Now Idolatry in Scripture 1 These. 1. 9.
is counted you know, whoredom, if they have been married to the Lord, owning
his Covenant; or else fornication, nothing more ordinary; it is enough to hint
it to you, and therefore when there is a renouncing of Idolatry, there the
Scripture looks upon them as Virgins; So when Judah and Israel had played the
Harlot, that is to say, had worshipped and served Idols, God charge their
spiritual whoredom upon them. But when they reformed, as Judah did; you know in
many Kings days Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, 2 King. 19. 21.
etc. And in the days when Sennacher. came up against them and blasphemed
them; the answer the Lord gave to Hezek. by the Prophet was this, the Virgin
daughter of Zion has despised thee; now having renounced her Idols, he so
calls her, and having betaken her self to the shadow of his wings alone, from
thence, from the hole in the rock, she despised the Assyr.

And (secondly) Because also, now taking upon them the profession 2 Pet. 2. 20.
of Christ, they escape and forego the pollutions of the world, then gross
scandalous sins they forsake, even Hypocrites as well as others, in which
respects they may be called Virgins, though their hearts be not right with God.

Secondly, they had all of them Lamps; they took their Lamps, says the text;
they have all of them a Profession of Christ, they make a show before men. The
Lamps I cannot take for any thing inward, but merely somewhat outward,
appearing unto men, they Romans 10. 10. Mat. 5. 16.
are Christians outwardly all of them: Even those really, believers with the
heart they do confess Christ with the mouth to salvation, they are not ashamed
to own him before men, and their light 2 Timothy 3. 5.
of good works and knowledge shines before men, that the world may see it,
there is the light of the Lamp. And truly herein hypocrites may go far; they
have a form of godliness, and as glorious a form as any others, and they do as
many good works, materially good as others do; and so they have a light shining
before men as well as others. So the Pharisees, you know they made as many
prayers, did as much Alms, fasted as often as others, made a glorious show,
here are Lamps.

Thirdly, their lamps it seems were burning all of them. Concerning the wise
Virgins there need be no Question of it. But for the foolish, I think it will
be gathered from that where they complain, that their Lamps were gone out,
extinguished; though it is Verse 8.
true, they were not fed with a right principle, and therefore they went out,
yet they did burn, they made a show of heat and light also before men, as Jehu
you know did, he seems to make a greater blaze in his zeal for God, then
Elijah himself did; And so for light also, knowledge abounds many times
brethren in an hypocrites head, a clear head, and a muddie heart, a sound head,
as the notion, and a rotten heart may be together; well, this is the third, I
hasten.

Fourthly, They all took them and went forth to meet the Bridegroom; they all
have their faces Zion-ward, heavenward, to meet Jesus Christ, only the
hypocrites they have faces one way, and row another way, as the Mariners do;
this I take to be their seeming to make for heaven all of them, and the one to
be as fair for it as the other, for they go as it were hand in hand to meet the
Bridegroom, yea a hypocrite may go far indeed in externals, as far as a child
of God, as afterward we shall have occasion to say; you may have your faces
Zion-wards, and seem to go forth to meet the Lord Jesus, and yet miscarry.

Fifthly, When he delayed his coming until midnight, they all Verse 5.
slumbered and slept.

We must not understand this of giving up themselves to security, and the
wallowing in the sinful pleasures of the world, the pleasures of sin for a
season. For this cannot suit with the truth of grace, and therefore cannot
agree to the wise Virgins, he that is born (...) Ioh. (...). 9.
of God sins not, cannot (...), not work sin, but his work is righteousness,
though he may have many by-blows in his work, many mis-carriages, yet his work
is righteousness.

Nor can it for a great part stand with the very profession of a hypocrite, to
return again to the pollutions of the world, which once he had escaped,
secretly; happily he may roll a sweet morsel 2 Pet. 2. 22.
under his tongue, and be loath to part with it, but the pollutions of the
world, which are open, like wallowing in the mire, will not stand with their
profession, therefore this is not meant by slumbering and sleeping, but either,

(Secondly) Is meant by it the sleep of death in part, for death is no more to
the Saints, though it be a sleep, and a killing sleep to hypocrites: our friend
Lazarus sleeps; or else,

(Thirdly,) Also partly a security and heaviness which grows upon the Saints,
on this side death, and me thinks the words seem to carry much for this, there
are two words, they slumbered, (...), and they slept (...), and the latter
seems to be more then merely Expository of the former. The former signifies
only a little drowsiness when a man does nap or nod a little, as a man sit^ing,
or standing may sometimes, but presently awake, aliquando bonus dormitat
Homerus. But then the sleep is a deeper security, when the eyes are altogether
closed, and a man is fast, though some sleep faster then others do; some set
themselves to sleep, they give themselves to it, others are overtaken with it,
it seizes upon them like an armed man sometimes, and herein they agree, the
Saints and hypocrites, formal and powerful professors of Christ, they all
slumbered and slept, they were all it seems overcharged with the cares of
this world, or somewhat or other, Luke. 21. 34.
that their watch was down, and they were surprised And alas Brethren, if the
day of the Lord Jesus should come upon us almost any day, would it not find us
sleeping, or if not sleeping, yet slumbering at least; but of this more
afterward.

Sixthly, They all arose says the text when the cry came at midnight. It was
high time then to awake, as soldiers that watch for Verse 6.
an enemy; they fall asleep, set some to watch, suddenly there is an outcry,
an alarm, O how quickly are they raised! If the last trumpet be the cry, it
shall raise all both hypocrites as well as Saints, only the dead in Christ
shall rise first, be awakened out of the sleep of death. If the cry be the
Ministry of the word by some smart visitation, it will rouse them all, let
hypocrites be as secure of their condition as they will, they shall have a time
of awakening,

Seventhly and lastly, They trimmed their Lamps. Some say only the wise Virgins
trimmed their Lamps, for the foolish had only dead Lamps, such as gave no
light, shining before men, but why then are they said to be extinguished or to
be gone out? Beloved, the words of the Text carry it for all, they all arose
and trimmed their Lamps, the copulative joines both sentences together, and
therefore the universal reaches the latter part as well as the former, except
there were some limitation. It should seem, Brethren, that hypocrites may make
as fair a show and deceive themselves, or being deceived by their own hearts,
even very long, to the very last, they thought now to arise with Sampson, and
shake themselves, when they have been sleeping upon the lap of their Dalilah,
but alas their Lamps were out, they trimmed them, and stirred them up to see if
they would burn any longer, but they were gone out, or going out as some render
it. A sad thing, Brethren, for us to deceive your selves even to the very last
cast until there be no remedy. O what treacherous hearts have we!

Eighthly, They agree also in the number, here in the Parable, five were wise,
and five were foolish, for this we must remember what was premised, that every
particular is not to be squeezed and pressed too sore; nor can we conclude from
hence an equal number of real Saints, or painted hypocrites in the Church, no
more then where there are Chap. 13. three evil sorts of ground, and but one
Mat. 13.
good; we can conclude that there are three to one unsound professors who
receive the word, to one honest and good heart, which brings forth fruit to
perfection, there may be more, there may be less, our Savior in the general
tells us, many are called, but few Mat. 20. 26.
are chosen; he might therefore here happily have some respect to the number of
Virgins which might accompany the Bride; which some say were five, because the
number consists of the first equal, and the first unequal number, even two and
three, because in a marriage, a superior and inferior, male and female are
joined together, but that is a nicity; however this we may take up from it in
the general, that there are some which are not what they profess, some are
foolish, and some are wise in the Church.

Now I come to speak somewhat to that which is distinguishing in the Parable,
between formal and real professors of Jesus Christ in this Kingdom.

First then in the general, the one are foolish, and the other are wise; Verse
2.
all are not wise that are within the Church, there are some fools. Why, but is
it folly then for any man to prosess Christ? No, it is not folly simply
considered in it self, but a duty to confess him, and hold him out before men;
but to stick here is folly, as we shall see more hereafter, blessed be the Lord
that there are some wise, though there be many foolish, some that will not be
put off with forms nor shadows, but must have the substance, the bread of life;
and not husks, they will not satisfy them. O that we were every one of us
such, Brethren.

Secondly, The foolish, they took no oil in their vessels, though their Lamps
burned, and afterward were extinguished, when they should Verse 3 and 4.
stand them in stead to enter with the Bridegroom, they had no oil: What is
meant here by oil, and what by vessels? for the first some say one thing, some
another, some as the Papists, say good works is the oil which is the life of
faith, without which it is dead, which is as if a man should call the flame of
a Lamp, the oil that feeds it; therefore, Brethren, according to the Scripture
expression, elsewhere, by oil I understand the saving grace of the spirit of
Jesus Christ; true justifying faith, repentance, never to be repented of, and
love out of a pure heart; unfeigned faith, unfeigned 1 John 2. 20. And many
other places.
repentance, unfeigned love, and indeed all the graces of the spirit. These are
they that feed the flame in the Lamps of the Saints; whatever hypocrites have
which makes a flame, and their Lamps do burn by it, of which more afterward,
because I would not stay you too long in the opening of it, this they wanted,
they cared not to make sure of this, to have this true saving grace; so they
had but as much as would make a blaze among men, that they might be seen to
have Lamps burning and shining as well as others, the rest they cared not for.

(Secondly,) For the vessels; some say the Lamps they had no oil in them; but
me thinks the Text distinguishes between the Lamps and the vessels, they took
no oil with their Lamps, he does not say in them, but with them; and the next
verse, the wise took oil in their vessels with their Lamps, (...), it is of a
large extent, but it signifies, somewhat believed, the Lamp: It is likely they
had some vessels they carried about with them, full of oil, that when the Lamp
needed, they supplied it still, else it would go out, so here, the vessel may
be meant the heart, brethren; a truly contrite heart, is the vessel into which
the Lord pours the oil of his grace and spirit, and hence there is a continual
supply, like the oil in the Cruse it fails not. Now this the foolish they cared
not for, but they had somewhat at present that would make their Lamps burn; for
holding out, they forecast not for that, therefore provided no oil in their
vessels, no true sound, saving, durable grace, in their hearts; the Lord grant,
Brethren, this be not the case and condition, of many a glorious professor
among us, our age has given, as large a testimony to this truth, as ever time
did.

Thirdly, When the cry came, and they went to trim their Lamps all of them, the
foolish Virgins Lamps were gone out, verse 8. The wise, their Lamps had need of
triming, as the Lamps of the Sanctuary were to be trimed every day, every
morning they gather some dross and filth which would dim the light, but now the
others they were quite gone out, when they had most need of them, they failed
them: And indeed, such a thing is an empty profession, it will not carry a man
through all conditions, as we shall have occasion to speak afterward.

O how sad a condition will every hypocrite be in, when he falls under such a
disappointment of his hope, then which to a reasonable creature, there cannot
be a greater vexation, he thought he was as fair for heaven as another, and yet
when all comes to all, in the hour of need, the Lamps quite extinguished, put
out in obscure darkness, the beginning of that utter darkness where their
portion is like to be for ever.

Fourthly, The foolish Virgins then are on the begging hand, and the wise on
the denying hand, and they send them to buy of them that sell: Here I know not,
that we are to press every particular; as if the foolish were so foolish as to
beg grace of the wise, to have a part of others, except the Papists, who will
have no other Church of Christ but themselves by no wise, and then that, to go
to their Merit-mongers and Indulgencers, and the Church-treasure for
righteousness, rather then to Jesus Christ. Nor is it any harshness, if the
Saints deny them, for alas brethren, it is not in them to give, lest they have
not enough for themselves and them also; there is no super-erogating (...).
Some say, the speech is defective, an ellipsis of the refusal, and the reason
only is here given; others read it thus, least there be not enough for you and
us, go to them that buy; and so there is no such defect, the sense is the same,
Who is it that sells but Jesus Christ indeed, and that without money and
without (...). 55. 1.
price, as you have it in that place of Isaiah? But we may look upon this
answer, not as a monition, or serious advice what to do, but ataunt rather, a
derifion of them, go to them that buy: and so it suites wonderful well with the
Papists: now go to your Merit-mongers (...) King. 8. 27.
to buy. So Eliah, cry aloud he is a God, either in a journey, etc. So the
Prophet to Babylon, threatening ruin upon her, thou art wearied in the
multitude of thy counsels, let now thy Astrologers, Star-gazers, monthly
prognosticators, stand up and Isa. 47. 13.
save thee from these things that shall come upon thee. That which is plainly
and undenyably held forth to us therein is, that the foolish Virgins are to
seek their grace, when they should use it; then they see they have none,
whatever they deceived themselves with before, the Lord grant this prove not
our condition to any of us.

Fifthly, that while they are thus unready for the appearing of Christ, and go
to buy, the rest that had oil, that are ready, enter into the joy of their
Lord; when once the time comes, there is no longer delay, but as many as are
ready he takes in with him, and then the door is shut; it is shut against all
those, that are unready, have their work to do; when their time is gone, when
they expect (...) glory, they want their grace, when they would have the Crown*
they (...) begin their race. Ah Brethren! if this prove the condition of our
selves, sad will it be with us, that others shall enter in, that we thought in
no better a condition then our selves, and our selves shut out because we are
not ready; he will not then stay any longer, he has waited upon us long enough.

Sixthly, Yet the foolish Virgins, though they have no oil, and their Lamps be
out, they come and they cry, Lord, Lord; they cry Verse 11.
with earnestness to have the door opened. Ah Brethren! you that now content
your selves with a mere formality, and nothing will stir you up to be zealous
and to amend, then you will cry either at your deathbed, at that summons, or
at the judgment, O Lord, Lord, Mat. 7. 22.
open to us, the strange presumption and confidence in poor sinners hearts,
though they know they have no oil, yet will expect to enter into heaven, though
they know they have loytered and trifled away their time of getting grace, yet
they would have admittance, they would have heaven in the end, though they care
not for working out their salvation with fear and trembling, they leave that to
others to do, yet expect the salvation in the end as well as they. And see how
far hypocrites may go, they come to the very gate, and there they cry, Lord,
Lord, open to us, but, all in vain.

Seventhly, The answer the Bridegroom gives them: Verily, I say unto you, I
know you not; there is need of an asseveration to press it upon them, their
confidence was so high that they should enter in with the Bridegroom: What?
take all that pains to provide Lamps, to take them to go forth to meet him, to
raise themselves up to trim them, yea afterward, to go out to get oil, and yet
shut one; this will hardly down with them? Verily, says our Savior, whatever
you may presume upon, and vainly hold up your hearts with, be assured, I know
you not. O this is a word will kill the st^u^est hearted sinner, when it comes
to the pitch! and the most swel(...)g confident hypocrite in the world, it will
make his heart sink within him like a stone; I know you not, and therefore
there is no reason I should let you in, I never knew you; though they had
neglected to Mat. 7. 23.
acquaint themselves inwardly with Christ, to procure his favor, for that is
the knowledge; Words of understanding with the hebrews, are pregnant and carry,
or are big with affection also I know you not, so as to approve you: to favor
you so (...)y, as to admit you. Yea, I never thus knew you: (...) have I known,
says the Prophet Amos 3. 2.
concerning Israel, that is to say, so known as acknowledge, owned, favored.
Now I say, the hypocrites will scrape acquaintance with Jesus Christ, O they
are the people, and they have served him, and worshipped him, and kept Sabboths
to him, and Preached in his name, and heard him preach, and now not know them!
This how strange will it prove to many a poor creature? A^blessed souls that
know the Lord Jesus, or rather are known of him! 1 Ioh. 2. 3.
And sad is the condition of such as shall thus be shaken off by Jesus Christ,
and shaken into hell indeed.

You have the Parable, though many more things might have been observed to you,
and by a curious eye, more distinctly to you. Yet pro modulo I have endeavored
to make it plain to you. And I hope so plain, as that now every understanding
is able to take up many Doctrinal Observations, from them thus explained. For
the Application, or inference, from all, Watch therefore, for you know not.
That we shall make use of likely in some of the Applications, of some of the
observations from the words.

There is much variety in them, and I had hoped to have reached one, at least
from the connection of this parable, with that which goes before, he inculcates
the same thing upon them, by another parable, which he had taught them
immediately before.

The first Doctrine shall be from the consideration of the words, with what
went before; much of the former Chapter was spent Doct. 1.
before, in stirring them up to watch for the appearing of Jesus Christ by a
double Argument. Taken from the end of such as watch, the end of such men is
blessedness and peace, blessed is the man, whom the Lord shall find so doing.
And the end of such as watch not, but presume upon his delay, to give liberty,
and the reins to their lusts, they that have time enough to repent, he will
come in a day he thinks not off, and will cut such a servant asunder.
Beloved, the former Arguments, the uncertainty of his coming, etc. one would
have thought, now, here had been enough said upon this argument, for what could
be more plainly spoken, and what more cuttingly, and pressingly, then this? Are
there any weightier Arguments, then lif and death: the best of lives, even a
life of blessedness, and the worst of deaths, a portion with hypocrites, who
have the Freehold, and sink deepest into the lowermost pit: and there is no
question, there was no affection wanting in Jesus Christ, when he spoke to his
Disciples, and therefore it may seem considerable, and it is so surely; that
sometimes he is pleased to prosecute the same Argument again all along through
this whole Parable, and the next is not much unlike it neither.

It is requisite to inculcate and beat upon hearers the same Doct. 2.
truth, the same things again and again. Surely, if it had not been so, the
Lord Jesus would have spared this pains, he did all things Mat. 7. 37.
well, and as he was no niggard, so he was no prodigal of his pains; if he
would not have the Fragments of the bread to be lost, he would never crumble
away the bread of life in vain, to no purpose; but that there was a necessity
for it, and sure we may follow his example safely herein, for there is nothing
extraordinary in it, but rather a great condescension in Jesus Christ, stooping
to the weakness, and necessity of his hearers, his Disciples; he spoke as never
man spoke, and therefore if it had been sufficient at any John 7. 46.
time, or for any person to tie themselves up to such a strictness of speaking,
as never to repeat the same things again, surely it had been sufficient for
him, who spoke as never man spoke, with that Authority, and Majesty, and
commanding efficacy, many times; Mat. 7. 29.
but yet you see he is pleased to go over and over, things again and again, and
to inculcate, and beat things upon his Disciples. We need not go further then
our Savior his example for it, for as he said of Goliahs sword, there is none,
to that. So there is no pattern to this of Christ, the great feeder of his
people with knowledge and understanding, who stands and feeds them, in the
strength of the Mica. 5. 4. Isa. 40.
Lord. And I doubt not, but many of you can make it out, from many other
instances, in his example, how he did often beat the same things upon his
Disciples; how often does he press upon them that of humility; Learn of me, I
am meek and lowly? And except Mat. 11. ^9. 18. 3.
you be converted and become as little children, ye cannot enter into the
Kingdom, and so in his washing his Disciples feet. How much ado has he with
them, to beat upon them, that his Kingdom was not Ioh. 13. 10. 12. 14.
of this world, but spiritual; they would be fitting some on his right hand,
some on his left hand, and he told them often, his Kingdom was not of this
world, that he came to suffer, and not to reign among men, and so how often
does he press it upon them, the Doctrine of love one to another, or takes not
up with once, one Mat. 20. 21.
exhortation, as if that would answer the end of his coming, to reveal to his
Disciples the whole counsel of God, which he had heard of his father: no but
again and again, he presses it upon them. It is given as a command to Parents,
I wish, we that are parents, and Deuteronomy. 6. 6.
have children, who have souls either to be saved or perish, would remember it,
thou shall whet these things upon them says the Text, these things which I
command thee this day shall be in their heart. Luke 1. 66. Psalm. 1. 19. 11.
Col. 3. 16.
I, if we were of Mary's spirit, to lay up the words there: or David's, to hide
the Commandments in our hearts: or took Paul's advice, let the word dwell
richly in us, if we had a treasury there, we should have, to draw forth
continually, as occasion serves: And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy
children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou
walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, etc.
diligently teach them, the word is, whet them upon them; It is not the drawing
the knife over the whet-stone once, that will set an edge upon it, but often,
again and again. The best of us are too like children in understanding, and had
need of it, or at least many of us.

I shall give a few Arguments to consirm it, and then Apply it.

First, The understanding is very dull in many: though there be some it may be
more acute, to whom it may be a dulling to beat their earsoften with the same
things; yet for the most part, Brethren, we are dull of understanding,
childrens capacities we have; you know the Disciples were so, our Savior
upbraideth them with it, and yet they were good men, do you not yet understand;
are ye also yet Mat. 15. 16.
without understanding? And when he was risen from the dead, he expounded the
Scriptures, the Prophets concerning his death and resurrection; alas until he
opened their understanding, though he had often told them this, had preached it
to them again and again, and even before his death immediately, and alas, yet
they understood not, until he opened their minds. But you will say, this was
before the pouring out of the spirit, there was more need then, but that Luke
24. 45.
unction, that teaches us all things, was given in so large a measure, etc. I
answer, It is true the spirit is given now in a larger measure, and therefore
the greater shame is the dullness of our capacities many of us, I speak not of
all, Brethren, neither of them that are strong men and women in Christ, nor yet
of such as happily natural incapacity is a great hindrance to. But were we not
many of us, much wanting to our selves in reading, meditating on the word of
truth, we might be much more apprehensive then we are; we are in a strait
indeed, for some are so acute, that we can scarce touch lightly enough upon
things, least they nauseate, others are so dull, we cannot dwell long enough
upon them almost, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2.
to make them understand something. Well this is the first Argument.

Secondly, Because men are exceeding slow to believe things. O fools, says our
Savior, and slow of heart to believe the things which Luc. 24. 25.
the Scriptures, etc. Concerning the Messiah, how he must be rejected, and cut
off, and rise again the third day. Might he not upbraid our Congregations,
brethren, in the like manner; how often have we heard the same things, and it
may be, given assent to the truth of the same, but yet are slow, to believe!
And this Argument will stand good against the acutest hearers, though they may
outrun the speaker happily in apprehension, they may be slowpaced enough in
believing. Now it is true, it is not all our inculcating and pressing the same
truths upon men, that can work their hearts to believe, until the arm of the
Lord be revealed to them; Isa. 5^
yet we know not when, and how far he may reveal his arm: It may be a little at
one time, and a little at another; Agrippa hearing Acts 26. 28.
Paul once discourse of Jesus Christ, was almost persuaded, happily if he had had
another opportunity to hear the like things again, it Acts 24. 25.
might have proved a through work: Felix trembled at the first Sermon upon
Judgment to come, if he had heard it the second time, who can tell how far it
might have wrought? This the second.

Thirdly, Alas Brethren, our memories are such leaking vessels, we are full of
chinks, hac illac difluxerimus, and therefore as from thence the Apostle
infers, we should give the more diligent heed to the things which are spoken,
(...), least we run out Heb. 2. 1.
So should we also inculcate the same truths again: who is there that has not
woeful experience of this, other things evil and vile, they have such impression
upon our memories; O how much ado is it to raze them out, injuries are graven
upon us, even as with the pen of a Diamond, vain words, wicked speeches, we
have heard long since, we cannot forget: but a thing that is good, O how much
ado there is to remember it? had not a riddle need often to be put into the
water, it will hold nothing else? be not forgetful hearers of the word, says
the Apostle, but doers of the same; how many of Iam. 5. 25. Mat. 13. 14, 19.
us are even highway seed hearers! The word is gone from us, before we are out
of these doors, or the most part of it. So the fowls of the Air, the evil
spirits, they steal away the word from us; so that we had as much need to hear
it again, as when we came. O says Peter as long as I live, I will put you in
remembrance. To 2 Pet. 1. 13.
do good and to communicate forget not, says the Apostle; no Question they had
been taught that lesson again and again, and yet they were apt to forget, and
therefore the Apostle goes over it again to them, to put them in remembrance.

Fourthly, It is requisite because our affections are so dull; they had need to
be often quickened, therefore whet the word upon your, children: It is not one
whet, that will edge a dull knife, but over and over with it again and again,
as many times in Scripture a repetition of a thing (in prayer, in preaching)
speaks the affections of him that delivers it, so it stirs the affections of
the hearers, Phil. 4. 4. says the Apostle, rejoice in the Lord always, and
Phil. 3. 18. I told you often, and now tell you weeping, with more affection
then before.
again I say rejoice, is that a tautology, or a vain repetition? no, sure the
Apostle was not guilty in that kind, but it was needful, to stir the affection
to the duty; our hearts indeed are like so many dead Seas, and it is not a
little breath once upon us, that will move, but when the wind passes often,
and strongly over us, then it may affect us happily; the word is therefore
compared to the words of the wise, which are like goads, not the words of
fools, who are no orators, senseless, and know not what belongs to the Art of
speaking rightly, but the words of the wise are like goads, sharp, and they are
to be often used, we are like oxen in duty, creatures that will often need to
be pricked up, therefore the metaphor is used; therefore Eccles. 12. 11.
says the Apostle, I put you in remembrance of the things you knew before, and
were established in, even to stir you up; there is 2 Pet. 1. 13.
need of quickening the affections; a man may deliver the same truth happily more
stirringly, one time then another, and the spirit may breath in it, one time
more then in another, and then the affections are stirrd indeed to purpose;
that is a fourth: Gutta cavat lapidem non vi sed saepe cadendo.

Fifthly, because of the unconstancy of our hearts, if we be a little affected
with a truth at one time, how long does such a frame continue upon us? David
was sensible how fleeting the frame of our hearts are: And therefore though
himself, and his people, were in as sweet a frame as any we read of almost,
when they offered with a perfect heart, willingly, and so willingly, as that
David rejoiced in it, and blessed the Lord for it, that they had hearts so to
do; 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. Ver. 9. and 17.
this was a precious frame indeed, yea David rejoiced at the willingness of
others, not envied at it, says he, that the Lord would keep this frame for
ever, Keep this upon the imagination, or figments of their hearts for ever.
Alas if he keep it not, it is gone presently; now upon Eagles wings soring, by
and by, with our bellies cleaving to the earth, Psalm. 119. 24. thy testimonies
are my delight, and 25. v. my belly cleaves* to the dust. And therefore, the
words of the wise, they are as goads and nails, nails to take hold, and fasten
things together, that they may abide, and if they be driven to the head, yet
how quickly may it be loosened again, is there not need of the same hammer to
fasten it again, therefore says the Apostle Peter, though you be established
in the present truth already, yet I Judge it meet to stir you up, by putting
you in remembrance. 2 Pet. 1. 13.


Sixthly, because we are so slow to do what we know, which indeed is the main
thing, we do but build Castles in the Air, Brethren, if we hear and do not,
and yet who is clear in this point? yea how often may we hear a practical
truth, pressed upon us, before we practice it? yea when we are convinced to do
it, and resolved we will, and yet with the Son in the Gospel, I go Sir, but he
went not; now this is the Learning indeed, a man has never learned a lesson
Mat. 21. 30.
in Music, or learned a Copy, until he has practiced it, and can do it. Ah
dear friend, do not our hearts blush sometimes, when we consider how often we
have had this watchfulness pressed upon us, and yet how little have we done to
bring our hearts to it? And so for weanedness from the world, for self-denial,
for any other duty almost; and therefore it is requisite, Brethren, that the
same things, should be repeated and inculcated; but so much for the Arguments.

For the Application of the Doctrine: It is a plea then for a Use. 1.
standing Ministry in the Church of Christ according to that of the Apostle, he
has set some Pastors, some Teachers, for the perfecting Ephesians. 4.
of the Saints; and also, while there are so many necessities upon them as you
have heard, how are they perfect? So says Peter, I 2 Pet. 1. 12.
will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though
you know them, and be established in the present truth, yet I think it meet as
long as I live in this Tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in
remembrance. Alas Brethren, suppose you are many of you so well acquainted with
the mysteries of faith as that you need not to be further instructed in these
things; yet it is a Peter's duty you see, I think it meet or just to put you in
remembrance, yea and as long as I live to do it, though I have nothing now to
present you with, and though you be established in the present truth, yet I
must put you in remembrance. They that despise prophesyings under that pretense
that they have an unction 1 These. 5. 20. 1 John 2. 20.
themselves within them, which teaches them all things, I doubt they will find
by woeful experience, they quench the spirit of God in themselves (and what in
them lies) also in others by weakening their hands, but who is like to pay for
that?

(First,) Remember but that of the Apostle John in that same place, you have an
unction whereby you are taught all things; what need John then to have written
this Epistle to them? you will say, or some may say, he might have spared the
pains, that unction of 1 Ioh 2. 21.
theirs is a supersedeas to him, and all other Ministers whatsoever, they have
no need of them; what says he, I write not these things to you, because you
know them not, but because you know them. It is for confirmation, for
quickening; there is need enough of it, else sure the spirit of God in him would
not have wasted such precious pains upon them. The Thessalonians have no need
that he write to them touching Brotherly love, they were nearer perfection,
then, for ought I see the Churches of Christ now are, love is the fulfilling of
the Law, and therefore had less need of the Apostles pains (...) These. 4. 9.
in writing to them; but yet you see he bestows it, and surely not in vain;
he exhorts them to abound more and more, to continue in well-doing to encourage
them, and strengthen their hands; this is none of the least works of a
Messenger of Christ.

(Secondly,) Here is a pattern for the Teachers of Gods people: Let it not be
grievous to you, brethren, sometimes to beat the same things upon the people,
if that man's wisdom might be heard to speak, and carnal reason, it would say it
becomes not an exquisite Phil. 3. 1. Verse 18. 1 Cor. 5. 9.
Orator for men to insist too much, nor too often upon the same things, That is
employed in that of the Apostle, to me it is not grievous, to others happily it
might; It is not more tedious to a curious ear, then it is to a quaint tongue,
to speak the same things again and again, but let us not consult with flesh and
blood in these things, but tread in the steps of our Savior; Surely there was
never such a treasury of wisdom and knowledge as was in Christ; in Col. 3. 2.
him were hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and it had been easy
for him still to have brought out of his treasury things new and not any old.
But you see what manner of Preaching is his to his own Disciples. We are called
upon in Timothy to exhort 2 Timothy 4. 2.
with all long suffering and Doctrine, and be instant in season, out of season.
Aug. would rather speak broken La^ then the people should not understand, and
he would have Preachers press a point upon their hearers, until they might even
read the print of it in their faces; think not a light touch will do it.

And yet let me not be mistaken here neither, for I mean not hereby to make a
Cloak for any Ministers idleness or sloathfulness, who therefore may dwell
longer then is meet upon a thing, or often go over with a thing, because they
will not be at more pains to bring forth new as well as old, no, far be it from
me, the Apostle gives us another rule, give attendance to reading, to
exhortation, to (...), be thou in them that thy profiting may appear to all. A
1 Timothy 4. 14, 15, 16. Mat. 13. 52.
Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of heaven, brings forth both new and old: but
if there be need to press things harder or more then ordinary upon people, let
it not be grievous to us; it must not then be a carnal self-love, love of our
own ends, but the love of our poor souls, and their profiting that must lead us
to it, else it is nothing; for you, says the Apostle, it is safe that I write
the same things; Phil. 3. 1.
and what was that? even the warning them of false Teachers, it was safe for
them to hear it again, and it was no such pleasing string for the Apostle to
harp upon, but yet because it was safe for them, he denied himself in that: If
the Ministers of Christ do sometimes more then ordinary strike upon that vain,
instruct tenderly, it is necessary surely, or they think it so, else it is no
such pleasing thing.

(Again) there is much wisdom to be used also by us, in pressing the same
things, making a difference between persons and persons upon whom, least we
grieve or dull some, instead of quickening them, therefore the Apostle he does
with a kind of modesty, use this freedom with them, he acknowledges indeed,
that they did know the things he writ, he would not have them think, he took
them to be so ignorant, or to be so fickle and wavering, but they were
established in the present truth, and yet says he, I hold it my duty sometimes
to put you in remembrance, and to stir you up. So 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13. It grieved
Peter when Christ came over so often with it, Love thou me? Ioh. 21. 17.
John, not because you know not, but because you know these things, therefore I
write to you, 1 John 2. And so the Apostle, you need not that I write to you
concerning brotherly love, you do love one another, but continue in it, abound
in it more and more. See how sweetly does he insinuate into them; if he had to
deal with other people, he knows how to speak after another manner, to come
with a rod, if there were need.

Again, there is much wisdom to be used in the dressing the same truth again
and again, for the truths which you are necessarily to know, they are not for
number infinite, and you will easily find, if you consider the Scripture, how
the same truths are proposed to us in the Scripture, an 100. ways, several
ways, because the Lord knew our frame, that naturally, we would have somewhat
new, and were affected with variety, therefore he gives us the same truths,
under diverse dresses, (...), says the Heb. 1. 1. Eccl. 12. 10.
Apostle, the Preacher chose not acceptable words, though It would not feed
that itching humor that is in some, yet I would allow as much as love and
prudence examined together would advise, because of the weakness and frame of
men; and if one therefore diversely dress the same truths: omne tulit punctum:
will the Lord They had the same manna, but were allowed to dress it diversely.
seal this instruction to such of us as it concerns. And, Brethren, pray for
us that we may be wise-hearted, and know how to fit our selves, and bait the
hook, so as it may be most drawing.

Thirdly, It may serve to humble us for our dullness then, and those many other
defections which are the rise of this necessity to beat the same things upon us
again and again. Dear friends, we swallow much every Sabbath, every
opportunity, how little does incorporate with us, how little abides with us,
what pains is the Lord fain to take with us, line upon line, and precept upon
precept, Isa. 28. 10.
here a little and there a little, in season, out of season, and yet, Brethren,
how little the better are we for it. May we not all of us lay our hands upon
our hearts; is it not matter of humbling, we should put the Lord and his
Messengers to so much pains with us, and be yet little the better for all? O
let us magnify the long-suffering of God, and bless him for the long-suffering
of his servants with us, that he is pleased to follow us up and down with this
and that necessary truth! It may be thou have heard some things which now thy
soul has the experience of, thou would not loose for a world, and many a
time thou have heard them, but it has been like water spilt upon the ground;
and at last, the Lord has fastened the nayl to the head, if it had had but one
blow, it would not have stuck.

Fourthly, It may caution us, brethren, against nauseating Divine Phil. 4. 3. 1.
truths, because they are so often beaten upon us, it may be the same things;
It is safe for you, brethren, it is good for you, if you know the things belong
to your peace, say not then, occidet mis^ros crambe repetita Magistros: What
shall the Disciples say to Christ because he so presses them to watch for his
appearing, here is nothing but harping upon one string, nothing but watching
and watching pressed upon us, we would have somewhat else, we are weary of this?
No, but rather continue, O sure it is needful, our dullness calls for it, and it
is much tenderness that he will not give us over until he has wrought it upon
our spirits. Should the Philippians cast it in Paul's teeth, he had told them
often of those Phil. 3. 18.
unruly masters, that they had heard enough of that? O no, now he tells them
with tears, with more melting then before, the same thing in a more affected
manner, they had no reason to loathe. It was the great sin of the Israelites you
know, they had manna every morning. Numb. 21. 5.
this was their daily bread; at last they grew weary of it, nothing but this
manna: our souls loatheth this light bread; for a while it was excellent and
delightful, but after a while they loathed it; It seems it had not a taste to
suite every man's palate, what was most delightful to every one, as some
thought, then they would not have loathed it; but they might dress it diverse
ways, and yet they loathed it; this was a lust which put their mouths out of
taste, and so far, as that they prefered Garlic and Onions before it. It is
nothing to be taken with the word, when a Teacher is as one that plays
skilfully upon an instrument, touches every string, and in such a manner as
the variety makes sweet melody, but this harping upon one string is not so
pleasant: here is a trial of your love to the word as it is the word, whether
in its nakedness and simplicity you can love it, and though you have nothing
but the word, and the word the sincere milk.

Another Caution shall be this, to take heed of that humor which reigns in
abundance among us all, affecting novelties. O such itching ears would not have
suited with our Savior his manner of Preaching! they have the same again and
again from him: A new light, though it be but a Comet, draws more eyes after
it then the Sun, because he daily runs his course, this is a great vanity in
men's minds, and truly it is so in spiritual things; A new Doctrine, Oh how it
bewitcheth men! as that did the Galathians; it is more Gal. 3.
then ordinarily taking with us, else the power of darkness and error had not
been so great in our days as it has been, and truly when we begin to be weary
of the eternal Gospel, which never waxes old, and cannot away with the same
things after we have once heard them, which argues we receive not the love of
the truth, embrace it not because of it self, but its dress or its novelties,
or some such accident: we are in the very highway to delusion; as the Apostle
says. I am sure, Antiquity was the commendation of the 2 These. 2. 10, 11. Romans
1. 2.
Apostles Doctrine even to the Romans themselves, he brought no new Gospel but
what was from the beginning. Is it not the same spirit surely that works so
mightily among us, whereby men would commend any thing for its novelty? It is
horrible pride both in Preachers and Teachers; Lucifer-pride, and a strong
savor of the old Adam, that rather then we will be confined to a course, and
dwell upon such things as have been received as truths in Jesus, we will have
somewhat new, or else we will to our own inventions for it: the Lord deliver us
from such a spirit.

And lastly, brethren, it is necessary that the same things be thus inculcated
upon us, then surely we may hence learn, that there is somewhat more for us to
learn still in every truth we hear, it may be often we have heard such a duty
pressed, such a sin descried, there is somewhat in it, that God meets thee,
it may be everywhere with the same message, they spoke with one mouth the same
thing to thee; Is there not cause to fear? Surely that is one consideration;
and the Lord in mercy to thee will not let thee alone, but one Bell in Aarons
ring sounds louder, then all the rest in thine ears. Surely, surely, there is
somewhat unhealed that every one thou comes near does grate upon. It may be,
brethren, to come a little nearer, thou have long heard of coming to Jesus
Christ, that thou might have life, and thou have been as much woed and
entreated as many others, and thou art even weary of this lesson. What ado is
here about coming to Christ, what do we not come to him, do we not follow him?
Ah dear friends! It is the work of your whole lives, and why may it not be the
work of our whole lives? yea it is to be feared, thou with whom so sweet a word
relisheth no better, that thou have never known the worth of it experimentally.
Be not deceived, brethren, you may be mistaken, and far enough off from him,
when you think you come to him* but suppose you are come to him, may you not
draw nearer then you are come; have you not many backslidings? Do you not miss
a stroke sometimes, and are carried down the stream, the Lord knows how far:
and had you (...) need of hearing then of coming to Christ, renewing your
acquaintance with him? Alas Brethren, if many of us had not had this truth
beaten upon us often, we had never come to him, can thou tell how often thou
had in the Gospel a crucified Christ held out to thee; before thou had a
heart to look on him, and mourn over him, and over thy self, whose hands have
been imbrued in his blood, here thou have seen him here crucified, and there
crucified, in this Sermon and that Sermon, in this Sacrament and that
Sacrament; and yet al^s! thy sullen heart would not bleed; now if thou had
never heard of him more, it had not been pressed upon thee any more, what had
become of thee, if notwithstanding all this thou had been sealed up in
hardness and unbelief for ever. What narrow-mouthed bottles are we receiving,
now a drop and then a drop, though much be poured out, many times little
stays, or if our heads fill, our capacities being large, apprehensions quick,
and memories strong, how little is it that sinketh any further, there is need
of pressing and boring, and unspeakable mercy it is, if at last the passage
between head and heart be opened, that so what we have known long it may be;
yet now we may come to know after another manner, even as we ought to know it,
not to be puffed, but humbled, to be warmed, melted, changed by it.

How often Brethren, have we had the Doctrine of love pressed upon us, even as
John had nothing else in his mouth almost, my little children love one another,
my little children love one another; when he could not go, as the story says
of him: and can we hear it so often, but there is somewhat yet to learn that we
have not learned, may we not grow in it, abound in it more and more, as the
Apostle says to them, even the Thessalonians? Ah where is a heart 1 These. 4.
9, 10.
wherein it abounds, love to Christ, love to his people, a little unlikeness to
our selves in a thing of no great moment, is able to quench our love, so far it
is from being as strong as death; a little earthly enjoyments, a house, a wife,
a company of sweet children, pretty taking vanities, they have such a hold upon
our hearts, that they stifle our desires, to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, O we see not, nor have learned how far better it is to be with him! is
there not more to be learned by us all, in this point? And if we can or do love
the Saints in whom the Image of Jesus Christ is, alas may we not do it more
fervently then we do? if there be some fervor appearing, 1 Pet. 1. 22.
may we not do it with a purer heart, merely because Christ has loved them,
who is the beloved of our souls? what means else our having the faith of
Christ with respect of persons, what meanth else our loving men more for their
gifts, then for their graces, for the common then the special inspiration of
the spirit upon them? Do we not know men after the flesh? and yet, happily are
ready 2 Cor. 5. 16.
to be weary of the Doctrine of love; What needs so much ado to press it
upon men, the Lord show us our shortness and humble us under it?

But I will come a little nearer to the purpose, in the Text and the thing in
hand, which lies before us, the Ordinance to which some of us are now called,
for this of watching for the appearing of Jesus Christ, I might have raised
indeed a closer observation, and more particular when I had finished this, but
I would not hold you too long upon this, which is but the coherence of the
words we shall likely meet with it, before we have done with the Parable. And
that is the necessity of pressing this great duty of watching for the appearing
of Christ, much upon people, for this is the thing here our Savior so muchin
sists upon, and often in many other places, What I say to you, I say to all,
watch; And so Luke 12. 35. Surely there is somewhat more in it, then ordinary;
The duty is more spiritual, then ordinary, and then our carnal hearts are as
hardly drawn to it, as a Bear to the stake: It has many a time, I know been
pressed upon us all, to get ready, and stand ready, to wait and watch for his
appearing; Have we done it? How many of us, brethren, if Christ should come
this day would be found sleeping, some dead asleep upon the lap of the
pleasures, and honors, and riches of this world and (...) to be disturbed, we
never dream of his coming; Would men, think you, if they had learned this
lesson, dare to multiply encumbrances in the world upon them? and with so much
diligence, be casting out their roots in the world; as if they would never be
plucked up, as if their portion were here Luke 21. 34.
below? how often have we been warned in the name of Jesus whose the warning
is, take heed your hearts be not overcharged with surfeting, and drunkenness,
and cares of this life, and that day take you at unawares? has this sunk with
us? have we made conscience any of us, to ease our selves of any unnecessary
encumbrances, that we might wait upon him without distraction? What day almost,
brethren, goes over any of our heads, or what hour of the day wherein we shall
be ready to open, if he should knock for us? Alas some of us, brethren, care
not how long he defers his coming, if he would never come, we should be the
better pleased, for our hearts tell us, it will be a woeful day to us, we have
no oil in our vessels, we have no grace in our hearts, nor any do we look
after, we know we are not in him, nor are we solicitous to be found in him, we
are for our building, and planting, and rejoicing in our youthful vanities, and
leave these serious things to melancholy Spirits. Ah dear friends, had not
this truth need to be pressed upon you? your danger is great; if you could as
easily put by the coming of Christ, as you can make a shift to smother the
thoughts of it, your hearts indeed might cheer you, and your condition were
something like: But he will come; and though you be asleep in the Arms of your
lusts, know that your judgment sleeps not, and your condemnation 2 Pet. 2. 3.
slumbereth not. And make what haste you can to be rich, or to be honorable
(and such persons are not innocent) make what have you can in your career of
sinning, it travels as fast you, and will be sure to meet you at the gates of
death and hell, if not sooner. But it may be, we think we have done this great
work, we are through grace acquainted with the Lord Jesus, and his spirit,
which has effectually wrought in us to believe in his name, to love him, the
main is done with us, and therefore sure we may have more liberty then others
now: Is it so? but is this all that must go to watch for his appearing, do we
not find our hearts thrusting away from us that day; and our hands fail, and
security setzeth upon us? the Disciples were in danger to be surprised as well
as others: Is there any of us so lives as that we could readily and cheerfully
meet the Lord Jesus at an hours warning, a days (...) and who knows he shall
have so much to set his house in order? O there is need to press this duty upon
us all, brethren, be our condition what it will we have yet somewhat to learn
of it, and shall have, let us hear it as often as we can; But I will leave what
further may be said unto its proper place, in the handling the Parable.

A word or two to the present occasion, we are many of us now called to this
sealing Ordinance: And though we have been often stirrd up and taught our duty
concerning it, is there not need to chafe the oil in upon our hearts, our
affections still? Alas how often have we heard, that what it finds it
sealeeth; And yet do we not dare to come some of us with hard hearts, with
covetous hearts, uncircumcised hearts, I would not speak, brethren, to grieve
the heart of any, the Lord would not have grieved, as they that have least
cause will be most sadly assayling themselves with condemning thoughts; but the
Lord grant there be none found among us guilty kind. As often as ever we come
we hear how dangerous a thing it is to come unworthily prepared to it, and yet
the Lord knows how often we have thrust in here some of us, without a wedding
^ Cor. 11. 30.
garment; And that you have not been bound hand and fooe; bound up in our
grave-cloaths, and cast out of his sight for ever, it is unspeakable mercy; O
that this might melt us and humble us! and though blessed be his holy name, I
believe there are many poor trembling souls, who go about these things with
trembling hearts, least they should miscarry, and grieve him, and bring his
blood upon their heads, I doubt there may be some of us found whose hearts are
far from such a frame; had we not need then to be put in mind and remembrance
again and again of these things? It may be we have faith and love to Jesus
Christ, it may be we have humility and self-loathing, it may be we have a
mourning spirit over our sins that have grieved the Lord Jesus, put him to all
that grief for us, it may be we have a thankful heart; but are these graces now
in action, are they upon the wing? how often have we been minded thereof, that
we must be actually prepared? Alas! alas happily some of us have not taken the
pains with our hearts which we might, and which others would have done if they
had had the hearts which we have, happily some of us have been striving, but in
our own strength. and have done little, happily others may have been helped in
the preparing our hearts to seek him herein, but by our pride or carnal
confidence, have lost our frame again. It may be some of us brethren have not
been very negligent, but yet not so diligent as we ought, O brethren! how
needful are these things! bear with me if I do press you to them, it is not
tedious to me, because I hope it is safe for you, O! that I could do it, with
such a spirit, and such bowels, as the Apostle did! the Lord set it upon all
our hearts, we are exceeding dull to believe, and more dull to practice, and do
his will revealed to us; Though the good be our own, the glory only his. But I
will not insist any further here, the Lord give us understanding and believing
hearts.

Now for the words of the Text.

The Kingdom of Heaven is like to ten Virgins which went forth to meet the
Bridegroom.

I shall begin according to the former method. And first speak concerning Jesus
Christ with respect to his Church. And touching him there are many things in
this Parable. First he is the Bridegroom. 2. His delay of his coming. 3. The
cry before his coming. 4. The coming. 5. The time of his coming, at Midnight.

To begin with the first,

The Bridegroom, (...); However it be that the scope of the parable be to stir
up all men that profess the Lord Jesus to a perseverance in watchfulness, to
stand ready for his coming, which being apprehended, there is no necessity of
pressing each particular in the parable, yet I conceive, according to our
Savior. His opening of other parables, we may insist upon the chief things
therein, as where HE would let us see what need we had to take heed What, or
How, or Whom we Hear, by the parable of the several sorts of Ground, receiving
the seed of the Word, he not only tells us the difference of the Grounds, but
Mat. 13. 37, 3^ 39.
what the seed is, and who the Sower is, or else in that parable of the good
seed and the Tares, he tells us particularly what is meant by each. And
therefore I must not here pass over this of the Bridegroom. The Virgins went
forth to meet the Bridegroom.

The note will be The relation between the Lord Jesus and his people, Doct*
He is the Bridegroom, and stands in that relation to his people. that this is
so, we need go no further, then this parable, for who else is it that comes,
and with whom they that are ready, do enter into the M^rriage, then Jesus
Christ, who is our life, who appearing, ver. 10.
we shall appear with him in glory. Again the foolish virgins cry to him Lord
Lord open to us. Who is the Lord, but Jesus Christ, as will appear by comparing
this with that speech of our Savior. Not every one that says to me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter, Mat. 7. 22.
but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. Many will say to
me, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, in whose name, but in the
name of Jesus Christ: and in thy name cast out devils, whose name, but the name
of Jesus Christ? Again, who is it that passes the doom and Sentence upon poor
souls, but Jesus Christ, who shall judge both quick and dead, he says I know
you not, in this place, depart from me, for I know you not. I never knew you,
in that place of Matthew. Again in Mat. 7. 23.
the winding up of all, in the Application we have an explication of this part
of the parable, Watch therefore for ye know not the day n^r hour wherein Son of
man comes, and who is this Son of man that comes so uncertainly: but the
Bridegroom, for whom the Virgins watched a while, but he not coming the time
they thou ht, they fell asleep, and were found unready; therefore watch, and
who is the son of man, but the Lord Jesus? You know he often calls himself so
in the Gospel. I suppose this is the most solid and near proof of the Doctrine.
Which is fetched out of the parable, yet a parallel place or two more, I will
add to it, in that place of John, where he answers his Disciples, who seemed
to envy at it, that all the people followed Christ, and not their Master, O
says he, he that has the Bride is the Bridegroom Ioh. 3. 29.
but the friend of the Bridegroom stands and hears his voice and rejoices.
I am not the Bridegroom, says he, but only his friend, for I have not the
Bride, she is not mine, but his; I have only prepared a people for Christ,
being a voice crying, prepare ye the Lord his way, make his paths straight, but
he is the Bridegroom, who has the Bride; that is to say Jesus Christ, for the
comparison is between him, and the Lord Jesus, only so he gives the honor to
Jesus Christ, and is willing to be Out-shone by him, as the morning star, by
the Son when it arises, appears not any more. But one more, and that is of
Matthew, when again the Disciples of John, being in a mourning condition, as it
should seem for their Master, now in the Paw of that Lion that crafty Fox
Herod, they had cause to mourn and fast, if by any means they might prevail,
for his deliverance, as the Church afterward made continua! supplication for
Peter. Now they saw not the Disciples of Christ to fast and mourn, and
therefore they had a little emulation at them, and were quarrellous, and
complaining to our Savior, Why do we and the Parisees fast often, but thy
Desciples fast not. Our Savior again answers, How can the children of the
Bride Chamber mourn, while the Bridegroom is with them, but the days are coming
when he shall be taken from them and then shall they mourn. Is it sit or
convenient for them to mourn while he is with them, for that is meant by (they
cannot) the impossibility Mat. 9. 15.
set forth interrogatively, for the Affirmative interrogation, has the force
of a strong Negation, Can they, that is, in no wise, they cannot mourn, the
meaning is, it is not suitable, it is not convenient, so Nazianzen. It is
reasonable that they should now mourn. You all know who are meant by the
children of the Bride-chamber, even the Disciples, and the Bridegroom is Jesus
Christ, who yet a little while was with them, and ere long should be taken away
from them, and then should be a time of mourning to them. But I will not here
stay you longer, the rest of the Scriptures we shall consider, in the opening
of the Point to you.

The Bridegroom, being a relative, must have a Correlate and that is the Bride.
And therefore first we will speak a little to that, who this Bride is, for it
seems not to be intimated in the Text, but the Bridegroom to stand alone. And
then a word or two to the person, and quality of the Bridegroom.

For the Bride, the Text seems not to show her to our view, for here only,
the kingdom of God, the Church visible, is compared to ten virgins, some wise,
some foolish, and this may seem hardly to be the Bride, for the foolish you
see, they are disowned, and Jesus Christ certainly espouseth none to be his
Bride, but he communicates of himself to them, who is the wisdom of the
Father, and has all treasures of wisdom and knowledge in him; and therefore
his spouse, can not be the foolish virgins, they have no fellowship with him in
his wisdom. And for the wise, though it be said they entered with him in to the
marriage, yet they are here spoken of, but as virgins which are companions to
the Queen, as it is in the 45. Psalm. v. 14. which in weddings it seems did
accompany the B^ide to bring her to the Bridgr. but these were not the spouse,
and therefore it may seem there is nothing here intimated of the Bride which is
the correlate of the Bridegroom. We answer, In propriety of speech indeed, the
Bride is the Queen, and the Virgins her companions they are not one and the
same, but in these tropical speeches they may be one and the same, and are so
doubtless, for herein we must know that the Church, and people of God admits of
notions, of diverse relations unto diverse conditions As in another Parable,
where the Communications of Christ to his people are set forth by a Marriage
Feast as afterward we shall Mat. 22. 2.
show you, here you know the King prepares a feast for his Son, that is to
say, for Jesus Christ a marriage feast it is (...), a marriage it self, though
by that be meant a marriage feast, now many guests were invited, and they make
this and that excuse, at last he retcheth them in from the highway sides, and
heals the poor scattered contemned Gentiles, brought in when the Jews refused,
here is the communication of himself to them as a Church visible, for so it
must be understood because there was one there without a wedding garment; It
seems there was a custom to put on their best apparel, somewhat suitable to
the occasion. Well, the rest they had such a garment. But if this be but a
marriage feast for Christ and the Bride, What are those Guests then that are
invited to it? It should seem they are not the Bride her self. Why truly here
the Answer is the same, in this Tropical speech they are one, and the same,
though here they be not considered as such. And so in our Text the real
believers, aand Saints in truth, are set forth by the wise virgins, and all
such have Christ, and Christ has them as the Bride, only here they are
considered indeed according to the comparison, as the virgins her companions
which go forth to meet the Bridegroom. Yet indeed and in truth they are the
Bride her self. And he said in that place of the Revelations, Blessed are they
who are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb, and so R^v. 19. 9.
called as to come to it, but if they were not the spouse, had not an interest
in the Bridegroom, as such, truly there would be no hapness in it to behold
him, and not to enjoy him; and therefore this is but the same thing with that
in the New Jerusalem; the holy R^v. 31. 29.
City, coming down from God, even out of heaven as a Bride adorned for her
husband, and the Angel said, come and I will show thee the Bride the Lambs
wife, where the Bride and Guests are one and the same surely, only considered
under a diverse notion, according to the nature of the similitude or comparison,
and so it is in this place. Yea, that which seems farther off in the
comparison of the prothesis in the apodosis comes as near, that is to say of
young men, the friends of the Bridegroom, the children of the Bride Chamber,
they also are a part of the Bride, for they are these Virgins also, though in
the comparison male and female are distinguished, yet in Christ, no difference.

Well then, these virgins, the wise virgins, though considered here only as
accompanying the Bride, the Queen, to the Bridegroom, Yet they are the Bride
herself indeed, now herein is the mystery of the Saints communion with Christ
transcendent and wonderful, that though they be married to him, yet they are
virgins still; It is true an espousal of a virgin deflours her not, but she
continues so, until the consummation of the marriage, though the Jews had
another manner of custom, sometimes to espouse by copulation; though afterward
it was forbidden with them. See Goodw. Antiq. Jud. yet when the Saints have the
fullest, nearest marriage, communion with Jesus Christ, yet they are virgins,
yea the purer their virginity is, then the Idols of their hearts, they are
fully cleansed from, according to that Gospel-promise, I will cleanse them from
all your Idols, then it is done fully. And this is the virginity of the Saints,
it lies in their union and fellowship with Jesus Christ, and none else; thus
says Theophil. from Chrysostom. is a wonder that she should be married, and yet a
virgin and the more, for marriage communion, the Church with J. Christ the
purer her virginity is, the more perfectly is she cleansed from Idols and all
uncleanness. The truth is brethren we are never The High Priest to m(...)ry
only a V(...) gin. Lev. 21. 1(...)
virgins, until we come to be espoused to him, but all filthy fornicators and
unclean persons, wallowing in our filthiness, and now when once the Lord Jesus
lays hold upon us for his, we begin to be virgins, where again the
transcendency of grace above nature, which is the ground of the comparison, if
it reaches not the thing compared to it. And so though they go a whoring
afterward from the Lord Jesus, play the Harlots, as he complains of Judah and
Israel, you know often in the Prophets, that is to say by going after other
objects of worship, then himself, other lovers, yet when they return to their
own husband again, why then they become virgins. Now though Judah had been
woefully corrupted with Idolatry in the days of Ahaz, that Ahaz. There is a
brand set upon him worthily by the spirit of God, for he corrupted the people
above measure, shut up the doors of the House of God, had Altars in every
corner of the City in the open places, as the Pharisees prayed in corners, the
places where many streets met, impudent whoredoms in the face of the Sun, they
discovered their sin as Sodom, yea, they cut in pieces, many of the vessels of
the Temple, and brought in so much filthiness into it, as that they were
sixteen days cleansing it. Now they played the Harlot, and therefore wrath was
against them, and all Israel for that. But now when in Hezekiah his days, the
doors of the house were opened, they repented, he called upon them to turn to
their God, set up his pure worship again, though to his own cost and charge,
for the daily burnt Sacrifice, a high example for godly Princes, you have the
memorable story in 2 Chronicles. Well now when Sennacherib comes up against them,
says the Lord, The virgin daughter of Sion has despised thee before an
Harlot, an impudent one, commiting 2 Cron. 29 30.
abominations in the very corners of the streets, now the virgin daughter of
Sion, here is indeed wonder upon wonder in this, but I doubt I stay too long
upon these things.

The next thing is the Bridegroom, The Person that stands now in relation to
the Bride, who is it, but the Lord Jesus, Immanuel God with us, Married to us
in our nature taking that upon himself, It is no mean Person brethren that is
the Bridegroom, but he who is God equal with the father, and counts it no
robbery Phil. 2. 6.
to be equal with him. He who is the shining forth of his fathers H^b. 1. 3.
glory, the express image of his fathers person, this is he brethren. What
shall I say brethren, Alas, I doubt I shall dishonor him by speaking of him.

1. If you look upon his birth, who can declare his generation, It is that,
people do much look at, in their marriages, and there is Is^. ^3 8.
somewhat in it; though happily, not so much as men place in it among men, but
here there is very much, He is the Son of God. The Jews looked upon it as so
high above him, seeing no farther then Haman, that they cried out of blasphemy,
that he made himself equal with God, he is the Bridegroom then, the Son of God,
his own Son, as the Gospel has it, his only begotten Son; He w^o by a divine,
infinite, incomprehensible communication is one in essence and nature with his
father, he it is (brethren) that is the Romans 8. 32.
Bridegroom. We, by Birth, what are we? but the basest, our Ioh. 3. 16.
Father an Amorite, our Mother an Hittite, yea a seeed of evil doers, a
generation of vipers, worse then worms, and the vilest; Ezekiel. 16. 3.
And yet the Lord Jesus the Bridegroom bearing such a relation, to such as we,
and taking us into such a relation to himself.

2. If we look upon his beauty brethren, Alas! if we turn our eyes toward it,
we are dazzled, a beam or two he shows us in a glass darkly indeed, that yet
rightly understood, would amaze us; as to behold the glory of the Sun reflected
by a glass, or a piece of burnished metal, it dazleth us, we cannot behold it,
when he says, he is the shining forth of his fathers glory (...) the shining
Heb. 1. 3.
forth of his fathers glory, which considered as God-man, is a glorious
expression of his beauty. But considered as he is the Son of God, it falls much
below it, for the beam of the Sun, though never so glorious, is far below the
essence of the Son, but he is, one in essence with the father, He is as
God-man, the express Character of his fathers person. A poor dull carnal eye
that looked no farther then the veil of flesh, and saw him a man of sorrow,
acquainted with grief, his visage marred more then any man's as he Isa. 53. 4.
says, Smitten of God, or a smitten God, alas, there was no beauty to be seen
why he should desire him. But his beauty is inward, he is white and ruddy, the
chief among ten thousand, either his divinity Cant 5. 10.
and Humanity, or his fullness of Grace, and his bloody Merits in a sweet exact
mixture. O how beautiful do they make him, he is fairer then the sons of men!
If that beauty will carry it, he is the very Paragon of Heaven.

3. For Riches there is none like to him. This is a great allurement you know
indeed, for the most part men do marry the gold and riches of the world rather
then the person, though this be a madness; an Heir to a great estate likely
will not need a wife, Why, the Lord Jesus is heir of all things, all things in
Heaven and Earth. He is the only Son of God, the heir apparent of heaven he
is, being the Son of God, so that what ever we want, it will be abundantly
supplied in him. Abraham his servant wooing says, his Master was rich, and had
only one Son, and he heir of all. Genesis 24. 35* 36.

4. If Honors will do it for that is somewhat which much takes with men, he is
no less then a King, and no mean one, he is the King of Glory, a glorious King
indeed, as he is called in that Psalm, Yea the King of Kings; and Lord of
Lords, Rev. 17. 14. A most high and eminent Kingdom, who has all other Kings
at his command, a hundred seven and twenty Provinces were a great Dominion, but
not only all the Kingdoms of the earth are the Lords and his Christ's, but by
him Kings rule, and Princes decree Justice, it is by his permission, any of
them exercise their power.

5. For Power as well as Authority, and Majesty, he it is that can do what he
pleases, he is indeed the Mighty God, and what then can stand in his way. He
is our Maker, and there is much Isa. 9. Isa. 54. 5. (...).
in that, thy Maker is thy Husband, thy Redeemer, the Lord of Hosts is his
name; thy Maker, he that gave thee thy being when thou had none, by a word
of his mouth. O here is power indeed! he that could give us a spiritual being
by the same word, there, is yet more power, for in the first there was no
repugnancy but here there is, he is the Lord of Hosts; It was much to Israel to
consider who was their Husband, even the Lord of Hosts, he that could Redeem
them out of Egypt, sink all their enemies in the Red Sea, go as a Captain
before them, drive out the Canaanites, notwithstanding their Iron Chariots, the
Anakims, that were a terror to them. He now was their Husband He is a man of
war, and a most mighty man of valor, for that Goliath himself which defies the
Armies of Israel, is nothing in his hand, the roaring Lion, is nothing in his
hand, he can tear him in pieces, and bruise him under his feet, even as a Lion
tears a Kid. It is very much brethren, this to commend the Lord Jesus to us, he
can fight our battles for us, so that if we can but stand still we shall see
the salvation of the Lord.

6. For a lovely sweet disposition, which is none of the least desirable things
in a Husband; O never was there like to Jesus Christ for disposition, he is
love it self, and tenderness it self, bowels and compassion it self! there is
many a one, though they have beauty and riches, and honors, and birth and
power in an Husband; yet if there be an unsuitable disposition, there be
rigidness, and harshness, it imbitters all; O do but observe how sweet a
disposition he was of, so far from harshness to his people, that he melts
over his very enemies that refused him, Ah that thou ha^st known in this thy
day etc. O how he is touched with our infirmities, afflicted Luke 10. 42. Heb.
4. 15.
in our afflictions! A woman that has such a husband, what a sweetning is it
to all her afflictions; If love will do, he ^^ll never take any other course,
never any estrangement of himself from a soul, here is a Bridegroom indeed. But
I will not speak any further, Brethren, you have heard much, and much better of
the excellencies of Jesus Christ, then I am able to speak to you; this only
for the second thing.

There are yet to be considered the Causes, which according to their several
influences, concur to the making up of this relation between Christ and the
Church, of a Bridegroom and a Bride, whichwhen I have spoken somewhat to, I
will proceed.

1. Then, The Father, he gives them to his Son, and the Son to them. This is
above comparison, though the Father of the Virgin give her, give his consent,
and so the Parents of the Son, they give their consent. But here is God the
Father who does all, he gives his son for his people, and to his people, as
you have it in that place, he so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Ioh. 3. 16.
Son, that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but might be brought in
to the nearest unity with him, might have life everlasting, in communion with
him. If thou had known the gift of God, says he to the woman of Samaria, and
who says to Ioh. 4. 10.
thee give me drink, or, And he gives us to his Son, that is to say, as many
as were in his purpose of grace, thine they were, and thou gave them to me;
they were thine not so much by Creation, for he speaks of many that yet were
not created, nor are Ioh. 17 9.
to this day likely, created, but in the purpose of grace they were h^s, and as
absolute sovereign over all, so they were his to do with them as he pleased, to
have made them vessels of dishonor if he had pleased; as Ananias was it not
thine own, might thou not have done Act. 5.
with it what thou would? So here, we were the Fathers as Sovereign, all of
us and his Christ's, not only so, but in his purpose of grace he gave them to
his Son, to be his Spouse, his wife.

2. But yet Alas they would be under the hands of sin and Satan inslaved in an
Iron Furnace, hard bondage, he must redeem them, if he will have them, they are
sold under sin and Satan, the Prince of this world; therefore he must pay the
price, they were obnoxious indeed to his Justice, or would be in time; and
therefore he must provide a satisfaction or else they could not be set clear.
It was the manner in some Countries brethen, to give Dowries for their wives,
to buy them before they had them, quite contrary to what is among us, Ask me
never so much dowry, says Sechem, Genesis 34. 8, 11, 11.
and I will give it, he was now in love with the Virgin, and nothing was too
much for her now; so here the Lord Jesus, as well as his Father, he before the
world was, foresaw what a happiness it would be to poor Creatures, and what a
glory and joy to himself, and them for ever one in another, and therefore he
delights now in Prove. 1. u^t.
the habitable parts of the earth in the sons of men. O now what ever is
required I will give, if I must take flesh, an infinite condescension, I will
do it, as if a Prince should say, if I must be clothed with rags; yea with
clods, yea with worms, I will, rather then I will go without such a poor worm
to be my spouse, If I must part with my dearest blood, and extend it to the
last drop, I will; Ask me any Dowry, yea if I must give my self for them, who
am God, and equal with thee, as well as afterward man, I will do it, my kingdom
for them, my glory for them, my blood for them, O Ephesians 5. 25.
brethren the Lord Jesus is worth a hundred thousand worlds! well he will buy
us, he has done it, at a dear rate. Indeed David bought Michal at a dear rate,
by the death of the Philistims, and afterward two hundred foreskins of the
Philistines, it pleased him well, what is this brethren: If David must have
parted with 1 Samuel 18. 25.
his life for her, have been so much debased, as to have lived a poor despised
contemptible life for her, a h^wer of wood, or drawer of water, or ground at a
Mill, or to have been as Job continually, a man of sorrows, and upon the
dunghill, this had been somewhat, but nothing to this of Jesus Christ. Satan was
there spouse, bought at so low a rate as the Church of Christ was. I have read
of some that must not marry a woman until they had killed an enemy, and other
until they had killed, or overcome their Corrivals, and happily this might be
hard: But the Lord Jesus, he must grapple with his Corrival the Law, the former
Husband as the Apostle calls it, as it is the strength of sin, and slay that,
and take away the Curse, and break the commanding power, the streaming power of
the Law, before he could take us to be his. And so he must grapple Colos. 2. 15.
with principalities and powers, and spoil them,, and lead captivity captive,
scatter him in his temptations, break him in his policies, undermine him in his
depths and methods, overpower him, in his malice, he must destroy all these
enemies. Yea more then all this the wrath of his father that was against us,
and against which there was no standing, he must interpose, and screen us from
it, and O! How it scorched him, though he quenched it! As the Passover was
roasted in the fire; so the Lord Jesus our Passover, was even roasted alive in
the displeasure of his Father.

3. Then he comes a wooing, for when all this is done brethren, we are
unwilling it may be to have him, are well contented to continue with our former
Husband, to be yet under the Law, and the commanding power of sin, and see no
such beauty in him, as to desire him, nor any such freedom and comfort in being
one with him as to desire that. Yea if we be convinced a little of this, yet
happily our wills or hearts are not toward him; and therefore he is fain to
w^o us, when all is done; himself came in the days of his flesh, and what was
his work before his suffering, but to woo poor creatures to accept of him. How
did he woo the woman of Samaria, If thou had known says he, the Gift of
God, thou would have asked him insinuating, there was more Ioh. 4. 10.
in him then she yet saw, as appeared when he told her her sins, what they had
been? How often would I have gathered thee, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, says he; O I
have been ready to spread my Skirts over you, but you would not: Sometimes
entreating, sometimes lamenting their condition; sometimes displeased at the
hardness of their hearts. It is much for a King to come a wooing himself, a
great King. They use to send, as David to Abigail, Abraham, to Rebecca: but
here, he comes himself a long journey, from Heaven to Earth, and contented to
take on him the form of a servant, that we might not be dazzled with his glory,
and no pains does he refuse. How did he go up and down on foot until he was
weary? Blessed Savior, he was weary at the well there by Samaria, and all was
that he might everywhere woo and entreat poor creatures to accept of him. And
2: not only by himself, but by his Messengers, now he is in his glory: now he
sends by his Messengers to this end. You see Abraham his servant went to take a
wife for Isaac, and David his servants, went to Abigail. So brethren, do the
Messengers of Jesus Christ his paranymphs or pronubi. They speak now a good
word for Jesus Christ; so 2 Cor. 11 2.
the Apostle, I have espoused you says he to one Husband. Such are friends of
the Bridegoom, as John was, that did what he could to Ioh. 3. 29.
bring the people to Jesus Christ, even the people of the Jews, and would fain
have had all the people to close with him. But

4. In this espousal to Jesus Christ, we are to consider several things, what
is done 1. By the spirit, he is indeed the great wooer, He is sent forth to
convince of righteousness and of sin, the burden of the work lies upon the
Spirit, and happy it is for us that it does so, for how fruitless would our
endeavors be to you, else brethren, we might spend our selves, and be spent,
and when all is done complain, We have spent our strength in vain, for Israel
is not gathered, How sad for you? How uncomfortable for us? No no, the great
perswader is the Spirit: he comes and he opens the eyes, and then the poor
soul sees, O he is aere alieno obrutu^, so deep indebted to the Justice of
God, that whatever he can do or suffer to pay it, eternity is little enough to
pay it in, O now for a Husband, now how happy a creature should I be if some
that were able to bear the debt would discharge it, would take it up for her.
He then insinuates somewhat further, and convinces of Righteousness, that
there is enough in Christ if we owed a thousand Talents more, O then that I had
it says the poor soul: O he is willing, he is willing says the Spirit;
therefore he is Preached to every creature. Thus if this Arm of the Lord were
not revealed, our report of Christ would never be believed. But what Isa. 53. 1.
then do the Ministers do?

Yea their word, the word of Faith which they preach, it is the vehiculum
Spiritus. It is that wherein the Spirit breaths. It is the spirit brethren,
ordinarily in the Law which convinces of sin, or the Gospel preached legally,
as the great aggravation of men's sins; and it is the spirit in the Gospel
preached Evangelically as that which holds forth a ransom, a propitiation for
sinners, whereby the Spirit convinces of righteousness. Where, as in a glass
the Spirit of Christ does hold out The beauty, excellency, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
love, and loveliness of the Lord Jesus, which is most transcendent and
ravishing to the soul that sees it, but a little more particularly then.

1. The Spirit by their word ordinarily, not excluding other means, though the
Spirit always is the great wooer, and worker in this kind. I say the Spirit, by
their word does work to the revealing of a poor creature, breaking that enmity
that was in the heart to Jesus Christ: So the Apostle, I have espoused you to 2
C^^. 11. 2.
one Husband, so we read it, which Beza disalloweth not, but he reads optavi,
Erasmus adjunxi, the word is (...) I have joined them to the Lord says he,
Eras. vel^t ea quae glutine aut ferrumine comittuntur, but yet me thinks, says
Beza, the the word (...) that I might present you as a pure virgin to one
Husband, etc. confutes is, speaking afterward of a nearer joining to Christ
then now, therefore he reads it I have fitted you for the Lord, wherein

1. Is a reconciling of the persons to Jesus Christ. We beseech 2 Cor. 5. 10.
you says the Apostle, be ye reconciled to God. In Christ's stead we do it, as
if he did beseech you himself, we pray you be reconciled and O that we could do
this brethren! but with such bowels as the Lord Jesus, or as this Apostle did.
We are soon answered, and take a denial of you for you practice a denial, and
we are too easy to take it. O I beseech you says the Apostle, be you
reconciled. Alas poor sinners, you are enemies to Christ, and how will an enemy
be married to an enemy while such, you think you are not enemies, and you are
not so indeed, in word, and profession; but in your deeds you are enemies. You
do nothing but wound and tear his name, and are you not then enemies, you hate
the strictness of his ways, and his people that walk in them, and are you not
enemies; you are in love with your sins, which were the very spear at his
heart the knife that butchered him, and are not enemies? Ah! how many such here
this day, Now our work is to entreat you first to be reconciled, as for his
part he is ready to forgive, and forget all, and to look upon you, as if you
had never had offended him, if you had but hearts given you toward him as his
is toward you.

2. Not only, but then there is the espousing brethren, and that is when there
is a mutual promise past between the Lord Jesus and the soul, he will be a
Husband to thee, and marry thee to himself, and thou will be faithful to him,
wilt never follow other lovers any more, Thou will be his, and his alone, if he
be pleased to be thine. Now the Gospel which we preach is the word of this
faith. It is indeed the spirit brethren, which is received by the hearing Gal.
3 2.
of faith, by the word of faith, as the Apostle spoke, that does persuade a
soul to this, to close with him, to take him, upon his own terms. He will be
his virgin now for ever.

3. There is yet further an adorning her, when so espoused, and so fitting her
for him to be presented him a pure virgin. That I might present you, not only
chaste, but all manner of purity, (...) and this is nothing else brethren, but
the integrity and uprightness of the soul, the abounding of the soul with all
the graces of the spirit, wherein there is a growth by degrees. And this is the
work of the servants of Jesus Christ, a part of their fitting of them for him
To labor, to carry on his work so in his peoples hearts, that they may be
adorned and meet for such a Bridegroom.

There are but two things more to be hinted, before I come to the Application
of this. And the next is The manner of this espousing or betrothing, but before
that we must note, That as there was a betrothing of virgins some time, before
the completing of the marriage which custom is commendable, you know Joseph
had Mary espoused to him, before he took her to his family, as completely Mat.
1. 14.
and fully. So among the Heathens, also placuit despondi nuptiis hic dictus est
dies, says the Comic. Terent. only to the faith of the marriage. Now they were
counted by the people of God, and by the Law, man and wife, Husband and wife
(*). It was Deuteronomy. 22. 23. Lat. Alex. Genesis Dier. l. 2. Page 58. One promising
another, were called Sponsus and Sponsa.
death for them to violate that betrothing as well as if they had been never so
completely and solemnly married, whereby it appears God would have them look
upon it as a perfect marriage, though the consummation of it were not until
afterward the taking of her home, and solemnly engaging de presenti as they
say. So here, the consummation of this marriage is deferred a while, as you
have it in the very Text at last, at midnight the cry was, Behold the
Bridegroom comes, and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage,
that is to say into heaven. Then when Isaac took Rebecca and brought her into
his Mothers Tent, and became one with her more nearly, she became his wife
indeed so hereafter, when he takes us into his fathers house brethren, when he
takes us into Heaven, there is the marriage consummated indeed.

But for the manner of his espousals, First, remember this in all He does it
freely. For alas Brethren, what can the Lord Jesus, Ezekiel. 16. Not great, Deuteronomy.
7. 7. Nor good, Jos. 24. 23. they were Idolaters.
now if he come into the Congregation this day, see in any of us that he would
take for his spouse, what can he see in us, there is nothing desirable nor
lovely in us, we are like poor Infants cast out in our blood; not washed, nor
salted, but stinking, loathsome, the navel not cut nor bound up, cast out to the
loathing of our person. Ah Brethren! while poor sinners are in their sins, they
smell not So 1 Samuel 12. 22.
the loathsomness of their souls, they have stinking nostrils, to which the
savor of sin is suitable; and therefore they smell it not, we are as persons
that have been long in a filthy Jakes or Dungeon, and by continuance of it, we
feel it not, it is so habitual, or indeed connatural to us, but now bring a man
out of this place, a little while, and put him into it again, O then how
loathsome it is to him, yea, bring him to the door of it, O it is ready to sink
him, so it is in this case, you see it not, poor creatures, O that such of us,
as the Lord has made sin loathsome to, could tell how to pity you, but sure
you will find it so, if ever the Lord Jesus do espouse you, he will first let
you know what you are, to whom he does this, Alas, what can he see in us
brethren, or has he seen in any of us, that he stands in this relation to, for
birth, you have nothing but baseness, The Devil is our Father, and his works we
will do. I mean as to corruption that is within us, whence is it, Ioh. 8. 44.
but from Satan. For Beauty, there is none, but all deformed wounds, and
bruises, and putrified sores, full of corruption, that stink and are loathsome,
and what beauty can there be in such a Isa. 1. 6.
person. Alas! our hands are withered, as to any thing that is good, and our
Legs are Lame throug Hypocrisy, we halt between two, we are very Criples
indeed; no strength, not so much in our Ankle-bones as to stand upon our Legs.
We are blind and cannot see, deaf and cannot hear, pride like a Tympany swells
us. All manner of deformities gathered into one are the very picture of a poor
sinner, O brethren, who could affect such a creature were not this free,
altogether free. We must have something or else we cannot take a person into
such a relation. we must have beauty and parts, and birth, and wealth, and
wisdom and what not. we are blacker then Ethiopians, more brutish then fools,
viler then the earth, poor and naked and miserable, and what not, and O that
ever the Lord Jesus should take such as we are, in such a condition, well this
is the first.

2. He does it so willingly as to rejoice in it: It may be it may make a man
more serious and Melancholy, in such a condition, if he be sensible of the
weight of the things he goes about, but now the Lord Jesus knowing the issues
of things, and that it will be eternally happy for the poor soul, and he shall
have glory in it; he does it, and not only so, but he rejoices in it, even ^s
a Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, as the Prophet has it. The Isa. 62. 5.
words of the Text are very Emphatical, as a young man marryeth a virgin, so
shall thy sons marry Thee, he speaks of the Church Neh. 13. 24. Mar^^e^h, that
is to say, made to dwell.
of the Jews their sons, shall abide with her, as one that marries another,
and dwells with her, and they shall not be removed: but a young man marryeth a
virgin, a chosen young man, the freely chosen (...) happily because they used
to choose young men for expl^its in war, or otherwise as being of more strength
and activity, such an one marrying a virgin, not an old man, a virgin, nor a
young man marrying a widow or Ancient woman; but a young man, a virgin, so an
old man, an old woman, the reason of it is that hereby God might set forth how
every way (there being a suitableness to give full content and satisfaction) he
rejoices therefore over his people he thus espouseth as a young man over his
virgin, his Bride that he marryeth; therefore she is called Hephsibah, my
delight is in her, and Beulah, she is married. And this, if it be not full
enough, take another place, and it is that of Zeph, where he prophecyeth in
like manner of the restoring of Jerusalem, and Gods taking her again after she
was put away, as it were, the Zeph. 3. 17.
Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save, he will rejoice
over thee with joy, he will rest in his love he will joy over thee with
singing. Mind you, he will rejoice over thee with joy, that is to say,
exceedingly rejoice, as in another case the friend of the Bridegroom, rejoices
with joy (...) he rejoices with joy, that is to say GREATLY, yea he will rest
in his love, he is fully satisfied and contented, yea rejoices with singing,
an outward expression of it. How many expressions are here whereby he would
have us know the largeness of his heart toward us in this his espousing any of
us to himself, and Alas! all little enough to poor trembling souls, to raise a
drooping spirit to believe any thing of this kind, and it is not only a flashy
ungrounded empty joy, but he will rejoice over such a soul to do them good, I
will rejoice over them to do them good, as if he had said it is the very joy
Ier. 32. 41.
and rejoicing of my heart to do you good. Though you think happily that Jesus
Christ is hard to be entreated, and you have sought him long, etc. and you
find little, O entertain not such Deuteronomy. 30. Psalm. 35. 27.
thoughts, for surely he does rejoice over his people to do them good; but so
much for that.

3. He does it brethren; so firmly in every respect to all after-claps, being
provided for, it shall never be broken, There is many Isa. 65. 18, 19.
a man, espouseth a wife, and happily through weakness of the disposition, or
some disease, or the like, which afterward being discovered, procures a
disrelish, and happily breaks all or the like, but I will a little insist upon
this because it is very considerable, and therefore.

1. The Lord Jesus he does it in such a way, as that sure he will be, that
Justice shall be satisfied to the utmost in the behalf of a soul, whatever the
debts brethren have been if 10000 Talents, whatever the offenses have been, you
have been guilty of; which happily Romans 3. 25, 26
may lie sore upon you: O you are afraid of the justice of God, he is just and
dreadful, and though he may forbear me for a while, thinks the poor doubting
soul; yet he may afterward come upon me for all, and what will become of me
then? no, the Lord Jesus he has beforehand satisfied all that can be
demanded, he has paid to the uttermost for them, being a Savior to the
utmost, all the black and bloody bills chargeable upon thee, were charged upon
him. It is true indeed hrethren, if this contract or espousal between Christ
and the soul; were made without provision of satisfaction to justice, he might
come UPON THE SOUL AFTERWARD and break and undo all again, but our Savior is
wiser in his negotiations then so: he has first cleared all as to the merit;
and having taken satisfaction in his son, and given him an acquittance, being
well pleased in the Lord Jesus, he cannot now again return upon thee for
arrearages, that is a great and rich Scripture indeeed, he came to be a
propitiation then through faith in his blood, that God might be just, the
justifier of them that believe, that he might be justifier, and yet so as
himself be just, Romans 3. 23.
not only in fulfilling his promises of Christ his coming; but be just, that
is to say, his justice fully satisfied, and yet his infinite mercy take place.

2. That he is real in what he does, he does not mock and delude poor
creatures, indeed a man that is variable, and changeable as the shadow, he may
make a show of much love, and carry on a Match far, and when all comes to all,
cast her off; and take up other resolutions; but the Lord Jesus, surely he is
real in what he does: indeed God has much ado with us many times to persuade
us to this, that he means as he says, and we shall find him full as good as
his word and his offers, because alas! we judge him by her own unconstancy,
because our hearts are so hollow, we think his may be also, but remember his
thoughts are above our thoughts, and his ways above ours, says the Lord I will
betroth Isa. 55. 8.
thee unto me, I will betroth thee to me, and again the third time he repeateth
it, I will, I will, I will, as the soul is ready to say, O Hos 2* 19, 20.
O sure he will not look upon me, such a one as I! yea I will, I will says he;
yea notwithstanding all your mis-doings, I will, your unkindnesses I will, your
jealousies of me, I will, your backsliding, I will betroth thee to me.

3. It is done with that wisdom and Council, that it will never be overthrown.
Counsel is so called from a word signifying to Found, because it is the
foundation of actions, that which is done rashly, and unadvisedly many times,
men are fain to come off with a non putaram, to retreat with shame, or when
through weakness they cannot see through* things. Now this is not to be thought
of Jesus Christ Brethren, for he is the wonderful Counselor, Is^. 9.
the wise God, a God of understanding and wisdom, and, by him actions are
weighed, yea his own actions are weighed: his 1 Samuel 2, 3. D^u^* 32. 4.
choice of some persons, to life and glory, it is the counsel of his will, not
only his will, but the counsel of his will; he does it with such wisdom as
foreseeth all the events. It was not a rash thing that God brought Israel into
the Land of Canaan, no he did it with Counsel; and therefore he says that he
knew what they would do Deuteronomy 3. 1. 21.
before hand. Ah! (may a poor soul think,) the Lord Jesus indeed has made love
to me, but did he think, I would be such a wretch under all this his love: I
would carry so unkindly toward him; yea, he knew this, and considered it
before hand. He did sit down brethren, and from eternity consider what it would
cost him, the bringing of such sinners as thou art to glory, that many a grief,
he must have, many a slighting of his love, many a kick in his very bowels,
Jerusalem would wax fat and kick against him, he Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
knew this, and yet notwithstanding he resolved upon it, he would go through
with his work, if he could not have born these things brethren and covered
them, he would not have made love to us, if he could not have taken us with all
our weakness and imperfections, for he would undertake nothing that he could
not bring to pass, that were weakness; therefore he is said to do it in
judgment also.

4. It is with that faithfulness, that the Lord Jesus will not only not
c(...)st off, when once he has taken a soul so near him in this relation, but
his heart being once pitched, it is never removed more, it is not with him as
it is with men, for however when once we have betrothed persons, we are engaged
by the Law of God to take them, and our Consciences do bind us, though it may
be, between the espousal and marriage; though there be not a casting off, yet
there may something intervene, that may carry away the heart, so that the heart
is not so toward her as before, and the person could be content to be loose,
if it were not that he is entangled i Mal. 2. 16. He hate(...) putting away
among men. Hos. 2. 19.
such ^ands, he cannot break, but now it is otherwise with the Lord Jesus, his
heart if once pitched, is never removed more, if he loves, he loves to the
end. It is for ever that he betrotheth, when he betrotheth. Alas! there is
little comfort, or sweetness in enjoyment of such near relations, if their
hearts be not toward one another. It is true they may live together and do
duties one toward another outwardly, but if the heart be gone, there is little
comfort in it, so it cannot be with Jesus Christ, He may indeed sometimes
suspend the outward acts if I may call it so, and withhold himself sometimes,
and not give that free communion of himself to the soul, but yet his heart all
that while, is never the further off, his heart is never gone, which is indeed,
all in all. One of the Churches eyes at any time will ravish his heart Cant. 4.
9.
that he cannot well hold longer, from revealing himself again to the soul,
after he has withdrawn.

5. For after-sinnings there is also a treasury of pardoning mercy laid up,
there is a treasury of Merit which he has expended to purchase mercy for us,
which is always before the father, not only Psalm 130. 4. There is forgiveness
with thee, etc. Heb 9. 24.
for the sins past, before we believed, but for all after, since the pardon is
purchased already, though it be not applied, nor the sins pardoned before they
be committed, yet there is forgiveness with God, there it is, and ready to be
issued forth, as occasion serves: And he himself at the right hand of the
father continually i(...)eceding for the Application of it. Whereby he is able
to save us to the uttermost. Brethren if we could say thus far, or thus far he
Heb 7. 25.
can help and save, and there is forgiveness indeed, our hearts might fail us,
but it is to the uttermost, to all perfections, or all end, (...) And yet let
not graceless sinners abuse this, but rather fear him so much the more, there
is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared, not that we may wax wanton
under it.

Again, on the other hand. He makes the soul also to close with him, and give
it self up considerately and in truth sincerely.

First, Considerately and not rashly the soul gives it self to Jesus Christ,
promises to be his: the love of J. Christ Constrains us because 2 Cor. 5. 14.
we thus judge if one dyed, then were all dead. It is the act of the judgment,
convinced, that Jesus Christ is the chief of ten thousand, that he is only
lovely, altogether lovely, of our necessity of him, of his all sufficiency to
answer our wants, and only sufficiency, his willingness to accept of us. No
depth of earth, no judgment, no rooting, in it self, Mat. 13. There is many a
poor creature for a flash, a sudden motion, has some velleities, some wishings
and wouldings, but this is a serious and judicious closing with him, promising
to be his, to take him for better for worse, to go through with him in all
conditions, if he go to prison, to go with him, to death, to go with him. And
he only can work up the heart to this.

Then secondly, It is in sincerity as well as thus judiciously, he loves truth
in the inward parts; and therefore looks at the heart Psalm. 51. 6.
more then at the outward. Alas! how often did Israel turn to the Lord, but
fainedly, not sincerely. But now the Lord, his people indeed give up themselves
to him cordially, though it be Ier. 30. 10.
but weak, yet it is in truth their resignation of themselves to him, and
taking him for theirs, not for by-ends, or reports, but for himself, not for
riches, honors, a name, any thing; but for himself, no not only for peace,
but for himself who is the Prince of peace, no nor merely, for the grace and
glory which comes by him, but for himself. To love a man, and choose him
merely for his wealth, or his honor, which a woman shall have by him, it is
false and dissembling, she loves him not indeed: no, it is the person that she
would have, if it be in truth, let the other accomplishments be less or
greater, so the soul, O thy self, thy self, give me Christ Genesis 30.
or else I dye, What will thou give me if I go Christ less, will thou give me a
name, riches, a portion in this world, a fellowship with thy people in the
Ordinances, yea grace it self, if it may be given without Christ, O none but
him, none but him. Well, thus now thy Lord works a poor soul to close with him,
so that choosing Christ for himself; while we have him, we are well enough. If
a man follow him for Loaves, when they cease, farewell Christ; or for riches,
or prosperity, when that cease all is gone: They will not go to prison with
him, they will not suffer with him, no they never intended it, but to have such
a Christ as to be kept from those things. Well, this is not sincere, nor
upwright, which is wrought, in every heart, whom the Lord does thus espouse to
himself, which may serve for a word of trial to us all.

I have only a word to speak to the solemnity of the Marriage Feast: you see
Marriages used to be made with feasting, it being a time of rejoicing, so
Sampson he made a Feast seven days, that Judge. 14. 10.
was the manner it seems, and so Laban says to Jacob, fulfill her week, the
solemnity of the Marriage. And our Savior himself Gen 29. 22.
was at a marriage feast, at the first miracle that he wrought. And though this
feast it seems, was rather at the complete marriage then the espousal, yet this
Feast is at his espousal, and continues until the consummation; and yet a
greater feast to be expected. Ioh, 2. 1. 10.
The Kingdom of Heaven says our Savior, is like a King that Mat. 2^. 3. 4.
made a Marriage Feast for his son, and bid the Guests. Here he speaks. (I take
it) of the administrations of grace in the visible Church of Christ, for one
was there that had not a wedding garment. O Brethren, A Feast of Fat things, of
Wines on the Lees, well refined, a Feast the Lord makes, says the Prophet.
Their Isa. 25. 6.
Feasts were rather in drinking, then eating; and therefore they had their name
in Hebrew (...) A drinking, a Feast, so Ahasuerus feast, a drinking. And so the
Greek (...) a drinking Est. 1. 3.
together; so here brethen, such dainties are provided as eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, nor can enter into the heart of man, as a man that never tasted
honey, though he may hear speaking of it, cannot conceive what it is. Eat my
friends, and drink ye, yea drink abundantly says he in the song. It is
observed by some, that Matthew calls it a dinner, and Luke calls it a supper,
both Cant. 5. 1.
indeed, for we dine and sup with him, and he with us in the Administrations of
his grace, and those sweet communions that Mat. 22. 4. Luke 14. 16.
we have with him, while he sits with us at the Table, as not long since you
heard. Yea we have continually brethren such as are believers indeed have
continual meat at his Table, as Mephibosheth at David his Table, a daily
portion the 2 Samuel 9. 7.
things of the day in its day, so we our daily refreshings from his presence,
so Jeconiah had his portio^n from the Kings Table daily. Some say the dinner is
here but the supper in Heaven, and this not comparable to that, now we have
flagons, but there will be springs and Rivers, or rather an Ocean of wine to
all eternity, here we drink and take in the comfort, there the comfort takes in
us, we enter into the joy, because it cannot enter into us. O blessed is he
that shall be brought brethren to the supper of the Lamb forever and forever.

Lastly, The consummation of this marriage, when the Bridegroom comes, to take
his Bride to himself, to take her now from among the pots, wherein she has
lien; to take her now nearer to himself, to his bosom indeed, now she has had
some smiles from him, to keep the heart alive, now and then a Kiss, but then
continual embraces. Now and then he has met with her, here and there, and then
withdraw again, but then we shall be always in the glorious light of his
countenance. O Brethren! If a smile from Jesus Christ will sweeten the
bitterest cup of Affliction here below; yea, very gall and wormwood, it will
sweeten the mouth and fill us with comfort: what will it be then, when nothing
but pouring out of love upon the soul to eternity? and when there shall be no
bitterness at all to abate it, and no mixture, no interruption, no fear of
losing that sweet and ravishing communion with him: Oh heaven will be Heaven
indeed! But so much for the Doctrinal part.

Now for the Application.

First then I pray you let us be more serious in taking notice of the Use. 1.
great transcendent love of Jesus Christ, to such as we are; that we should be
made a spouse to him. O brethren what condescension is this, he being so high,
and we so low, such poor abject creatures. Alas, conception fails us brethren,
comparison fails us, for there is no proportion between an infinitely glorious
God, and vile dust and ashes. Who regards a drop of a Bucket, or thedust of
the balance, they are poor contemptible things, who desires a poor worm, or
an Ant, every one, trampleth them underfoot, and thinks he does them no
wrong, though he never gave them no being; alas brethren, we that are less then
nothing, in comparison of him, that he should set his love upon us, and become
espoused to himself, how shall we conceive of it, much less speak of it. You
would think it much for one of you brethren, one of us to have our hearts drawn
out thus to a poor abject forlorn maid, lying in the street, that we must take
her to a nearer relation, to a bosom-communion and fellowship, this were
strange, but for a ^rince to do so, is yet more strange; but all is nothing to
this of the Lord Jesus to our souls. It was Condescension for the Cedar to
marry 2 King. 14. 9.
the Thistle. as it was ambition for the Thistle to seek to the Cedar, O such
thoughts, if they rise, they are even stifled, in the very birth! A beggar will
not fall in love with a King, she thinks it is impossible to compass it,
there is no hope; and therefore no desire: and truly I think it is as rare for
a King to fall in love with a beggar, he is so far above her, and has objects
more suitable to himself to set his love upon, so that it would be one of the
wonders of the world, if such a thing should be, why brethren much more then
this, is acted daily; while the Lord Jesus the King of Kings, the Lord of
Lords, makes love to such poor worms as we are, and yet it is not wondered at.
It is true, we think our selves something; and therefore we are the less taken
with it. Tell a Pharisee how great Condescension it is, for the God of Heaven
to set his love upon his soul, he believes no such things, nor the Papists
neither; Nor many a poor hypocrite: Alas, they think they have somewhat that
deserves him, I, some beauty is in us, that the Lord saw; and so it was meet
for him to lay out his love upon us, proud wretches that we are; it is well we
have an infinitely condescending love, yea and powerful that can overcome our
pride, and swallow it up, and love not only poor creatures, nothing-creatures,
but such as falsely suppose themselves somewhat, when they are nothing, else
what would become of many of us. Well, sure it is because we know not our
selves, or know not what this love means; else we should all of us easily
subscribe to this.

2. That he would be at such a price for such, for alas brethren (...) who
would lay down his life, almost for the cho cest of persons; though some, in an
Agony of Passion, and discontent, have made themselves away for them, they have
doated upon, yet here was some proportion between the persons loving, and
loved; yea happily the person loved, might be the more eminent person; and
therefore might stand off and a man when he does this, alas he is beloved
himself; he is wrapped by the violence of his passion out of his choice, his
understanding and judgment dethroned, and then the Affections like wild
horses: O whither will they not hurry a man, but in such a case, a man is not a
man; but now in sobriety of mind consider it, and who would lay down their
lives and dye for the obtaining the rarest creature in the world for a spouse,
surely none, O no: Skin for skin says the Devil, and though a man imagine more
to be in what he has never enjoyed then he finds by experience in what he
has had the flower and cream of, yet notwithstanding if a man be himself, he
will prize his life above all; but if he would dye, would he dye a most
shameful death? to have his life taken away by the most violent destructions
and convulsions of mind so strongly working upon the body, as to moulder it
away by degrees; surely hardly any man would ever venture in such a case as
this. Alas! What is this? to what the Lord Jesus has willingly undertaken for
worms, what man would dye for a worm, that it might live, and he might have it
put in his bosom, or rather would be contented to ^ay down his body, take up
the form of a worm, and therein dye the most miserable death, that he might
have worms saved from death, and be his nearest relations for ever: O does not
this transcend the love of Angels, brethren, Alas! what is this to what Jesus
Christ has paid for poor worms, at the best, sinful dust and ashes, and that
we might live, and live in union and fellowship with himself for ever; Ah
Brethren, if God would but make us sensible what we are at the worst, and what
the Lord Jesus underwent in some measure, for apprehend it fully we cannot; but
such as have ever tasted what it is to sip of the cup, may apprehend more then
others, what dregs were at the bottom, a drop how does it put the soul into an
Agony, upon the rack that thou would choose death rather then life, O what
then was the whole cup brethren? that he should undergo this: and should with
his most precious blood be willing to purchase such poor abjects, forlorn
Creatures, to be a spouse to him; yea, with his blood drawn from him, through
the very pores of the body, by the very distractions of his soul, and wres^ling
with wrath: O was there ever grief like this, that the father put him to, and
was there ever love like this brethren? O that we had hearts indeed to admire
it!

3. That after all this is done, he should be at such pains to bring us to
himself, to woo us, to come himself, to send us his messengers, to strive with
us by his Spirit: as you know he strivd long with the old world, and strived
long with the Israelites in the wilderness: and many of our souls can say it by
experience, he has striven long with us by his spirit, when we have been
convinced, our ways have been folly, and misery; and yet we would not yield:
how has he followed us up and down with motions of his spirit, and waited to
be gracious, and all, but to have our consent to take him for ours. Dear
friends, who are we, that the Lord Jesus should thus ambire, make so much ado
with us, to have our consent to take him, to accept of him for a Husband. O
what desperate enmity is in our hearts against him, that there must be so much
ado to overcome it. You would think that poor beggar either a very crooked
cross piece, full of bitter hatred against a Prince or Nobleman, that sues to
her with all the entreaties that can be, sends messenger after messenger,
comes himself and beseeches her to accept of him; and yet she will not: no,
is she well, where she is desires not, either you will say, she believes not
what he says, that it is in reality, it will not enter into her heart to think
he is real, he is so far above her; though he tell her he knew that, is
sensible of it; yet makes love to her, merely because he will, and his heart
is toward her, not for any thing in her self, she believes not; or else that
she is a desperate enemy and hater of such a Nobleman, and would rather perish
there, or languish in such a condition as an abject, then accept of him: O this
is the condition of many of us, brethren, some poor deject dunbelieving souls;
alas! their hearts, even fail within them to hear that J. Christ should make
love to them, O it cannot be sure to such a worm, such a wretch, so poor, so
filthy, so full of rags and vermin, so full of sores and wounds, full deeply
indebted, so deformed and loathsome every way: O they know not how to receive
this. Others they are even stout and proud, and care no more for these things,
then if Jesus Christ had said nothing at all; as for them, they are well
enough, if he will let them alone; they desire not to mend their conditions, by
closing with him. Now brethren, to both these how does the Lord Jesus apply
himself: Never were there more powerful Arguments used, and never more
powerfully pressed, then he presses them, and that with more diligence, and
patient waiting upon us, and O what love, what manner of love, is this that all
this flows from!

A little to touch upou each of them, brethren, happily the Lord may be pleased
to breath in them to some poor soul, and as he does at other times thus: so
this day, brethren: Even to you, he is pleading with you for this very end,
that some poor sinners would be persuaded to close with him.

First then, The Arguments are the most pressing, that we are capable of
indeed: For he sets before us Life, and Death; life, if we close with him;
death if we refuse him, reject him. It is not a thing wherein we may choose or
refuse, and no wrong to our souls; no brethren, but he tells us, let our
condition be what it will, be we as dead as we may; if we close with him, we
shall be quickened, there is warmth enough in his bosom to revive us; there are
spirits enough in his love, to fetch us again. O we shall live; condemnation
shall be taken away, for there is no condemnation to them that are in Jesus
Christ, our bolts and shakles shall be removed, the obligations of our souls to
the Justice of God, it shall cease,: O brethren, here is the case now, a poor
condemned woman ready to perish, the Prince has so much compassion on her,
that he entreats her but to accept of him, to be espoused to him; promise him
marriage, if so: he will pardon all that is past, she shall have her life, Is
not this a pressing Argument(...) doubtless it is, to such a one as this, when
death is even present to her, before her face, is ready to be turned off the
Ladder, and now, an offer comes, O if you will but Marry the Prince you shall
be saved, though before she refused, and the Argument had not such force in it,
because the thing was at a distance, yet now you would think her desperate
indeed, that should refuse it. So brethren, the Lord Jesus he does at other
times; yea, and when the soul is as it were on the wrack; upon the Ladder,
under strong convictions, the Sentence is received, and it is even going forth
to execution, O now here is life and death before thee, will thou now marry me,
be a spouse to me, says the Prince, the Lord Jesus, the King of Kings? Are not
these pressing Arguments.

2. Again, another he uses is his precious blood, that he has not thought too
dear for us: O brethren, when he beseeches us by such an Argument as this is,
by the Mercies of God, as the Apostle has it, will it not turn all that is
within us to him? If a man though but inferior to a woman, should show so much
love, as to expose his life, to hazard for her, would it not be strong a
Argument when he comes to woo her, O remember my life, my blood is not dear
to me, that it may go well with you, will not this move her, there is a heart of
stone, it must needs be so? Why truly brother this is the Argument every time
that you have Jesus Christ held out Crucified before your faces, O do you not
hear, how every wound speaks to you, as well as for you to the Father. O
sinners why are your hearts no more toward me, have I not dyed for you, my
blood, my life was not dear to me, for your sakes, If you will not believe me,
Behold my hands and my feet, yea, my sides and my heart, look upon me in the
Garden, trace me there, where it trickled down my weary body, and see how I
have loved you: and will you still refuse me, will you still think that my
heart is not toward you, or shall your hearts not yet be toward me? Yea, have
I not been willing to lose, the light of my fathers countenance, to be under a
defection, to be eclipsed, for you, which was so much the purer, though nothing
so dear to me as his love, and it were upon me in the greatest heat and glory,
and my heart most affected with it; yet to suffer an eclipse for you, and will
you not close with me, will you not be persuaded?

3. Again, once more in the most pressing manner, and powerful, he follows us
up and down with these Arguments. O, with what bowels, how do they y^rn over us
every step he follows us, O why will you dye, why will you endure the
everlasting chains, to pay the uttermost; further, when I offer you my merits,
my satisfaction for all your debts. Look upon him weeping over Jerusalem; O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, O with what affection, that is the edge indeed of an
invitation! O if he were now Preaching to you, I believe brethren, he would do
it with bowels. And so did Paul, that Saint in whom grace did so abound, and to
him, O he warned them day and night with tears. O why will ye dye: will ye not
believe, will you not close with me, can you find in your hearts to slight me,
set light by my love, that is so drawn out toward you, O what love is here
brethren!

And then with what diligence and patience, often he would have done this, and
wayts long, How many years, have some of us, been thus besought, to close with
a Crucified Christ!

Again secondly, This may serve for ever to keep us low, if love work kindly so
it works, it melts down the heart, the very mountains, high and towering
thoughts and imaginations flow at his presence; you see how it humbled Abigail
when David sent to woo her, she bowed her self with her face to the earth, and
said behold let thine hand maid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants 1 Samuel 25. 41.
of my Lord. A Spouse to David Gods Anointed; I am not worthy: let me be a
servant, not worthy to wash his feet, yea the meanest servant, a servant to his
servants to do the meanest offices for them, to wash their feet. So Ruth, when
Boaz took but notice of her and spoke kindly of her, Whence is it says she
that my Lord should take knowledge of me, who am but a stranger, yea Ruth. 2.
10, 13
thou have spoke comfortably to me or to my heart, though I be not like one of
thy hand-mayds. It is true the Lord would not upbraid his people with what they
have been, nor does he ever do it, yet they should keep it before them
continually to keep them low. So he says he will betroth his people, after
their going a whering from him, there is much in that expression, and one thing
among the rest is conceived to be this, by Mr. Buroughs upon Hos. That he
would forget her former unkindness and unfaithfulness, and she should be now
not only as an unfaithful wife received again, but Married as a virgin, as if
she never had departed. But though the Lord will not upbraid us, as James
says, yet we should keep upon our hearts the sense of our former vileness,
when the Lord first met with us, in the way of his love, so Paul does I am
sure. God never tells them, after the first time, Why ^am. 1. 5.
persecutest thou me, he never told him afterward he had been a persecuter, and
what a blasphemous wretch he had lived. But Paul by the spirit of grace and
power in him, he often looks upon his feet, upon what he had been, and that
kept him in so sweet an humble frame, O I am less then the least Saint. Shall
the thoughts of love from David so humble Abigail, and from B^az, so humble
Ruth, and shall not this love of Jesus Christ infinitely greater then all,
humble such poor filthy creatures upon whom he has set his love?

Thirdly. Let us hence take notice then, of the many precious privileges of
the Saints. We live much below them, because we study them not, keep not the
relish of them upon our hearts, I mean endeavor not so to do, the Lord give us
hearts now lifted up to him.

First then, As many as by believing are espoused to Jesus Christ, they are one
with him in the nearest union. Surely it is not for nothing, that the H. Ghost
delights so to set forth the believers relation Ephesians. 5.
to Christ, by this of a spouse to a husband, you know that this is the nearest
union among men of one person to another. Kindred are near a man, his children,
his brethren, they are usually called their bone, and their flesh; as the men
of Judah spoke to David, we are thy flesh and thy bone, but this is a^ a
greater distance, but now in Marriage two persons that were strangers one to
another, never saw the face one of another, within a little while, by this
Ordinance of God, are brought to such a nearness, as that Father, and Mother,
and Children if they had any before, yet they are not so near to them; they
shall leave Father and Mother, and be joined to their Husband; here this union
is the stranger, Genesis 2. 24. Ephesians. 5 30. and 31.
by how much greater the distance between the persons were, and how much the
closer the union is now it is made; the distance was great, whether we respect
the dignity of the person, there was no proportion, a King and a Beggar are but
a shadow, and a dark one too; to set forth this, a King and a worm, to take it,
and lay it in his bosom, is nothing to this, but chiefly in respect of enmity
of mind; alas that such as we are, at the deadliest feud, haters of God and of
Christ, not only strangers but enemies through evil works, that those should be
brought so Col. 1. 21.
near to Christ, as to be made one with him, this is something indeed. An
impotent and weak enemy, that could do nothing against him, not so much as move
any longer then he upheld us, and yet we should be looked upon; indeed a potent
enemy happily in policy, may be concerned to such an union, but a weak enemy
rather, would be trampled under foot.

But then the nearness of the union; man and wife are one flesh says the
Apostle, but he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, The 1 Cor. 6. 17.
union of soul and body is nearer then of man and wife, if too bodies could be
acted by one and the same soul, this were a near union indeed; Why, the Lord
Jesus and the saints are one and the same Spirit, whereby they are knit
together in love, this is a near union indeed. Is this a light thing, a small
thing to be made so near the Lord of life and glory; even the Children of
Israel, a people near to him, who is like them that have Christ so near them,
of that are so near him.

Secondly, There is a sweet Communion and Fellowship arises upon this, a
blessed imparting; now of all his fullness to such a soul, all that is Christ's
is now yours, his righteousness yours, therefore the Holy City the name of it
is called the Lord our righteousness. Now his honor is yours, where he is
King, you are Queen, as in the old custom with the Romans they used to say,
where you are Caius, I am Caia, says the woman, where you are Lord, I am Lady:
be the poor Creature never so contemptible, yet marrying with a noble person it
dignifieth her, with a rich person it enricheth her, because she has an
interest in all. But beloved, that (though this be matter enough to insist
upon; if I could enlarge things for fear of being too tedious) There is a sweet
inward fellowship-Communion, between the Lord Jesus and the soul, that others
know nothing what it means; the Lord Jesus is more open hearted to them, his
secrets are with them, they are the hidden Manna, and they again are most free,
to power Psalm. 25. 14.
out their souls, to Jesus Christ, into his bosom, to power them out like
water; as he will hide nothing from Abraham; so Abraham will hide nothing from
him, such a confidence has the poor Believing soul, that he speaks boldly,
freely, (...) with Heb 4. 16, Come boldly to the Throne of grace.
speaking all, so the original word properly imports; that which none else in
the world shall know, they will make known to Jesus Christ, they can be more
free with him, then any other. And not only because he already knows the
heart as I conceive, but out of a sweet confidence they have in him, and
experience of his bowels yerning over poor souls in such a Condition, so that
if he knew not all that was in their hearts; they would out of this freedom
open it to him. Yea the Lord Jesus he dyed our death, and grieves our griefs,
and we rise his resurrection, and rejoice in his rejoycings, he partaketh with
us, yea indeed bears the heavier end, and all indeed of our miseries, and we
partake of his joys, the oil of gladness we are anointed with. But this is the
second. Psalm 45.


Thirdly, another is the cohabitation of Christ with his people, I will dwell
with them, and I will walk in them, when the new Jerusalem comes down from
heaven, the Church of the Jews shall come in; then he will especially dwell in
them, then the Tabernacle of God is with men, but now says the Apostle, that
Cant. 7. 5. He is held in the Galleries. 2 Co. 6. 16.
Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, though he be absent indeed in some
respect, at the right hand of his father, absent in body, yet he is present in
spirit, as the Apostle says of himself, as he would have us to be in Heaven,
have our hearts there, and so to dwell there, to have our conversations there,
our love there, and where the heart is there the man is, Animus non est ubi
animat, sed ub i amat, well, we then dwell with him, and he dwells with us, with
him will I dwell says the Lord. It is a Marriage duty to dwell one with
another, and if a believer have an unbelieving 2 Cor. 6. 16.
yoke fellow, if he or she will live with the believer they must not put them
away, they must not depart from them; so it is here, the Ephesians. 5. 29.
Lord Jesus dwells with his people, and this is no small privilege to the
Husband the Bridegroom at hand, always ready to pity and 2 Samuel 12.
compassionate us in our sufferings within or without. But this the third.

Fourthly, he nourishes and cherishes them. No man hates Cant. 1. 3.
his own flesh says the Apostle, but he nourishes it and cherishes it, as
you have it there in Nathan's parable one poor Ewe Lamb and he laid it in his
bosom, and it did eat of his bread and drink of his cup, by which are meant all
manner of supplies tenderly and freely ministered to a yoke fellow, as afterward
by the opening of the Isa. 40.
parable it appears well, now thus does the Lord Jesus dwell with us, as many
as believe, he cherishes us, and nourishes Mat. 23. 37.
us.

1. He lay's his people in his bosom. The Church is said to lay him between her
breasts, which only is an expression of her love to him, not for that he needed
any cherishing from thence as David Mal. 4. 2. Luke 22. 15. Math. 26. 29. Isa.
53. 11.
did from Abishai, when he was old he must have a young virgin, to keep warmth
in him. This is the case here, if we had not such cherishing from Jesus Christ
alas brethren we should quickly be benumbed and frozen and stiff and unfit for
any service he calls us to where should the spouse in her fainting swouning
fits lie, but in her Husbands bosom, this the Prophet sets forth in another
simile, of a shepherd, the Lambs that are feeble, and are not able to go or
drive the pace of others, he puts them in his bosom says the Text, thence they
may gather heat, and so the Chicken from the wings of the Hen, there is warmth
and cherishing, so the son of righteousness, when they are spread over a soul,
there is healing and strength in them.

2. But then they eat of his bread and drank of his cup, when he was upon
Earth, you know he did eat and drink with his Disciples, he desired to eat that
Passover with them. O blessed are they that eat bread with him at his Table, in
his Kingdom! he speaks of drinking wine new with them: that which is a
refreshing to them, is a refreshing to him as I may say, what is the
satisfaction of a soul brethren, but when he eats the flesh of Christ and
drinks his blood; when he feeds upon those real dainties; and what is the
satisfaction of Christ, but to see this, He shall see his Seed, and be
satisfied to see his mercy and his bowels, the precious fruits of his death and
resurrection, made over to a soul, to see them living by Faith upon them, and
eating and drinking abundantly to their souls satisfaction, this is the
satisfaction of the soul of the Lord Jesus also: well he nourishes them, it is
the Saints privilege; a man will not feed strangers continually at his Table,
nor enemies, but when once this relation is made up, this is the result; O what
filling is to the hungry and thirsty soul, they shall be satisfied!

Fifthly, (which should have been before this,) he will purify his Church, his
spouse, the more Communion he has with her, the more pure she is, what is
humbling in other Marriages, is advancement in this blessed Marriage. It is
said that the virgins Es^h. 2. 12.
which were to come to King, Ahashur, were to purify themselves before they
came to him, much ado there was to purify them with oil of Myrrh, which they
say was to make the skin smooth, to clear the beauty, to free them, from
Wrinckles, and to keep it from decaying. The sweet Odours were to make them
delightful in their savor, to make them lovely to the eye of a man, so curious
they were; but the case is otherwise here. Alas, he is fain to put his
comeliness upon us, else we should not have beauty at all that he should desire
us, as you have it, in Ezekiel. 16. And therefore the Apostle to the Ephesians, he
gave himself for his Church that he might purify it. Though we were nasty,
sluttish, lothsom creatures before, the Lord Jesus will not have us continue
Ephesians. 5. 25. and 27.
so, but wash us in that fountain, opened for sin and uncleanness, that Jordan
with us to wash away our Leprosy: And therefore he himself came by water, as
well as by blood. Alas! what should the Lord Jesus do with us bretbren, if we
should retain our swinish disposition to wallow in the mire? and then think to
come and lie down in his bosom. No, he cannot away with this: he must wash away
this disposition, and has done it for all that are his, that now they shall no
more delight in sin, but if they miscarry now it shall be their grief as well
as it is his, he purifieth his people: A sad word to such, as yet mallow in
their uncleanness, a sign they have nothing to do with Christ. An encouragement
to poor Creatures who labor under the lothsomeness of their corruptions, he
gave himself that he might purify to himself a Church, he can do it, he will
do it, his blood does lie in pawn, he will not lose the price of his blood, nor
shall his people lose such mercies as this, which cost the heart-blood,
whatever they go without, they shall not go without this.

Sixthly, He will make them fruitful, Marriage-communion is a fruitful
communion. This is the general complaint of the people of God, of their barren
hearts and empty lives, but he will make them fruitful, he will not have a
barren spouse, whether we speak collectively, or distributively of the Church
of Christ. Gal. 4. 24.
Collectively, Jerusalem which is above, is the mother of us all, a way, that
is barren, and God does not own with bringing in souls to Jesus Christ, has
cause to fear, whethether in such a constitution they be the Church of Christ,
yea, or no: It is true the Gentiles before they were married, had no children:
and the Jews that were the married wife, when God was casting her off, grew
very barren, but now more are children of the unmarryed, then of the married
woman says the Lord. But it is clearer to us to speak distributively, he will
make us fruitful, When a man is married to the Law, which is the strength of
sin as the Apostle calls it, O how fruitful is he in works of darkness, and
shall not Jesus Christ be as vigorous and fruitful a husband, as the Law can
be, and sin can be? Let Sarahs womb be as dead as it may, yet he can make her
fruitful, Let a man's heart be as dead to good works as you Romans 7. 12.
can imagine, he can renew strength again as he did Abraham's and Sarahs. If he
speak the word, a green tree is withered; if he speak the word a barren tree is
fruitful, the Apostle his expression, we are dead to the Law, says he, and so
free, from our former husband that we might be married to another, even to
Jesus Christ, that you might bring forth fruit unto God, see what riches of
fruitfulness, or seeds of it are in the womb of that one Text, God is able to 2
Cor. 9. 8*
make all grace abound toward you, that ye always, having all sufficiency in
all things may abound to every good work, mind you, here is good works, and
abounding in them, that is more; yea in every good work, good works of all
kinds, and abounding in them all. And whence comes this, he is able, to make
grace abound toward you, though if you had but a Cistern, you might be drawn
dry, or the stream; yet there is a fountain which continually overfloweth, he
is able to make grace abound; yea all grace abound, that you should have all
things, and all sufficiency in all things; yea, and always have it so, that you
may abound: O brethren, there is more riches in such a promise, then in a
thousand worlds, if we could but live by faith in such a promise, we should be
fuller handed, and freer hearted, and more abound in good works of all kinds.
Well, this is the sixth.

Seventhly, He will present them to his Father without spot or Ephesians 5 27.
wrinkle, or any such thing, a glorious Church as there it is; now alas!
Brethren, the Saints sometimes lie among the Pots, here the Apostle speaks of
the top of the Saints perfection, that which is due, or which they are capable
of. There shall be no privation any more, we are now but changing into his
image, from glory to glory, then he will bring us to his father in full
brightness of glory. If the Church on earth brethren, the glory of the Bride be
so great, as to be compared in her primitive purity to the glory of the Sun, a
woman clothed with the Sun, what will it be when Christ shall appear with him
in glory? No deformity shall there then be brethren, but the Church shall be
altogether lovely. But here further, by spot or wrinkle are meant the stain and
deformity of sin only; or else the deformity of sin, and suffering both, Of
sin, if so then, by spot we may understand any greater stain or blemish, by
wrinkle any less deformity, by spot a gross sin, by wrinkle an ordinary
infirmity. Or else by spot any sinful work, by wrinkle any failing even in good
works, there shall be nothing but uprightness, or else as some, even Mr. Caryl
making a double Metaphor; yet to the like purpose, there shall be no deformity
which usually follows age, in things and persons. In things an (...) 16.
old garment is usually spotted and defiled: In persons, wrinkles use to deform
them, you know the moisture consuming the skin shrivels up, and the beauty is
gone; now says the Lord, there shall be none of all this, no such deformity,
no old things, all shall be done away, and all things shall become new, they
shall be like the purest garment, in its gloss and luster, like the purest
face, in its flower, no deformity at all. Or else by spot, we may understand
Prove. 17. 12.
sin, and by wrinkle, sorrow, and so we know, that sorrow will dry up the bones
and marrow and moisture, my flesh and my skin, he has made old, that is to
say, by reason of sorrow, it wrinkles the face, breaks the beauty, sarrows the
Cheeks, brings deformity upon Lam 3. 4.
the greatest beauty; now there shall be no such thing, sin Psalm. 6(...).
there shall be none, all pardoned; yea, all far removed, none inherent, as you
heard before, all glorious, no deformity, no vileness and then no sorrow
neither to abate our fullness of joy, but a merry heart, a joy to swallow up,
now the wings shall be covered with silver and feathers with yellow gold, yea
those very afflictions wherewith we have been racked, shall work out an
exceeding and far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, specially if they
be for Christ, here is a privilege indeed brethren, nor any such thing, any
thing which themselves or others may suspect to be a spot, etc.

But then, his presenting them to his father, this is after the manner of men,
you know Isaac took his spouse, and presented her to his father, and brought
her into his mothers Tent, so will the Lord Jesus present his Church to his
father, here is my spouse now in that glory which I have put upon her, the
price of my blood, this is my glory, and he will not be ashamed to confess his
people, to own them for his Bride, before his father at that day, and then he
will bring them into his fathers house, there to abide with the Lord forever;
there to be swallowed up of his love, and likeness, forevermore. O blessed soul
that labors now under a body of sin, and death and art loathsome in thine eyes!
lift up thy head, this day draws nigh, every spot shall be done away, yea
there shall be nothing like a wrinkle upon thy soul, O what will this be to the
soul, that is weary of sin indeed!

4. Use of the Doctrine shall be then to teach us the Dignity, and Use 4.
Duty of a Gospel Ministry. Their dignity, they are such as are entrusted with
this great work, to fit a spouse to Jesus Christ, to reconcile her to him, to
espouse her to him, they are no ordinary servants, the Lord sends about such
works, yea even you see Eleazer Genesis 24.
was no mean servant, the ruler of the house. Princes send their Ambassadors to
treat about Marriages for them. So we says the Apostle in Christ's stead, as if
he did beseech you. To be the friends of the Bridegroom, is no small
privilege, but I will Ioh. 3. 28.
not stand upon this, but rather a word or two of the Duty, you may see how
great it is, that you may be the more moved to pray for them.

1. Then the Duty lies in this, that we woo for Christ, and not for our selves,
he that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom says John but the friend of the
Bridegroom envyeth him not that happiness, but would further it what he can,
and that is his rejoicing, this my joy is fulfilled says he, that people come
in to Christ. It is a sad thing brethren, when we shall be found at the day of
account to have spoken, it may be, but one word for Christ, and two for our
selves; the Apostle tells us of some that should arise in the Church of
Ephesus, speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them, I pray you
mind, to draw Disciples after them, not after Act. 20 30.
Christ. It is sad, I say, when men shall compass the Sea and Land to make a
Proselyte to an Opinion, much pains laid out this way, and when all comes to
all it shall prove but Copper, and not gold; but Jesus Christ is little
beholding to them: or if we preach Jesus Christ, and intend our selves, to lift
up our own names, and not the name of Christ: O this is great unfaithfulness,
says the Apostle Paul, speaking of that Corinthian Church much like ours, I am
of Paul, etc. were you baptized into the 1. Cor. 3.
name of Paul, was he crucified for you, etc.? Alas says he, I have done
nothing but wooed you for Christ, espoused you to one (...) Cor. 1. 13.
Husband, and not to so many. The children of the Bride-chamber are never
called together to prostitute the Bride to them; but to rejoice, and celebrate
the Marriage with more solemnity. Yea by how much the greater honor it is to
have the charge of the Bride, by so much the greater sin it is to deal falsely
with Christ in it, and to draw them after our selves, when we should draw men
after the Lord Jesus.

2. Their Duty is, to present them to the Lord Jesus as a pure virgin, having
espoused them to one Husband, now to watch over them, to take such care of them
and pains with them, that (...) Cor. 11. (...).
having escaped the pollutions of the world, they may not return any more to
them, but be kept pure; and holy to the Lord; and therefore says the Apostle,
I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, jealousy is a kind of fear,
sorrow and anger; It is the rage of a man says Salem: indeed it does as it
were raise a man above himself, carry him out of himself; therefore says the
Apostle, bear with me if by reason of my earnestness, I seem to be out of my
self, it is for your sakes, I am jealous for you says the Apostle. And what
was the matter, they were in danger to be seduced by false Apostles; to be
corrupted from the simplicity of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and this was that
the Apostle was jealous over them for; and surely brethren it is commendable
and imitable, I plead not for passion and wildfire, but a holy zeal for the
glory of Christ, the welfare of souls, we ought not to be cold but zealous
jealous for you brethren if in danger of seducing at any time, this is a large
duty indeed, we are apt to sleep, especially if sang asleep by the delusions of
weakness and mildness and love, falsely so called, and then the mischief is
done, but enough of this. I hope you see, there is cause enough to pray for us.

5. Another Use then shall be tending to the wooing of some poor Use 5.
souls, this day to accept of the Son of God, the Lord Jesus, and of his love,
and to make up the match with him, this is our work indeed. And O that it might
prosper in the hand of a poor unworthy servant and friend of the Bridegroom,
this day; you have heard Who he is, and What he is; you have heard already the
glorious privileges which arise from a closure with him; yea how often have
you heard these things, and yet you are coy, and hang back. I am come this day
brethren to tell you, the sum of the message is, that the Lord Jesus is willing
to have you, if you be willing to have him. How long shall the Lord Jesus
follow you with these mercies, the price of his most precious blood; and yet
you slight him. What can you desire, that is not to be had in Jesus Christ. If
you would have beauty, he is the chief of ten thousand. If you would have
riches, you shall have all things with Cant. 5. 10. Romans 8. 27.
Christ, how shall he not with him give us all things? Would you be honorable,
those are truly honorable that God honors? now he will honor them that will
honor him and honor his Son. And wherein is he and his Son honored, but in
this, if we believe in his name, give him the glory of his mercy and
faithfulness, (...)at I were able to speak of him, so as that you might some of
you fall in love with him this day, Shall I a little stir you up to this!

First, If you have him not, you are like to live and dye under that cruel
husband, the Law and Sin, the Law as it is the strength of sin which is the
cruellest bondage in the world, the Law 1. It commands a most absolute
obedience and conformity to it self, there must not be the least turning aside
to the right hand, or to the left, not a lota be missed, all things obeyed, and
continued in, and that upon pain of an eternal curse, cursed is every one that
continues not in every thing which is written to do it, it is a most rigorous
exacter of obedience to its cominands, there is no pitying, no sparing, as Mal.
3. 17.
there is now in Jesus Christ, he pityeth and spa^eth, as a father his son, as
a husband his spouse. If a man could from his youth up keep all, and but miss
it in a word, in a vain thought all his life time, there is no pity, no
sparing, it condemns to the lowermost ^ell. O what a condition are you in,
sinners, upon whom all your breaches of this Law does lie! 2. It is a cruel
bondage; because it gives no strength, if it did impose never so much, if it
did give any strength, it were something. It is true we had strength which God
gave us at the first, until we wantonly fell, and broke our bones, and so
brought weakness upon our selves, but now in this condition, yet, we are under
the Law as a husband, which will command peremptorily, but gives us no power,
like the the Egyptians taskmasters, they would have them make bricks, and yet
give them no straw; and yet the Law is holy just and good. Now the Lord Jesus,
what he commands, he gives strength to perform. 3. It admits of nosurety,
we must do it our selves obey to the utmost our selves, or else be ruined to
the utmost, perish to the utmost, cursed is every one that continues not in
every thing, one man, cannot be accepted for another, the soul that sins it
shall dye. And 4. Yea more then all this, It provokes us as we are corrupt to
break it, as a bank against a strong stream Col. 3. 10.
it makes it swell and rage, the motions of sin which were by the Law, this is
by the Law, but not from the Law, but from our corrupt hearts, but sin takes
occasion by the commandment, nitimur in vetitum cupimusque negata like wild
Asses Colts, when the law Romans 7, 5.
comes to yoke us, and hamper us, we break the y^ak, and the bands, as the
Prophet speaks, will not endure to be held. Now is not this a sad condition, to
be under such a hus(...)d as this; and yet how many of us are in this case, and
contented so to be? Well, remember brethren, the end of these things will be
bitterness and death, that is the wages.

2. Another Motive, may be this, he is ready to close with you, if ye be ready
to close with him, be you what you will, never so vile in your own eyes, for it
may be this is the discouragement of many; they would rather then their lives,
have the Lord Jesus for a husband; but alas, there is no beauty in them; he is
the chief of ten thousand, and they are the vilest of ten thousand, the chief
of sinners, he altogether lovely, they altogether loathsome; He is white and
ruddy, they are black and bloody; lying in their blood and filthiness, cast out
to the loathing of their persons, and what hope can they have that he will
accept of them? very great hopes brethren, for this is the tenor of the Gospel
to be preached to every Creature, without exception or Limitation, and every
one that believes in him, comes to him, he will in no wise cast out, if he
would, what had become of Paul or Manasseh, say not then, Alas I am poor and
miserable, and naked, yea Leprous and filthy, and therefore it is not for for
such a one as I, to think on Christ; indeed, thou can not think of him, until
he, first think of^hee, nor work toward him, until his heart has been working
toward thee, and is not that demonstrate that he is willing to receive thee,
to make a match with thee, though we be worms, and no men, have cause to cry
out, if we were never so holy, Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of
him, as to visit him with such salvation, make him so near thy self in thy son.
Yea surely he is willing, he would not have moved toward thee else, he does
not use to mock poor Creatures to make them believe his heart is toward them,
and when their heart echo again and say thy face Lord will we seek, then to
shut up his bowels, and shut out their desires. Brethren, take heed of too much
being alive to the Law, for that seems to be the savor of our spirit, while
unworthiness is the obstruction to our coming to Jesus Christ: we must be dead,
brethren, to the Law and the righteousness thereof, all our performances and
best duties, else we cannot live to Jesus Christ: The Lord Jesus never matched
with a Creature because it was worthy of him, of so near an union with him, for
alas, what creature, being but a creature, can be wotthy of such an union with
the Lord of life and glory. Mal. 3. 2.
No, no he ^akes an Ethiopian and washes her clean from her filthiness before
he has done with her, nothing but that fullers soap will fetch out the spots.
Yea I will say one thing more, that the Lord Jesus never* Matched with any that
thought themselves worthy of him, there is an encouragement to such poor
drooping so^l^, did Paul think himself worthy of Christ? nothing less nor any
of the Saints. He that will not have Christ freely, is never like to have him,
I will love them freely says he; No, says many a proud sinner, thou shall not
love us freely, we hope to approve our selves worthy of thy love, I tell you
brethren such a soul has not known what the meaning of grace is to this day,
Well, then remember, be you as unworthy as you can, in your own apprehension,
all the mercies of God, purchased by the blood of Jesus Christ they are freely
offered and tendered to you this day, to thee man, to thee woman, that art
viler then the earth in thine own eyes, yea to hard hearted sinners, that see
not themselves, they are tendered to melt them down, and if this will not do
it, nothing will do it. O that I could speak of these bowels, with such bowels
as some of your hearts might be stirred, and moved this day, but so much for
this second!

3. Motive, the Lord Jesus is not only willing thus to communicate himself to
poor sinners, but it is his delight so to do, It is the satisfaction of the
soul of Jesus Christ, when he beholds the precious mercies purchased by his
blood accepted of by poor sinners Isa. 53. 11. John 3. 15.
and to work mightily in them and to them. He shall see his Seed and shall be
satisfied; the father is satisfied, and the son is satisfied, when they behold
this, this is all that they expect, the father for his love, such a love, as
the world cannot parallel, a Sic without a Siout, God so loved the world, It is
all he expects that those mercies which he has purchased should be freely be
bestowed upon, and freely accepted of by poor sinners, and it is the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ also, it is all he expects of us, I say the
continual streaming of that fountain opened for sin and for uncleaness they are
as if he had said, I have enough for all my pains, my sweat, my agony, my
eclipsing, for the pangs of hell in my soul, for my death, and blood and
burial, all the contempts powered out upon me, and the sorrow ^endured, though
there was never grief like mine, yet this is enough says he, he shall be
satisfied, if he do but see poor sinners to receive him, and so become his
Seed, close with him and so become his spouse, for it is the same thing, though
clothed with a diverse Metaphor. Brethren, i^ may be, you would satisfy Christ
another way, you would do this and that for him, Labor as abundantly as you
can, be as holy as you can, perform your duties in as lively a manner as you
can: but when you have done all, if you hang your peace and comfort upon this,
and not in your free acceptance of Christ: and with Christ, you seem yet to be
married to the Law, and not to Christ, or at least you turn aside to your
former Husband, a Covenant of works, this is a dissatisfactiou to Jesus Christ:
as if there were not riches of grace in him to swallow up all your
unworthiness. O Brethren that the Lord would persuade your hearts this day,
what a delight and satisfaction it is to him to see poor sinners come and lie
at his foot and willing to receive him, to match with him, notwithstanding
their unworthiness!

4. Consider but how little a thing will do the deed, and espouse thee to the
Lord Jesus, Alas you will say, you find it a hard thing to believe, as hard a
thing as to keep the Law. It is so, in respect of our strength, but many they
mistake, and think except they have such and such a strength of faith they have
none at all, nor do not close with him nor he with them. If they could say with
Thomas my Lord and my God, or with the Isa. 45. 22.
spouse, my beloved is mine and I am his, then there were some encouragement
indeed. Brethren if it be but as a grain of Mustardseed, it will do the deed,
look upon me all ye ends of the earth and be ye saved; A look upon a woman to
lust after her is Adultery in heart, it is a heart union of two to one flesh,
for it is yet the heart, the mind that sees more then the eye; the eye may
look upon many things, and discern nothing distinctly if the mind be upon
another thing, so here; why should not a look after Jesus Christ to desire him,
when the soul has a sight of him passing by in his Glory. O that he were my
Husband! O that I were Married to him! that he would accept of me! O happy
souls that enjoy seeking communion with him! This, Brethren at the first, is
enough to make a Match between us. As the Lord Jesus is willing to have thee,
art thou willing poor trembling soul to have him? have him thou shall, yea thou
have him already though this says must grow up to a greater measure, happily,
before thou cast discern it or have the comfort of it.

Only lest any should be mistaken, I will here give a word or Direction or
Caution.

First; take heed of thinking thou art willing when thou art not, for as there
are many poor drooping souls who think they are not willing to have Christ when
it is that their souls do ever break for longing after, so on the other hand
there are many will say, If this be all, it is an easy matter, we are all
willing to have Christ, O that you were brethren! if you were willing to have
him, sure you would make more after him then you do, many of you, he may go
whither he will, you never miss him, never troubled for want of him. Believe
it, you are not willing to have him, there goes more to a willingness in
sincerity, then you are aware of. And then on the other hand, those which are
willing are ready to think* Alas, they cannot find their hearts willing, they
are afraid they may deceive themselves; But what is it man that makes thee
walk so heavily, so carefully, so droopingly? is it not the want of Jesus
Christ? what is it that thy soul cries out for to God, early and late? so that
heaven and earth is full of thy sighs, and groans, and tears: is it no^ for
Jesus Christ? What is the reason that thy soul follows so hard after God? if
thou be not willing to have him. What is the reason else, that all comforts
wherewith thou aboundest yield thee no satisfaction, they are nothing to thee?
No, thou must have Christ or else thou dyest, and yet think thou are not
willing to have him. O surely brethren, here is a willingness, take him, take
him then poor soul, Behold his arms are open to embrace thee, his heart is open
to receive thee! O embrace him, close with him, and take the comfort of it that
thou may walk cheerfully before him for ever!

2. Again, Be sure Brethren that you choose Christ: and not somewhat else
instead of him, Choice is an act of the reason, and judgment, and so must we
proceed upon judgment, mature consideration of things, else it will never
hold, we shall mistake the object, take somewhat else for Christ. Or else if we
pitch upon the Object it will be so slightly, as not to make a Marriageclosure:
The Apostle says the Love of Christ constrains us because 2 Cor. 5. 1^. H^s.
2. 19.
we thus Judge, if Christ dyed for all, then were all dead, there is an object
of Judgment going before the constraining of that love of Christ, so some
understand that, I will espouse, or betroth thee to my self in Judgment, not
only on his part, but on our part, it shall be in Judgment, usually the
Affections, or passions these are violent, like a Land-flood, yet having not a
spring to feed them, they are quickly dried up.

1. Then, Be sure you choose not the prosperity you expect to accompany Christ
instead of him. How many followed him for John 6. 26.
the loa^es, they were not in love with Christ, but the loaves, they loved
their own bellies, and not the Lord Jesus as the Apostle Luke 3. 58.
speaks. And therefore our Savior deals plainly with men? At the first, you
dream of outward felicity if you have me, you are deceived says our Savior,
the Foxes have holes, the birds of the Air nests, etc. If that men did
certainly know they must suffer persecution for the name of God, the name of
Christ, as all that will live godly in this world, must do it more or less: I
doubt this would quench those wishes and velleities that sometimes they have
toward Jesus Christ. Do not mistake if you have him, you In Romans (...).
must expect trouble with him, troubles within, and troubles without, such as
you never likely met with before: and if you cannot be willing to take him with
his reproaches, his poverty, his nakedness, his imprisonments, you are not
worthy of him.

2. Be sure you choose not his graces, or any thing but himself primarily, many
would have him, but what is it they mind or eye? that they might have peace,
and comfort, and pardon of sin, and this and that privilege; but they do not
pitch upon Christ himself primarily as the fountain. Well then labor to fall
in love with his person, to see some excellency in Christ, that you apprehend
not before; O! when the soul has his beauty, loveliness to know him, that the
fullness of the Godhead is in him, that he is the express image or Character of
his Fathers Person, Heb. 1. 3.
then to choose him upon such grounds and deliberates is likely to hold. This is
the rooting, Brethren, which the word of grace has in the heart; the depth of
earth whereupon a well poysed judgment we choose the Lhrd Jesus; that we see
so much in him of worth, that we are now satisfied; come life, come death, come
poverty, come persecution, come what can come, there is enough in him to make
up all: until we come to this, Brethren explicitly or implicitly, it will
hardly hold. O therefore Brethren labor to study Christ and his excellency,
whereby he is the chief of ten thousand, Beg of him to manifest himself to you,
that you may judiciously choose him.

Use 6. Shall be for exhortation to the people of God, such as the Lord has
given ^ower to believe in the Lord Jesus and Use 6.
close with him* he has made you willing to have him, and upon his own terms
you should be exhorted in that.

1. To labor to make it^ sure that you have the match made up between Christ
and your souls; for he loses much of his honor, and your souls the comfort of
your condition in a great part, because you are not sure it is so. Surely he is
willing to seal it up to you with the privy seal, the seal of his Spirit
witnessing, to your spirits that you are his: Yea, and he has promised too in
that place, where he betrotheth his people to himself; I will say to Hos. 2. 23.
them, you are my people, and ye shall say, thou art my God. Thou can not say
he is thy beloved, or thy beloved is thine* and thou art his: but observe, he
has promised that he* will speak first to thy soul, and say thou art mine, and
then the soul shall say, thou art mine, my husband, my God; for the thing
expressed by both is the same. There are many oath promises of the like ki^d,
why do not we let them lie dormant, and do not put them in suit more earnestly
in the Court of heaven? were we not much wanting to our selves herein, it would
be much more comfortable for us then it is?

2. Yea though thou have not thus far assurance that it is so, and the match
made up between thee, and the Lord Jesus, yet take heed of a jealous heart of
him, as if he were unwilling to match with thee, or as if he were off and on,
and did but mock thee, because thou find it not in so full a measure as thou
would, what will more grieve him then this? what could he have done more
then he has done, to manifest his willingness to receive all that come to him,
that are made willing through grace to receive him? You have his promise, which
usually among honest men, is as good as their Bond and we build upon it: And
what do you make of Jesus Christ? is he not upright, and just, and true? has
he said it, and will he not make it good? has he not said, as many as come to
him, he will in no wise cast out, and is ^is word worth Ioh. 5. 37.
nothing? indeeed if a man fail once in his word, we will hardly trust him the
second time, and if ever sinners or Satan can come forth and say, that the Lord
Jesus made a promise, and was not as good as his word, then you may indeed have
a jealousy of him (...) Ioh. 5. Ephesians 4. 30.
but they cannot, they cannot, the Devil will tell you, his promise of the seed
of the woman breaking the Serpents head, he has felt to his wounding: and his
promise of Satan's falling down like lightning, and there is not a sinner in
hell can charge the Lord Jesus with breach of promise. But it may be this is
not enough to poor unbelieving souls, therefore you shall have it written, and
sealed, and witnessed, there are witnesses in heaven and upon Earth, and seals:
the Sacraments, the broad seal, and privy seal of the spirit, yea there is an
oath also to make it good, what would you have more? what can you desire more
then this? would you see the work done, why is not the giving up of Jesus
Christ to the death for sinners, the greatest part of the work? Sure if ever,
he would have baulkt there, and yet you see it stuck not: O therefore be not
jealous of him, who has so freely and so largely Luke 1. 75.
laid out himself for sinners.

3. Now then ye that are Saints indeed love the Lord Jesus. O love the Lord ye
his Saints: None have such reason to love him, as they that have tasted of his
love; if there be any ingenuity in Psalm. 31. 23. Psalm* 91. ^4.
us, love will beget love as one flame begets another; because he has set his
love upon me, says the Psalmist, therefore I will deliver him: if we could
love the Lord Jesus more, we should be delivered more from those evils we mourn
under: How lamentable a thing is it, how much love have we for Creatures, and
how little love for Jesus Christ? did Husband or Wife die for us? ransom us
from the pit and hell? I hope there are some of his people (believe it) that
have more affection for Jesus Christ, then ever they had for the Creature. Ah
blessed souls! how infinitely are you engaged to him, for so fully seizing upon
your hearts! O who are you, that you should be able, thus entirely to love the
Lord Jesus, and admitted to it! but thus it is, and magnify his Name. But
alas, for the most part, the complaint of the people of God is, they cannot
love him. O labor to Deu. 30 6.
get those carnal affections mortified, the fore-skins of our heart taken away,
and our heart circumcised, and then we shall love him: you have a promise,
improve it for that end. If we could but spare time to set our selves to it, to
study his heart toward us, and ours toward him, his excellency and
loveliness, we could not but love him. O beg the spreading abroad of his love,
sheding Romans 5. 5.
it abroad, not only upon our understandings but our affections; for no further
then he sheds it, will it spread; it will stay in the brain, in the
understanding; if the passages between head and heart be not opened by him, we
shall never be affected and warmed by it.

Alas you will say, our distances are so great that kills our love: No brethren,
that cannot be, the distances are not so great now: for the relation between
Christ and thy soul, if thou believe, is the nearest relation: he is one
Spirit with thee, and therefore there is not such a distance; and though in
respect of dignity and worth there be a distance, yet remember, now we are
(...) part of himself, and partake with him of his dignities also: but however
love knows not that overmuch aw and respect as to kill it, but it will be
working toward the person beloved; Mary Magdalen loving him holds him by the
feet and weeps over him. If a Prince will marry a beggar, surely he will take
it well, and expects it, to be loved of her, and he would not be pleased with
such a dejection in respect of her own vileness as to quash her love, yea
brethren, me thinks the meaner we see our selves, the more we should love him;
for what can we do else but love him, we have nothing else lovely or desirable
but our love, our hearts: therefore Oh love him, and abundantly love him O ye
Saints of his, whom he has so loved.

Alas, But our love is little in comparison of his love to us, and this
discourageth us. It is true, What proportion between the drop of a Bucket and
the ocean, Some there is, but there is none between the largeness of Christ his
heart toward us, and ours toward him. But shall our love perish and dry up,
because there is not as much in the little limbeck, as in the fountain, in the
river, as in the sea. He is love it self brethren, and therefore we must be
contented to fall infinitely below in love: but let us love him according to
our measure. Again, if there be the whole heart to love the Lord Jesus, it is
as much proportionably for us, if we could reach it, as it is for him to love
us with his whole heart, as he is pleased to express it. The Creature is
infinitely less then Christ, and therefore must needs have infinitely less love
to him, then he has to us, but yet there is nothing wanting where there is
Totum: therefore rather it should provoke us. He has loved us first, and loved
us more abundantly then we can love him: therefore labor to get our hearts as
much enlarged as we can in love toward him, though we fall short of what we
might attain to: he will make up imperfections, there is love enough in him,
and there is the advantage of his love being above ours, that he can cover
those imperfections in our love to him, which if he had not more abundantly,
then he could not do.

What shall I say more, Love is that which commands all, it draws all the
affections along with it which way ever it turns, thither the desires are bent,
there is the hope fixed, there the delights are qu^ amat, amat, and nihil aliud
novit. She that loves, loves, and knows nothing else. O how shall we not be
able to do any thing against sin for Christ? if we loved him so entirely then
our hearts would be in Heaven, we could not grufle as many of us do then, we
should be more tender of his name, and of his honor, then now we are? but
alas! I am not able to press these things home, the Lord set them home: You
must love him brethren, else you will have little joy of your communion with
him which is to endure to eternity.

Again, Labor to rejoice in him and in his love, rejoice in Psalm. 33. 1.
the Lord O ye righteous says the Psalmist, Rejoice in the Lord, says the
Apostle, and again I say rejoice, it is a duty of that moment, he cannot leave
it, he goes over and over with it, do not think I am mistaken when I bid you
rejoice, because happily your condition may be afflicted other ways, again I
say rejoice, I am still of the same mind. The Lord Jesus rejoices over you, as
sad thoughts as you have concerning your selves: he rejoices, over you, he is
glad to communicate his love, and shall not we rejoice then in the receiving of
it? Can the Children of the Bride-chamber mourn while the bridegroom is with
them says our Savior? it is not suitable to their condition, when he shall be
taken away, then they shall mourn: I deny not Brethren: but if the Lord do
withdraw himself; we should lament after him, and seek him sorrowing, as Mary
the Mother of Jesus did, and the Luke 2. 48.
more love we have received, if we grieve him, this will be the more grief of
heart: but if you that have his presence in a sweet manner, and yet hang the
head, and droop, as if our joining to the Lord had been the undoing of our
souls; So pensively and sadly we many of us walk, that indeed we are a shame
and dishonor to the Lord Jesus. If you should see a Virgin espoused to a man,
and should from that day forwad never hold up her head, but walk heavily, what
would you think? sure she apprehends she has made an ill choice, her
expectations are frustrated: therefore Brethren look to it, that we rejoice; if
the Children of the Bride-chamder cannot mourn, but rejoice to hear the voice
of the Bridegroom much more then the Bride. The Lords takes pleasure in the
prosperity of thy soul, and why should not thou Pro^ 23. 37^.
^ake pleasure in the prosperity of thy own soul, being made one with Jesus
Christ.

5. Look to it that you be faithful to the Lord Jesus as a Bride when once
espoused, if she turned aside to another, it was death, they were looked upon
as in a married state and condition, indeed the truth is, when the Lord has
truly espoused his soul to himself, he has done it in faithfulness, and makes
the soul faithful to him, that in the great Article of the Covenant they Psalm.
44. 17.
never deal falsely with Jesus Christ, that is to say, they choose not another
Savior; another Lord, under whose dominion to put themselves constantly; yet
there may be sometimes to Jesus Christ, even in his own people. If that once it
comes to this, that we embrace sin and consent to it, and take any delight in
it, this is to play the harlot with Jesus Christ, O take heed of this brethren
indeed the heart is all that he looks at, how we stand affected to those evils
which yet remain! if Paul have a body of death, yet he delights not in it, but
groans being burtheued, this he accounts not unfaithfulness; but when a man's
heart begins to sit loose from the Lord Jesus, to be almost indifferent, he
could sometimes in a fit of wretched carnality be content to have another Lord
to rule over him, to be free from Christ. O! this the Lord looks at, and he
will search out, this will move him to jealousy; therefore take heed of this,
a woman may do as much service and seemingly as readily to her husband as
before, but yet her heart be gone, and she could be contented to be loose, this
is heart-Adultery, this the Lord Jesus in us brethren, looks at as such; if we
serve him, and do duties but in such a manner that we could even be contented
to be at liberty, it is not right; take heed of provoking the Lord Jesus, lest
it prove in the end that he never knew us indeed. Labor to be faithful then in
this, in the main.

Again, In managing all he puts into our hands, be faithful. The heart of her
husband does safely trust in her. It is the commendation of a woman of a
thousand in the Proverbs, she will be improving. It may be you have not so much
to turn as others have, Prove. 31. 11.
others have ten times more parts, and opportunities to do good, let them look
to it, they have ten times as much to answer for, and must do ten times as
much; but thou may be as faithful in a little as they in a great deal. One
servant is a Steward in the family, has all under his hand; and another he is
a poor under-servant, has some mean service committed to him, why now he may
be as faithful in his place, as the other in Numb, 12.
his: Moses was faithful in all the house of God, he had a great command; Caleb
might be as faithful for what was committed to him following God fully as the
Text has it, say not then, If I were a Magistrate, a Minister, a public
person, had such opportunities to do good I might do much, but I am an obscure
person: Well, be Pro. 10. (...). 20
thy condition what it will be, thou may do good, and be faithful in thy
place according to what thou have received, thy lips may drop like a honeycomb,
and feed many, and like choice silver, and enrich many, though thou be never so
mean, and so for the Family, and up and down, where ever thou come, look that
thou be faithful to do all from Jesus Christ, and to do all to him, that thou
rob him not of the glory of what he has done for thee, and by thee, for then
thou art not faithful.

6. Another Exhortation shall be then to desire the coming of the Use. 6. Rev.
21. 2, 9.
Bridegroom, the Spirit and the Bride say come, the spirit in the bride
breathing in her, as it is in the Revelation, they say come, We look upon the
day of death, as if it were the day of divorce from the Lord Jesus for the most
part, truly for them that are out of Christ, it is no marvel if it be a King of
terrors to them, but to the Saints me thinks, who look for the appearing of
the Lord Jesus to consummate the marriage between them, it should not be so
terrible as it seems to be to the most of us, and to this end take ye here
brethren, at the marriage feast he turns our water into wine, but in heaven our
wine into spirits, and sets them a flaming, our love flaming to all eternity.

7. Exhortation, which is to look to our Ornaments, to get them Use 7.
ready, why do we hang back, but because we are not ready, we have somewhat or
another unready, still, our work is not done, can a maid forget her Ornaments,
or a Bride her attire, yet my people have forgotten me? As a Bride adorneth her
self with her Jewels, Ier. 2. 32. Isa. 61. 10.
so he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with
the robe of righteousness. Eleazer put jewels upon Rebecca before she came to
Isaac; and therefore the spouse is called Callah in the Original, because of
her perfect adorning, therefore look to this brethren, that you be adorned, O
every day put on your Ornaments and make ready for his appearing, for while
your hearts are out of order, your Spirits out of frame you are not fit to meet
the Lord Jesus; and therefore you will hang back; but so much of this
Exhortation.

The last Application will be a word of comfort to such as through grace have
yielded up themselves to the Lord Jesus, or are Use 8.
desirous or do so, to be espoused to him according to the several conditions
of such creatures, there may from hence be a various and strong consolation
administered from this Doctrine.

First, Then alas! you will say withal your souls you close with Jesus Christ,
there is nothing you more gladly undertake, but you know he is a righteous God,
most just and most pure of eyes, and therefore he will surely be displeased with
you, and you shall have little comsort, yea you do find that your fruitlesness
of walking does provoke him; and therefore you are afraid sooner or later, he
will cast you off, before you come to enter with him into the marriage, O I
shall one day fall by the hand of this Pride, of this uncleanness, of this lust
or the other. For Answer to this remember. 1. That the Lord when he does
betroth, he betretheth forev^r, and he does it in faithfulness, so that if the
saithfulness of Jesus Christ could fail who has espoused thee: thou might
miscarry. Men indeed after espousals if they discover any deformity which they
knew not before, may be apt to change their minds, yea sometimes where there is
no cause at all but their own fickleness and changableness; but there is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning with him, has he spoken it, and will he
not perform it? I will never leave thee, says he to Jacob until I have
performed all the good which I have spoken concerning thee. But a little more
fully to open it. Genesis 28. 15.


1. I say, by way of Concession, he may sometimes be angry with his spouse, or
at least withdraw himself, properly he is not angry at all, nor subject to any
passion, but he may behold that in his people, for which he may sometimes put
them to a little grief, and make them believe that he will cast them off, as
you have it in many of the Psalms, he may frown, and hide his face from his
people, but as on their part, every withdrawing from him is not a breach of the
marriage-Covenant: so neither is every withdrawing of his refreshing presence,
a breach of his Covenant, yet when he does so withdraw brethren, alas his heart
works toward his people as to Isa. 30. 18.
Ephraim, I do earnestly remember him still, he may give his people sharp words
sometimes, which will be a cutting to the souls that are deeply in love with
him, but they go to his own heart as well as they do to theirs; here is the
difference brethren, between our withdrawings from him, and his withdrawings
from us that are his people, our hearts are many times gone in a great part to
sit loose from him, though not altogether for the Church when she slept, her
heart waked, but now with him it is otherwise, his heart is never gone in the
least from his people, only he may speak sometimes a bitter word to them, but
all this while his heart is full of sweetness and love to them, this is one.

2. Remember this also as a pillar of the former, that he has builded and
founded this espousal and union between him and his people so sure, as that it
can never be shaken; upon the freeness of his grace; and therefore it cannot be
moved. Upon his full knowledge of what we would be, indeed, if the Lord Jesus
had not known what fruitless froward creatures we would prove, how unthankful,
how unkind, it had been something, for a poor doubting soul to have fed his
fears with: but he knew long before brethren and if he had seen that he had not
had bowels enough to swallow up all our unworthiness, he would never have made
love to us, for he is God, and his work is perfect, he would never have begun
except he had been able to lay the top-stone: Again the satisfaction of the
Justice of God is to the full, this is that which amazeth, and alrighteth many
a poor soul; they forget themselves and look upon their failings, as those
which expose them to divine vindicative justice, which is a great mistake, for
that was once fully satisfied in Jesus Christ, and he is well pleased in him
with all that can bring him in their arms, if we can but come to God with Jesus
Christ in our arms, he has no more to say to us, all is made even in Christ,
there was never such a declaration of the Justice of God, as in giving his own
son, to be a ransom, a sacrifice once for all, and the Apostle says it was to
declare the righteousness of God; therefore he was given to be a propitiation
for the remission of sins, there God appeared righteous indeed, that the flames
of hell must kindle upon his son, yea and burn to the lowermost hell in a sort,
that he might be satisfied, that justice might for ever lie still and be
silenced, as to his people, it is more that Christ suffered, then if thou and
ten thousand such as we are, should suffer to eternity, we Romans 3. 25
could never have paid the utmost farthing, which he paid to the uttermost,
else he could not have saved us (...) besides, (...) we should have been long
paying that we paid, he at once paid Heb. 7. 25.
all, and therefore this Marriage is so founded brethren upon this satisfaction
of Jesus Christ, that it cannot be shaken. Yea

3. As to that of afflicting his people, and frowning upon them, he is not
forward to it, he is not strict to mark what is done amiss, to take notice of
every slip and failing, if he were we should never Psalm. 130. 3.
have comfortable moment; no, he is rather strict to mark what is good in us,
what beauty there is in us, if there be but one beauty or fair place in the
midst of many spots, his eye and his heart is rather upon that, as some observe
in that of Sarah, there is but one good word in her speech calling Abraham
Lord, all the rest savours of unbelief, and yet the Holy Ghost takes notice of
that. So Rahab Jos. 2. 4, 5. Heb. 11. 31. Alas what miserable mangled Services
do we offer up, to our own eyes there is not any thing desirable that is ought.
Well, if there be but one sigh, one groan, in sincerity, he is more ready to
take notice of that then of all your failings; and therefore is not forward to
put his spouse and people to grief, O he is full of kindness and tenderness to
us.

Yea 4. It is observable that he is said to rejoice over his people continually
as a Bridegroom over a Bride, not only his heart is constant to them, but it
is constant in the same fervor of affection toward them, a Bridegroom
rejoices exceedingly over his Bride, though happily afterward he is not so
much affected, for it is our natures the imperfection of them, that new things
affect us more then old, now with God there is nothing new nor old, but his
heart is the same, and so is Jesus Christ his heart; he rejoices over his
people continually as a Bridegroom over his Bride, not as a man over his wife,
but as a Bridegroom over his Bride, now surely if a man do afterward cool in
his affections toward his wife and could be content to be separated from her,
yet upon the day of espousal or Marriage, he will not be induced to it, he
rejoices over his Bride: Why such is Gods heart and Christ his heart
continually to his people. But so much for this:

Therefore the Lord help us to conclude, from those promises, however it be,
however he may speak against us, sometimes, and act so, as it seems to us to
be against us, as Jacob says, all these things are against me, yet he will not
part with any soul, he has espoused to himself: Ahashuerus may put away the
Queen upon a seeming scorn, or contempt, refusing to come at his command when
he was in is cups; but brethren, though it may be thou have and thou do many
times slight the call of Jesus Christ, thou will not come, nor follow him when
he would have thee; thou shall follow him in darkness, and lament after him,
when he is withdrawn; but he will not put away. It is said in that of Mal. the
Lord hates putting away, it is true, it is firstly intended there of men's
putting away their wives, but surely if he hate it in us, he will not admit it
in himself, though it is true, he is above all Law given to us, yet he has set
forth this mystery of his union with his Church, by the Marriage-union, I show
you a mystery says the Apostle, but I speak concerning Christ and his Church.
And as it holds in love, and cherishing, and nourishing, and not hating; so why
not in this, that he hates putting away, the Lord cannot admit of such a
thought of putting away such a soul, if Satan would move for it, the Lord hates
it, and hates him for it. Be of good cheer therefore thou poor drooping soul
that have received him, accepted of his love, closed with his wooing and
entreating thee to be reconciled and given up thy self to him, assure thy self
he will never put away any poor soul.

Ob. Alas! but you will say, this is little comfort, though he be thus
unchangeable, yet I may change and break the Marriage-Covenant with him, or I
have done it, I fear; and therefore in such a case he may put me away, and yet
not change, for the change is in me. For this brethren remember, It is not the
backslidings of his people, that can undo the match made between him and them,
did not Israel go a whoring after other Gods, and is not that the breach of the
Marriage-Covenant, he speaks there of that Church, a man will not receive his
wife again, likely in such a case, yet return again to me, says the Lord, and
I will receive you. If that the Lord had not foreseen those backslidings in
his people, it had been somewhat, if Christ had not fully satisfied the father
for them as well as for other sins, it had been something, if upon this
account, there were not forgiveness, laid up in store enough with God for these
things it were somewhat indeed. And it is very observable brethren (I speak the
more, because I know that poor creatures in this condition they are full of
jealousies and fears, and all that can be said is little enough to quiet and
comfort) [first* observe that the Lord speaks over and over, and over again,
Israel had back-sliden in that Prophecy of Hosea, as appears chapter 14. 4. I will
heal their backslidings. Well, now they could hardly believe that God would
receive them again, they were so confounded they had nothing to say; therefore
he puts words into their mouths in that chapter, teaches them what to say, but
observe in the second chapter, I will betroth them, says God, I will, I will.
you have it no less then three or four times, which speaks the certainty and
ardency of affection in doing the thing in answer to their doubtings, I will do
it, says the Lord. Alas says the poor soul, it will not sink with me, that
after such Apostasy and backslidings he will receive it: I will do it, says
the Lord again. O! I cannot believe it says the soul; I will do it says he
again. Yea 2. Observe there that he will do it, and espouse them, betroth them
again; as one very well hoteth, he says not, he will receive them, as a man
may recive his Adulterous wife again, but I will betroth them, says the Lord,
as if they were virgins,, pure, and unspotted, the Lord will receive them, not
upbraiding them with their going a whoring from him, so the virgin daughter of
Sion, you have heard they are called upon their repentance, as if they never
polluted themselves, so that if the 2 King. 19. 21
Lord give thee but a repenting heart, thy backslidings will be as if thou
had never started from him, and from final departing, he will keep them, I
say, he will keep them; here is the difference between this espousal, and those
between men and women, there, if the man's heart continue faithful, happily hers
may fall off, and never close again, and there is an end of the matter, but
here the Lord Jesus, his heart is not only toward his people, but he keeps
their hearts with him, that they shall not depart, It is the very tenor of the
Covenant of Grace, I will put my fear into their hearts, and they shall not
depart from me, as long as God is faithful, and the Covenant of Grace stands,
they shall not depart, let Satan, Ier. 32. 4^^.
and sophisters say what they will.

Then in the next place this being made good, there is a spring of comfort
arises from this, and that is in respect of troubles and crosses, afflictions
and losses, the fading vanities of the world. Thou may lose thy dear
husband, that is as dear as thy life, But thy Maker is thy husband, if thou
believe, and thou can not lose him, nor he will not lose thee. Thy dear
children, they are but fading flowers, that even wither in the hand and perish
in the using, as all these outward comforts do, but here is a comfort, never
fades, thou may be afflicted happily with the cooling of the affections of
dear relations to thee; why the Lord Jesus his heart is at the same pass always
to thee, it is always, a day of espousal with him, he rejoices continually as a
Bridegroom over his Bride. Methinketh brethren, whatever your troubles are,
inward, or outward, here you may relieve your selves; by having recourse to
your interest in Jesus Christ your Redeemer and your husband, if you believe in
him. But I will not stand any longer upon this Doctrine.

I had now thought to have gone on, with what is spoken concerning Jesus
Christ, according to the first proposal of a method. But it may happily be as
well, if not better to many understandings to take things as they lie in the
Text, and therefore I shall so do.

Then shall the Kingdom of Heaven be likened to ten virgins, Use 1.
which took their Lamps and went forth to meet the Bridegroom.

For the Adverb of Time, Then I shall happily speak somewhat afterward. The
Kingdom of Heaven, that is to say, the visible Church I might in^ist upon it
and show you, that the Church visible is a Kingdom, and that Christ is the head
of this Church, the King of the Saints, and not only rules the Saints which
really believe, by his word and spirit which abide, and dwell in them: but also
he rules his Church visible by his word and spirit, and Ordinances, all the
Administrations of the Kingdom. But that Kingdom has been lately spoken to by
a brother, therefore I will wave that.

I might also speak something to the heavenliness of the Kingdom the Kingdom of
Heaven, and show you how it is heavenly in its Original in divine Laws,
Institutions, and many other ways; But you had it held forth largely, by a
better hand; therefore I will not trouble you again with these things so soon.

It shall be likened to ten virgins. There is another Note which flows
clearly (I think) from the words, and that is this.

The visible Church for the matter, is made up of visible Saints: Doct.
that this is so, will appear from the very Text it self. First, It shall be
compared to ten virgins, he says not to a mixed multitude, or to 10 women,
five whereof are virgins, and 5 harlots or strumpets, but to 10 virgins, and
what that word does import, I believe you remember since the words were opened
to you, such are 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9.
turned from Idols to the living God, as he speaks of the conversion of the
Thessalonians, according to the judgment of Charity, for else so far as a
professed subjection to Jesus Christ, and renouncing 2* Pet. 2. ^0.
them reaches, he spoke according to a judgment of verity, for that they did
profess, and so escaping the pollutions of the world, forsaking gross and loose
courses, and professedly subject themselves to the rule of the government of
Jesus Christ. To such the Church visible is here compared, and the most the
Lord speaks of his relation to his people, it is after the manner of men, under
such similitudes as we can conceive of, and as we may be led by, as by a clew
into the understanding of the deep mysteries of faith and salvation.

But if any will think or say this is not a sure bottom to build such a truth,
or point upon: because the virgins, here are not considered as virgins; but as
persons accompanying the Bride, going forth to meet the Bridegroom: I shall
first say,

That as they are not only considered as virgins, so neither is the
consideration of their virginity to be waved, for as in the similitude usually,
they were those virgins which did accompany the Bride, so I suppose in the
Apodosis now of the comparison, we are to look for somewhat which may answer
that virginity, And you find it in Scripture to be answered by those things I
have proposed, that is to say, their forsaking Idolatry, turning to the true
God, and their renouncing their former profane conversation. And then
secondly, I say this is not the only bottom in the Text, whereupon it is
builded.

For in the second place besides that they are called Virgins, or compared to
virgins, they are also said to take their Lamps, and surely if we must expound
what is meant by the Lamps: we can understand and nothing less by it then a
visibility of Saintship. But if this will not carry it neither, methinketh the

Third should be undeniable, they went forth to meet the Bridegroom, that is
to say, they went forth from home, and forlook their fathers house and mothers
they set upon their journey heavenward, Zion-ward to meet Jesus Christ who is
the Bridegroom, who will ere long come to take the Bride unto himself. There
are many Isa. 35. 8. Izek. 44. 9.
Scriptures will speak fully to the proof of this. Some prophesies there are,
as that in the Prophet Isaiah; there he speaks of a highway shall be cast up,
and the unclean shall not pass over it; Again none uncircumcised in heart or
flesh shall enter into his Sanctuary; this applied, not only to the times of
their returning from Babylon, but to the Gospel Times; What can it speak less
then this Brethren? that no visible, unclean creature, shall ever enter into
the Church of Christ? It should consist of visible Saints, This is plain by the
tares and the wheat, which, while in the blade are are so like, they hardly
discernable in those Countries as Jerome says, And so by the Apostles,
wherefore else do they call them holy to the Saints which are at Corinth, at
Ephesus, etc, but either Mat. 13. 25.
they were all such visibly, and in the judgment of charity, or else ought to
have been such? Mistake not, I say, not that none should be a member of a
Church, but he that is a real Saint and shall be saved, for then there could be
no Church wherein we could walk or administer, or receive any ordinance de
fide, because we know not who are such, nor cannot know, as I conceive, nor
have any rule to make an infallible judgment of any man, but only probably to
conclude concerning the state and conditions of men, that which is invisible to
us, it is true, its visible to God and that which is visible to him, is
invisible to us. But visible Saints surely they ought to be.

Now for the further opening of this, what I mean by visible Saints, and
Saint-ship, I shall endeavor to lay it down in these particulars, as plainly
as I can to your understandings.

First, Then it is requisite to Saint-ship, that there be a separation to God
from the world; that is holiness whether in things or in persons when they are
separated to God for any special use Acts 10. 14. and 15.
of his, they are called holy, Common and unclean, are convertible terms, as
you have in it in the Acts; and as appears by the sanctifying of the Vineyards
and Orchards; when the Lord had had the first fruits of them, then they
themselves, and others had the free use of them; the word in the original is
they polluted, or Deuteronomy. 20. 6. Lev. 19. 23.
profaned them, the common use of them is distinguished thereby from the holy
use whereby they were separated before from them to the Lord: whether persons
separated to themselves to the Lord; acti agimus; the Lord turns them and they
are turned; or whether they be altogether passive (as in the first work of God
we all are) if it be a separation to God; this is a Holiness, a Saint-ship; he
writes to the Saints in the Church in such a place, such as he has espoused
to Christ, they were set apart to him: so the Congregation of Israel are said
to be a holy people to Exodus 19 5. Numb 24 9. John 15 19.
the Lord their God, because God had separated them to himself above all other
people, this is so notably known, that it were to waste time to prove it. So I
have called you out of the world says our Savior, It is equivalent to that of
the Apostle, called to be Saints, or Saints by calling. But if this first be
defective and reach not happily every scruple that may arise concerning this.
Suspend your judgments until you hear the rest which will help to clear it.

2, The means of this separation and holiness to God, it is a Covenant of grace,
it is true there were many things separated to Which Covenant is the Gospel
preached.
God among the Jews by a Ceremonial institution, those Carnal ordinances and
commandments as the Apostle calls them, and from among them some persons were
more specially separated to God as His in a more near special manner for that
service he had appointed them to, so the firstborn you know were separated to
God from among all the children of Israel, they were holy to him, not as if
they were really more sanctified then the rest, but separated to a nearer
service and use, and so the Levites instead of them afterward, and the Priests
they were separated in a special manner to minister before the Lord, wherefore
Aaron is called the Psalm. 116. 6.
Saint of the Lord, not as if there were not men as holy as he, as Moses, and
Caleb, and Joshua but he was specially separated to that service of drawing
near to God, and this is by a kind of Covenant, the Covenant of the Priesthood,
so Nehemiah in his imprecation Neh. 13. 29. Numb. 25. 13.
against those Priests which had married strange wives. Manasseh the brother of
Jadduah, the son of Abjada, the son of Elishib Married, the son in Law of
Sanballat, Remember thou, O my God (says he) because they have defiled the
Priesthood and Ezekiel 16. 8. Numb. 24. 9. Amos 3. 2.
the Covenant of the Priesthood, which Covenant you have in that of Numbers, he
shall have it, that is to say the Priesthood, and his seed after him, even-the
Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood. But this is not that separation we speak
of, but that Covenant whereby God takes a people to be his, a peculiar people
to himself which he does by Covenant, he enters into Covenant with them, and
they become His separated to him. And therefore Israel was separated from all
the Nations round about by virtue of this Covenant, and made to dwell alone,
you only, have I known says the Lord, and abundance of such expressions there
are:

3. Then as here is a twofold being in Covenant with God, so there is a twofold
separation to God and a twofold Saint-ship, First that which is invisible and
saving, When the Lord gives to poor souls really to embrace Jesus Christ in
the Covenant of grace that 1 John. 5. 6. Levit. 14. 5.
makes good the absolute part of the Covenant to them, the Lord Jesus the
great undertaker, both on his fathers part and on our part those are such as
are sprinkled with the blood of the Covenant, from all their guilt, and the
water mixed with the blood, as Christ came by water and blood, so they are
cleansed from all their uncleanesses, else no entering into heaven. Nothing that
defiles comes thither, Now that such as these are Saints, can be no question,
this is Gods setting apart him that is Godly for himself, Psalm. 4. 3. (...) or
as some read wonderfully set apart, him that is Godly for himself, for there is
no such wonder, or mystery in the world as this; now these are the Saints
indeed, that already have things which accompany their own salvation, But
secondly, there are others that are only externally and visibly in Covenant,
that is to say, they are so far interested in the Covenant of grace as that
thereby they are taken by the Lord to belong to his family, his household, to
partake of the privileges thereof, to share in his provision for his family;
the fat things of his house, in his Protection in a special manner, and his
guidance, yea and the life eternal also is conditionally promised to them, if
they believe and repent, if they will but consent, and close with Jesus Christ,
the Mediator of that Covenant. Thus every professor, though but formal, is
separated in a sort co-incident, for those that are really and invisibly
separated to God, they are visibly so also but not vice versa universally. So
grace is distinguished into grace freely given, and grace which makes
acceptable, which are partly co-incident, for all grace which makes
acceptable: for common gifts and graces are freely given, so it is here. Now
those are they (brethren) that I here intend, whether grown persons which
profess this Covenant, or infants of such, who are within the compass of the
Covenant for this purpose, whom I understand by visible Saints, or persons
visibly holy, or visibly separated or set apart to God, that is to say such
persons concerning whom we have Scripture grounds to Judge according to Charity
and to hope that they are Gods, because Deuteronomy. 29.
separated to him, by virtue of his Covenant.

That they are thus holy, It is plain from many Scriptures. Paul in his
Epistles to the visible Churches of Corinthians; Galatians, Ephesians, and the
rest, to the Saints at such a place, Saints by casting, Saints by a visible
separation to God from the world; otherwise we cannot believe, but there were
many of them that were never really sanctified. And so, that Children of such
are Saints in such a sense, mind but that one place, Else were your Children
unclean, but now they are holy. Not Legitimate, for then the Apostle speaks not
truth: for they are lawfully begotten, (...) Cor 7. 14.
though the father and mother, be not sanctified one to another, as if both be
unbelievers. Nor yet holy to appearance, that is to say, they might have an
holy use of them; for I find not holy taken alone, without respect to the
person to whom they are said to be holy. As for instance, To the believer all
things are pure; to say all things are pure, without meationing the person to
whom they are so, is not the Scripture-manner of expression; and since it is so
many hundred times taken alone, not in connection, sometimes with respect to God
expressly for persons so separated to him, why we should not so understand it
here, for my part I see not. For Application of this,

First, Then they are too blame surely Brethren: If the visible Church do
consist of visible Saints, visibly separated Use 1.
to God, that is to say, so as there is ground for us to believe and hope well
of their eternal state, I say they are too blame, that so carry the affairs of
the Church of Christ wherein* they are, as to make no difference between the
precious and the vile, no difference between the Church and the world, between
the Sheep of Christ, and dogs and swine. Is it nothing to have the body and
blood of Jesus Christ openly prostituted to such as though indeed they have the
name of Christians, yet their lives, to every one that knows them, deny that
they have any thing to do with Christ; No purging out the old Leven, and
therefore no likelihood to be a new lump, O that we (...) Cor. 5. 7.
were sensible what a guilt is contracted every where by this means! Alas! Let
the people of God take the greatest pains with their hearts to draw near to
such an ordinance as the Lords Supper, and they shall have cause to pray with
Nehemiah, The Lord spare us according to the multitude of tender mercies. And
with Hezekiah, The Lord be merciful to every one that has Neh. 13. 22. 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. and 19.
prepared his heart to seek the Lord, though he be not prepared according to
the preparation of the Sanctuary; but when without any care, it shall be
promiscuously given to Drunkards, Swearers, openly profane wicked wretches to
the bane of their souls, to the provoking God to bring* wasting judgments upon
the place and people where such things are done. Surely it is time to look
about us, O! that we (who can do no more but mourn for these things) had such a
sense of the dishonor of the Lord Jesus, and abuse of his love and grace upon
our hearts, as to mourn! And O that such of us as have power in our hands to
command a Reformation in this kind, the Lord would persuade the heart, that
there is such a power! Hezekiah and J^siah not only commanded the true worship
to be set up, and turned the people from their Idols to the trne God, but they
commanded the purifying the Temple, a type of the Church of Christ, and
purifying of the Priests and People, that they should not pollute the
Ordinances of God, And this example of theirs is commended, and surely it was
done as they were types of Christ, except they were types of Christ as they
were Magistrates, and if so, it would follow we should have no Magistrates at
all; For Christ the substance being come the thing typified, what should we do
with the shadows any more.

2. Then on the other hand, they are to be blamed also, who are stricter then
the Lord Jesus would have them, in their admissions to Christ's fellowship and
communion; All visible Saints he would have admitted to communion and
fellowship with his people in their several societies; that is to say, they
seeking to join themselves to them. Now here indeed there is a difference of
apprehensions, and I purpose not to enter into disquisition of such things at
this time and in this place; Men's charity may do something indeed to moderate
them, but its not that which is to be the judge, but the Scriptures; what rules
are there laid down according to which we ought to own persons, as belonging to
Christ his visible kingdom, that is to say such as profess and contradict not
their profession. But surely it is blameworthy, if that upon niceties and
trifles in comparison we shall dis-own such as truly fear the Lord, so far as
we can judge of them. And truly Brethren, I desire to speak it with a spirit of
tenderness to them, they are injurious in this respect, who do deny Infants of
Believers any room in the bosom of the Church: for they are holy, they are
external Saints, and separated to God, and it is apparent, that once they were
members of the Church of Christ, and by virtue of a Covenant of grace, I will
be thy God and the God of thy seed, which he that denies any more to be
comprehended in then a temporal blessing, when God says he will be their God;
I would pity them, and pray for them that they might come to themselves again:
for then sure they would judge otherwise. Now if they were such, once members
of that Church with which we are one now: for so says the Apostle plainly, the
Gentiles are made one Ephesians. 2. 14.
with the Commonwealth of Israel, we are graffed in among the branches; how
comes it to pass, they should be all cast off, and cut off from the Olive, and
not a syllable of it mentioning any such thing in Scriptures, no account given
to the world of it, and that it should be in such a time, when the fullness of
grace was revealed in Jesus Christ: for grace came by him, and now there should
be less grace come by him, and narrower privileges to the Church, will hardly
be understood, I think.

The third Doctrinal from the words, will be this; In the visible Doctrine 3.
Church there are some good, some bad: Ordinarily they were not all wise
virgins that the kingdom of heaven is compared to, but five wise, five foolish:
All within the visible Church are not wise to salvation, Five of them were
wise, five were foolish. The proportion of the wise to the foolish, five to
five, in the Parable, is not concluding that there are as many good as bad in
the Church: there may possibly be a visible Church where there are none bad,
but I doubt there is none such found: there were but twelve Disciples, and one
was a Devil, and all the parables whereour Savior holds out the nature and
state of the visible Church to us, is, we find there is a mixture: So in the
Parable of the Sower, there are four sorts of ground to which the kingdom Mat.
3. 19.
of heaven is compared, and but one of them brought forth fruit to perfection;
the stony Ground it was quickly scorched; from the sandy ground springs up
quickly, and withers as soon; the thorny ground holds out longer, and endures
happily the scorching of the Sun, the Persecution, and yet is choakt, when all
is done. And so the Parable of the tares sown in the field, they grow up Ve.
24. and 25.
with the Corn, and it seems by the ancient report even, Jerome, are so like
it while in the blade, that they can be hardly discerned from it; but there
they grow, and partake of the juice of the earth, and fatness of the soil, and
are green and flourish, and yet at last are singled out for fire. And so the
Barn-floor, there is wheat, and there is Chaff lying together, until he whose
fan is in his hand shall thoroughly purge it, and then the separation being
made, Mat 3. 12. Mat. 23. 47. Romans 9. 6.
Woe to the Chaff, but at present, etc. And so the draw-net, though it gather
together somewhat naught which is to be cast away, yet while under water, it is
hidden. And so the Apostle, All are not Israel that are of Israel: Some are
Israel that are of Israel, but all are not: Some are of Israel, though they be
not the Israel of God, that shall inherit the heavenly Canaan. I hope it is
needless to waste more time in heaping up of Scriptures to make it good.

The ground may be because the Church here below, the visible Reason*
Church which admits of members, has not an infallible spirit to discern
the deep hypocrisy that is in men's hearts: or if they had, do I think they
were to use it, but serve Gods holy ends in following Christ his example, who
suffered a Devil, though John 6. 70.
a white one, he was indeed in the likeness of an Angel of light, yet he did
suffer him in his family until it broke out into scandal! There is much in this
one reason, 1. What deep hypocrisy may lurk in the hearts of men, under a
plausible profession: so that men can suspect nothing many times, as you see
Ananias and Saphira, Simon Acts 5. 8.
Magus and others: Judas carried it so cunningly, and seemed so zealous and
full of charity: O why was this waste, etc. when the Spirit of Christ went with
his spirit, and saw his fetches Ioh. 11. 6.
and deep ends, he said it because he had the bag, and was a thief, the more he
had to row in, the more bold he might make with it, and it would the less be
mist, but his paint was so exact, and so near the life, that the Disciples took
him to be as real as themselves any of them, rather suspecting themselves then
him, his heart was too deep, for them to fathom, Because 2. They had not such
an infallible spirit given, nor have any of the Churches now such a spirit
given whereby to know the secrets of men's heart, nor do I find that the
Apostles had such a spirit given them, now and then indeed they had some secret
things and actions revealed to them, but not that incommunicable property of
God to search the heart, I the Lord search the heart and try the reins. Peter
indeed, had that private action and falsehood of Ananias revealed Acts 5.
to him, and from thence he concluded, Satan had filled his heart in that he
lied against the Holy ghost: but what is this to the searching of the heart?
and this that was revealed, was but for an act now and then, in Acts 10. He
knew not that there were men sent for him from Cornelius, until the Spirit of
God told him, and revealed it to him: so that he had not that knowledge which
he had of secret things, not made known in an ordinary way by sense, he had it
not habitually but by several acts; Or if they had such a spirit, which none
can prove, they did not act by it in admitting persons, for then such as those
would never have been admitted. Yea, 3. If the Church had such a spirit, it is
very likely she were not to act by it in admission: For our Savior himself
though he knew whom he ^ad chosen, and knew from the beginning who should
betray him, yet he did admit him that he knew would prove a Devil; and
therefore he acted therein according to his humanity, and to leave us a
pattern, that though we may suspect happily such or such a person, and not
savor them according to that discerning which God has given us of the spirits
of men, yet if not scandalous not to reject them, making such a profession of
Christ as according to charity and Scripture-rules we ought to hope well of.
And methinks there is somewhat in that Parable of the tares, though while in
the blade they were scarce discernable from the wheat, yet it seems by the
Parable, that now they were come to such a growth, as they did discern them,
therefore came with that Question, whether they should pluck them up, and yet
he would not have if so: they were not thorns and thistles, and such as would
altogether choke the Corn, though they might hinder it: if only Hypocrites
though discovered, if they can be discovered without profaneness and scandal,
they are not to be plucked up from among the good Corn, and hence it is that
there are good and bad in the visible Church though the bad seem to be good all
are Virgins, but all are not wise virgins.

For the Application of this, We may hence take notice of the great indulgence
of God, and the largeness of his grace, and the riches of his patience and
long-suffering to poor Creatures, in that he takes many as his own, within the
verge and comprehension of this his Covenant, that never really partake of the
saving benefits of the Covenant. So you know it was with Israel, though they
were as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant should be saved. All are not Israel
that are of Israel, that is true: and Romans 9. 27.
yet they are of Israel though they be not Israel, that is as true; Rom 9. 6.
Now that the Lord should admit of such to be of Israel, that never were nor
are like to be Israel, this is largeness of bounty. Alas! how many wild Olives
are graffed in among the branches Romans 11. 17.
which remain and partake of the fatness of the Olive, the privileges, and
ordinances, and gifts of God bestowed on his Church for edification, and yet
shall be cast out, as branches broken off dried and withered, shall be taken
away as barren, and unprofitable, Romans 11. 22.
and burn for ever; if thou continue not in this goodness thou shall be cut
off. It is not the manner of men to plant such in their vine yards as they know
will bring forth nothing but leaves, no fruits but sour, the grapes of Sodom,
and yet this the manner Deuteronomy. 32. 32. and 34.
of God to such as shall be cast out into utter darkness, yet should be
admitted to be the children of the kingdom.

2. That he owneth many as separated to himself in such a way before they come
to own him, and though they dwell under his shadow and shine, and in droppings,
and dew of heaven, yet a long time bring forth nothing, do nothing but abuse
his grace, and this riches of his goodness, and yet at last notwithstanding all
he should go on to separate them to a nearer holiness to himself, seize upon
their hearts, put another principle and seed into them, whereby they should be
fruitful for the time to come. Ordinary experience teaches us this, how many
years many a poor formal Professor has walked under the means of grace and
passed for a Saint, and yet has been in the gall of bitterness: but the Lord
out of his infinite mercy and rich grace has healed him afterward; It is no
question it is the case of some, that that very grace which they have so long
hypocritically pretended to and abused, was that at last which seized upon them.

Why but you will say this is no privilege nor mercy to be members of Christ
his visible Church, if we therein enjoy not Christ, and for our Children to be
owned as those separated to Christ, and yet though Children of the kingdom, and
be cast out, for none Mat. 8. 12.
are like to sink so low into hell as those which are cast out of the kingdom,
such as so often abuse mercies and Gospel Grace tendered to them?

I answer, It is true, the name of the Lord our God is great and Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
fearful, as in that place of Deuteronomy, And the nearer a people have been
drawn to Christ within the compass of this Covenant of Grace, and afterward
perish, the deeper will they s^nk: those will burn with a witness, that are cut
off from the Vine. the visible Church of the Olive, as unprofitable, dead and
barren branches: Yet it is a privilege, and a great act of grace to be of the
Olive, Is it nothing to be one of Gods household or family, to be under his
provision, his protection, and guidance in a special manner, to be in the state
of separation to God of old; and sealed up therein to God by Circumcision? It
was profitable much every way the Apostle said. Yea I will say more, That the
greater force a thing has to aggravate the condemnation of poor Creatures, the
greater the mercy is. Shall we say the Preaching of the Gospel is not a mercy?
because this is the condemnation indeed, that light is come into the world.
Ioh. 3 19.


The second use may be to help the people of God over a stumbling Use 2.
block, which may be an offense to them happily in some Churches of Christ:
either such as themselves walk with, or others, It may be there are some, in
such or such a Church, whose spirits thou can not savor, thou have them in
suspicion, and therefore thou can not be free to have fellowship with them;
Or if thou be in Fellowship, thou art ready to withdraw upon such an account:
First, be sure to take heed of making breaches in thy love: It thinks no
evil, hops all things that are hopeable, And do thou know how much smoke
there may be with some fire: how much corruption and ashes there may be, and
yet some fire? Therefore take heed of judging the state and Condition of men,
where they are not in the course of their lives profane and scandalous. 2.
Much more take heed of that dividing and separating upon such an occasion as
this: for did not our Savior walk with his disciples, though he knew Judas a
devil, and doubtless it was more a grief to him, then it can be to us, the less
holiness, the less evil will grieve, and a man is more tender; there must needs
be all tenderness where there is no sin to harden it. O then let us arm our
selves with the same mind. There were great abuses in the Church of Corinth
and yet he stirs not them up to division, but love rather.

Why but you will say when they become scandalous, what should we do then? Why
then the Church ought to deal with them judiciously, to enquire into them,
admonish them, censure and cast them out, if the other preparative means, with
waiting upon God in 1 Cor. 5. 11.
them will not do it, That is clear in the incestuous person, and again, If any
that is called a brother be a drunkard or a rayler, etc. with such a one no not
to eat, it is clear, whether they might so withdraw from him, before the Church
had censured him under trial, I think not, for then, he was to be as a heathen,
in respect of communion, and yet not accounted an enemy, but esteemed as a
brother, now, truly if the Church be so overrun with this hem(...)k, for want
of weeding like the slothful man's vineyard overgrown with thorns and thistles.
Through the sloth of the Church and officers, the ordinance of excommunication
so neglected, that now they are grown so corrupt, as there is no way lef^
according to the rule of Christ to purge them; what other means is left in such
a case but withdrawing, I do not understand.

3. It may teach us notwithstanding the sad condition of such Use 3.
as continuing members of the visible Church, yet remain in an unregenerate
state, happily we all look upon our selves to be members of the Church of
Christ; but have we this grace in our hearts, this oil in our Lamps, we have a
name and profession, but can we say that Christ is in us the hope of glory? If
not brethren, our Man. 23. 27.
condition is sad* indeed we are a people that happily the world can lay
nothing to our charge, we may put the best side outward like painted
sepulchers, but what is within? what is within? but rottenness remember, that,
though men cannot judge your hearts, but hope the best of you brethren, yet
there is one which searches the heart, and judges the heart, and of you
according to your hearts, though his Disciples cannot find out Judas, yet our
Savior would find him Rev. 15. and 2. 18.
out at last, h^s eyes are like a flaming fire. Let your hypocrisy be as deep
as it may, it shall not be hid from the light, nor from the scorching heat
thereof

Yea consider seriously brethren, that those things you glory most in, and
pillar up your selves with, they will be your ruin if you remain in this
condition, and that is the Ordinances, you have the Covenant preached, and
sealed to you, from time to time, and communion with the Saints, you think this
is enough, you cannot Mat. 8. 31.
miscarry, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, you trust in lying
words, for they will deceive you, may you not be children of the Kingdom, and
yet cast out, yet, will not this be the thing which will sink you, that you
have been children of the kingdom, and yet fall short of the kingdom. You come
to the feast, for the^e is a wedding feast, the Gospel and the Ordinances are,
whereof, see page 106. which you are to understand all the administrations Isa
25.
of the grace in the Kingdom, the Gospel Ordinances this is the feast of fat
things, the fat things of heaven, you may be admitted to this feast, to all the
Ordinances, not a dish upon the table, but you may eat of it, But alas!
brethren, if you be yet in the gall of bitter^^ss, though you go for sweet
Christians, all turns to gall and poison to your souls. It is impossible for
such a man or such a woman, ever to come worthily to partake of the Ordinances,
a child of God has much ado with his heart to bring it into frame, to get the
spirit fixed, to sing and give praise, to prepare his heart, and much pains
many times, and the work done but in a little part yet there is mercy to
accept, where we do our best, there is habitual Psalm. 57. 7.
preparation, there are the graces of the spirit, and there is Christ put on by
faith for righteousness and holiness, but the graces are not so lovely, so
stirred up, and much ado, to blow away the ashes, and they fly about our ears
sometimes, that we even lose our selves in the work. But yet God will be
merciful, and cover our shortness if we reach but this, the sense of our
unpreparation, and be ^u^bled for it. But now thou that art a hypocrite, and an
unregenerate man, 2 Cor. 2. 16.
thou can never be prepared to come to hear, to receive the Supper, and so
they prove the savor of death to death, thou have no promise thou can build
upon, but that they will be thy bane, Alas poor soul! how many times have thou
drunk the cup of the Lord, and it has been a cup of deadly wine to thy soul,
thou have eaten and drunken thy judgment and condemnation so often, that thou
art even stupifyed and past feeling it is to be feared, 1 Cor. 11 31.
it not only argues a desperately hard heart to come and look upon Christ
crucified, held out in those Ordinances, as our meat and drink to nourish us,
and not to relent; but it hardens us so much the more. Thou may yet come often
ento receive the Supper of the Lord, but as often as thou do it, thou do
but more deeply poison and fill thy soul. O! Brethren, that the Lord would let
us see this day whether this be our condition, and we have rotten hearts
covered over with a glorious profession, that we might not dare to draw near,
for we cannot have a Wedding Garment upon us brethren: if we have not the
habits of grace, if we have not Christ for righteousness and holiness, how can
we act that grace which we have not? Thou art fit for any thing else, but for
the worship of God, thou art fit for thine own occasions, and fit to serve the
Devil, to be at his beck, but not to worship God in those Ordinances, remember,
remember brethren, though you may have somewhat now to answer us, when we
preach this word, and to answer your own consciences, and can make a shift to
silence them when they tell you though you have a profession and name, and are
reckoned among the Saints, yet you never were born again, never did put on
Christ indeed, you cannot have a wedding garment, though you may brethren
deceive your selves and us, and take this and that, for a wedding garment, when
the Lord Jesus shall come, and ask you how come thou in hither without a
wedding garment, Mat. 20. 12, 13.
thou had not a dram of grace, thou never put me on for righteousness in
believing, how came thou hither, how durst thou be so bold as to draw nigh to
my table, to meddle with my precious blood and body broken for sinners, when
thou had not a wedding garment on: you shall then be speechless, it shall
be so evident, O take him bind him hand and foot, hang these Ordinances and
privileges which he has so long abused, my blood and body which he has eaten
and drunk that is to say Sacramentally, the signs of them, as those in 1 Cor.
10. they did all eat the same spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4.
etc. and yet most of them perished, sink him, sink him, he has trampled my
blood under his foot, counted it an unholy thing, else he would never have
cared to have come with an unholy heart to it, therefore now, I will trample
his soul in my fury unto the lowermost hell, O! how this will sharpen the teeth
of the gnawing worm, to eternity; O how this will inrage the flames of those
everlasting burnings; therefore consider this your sad condition, let it be a
terrible word to you, the Lord give you hearts to tremble at it.

And in the last place, Let us take heed how we rest and lean upon a profession
and a name. Methinks there needs no more Arguments to move us, then what has
been spoken already; What folly is it for a man to hang his weight upon that
which he is told will break, and then he falls into an irrecoverable gulf, O!
that we had that always sounding in our ears! in the seventh of Mat. Lord, Lord,
open to us, we have done this and that, heard thee preach, done wonderful
works; they were visible Saints surely at least, and yet he calls them workers
of iniquity, which they might ver, 22.
do in secret acts with pretenses for God, but intending themselves. What if
Simon Magus had had that power to give the gift of the Holy Ghost, and had done
it, and replenished his purse by it, for likely he that would have bought it,
would have been as ready to have sold it again; he might have past for a Saint,
but what would his end have been? O Brethren consider your latter end, the Lord
teach you that one point of wisdom, that so in time (...) may flee from that
wrath to come. But so much for this Doctrine also.

Verse 3, and 4. And they that were foolish, took their Lamps, and took no oil
with them. But the wise took oil in their vessels with their Lamps.
WE may read a wise man or a fool in his actions, and so here, the foolish took
no oil with their Lamps, and what more foolish then that? For the opening of
the words, I shall not need to say much: by the Lamps I understand here a
profession of Jesus Christ, a name, a show, the Apostle Phil. 2. 15. John 5.
35. John 12. 6. Isa. 50. 10.
speaks of the Saints as light-bearers, they should be burning and shining
lights, as John was. Light there is, and sometimes appearing heat, even in
formal professors, as you see in the case of John, how zealous for God. And
Judas, a man would have thought him zealous, when he said, Why is this waste,
but it is like the light of the glowworm, touch it, and it has neither light
nor heat, they are indeed sparks of our own kindling, as it is in that place of
Isaiah, the sparks there may be the action of Devotion, and Duty, which may be
elicited, or educed by the help of nature, and of education, and custom; the
conscience being enlightened by the Law of God in some measure and self-love,
working somewhat in men, will put them on to do something to quiet their
Consciences; but alas these sparks quickly go out, and the Lamp is put out in
obscure darkness; There may be also somewhat of Common-grace, some enlightening
of the mind, and some kind of affection, as the second ground, received Mark
6. (...). Act^ 2. 41. Ez(...). 33. 3(...) and 32.
the word gladly, and Herod heard John gladly, but a great difference between
these, and the Disciples who receiveed the word gladly, the one rejoiced
happily in that which in the word is suitable to a carnal appetite, as the
Eloquence, as those in the Prophet thou art to them as one that plays on an
Instrument, but the other rejoiced in that of Christ which is therein found. So
the Be, is pleased with the Flower, the Sheep with the Blade, the Bird with
the Seed, and the Swine with the Root.

But new for the oil in the vessels, what is that? The foolish took no oil in
their vessels with their lamps. By this I understand brethren, 1. Ioh. 2. 20.
the oil of the Spirit, ye have received an anointing, the Spirit of grace, and
the grace of the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit dwelling in us; there is a Cruse
opened, that will never be drawn dry, like the Fountain of waters, or Rivers
springing up with eternal Ioh. 4. 14.
life, it never sails. By this then I understand the true saving work of grace
in the heart; a receiving of the Spirit of grace, the Spirit of Christ by faith
as the Apostle speaks, by the hearing of faith, by the Gospel, the word of
faith, which was blessed, Gal. 3. 12.
to the working of says, in your souls. Now this spirit works faith, and that
works by love, and that never fails, but is perfected in heaven, so humility,
self-denial, and all those graces. And not only the graces of the spirit, but
1 Cor. 13. 8.
this Spirit of grace dwelling in the Saints, which continually supplyeth their
wants, so that the Lamp shall not go out forwant of oil.

From the words thus understood, this note will arise. Doct. 4.


He that contents himself with a profession of Christ, without the real saving
work of grace upon his heart, is a fool; but he that looks to the main thing,
the getting grace in his heart, as well as making a show before men, is a wise
man. Profession without the enjoyment of the Spirit of grace, is but folly, I
will put them both together, that contraries may the better illustrate one
another, juxta se posita, and if either of them be proved, both of them are
proved; for they will infer each other, by the rule of contraries. Nothing is
more ordinary in Scripture, then to call sinners fools, sinners of all sorts
are fools, committing wickedness, is committing folly in Israel, but no fool to
the wise fool, wise in his own conceit, there is more hope of a fool then of
such a man, and who are usually more wise in their own conceits, then formal
professors are? he that hides hatred with lying lips is a fool, he that hides
hatred Prove. 26. 12.
to God, a rotten heart with lying lips, whereby he professes much Prove. 10.
18.
love to him, and carries a fair show, he is a fool in grain. If we would know
where wisdom begins, or what the sum of wisdom is, the wisest of men shall
tell you, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, or the sum of
wisdom, some read it so. And Prove. 9, 10. Psalm 111. 10.
so Job who was no child in Christianity, to man he says; to fear the Lord
that is wisdom, and to depart from evil that is understanding: Mark you,
Whatever men place wisdom in, or folly in, this is the very sum of wisdom to
fear God, fear is put for all grace, a manfearing God, and eschewing evil, was
the highest character, Job 28. 28.
the Lord gave of Job. It is indeed the root of all that good we do, and evil
we avoid; and I will and but one Scripture, in the ^hiddenarts, thou shall make
me to know wisdom, it is one thing to be wise headed, and tongued, and another
to be wise hearted; Psalm. 51. 6.
and therefore in Scripture nothing more ordinary then to set forth wisdom that
is true indeed by the heart, God himself is said to be wise of heart. Foolish
creatures, Ephesians. a silly Dove, without a Hos. 7. 11.
heart. They may have head enough, notion enough, flashing light, appearing to
others enough, but they are without a heart, they have not the great work
there, a new head, and an old heart, a full head and an empty heart, a light
and burning profession, and a dark dead and cold heart, he that takes up in
such a condition is a fool, an errant fool.

For the further clearing of this, I shall enquire a little wherein the nature
of wisdom and folly lies, and then show you how it is Applicable in truth unto
this profession of Christ, without the possession of him.

Wisdom then I conceive may consist of these three generals, 1. In the
obtaining what we want, the good we want; and therefore come short of happiness,
because we want it. 2. In the keeping the good we have, when once we have it:
And 3. In avoiding the evil we fear, which would render us miserable, in these
three things I take it, wisdom consists.

Now to speak a little to each of these, and see how we may prove the formal
professor by his defect, and falling short in each them, in all of them; and
for the first, the obtaining of the good we want to make us happy, Alas you
know brethren, we are all fallen short of the glory of God, and by nature are
without him, and without Christ in the world, and have not the things which
Rom, 3. 23*
accompany salvation, neither, he then is a wise man in general (...) who
knows those principles, and ends which are universally necessary to a man's
good, his chiefest, and most general good. So that there are, I conceive, three
things in this respect under this head, and so proportionably under the other,
which go to the completing of wisdom.

First there must be a knowledge of the end, and a propounding of this end to a
man's self, an end you know is nothing, but that which is good: either really
so, or appearingly so; for that is the object of the Will goodness, as truth is
the object of the Mind, and understanding, a man cannot appetere malum, as it
is malum, and be a man, to delight in evil as it is evil, is diab^lical, to
delight in s^n or folly as it is pleasant, as it is suitable to the corrupt
nature, to the soul, the Will crooked and deprayed, this is humane, because
though a man do thus p^opose s^n as his and, yet not as it evil, but as it is
good, to his corrupt judgment and Will, that is to say suitable, and
convenient to him. An so sor suffering, there is no man living can prevail with
himself, to be willing to be miserable, they would be happy. Well then it is
good which is the end, either real or apparent. But now here, in this spiritual
wisdom, and folly, we must understand his end suitable, that is to say,
understand it of the most supreme principle and ultimate 1 Eccles. *1. 15.
good, and that is God, for what good else is there, that can indeed make the
soul happy, but God in Christ; for that good which must make blessed, it must
be commensurate to the soul, so as to be able to fall, and satisfy it, else
the^e will be somewhat wanting still, and alas for all other goods below God,
it may be said, that which is wanting cannot be numbered. Now there are two
things considerable in the soul of a man, especially to which there must be an
answerableness in the end, which is to be followed unto enjoyment, else the
soul cannot be happy.

The first is the vast capacity and comprehension of the soul, to which there
must be an answerable fullness, in the object, and the end, else the soul cannot
rest upon it as its Center, and happiness, and this we may take notice of
especially in those two faculties of the Understanding and the Will, the
Affections, they are but as it were the several motions of the Will, a kind of
Appendix to it. Now to these two faculties, in the supreme and ultimate end
there must be an answerable ratio very and boni, great enough to fill or
satisfy the understanding or mind, that has for its object truth, and not one
truth, or another, but all truth, it is not satisfied with the partial
discoveries of truth, or here and there a little, but it would have all, now
the Lord is the highest, and the best in genera vari, he is truth itself, as
well as being it self, and other things are no further true, then they have
some proportion to him, which they also have from him, therefore the mind
having gotten such an Object as this to dwell upon, wherein it may be swallowed
up, and satisfied with truth, it has its perfection.

2. The will that has for its Object good, and it is not content with a
partial good, here and there a little, but it would receive all good, now the
Lord he is good, and there is none good but God, he is the supreme good, the
greatest good, and the last in genere boni, all goodness in the Creature
whether honor proportionable, or delightful, or pleasant good, alas what is
it? but a little reflection of his glory upon the Creature, a little spark of
his kindling, a little drop to the ocean, but this is but answerable to the
capacity, and comprehension of the soul.

Secondly, there is also the everlastingness of the soul; it lives for ever,
and therefore a short good though never so full, is not commensurate unto it,
there must be certitudo aeternae fruitionis, which as well as fruitio
incommutabilis boni to make up a blessedness lib. 11. cap. 13.
which is the end, the soul proposes to it self. So Aug. de Chro. for fuisse
selioem mi^erum. It is the depth of our misery, we are now cast down so low,
because we were once seated, raised so high in honor so near to God, and yet
if we might spend but a time in h^aven, and enjoy* God, and afterward forsake
that habitation, this world would be the ^ell of hels, unto such a soul, but
there is an everlastingness in the good itself we enjoy, and in our enjoyment
of that good We(...) this then is the great end, ^o know and to propound to a
man's self, to set as his (...) as his mark, is a part of wisdom, he that does
great things, takes much pains for poor ends is a fool, the end speaks a man a
wise man or a fool; as much as any thing* But

2. Then there are the means to be used for the attaining of that end, that is
the next thing. If a man have never so right an end, and yet know not what
means to use for that end, or use them not aright, he is a ^ool, not a wise
man. As now, a man would have health and he knows not, that physic will
avail him, it is all one to him, a cup of poison, or a purging potion is all
one to him, or if he have the means, and use them not, or not aright, and so in
any other thing whatsoever, I briefly wrapped up the other two in this place. Now
to this great end the enjoyment of God, the means what are they but more
immediately the closing with Jesus Christ by faith in his blood, for he is not
received but in Jesus Christ, nor to be enjoyed but in him and through him, Now
since we have lost the image and glory of God, it would not prove good to us to
enjoy him, if it were possible for us so to do, that is to say it would not be
suitable to us as we are corrupted, heaven would be hell to a wicked man, if he
could enter into that holy place a while. And therefore there Ephesians. 2* 12.
is a necessity, that we close with Jesus Christ that in him we may be brought
near, being reconciled through the blood of his cross and the enmity slain that
is in our hearts against God, and a new nature put upon us, the heart changed
and made conformable to Col. 3. 10.
God, that image, and likeness restored, which consisted in knowledge,
righteousness and true holiness, that now to enjoy God in the fullness and
holiness and joy, it is suitable to this new man wrought in us by Jesus Christ;
suitable to that spiritual Ephesians. 4. 24.
Christ which is founded in us, and so is good to us, therefore this is the
great means, I say the closing with Jesus Christ for righteousness, and
reconciliation and holiness, that heaven may be suitable unto us, that we may
also by him be changed, and made fit, and able to bear the weight of glory
which is there to be put upon us. More mediately and remotely: now the means of
grace, the Gospel and ordinances thereof, wherein God is revealed in Christ,
therein he is revealed for righteousness for holiness, he is preached therein
in the Covenant, and that sealed up to us in the other ordinances, And all the
means of grace are helpful for this end. Well, now before I go any further, Let
us see the wisdom and folly of a pretender, and a real Saint, that is a virgin
Romans 1. 17.
indeed.

1. Then for the end, though miserable man would be happy, yet we miss it in
the end, and if we miss the end, all our endeavors are nothing: Now a child of
God, his end is God, as he is Psalm. 73. 25.
a glorious God* and as he is a good God, and here is wisdom indeed, that is to
say, he aims at this, to glorine God, to exalt him, that he may be glorified
in him, as well knowing, that the glory of the Lord is that wherein his own
good, and salvation is wrapped up, for wherein are the riches of his glorious
grace manifested, but in the pardoning and subduing of iniquity? O for thy
names sake pardon mine iniquity, for it is great; for his names sake, Who is
like unto thee, a God pardoning iniquity transgression and sin. Psalm. 25. 11.
Mic. 7. 18. and 19.
And then the salvation of his soul, he is wise, that is wise to salvation,
that is wise for himself indeed in the main thing. You see a man wonderful
industrious, takes great pains, runs and rides, is very earnest, and what is
his end in this, to have a flea to catch a butterfly? You would judge this man
a sool, the end will recompense the laborious use of the means; Now a formal
professer, he will keep as much a do as another happily, be at as much pains in
duty, spend as many hours in private happily some may be of J^hu his stamp, and
strain as long as it will hold; but what is it for? Alas, they seek a poor
empty self, they would have a name, they would have their zeal for God seen,
they would have their ends satisfied, it is the way to flourish. What pains did
they take to follow Jesus Christ up and down, and all was for the loaves? a
poor end. Suppose the end be a little stopping the mouth of a clamarous
conscience for the present, a poor end. Is not this folly, to shoot so high and
aim so low? But happily it will not be so easy to convince hypocrites that
they miss it in the end, though for my part I think it is that which we
ordinarily miss it in; Ezekiel 7. 5. Hos. 10. 1.
did you at all feast to me says the Lord? or fast to me, did you not bring
forth fruit to your selves? which are infinitely too low; to be our own end,
for when we enjoy the most we can in our selves as our end, we grasp no-thing
but sin and emptiness, wind and misery to eternity,

2. Then for the means, which you see what they are, immediately Jesus Christ
closed with mediate, the ordinances wherein he is held out. Alas, herein they
do fearfully miss it, though they profess him, As will appear in many
particulars.

1. They do not choose the right means for the attaining the end wherein a
great part of their wisdom lies, this is life eternal to know Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent; this is the means and the way to it, and indeed a part of it,
the suburbs of heaven. Now alas brethren, there are so many things, which are
so like to Jesus Christ; and so many acts like to the embracing of him, that
they are deceived, and so they miss of the main means and fall short of the
end, simile and matter erroris. A man misseth his way and takes another way, lay
near it and was like it, and he runs and takes pains to come to the journeys
end, but alas it never will bring him thither, he is out of the way, Jesus
Christ is the way, as well as the life, now there are false Christ's which men
make to themselves; there is much bad like to good, and much error like to
truth, one man he thinks a drunken Christ will serve his turn; a covetuous
man, he thinks Christ and his secret lusts will stand together, though his
profession and open sinning will not stand together, he thinks he may have
Christ in his heart and sin regarded there, though he cannot have holiness in
his profession an appearance of it, an open profaneness there, as if sin would
better agree with Christ, then his profession. Some think they have a Christ
made up all of pardons, no matter for holiness at all, let them live as they
list, no matter for walking in him, yet he is so merciful, if they can but cry
have mercy it will do the deed, though they wallow in their uncleanness all
their lives, some they are on the other hand, that make to themselves a holy
Christ, not minding his pardoning mercy, O if they can but do this and that,
they walk uprightly with men, they serve God, none more constant at the
ordinances then they, private and public, and therefore surely Christ is
theirs; not remembering with Nehemiah, the Lord spare me according to thy great
mercy, or multitude of mercy, even when he had done so eminently for God. Alas,
brethren what pitiful mistakes are these? Many are ready to think, if they have
but now and then a little affections stirring at a Sermon, O sure they have
Christ, if they have but a little velleity sometimes, a wishing and woulding,
this must go for Christ, how prone are we to substitute any thing in the room
of Christ? Now a man that would live, and shall eat dirt or coals instead of
bread, you would think that man a fool; or a man N^h. 13. 22.
that would be rich, professes that is his end, and he bags up indeed, but
what is it? dung and dross, stones and trash, would you not count this man a
fool? this is the condition of every formal professor of Jesus Christ: they do
indeed fix upon something but it is trash; it or if any thing better, their
duties, their holiness it is trash, it is dung instead of Christ, this is the
first.

Now, for the secondary means, the means of getting Christ, which is the more
immediate means and way to his enjoyment of God, which is the happiness of the
Creature, herein indeed most ordinarily the folly does appear, and therefore I
shall here consider several particulars.

1. To use means to get any thing, and not seasonably is folly, to use them too
late, for a man that is deadly sick he will not be persuaded to take Physic
until he be past recovery, such a man is a fool that so long will lean to his
own understanding; and so for meat, a man that will fast so long until he
cannot eat at all, this is the very case in this place, you see they did not
ever neglect Eccles. 10. 1.
to get oil in their lamps in their vessels, they were very inquisitive, sought
it of the wise virgins, and went to buy it of them that sold, but alas it was
too late. Would you not count that man a fool, that has provisions to make for
his family the week following, Eccles. 3. 1, to the 6.
at the Market, and he goes, but it is when all is done, and shops shut up,
and there is no more place to buy any thing. So here, and so the Manna, if they
went to seek Manna upon the Seveath day there was none to be had, yea if daily
they went not to seek it in the morning, but staid until the Sun were hot,
there was none to be had, it was gone. there is a season for every thing the
wise man says: and every thing is beautiful in its season, he that gathers
in Summer is a wise man, says Solomon: he that makes Psalm. 10. 5.
hay while the Sun shines. It is a sad piece of folly, that a man should have
his grace and his Christ to get, when he should use them, when we come to dye,
and have five times as much need of Christ as in our lifetime for the most
part, that then we should be to get Christ, and have tri^led away the day of
grace in flourishes and shows, in taking of Christ, and had him not in our
hearts.

2. To have means for the getting of Christ, and never make use Prove. 17. 16.
of them; there is folly indeed; wherefore is there a prize in the hand of a
fool and he has no heart to it, he is a fool that has an opportunity to make
himself for ever and has no heart to it, to improve it, redeeming the time
says the Apostle; that is, to walk Ephesians. 5. 15, 16.
circumspectly not as fools, but as wise; what would many a poor Creature in
hell give, for such an opportunity of grace as we have? Yea if the Gospel were
preached to Tire, and Sidon they would have repented long ago, says our
Savior, but you have the opportunity in your hands, but you have no heart to
it at all, this is sad. To see a man feed upon husks, and dirt and so perish,
when he has no bread to eat, is a pitiful sight, but this is necessity not
folly, but here is bread to eat, that we might live, and yet we neglect to
gather it; or to eat it, content our selves with husks and trash is not tl is
folly, and this is the condition of every formal profess^r?

3. They rest in the means short of the end, and that is grievous folly, the
means of grace, whereby Christ is to be gotten, and Christ in us revealed to
grow, and increase, if we rest in these means, whether we have Christ yea or
no, it is great folly, what man is there that would so do. But there is more in
this, for this preferring, and prizing, and lifting them up above Christ will
be our condemnation, setting up any of them instead of Christ.

But enough of this, The Second thing, or point of wisdom is in keeping that
which we have, the good we have, that is a chief point of wisdom indeed,
Nonminor est virtus, do you not count him a fool that takes great pains to get
an estate, to get much, and is as lavish of it, takes no care to keep it, when
he has done lets one run away with one p^r^, another with another part, why
now here is the case, an hypocrite, a formal professor, a foolish Man. ^5. 19.
virgin has something, he has common grace, happily he has many duties and
services, but all these will be taken away from him; he cannot keep his
garments, nor does he take the course to keep them, for he that would keep
these things must look after somewl at more, the power of Christ within to
enable to improve these to his glory, else he that has not, from him shall be
taken, even that which he has, you have leaves of profession, these shall be
taken away. But the

Third thing is more considerable, and that indeed I think will prove
comprehensive of the two points, and of wisdom; and that is to avoid carefully
the evil which they fear, the greater the evil, the greater should be the fear
of it, if he be a wise man: Now the evil, which we will speak of, shall be the
Soul-Evil, which must needs be the worst corruption optimi est pessima, and evil
by how much the more destructive it is, by so much the more wisdom is requisite
to avoid it, and by how much the more eminent it is hanging our head, this evil
brethren is not the loss of outward 2 Cor. 6. 1^.
things which are perishable, not the suffering of temporal troubles, these may
run into the soul of a Joseph, and a Job, and they triumph over them, their
blessedness will be above all these, they have oil at top, but what is it then.

1. The Malum damni, the great evil of loss, is the loss of a precious soul,
that nothing is able to purchase but the blood of Jesus Christ, if the blood of
Jesus do not deliver thy soul, there remains no more Sacrifice for sin, if
thou fall short of this, which is already offered, O what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul, Mat. 16. 26.
when it is once lost, shall he give ten thousand Rivers of oil, or golden
Mountains, or the fruit of his body! Alas, all this is nothing to the loss of
the soul, and what is the loss of the soul, but the loss of the face and favor
of God in Jesus Christ for ever; that is the death of the soul, which is the
souls loss; to be separated from him, the loss of the beauty of the soul, and
the end of it, to serve him, and be glorified with him.

2. The inflicting of the heaviest suffering, is the poena sensus, that is to
say, when God pours out the burning coals of his wrath upon the naked
Conscience, whipping the naked and galled Conscience Psalm. 90. 11.
with Scorpions to eternity, O this dwelling with devouring fire, and
everlasting burning without a shadow, will make the sinners Isa. 33 14.
in Sion afraid, and fearfulness surprizeth the hypocrites; O it is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31. According to his
power, so is his wrath, as is the man, so is his might, said he of Gideon, as
is the ability so is the arm, to lay heavy Mat. 10. 8.
strokes, not to dispatch us as he said, but to sink for ever, he is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell.

Now the means to avoid this evil are the same that before, no other way in the
world, but to get into the City of refuge; if they rest and stay by the way,
this evil will seize upon them, and their blood will be upon their own heads. But
wherein does a formal professors folly, and a Saints wisdom appear in reference
to this.

1. He that foreseeth not an evil coming upon him, is not so wise as he should
be, the prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself, this providence is
a great part of prudence, for a man to see Prove. 22. 3.
a mist no further then under his feet, like the beast, is a great folly, a
wise man has his eye in his head; do you think that man that Mat. 7. 24.
builds his house upon the sand, did foresee the showers, etc. a house they
must have, somewhat to shade them from the weather; but here is the folly, to
build upon such a foundation, not foreseeing what is like to befall it, O that
my people were wise, that they Deuteronomy. 32. 25.
would consider their latter end: they sit not down and consider, etc.

2. If they have now and then a hint of it, yet they make no provision against
it, as it is likely Hypocrites have some grudgings sometimes, and some
discoveries of their hypocrisy, rottenness of their houses they have builded,
and yet they heed it not, this is worse: is not this great folly? yea, how
often are you warned and awakened, and yet you will not stir? if a man should
see a storm coming that will destroy his house, except he fortify it, and
should not care, were not he a fool? they will* not hide themselves from the
storm.

3. It is folly, rather to run a hazard of a greater evil that is future though
certain, then to undergo a much less evil, though present: as for instance a
man would rather venture his life unavoidably, then he would take such a bitter
potion; the young man in the Gospel that went far, he would notwithstanding
venture his soul, rather then his estate? and is not this the Condition of many
formal Professors? Alas brethren! if a little reproach or persecution for
Christ's sake come, and the way of Christ be a disgraced way, they count the
riches of Egypt, greater treasure, then their souls and heaven, and therefore
venture all upon it: O this is folly!

4. Yea a man that would lose a far greater good to gain a less, is a fool: and
what shall a man gain, if he get the world and lose his soul? and what shall an
Hypocrite get by his close ways of unrighteous gaining: if he lose his soul?
will it countervail it, if laid in the balance together? What will you gain, if
you have never so much reputation for wise and holy men, which is the thing you
seek likely, many of you seek honor one of another, and lose the soul in the
mean time, gape at the shadow, and lose the substance? O this is a folly with a
witness, that will part with Ioh. 5 44.
Gold for Counters, with Pearls for Pebbles! and yet such is the Condition of a
formal Professor of Christ. If this be so, then a man that contents himself
with a profession of Christ without the enjoyment of him is a fool, and the
contrary is a wise man, then,

First, We see that God and the world are of two minds: O that men would be but
persuaded that this is folly! but the world counts this the greatest folly
that can be to make so much ado about the soul-affairs, to trouble themselves
so much about the interest in Christ, they are the wise men that have heads
deep and large to compass their designs for the world, and to have a profession
of Christ, the thing may be of some use, but the thing it self it is but a
burden: they will never trouble themselves with a Lamp, and a Vessel full of
Oil, besides it is enough to have a Lamp; But surely Brethren, the Lord judges
otherwise you see who is the fool in Christ's sense; and what will it avail if a
man the world account him a wise man, and he himself deem himself a wise man,
and Jesus Christ accounts him a fool? he never gives names for nothing: they
are sure to answer them sooner or later, the easiest course Brethren, is not
the wisest, then the Sluggard were the wisest man.

2. It may serve to reprove and convince us of much folly then that is among
us: Stultorum plena sunt omnia, all Proressions are full of fools, and none
more, then the Profession of Jesus Christ: for the higher the end, the greater
the folly in pretending to it, and missing of it. I doubt brethren, all the
Congregation are full of such fools as these are, it appears to be so in the
Prophets time; Who is wise, says he, and he will consider these Hos. 14. 10.
Isa. 50. 10.
things, etc. and Prudent, and he shall know them? Who is wise? by this
interrogation there is implied a paucity of them as in that, Who is there among
you that walks in darkness, and sees no light? they are not very ordinary; so
again, Who has believed our report, Isa. 53. 1.
and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? May I not take up the Prophets
complaint now, and say, who in this Congregation is wise! who so wise as to
consider their latter end to provide for it? not to rest in a name, in a
profession; Some I doubt not but there are, who are able to produce their
Evidences, Christ in them the hope of Glory; but are they so many as were to be
wished Col. 1. 27.
brethren; do you not take up short of Jesus Christ? rest in the means as you
have heard before.

3. Then it shall serve to stir us up, to awaken us to look about us: for that
is one thing also which that interrogation imports, to stir us up to Consider
our ways, and our Condition and State; Whether we have this oil in our vessel
as well as in the Lamp, surely Brethren; For Motives,

4. This is a very pressing one which our Savior covertly gives in the Text,
they were foolish virgins which took no oil, and the Prophet Who is wise, and
he will consider these things? for men would not be counted fools of all
things, men had rather be wicked and counted so, then be counted fools; and
will rather show their wit in froth, and jests, and overreaching, then be
counted fools, you know the affectation of wisdom was the first temptation, and
ever since, vain man would be wise, though he be Ibb. 11. 20.
born like a wild Asses Colt: we are most stupid Creatures, and yet would have
a name to be wise, and are indeed contented to be fools in Gods account, rather
then we would not be wise men in our own account, and the account of the world,
desperate fools! this is cum ratione insanire, if any thing be. O brethren, if
we would be wise indeed, take the advice of wisdom it self, or the wonderful
Councellor, take heed of resting in this Condition, without oil in your
vessels: he is wise indeed that is wise in the latter end, that thou may be
wise in the latter end: he that lives in reputation of a wise man, he thinks
himself so, and dies a fool in the account Prove. 19. 20.
of God himself, and all others, this is the fool in grain; the more care to
get and keep our vessels full of oil, the more wiser we shall approve our
selves.

2. Dear friends, Consider seriously now, You think you follow Jesus Christ,
and your Lamps are burning? but what a sad disappointment will it be and
confusion? For hope disappointed confounds a man, as it is in Job: they are
confounded because Job 6. 20.
they hoped: you hope for heaven now, if you be disappointed, and your Lamps go
out in obscure darkness just when you have the most need of them: O how will
you be able to bear it!

O therefore whatever you do, labor to get this oil, make sure of this
brethren: never give the Lord over, follow him up and down in all the ways of
grace, until thou have gotten thy vessel full, thy heart filled with grace,
with his fear, his love, with humility, self-denial. O look to it, that thou
close with Christ, that you do not mistake somewhat else instead of him, beg
the Spirit Brethren, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the (...).
3. 16. (...) Cor. 9. 8.
inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, and you may have all
grace to abound toward you, and in you, that having an al-sufficiency always in
all things, you may abound in every good work, your hearts being full, there
being a Spring to eternal life: that your Lamps may never be put out, but you
may appear wise in your latter end, which tries indeed which are the wise, and
which the foolish Virgins. O be diligent in improving all the Ordinances for
that end, received ye the Spirit by the works of the Gal. 2. 3. Exodus 16. 13.
Number. 11.
the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? You have heard it is the dew wherein the
Manna descends, it is the vehiculum, we come to hear all of us, O take heed how
you hear, with what hearts you come before him, and how you attend to this
word, do you know in what part of it the Spirit will descend, will come upon
the heart, at which Sermon, in which part of the Sermon? O brethren if we come
with vessels full, conceited with Pride, full of Earth stopped up with the
world, how can we expect this oil should be poured into us? therefore Come,
labor to bring your empty vessels to the Lord in his Ordinances: for it 2
Kings 4. 3, (...) ul(...)
is observable as long as there was an empty vessel, the oil run, in the widows
case, and so it would be here, he never sent a poor empty broken Spirit, a poor
Creature, poor in spirit to come humbled and trembling in sense of its wants,
and worthlesness he never sent them away empty, when the vessel is full, he
will not pour out the oil, it would be lost, there is no room to receive it.

Again, Labor to number your days brethren, that you may apply your hearts
unto wisdom, to this wisdom, to salvation: this Psalm. 90. 20.
is a rich piece of skill, that is not to be learned but in the school of
Christ, to number our days. Consider the shortness of our time, how short, we
cannot tell, for ought we know this night, he was a fool in grain in the
Gospel, who put off the day of death so long, thou have goods laid up for many
years, Eat, drink and be merry. I, but what was there laid up for eternity? was
there any Grace laid up to carry him through death? no, not a jot: thou fool
this night shall thy soul be taken from thee, and then whose shall these things
be? these are things which in Luke 22. 19.
themselves are not, either they take wings and are gone, as a flock of Birds*
in a man's ground, or else they are taken from them, and leave them to they know
not whom: for naked must they return thither, to the grave which Job had in his
mind, and happily pointed at it in that speech, he was a fool that put off the
thoughts of death for many days upon the greatness of his riches, which could
not profit him in the day of wrath, nor day of death neither; but now this
wisdom if the heart be applied to it, will provide somewhat that will carry
them through: they will provide some oil in the vessel that shall not fail,
somewhat to follow them when they are dead, to enter with them into the
Marriage of the Lamb, A man may number his days, and think of his death, and
wish it much, and yet if God teach him not to make this use of it, it will not
be: O therefore beg of him such a heart, so to number them, as that you may
apply your hearts to this wisdom, if death be so near, eternity at hand, there
is entering with him into the Marriage, or being shut out for ever O what need
had we then to bestir our selves, get this oil, this grace in the heart; for
indeed we shall find brethren, though we may live by a form, we cannot dye by a
form of Godliness, but it must be the Power of it, that must carry us through
death.

It may be a further Instruction to us, then surely there must be a great
change in us to this true wisdom: for alas, we are born like wild Asses Colts,
none more stupid; An Ass, a wild Ass, a wild Job 11. 12.
Asses Colt, what more brutish? now this must be a wonderful change, to make
such a man wise to salvation: but what is too hard for the grace of the
Almighty, we are fools by nature, and yet we have a conceit we are wise, affect
wisdom, and because we would be wise, we easily believe we are so, self-love
bribing our judgments also: but now when God comes to work in us, he emptieth
us of our own wisdom first, and our conceit of wisdom rather, for indeed the
wisdom of the flesh and the world is foolishness with God; but the conceit of
wisdom is much, this 1 Cor. 3. 19.
must be captivated, those high thoughts, and we must become fools that we may
be wise: there must he a great change indeed, which alas many a Professor never
had experience of.

Be not satisfied, nor contented then to use the Ordinances of God which are
the means more remote from the end, until you find and feel that the Lord Jesus
does in them embrace your souls, and your souls embrace him: until you feel
this oil poured into your hearts, until you find your selves changed into his
image, your hearts coming in to a better frame thereby, and kept in a holy
frame thereby in some measure: is it not better to try now, then he tried by
his hand at death, when there is no place to get it, etc?

Alas you will say, how shall we know we have this oil of grace in our hearts?
It is a notable way Brethren, to know it by the overflowing of it, when it
abounds you shall see it, as it is set forth; the presses burst out with new
wine, then it discovers it self: the reason why we see it not, nor cannot see
it, is because we have yet so little of it, thought it be a Well springing up
Prove. 3. 10. See Job. 1. 10. His substance is increased, the Original is, it
breaks out.
to eternal life: yet while it is low and much mud it is hard to discern it:
but does it spring up when the vessel is filled with oil? you shall see it is
there, and have the comfort of it. O but this is little comfort to them that
are weak you will say. Why press forward, forget the things which are behind,
Slothfulness and Ease are not the way of comfort and peace, but the diligent
hand which makes rich.

Again, ye know grace is set forth by oil, as it softens and sweetens, so we
shall find that operation of it in the soul; does it change thy nature from
harsh, and crooked and perverse, to sweet and gentle, this is a fruit of this
spirit a consequent of this anointing. And so it will be uppermost, what it is
that lies highest in thy soul, which thou liftest up, Is it this?

Have thou ever been upon serious examination, and do thou make God thine
end, thy happiness? Can thou say, Whom have I in heaven but thee, etc? the
world is not thy end.

And then for Jesus Christ do thou close with him? have thou ever believed?
rouled thy self upon him, by faith receiving him, and the spirit by faith, this
is the oil, here is a fountain, a cruse that will never fail, a spring
springing up to eternal life.

Verse 5. While the Bridegroom tarryed they all slumbered and slept.
THe Coming of Christ is compared to the coming of a Bridegroom to take his
Bride who comes with the Virgins her Companions to meet him: Now these
solemnities used to be performed at the beginning of the night: but here in the
Prothesis of the similitude, it seems (which was more then usual) he delayed
until midnight, he came not at the time expected, and they were ready for his
coming and going out to meet him. but he came at a time they looked not for
him: when their waiting was at an end, they fell asleep, and then the Cry goes
before him, behold he comes. You have heard already who is the Bridegroom,
Jesus Christ: Here we have his coming, the delay of it, and the occasion which
the wickedness of some and the weakness of others took from hence to fall
asleep: It was abused for an occasion to the flesh. A double Note from the
words, but of the first only at this time.

The Lord Jesus does delay his coming, (...), I shall a little prove it by some
Scriptures parallel, and Doct, 5.
then open the terms, confirm it by Arguments, and apply it by use to our
selves.

1. Then for the Scripture Proof, take that place where our Savior stirs up
his disciples to watch, they knew not what Met. 2^. 48.
hour their Lord comes, of which hereafter if the Lord will. Blessed is that
servant which being set over the household to give meat in due season, shall be
found so doing: but now if the wicked servant say in his heart my Lord delayeth
his coming, (...), and begin to beat his Fellow Servants, and eat and drink
with the drunken, here you see there is a delay, and from hence this wicked
servant takes encouragement to lay the reins upon the neck, and to run to all
manner of excess, the very same you repeated by Luke, therefore it shall suffice
to name that, I will Luke 12. 45.
add but one Scripture-more, which happily may be of more use then any of these
to some perceiving judgments, for happily you will say this is but a bribed
judgment of some wicked persons bribed and blinded by their Lusts, indeed
there is not such a delay, which indeed is a great part true, for the delay is
for the most part, to be measured by our weakness and shortness, as afterward
will appear: yet somewhat there is of a delay, and that you shall find in the
Apostle to the Thessalonians, Let no man deceive you by any means; be not
quickly removed, or shaken in 2 These. 2. 2.
mind, or troubled, whether by Spirit, or by Word, or by Letter as from us, as
the day of Christ is at hand, (...): but there must first come a falling away,
etc. which is fulfilled in the great Antichrist the Pope who sits in the Temple
of God, as God, etc. Yet the other Apostle says, the Judge stands at the
door. (...) Grudge not one at another, complain James 5. 9.
not one of another: for the Judge is near at hand ready to judge you all for
it, So sin lies at the door, that is to say to be near at hand, It is no
contradiction to that: that the day of the Lord Genesis 4. 7.
is not at hand: for that is the day wherein he has appointed, wherein Josh.
5. 24. Acts 17. 31*
he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he has ordained,
whereof he has given assurance to all men, in that he raised him up from the
dead. If this judging which is near, is a temporal Chastisement, he would lay
upon them, as if when children are envying one another, quarrelling and
grudging one at another, accusing one another, and falling out one should move
them to forbear; and by this Argument, take heed your Father is at door with a
rod in his hand, and he will judge you all: So he judgth the people that they
might not be condemned with the world. I thought good to speak thus far, lest
that seeming 1 Cor. 1^. 22.
contradiction might trouble any, so much for the proof. The second thing will
be to open the terms and

First, What is meant by coming? the coming of Christ: This will open the
particle of time in the first verse, then shall the Kingdom of Heaven be
likened, etc. the same Key will open both. To omit then any other opinion of
it, I understand it either of the coming of Christ to a particular soul, which
is no sooner separated from the body, but comes to judgment. Now Christ may
be said to come, he comes to put the sickle to such as are ripe for it, he
comes to gather into his barn, if they be wheat, or else to burn them up with
unquenchable fire. Or else, 2. And rather Col. 3. 4.
of the day of Judgment, that great day and appearing of our Jesus Christ, who
is our life, when his people shall appear with him in glory: Eccles. 11. 3.
which day will find many alive who shall then be changed, before they enter in
with him, and which day will find doubtless many in deep security and formality
to have their work to do. And for those that are then dead, and shall be raised
up, it will find them in that state wherein they lay down in the dust, either
of faith or unbelief, and accordingly either they shall be shut out or admitted
to the Marriage. And methinks this doom of our Savior, I know you not which is
parallel to that, Mat. 7. 23. Depart from me you workers of iniquity, I know
you not: which surely does agree to none, except it be at the day of death, or
the day of judgment: for any other time I will not trouble you with any thing
about: And so much for this first.

2. Now for the delaying: What is Jesus Christ more backward then the Church to
this union, that they go forth to meet him, and seem forward, and he delays his
coming? for what will make more have then love? will it not bring him upon
Eagles wings? yea, riding upon the clouds, and wings of the wind? and how are
we to understand this of his delay of his coming? or what is he an idol-Christ,
that is taken up in a journey, or any other business, as to forget his spouse,
and neglect her to come speedily to make up the match, to bring her into his
Fathers house, this were indeed agreeable to a poor finite forgetful Creature,
but not to Jesus Christ. Yea more then this: Is he not said to come quickly in
diverse places? and how stands that with the delay of his coming? See that place
in Luke in the Parable of the unjust judge, overcome with the widows
importunity, though he neither cared for God, nor regarded man: yet because of
her importunity, he would avenge her of her adversary, how much more God, who
is love it self, and tender of his people as the apple of his Deuteronomy. 32 27.
eye, who is most just, and most faithful, and who does indeed fear the wrath
of his adversary after the manner of men, being tender of his people and of his
own name, lest he should reproach his name, and that reproach with ruin fall
upon his people, and Rev 6. 10.
besides all this being importuned by them, as the souls under the Altar,
crying continually, how long Lord, holy and true, will thou not avenge our
blood upon the inhabitants of the Earth: why says the Text, shall not God
avenge his own Children which cry day and Luke 18. 7, 8.
night to him, though he bear long with them, that is to say, with their
enemy, I tell you, he will avenge them speedily, (...) speedily, in a trice, a
moment, by and by, according to that of the Apostle, (...) Heb. 10. 37.
quantulumcunque how little soever, as little as may be, and he will not tarry.
How hang these things together?

For the clearing of this, it is necessary to say something: And first I will
show you, in what respect he is not said to delay, or it is denied that he does
delay his coming; but it is short, and quickly, and then 2. In what respect he
is said to delay his coming, and then come to the argumentss

2. Then he is not said to delay his coming in respect of his own eternity,
wherein all the differences of time are swallowed up and appear not at all,
there is no time long, or short in eternity, there is not prius, or posterius
there, and therefore the Apostle in this argument speaks in this wise, know
says he to them that were ready to mock, because it was so long before the
promise of his coming was fulfilled for the glorious liberty of the Sons of God
from under their iron yokes put upon them by their persecutors: why says he,
God is not slack, as some count slackness or tardiness, (...), who reckon it
according to Days, 2 Pet 3. 8.
and Months, and Years, and Ages,: no says the Apostle, alas, a thousand years
are but as one day to the Lord to eternity, eternity does not bid us with the
unjust Steward, sit down and write 50 for an 100 but a thousand for one 366000
for one, for it is to one day, that a thousand years are compared to in Psalm
90. 4.
eternity, and so one day as a thousand years, it is as long as a thousand
years with him, which we cannot conceive of, because we are not able to reach
to eternity. Now if Sentence against an evil doer be deferred but a day, we
count this a swift witness against such a man's sin: as in the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shall Genesis 2. 17.
dye the death: but if it be a thousand years, it is all one with God: So that
though to us poor finite Creatures, who number actions according to days and
months, it may seem a delay, yet to God it is not: for all times past, present,
and to come, are present to him, it is but one eternal nunc or now, and
therefore there is no delay (...).
in that respect.

2. Yet further there is no delay, but he comes quickly, suddenly, very
speedily in another respect: Because he does not stay longer then the appointed
time: Hab. 2. 3. the vision is for an appointed time, it will not tarry: then
we are said to delay properly, when there is a time prefixed for such a thing,
and we keep not touch, but stay longer, this is properly delaying. Now you know
there is a day appointed, wherein he will judge the world in righteousness,
Acts 11. 37. Mat. 24. 36.
by the man whom he has ordained, there is a a day and an hour which no man
knows indeed, and therefore men but do proclaim their vanity in guessing at
it; the times and seasons it is not meet for us to know which the Father has
kept in his own power. Well then this day now he will not out-stay, not a day
longer will he Acts 1. 7. Exodus 12. 41.
stay; but come quickly, very speedily, the very self same day, as the very
self same day he came to deliver Israel, and to judge their Enemies. The people
might indeed think it long whiles they were in bondage, groaning, that he
delayed his comin, yet he did not, for if the day appointed before had The like
may be said of death and judgment. Job 14 5.
come sooner, he had delivered them sooner he keeps touch to a day.

3. He does not delay his coming, that is to say, so as to omit the season of
it, for every thing is beautiful in its season, there is a season to suffer the
enemies of his Church to ride over their heads, and there is a season to bring
them under their feet again, and give them their necks to trample upon, there
is a season to permit them to eat up his people as they eat bread, and to make
themselves drunk with the blood of the Saints, and there is a season to give
them blood to drink, for they are worthy. You know if a man Psalm. 95. and Heb
4. 7.
omit his season for any thing, he may never have another, he is looked upon as
a slack negligent person, as now, he that puts off his gathering of harvest
from Summer to winter, so to day if you will hear his voice, there is a time
limited, a season of getting grace, which if omitted, and put off by delays, we
show much hardness of heart, and little wisdom to think we shall do that to
morrow, which we have not heart to to day, men think God is slack, when indeed
he is only patient, and they are ignorant, and see it not; but for the season
he does it most opportunely for his own glory, and the good and salvation of
souls; as will appear in the Arguments of the Doctrine. But I will not
anticipate my self.

4. He does not delay, as some men may count delays or slackness, as if he
would never come, they are ready to think, because judgment is not speedily
executed, ^ush the Lord sees not, he regards Psalm. 94. 7.
not what they do, he watches not over their sin, he will not bring them into
judgment for these things, and so think he is just such a one as themselves:
Why? because when they are offended, happily except they take revenge when they
are moved at the first they forget it afterward, and never set themselves in
cold blood to it, though many men's malice is much more durable, a little tract
of time will not do it out: though we should go to school as children in this
respect, but I say If it be not presently, we judge the Lord, and measure him
by our own thoughts, if he hold his hands for any while, our hearts are fully
set in us to do wickedly, we are ready to think he will not come at all to
witness against our wickedness, or formality, and luke-warmness in his ways,
but thus he will not delay. And so much for the Negative.

Secondly, then for the Affirmative, In what sense he is said to delay his
coming, and

1. In respect of the long time between his first and second coming, Eccl. 8. 7.
his appearing it is long, enduring many ages and generations, many believers
dying in faith, and not receiving this promise of his second Heb. 11. 13. 1
Pet* 1. 11.
coming, as those did, who were before his first coming, they looked for him
from age to age, and the Prophets searched what, and what manner of sins those
were which they spoke of, they did a little pierce into them, as much as they
could, they might think it long that the promise made to Adam so many ages
before, should yet be unfulfilled: And so the coming of Christ the second time,
it is long between 1600 years already, but this is not so properly a delaying;
but surely his delaying of his coming is to be understood according to our
apprehensions of it, and not according to his determinations who has appointed
the time, and stays not a jot longer, and has appointed it according to the
Counsel of his own will with admirable wisdom in the best season.

2. Then he is said or may be said to delay his coming, because our days are
short, and we are ready to reckon upon it according to our days; it is many
days indeed, and many years before he comes to take a poor weary soul to
himself, and because he is poring upon the days, and upon the years and
months, therefore he thinks it is very long, and tedious the delay; and
therefore the Apostle does meet with this covertly, in that of Peter, be not
ignorant of this one thing, says he, that one day is with the Lord as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day; 2 Pet. 3. 8.
Alas, if we number by days, which are short and nothing, it Psalm. 90. 4.
will seem a delay indeed, but if we look upon eternity, wherein a thousand
years are but as a day, then it is but short: but this is understood by the
opposition it has to that which went before, therefore the less of it here.

3. Because of the shortness of our patience, alas it is very short, the
Apostle to the Hebrews does exhort them to hold out against persecutions, to
hold fast their confidence which has recompense of reward. Alas, but it is
tedious thus to run through fire and water, to have wave upon wave, and billow
upon billow, why it is true says the Apostle! But you have need of patience,
that when you have done his will you might receive the promise, the promise of
his coming, the apearing of Christ who is our life: Alas but can we endure it?
O it is long! No says the Apostle, for yet a little while, and he that shall
come will come, do not think it long, think not he is slack, he will not tarry.
O brethren, a man under a hard bondage, groaning as the Israelites did in
Egypt, thinks Heb. 10. 35, 36, 37. ^ab. 2. 3. Psalm 13 1. ^^v. 6. 10.
every day seven until he be delivered, and therefore the Prophet exhorts them
to wait for the vision which was for an appointed time, it would not tarry, by
the medicine you may gather the nature of the malady, it was impatience under
their bondage and trouble, and therefore you find so many sad complaints in the
Psalmist, how long Lord, etc. how long will thou forget me for ever, etc. and
so the souls under the Altar, how long Lord, holy, and true, will thou not
avenge our blood? And so under spiritual pressures, suppose temptations from
without, or inward pressures, a body of sin, and death, we are ready to cry
out, how long Lord, how long? How did Job long for death, he had such wearisom
nights, and months of vanity, when God made him possess Job 7. 3
the iniquities of his youth. Well in this respect also he may be said to
delay, according to our apprehensions.

4. In respect of the importunity of our desires, as well as impatientcy under
afflictions, this is an impatiency too, and might be a branch of the other, but
a man that has not that pressure upon him, yet if he be deeply in love with
Jesus Christ, and with his appearing, O how importunate are his desires after
it, so that as Romans 8. 19. Heb. 10. 36. Hab. 2 3.
the Apostle calls it, there is an (...) a looking out after it, with a neck or
head stretched out, as a man that looks for a thing stirring up himself,
stretches out his neck, lifts up his head, that he may see as far as he can,
looking many a wishly look after the thing he desires, or person he desires.
The proverb is true in this case etiam celeritas in desiderio mora est, And in
this case now, a man is ready to think there is a delay when there is most
swiftness, when God is a most swift witness for, or against such a person, our
desires run before it usually, and so it seems to Psalm. 63.
slack and come behind, O when shall I come and appear before him in Sion, Not
only, Lord now let thou thy servant depart, etc. but, O how long will thou
thou keep me prisoner in this Tabernacle of clay! Now in all these respects, he
may be said to delay Acts 17. 13.
his coming, but so much for the opening of the Doctrine.

Now for the Arguments. I shall speak a little to them. And the First may be
this. The time is appointed for his coming, he has appointed a time wherein,
etc. which he will not anticipate, so neither will he stay beyond it. the

Second shall be this, it is to exercise his peoples patience, to inure them
to bear, patience works experience, and experience hope, the richer the
patience is, the richer the experience is, and the nearer we come to a full
assurance of hope, the riches of it, Now the exercise of patience the spirit
breathing in it to his Iam 5. 11. Rev. 13. 10.
people, is that whereby it grows, and increases with the increases of God,
the patience of the Saints, is one of their greatest exercises, and therefore
the Lord takes much pains with his people to make this jewel in their Crown
shine gloriously, Consider the patience of Job, etc. behold here is the
patience and faith of the Saints, and in another place it is ushered in with a
Behold.

Now, God will have our patience have its perfect work, be as long and as broad
as the trials are, And therefore he Luke 8. 15.
delays his coming in that sense as you have heard, this waiting for the
reward after we have done the will of the Lord is harder then the other, of
bringing forth fruit with patience. Another ground shall be;

3. That the measure of the sufferings of Christ may be filled up in us, the
Apostle is said to fill up in his body the measure of the sufferings of Christ,
that is to say, there is a proportion of sufferings, Col. 1. 24,
for the body of Christ to undergo, and he in his body filled up his measure,
in a great part, not as if they were more righteous, but his people being so
nearly united to the head, as that they and he make one Christ, therefore the
sufferings of his people are called the sufferings of Christ, now there is a
means to be filled up, and this he will have filled, because these less
afflictions, which are but for a moment, they work out says the Apostle, not
meritoriously a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory, he was made
perfect through sufferings, and so must his 2 Cor. 4. 17. Heb. 2. 10. Romans 8.
17.
s^ns which he brings to glory be made perfect through sufferings, and drink
of the brook in the way, and so lift up their heads, suffer with him, and then
be glorified with him, now if there were not such a time as we count a delaying
of his coming, there would be no room for this.

1. That the fullness of Christ may come in, for there is a fullness Ephesians. 1. 23.
of Christ, as the Apostle calls it, both of Jews and Gentiles, as the several
members of his body make up the fullness of his body, and it is not complete, if
any of them be wanting, there is some of its perfection wanting, indeed it is a
glorious honor he 2 Pet. 3. 9. Rev. 6. 11.
puts upon the Saints, and dear affections he shows, and a near union, that
he accounts himself not perfect without them, until they be come in; so this
is the answer the importunate cry of the souls under the Altar receive, how
long Lord holy and true? do thou not avenge us, and judge our enemies? there
were white robes given them, and it was said to them they should rest yet for a
little season until their fellow servants also, and their brethren also which
should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled. If a man bid many guests to
a Feast, they must stay until they all come to sit down together. As Christ is
imperfect, that is to say, without his fullness with his body, so is the soul in
a sort without its body; and as the Lord desires the work of his hands, as Job
speaks, touching Job 14. 15.
the Resurrection, thou shall call, and I shall answer, etc. the soul may
desire also that work of his hands, to be reunited again in the Resurrection,
a pledge, and an earnest whereof they have in heaven, not only Christ the head
his glorious body, but Enoch and Elias. Now there may be much desire happily
for this coming of Christ, that this may be made up, but as the Apostle says
in another case, God has provided a better thing for us, that they Heb. 11. 40.
without us should not be made perfect, so they without the rest, the fullness
of Christ should not be made so completely perfect. Well then, the fullness of
Christ must come in, that day shall not come, until there be not one soul more
to come in, which belongs to his fullness; that is the fourth. This reason
indeed only concerns the great day of Christ his coming.

5. To give time and space to men to repent, and to work out their salvation
in, I gave her space to repent, says the Lord to that woman, Rev. 2. 21.
and she repented not. Whether we understand this of a man's particular day, or
the great and general day, it is true; Why is not Sentence speedily executed
upon sinners? Why is it! that they might repent, despisest thou, says the
Apostle, the riches of his goodness, and long-suffering to thee, (...), not
knowing the goodness of God, his long-suffering has his tendency in it to lead
to repentance, Romans 2. 4.
being given for that end, Mora sponsi poenitentiae tempus est: Hilar* can. 27.
So our Annot. So that this will leave sinners without any excuse. If there had
not been such a delay, they had had no time to repent, and they might have said
so for themselves; but now they have no pretense, they shall be all of them
(...) condemned of themselves. And for the Saints and people of God, it is that
they might have time, and space to work out their salvation with fear and
trembling, to work it out (...) Alas they must be converted and become as
little children, or else they cannot Mat. 18. 3.
enter into the kingdom of heaven; now there is much industry, and pains
required, to bring the heart to this meetness for heaven and therefore he
delays his coming: As for instance. If a Bridegroom too soon come upon his
spouse, that he knows has a house full of filthiness, and nasty places to
trim, and make handsome, and her self to trim, and deck and adorn; he will stay
a while, give her time to make all pure, and clean, and fit for him, and then
he comes, and this is another.

6. That the measure of sin and sinners may be filled up, there is a fullness of
Satan as well as of Christ, a fullness of sin as well as Genesis 15. 16.
of holiness, you know he would not give Canaan a type of heaven, to his people
Israel, because the iniquity of the Amorites was not yet full, he could not
give them Canaan but he must destroy them, and therefore he would first have
their measure full, their Ephah full, and then sink them with a talent of lead.
So here there is a fullness of Satan's kingdom, a fullness of sin, upon which when
he comes, he will come to pour out the fullness of his wrath, and to tread them
down in his fury for ever; therefore he stays a while until they have filled up
their measure. He did not cast the Jews out of sight, until they had filled up
their measure, by persecuting of the truth, and the Saints, which is a
wonderfully filling sin indeed, that quickly fills the bag to the mouth, and
then it is sealed they persecuted the truth, that they might fill up the
measure of their sins always; and then you see he came against them, Now when
all the vessels of wrath are formed, and they are fitted to destruction, then
he comes as to receive his bride, so to slay his enemies with a flaming sword,
and furious indignation, that would not 1 These. 2. 16.
close with him. This another.

7. That the promises may be fulfilled, which are many of them yet to come, and
to be fulfilled, as the prophecy of Babylons falling, the tenth part of the
City, even Rome, which some judicious compute to be just the tenth part of what
formerly it was. The ruin of Antichrist, the bringing in of the Jews the seed
of Abraham his friend, from all corners of the world whether they are driven
through his displeasure, and the fulfilling those many glorious things which
are spoken of the City of God, the new Jerusalem which comes down from heaven,
which many of the Saints do expect, yet to be fulfilled when Satan shall be
bound for a thousand years, surely a tittle of this word shall not fall to the
ground, not Psalm. 87. 3.
the word of promise, heaven and earth may fall, but this word of God cannot
fall, it must be fulfilled. The Lord Jesus will be contented, to be without his
fullness until then, and the glory of that fullness until then; and therefore for
this cause, his coming shall Psalm. 40.
be delayed, he came once out of heaven with much readiness, Lo I come, I come,
though to dye, to lose his life, his peace, his comfort, the savor of his
father; rather then the prophesies should not be fulfilled as we have it often,
that it might be fulfilled, etc. He will be without his bride in fullness for a
time, and they must be without him in fullness for a time until the rest of the
prophesies be fulfilled. O how he glorifieth his word above all his Name.

8. Lastly, Happily to edge our desires after the day, you know the withholding
of a desirable thing for a time, does much draw out the desires, as the drawing
away the bait from the fish, draws it after it, and truly all the ways the
Lord takes with us are little enough to put us on to desire that day. But so
much for the confirmation of the Doctrine, before it was said, therefore it
seemed long, because we desired it importunately: Now therefore we desire it
because it seems long, and so our desires after his appearing do feed
themselves, by adding this oil to the flame, even the length of the tarrying,
which does partly arise from themselves: so some things are mutually causes one
of another, as the Ice resolves it self into water, and again the water into
Ice; the vapors ascending into Clouds; and the Clouds into vapors again,
after they are emptyed upon the earth. So*

The Use of the Doctrine shall be first by way of reproof, to convince us of
sin, in abusing this truth, which nothing is more Use 1.
ordinary among men, they dare not utter it with their mouths, but this they
speak in their hearts, the Lord delays his coming, and Mat. 24. 48, 49
therefore they begin to eat and drink with the drunken, to beat their
fellow servants, they will neither work themselves, nor let others work that
would; Mark how the Evangelist brands such a man, calling him an evil servant,
or an hypocrite, and indeed brethren, It is not as if there were any thing in
the nature of a delay, to work such a carelessness in us, for if he came more
speedily, what is the language, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall
dye, 1 Cor. 15. ^2.
whether he be a swift witness against men, or whether he tarry, all is one; if
he do not speedily execute the Sentence which is past upon men, evil doers,
their hearts are fully set in them to do wickedly; and if he do threaten to
come speedily, and avenge himself Eccles. 8. 11.
upon them, let us eat and drink, for to morrow, etc. forgetting the
after-clap, that after death comes judgment, do not then pretend brethren
this for your selves, and lay the fault upon God as Adam did, and all the sons
of Adam are ready to do. Say not Heb. 9. 27.
then, If God had threatened, as he did Niniveh, Yet forty days and Niniveh
shall be overthrown, yet forty days and thou shall come to judgment, sinner
thou would have repented as well as they did: no: but as Abraham speaks to
the rich man in the parable, if they will not believe Moses and the Prophets,
they will not believe though one rose from the dead. So in this case, if thou will Iona^ 3. 5.
not repent and believe, though the coming of Christ, do tarry a while; I will
be bold to say thou would not repent if thou should know that within forty
days, or forty hours, thy soul should be taken from thee, the fool in the
Gospel, when he thought he had many years before him, and goods laid up for
them, he nourished his heart as in a day of slaughter, and when it was told
him, that this night his soul should be taken from him, do you think the fool
had so much wisdom to repent, we read it not, nor do I see any cause to think
it. Luke 12. 19.


A second sort, which are to be reproved or convinced of sin; are 2 Pet. 3. 3,
4. Isa. 29. 1. 4
such as mock at the coming of Christ. It is a prophecy of the last days, in
the last days there shall come scoffers, walking after their own lusts, saying,
where is the promise of his coming, for since the fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were since the beginning of the world; That these are
the last days, if we had no o her Verse 22.
Argument, the impudence of many now adays denyinng resur ection and judgment,
and any such things as these are, are too clear a proof of it, Observe, Where
is the promise of his coming, a promise to the people of Christ, for he comes
to give them the Crown of righteousness, having fought their fight, and
finished their course, etc. but a threatening to the sinners of the world, as
that the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. Well, you tell us of
a glorious appearing of Christ, but where is it? we see no alteration, all
things continue as they were, there is no sign of such a coming, O what
wretched Athiesm is in the heart brethren, that because the hand of God does
not presently seize upon us, therefore we make a mock at it, thinking there is
no such thing, O this unbelief is the ground of all departing from God, do not
your actions proclaim this, that you expect not his coming, you rather make a
mock at it, you make so light a matter of sin, of the most horrid sins:

Yea some that seem not to Question his coming (though I think that is the
ground of it, their secret unbelief that there will be any such, or no) they do
even provoke the Lord, and pluck him out of his place, they challenge the God
of heaven that say, Let him make speed, and hasten his work that we may see it,
and let the Isa. 5. 19.
counsel of the holy one draw nigh and come, that we may know it, that we may
feel it, for we fear it not, this is the language of the men, that declare
their sin like Sodom, heed it not, stout-hearted sinners, that set God at
defyance, bid him do his worst, they will abide all that comes, rather then
they will part with their lusts, wherein they walk as the Apostle has it; they
would fain see who shall control them, who should cut their Cart-ropes, and
Psalm. 12. 4.
Cords of vanity, wherewith they draw iniquity, and toil, and tear themselves
like horses in the drudgery of sin, Well I will speak Isa. 5. 18.
a word or two to all these, it is a terrible one indeed, the Lord give us
trembling hearts at it.

First, However long it seems to stay, it will come before thou art ready for
it, and for all this gallantry of spirit that sinners cloth themselves with,
the stoutest-hearted sinner that hears this word when that comes shall quake
and tremble. What cared Belshazzar for the God of Israel, he thought it was
nothing, to carouse in the vessels of the Sanctuary; but you see, with two or
three words writing, what an Agony it wrought him into, Amos 5. 18. You desire
the day of the Lord, poor creatures, you do not know the day of the Lord is
darkness and not light, your hearts will dye within you like stones, when it
comes upon you: Observe it brethren, usually those that are the most
stout-hearted, in setting the Lord at defiance: are most dejected when it
comes; I, will the Atheist say, if this were true, that this day would ever
come, it were something, but we see no appearance of it.

Why Brethren, are you such Atheists? I hope there is none such here, but will
own the Scriptures to be the word of the living God, and how often have you it
there written, he has Acts 17. 31.
appointed a day wherein he will judge the world by Jesus Christ: and God is
not slack as men count slackness, as some count it, as if he would never come;
believe it, believe it Sinners, your judgment lingers not, and your damnation
slumbereth not, but travels as fast as you do, and it will meet you one day,
and seize upon you. O if God should send such a hand to write upon the wall of
the Taverns, where men are carouzing, etc. mean mean, thou art weighed, etc.
this night shall thy soul, etc. Deuteronomy. 5. 5. He that believes not these things
is an Atheist* indeed, worse then the Devil himself, who believes and
trembles, James 2. 19.

But me thinks reason it self should evince it, and teach us, that the first
Principle of all things made himself the end of all things: He that is first
must also be the last; and therefore such as would not serve that end, and
honor God here, he will honor himself upon them; he must needs be righteous,
and give every one according to his works; Now Sinners do not receive according
to their works many times here, but they are lively and grow old, and are
mighty in power, their seed are established before them, etc As it is in that
place of Job, their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon
them, they have no changes, and therefore they fear not God; they spend their
days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave; that is to say, without
any tedious sickness, Job 21 7, 8(...).
such as Job had, and therefore they encourage themselves in their evil ways;
they say, what profit is there if we should pray unto him, we prosper as well
as any, who is the Almighty that we should serve him? Let him depart from us,
for we desire not the knowledge of his ways, whereas a Job, a Paul that are
upright, fearing God, eschewing evil, exercising themselves to keep a
conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men: they shall be plagued
every morning; God shall take them by the neck and shake them to pieces, and
pour out their gall upon the ground, and break them Psalm. 73. 14. Job 21. 30.
with breach upon breach. Now brethren, if Sinners were not reserved to a day
of judgment and destruction, that they should he brought forth to the day of
wrath, how would the Lord be righteous and just? it is a righteous thing with
God to render tribulation to them that trouble you ^but to you that are
troubled, rest with us. Again,

Thirdly, Remember this, Thou despis(...) the riohes and long suffering 2 These.
1* 6.
of God, not knowing that this goodness leads thee to repentance: Romans 2. 4.
It has a tendency thereto; God is not slack, but is long-suffering to us, not
willing any should perish, he waits to be gracious; 1 Pet. 3. 9.
Sinners, he gives you space to repent; though he tell you not how long that
space shall continue, that while it is called to day you might hearken to his
voice; Now instead of turning to the Heb. 4. 7.
Lord, you despise this his patience; let him wait upon whom he pleases, you
desire him not to wait upon you; but let the day of the Lord come that you may
see it; because you prosper, and your breasts are full of milk, and your bones
watered with marrow, Job 21. 24.
as it is in the Original; you make a scoff at the judgments of God, and mock
at all his terrors, as if nothing concerning you: What is this but not only to
break the yoke of Christ and his Cords of obeisance, but the Cords of a man,
and of love, Hos. 11. 4.
wherewith he draws sinners toward Repentance? it follows in the text,
that such men treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, after their own
hardness and impenitent heart: let them put off the day of judgment as well as
they can, they do treasure Romans 2.
up wrath against the day of wrath, treasures of wrath are abundance: he stores
up treasures as we do sin: God seals up such men's sins among his treasures
indeed; you fill up many bags, and apace, as a few great stones will fill a bag
over little stones will do; nothing heightens your sins more then this, the
despising the goodness, and patience, and forbearance of God, riches and
treasures of goodness and long-suffering, abused and perverted to a wrong end,
to encourage your hearts to strengthen your hands to sin: Swell the treasures
of the displeasure which hangs over your heads every moment. Ah dear friends,
that God would give some poor hard-hearted Sinner a trembling heart at this
word, I doubt it is some of our cases; do you know what you do, Sinners? you
heap up sin, they are gone over your head, I, that is not al, you treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath; that day, when all the treasures shall be
broken open, the Sluices opened, and the tide of streaming vengeance shall carry
away poor sinners to that bottomless gulf; O who may abide this day! No,

Nor do not think, You shall have worse then other men, and you hope not so
bad; you never yet sinned as some others have done; you bless God you are no
Drunkards, nor Extortioners; you never sinned as Sodom, nor as Gomorrhah;
suppose so, Yet it may be more: tolerable for them, then for many of us, who
shall despise this long-suffering of God, and the riches of his goodness to us.
The Lord of that servant that encourages himself to sin, upon his Lord his
delaying his coming, he will come in a day when he looks not for him, and he
will divide him asunder: Mat 24. 49, ^0.
Either rend his soul from his body whether he will or no, this night shall thy
soul be taken from thee; Sinners are not willing to part with the^r souls, and
no marvel when they behold hell from beneath moved for them. Or else he will
separate them from himself, and the Congregation of his people for ever; they
shall not stand in the Congregation of his people, though here they were Psalm.
1. (...).
mixed together; Or else he will bring upon him the most exquisite tormenting
evils, as men sawn asunder, or as Agag, or as they, Dan. 3. 29. So in the
Evangelist, And give him his portion with Hypocrites, as some gloss it; they
are the freeholders of hell, the lowest place they have; for simulata
sanctitas duplex iniquitas: and therefore they shall receive double, even
according to their deeds. See brethren, we may be his servants in name and
profession, and he may commit to us the Stewards office also, and if this be
our own end (a sad word for us as well as for you, for loose, and contentious,
and ungodly Ministers) and yet notwistanding perish with deepest destruction,
if we despise this long-suffering toward us.

3. Again, It reproves such as of profaneness of their spirits, upon every
slight occasion will be calling upon God to judge them; appealing to him,
nothing more ordinary in profane men's mouths then this, the Lord judge them.
Yea more fearful indeed, so fearful that I hardly think the Devil himself would
so speak, for they believe and tremble that God would damn them: calling for
that day upon every little vexation, when men suspect them or censure them for
any thing they would clear themselves, and to that end use such fearful
imprecations as these. Ah, woe be to them that say, let the day of the Lord
come, what if the Lord should take such men at their word, and put an end to
his long-suffering, and say, Well judge thee I will, this hour thy soul shall
be taken from thee, would they not be in an other Note? you need not call for
it; it will come fast enough.

4. It reproves such as out of a conceit, they have of their own innocence,
they will be calling for that day: Job himself was blameworthy Job 23. 3, 4, 5.
that he presses so much upon this: O that I might come to him, where I might
find him, that I might come even to his seat, I would order my cause before
him, and fill my mouth with arguments: I would hear the words which he would
answer me, and understand what he would say unto me. And so again Chap. 13.
Withdraw thine hand far from me, and let not thy dread make me afraid; then
call thou, and I will answer thee: charge upon me what thou can of wickedness
or profaneness, and I will clear my self; or let me speak, and answer thou me:
let me be the Plaintiff saying out the sad condition of my soul, and do thou
answer me; Job 13. 22.
justify thy proceedings with me. Though he did well to retain his integrity,
and justify that before men, yet it was too much boldness to offer to enter
into judgment with God, and so earnestly to desire that day. Alas brethren!
when he shall bring to light the depths of our hearts that we never saw, who
shall stand before him at his coming, thus to lay us open, if he enter into
judgment with us indeed?

5. It reproves another sort, and those are they, that when their Consciences
are a little galled, happily by the Word, or some other way, they are ready to
cry out for the day of the Lord; they think man's judgment and man's day is very
hard and harsh, and hope to be relieved by this day of Jesus Christ; does the 1
Cor. 4. 5.
Lord make his Ministers sometimes sons of thunder? and is not he the Father,
the God of thunders? then is your day brethren, so dreadful that you cannot
bear it, if while he sits to purge as a refiners fire, you be scorched with
that, so that you cannot abide the day of his coming; do you think to help your
selves by putting yourselves upon the everlasting burnings? It is true, ^er.
23. 92.
the word of God is a fire, and if it get into a sinners Conscience, it will
scorch and burn, and make the soul even f^y again; but what is this to the
flaming vengeance wherewith the Lord Jesus shall be clothed, when he appears
and his coming is? you Heb. 4. 1^. and as an edged sword.
think we handle you roughly sometimes, and you shall find more tender usage
from the Lord Jesus; O he is more merciful, full of bowels, indeed he is so,
infinitely more merciful: but you will find him to be infinitely just as well
as merciful: Sinners, he has a Go ye Cursed, as well as Come ye blessed, to
pronounce, he will handle you more weightily then Creatures can, if you be not
ready for his appearing; If you cannot bear the smoke of the, bottomless pit,
over which you are held it may be sometimes, will it be a mending your
condition to leap out of the smoke into Heb. 10 31.
the fire? It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God;
therefore it may serve to reprove such as would hasten this day of the Lord,
and yet can have no hope the Lord knows in the Evil day.

The next Use shall be then to stir us up every one to wait for this Use 2.
day, this coming of Jesus Christ, specially the people of God: You that hope
for mercy in that day, as he prays for the house of Onesiphorus; what should
we do, but wait for it? Yet indeed it may reach the Condition of all, whether
good or bad. If he delay 2 Timothy 1. 16.
his coming, then wait for his coming; Only the waiting of the people of God
is somewhat of a different nature; And therefore let me speak a little
distinctly to the waiting of the Saints of God for that day, wrerein there are
two or three things included as several branches of this duty.

1. There must be a love and desire to this coming of Jesus Christ, and this
presupposes that that day, and the coming of it will be good to the people of
God; for we cannot love or desire, or will any thing evil under the formality
of evil, be a good day, a day of transcendent gladness of heart, when the Bride
shall be taken by the Bridegroom, presented to his father without spot or Ephesians.
5. 27.
wrinkle or any such thing; when there shall never be any estrangement between
the Lord Jesus and the soul any more, never any withdrawing, any clouding, any
disturbance of peace any more: will not this be a good day, when our grace
shall be all glory? then shall we appear with him in glory? And therefore Job
speaks Col. 3. 4. Job. 19. 27.
after this manner: I know that my redeemer lives, etc. in my flesh I shall
see God whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
another, therefore it is the same body by the which, and not a new one which
never had union with the soul before; though my reins be consumed within me, so
we read it, that is to say, though inwards as well as outward are consumed in
the grave, yet I shall see him; but though is not in the Original, and
therefore it may be read without, my reins are consumed within me: the reins
are the s(...) of the desires, therefore I have such desires after that day,
that even my reins are spent in them, and consumed by them, this is going forth
to meet him indeed: It is not every Christian that can desire this, but such as
are ready for his appearing whereof afterward. But then Secondly,

2. In this waiting there is an Act of faith also to be put forth, cast not
away your confidence that believe there will be such a day, Hab. 2. 4.
it is certain though it be future, though we see it not, yet because he has
said it, therefore believe it: and if we so believe, we shall not make have,
that is to say, more have then is meet, press hard forward toward the Mark,
Phil. 3. 13. 14. we ought to do, but we should not take any indirect course to
bring our selves to it so much the sooner, as some by a dispatching themselves
under Isa. 28. 16.
a temptation when faith is overwhelmed, or else by such cruel macerating of
the body to beat it down, that the frame of it should be quickly be dissolved;
though we should be weary of the body of sin, and we cannot well be weary of
it, yet faith now should eye that glorious liberty of the sons of God, and it
makes it present: It is the substance of things hoped for: it gives it a
being already, and therefore this also is implied in this waiting. Heb. 11. 1.
And then

3. In this waiting brethren, for his appearing which is proper to the Saints,
there is a patient continuance in the waiting, a patient continuance in
well-doing the Apostle mentions, there should Romans 2. 7.
be desires, not a fit and start, but a Continuance in them, and so a drawing
out the acting of faith, believing that day will come which shall put an end to
all our fightings without, and terrors within, when we have need of patience
when we have done Heb. 10. 37.
all that we might receive the recompense, the promise of temptation, whether
inward, or outward; our patience is put to it very sore, yea and in a fit of
ravishment with Christ; then we would have no delay, but in heaven we would be
even that very moment, and those holy, flames are sweet: but yet if the Lord
see it good for Paul to continue in the Body, and he must yet undergo more for
Christ before he come to reign with him: why he is satisfied, and so ought we
to wait patiently for this his appearing. The Virgins waited it should seem,
and were forward and ready, but their patience held not out as it should:
therefore labor for this. But then

Secondly, For the waiting of Sinners. Wait for this day, for it will it come
though it be delayed, and you know not how soon it will come upon you. Now your
waiting must be of another sort.

1. With fear and trembling, that which a man fears he expects in some sort
as well as what he hops for: O that this dreadful sound were but in the ears
of Sinners wherever they went, there is a day coming, which will pay for all
your pleasures of sin, when God shall pluck your sweet morsels out of your
belly, and turn your stolen waters, and bread eaten in secret, which were
pleasant and sweet to you, into the poison of Asps. O do not say, you are at an
agreement with hell, and with the grave: for alas that agreement shall Isa 28.
15.
be broken, the grave shall receive you, and reserve you for this day of wrath,
and then give you up, it will not hide you from the wrath of the Lamb, hell
will open for you: Faelix trembled, when Paul disputed of righteousness, and
temperance, Acts 24* 25.
and judgment to come; this day of Christ's coming how terrible will it be to
foolish Virgins? O that all such would tremble before the Lord: fear it, fear
it, it is coming upon you, it lingers not, he is not slack!

2. In order hereto you must labor to believe it, it is an Article of our
faith: we profess the resurrection of the dead, which is either to life or
condemnation: and thou that live in sin, can expect Ioh 5. 29.
no other but a resurrection to Condemnation. But alas! men do not believe
this; Devils are afraid of that day to which they are reserved in chains of
darkness, when they shall have their full cup given them to drink. Ah dear
friends! that the Lord would single out such as he would persuade this day from
the terrors of the Lord, to fly-from this wrath to come, to 2 Cor. 5. 11.
make ready for this day that is a coming: wherewith I shall wind up all, I
shall say to this doctrine. The last word therefore is of

Exhortation, since Jesus Christ does delay his coming, That we Use last.
would make good use of the time: he gives us time and space to repent. The
people of God they have need to make use of this time: have we not work enough
to do, before we can expect to be glorified with him? how many of us have a
world of iniquity Rev. 2. 23.
to subdue? how far are we from being as little children in malice and
humility, such we must become, our Course is far from being finished. O
brethren, Jesus Christ will adopt us to himself, and we by the Spirit are to do
it, that we may be meet spouses to him, then it will appear that we desire his
coming indeed, if we lay out all your might to prepare for it; if the heart be
^luttish, and so we let it lie, if we neglect our ornaments, are careless, put
them not on, be not decking our selves, how can we say, we love his appearing,
even the appearing of the Bridegroom?

But then 2. How much more have Sinners to do? It is true, he delays his
coming, and so he has a great while in respect of thee: how many years has he
waited upon thee to be gracious to thee, and yet thou are where thou wast at
first? Ah dear friends! if Jesus Christ find you that profess his name in your
blood at that day, what will become of you? Will you have time to repent, if
you repent not? it will not be the time of love, but of displeasure: it had
been better for you, you had never had such warning: O do not despise the
riches of his goodness, and long-sufferings toward you: O consider your ways,
and the Condition of your souls at the last, and turn to the Lord your God with
all your hearts, and not feignedly close with Jesus Christ; get oil into your
Lamps, and into your vessels, for why will ye die, why should that day come
upon you before you are ready for it? O make have Brethren, you are this day
warned to fly, that is to say, with all speed to haste away from the wrath to
come: for judgment lingers not, it will not stay beyond the appointed time,
even your own appointed time, for the number of your months are with God, Job
14.
it will not stay a jot longer; now you do not know whether this may be the
day, the night, this Sabbath the last, this warning the last: therefore lay
hold upon the opportunity. O that the Lord Jesus would seize but upon some of
our hearts, that we might make a good Use of this delay! And O bless his name,
and let us all admire his goodness to us, that he does delay his coming, that
we have time and space to repent, to work out our salvation in, and that until
all the fullness of Christ be come in. It is his long-suffering, not willing we
should perish, but come to repentance. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
O that we were thus wise, that we could thus consider our latter end. But so
much for this Doctrine.

THEY ALL SLVMBRED AND SLEPT. Here I say, you have the occasion which the flesh
took from the delay or carrying Verse 5.
of Christ to slumber, and sleep all of them, both wise and foolish. Some have
understood it of the sleep of death, that they al dyed, good as well as bad,
but this cannot be so, for it is not true, understand the coming of Christ
which way you will, If for his coming to the universal judgment; it is not
true, for all shall not sleep, but some 1 Cor. 15. 51*
shall be changed as the Apostle has it. If we understand it of his particular
coming, to summon us to appear before him: It is less true, for when the
summons comes, it is before we dye. Death indeed is his Messenger, or
Sergeant; and therefore they are not dead, before he comes to fetch them,
besides it is not so usual to set forth death by a double expression, of
slumbring and sleeping, but rather sleeping only. Besides this slumbring, and
Mark 13. 35, 36.
sleeping here, is noted as a failing in the wise virgins as well as the
foolish, if I understand it aright, for it is the privation of that
watchfulness, which is enjoined, and wherewithal is wound up in the close, and
by this parable he shows us the sad inconveniences of sleeping and slumbring,
and the incidency of it to us; and therefore exhorts us to watch. Now sure, to
dye is not any fault, when we are called to it, but an appointment of God for
us to dye, to submit to which, to be willing to which is a grace, and not a
sin. Again, in this parable there seems to be some time for the getting of
oil, or at least for them to use some endeavors to get it though it be in
vain, which may be indeeed after a summons to death, there may be some little
time which a hypocrite may think to improve to get grace, though it prosper
not, but after death, there remains nothing but judgment. The particular
first, and afterward the general.

The time of their sleeping is considerable indeed, and that is it seems to
be just a little before their Lord comes, the L. Jesus, for it was the cry
that wakened them, Behold the Bridegroom comes. Whether we look upon this
coming of Christ to be his last and general coming, and so understand the ten
Virgins collectively for all the visible Church, then found on earth; it is
considerable that they shall generally be found sleeping, you know how the
Evangelist sets forth in the former chapter, wherein the Disciples ask him
when those things shall be, and what shall be the signs of his coming, and of
the end of the world. When Jerusalem should be destroyed, when he would come
gloriously by his Spirit, and word prevailing Mat. 24. 3.
over the world, suddenly like lightning passing from one end to the other, as
some understand that. Or whether we make that coming of Christ, and the end of
the world all one; It should seem this is to be referred to the answer, to the
third, the end of the world, as it was in the days of Noah, they were eating
and drinking, and never minded, were careless, and asleep, until the world was
in a flood about them; note here, in the end they shall be asleep, alike secure
and drowsy, and as little look for the end of the world until all be on a
flame about their ears. And Satan's letting loose after Rev. 20. 7.
the thousand years being imprisoned, seems to speak sad work he will make
among men, immediately before the last end. Or if we understand it
distributively of each Saint, as sometimes in the same Scripture the H. Ghost
speaks of the Church collectively and distributively Cant. 1. 4.
draw me, we will run after thee, so here the Virgins, they all slumbred and
slept, and so they might do, if they did it singly, near the time of his
approach to each of them to take them to himself for ever, or separate them
from himself for ever, which is the case of the foolish virgins. I say it is
alike considerable, and may give us ground of a note of observation by and by.
It is true indeed some understand that in the beginning they went forth to meet
the Bridegroom, by a Prolepsis, or Anticipation, as if they did not go forth at
all to meet him until after the cry was made, but I cannot see the reason of
it. They would have it, that Christians are very apt to be sleepy in the
beginnings of their faith, and work of faith which indeed may be so: but
methinks that does not so well suit with the time of first-love, which the
Scripture often mentions, men are usually most forward then, and most
watchful and wakeful then. Nor do I know any inconvenience but Rev. 2. 4.
they might sleep in the way in their journey going forth to meet the
Bridegroom; and methinks the tarrying of the Bridegroom being interposed
between their setting forth toward him, and their sleep does plainly argue it,
if we may argue from these things, but they will argue as much for the one way
as for the other; so that I would rather take it thus.

And however it be, that with particular circumstance be not to be too much
strained, when we have the scope of the Parable, yet remember that this we are
now upon is the main thing, if I understand it aright, for this sleeping here
is the privation of that watching which is a duty so often and so much pressed
upon the Disciples in the former chapter, and this and many other places, and
this appears to be the scope by our Saviors winding up all in that
Exhortation, therefore watch, for ye know not what ^our he will come, the
foolish virgins and wise, both were too foolish in this, when he tarryed they
slept, and while they slept he came; and what prejudice it was to them
afterward, likely you may hear more fully; therefore says our Savior watch.
Therefore, this if I do insist a little upon it, I hope it will not be amiss,
it being the scope of the Parable.

They all slumbred and slept, here it will not be amiss for the further opening
the words to tell you What kind of sleep this is, and the degrees of it; for
the kind, you must know brethen, we are As Genesis 15. fell upon Abraham. Mat. 26.
40.
not speaking of a bodily sleep, whether ordinary, or extraordinary, from a
natural, or a supernatural cause such deep sleep as fell upon some, though the
Disciples were much blamed for their sleeping, when they should have watched,
and prayed; I take it their natural sleep was not there considered, but as an
effect of their spiritual sleep; their souls were asleep, and thence they slept
when they should have been praying, to have been a comfort to Christ in that
his Agouy: but we are now to speak of a spiritual sleep, the sleep of the soul.
Indeed the soul considered as a spiritual being, in its natural capacity,
properly never sleeps, but the body: It is never weary of its actings, but
the body is; which it uses as its instrument, as it never grows old, so it
never grows sleepy; and therefore we do not consider the soul neither in a
natural capacity, only as it is a spiritual being, but in a supernatural
capacity, that is to say, as it has some divine qualities put upon it, whereby
it acts and works toward God, and toward Christ, as natural Agents act by
their qualities, the fire by its heat, so the soul by its faith, and by its
love, and by its humility. So then, we are here considering not a naked soul,
but a soul as it has either in reality or else in appearance put on Christ for
righteousness, and for holiness, is raised up from that death in sin, to a li^e
of grace or love to God. Now this soul so considered alas sometimes it falls
asleep. So much for the kind of sleep. 1 Cor. 1. 30(...)


For the degrees of the sleep, here they are two (...) two words, and of two
significations, as indeed our own English words do plainly distinguish, you
know to slumber, is much less then to sleep in our experience of it, to
slumber, is when a man only does nap or nod, he is not fast asleep as it were,
between sleeping and waking, a little thing waketh him; now he is awake, and
then is napping again, but not so fast as to have the senses altogether sealed
up, as in a sleep; then it is otherwise, there must be much ado to wake a man,
when he is in such a sleep. So it is in this case, This spiriritual sleep,
there are degrees, a napping, and nodding; now asleep and then awake again, we
are neither awake nor asleep, there are interruptions successively in our
sleeping and waking: But when a man is asleep, he goes on away with it,
continues so great a while, sleep has seized upon him, locked him, and sealed
up, and made him sure as I may say, which what it is, shall farther be opened
by and by, only here let us take up the Doctrinal Observations from the words,
which shall be only these two.

The people of God which are wise to salvation, as well as foolish Doct. 1.
formal professors are liable to slumber, and sleep, the best men and women are
liable to it.

That the Saints may fall into slumbering and sleeping, when they 2.
had most need to be awake, as you see in this case. Happily I may handle them
distinctly, if I see it may not be too tedious.

For the first, that the best of the Saints, such as are wise to salvation, yet
may slumber and sleep, I think there needs not much to be said by way of
confirmation, you see this is plainly the heart of the Parable we have in hand,
or else I know not what it is; Jonah you know he was fast asleep in the side of
the ship, it was bodily Jonah 1. 5.
sleep indeed, but it was an effect of this spiritual sleep that was upon him,
his graces were now sleeping, his fear of God, against whom he had sinned in
running away from him, and his self-denial, these were asleep, and made him so
secure, that though they were in a storm he feared it not, as a drunkard that
sleeps upon the top of a Mast, in greatest danger, and sees it not, nor so
much as dreameth of it, and it is thought by some also that Zech. 9. 1.
Zachary that good Prophet who had so many visions from the Lord, that he was
drowsy and sleepy notwithstanding, more then was meet, his mind as well as his
body, but there shall be no question made of the Disciples, they were the best
of men then alive, they were first chosen out of the world, the world is a
wilderness they were as a garden enclosed; therefore the best considered in
respect of others, and yet you find how often our Savior endeavors to stir
them up to watchfulness; What I say to you, I say to all; watch, watch and
pray. And how much in these chapters, surely it argues they were liable to
sleep, they were prone to it, else that lesson would not have rung so much in
their ears. Or would David have come over so often with that, quicken me O Lord
according to thy word, quicken me according to thy word; but that he found
himself going, napping and nodding. But if we will Psalm. 119. 25, 37. and 40.
go to the Christian of Christians, the flower in the garden enclosed, there
were three Disciples that were favorites, it seems that the Lord Jesus took
with him as witnesses of his transfiguration before, and now to his passion and
Agony; yet notwithstanding, these favorites, when they should watch with
Christ, they fall asleep, their souls were asleep in a great part; and
therefore their Mat. 26. 40.
bodies also were asleep. However our Savior says, the spirit is willing, but
the flesh is weak; the spirit is in part weak, and unwilling; else if perfect,
it would have kept them awake, there is a willingness, and unwillingness; and
for an act the unwillingness Ioh. 21. 18.
may prevail against the willingness, as in this case: Peter should be carried
whether he would not, and yet sure he would; there his willingness prevailed:
but I will not stand any longer, only note you here brethren: one thing
farther is this; that they fell asleep the second time, and the third time
after they had been reproved for it again and again, and that sharply that they
had nothing to say; they knew not what to say, says the Evangelist, and yet
they fell to it again; if these were so apt to fall asleep, sure then much more
such poor weaklings as we are in comparison of them.

Well then, if any one further enquire, What this slumbring and sleeping is;

By slumber and sleep, I understand brethren the unbending the bow of our
souls, as sleep is a cessation of the animal actions of a Mark 14. 40.
living creature, by the obstructon of the animal spirits, by the abundance of
vapors ordinarily, there are some other cases, but this is not so much for our
purpose. Slumbring is when there is a little shorter failing, or cessation of
the actions of a living creature, when the senses are binding, as I may say,
but they break through it, and so awaken the person does; there is a double
principle in man, in every child of God I mean; there is a corrupt and
regenerate part, there is flesh and spirit, as you have it in that of our
Savior, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak; the flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; this flesh, this corrupt
part we may not unfitly brethren resemble to the vapors, Romans 7. Psalm. 5. ^7.
that continually arise from the stomach toward the head. And the Spirit to the
Nerves, the instruments of action, the graces of the spirit are the nerves of
the spirit indeed: and by some of them, as by the nerves the continual supplies
of grace, and fullness of Christ the head, where the fullness of the animal
spirits are, is communicated to all the parts, to the strengthening of all
graces, that is to say by our faith. Now this being so, I take it then a man
slumbers, and sleeps, When his corrupt part does either with a less, or a
thicker steam of lusts seize upon (as I may say) and hinder the graces of the
spirit from doing their work, from acting, specially that grace of faith which
indeed does derive from the head Jesus Christ, the spirits lively influences;
therefore not unfitly is corruption compared to wet moorish places, a moorish
^ennish heart that is full of such corruption, or a body full of such humors
you know is much more sleepy then another.

Well then to bring it to an issue, when sin so fully prevails over us, as to
damp the graces of the spirit, either for a shorter time, it being quickly
dispelled, there is a slumbring, or for a longer time, there is Romans 8. (...).
a sleeping; aliquando bonus dormit at Homerus. So that brethren when ever we
are called to act any grace of the spirit, and we do it not, though it be but
for an act, that is as I may say a slumbring though you may quickly recover
your selves; If it be for more Ioh. ^0. 25.
acts, or continue any time, it is a sleep. Thomas his faith was asleep, he
would not believe, his unbelief prevailed much, seized upon his faith, bound it
as I may say; and so ignorance and blindness prevailing over the understanding.
But for faith, methinks that is plain, When the son of man comes, whether it
be to that general day, or any particular day of avenging his people, shall be
find faith upon the earth? faith in act to believe this, alas people will be
asleep, their faith surprised: and so for love, which is another Luke. 18. 8.
Rev. 2. 4.
grace, it is prophesied of the latter times, the love of many shall wax cold:
the Church of Eph^sus had lost her first love, she was fallen asleep, this is
the active grace, faith works by it, now this action ceased; as in a man
asleep, his members languish, and hang down, and are not fit for any action, so
their love waxed cold. And so when instead of a holy vigilance there creeps a
security on a people, which is a main ingredient into this spiritual sleep, as
the virgins here, they were all secure, they looked not for the coming of Jesus
Christ. And so when instead of a fervency of spirit in serving God: a deadness,
a dullness creeps upon Romans 12. 11.
men, they pray as if they prayed not, if it be but for an act, it is
slumbering; now they are dead, and then they are lively it may be next time,
and then they are dead again; this is slumbering, napping and nodding: Now they
can act their faith, and then they cannot; now they can avoid this sin and
that, and then they cannot; but are overtaken by it, this is slumbring: and
alas brethren, are we not all of us liable to this? Yea, it may be these things
seize upon us more violently, we not only offend in many Iam. 3. 2.
things, but continually lying secure, continue in such a dull listless frame,
little or no actings or strivings of faith, or love, or fervency, or waiting
for Jesus Christ, and his appearing, this is sleeping. Well, I wish we had not
too general, and too good proof of it by our own experience.

You have had already in this part of the discourse, the general reason of this
sleepiness of the Saints respecting our selves, and that is the (...), a seed
of that Poppy-seed which lays us so often asleep, a filthy heart, streaming
continually filthy gross vapors, which clog and seize upon our graces, and
hold them prisoners as I may say for a time, that we cannot act them: But I
will a little more particularly descend to speak to some cases.

Not to speak of that vindicative hand of God upon some, when in vindicative
justice he sends upon men a spirit of slumber, and of sleep; for I hardly
think that is competent to the Saints, though Romans 11. 8.
to hypocrites, it may; yet those are not they, I am mainly to speak to in this
discourse, but of other causes, And

First, A cause of it may be this, sloathfulness it casts men into a deep
sleep: It is so in naturals, and it is so in spirituals; a sloathful Prove. 19.
15.
man, that will not labor, the vapors gather, and becloud, and bemist him,
that he cannot break through them, but they seize upon his senses, and hold him
prisoner a great while, and if he be stirred, yet a little sleep, a little
slumber, a little folding of Prove. 24. 33.
the hands to sleep, that is the slothful man's guise, and as the door turns
upon the hinges up and down, so the slothful man does upon his bed, Labor and
pains taking, it dispels the vapors, scatters them, and so they clear up, so
it is here: a sloathful spirit is the immediate forerunner of this sleep;
therefore the Apostle exhorts them, not sloathful in business, fervent in
spirit, serving Romans 12. 11.
the Lord. And you shall find brethren, when he that had one talent given him,
he improved it not; the Lord calls him a wicked, and sloathful servant: Alas,
his soul was asleep, and his talent laid tosleep in a Napkin; well this is one
cause, if we have opportunities in our hands to do good, and we do it not, as
the Apostle Mat. 25. 26, 30
exhorts us to do; we are sloathful. A man that is idle, shall have very much
ado to keep himself from sleeping; a wonder Judge. 4. 21.
brethren, if we be not all asleep, we have so many opportunities to do good,
such talents put into-our hands, some of us, most of us, and yet do so little
with them.

Secondly, Another cause of sleeping may be wearyness, you know the sleep of
the laboring man is sweet; so you see Sisera, after he 2. These. 3. 13.
was toyled and spent with his fighting and flight, he was ready to lie down to
sleep presently* so brethren, it is in this case, when we have run a while in
the race that is set before us, or fought against our corruptions, toyled hard;
if we sit down when weary we are asleep presently; O says the Apostle, be not
weary of well-doing, if you be, you will fall asleep! this we find in the case
of them in the Hebrews, they were harased and persecuted grievously, their
faith and patience, were even tired out, alas their hands therefore were weak,
and knees were feeble, their members began to languish, and sleep to seize upon
them. Sometimes when we toil all night, and take nothing, we spend, and are
spent, we are apt to be weary brethren, and then it is two to one but we fall
asleep; Heb. 12. 12.
That is another cause of this sleep.

Thirdly, Another Cause may be the false questions which men make, the
mistaking of things, a man mistaking the day for the night; he slumbers it may
be, and thinks it is night; or the day is not at hand he sleeps; this is
clear I think in the present case; What made the virgins thus to give sleep to
their eyes, and slumber to their eyelids? they thought their Lord would not
come yet, he delayed his coming, and likely they thought he would do so still;
and therefore thought they might sleep, or else atleast they might think, while
he delayed his coming, it was no great matter whether they slept or waked, it
would be of little availment to them; and therefore they even laid them down
formally to sleep; O how easily are we lulled asleep with such mistakes as
these! now how Mat. 25.
false was this in the mean time, for there is much to be done while he
tarryes, to wayt for him; to have our lights burning, our lamps trimmed, our
ornaments ready, to wait for him until he come; for we shall be paid for our
waiting, as well as for our our working, Luke 12. 35, 36, 37.
and then we should be ready to open to him whenever he comes: this another.

Fourthly, Another cause or occasion at least of this sleeping, what is it but
a letting down our fear and care; if we served the L. continually with a holy
trembling as the Psalmist calls upon us, we should hardly sleep, a man that has
a trembling heart, sleep passes from his eyes; or a man that has his head f^ll
of cares, and his heart also; they will keep him waking: so Jacob, his Genesis 31.
40.
sleep departed from his eyes: O the care he had of Labans sheep! he slept not,
Ah how far short are many of us, that have the charge of the slock of Christ,
purchased with his precious blood, for we sleep, and let the Wolves come,
sleep, and let the envious man sow tares. Paul, O how watchful a man wash, how
diligent? he warned them Act 26. 31. 2 Cor. 11. 28.
night and day with tears; what was the matter? O the care of all the Churches
were upon him. Why brethren, we have every one the care of our own souls; yea
and of one another, we ought to watch over one another, and tender one
another; to walk fearfully lest we be stumbling blocks one to another, hurt one
another; we are our brothers keepers, and if we have this care upon us lively
of our own souls and others, it will keep us waking: The rich man's abundance
will not suffer him to sleep, Eccles. 5. 12.
he is afraid of losing it; a man that has a great charge about him, and walks
through woods and dangerous places, he is afraid of every one he meets, lest
he be robbed, he will hardly sleep: O you have precious souls to lose brethren!
And some of you have grace to lose; which may in part be lost in its own
nature, it is looseable; being but a creature depending continually upon a
divine supply, as the Ray upon the Sun: If there be now such a care as this, it
will keep the soul awake; but now if we grow confident and bold, and do not
fear always; we are then falling asleep: so it is, see it plainly in the
Disciples that went with Christ into the garden, to behold his Agony, they were
wonderfully heavy asleep; the soul was asleep, their graces were not upon the
wing, what was the matter? if you mind it, they were the men that above all
others had been most confident and secure, and had expressed it before; Peter
said, that though all men should deny him he would not: and when our Savior
told him, he should deny him, he was so blinded with his confidence now, that
he Mat. 26. 33, 34 38.
would not believe Jesus Christ, but rather believed himself, and his own
folly; he said he would rather dye for him, then deny him: Well, when it comes
to the pinch, he falls asleep; Ah Peter, sleep thou, thou of all other men,
methinks should have waked with me, will thou dye with me, and yet cannot
wake but fall asleep? not one hour wake with me, thou, such a confident man;
Ma^k 14. 37.
and yet when it comes to the pinch, fall asleep? And the two sons of Zebedeus
with him, they were very confident, they would sit on the right and left hand
of Christ in his kingdom, Why can you drink of the cup I am to drink of? Yea
say they, we can: and be Ma(...) 20. 20, 21 22.
baptized with the baptism I am baptized with? yea, they could. Now those are
the men above others that are asleep: Who can tell, but if some other of the
Disciples that had been lower in their own thoughts, and had walked more
tremblingly before him, but they might have waked when those slept? This
another.

Fifthly, Stupifying the head, the senses, with some injury, it will lay a man
asleep, yea more then ordinarily, into a swoun, so that he feels nothing; as
for instance, let a man have a great blow upon his head, it stonyeth him, he
falls asleep under it, he can feel nothing; now his senses are locked up, as if
in a dead sleep; it is so here, a great sin brethren, it stupifies a man's
conscience, it makes him past feeling for the present in a manner; we would
hardly think it, it may be we would think that men are rather apt to fall
asleep, that have none of those great sins, but only of an ordinary nature;
they are apt to slumber, and that great sins 2 Samuel 12.
would rather awaken men, and stir men's Consciences; indeed it may be they may
put a man to some more torment a little at present, but afterward they do
stupifie; the deceitfulness of sin makes hard, as the Apostle says, specially
if it lie unrepented of a while; do you not see how David lay in a dead sleep a
great while, upon that his fall, in the matter of Vriah, all his senses Psalm.
52. 15.
closed up, he could not open his mouth to speak to God; O Lord open thou my
lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise: And so Jonah his sin was very
great, running away from God to Tarshish, when he sent him to Niniveh, and who
more sleepy then he in the vessel? up, why sleep thou, thou sleeper, said
they; alas the poor Mariners looked upon themselves as lost men, he feared
nothing, he was asleep, Conscience asleep, Soul asleep, Fear asleep, he was
benumbed with that great blow he had given his soul, he was more sleepy, and
heavy then natural men themselves; their Consciences were sooner awaked by the
hand of God then his was, a fearful condition. Now be not mistaken brethren, I
mean not by great sins, only such as are gross in our own account, but the
greatness of a sin lies in the liking of it; indeed if there be a liking or
love to a greater sin, it makes it so much the greater; but if there be a less
sin, it makes it very great, even greater then the act of another sin, that
for the act is greater then it.

Sixthly, Another Cause you know is surfeting and drunkenness, Excess in the
use of the creatures, we use to say, laden bellies, leaden heels, the bellies
being full, the bones would have rest; It is so in nature, and so it is with
the soul: Lot, when he was drunk, he fell asleep, and slept so deeply, that his
daughters played the Gen* 9. 33.
harlots with him, and knew nothing neither when they rose, nor when they lay
down; truly brethren, the drunkenness of the mind casts men asleep, if a man be
drunk with erroneous principles of looseness, it casts him into a sleep,
presently the head is giddy with it; but chiefly if a man be drunk with
passions, or drink, or surfeit of the delights of the creature, abusing the
world in using of it, this was the sleep of the old world, they never dreamed
of the flood, they believed it not at all: Why? they eat, they drink, Luke 17.
26, 27.
they married, they gave in marriage. There is no Copulative between the words
in the Text, which they call an Asyndeton, as if there were no distance of time
between one and the other; they made it their work and business to give
themselves to these things. And so it will be at the last day, when Christ
shall come; This is the sleeping then surely, in a great measure, this day came
upon the foolish virgins, yea, and wise too unawares; and why might not this be
a great part of their sleeping, or a Cause of it, they thought now they had
made sure of the main work, they might give themselves a little more liberty
then before, and might busy themselves in the world as well as others, and so
were excessively taken up with it, and then the day of the Lord comes
unawares. Therefore our Savior gives this caution, take heed Luke* 12. 34.
your hearts at any time be not overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, and
the cares of this life, and that day come upon you at unawares. Alas men are
too busy in the world to mind the coming of Jesus Christ, or to wayt for him,
they are drunk; and therefore fall asleep, drunk with delights, with love to
these things, care about them, they have more then their load as we say of men
drunk, and therefore they sleep. I wish this were not the sin of the Saints
themselves.

Seventhly, Another Cause may be the company of sleepy ones, this may be the
case, at least to some, and it is not unlikely but the foolish virgins, and
wise walking together; the foolish might give such an example, and the wise not
wise enough to avoid: but would sleep for company, and so it is still in the
visible Church because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold,
some Mat. 24. 12.
think this may be hinted in that place, but sure it is that examples are very
potent, plus vivitur exemplis, specially if a person be in repute, a man of
name or renown among the Saints, a brother or a sister, whose praise is in the
Churches if such a one as this shall grow earthly and carnal, and that
carnality and earthliness, damp the soul, and bring a deadness upon the graces,
why how many will be ready to think they may sure let the rayns as loose as
they, and Gal. 2. 14.
may seek after the world as well as they. Peter's example you see, when he
dissen bled, what a force it had; thou compellest the Gentiles to live as as do
the Jews, by his example he did it when the Jews came down from Jerusalem;
therefore David complains indeed Psalm. (...) 20. (...).
of the example of wicked woe is me, etc. And so Isaiah complains w^ is me, I
dwell among a people of uncircumcised lips, and I am such my self; and they
help it forward, but indeed the examples o* loose, and cold, and sleepy
Professors are more mischievous, especially ^am. 6. 5.
if they have been more lively, and insensibly decline, and decay, because, we
have the less suspicion of them; and therefore they are notable quench-coals
indeed. This is another ground.

Eighthly, And the last I shall speak to shall be this, from all the former,
When the Lord his holy spirit is grieved by all these, he withdraws his
spirit, and then we fall fast asleep, and alas if a man be waked out of a dead
sleep, except there be one watching by him, or one that has a Lethargical
distemper apt to prevail upon him, except he has some to sit by him to keep
him awake, he falls asleep; and such pains is the holy Spirit at, sitting up
with us to keep us awake; Now if we do grieve him, and he depart from us,
presently deep sleep falls upon us like an armed man, and we cannot resist, so
the Disciples had grieved the spirit of God by their self-confidence, nothing
more; and therefore he leaves them: well, he will see what the end of this
their trusting in lies will do, and he lets them fall again, and again, and
you see how woeful sleepy and drowsy they were, they could not watch one hour,
they fell asleep again and again, three times after another, though they were
sharply reproved for it, they were pricked, and provoked to awake, but it would
not do; alas, the Spirit was withdrawn from them: Thus much shall serve for the
Arguments.

For the Use then brethren in the first place, May it not Use 1.
serve to humble us, surely this is one end of Gods leaving his people to such
a drowsy frame, that they may be humbled; as it was in the case of his
Disciples, he would make them know how weak they were, if he did but depart
from them, as confident as they were; how should we be ashamed of our selves?
as a servant when he sleeps, when he should be about his business, and is
reproved for it; alas, he is confounded, he has nothing to say for himself, so
the Disciples, they wist not what to say, says the Text, What, are you now
says our Savior, asleep? now, when it is a time to exercise your graces, and
to pray if ever you will pray, are you now asleep? He that sleeps in harvest,
is a son Ma^k 14. 40.
that causes shame to himself and others, it is a time of work, and to be
lazing and drowsing upon the bed, it is a very shameful thing indeed.

O that the Lord would lay this as a Plaster upon our Souls, as many as are
drowsy, or have been drowsy, or sleepy, to hold the Plaster on; though it be
a smarting plaster, yet better it is for us to have some smart, then to dye of
the Lethargy, better be cupped and scarified, and anything: Ah, when God cures
sin by sin, it is a smarting cure, like the curing of a poisoned wound, with
more poison, or fetching out of fire with more fire, wherein the severeness of
the Physician appears, and his love to us, who had rather we should smart
then dye; well, be humbled for what we have done, if this work be some smart
unto us, our many sleepy Sermons, Prayers, sloathfulness, security, we have
been; and it is well if we be not upon our beds now, this very day, if our
souls be not asleep: If you be, the Lord humble you for it, as he humbled his
own Disciples, that this may be your care.

But not only so, But let us all take notice of, and be humbled for our great
proneness to slumber, and sleep. Water the root brethren: If we be awake, and
have not lately been overtaken, yet remember we have the root within us, water
that with our tears, be humbled before the Lord for it, yea labor we to walk
continually humble before the Lord for the sight and sense of it; it will
appear how apt we are to fall asleep, if we consider that whatever our
condition is, we are apt to it. For a prosperous state, this is like a rocking,
and singing to the soul; how quickly did the Church fall asleep in Constantine
his days, in his lap, and the child in the mothers lap, Outward prosperity,
inward prosperity. Was not David slumbring when he said, I shall never be
moved; and so Job. 29 18. Psalm. 30 6.
Job, I said I should dye in my nest; what not only when he had an outward
flourishing condition, but when he had such a strength of grace, as to enable
him to do much for God, to walk uprightly with him, to be fruitful in good
works, then, I shall dye in my nest, I shall multiply my days as the sand, he
was even going then: O this is matter of humbling indeed brethren, that when we
should be putting forth the fruits of his love unto our souls, we should drop
asleep!

But then a man would think this is more natural now, to fall asleep in the Sun
shine, and in the midst of the sweet refreshings of the spirit of God, as
music and delightful things, which do mulcere, they do persuade sleep, if we
have not somewhat to keep awake. But a man would think now that an ^our of
trouble and affliction (except it be so great as to stupifie it) should rather
Psalm 77. 3.
keep a man awaking, as the Psalmist, thou holdst me waking, says he, in the
night: Now the Disciples, they were in an hour of temptation, and a great
grief, and trouble, and though they knew now their Lord was ready to depart
from them, and now Luke 22. 45.
entering upon his agony: yet alas how dead, and lumpish were they? they fell
asleep: though there may be some natural cause for grief of the soul, to make
the body heavy, as it seems to be rendered as a reason; for they were sad,
they were heavy with grief. Yet methinks this should so much the more have
quickened their spirits; But alas brethren, we are even so prone to sleep, that
if the spirit of the Lord do not watch with us continually to keep us awake, we
shall sleep, if it be on the top of a Mast: Little dream men! And this is the
case of us all, as you see in Jonas; O that this were much upon us, that God
would humble us for this, the very inclination of our hearts to slumber, and
sleep, and laziness, whereby he is robbed of his glory, and our souls much of
our comfort, and the profit we might gain, as will afterward appear.

A little further to amplify this Use: Surely brethren, It is matter of great
mourning to look upon the sad effects of men's sleeping among us, look without
us, look within us, look into the Church, look into our Families, look into our
own hearts, and do you not find brethren, that generally there has been a
sleeping, O Prove. 24. 30.
the Lord reprove us for it, and shame us out of it, as he did his own
Disciples! Is not the Church of Christ, the Vineyard of the Lover-run with
Weeds, with Nettles, and Hemlocks, and poisonous weeds which do even kill the
good plants? When was the face of this field, the Church of Christ in England
and Ireland, so overgrown with such weeds, when was there such a face of
things? It is true, it is not long since the Wilde-Boars of the Wood did wast,
Psalm. 80. 13.
and such as would have plucked, and rooted it up, and laid it waste, had not
the Lord wounded them; but now, how does it swarm with little Foxes that spoil
the Vines, which have tender grapes; and is there much difference between
plucking up a Corn field by Caut. 2. 15.
the roots, and letting it be overgrown with weeds unto chaoking! How comes
this to pass? Surely brethren, the reason is because we have slept, While men
slept the enemy did this: Magistrates, who are the keepers of the Lord his
Vineyard, they have slept surely, the good Lord pardon it, and open their eyes,
they have not kept the Vineyard, but exposed it to the evil man to do what he
would in it: they have drunk in that unsound principle many of them, that they
have nothing to do about the Church and Kingdom of Christ; and this like a
poison of Poppy or Opium, Cant. 1. 6.(...)
has laid them fast asleep as to this; if God had not watched over his
Vineyard, better then men that have the charge of it, what had become of it
before this? Were it not a sad thing think you for a nursing father to have no
more care of his Charge, then to let any one who would come into the Nursery,
go in and out, and bring what poison he would with him, and give it when, or to
whom he pleased; would this be a discharge of his duty? this Isa. 49. 23.
is a sad nursing. Well, sure I am, Magistrates are Nursing fathers, and ought
to be so, and if it be not their duty as much to hinder the poisoning, as to
further the feeding of the Church, I do not understand. Well, they have slept,
they have not kept the Vineyards of the Lord.

For Ministers, they have slept also surely, they have not been so diligent,
they have not seen afar off when the evil has been coming, Mat. 13. 25.
and given warning of it; O how did Paul warn the people day and night with
tears! for he knew that after his departure Act. 20. 31.
grievous Wolves would come in; where has there been almost, such a spirit as
this of Paul? doubtless brethren, there have been some who have stood in the
Watchtower, and have seen these things and have blown the Trumpet. O but there
has not been that tenderness of doing of it, it has not been done in that
lively manner as it should be, it may be if there had been more mourning in
secret then for these things, if they would not hear, it might have been
otherwise.

And have not the people of God been to blame, are not they the remembrancers
of God as well as his Ministers, yea that make mention Isa. 62. 6.
of the Lord, or are his remembrancers, and have not they slept, while men
slept, the enemy has done this, Indeed we are apt to eye the miscarriages of
others, and impute the sad condition of the Churches to this person, and that
person, to the male administration Ier. 8. 6.
of Magistracy and Ministry, and surely they are not excusable before the Lord,
but all this while we forget to smite upon our thighs, and cry out, Ah what
have we done? that the Vineyard of the Lord Jesus is thus overgrown with weeds;
have we not given the Lord rest? he would have us give him no rest, we have let
him alone, that is to say, we have not even wearyed him with our complaints,
our sighs, and tears, and groans, and prayers of faith; whence does deliverance
come usually but from the prayers of such as are Princes with God, it may be
sometimes we pray a little, and sometimes are affected with it; but we fall
asleep again, and give the Lord rest, has not he the hearts of Magistrates in
his hands, and cannot he turn them as the Rivers of water, whithersoever he
will? and so the hearts of Ministers, can he not give them such a spirit, as
day and night to warn the people with tears: O surely, if we did speak less to
men, then sometimes we do happily, and more to God, it might do better. But
then the Prayers of Faith are wanting, we are ready to despond; our hands hang
down when our hopes are not lively, and therefore no marvel if iniquity abound
and prevail: surely brethren, there is a general sleeping among us.

The sad effects in our own Families: what sad work is there many times, and
all for want of watching? Parents asleep, Masters asleep, act not their Faith
in Prayer: for their in a relations, it may be, and therefore they miscarry
many of them manner. But to come nearer, Alas brethren in our own souls, what a
strange temper are we in many times, not fit for any thing! O how does
Corruption grow upon us as pride, and passion, and Earthliness, and what is the
reason? we sleep, but though we sleep, Satan never sleeps? O how does he
watch such an opportunity to water his plants in our hearts when we are asleep?
alas, can we tell how often brethren, we have lost our frame of heart when the
Lord has humbled, and melted, and enlarged our souls, Our Wine is quickly
turned into water again, and we know not how we lost it: Surely brethren, we
were asleep, and then what sad Lamentings there are after the Lord again, till
we come to our selves? Well, the Lord make us sensible of it, both for our own
souls, and for the Churches of Christ: If the Lord Jesus should come to us
brethren, as he did to his Disciples, now and reprove us, and ask us; what are
ye all asleep, could ye not watch with me one little while? How comes it to
pass that your Churches, your Families, your hearts are so choakt with tares
and weeds? What could we answer him, should we have a word to say for our
selves? well the Lord affect our hearts with it: so much for this Use.

The next use of the point shall be a distinguishing word between Use 2.
the sleep of Formalists, sinners, and the sleep which is incident to the
Saints, the people of God: the wise Virgins slept their sleep, and the foolish
theirs: and however in the expression there seems to be no difference, yet
there is a difference sure between them to be found; for it may be, this may
trouble some poor souls; who may think because they sleep, therefore they are
surely of the foolish Virgins: And others may be emboldned, and their hands
strengthened: What the best sleep as well as others, therefore though this be
my Condition, yet all shall be well: I would therefore add a word, or two to
this.

First, Then remember this: Sinners at the best, and Hypocrites at the best,
their hearts are asleep, and the Saints at the worst, their hearts are awake;
indeed in naturals we use to say, when a person is ready to drop asleep, his
heart is asleep already, but it is not so in Spirituals with the people of God:
Judas when he was at the best that ever he was, before he discovered his
covetousness in the business of the poor, he was unsound at the heart, his
heart was dead, indeed it is a dead sleep that is upon their hearts; and yet he
walked up and down, as men in a deep sleep sometimes will do in a strange
manner, but his heart was asleep; Now Peter he he fell asleep too in the matter
of his denial of Christ, but his heart was awake: though the senses were closed
up for a time, yet when the Son of righteousness broke forth upon him, looked
upon him, you see he presently waked; so the Church, I sleep, but my heart
wakes; in the deepest sleep of the Church of Christ, the heart is Cant. 5. 2.
awake, there are diverse apprehensions of this; Some understand it thus, I
sleep, but my heart wakes, that is to say, Christ, who is as the heart to the
Church, the seal of life, and vital spirits, he wakes, or else taking the
Church Collectively, she sleeps, but the heart waketh, that is to say, she
may miscarry in some lesser matters as External, but in the main, the
fundamentals, the heart of religion, in that she never falls altogether. But we
shall speak to it as it respects particular persons as well as the general, as
doubtless it does: I sleep, but my heart waketh: the Church was Lazy, and
drousie, slumbred and slept, but yet not so: but that the heart was awake, it
was not a dead sleep, and this will appear if we consider two or three things.

1. The Church then has a Conscience not altogether past feeling but in foam
measure awakened: and then 2. The will and affections not altogether lost and
gone in such a Condition. 1. Then the Conscience that has yet some stirring,
and that will appear: because, 1. The Church here knew the voice of her beloved
even when she was asleep, when he came, and called to her my love, my dove, my
undefiled open to me: She now knew the voice of Christ, so, many a drousie soul
that is slumbering and sleeping, knows the hints and motions of the Spirit
which he has, but alas has not power to obey: for sleep has so overcome
them, security has so seized upon them, that though they hear, yet they do
not, as me thinks in that very business of Jehoshai, which I have thought
strange of, when his Conscience was awake, he would hear the voice of the Lord:
in Micah, he 1 King. 22. 29.
thought all the rest of the Prophets of Baal were false, he would have the
Word of the Lord from the mouth of a true Prophet; a man would have thought now
he should have done it presently, being an upright hearted man also, no: yet if
you read the text, you shall find he went with Ahab notwistanding: here he had
a Conscience awake plainly, but yet he did not obey: he was so far engaged now
to Ahab, not only in affinity, but his word was out, and his honor at stake:
and though Conscience likely might check him for the thing, as well as put him
on to enquire of a true Prophet, yet those Lusts now, love to his own honor,
and carnal interest, and affection laid him asleep, he went up notwithstanding,
well this is the case in this place. Can we not many of us set our seals to
this truth? how often in a fit of security have we had Convictions and Checks?
we have heard the voice of Christ: open to me my love, let my word have roo^ in
thee, this thou do is not pleasing to me; O why will thou shut me out, and
deal so unkindly with me, and yet your persons asleep? though we hear many
things, we heed them not much: but turn upon our beds, as the door upon the
hinges, and cannot get off.

2. Conscience is so awake usually in the people of God, as to tell them they
are asleep, they have somewhat secretly whispering them in the ears, that they
are not in the right way, they are slothful or sluggish. David I think was in a
deep a sleep, as any that we read of, yet I can hardly think but David had this
within him some grudgings and misgivings, that all was not well with him at
that time: But because happily this may be common to them with Hopocrites
except they be very fast asleep, indeed, therefore I will rather insist upon
the third.

3. I say usually the People of God as they know they are asleep, when they are
asleep, so they complain of it, they rest not; so questionless sinners do
usually, there is nothing disturbeth them, so far as to complain of it: I sleep
says the Church, but my heart is awake, it appeared the heart was awake
indeed, because she complained of it, as a man that is droufre, and cannot keep
his eyes open, he naps and nods it may be, and wakeneth again; or if he
apprehend himself in danger, to have any pressing business upon him: if he
sleep longer it is unquietly, his mind is troubled with the thing, and it wakes
him often, and he wouldshake it off, but cannot: laboriosius dormiunt quam
vigilant: says one, ^o our Annot. So the Conscience* might then when asleep,
lash them: stir them up many times, tell them, they do amiss, prick them for it,
Nowan Hypocrite will hardly complain of his sleepiness, not in reality, ^f it
be a practice that may ^et him off with men to be whining and complaining, he
will complain happily more to men, then to the Lord; but this poor Creature
that sears the Lord: his sleep, O it lies like lead at his heart, he groans
under it!

But then for the Will that also is awake in part, when a Child of God
sleeps: It was so with Paul, the thing I would not, Romans 7. 15. 19.
that I do; this is most evident in their slumberings, they take a Nod, and
then up again, and would ^^ake it on: they would rather be doing the will of
the Lord, then thus lazing and sleeping. But now many a Hypocrite a formal
professor; he sleeps, and he loves to sleep, whether he sleep, or whether he
wake usually it is all one to him, whether lively, or dead, in the service of
God, so be it: he does his task, for the manner of it, he heedeth it not much:
but the Child of God would not sleep, though he be overtaken with it, it is
against his will.

Yet 2. I will not say, but the Will of a Child of God may be in fault
sometimes in part too, and how great a part is hard to say: as the Church she
lies sleeping upon her bed, it appears her Will was too blame: for she did as
as I may say, set her self to sleep composed her self, as men use to do that
would sleep, lie down, put off their clothes, separate themselves from thoughts
which might disturb them, wink with the eyes, they would sleep: so the Church
here had put off her Clothes, and washed her feet, that was a custom in the hot
Countries. before they went to rest, and lay upon the bed: Now by this it
appears that she was willing to sleep: yea, when the Lord Jesus called upon her
to arise, see how many frivolous excuses she had, as if she could not put on
her Clothes again, and could not defile her feet again, as if it would be a
defilement to her to come to Jesus Christ: Some think it is meant of some
declining from the doctrine of Justification by Christ only, She had washed her
self, and now to come to Christ only, would be a defiling of her. But happily
it is only accommodated to the similitude: A Boy when he is Ioth to rise, how
many excuses will he have; he wants this, and that, and twenty things; so very
ingenious are we, when the will sets the understanding a work indeed, to
find out excuses: so the People of God how loath they are to come to it, through
the hypocrisy of the heart: when God had roused David, he had a Psalm. 32.
mind to sleep still, he was loath to come to confess his sin: but God would not
let him alone, pricked him up, until he was so sore galled and wounded, he
cries out in the disquietness of his soul, and yet would not up: I say the
Children of God may be faulty in his will in a great part, yet afterward
usually it costs them heart smart for it; as it did the Spouse here, of which
afterward. Now an Hypocrite his will is fully engaged usually, though he may
have some Convictions of Conscience, yet the Will is to sin: Yet a little
sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, Prove. 4. 23.
he striveth not against it, but yields up to sleep, and is against them who
would awake him out of it, rather then against himself for sleeping. And though
a Child of God, that is but in part willing to sleep, may at present not take
it so well, until he be thoroughly awaked, of a man that should rouse him up,
yet afterward he will count such a man his greatest friend: well then, here is
the first thing, Hypocrites at the best their hearts are asleep; as the Saints
are not, but at the best they are lively, their Wills are- stirring: and the
Saints at the worst, their hearts are awake more or less, though the Hypocrites
hearts be asleep So then, the Hypocrites sleep when he sleeps, is a through
sleep, senses, and heart, and all, inward and outward and all: the Saints,
their sleep is but outward, they have somewhat alive within, the seed of God
abides within them, which keeps them from such a deadly sleep. Hypocrites
can sleep no further then 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
they were awaked before, and that they do usually altogether: now their hearts
were never awaked thoroughly: but the Child of God does not sleep so far as he
was awaked, that is to say, all that was awaked does not fall asleep again.

Secondly, Another Difference may be this; The one sleeps not, until he has
gotten the main work in some measure made sure, gotten oil in the vessel: the
wise Virgins would not sleep until they had oil in their vessels; then happily
they might think, though they should nap a little, they had that Cruse of oil
which would not fail, their Lamps would not go out in obscure darkness, which
yet was dangerous presumption. But now the foolish Virgin sleeps, and soundly
too, though she had no oil at all in the vessel: Ah dear friends! that is a sad
sign, when a man can fall fast asleep, and knows not but that he is in the
hands of his enemy, and before he awakes, a sword may be in his bowels; when
men can give sleep to their eyes, and slumber to their eyelids, I mean, be as
deep in security, and lazy, and listless as any, though they have no Christ in
them the hope of glory, but in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity,
this is a Hypocrite indeed. Now a Child of God happily may at the beginnings of
Acts 2. 16.
grace nap and nod, and happily sometimes fall asleep, I will not say it cannot
be so, but I think ordinarily it is not so: for you have it in the Scripture
all along, when once those in Acts 2. and the Jailer were awaked, and saw where
they were, even in their blood, did they sleep again, until they had some
assurance of their Conditions? No: O they run up and down as men in a trembling
frame, O what shall we do? what shall we do? is there no hope for us? no
healing by this Jesus whom we wounded? no salvation by this Jesus whom we have
made away? and usually, truly Brethren; I do think that as it is with sin, the
weaker it is when it struggles for life, (as it is with all other things) and
has little life in it, is ready to dye, it striveth and strugleth so strongly
as if it were nothing but life, morsus morientium: so when life is little and
weak, it is so earnest for the increase of it self, and strengthening it self,
that it appears to be all life, and none more vigilant and lively usually then
young Christians; their life is little and young, and therefore as young
Children, they would* be always at the breast. So it is here.

Thirdly, another difference may be this, that though both their sleeping may
be alike dishonorable to Christ among men who take notice of it, yet the one
is not so dangerous as the other: this follows upon the former, which may
indeed rather serve as to prick, to stir and rouse up men then, as a (...), to
judge of our sleeping. The Hypocrite makes as glorious a profession as the
Saint, seems to be as active, and stirring, and vigilant as any, as who
seemed more awake then Judas when he pleads for the poor, yet alas, God knew
the bottom of the business: but I say, they making such a profession now when
they fall asleep, it is as much to the dishonor of God, as if a real Saint do
fall asleep, as now for instance, suppose two, one wise, one foolish, they fall
into some giddy opinion of the times, O let him that thinks he stands take
heed lest he fall! or else both grow worldly, covetous, griping, or vain,
indeed cast off the ways of Gods worship, the great Apostasy of our times. Now
I say, this is alike dishonorable to God: but it is not alike dangerous, for
the one he sleeps, and his sleep proves the sleep of death, as the foolish
Virgins did; for though they were roused with the Cry, Conscience was a waked
it may be, yet their hearts were never roused up out of their sleep; they were
dead-hearted from the beginning, and so they remained: they never did arise
from the dead, that Christ might give them life: the one when he waketh, has
Ep hes. 5. 14.
neither oil nor Lamp, neither reality nor profession, the other has both;
though the Lamp want triming, there is not that lively expression of Christ in
their Conversations as should be, and therefore the light needs snuffing; the
one has the root under ground: but the other neither root, nor branches: so
that you see there is a difference between the sleeping of the Child of God,
and the son of Satan, the wise, and the foolish Virgins.

The third Use of the Doctrine may be this; If so be the Use 3.
people of God may thus sleep; Then brethren, It may be a warning word to us
all, to take heed of it, to avoid it, if it fall upon us, I mean the people of
God, it will prove bitterness in the latter end. Do you believe this, that you
are liable as well as others to sleep? that you have the seed within, you have
those Lusts, such foul hearts, which with their steam, are in danger to benight
you every morning, every day: do you believe this? and do you believe it is a
part of folly, the folly of the wise Virgins, to sleep? what need more to be
said to you concerning these things? will not you avoid that which you judge
evil?

But because we have to do with poor sleepy Creatures, whose souls it may be
are roady to drop asleep, even when they are hearing this, let me a little sot
it on, the Lord make the impression by his own spirit, and bore your ears, and
seal instruction to all our hearts.

1. Then consider brethren, that if once we fall asleep, we lose our discerning
between good and evil in a great measure: the Saints that are of experience;
they have their fenses exercised to discern between Heb. 5. 14.
good and evil: you may happily wake in your sleep, but your eyes are shut,
brethren, and it is a wonder of mercy, if you do not dash your selves to pieces
upon this rock of offense, or that rock of offense, this stone of stumbling,
etc. as men in their sleep sometimes will get up, and climb indeed to the top
of the house, and are they not in great danger of breaking their necks? would
you not pity such a man? O such is the Condition of a Child of God that has a
sleepy soul, a soul in a deep sleep: thou will be ready to judge evil good; and
good evil: Jonah his soul was Jonah 49.
asleep, that sin of his laid him asleep, though a good man: and do you not
know how sadly he missed it? I do well to be angry, yea even to the death: what
could Gain almost have said worse then he did, in this fit? A man in a sleep
cannot discern light from darkness, neither of tastes, nor smells, all is one to
him; when once Peter was asleep, he could deny and forswear the Lord-Jesus:
David in a sleep he cannot discern between the chance of war* and downright
murder; between showing kindness to his faithful servant, one of his worthies
in Israel, and making his Neighbor drunk, a sad Condition! Asa in such a time
when he was asleep, as appears clearly a little before, his 2 Chronicles. 16. 10.
says was lively, and he could rely upon God for the ruin of the Ethiopians,
Lybians, yet now he relies upon Benhadad, King of Syria; to help-him against
the King of Israel, even Basha he was asleep sure, that forsakes God to rely
upon an enemy, and takes such an evil Course to wish him to break his Covenant.
Then the Lord sent Hanani, the Prophet telling him plainly he had done very
foolishly, he would not bear it; he would not be roused out of his sleep,
brought to repentance: Claps the Prophet in Prison, oppresses the people: O
what will a man stick at, brethren, when he cannot discern between good and
evil: where the senses are closed? what will not a blind man run upon, and yet
a good man also? and this leads to a second.

2. When a man is once asleep, alas brethren, the passages between head and
heart, they are obstructed, that nothing almost that he hears will awake him.
So David, when he was asleep, you see how sadly he carried it; he went to the
Ordinances questionless in the house of God from time to time, or likely he did
so, and yet he lay in that condition for all that, alas the word of God sunk
not with him at all; you know you may call upon a sleepy person that is fast,
many times, again and again, and and he answers not: or if it move him a
little, or stir him, alas he understands it not, he hears a sound which
troubles him, but he understands it not, and so returns to his rest again,
this is the very case of a poor soul asleep: you hear indeed, but as if you
heard not; as a man that has his mind taken up with another thing, he hears,
but he heedeth not: so a poor soul asleep goes from Ordinance to Ordinance,
from Sermon to to Sermon, and hears: but the word sticks in the ear, it
reaches not the heart ordinarily, and is not this sad, brethren? Who would
willingly be in this Condition, that knows what it is to have a fellowship
with God, heart-Communion with God in his Ordinances?

3. Another Motive may be this; The poor service God is like to have from us
then, when we are asleep: some indeed he may have, but it will be so poor as if
none at all: what kind of service will that man do his Master, that is ready to
drop asleep every step he goes? as David, what service did he do the Lord
while he lay in that deep sleep? alas, his mouth was stopped, he was not able
to show forth the praise of God, until he had opened it. And the reason is
plain, because the graces of the Spirit, though they be within us; it may be
there is the root of the matter, there are the habits; yet we cannot exercise
them; A man asleep has life, and he breaths, but what Acts can he do which
may advantage himself or others? how can a man pray, when he cannot act his
faith, nor act his love, nor his zeal, and fervency of Spirit, but all are a
sleep? Ah what weak service has the Lord from many of us upon this account!

4. Another Consideration shall be this: the unseasonableness of the thing;
Every thing is beautified by the season, and if it be Romans 13. 13*
out of season it is uncomely: It is not a walking honestly, (...) honestly, or
comely, to sleep now: brethren, it is enough for ^inners that are of the night,
that never ^aw the day star appear, nor the Sun of righteousness arise upon
them, for them to lie sleeping now, it is something suitable; for they that
sleep, says the Apostle, sleep in the night, and they that are drunk are drunk
in (...) These. 5. 7.
the night: the night was for sleep naturally, and* therefore man goes forth
to labor, and to his work until the evening. So in Psalm. 104. 20.
spirituals, it is most unsuitable to sleep in the daytime: brethren, if you
believe you are of the day and not of the night, as the Apostle says, We count
him a Drone, a Lusk, or Lurden that shall sleep in the daytime* It was David
his fault to be upon the bed in the daytime* And so likely Is^bosheth except
the Custom of the place, being hot might excuse it: Well then has the Lord in
in finite riches of grace brought thee out of the dark night, made it day with
thee, when it is night with many families and poor souls about thee and will thou make it ^ight by sleeping? it is unseasonable, it is enough for them that
are in darkness to sleep.

Again, 2. Consider, It is the time wherein you are called upon, to act for
God, and for your own souls; It is not only the day, but the time for work: It
is our harvest brethren, wherein should lay up, not for many years, as the fool
in the Gospel said, but for eternity; treasure up grace for eternity: lay up a
good foundation for the time to come. O how richly laden are some of the Saints
over others are, that have made a profession of Christ as long as they live:
what is the reason, why they have slept, while they should have gathered? he
that gathers in Summer, is a wise son, but he that sleeps in harvest is a
son that causes shame: there the one is opposed to the other: that soul will
cloth himself Prove. 10. 5.
with shame and Confusion one day, that sleeps in harvest, in the time of
labor: wherefore does the Bridegroom tarry, but to give you space to repent,
to work out your salvation in: and instead of working, shall we sleep out this
time? and will it be Comfortable in the end? will it be comfortable, if instead
of laboring in the vineyard, we sleep all the heat of the day? what account
shall we make, when we come to receive the recompense?

3. Yet more unseasonable it is also: If you consider, that usually the time of
this falling asleep is after a good while converse, and walking with God, then
men fall a napping, the wise virgins they had their oil, and their Lamps
burning, it is true, they had provided for the main, and it is likely went
forth to meet him, but in the way, the nearer they came to their journeys end:
for there must be some good competent time sure, before they would conclude
that the Bridegroom tarried, and then they lay aside all, and fall asleep;
Remember that of the Apostle, knowing Romans 13. 11.
the season says he, that now it is high time for you to awake, for now is
your salvation nearer then when you believed: Now is the (...) to awake out of
sleep, now is salvation nearer. What is the meaning of this? the meaning is,
now is the most unseasonable Phil 3. 13.
time of all other, for you to be asleep: now you should press hard forward:
now just at your journies end, as a Traveller: or a man in a race, holds up his
head all the way, and makes speed, and when he is near the journies end, and
should lay hold upon the goal, that then he should sit down and sleep, this is
unseasonable, and utterly unsafe, if he expect to obtain by his running: Ah
brethren, sure you would obtain, else why did you run: if you expected not a
reward? Now may I not say with the Apostle, you did many of you run well: but
who hindered you? how came it to pass you dropped asleep? or are you inclining to
it? O take heed, it is not safe at the end of your race, the night is past, the
day is come, or the night, the time of this ignorance: for our life is compared
to the vision of God in heaven, may well be compared to a night, and that to
day: well this day is at hand, it is nearer, then when you began to believe:
for that is the meaning of that Phrase, as such a King reigned, that is to say,
began to reign, ordinarily in Scripture: Well then, it is utterly unseasonable,
therefore let me beg of you brethren, and the Lord prevail with our hearts to
take heed of it.

Fifthly, Another Consideration shall be this that while you lay your selves to
sleco, you lose God, and Christ, you lose their presence: Rev. 3. 20.
when the soul open to Jesus Christ, he comes in, and the father, and Holy
Spirit with him, and they bring their dainties with them, and abundantly
refresh the soul with his love which is better then wine, and as long as the
soul does give him entertainment, and follows to improve its Communion with
him, he will s^ay* but truly brethren, if we sleep, he will not then tarry, but
he takes his leave, and leaves us sleeping; and alas before we are aware, we
have lost him, and know not where to find him. It was Sampsons case, alas his
strength was in the presence of Judge. 16. 19.
God with him, when he departed, he was as as another man, he lies down upon
Dalilahs lap, and then he falls asleep, and at last he was robbed of his
strength, God was departed from him, he he had many forewarnings, but he was
bewitched with a Lust, it did so imprison his reason, that he could not see
what he was to do: at last he wist not that God was departed from him, he went
thinking to shake himself as at other times, but alas his strength was gone. Ah
brethren, if a man have a Dalilah, it is sive to one, but sooner, or later, it
will lull him asleep, and if it can but get him asleep, it is easy to get away
the Lords presence from him, and he know it not, until afterward.

Sixthly, Another Argument shall be not only that, not only when He may speak
once, yea twice, yet man regards it not, Job 33. The Disciples were reproved
time after time.
we fall asleep, we not only lose the Lord Jesus, and the presence of his
Spirit, but we then shall keep him out also, the senses are lock up. A Servant
fast asleep, when his Master comes home, he may knock long enough before he
open to him: why? alas he is asleep, herein indeed is the exceeding riches of
his grace, that though we grieve him by our slighting of his presence, and
Communications of himself to us, so as to fall asleep in the midst of them,
that he will abide no longer, yet his heart yearns toward us, and his Love
persuades him to return again to the soul, and he will try again, if we will
let him in, but we are asleep: Behold I stand at the door, and knock: it is
wonderful indeed, that he should do so, but so he does, and how long does he
stand at some of our hearts, when we by a sleepy spirit grieved him away? how
long does he tarry, before we open? you see, in the Case of the Church, I
sleep, but my heart waketh: open to me, Cant. 5. 2.
my love, my dove, my undesiled: how sweet compellations he uses? though thou
have shut me out like a kind love, yet my love open to me, my Locks are wet
with the dew of the night; much he endures before we open, and do but observe,
when she knew it to be his voice, yet she has many excuses: I have put off my
Coat, etc. and all this while he stays, but what unkind dealing is this? when
by his word he knocks, alas, it sinketh not, any further then the ear, there it
dies: knocks by the voice of his Spirit, and by rods, and afflictions,
sometimes, and yet we keep him out, M^^a 6. 9.
this is the sixth.

Seventhly, When we fall asleep, we little know how longwe shall lie in that
Condition, therefore take heed of it: O when David fell into that sleep, how
long did he lie in it* nine months at least, and he might have lain nine years,
except the Lord had taken a more then ordinary course with him; So the
Patriarchs; how long did they lie in their sleep, and their Consciences never
awaked until their affliction? this is clear in the very case of the Church in
the Canticles; how long did he call, and call again, and wait upon her, and yet
she is not awaked? a little stirred she is, but alas lies down again, as a man
half awaked, until at last, he was pressed to come nearer to her, to put his
hand in at the hole-of the Lock, and then at last she got off her bed with much
ado. First, He was fain to come nearer to her, with some inward touch and offer
of his grace offering, as I may say, with his hand to open the bolts wherewith
her heart was bolted against him: and then she waked, and not before; you see
these virgins here slept until the Cry came, and how long they slept, who can
tell? O it is a sad thing brethren, to be so long without Communion and
Fellowship with the Lord Jesus; to be so long under weakness and inability to
exercise our graces, that we can do nothing but poor weak service: so long to
keep out Jesus Christ, and when do we know that he will come so near to us, as
thoroughly to awake us, what if he should never do it, until our dying day? what
a sad end would that be!

Eighthly, Remember this brethren; though you may think of case in such a
Condition of sleeping, it will be no case to you, but trouble: for usually,
what is the r^ason we unbend our bows, loose the Cords? we think we may have
ease, take on more easily and fairly for heaven then we have done, now the main
part of our work is done: we have gotten the oil in our vessels, and a little
assurance it may be of his love, therefore now we may take our ease, and so
fall asleep; believe it brethren, it will be a little case to you, and it will
appear, if you consider these two or three things.

1. While you are in that sleep, if you be believers indeed, you will not have
ease: what distempered sleeps do men sleep, that are in continual fear? or that
should not sleep, and know they should not sleep, it will hazard their lives:
is their sleep sweet ordinarily? surely no: when a man sleeps, and in his
sleep is terrified with dreams, how unquiet is he? truly a believer, he never
sleeps heart, and all; if he did, it were somewhat like: now a Hypocrite
does, he sleeps heart, and all: that is first asleep, that never was awake,
and therefore he may take more pleasure. But alas the Child of God all the
while he is off from Christ, and the enjoyment of him, he is like a stone from
its center, like an Iron plucked from the Loadstone, that has yet a ^ingering
toward him, will not rest until it return to him again, so it is not quiet
altogether; therefore of all men the people of God are the veriest fools, when
they give way to sin, or lie Psalm. 85. 8.
down upon the lap of sinful delights, and fall asleep; because they have a
still principle within them, which is kept awake; a seed of God which still
interrupteth them, and they cannot take their fill of delight, nor rest in sin;
therefore to them it is returning to folly, when once peace is spoken to them.
I appeal to the experiences of all the Saints, whether when they are in a
sleepy frame, a fit of security has seized upon them, the presence of Christ
is departed, whether they have that rest and quiet in their spirits: it is an
uncomfortable condition to them.

2. Because usually when his people are in such a Condition, the Lord is sain
to take some violent course with them, more then he would to awake them; so
that not only their sleep is troublesome, but their awaking is also sad to them.
Here, there is a Cry made, whether it be by the voice of the word lifted up,
terrible threatenings! Or whether the voice of his rod which cries: it is
terrible, it is not a still voice happily will do it; but it must be something
that will make both our ears to tingle, as it was in Elias 1 Samuel 3. 11.
case; poor man he was asleep, a Lust had so besotted him, that is to say, his
carnal affection to his Children; he honored them above God, that love
devoured his love, and eat up his zeal for God, and the Lord warns him, sends
a Prophet to him, and tells him what he was like to trust to, he had set his
Conscience a little to work before: so far as to reprove them: But if nothing
else will do it, awake him thoroughly, What then? I will do a thing that shall
make both the ears of him that hears it, tingle; It shall awaken him, and
awaken others; the boring of the ear may cost us something he will give us an
alarm, a strong one at least, if he do not beat up our Quarters, where we lie
lurking. And you that are soldiers, and have been in this Condition, has it
been comfortable to you when you have been so beaten up? I think not, sure: O
what hurrying then, and terror is upon every man, when he is so surprised! So
nothing else would do to the Brethren of Joseph, and therefore God brought them
into that distraction they were never awaked until now. If men will not awake
with calling, we use to take them, and shake them, and use them more hardly.
The Lord calls brethren, you have the voice of the Turtle, the joyful sound of
the Gospel among you: If we awake not, what will he do? he will take you by the
Neck, and shake you awake: and truly brethren, the Lords shakings are terrible
shakings; he will shake the soul into a trembling and astonishment. What was
the reason that the Lord followed Jonah with a storm? he was asleep, his
Conscience and Soul asleep, Jonah 1.
and no easy means would awake him; the Lord was fain to let loose his hand
upon him, and by a terrible tempest to awake him; sure I am, this will not be
comfortable.

3. Afterward, It will not be quietness nor rest to your souls, the Disciples
you see, when they had slept, their sleep had so many Mark 14. 40.
reproofs: how were they ashamed of what they had done? they wist not what to
answer him, were fain to hang the head; It is a disqu^eting to a man's spirit,
to be covered with shame and confusion; O when shall he come, and upbraid the
soul with his slothfulness! What, is this thy love to me now? is this thy
kindness to thy friend? is this thy faith and zeal for me, that thou have
fallen asleep, and slept so long as thou have done? was my Love and my
Communion no more worth? is this the esteem thou put upon it, to fall
asleep in the midst of it? will you have a word to say to Jesus Christ now in
such a case? will it not be confusion to us? O brethren, It may be, we may bear
the shame, and reproof of such a sleeping fit upon our backs all our days.
Besides, can it choose but be a very great distraction to us, that when we are
awaked, and slept out our time, and see then that now Christ is at hand, the
day of his coming is here, and we have our work to do in a great part, our
Lamps to trim, will not this be a distraction to us? if we do escape the
destruction of that day, when a servant that has a house to make ready,
sleeps away his time, and by and by tidings come, his Master is at hand, and
the house is unready to receive him. O what a hurry and confusion and
distraction is he in then, and what fruit has he then of his sleeping? it ends
in bitterness, and trouble, and disease, and therefore Brethren, as we tender
our peace, our Comfort, take heed of sleeping.

Alas you will say, what should we do to keep our selves from this sleeping*
since it is so dangerous? I shall propound a few (...) to you.

1. Then take heed of the beginnings of declinings. Aristotle reports, the
Lions of Syria bring forth the first year five whelps, the next, four, the
next, three, and so on, until they come to a barrenness; like Mandrobulus in
Lucian, who offered to his god the first year gold, the second, silver, and the
third, nothing; See Trap upon Mat. 24. 13. If we would avoid sleeping, we must
take heed of slumbering, of heaviness, of any thing inclining to it; Do you not
mind whether your Love be as hot in prayer, as fervent as heretofore? if there
be a rebatement of it, fear it; you are going to sleep; Observe your selves
brethren, Is not your Love grown much colder, then it was, because iniquity
does abound? so that you have prejudices so many, love is eaten Mat. 24. 12.
out! O that the Lord would help you to look to it at the beginning!

2. Take heed of composing, or settling your selves too easily, this will
provoke to sleep; O do not put off your Garments, with the spouse! Men that
would not sleep, will hardly put off their Clothes, nor lay themselves upon a
bed. Not as if Saints did lose the habits of holiness or grace; But the Acts,
the outward garments they may say aside, and so setle themselves to sleep: It
is vain for a man to hope to be kept waking in such a case: O take heed of
loving ease, woe be to the n that are at ease in Sion, Brethren! If you be any
thing acquainted with the times, or your own hearts, you will find enough to
exercise you.

Keep in Action; acts dispel the vapors which persuade sleep: O brethren, time
shall come, when we shall have our graces continually in act; why should we not
breath after this, even upon earth: get as near to it as we can.

3. Take heed of putting off the day of the coming of Jesus Christ, that
seems ^ere to be the immediate cause of the Virgins slumber and sleeping;
while the Bridegroom tarryed, they Job. 29. ^8. Psalm. 3^. 6.
thought they might have time enough likely, they might take a nap(...) unbend
a little, if we would avoid sleeping, labor to keep fresh that upon our
spirits, the appearing of the Lord Jesus, a love of that appearing, and a fear
of an unsuitableness to that appearing when it shall be; O brethren, that we
could once attain to Jobs pitch to wait for our change every day; all the days
of (...)* ^4. 14.
our appointed time! I doubt, some of us can scarce say that we ^ait for it any
day, we put it off, and therefore no marvel if we sleep. It is that which is
present which must affect us, such is our Constitution: things though never so
certain, and though never so desirable on the one hand, or never so dreadful on
the other, yet they affect not, except they be present, some way, or other;
present in our thoughts, in our expectations, present to our faith, which is
the evidence of things hoped for: as once King James said, such a man
Preaches, as if hell were at his back, ready to swallow him up, that will keep
a man awake; either the joy of heaven set before us, and as I may say
continually present, the coming of Christ, Or else, the terrors of everlasting
burnings, the immediate Consequent of this day: O who can sleep that has the
coming of the Lord fresh upon his spirit!

4. Take heed of Pride and self-confidence; You see brethren, that has laid
the very Watchmen, themselves asleep, the three chief, Apostles. If Sampson had
not rested upon his own strength, would he when he had so many warnings, have
committed himself again, to the Lap of his Dalilah? surely no.

5. In the next place, take heed of excess in the use of lawful things: O says
our Savior, take heed your hearts be overcharged Luke 21. 34.
with surfeiting, or drunkenness, and the cares of this life, that will quickly
lay a man to sleep! You know the thorny ground went far, and yet though it
endured Persecution, and the Cup of trembling could not carry away the soul,
the Cup of delights in the world, it laid them asleep; the Sun did not burn
them, but the 1 Cor. 7. 29.
thorn choakt them: Licitis perimus juvenes, the time is short says the
Apostle, it is rolled up, as a Mariner near his port rowleth up his sails, or
as a piece of cloth rolled up; one turn more; and we are turned into the grave;
What then? It remains, that they that buy, be as if they possessed not, and
they that have inheritances by Lot also, be as if they enjoyed them not; they
that have wives, as if they had none; for the fashion of this world, the
Scheme, the Mathematick figure of this world passes away. Was it not this
which cast Solomon into such a sleep? He offended by women, though the wisest
King. So Mat. 24. 37. They eat, they they drank, (...), as some observe; It is
a word used most properly of beasts, living sensually in the delights of the
slesh; they feed themselves without fear, as the Apostle Jude has it, out of
measure, and so in time, there is a season for all things, etc. make not
provision for the slesh, etc. O that there were Romans 13. 1(...)*
more sobriety brethren, and moderation among us, appearing among us: there
would not be so much sleeping.

6. Take heed of any sin unrepented of, of continuing in it; for surely that
will damp the soul, and cast it into a sleep, as you see in the cafe of Jonas,
David, the brethren of Joseph: O specially of such sins, as stupifie, and seal,
and harden, sins of a high hand, and against light, against mercy with a high
hand, these are dangerous.

7. Be often stirring up your selves, as the Apostle speaks to Timothy, stir up
the grace of God that is in thee, the gift in thee, as fire under the ashes; A
man that is drousie, had need to shake himself, as Sampson did. Ah brethren,
there is a carnal mind in 1 Timothy 1. 6.
us all, which is death, it deadens all that is good within us; And except we
do often stir up our selves, labor to keep upon our hearts some quickening
Considerations, to press them home, to hold them to the soul, we shall, do what
we can, we shall sleep, or at least slumber: And beg with David, O quicken me
according to thy word! Alas, life is his, and all quickening and renewing grace
is his; therefore we should lie much before him for this mercy, if we would not
sleep indeed. So much for this Use.

The next Use of the Doctrine shall be an awakening word. It Use 4.
may be brethren, many of us that have this word alas, are asleep, and had need
to be shaken, and O that the Lord would even do it for us! Alas, It is not our
word will do it, it dies in the Ear, and goes no further, as a bullet whose
force is spent dies, reaches not the mark, except the Lord add an Almighty
force to it, it will do nothing. But I shall endeavor alittle this work by
offering some considerations to you. You that lie upon your beds.

1. Remember, in the first place that if Jesus Christ come, while you are in
this sleep, you will be found unready, what do you think that a sleeping, will
put your hearts into frame, to meet the Lord Jesus with? Surely no: One of
these two things will befall you, either your works will be quite undone, you
will have your grace to get, when you should enter into glory, or never; Or
else if you have it not to get, you will not have it in its brightness, and
luster, as Ornaments upon you; ready to open to him, to enter with him; either
your Lamps will be out, or else they will be to trim, when you should enter; O
that the Lord would enforce this Argument, and his own exhortation! Luke 12.
35. Stand ready therefore, with your loins girded, and your Lamps burning,
waiting for his coming, that you may be ready? Do you think this can be
comfortable to you?

2. Do but consider seriously, what danger we are in when we sleep, when we
give sleep to our eyes, and settle our selves to it, when we strive not against
it.

First, The Philistims will be upon us, as they were upon poor Sampson; If
Satan, and our hearts can but sing us asleep, then Judge. 16. 19.
the Philistims are upon us, as they were upon him, and at last you see how
sadly they destroyed him; you see what danger Saul was in when he was asleep;
David might have taken his life from him. And Sisera by a poor woman perished,
when asleep. And 1 Samuel 26* 7.
so Ishbosh^th, when asleep. Surely brethren, the devil never lulls us asleep,
believe it, but he has some desperate design upon us, which he cannot do when
we are awake. What danger were the Disciples in, when they were sleeping when
they should have Judge 4. 26.
prayed? they were just entering upon the pikes, and they were asleep; and see
what fearful work there was, they were all scattered from him: and Peter, how
fearfully he denied him! Could Satan think you ever have brought Lot to that
wickedness, if he had not been fast, in a deep sleep? It was strange sleepiness
in him to drink so much of the wine; Excess overthrew him. Surely brethren, if
ever there were an hour of temptation, this is one; If it might be tolerable at
any other time, yet not at this: for hell is broke loose, the devil is come
down, and has great wrath, because his time is short: O how he hunts after
poor souls, and who are so like to be drowned as poor creatures asleep!

Secondly, Then God usually does for sake a soul, if he fall asleep; As you see
in the Canticles her beloved was gone, he waited upon her a great while, she
would not awake; when she got up, he was gone: O what a sad case was Saul in,
When God had forsaken him, answered him not by Vrim, or Thummim, and the
Philistims were upon him, it made him out of his wits almost! Ah dear friends
If the Lord being provoked by our unkindness, giving our selves 1 Samuel 28. 6.
to sleep, do let loose sin, this or that lust upon us to worry us. And himself
depart, and stand, and see, what the latter end will be; this will be sad, thou
cryest to him, he will not hear; but is as one asleep to thee, because thou
wast as one asleep to him. O what will you do in this day!

Thirdly, Then he is least able to act grace, when he has most need of it;
because the spirit is withdrawn from him: Jesus Christ is departed from him, he
cannot resist a sleeping, he has no strength. A weak woman may drive a nayl
through the Temples of a most valiant General then. O what advantage has Satan
against us, and sin against us! The least temptation then, (...) too hard for
us, we have no strength to resist, come what will come, we are naked to receive
the thrust; And but that the Lord stays the hand of Satan, that it shall not
reach the heart; how quickly would he give such sleeping souls their deadly
wound!

3, Consider yet further, how we put the Lord Jesus to it, to prick us, and
stir us up lest we should lie sleeping, and sleep the sleep of death. They say
the Eagle will prick and beat her young ones, out of the Nest; else they would
be lazy and sleep there. Well surely brethren, If love, and sweetness will not
do it, gall and vinegar must: awakened we must be, for sure we cannot go to
heaven in a sleep; and how terrible will it be, if we put him to it thus to
teach us by terrible things in righteousness and mercy? It is Psalm. 65. 5.
faithfulness and mercy to us, he will be at the pains with us. And then
brethren, let me but add this only.

When the Lord Jesus shall deal thus with us, we that now are so fast asleep,
we may sleep then; if we could there will come such a day upon us surely, if
the Lord do not in tender compassions awaken us before hand. It is a bitter
ironical reproof, the Disciples had need of such sharpness in the reproof, for
milder words would not do: sleep on now, says our Savior, it is enough, what
did our Savior allow them to sleep? surely nothing less, Mat. 26. 45.
specially all this time; for that his next words are, arise, let us go hence,
behold, they are at hand, who betray me, why then they could, have little list
or leisure to sleep; but our Savior does with a holy mocking of them, (as I
may say) Well, you have been sleeping all this while, now take your rest, now
sleep if you can, now you shall have your hearts so full of cares and fears,
and be sobeset with temptations, you shall have little list to sleep. A
righteous hand upon them for their sluggishness; as the young man, rejoice O
young man in thy youth, etc. and let thine heart cheer thee, but remember
Eccles. 11. 9.
for all this, God will bring thee to judgment. Well brethren, as light as you
may make of this, you that love sleep, and give your selves to security, when
this day comes upon you it will make your hearts ach. The Lord persuade us of
it; I desire not the woeful day to any of you, but rather that you may escape.

Again, Another Use of the Point may be, then for such as are kept through the
Almighty grace from this sleeping; it may be, when others are sleeping about
thee, one in this corner, another in that, thou art lively, thy graces are kept
in vigor, thy sweet communion with Christ maintained: O how much, how infinitely
art thou engaged to the Lord Jesus? magnify his grace; How many considerations
here, might be heaped up, to heigthen your praises, that the high praises of
God might be in your hearts and, mouths. As

1. To consider; Its merely free mercy that makes this difference between
thee, and the most sluggish Professor, most slothful sleepy Professor. For it
is not surely brethren, because they have improved the grace which thou have
received, better then others have done; it may be, others have received more
grace, and walked as diligently as thy self, and yet notwithstanding left to
some fearful fall, to stupifie, or deaden them asleep. O magnify his grace,
that thou art thus far kept again!

2. To consider, How much misery and sin, thou do hereby avoid? the loss of
Jesus Christ, and his presence, etc. O it is unspeakable! for what sin, what
temptation, will not take with a poor soul, when he is in this drousie
condition? As Lot in his sleep, what would he not do? the soul asleep, and in
security, what would he not do? the things that now the soul abhors the thought
of them, if thou had been left to such a sleep as this is, thou would have
made nothing of, as well as others; as you see in the fearful example of many
apostatizing Professors in these days, that have walked very strictly before,
which surely, as it should minister matter of holy fear and trembling to us; so
of great praises to the Lord. And then the misery to awaken us, to put us to
those distractions, which have been already spoken to. Besides,

3. To consider, What great advantage thou have now above many others. Thou
have the presence of God which others want, thou have the light of his
countenance, thou have many a sweet communion with him, which others want,
being left to this sleepy condition, they have slept away their harvest; thou
art kept awake to gather in the Summer. O how rich in grace may such a soul
grow, if he do but know his season and opportunity! and are not these great
matters of praise?

Again in the next place; then brethren if we be so apt to Use 6.
sleep; Let us consider one another, to provoke, to stir up, suffer not one
another to sleep: Indeed brethren, so far as we are defective in this duty of
love one to another, so far we our selves are asleep. O be ye followers of
Jesus Christ, and be full of love, as he was, he comes to his Disciples, and
finds them fast asleep; what does he do, let them alone, or refuse Communion
with them? no: he stirs them up, gives them a reproof to provoke them, and
he does it again, and again, and again; And so in the case of Peter, he did you
know, look upon him, otherwise what had become of him? so he would not let
Jonas, or David go in their Conditions, but sends a Prophet to one, and
sends a storm after the other to awake him, and afterward comes himself. And
so the Church in the Canticles, see how he calls upon her there, and afterward
comes nearer; O Brethren, that I might be counted worthy this day to speak one
word home to some poor sleeping soul to awaken you; either a word of love, or a
word of terror! I have spoken both, but will you remember this as a duty?
Doubtless we have occasions before us every where; do we not know many lazy,
sleepy Christians? do we not judge them to be so? where are our bowels toward
them? why do we not shake them, do our endeavor, would we not be sorry to see
them forsaken of Christ altogether as to their sense, and sadly lamenting after
him? would we not be sorry to see them battered and bruised with the
temptations of Satan, in this sleepy condition? are they not in danger? shall
we see them lie as a prey just ready for the Devils mouth, and not endeavor to
stir them up to remove that drowfie frame from them? the Lord help us brethren
such as are more wakeful among us; for I believe some there are, that the Lord
has magnified his grace toward exceedingly in this respect. O how can you
improve your mercy better then thus; by stirring up others, that they may enjoy
the same sweetness in Communion, and close fellowship with the Lord, as your
selves do! But thus much for this Use also.

Use 7. Then, Let us be tender in judging one another Condition; Use 7.
judge not a man's state by the present frame that is upon him; Come into a
Garden in Winter, and there is no appearance of any flowers, the roots are
within the ground, shall we conclude therefore, there are none? no; so in this
case, there may be a sleeping habit of grace though it be not in act, the soul
is not able to act it for the present. As the wise Virgins, (though it was a
part of folly for the wise Virgins to sleep) yet we may not without great wrong
to them, and the grace of Christ in them, call them foolish Virgins; there is a
vast difference between them. If a man should have made a judgment of David in
his backsliding; what would he have thought of him? or of the Disciples, when
they were so heavy at such a time as that was; and that, after they had been
reproved for it, and stirred up, again and again, we would have judged likely;
O sure it would prove a deadly Lethargy, or there were scarce any hope
concerning them! O no, says our Savior, though he reproved them sharply, yet
some sugar he mixed with the vinegar, the Spirit indeed is willing, but the
Flesh is weak; he did not unsaint them, because of Mat. 26 4(...)
their sleepiness; no more should we; And indeed brethren, the difficulty is so
great to distinguish between a sleep, and death in sin sometimes, that we had
need to suspend, and be exceeding tender in judging. Physicians themselves have
much ado sometimes to discern whether there be life in the body, they are much
put to it, and yet it appears there is life, therefore let us be tender in
judging, leave it to him who can discern whether the life be within them yea,
or no.

Lastly, A word of Comfort to the poor people of God, that Use 8.
alas find themselves very apt to fall asleep, and shake themselves with
Sampson, again and again, and yet are apt to lie down upon the lap of a Dalilah
again: they know not what to think of themselves, whether they can be alive to
God, having hearts so desperately sleepy. Yea, it may be, though they have lost
the sweet smelling presence of Jesus Christ many times by their sleeping, yet
they have slept again, and cannot keep themselves awake; his smiles have been
many times turned into sharp rebukes, their honey into gall, and sometimes by
terrible things in righteousness, they have been awaked, and yet they are
sleeping again: sometimes they have been confounded and ashamed, and have had
nothing to say when the Lord has rebuked them, and yet they are asleep again?
O what can I think of such a Condition as this! I do believe the Closets of
some poor Creatures, can bear witness to many a sad complaint of this kind.
Well I answer to this,

Far be it from me brethren, to sow pillows under any man's Arm-holes, or to
make a bed for any to sleep upon: the Lord forbid, there should be a heart so
wicked, as to make such an use of what is to be said to such poor discouraged
souls! We are in a strait indeed, we cannot give a Saint their portion, but the
wicked are snatching at that, nor the wicked their portion, but the Saints are
catching at that; specially discouraged hearts, and many times applying all to
themselves that never was intended for them. But if any dare abuse it, be it
upon them; I must speak a word of refreshing to poor souls, that are even
wear^ed with a lazy sleepy heart.

1. Then remember this; That it is possible for a man or woman that is truly in
the state of grace, yet to be overtaken with sleep; therefore it is a
Conclusion without any good premises, that sure thou art no Child of God, no
wise Virgin, because thou art so often slumbering, and sometimes fast asleep;
As carnally secure Creatures do deceive themselves, (...) concluding because
the wise Virgins slept, therefore they are wise Virgins, ^ames 1. 22.
though they sleep; so on the other hand, do the people of God deceive
themselves by a like false reasoning, concluding they are foolish Virgins
certainly, because they sleep. All are not wise that were asleep, for some were
foolish; and therefore the carnal creature may sleep the sleep of the foolish;
all were not foolish that were asleep, and therefore thou may be a wise
Virgin, and yet overtaken with sleep: they both agree in* sleeping, or
slumbering; it is common both to wise and foolish, therefore thou can not
make it a distinguishing, or differencing note of thy Condition which is common
to both sorts; Only the degrees and circumstances, the antecedents and
concomitants of this sleep, are those which distinguish, as you have heard, and
I hope, remember, the wise if they sleep, usually get oil into their vessels
first, they sleep, but they sleep by candlelight, they suffer not their Lamps
to go out, they sleep, but their hearts weak, etc. Well, it is possible though
thou sleep, thou may be a wise virgin.

2. How know thou, thou sleep? and how comes it to pass that it is a
burden to thee? Thou complainest of it, and to such only we speak brethren, I
must tell you such as yield not up to it, such as love not sleep, but it is
tedious to them; but whence is this? Surely it is, because thy heart is awake,
as the spouse says, this is not a total sleep: O thou have cause to bless the
Lord that he has kept so much as thy heart awake, that sleep has not seized
upon all; If once the heart be asleep all is gone, therefore be thankful for
that, that there is any thing kept awake, thy Will, thy Affections.

3. I, you will say, if I could see my heart is awake it were something, but my
hear sure is asleep, my confidence does not much trouble me for it, my will
has been to blame; for I have even settled my self to sleep, thrown my self
upon my bed of security, shut the windows, winked with my eyes, put off my
clothes, I have slighted and neglected those acts of holiness from time to
time, of worship, or which should have been as my garments upon me; therefore
sure I am willing to sleep: yea more, he has often stirred and moved by his
spirit to awake me, and I have drowsed and turned like a door upon the hinges,
with the sluggard ready to cry a little sleep, a little slumber, a little
folding of the hands to sleep. O sure my heart is asleep as well as my self! I
I cannot say with the Church, I sleep but my heart waketh; O what shall I say,
or what shall I do? I answer, however it may be thy Will has been in fault,
and asleep in part, if it be not awaken in a good part, how come thou to be
thus sensible of thy sleeping, and slugg shness of it, what mean all those sad
and lamentable moanes thou make to the Lord in secret, if thou be not
sensible of it? I hope it is so with some of us; Are we not then sensible? O
sure the Will is not altogether asleep! yea the prevailing part is awake.

4. Remember this for thy comfort, If thou can not see clearly, as happily
under distemper, thou can not, neither thy heart be asleep, or awake yet the
Lord Jesus knows it, and he will acknowledge it; Mat. 25.
O, he is strict to mark what is good, if but a little spark in much smoke, or
under much ashes, when to all men's thinking the life is gone, he sees there is
somewhat alive, and awake within, a Seed of God within, and he will take notice
of it, for the comfort of his poor people; If ever in any example, we would
have thought men had slept, will, and all; we would have thought so of the
Disciples, that notable example, that being so often shakt with such sharp, and
shameful rebukes; yet they Mat. 26.
should forth with be asleep again, as if they had not (...)heeded Jesus Christ
at all, yet at last when they came to themselves and could sleep no longer, for
the enemies were upon them: Now sleep if you can, lest this should too sorely
assail them, that they had slept so soundly under such awaking means as they
had, and be swallowed up of to much grief. O says our Savior, the spirit
indeed is willing but the flesh is weak! he knew their Consciences would be
ready to load them, and Satan would help forward their overwhelming grief, they
wist not what to say to him, nor for themselves; and therefore our Savior
himself lets them know that there was some willingness within them, the
spirit was willing, but the flesh was weak, and that he took notice of it, and
accepted according to what they had, and not according to what they had not,
where there 2* Cor. 8. 12.
is a willing mind. O here is comfort indeed, to have to do with such a Master,
such a father, such a Bridegroom, as both knows, and that little willingness
that is in sincerity in his peoples hearts not to sleep, though they themselves
could not say so, he puts an answer into their mouths, to Satan's accusing, and
the smitings of their own hearts, and a plea in their mouths to himself, to
prevail with him for pity, and sparing of them!

Remember this, that though sleep and slumber, and many woeful interruptions are
in thy service of God, yet remember Jesus Christ he has served without any
such slumbrings, and such imperfections, and this is thine, he will render unto
man, if he do acknowledge to God he has sinned, that is to say freely,
feelingly, faithfully acknowledge Job 33. 26.
it. Ah brethren, it was a time of prayer, and a duty for the Disciples to
pray, when our Savior prayed; but they were all asleep! if now their
righteousness, peace, and salvation had depended upon themselves, where had it
been? or if Jesus Christ had slept as well as they, where had it been? but he
was wrestling, and praying for himself, and for them in himself, at that time
he never was heavy in his prayers, he never fell asleep, nor slumbred neither,
with this spiritual slumber, he fulfilled all righteousness to a tittle. O then
remember this brethren, this must be the ground of our grace, and comfort, you
must have it in another, and not in your selves. And magnify this rich grace
of God in Jesus Christ, that has laid up for such poor sleeping sinners, such
a watchful Ordinance.

6. Another word may be this, though it be true, in thy sleep thou art in great
danger, as you heard before, which indeed is enough to alarm us continually;
yet if we do strive and stir up our selves, and yet are overcome, though sore
against our wills; and so are in danger of some deadly blow, are weak, and
feeble, and the least temptation may smite us to the ground, much more then
dreadful temptations; and without all question, Satan never lulls us asleep,
but he has a design upon us, to take away our life, our God, our Christ, our
peace, our comfort, our strength from us; Yea to smite us to the ground at
once, and smite us no more. As 1 Samuel 26. 8.
Abishai said to David, and as he begged he might have leave, so does the Devil
even beg; O how fain he would have leave to smite us then, as he moved the Lord
against Job, so continually this accuser, and enemy whose work it is to devour!
O when he finds such a prey, how edged is his appetite, but remember this for
thy comfort, and say not, surely Satan will smite me to the heart at one time
or another, poor trembling soul, the Lord that keeps Israel, and watches
them, he never slumbreth nor sleeps! Indeed Psalm. 121. 4.
if the Lord had slept, as we are apt to think he does when he withholds from
us his quickening, or comforting presence for a time, and were apt to cry out
as I may say to awake him, yet he never sleeps, he watches and wards many a
secret thrust, and blow, that when we are asleep, poor creatures we cannot be
aware of, and though thou may grieve him by a sloathful spirit, and he may
make thee smart other ways for it, yet surely he will not give up the life of
dear Saints, the price of this life of his dear dear Son, to the will of Satan;
No, they were bought at too dear a rate.

7. Again, O what a comfort it is to a child of God, that he has to do with
such a Christ, such a Bridegroom, the wise Virgins belong to, are espoused to,
as when they do sleep, is willing to take so much pains to awaken them! This
indeed it should grieve us so much the more; that we should put him to it, yet
it is a comfort, and no weak one neither, that he is willing to be at suh
pains, with us; to Cant. 5.
awake us. How long does he stand at the door and knock, before they will open,
they lie asleep still, he calls them with the sweetest compellations, My love,
my dove, my undefiled, O thou dear and precious soul, it is I thy dear Savior,
It is I whom thy soul loves, will thou rise, and open to me! I am wet with the
dew of the night, can thou find in thy heart to put me to stand without, and
indu^e the cold and the injuries of the night, and weather, and keep me out of
thy heart the place which I have chosen for my habitation, and wherein is all
my delight? O what workings of his bowels are here, one would think this were
enough to awaken! No, yet she shifts, and makes excuses, and very frivolous
ones, as people will, when they are not very willing of a thing; Well, now a
man would have thought, the Lord Jesus might have been justly grieved so as to
depart, and leave her sleeping. No, says the Text, He came nearer, and put his
hand in at the hole of the door, Poor souls, he s(...)eth that the spirit is
willing, the flesh is weak, that is to say, So far as carnal, we are weak, the
strength of the flesh, makes us weak and nothing else will do; therefore he is
fain to come and take her by the heart, to touch her heart, to begin to unbolt
the door himself: he comes in some nearer, sweeter, powerful breathings of his
spirit within, that now she is overcome and rises, he would never let her
alone, until he had awaked her. O this is his course, he continually holds with
poor souls in the like condition, ^onnot many a soul in this Congregation, seal
to this truth! I believe they can brethren, though some of us happily have not
known it. Now it is true brethren, it is meet the spouse should smart a little,
for this her wretched sleepiness, for her slighting of his call, and shutting
him out, it is meet she should now, when awake follow him, and not find him
for a while, it cost her something; and infinite rich mercy that he would ever
be found of her again: alas brethren, it was more grief to Jesus Christ to
behold his poor spouse going up and down mourning after him, then it was to her
to follow him; and therefore that was a part of his pains: and after all this
love, he must himself awake poor soul, if that will not awake it; as sometimes
it will not, or at least so much as he holds out will not awaken? why then
happily he sees it necessary to follow Jonas with a storm, put him into the
belly of hell, do you think this was any delight to him? Surely no, to hear the
cry of his poor people that was in the belly of hell, or out of the deep
wherein they sink, out of the Dungeon where he casts them to awake them: Surely
no, and so for David his condition, he was so heavy in a sleep his bones must
be broken, etc. Is this any delight to him? no: surely brethren it is a grief
to Jesus Christ, and a part of his pains which we put him to, rather then he
should lose our souls: but here is the comfort, he will be at much pains to
awaken us.

8. And lastly, It may be now thou art heavy, and sleepy, and napping, at every
turn, there is a time when thou wast more diligent more wakeful, could serve
the Lord with more instance and intention of mind, and O, thou recountest that,
as a happy time, and thy sadness and misery, thou have lost that frame of
heart! O, how far art thou from it! Well, remember this, that the Lord he does
remember the love of thy ^spousals, the kindness of thy youth, which some
expound of their kindness to God in the Ier. 2. 2.
wilderness; which if it be so, as diverse understand it, then it is the more
considerable; When thou followedst me in the wilderness, how did they follow
him, was it not with murmurings and rebellion every foot almost, yet God
remembers this, even the love and affection showed in following him through
such an uncouth place. O what a depth of bowels are here to cover, and forget
all their rebellion, and to remember their love! or else, I remember the love,
I showed to thee then; however it be, we may make use of it; for what great
love does the Lord show then in giving a heart to love him, and follow hard
after him, not to slumber and sleep, for love will keep awake, it being full of
solicitous fear? Who are we says 1 Chronicles. 29.
David, that we should have a heart to offer so willingly? The Lord will
remember this, which it may be the present sense of thy sleeping, and
sloathfulness has blotted out of thy remembrance, it is before the Lord.

9. One more, and that is this. He will likely by this heaviness, and
sloathfulness of thine, take occasion to do thee good by it, cure and heal
thee: for will not the shame and sorrow which he casts upon a soul for
sleeping, keep him more awake for time to come? When once they were awaked, as
with the Disciples, they should have little list to sleep afterward. Or else
happily, hereby he would heal the pride and self-confidence which thou art full
of, and then which nothing more grieveth him I know thou would count it the
greatest favor, and would be willing to undergo some smart; yea much, so be
thou might be delivered from those grieving evils of thine own soul, it is
the excellency of that heavenly Physician, to cure sleep with sleep, poison
with poison, sin with sin, though it may be matter of sadness to us, to put him
to it, to grieve himself so much with us.

And for the general condition of the Church, and people of God, It is matter
of mourning indeed, that there is such a general sleeping, and such sad effects
of it every where; Magistrates, Ministers and People, they all sleep; and let
the envious man do what he will in many places. Here is the comfort, that he
that keeps Israel never slumbreth nor sleeps. By this means our temptations
are increased indeed, for false. Teachers they are a temptation, and a shrewd
one too, and how dangerous, when we are asleep. Yet remember he that permits
it, he never sleeps. Ah brethren! If the Lord had not kept the Vineyard,
better then men have done, what had become of it? long ago it had been a
Wilderness and desolation. Does he not see the designs of Satan and Antichrist,
and all their fetches and slights to wind in themselves at the back door? and
does he not laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision? If men
will not take the little Foxes that spoil the grapes, he will in his own time;
and they will find it most fearful to fall into the hands of God. He has long
since Job. 18. 10, 11.
set the bounds of the sea, which check the proud waves thereof, though a man
would wonder, when he beholds the mighty mountains, and swelling surges of the
sea, that it should not overflow all, but the poor light loose sand, and plain
ground, he makes a check to it, hitherto shall ye go and no farther. Can we
sufficiently wonder that the earth should be founded upon nothing but only his
word of command? Well, He has said he will make manifest their folly to all
men, and they shall proceed no farther; and though he seem to sleep sometime;
because his 2 Timothy 3. 9.
people give him rest concerning these things, yet surely he does wake, he
never slumbers nor sleeps, and he will not permit these things further, then
he will work his own glory, and his peoples good out of them. O therefore give
him no rest, you that are his remembrancers, keep not silence until the Lord
make it appear to all the world that he did not slumber nor sleep, until he
awake as a Giant refreshed with wine, and speak, and command all these tongues
that speak lies in his name, into an everlasting silence! Amen.

The next Doctrine shall be this: Doctr.


We are apt to sleep, when we had most need to be awake. This is raised from
the circumstance of time, or the season, if I may call an unseasonable time a
season; when they-slept, it was just before the cry came, which summoned them
to meet the Bridegroom coming, and wakened them at once. The Proposition is
universal you see, the subject is universal, and so is the predicate: for the
subject, the Saints, the real Saints are apt to sleep, the Text it self proves
it beyond contradiction; for it is spoken of the wise virgins, which is
comprehensive of all the Church of Christ, except the foolish; the foolish they
slept, and no marvel, but all the question would be of the wise, specially at
such a time as this: but the Parable plainly holds it out, they all slumbred
and slept, and if they did it actually, sure there was an aptitude, a
disposition to it; I know none can plead exemption, except they can be of the
Church of Christ; and yet not come under the notion of foolish or wise Virgins.
But the difficulty, and indeed all that will be worth the time to prove, will
be the universality of the Predicate, they are apt to sleep, when they had most
need to wake; that is to say, whenever they had more need to awake, then at
another time, then they are apt to sleep. This I know not how to prove better,
then by an Induction of particulars, here is one in the Text, and there is the
like aptitude found of their sleeping at all other times of need; therefore we
conclude it so general, that they are apt to sleep, when they had most need to
awake.

For this time in the Text, I think hardly any will question it: for men to be
sleeping when they should be making ready, and stand ready for the appearing of
their Lord Jesus Christ: Is to be sleeping when they have greatest need to be
awake: the carnal mind indeed will be ready to sing a requiem to it self, and
say it is no matter, so we have but a warning a little before he come, that we
may have time to trim our Lamps before he come, though we be found sleeping;
but surely brethren the spiritual part will judge otherwise, that there is
great need to be waking at the latter end of the race, when they should lay
hold on eternal life; Now Romans 13. 11.
is high time, says the Apostle, to awake, your salvation is nearer. If ever
there be need to have our ornaments on, our graces in a lively frame, and much
in act; then is the time, if ever men would run in a race, toward the latter
end of it is the time to spur hardest; it is a needful time, then it is a time
of acting grace of spending grace, of using all you have, you shall have
exercise enough likely for it; and therefore then to have our graces to trim
and fu^bish up, as it will be if we sleep: surely this is to sleep in a most
needful time, and yet this, the Saints are yet apt to brethren: how many do we
see growing more heavy, and dull, less life, and vigor, and power to act their
graces then before?

2. Again, another time of greatest need to be awake, is when there are the
choicest communications of Christ to the soul, to be had, that is awake and
ready to receive them, every one sure will conclude this is a time of greatest
need; for if we sleep out such a season as that, what may we lose! It may be
that which we shall never have opportunity to have again while we live: So the
Disciples, when they should have beheld Christ in his glory, he was praying,
and took up his Disciples, those three favorites to pray with him, well he was
praying, and as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his
raiment was white and Luke 9. 32.
glistering, and two men; Elias and Moses talked with him, but Peter and they
that were with him, were heavy with sleep, and when they were awake, they saw
his glory, etc. But how much of this fight did they lose before they were
awake? O Prayer is a special duty, and how does the heart drowse for the most
part, when it should come to it! and when does the Lord usually reveal more of
his glory; when does he usually make more of it to pass by a poor soul, or
company of his people, then in their praying? therefore if at any time they had
need to be awake, this is the time; but you see brethren, they themselves were
asleep that were the choice of the Disciples, and what they lost, they were not
like to recover, they were not like to see such a sight again: so much of his
glory again. And truly brethren, ordinary experience teaches us, some of us I
believe, that in the special Ordinances of grace wherein Jesus Christ is held
out Crucified, held out in his loveliness and glory; there our hearts are most
apt to he asleep and drowsy, and much ado, to keep them up to any thing. How
many are we, sometimes in Prayer, get but off the legs, and we are lively
enough for any thing else, when there is most need, we are apt to sleep.

3. After the greatest discoveries of grace, and of Christ to a soul, after the
most melting, warming Communion, and fellowship with Christ. As now after this
tranfiguration when they had seen this glory passing by them, a man would have
thought this should have ravished them so, as to have kept them awake; Yea,
after they had the Supper in the iustitution, and no question, brethren, but
there was a presence answerable to the Institution, and for the honor of the
Institutor; as when himself was baptized, the Spirit came upon him; O sure, if
the bodily presence were there, the spiritual would not be wanting! he would
exalt that New Testament-Ordinance, or seal above the other; and not likely,
but he would do so, that the Disciples might even take notice, that he was
leaving the one, and taking up the other instead of it. At the Dedication of
the Tabernacle, and of the Temple, the glory of God filled them, and I cannot
believe, but there was a wonderful, glorious presence at the Dedication of this
Ordinance, if I may call it so; well then, after such discoveries of Christ,
brethren such warnings, to lie down and sleep, how dangerous is it to catch
cold after such a heat? how will it grieve the Lord to see so much grace laid
out in vain upon us in a great part, if we be sleeping so quickly again? And it
appears, that Peter he had his Love, and faith much heigthned, but here was the
mistake he rested too much upon it, upon what he had received: O says, he,
though all men forsake thee, I will not deny thee, etc! Yet alas you see, when
he should have prayed with Christ, and so the rest, there in his agony in the
Garden, he falls asleep again, and again, and again: so dead asleep, nothing
would keep him waking. O how prone are the best of men to sleep, when we had
most need to wake! after the richest discoveries of Christ, when we had most
need to be most lively, to improve the grace we have received, to return love
for love, even then, we fall asleep, the Disciples, as eminent as any, did it,
sure then, they were apt to it; And if they, then, surely then any of the
Saints are apt to it now.

4. Another time of great need of waking for the Saint is the hour of
temptation, when that comes upon them; If ever Soldiers had need to be awake,
it is, when the enemy is upon them, when they are besieged, when they are ready
to swallow them up. What need had Sampson to have been awake, when the
Philistines Judge. 1. 6.
were upon him; and he had experience of it, again, and again, and yet you see
how securely he slept? And so the Disciples, it was the hour and power of
darkness that now was come upon them, and if ever they would be awake, now was
the time. Our Savior also warns them of their danger; O watch, and pray, lest
Luke 22. 53. Mar. 14. 38
ye enter into temptation; you never were in such danger as now; you are beset
with temptations, will you be in danger of reproach for my names sake, even by
and by; your enemies are ev^n upon you already, re^dy to apprehend me, and yet
notwithstanding all this danger, they slept most securely; surely no man will
deny, but the hour of temptation is one of the dreadfullest times to watch, or
be awake; have we not found it by sad experience? have we not had exercises of
faith in such an hour? for all the strength of our Patience, and submission to
his will, exercise for all our love, and all our graces, and is not this a
needful time then to have them ready at hand to us, and if we had not, how
sadly should we have been foiled, and God dishonored? yea, has it not been so
with many of us in such an hour? we have fallen, been wounded, wounded his
Name, and our own names, and our own souls, and all, because we were asleep?
sure, if any other, this is a needful time: and yet truly, this is so ordinary,
that when does an hour of temptation come upon the people of God, that it
finds them waking, standing with loins girt with strength, ready to receive
it? we are usually most sleepy at such a time.

5. After we have fallen by our former sleeping, then there is great need of
being awake; for alas brethren, the deceitfulness of sin is such, that except
it be presently repented of, and confessed, it hardens the heart, and so long
we continue in a grieving condition to the Lord; Therefore there is need to be
awake; and yet usually after falling, we are apt to sleep; and how long we
should sleep, if we were left to this sleeping evil, we know not. Peter had his
fall: O what need had he quickly to have repented! but poor soul he was asleep,
and therefore instead of repenting, he acts the same sin over, and over again,
and in a more fearful manner; If he had been awake at first, he had not
committed that sin likely; if he had been then awake, he had not then repeated
it, but he goes on, being in a sleep; Ah it was high time to awake him! for
who knows what he would have done, if the Lord Jesus had not looked upon him.
And so David, O what need had he to have been awaked after his adultery, that
his 2 Samuel 12.
hard heart might not have been more hardened, and his soul exposed to more
thrusts and wounds, and Gods Name more dishonored; but alas, he is fast
asleep! And so the case of Jonah, he had avoided that sad distemper of madness
and passion, if he had been awake; but it seems though he had been in the
belly of hell, he was not thoroughly awaked from his former sleep, in his former
rebellion, and therefore he rebels yet more, and more, now I say, after sin, we
are apt to be asleep, when we had most need to be awake. It is sad brethren, to
consider what a frame the hearts of Gods own people will be in sometimes; and
what guil there is? as in David, that they will not confess their sin, Psalm. 32.
when God has discovered their folly in part, but will cloak, and shift, and
excuse, and nestle themselves to sleep again, when they are a little awaked; O
when had they more need to repent, to rouse themselves? for when are they more
exposed to the rage of Satan? and yet then they sleep.

6. Another time, when we had greatest need to be awake, we are apt to sleep,
and that is, when we should be a comfort and refreshing to others in their
troubles and sorrows. Surely our Savior took his Disciples up into the garden,
that they might pray with him and for themselves; and to have been with them
Mat. 26.
praying, would have been a little comfort to him: therefore he came still,
after he had been strongly wrestling, a while striving in prayer, even to an
agony, to them he came as I may say, to have refreshed himself; as it was the
Apostles joy, and comfort 3 Ioh. 4. 1 These. 3. 8.
to see his Children in the Gospel to walk steadfastly with God and keep the
faith; now we live, if ye stand fast; so it would have been a comfort to Christ
at this time; but alas, all comfort forsakes him, he comes again, and again,
and finds them sleeping; he sweat that bloody sweat, and instead of wiping it
away, they laid more load upon him to increase it. O miserable Companions in
affliction were they, miserable Comforters were they, they were asleep. Truly
so it is with us brethren, when we should comfort one another with the comforts
we have had of God, we have them to seek, we have nothing to say; Or when by
our lively conversation; and standing fast, and being established ^n the
present truth, in these backsliding days, to the comfort and joy of them that
Christ has set over us; we are sleeping, and our foot sliding, into this, and
that false way, and this is another great time of need. But I hope enough has
been said, many more particulars might be produced; I doubt not, to show that
it is a like, in other cases of greatest need, we are apt to fall asleep.

The Reasons are from the desperate deceitfulness of sin, and our hearts, and
the cunning, and malice of Satan, to do us most hurt, etc.

First Application, Then sure there is no such thing as perfection Use. 1.
in this life, as some would have it, if we be thus prone to sleep, and when we
had most need to be awake; yea rather it argues great imperfection, even in the
best of the Saints that have a heart so untoward, and apt to be in the worst
frame, when it Phil. 3. 13.
should be in the best. To be out of frame at any time, to be sleeping at any
time, argues imperfection, and weakness, and weariness, and therefore the
Angels are called Watchers, wherein they approach nearer to the glorious
perfection of God, who never slumbreth, nor sleeps; but to be out of frame
then, when of Dan. 4. 17.
all other times, we had most need to be in ^rame, shows we are far from
perfection; that Corruption is strong and cunning, and the Devil without,
knows how to improve it to our great disadvantage, either unbefitting us for
doing good when opportunity is offered, or for receiving Good, when the heart
of the Lord is most widely opened.

This should be matter of deep humiliation to us all, that we are so apt to
sleep, when we have most need to be awake. The other Use 2.
Doctrine gave us a humbling word, but this much more: If we consider these two
things.

1. The more grace we have received, the worse we grow, turn the grace of
Christ into wantonness; for usually at the first, when the soul is awaked out
of its dead sleep, O how hard it follows Psalm. 132. 4.
after God, it gives no sleep to its eyes, nor slumber to his eyelids! until
he find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob in
the soul. Well, it is true, the Lord has done something for that poor soul; he
has opened his eyes to see the want of Christ, and touched his heart so, that
now he follows him, and cannot but follow him; this is unspeakable mercy. But
now when the Lord has done much more for the soul, has poured upon it his
Spirit, given the oil of gladness, as well as of grace, that then it should
fall asleep; the more engagements of Love the Lord Jesus lays upon the soul,
the more li^tless, the more lazy it should grow? The Apostle took it unkindly,
and well he might, the more he loved them, the less he 2 Cor. 12. 15.
was beloved; and this could not but shame them, if they had any ingenuity; and
may not the Lord Jesus take it as unkindly, that the more he loves us, the
less he should be loved of us, as his love grows hottest, our love should
grow coldest! O for a spiritual ingenuity, that we might lie down in shame
before the Lord continually for this; O what ungodly hearts, etc. and how
unkind, may poor creatures be, and are they, who have received greatest
kindness from him? Paul labored more abundantly, because grace bad more
abounded toward him, then others. We are prone to it, if we be not left to it;
the more grace we (...) Cor. 15. 10.
have received, the more listless to grow, which arises no^ from the nature of
grace, but from self-confidence, and resting in our receivings, which lays us
fast asleep; a man that has one talent, improveth it; but he that has ten,
lays it to sleep, etc.

2. What a shame is it for us, that when we have most need to act our grace, we
have the least use of it; for what was grace given us for brethren, but for
action, not to lie idle, and rust for want of using, but to exercise it for his
glory, our own comfort, and others good; Now how do we fall short of these
ends, when we cannot use it in our greatest need, is in those times before
mentioned; how would a man be ashamed, that is, or should be a man of his
hands, and when there is not such need, he can sense and use his hands exactly
to defend himself, or offend his enemy; but when he comes to it indeed, that
his life is in danger, he is in a deep sleep, as the Psalmist speaks, and none
of the men of might find their hands. A man is very rational at all other
times, only Psalm. 76. 5.
at a pinch, when he has more then ordinary need of it, he is a very child,
and can do nothing, this is a great shame. The Saints that have received much
grace, and therefore should act strongly for God, what a shame is it, that when
temptation comes, or when any more then ordinary occasion to exercise their
grace, they are like Children sleeping in their Cradles, can do nothing.

Then, If this be so; Let us learn never to trust our hearts, when they at the
best, in their highest frame, most spiritual, most enlarged; Use 3.
Alas, they are like a deceitful Bow, it seems firm, until you come to draw
it; but when you have need of it, draw it, it will deceive you, fall asunder;
he that trustoth in his own heart, is a fool, says the wise man; and who more
likely to know then Prove. 28. 36.
he, who beside the Spirit whereby he spoke, had had experience what a sad
thing that self-confidence and security had been? how fatal it had proved to
himself? be sure brethren, if there be any time more then another that we need
our hearts to be present, or graces to be in act, they will be asleep; our
corrupt part will cloud them, and bear them down. Do but observe it, if it be
but to watch one hour with Christ in an holy duty, as prayer, or the like: It
is strange, but it is true, our hearts will be less present then, then at any
thing else; Let the duty be done, or before it begin, and you shall not be
troubled with such a stream of vain, and impertinent, if not sinful thoughts,
but once go about this duty; and O how do they thrust upon the soul? and how
lively sometimes, (when there is not so much need) are the affections? and how
dull, and flat are they then? therefore trust not any frame you have at any
time received; for indeed it will prove a broken reed, even grace it self, if
you lean upon it, it will fail you, and pierce you also.

Then what need had we brethren, to ply the Throne of grace, to sit down by the
fountain, and fullness of life, and quickening influence, Use 4.
even Jesus Christ. David did even when he was at the best frame, as in penning
the 119. Psalm: when do we find more flaming affections toward God, and
Heaven, and his Law, and Worship, so strong as to break through all oppositions
of men, and Satan, and Corruption? and yet how sensible was he of his falling
flat, even in the midst of such a rapture? O quicken thou me, quicken thou me
according to thy Word, says he; alas this vigor will not continue, except thou
supply it with continual refreshing, and renewing of strength. And so in that
place, O that thou would keep this upon the imagination of the thoughts 1
(...). 29.
of their hearts for ever; alas, else he knew if there were a like occasion for
a free spirit in the service of God, and his Temple, it would be far from them.
O therefore ply the throne of grace brethren, live by the faith of the Son of
God: Faith will draw water out of the wels of salvation.

And O what need had we to keep in with the Spirit of grace, lest he leave us
in a time of need! It is true, when we aprrehend a danger, or an hour of
temptation coming, and the soul be any thing awake, O then, what mean it will
make for the presence of Ephesians. 4. 30.
the Spirit? but brethren, he deals with us, as we deal with him; If when we
have peace, and a calm, and in our ordinary waking we slight him, and sit loose
to him, believe it, in our time of greatest need he may justly stand at a
distance from us, and let us see what our own strength is, and what can we do
without him? O therefore, let us take heed of grieving this holy Spirit, which
is that Spirit that watches with us to keep us awake, lest if he withdraw, we
fall asleep, when of all other times we had most need to be awake.

Fifthly, Then what have some of the people of God to bless him for, and to
rejoice in the Lord, for that he has kept them awake, Use 5.
specially in the time of need? it is double, and treble mercy. You heard
before it is matter of great praises to be kept awake ordinarily. But in an
hour of temptation to be kept awake, watching and praying; so that when others
have entered into temptation, thou have been delivered: O what mercy is this,
and whence is it that the Lord does so highly favor thee more then others of
his people? So when he has in his Ordinances sometimes been, as I may say,
transfigured before us, and when others have been asleep, have seen nothing of
it at all, or very little; thou have been kept awake all the while. O that we
could tell how to set a price upon such a mercy as this? how sad a loss would
it have been, if thou had slept away such a season as others have done? that
happily thou might never have seen again? what had the Disciples lost, if
Jesus Christ had suffered them to sleep all the while of his transfiguration?
somewhat they saw of it, and by that they saw they might gather the better what
they had lost; it may be thou have lost something in such a time by sleeping a
while, but has he awaked thee to see the rest? Oh that God would help to prize
our mercies, to bless and magnify him for it.

Sixthly, in the last place then, if we find our selves growing secure, and
slumbring and sleeping, suspect there is an hour of great Use 6.
need to watch, to be awake, at hand. Either the day of our appearing before
the Lord Jesus, which is a time of greatest need, and if Satan can but get us
asleep against that day, he knows in likelihood we may set in a cloud, which
will be dishonor to Christ, discomfort to his poor people; or else some hour
of temptation is coming, and his design is now to lull us asleep, that he may
the more deeply wound us, take his aim better, where to hit us, and if he might
have his will, to smite us once for all. O suspect, if Dalilah spread her lap
for us; If the delights of the world do open their bosom for us to lie in, and
begin to sing sweetly in Judge. 16.
our ears, and charm us? O take heed, rouse up your selves with Sampson, before
hand, as he did it afterward still, until he was taken indeed, the Lord being
departed from him, a sad end of his sleeping. But suspect there is some design
in hand upon us, the aim is to get away God and Christ from us, our peace, our
holy frame from us, to bring the Philistims upon us. Or else that there is some
glorious manifestation of God toward us in his Ordinances, he is about to
cause his glory to pass by, and the envious man and our wretched hearts would
sain rob us of it; therefore suspect our selves, if we find we are growing
thus sleepy, that there is some time of need near at hand for our waking, for
we are exceeding apt to sleep, when we have most need to wake. But so much for
this Doctrine.

Verse 6. (...).
IN this Verse we have Christ his preparatory to his coming. In the next verse,
Its influence upon those unprepared virgins, toward a preparation of
themselves for his coming, and their own meeting of him.

In this preparation you have 1. A cry; which is laid down, first in general,
or first it is declared (...) that there was a cry. 2. (...) what this cry was;
Behold the Bridegroom comes, etc. And then the season of it in the second
place, it was at midnight. A Cry was made at his first coming, there was a
forerunner, and that was John the Baptist, and he was the voice of one crying
in the wilderness, an earnest, Mat. 3. 3.
zealous, loud speaking, prepare ye the way of the Lord. And now at his last
coming there is a like preparation of his way, there was a Cry made. Calvin
thinks the Cry here is put metaphorically for the suddeness of his coming, or
that it may be understood so, because when any great thing comes upon a people
suddenly, they make a stir, a tumult, it discomposeth them. Or as Children, or
Scholars, that are all out of their places, and at their sport, their Father or
Master comes upon them suddenly; O what a stir there is, an outcry, the
Master is coming, the Father is coming! Or when an Enemy surprizeth a place,
comes suddenly, beats up their Quarters, there is a Cry; O horse, horse,
arm, arm, they are here upon us. But I know not what Reason thus to understand
it of the suddenness of his coming, the Effect being put for the Cause; because
before the suddenness of his coming is set forth in the season plainly, as
hereafter shall appear; he came at midnight. I rather therefore take this for a
Cry by some messenger of God, as a forerunner of his Sons appearing, or coming
to his people, either to take them to the marriage, or shut them out of the
marriage for ever.

The Doctrine briefly will be this; The forerunner of the coming Doctr.
of Christ, is a Cry. At midnight a Cry was made. It is likely that this is
spoken by way of accommadation to the Prothesis of the similitude, as the
manner of Marriages then, when the Bridegroom was coming, likely there was some
messenger going before, to prepare them that were with the Bride, to meet him
that there might be no confusion when he came, so here in the (...) of the
similitude, the professors of Christ and the world, they are unready for the
most part, and in a sleep: And therefore this forerunner goes before the
coming of the Bridegroom, to give them warning that they prepare, etc.

That this is so, the Text it self is so express, I think it not very needful
to prove it further by Scripture, but show you that it is his course in all his
comings to send some messenger before him to prepare his way, to make way for
his coming; his coming to particular Judgments, as with the old world, he sent
his harbinger Noah, a Preacher of righteousness, and every blow of the workmen
upon the Ark was a Cry, and might have been as a 2 Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 11. 7.
dreadful sound in the ears of the world, he being the warning; the Ark must be
so long, an hundred and twenty years in building, the report of it then might
go over all the world in that time, for ought I know. Was not Lot sent to Sodom
before their ruin, Jonah to Niniveh, crying yet forty days, and it shall be
overthrown; But I will not stand upon this, you see it is suitable to his
former proceedings in coming to judge any people, or deliver his own among
them, and destroy the rest, which will be the effect of this coming of his.

Only here, let us note something concerning this coming of Christ, in a word
or two; for I will not dwell upon these things, having dispatched the main
things in the Parable already for the most part, and 2. Something touching this
Cry, what it is, and 3. Something concerning them both, relatively considered,
one respecting the other.

1. For the coming of Christ, which is the substance of the Cry, as you heard
before, either it is his coming at last to judge the world, to gather the
Saints together, and carry them into the Marriage as one spouse, topresent them
to his father, the purchase of his dearest blood which we must surely
understand here to be principally meant. And 2. The coming of Christ to a
particular soul, or people to gather them either to the spirits of just men
made perfect, the assembly of the firstborn, the general assembly, or else to
separate them from the congregation of the righteous; here indeed Heb. 12. 23.
Psalm. 1. 5.
they live mixed, as in the first Psalm, but then the sinners shall not stand
in the congregation of the righteous; but then the wheat goes one way, and the
Chaff another, the Gorn one way, the Tares another, the good fish in the Net
one way, and the weeds, and trash drawn in the Net another way. Before the
foolish Virgins might be counted wise, it may by many as well as the wise, yea
happily the only wise, and the wise Virgins the foolish; but now he comes to
make a difference, and lay it open to the view of all, which are which.

2. For the Cry: It is to be noted, that the force of the word imports a strong
voice, such a voice happily as would Stentora vincere, there is a still voice,
and a loud voice; a Cry is, when the voice is lifted up, when the throat is
extended, as I may say, when persons are hard of hearing, Isa. 58. 1. Cry with
the throat; Or it is to be extended to a great distance, there is a Cry Isa.
58. 1.
made. So then, this is no ordinary voice or warning, but a loud Cry, a shrill
sound, that is to be the forerunner of Christ his coming.

But then, What this Cry is, that is here spoken of, will be the subject of a
further enquiry? Why? surely brethren, we must understand it according, or
suitable to our exposition of the coming in this place.

If we take his coming here, to be his general coming to judge the world, then
the Cry may be one of these two, and both of them are forerunners, though the
one is more immediate then the other.

1. Then, The preaching of the Gospel to all the world, their sound is gone
forth into all the world. The Gospel of the Kingdom Mat. 24. 14.
must first be preached to all the World, and then shall the end be; it must be
for a witness to all Nations; this is a sound,, a Cry, and the substance of the
Cry is, behold he comes, go forth to meet him; he that is the Bridegroom, that
has purchased with his precious blood a peculiar people to himself to be his
spouse, even as many as shall believe in his name. Therefore go forth to meet
him, make ready for his appearing, when he shall come to fetch his Bride, see
to it that you be found in the number, this Cry is to go forth into all the
world, But this is further off. But,

2. The voice of the Archangel; for the Lord himself shall deseend from heaven
with a shout, with a shout, with the voice of the 1 These. 4. 16.
Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first;
(...) a shout, Beza says it is taken from Seamen, or the like, who when they
are pulling an Anchor, or Cable, with one voice cry together, and pull
together, as I may say a Hertamen, stirring up one another to pull; so this
will be a shout happily of all, or many of the company which come with Jesus
Christ, crying out, O he is coming, make ready for him; or what ever it be,
some shout there will be, or like the shout of men ready to set upon, and
destroy their enemies. The Archangel is chief, there being orders it should
seem among them, he does as I may say, cry before the rest, and instead of the
rest, and Calvin makes this exposition. The Trumpet also whatever it be
sounds, to sound forth the majesty of the appearing of Jesus Christ; i^ is the
loudest sound that is made with instruments, I think, and used much in Israel
in the gathering together their holy, and civil, and martial-Assemblies, and
for preparation to warn. Well, this will be a Cry that all the world will ring
of, the very dead in their graves shall hear it, they that are in the grave,
etc. Ioh. 5. 28.
Not while they are dead, nor be quickened by any virtue of a Creature, as this
Cry is, but the power of Christ then going forth, and raising them up, they may
be said to hear it, or at least they are raised at that time; The trumpet
Calvin mentions 2 Cor. 15. 52. Calv. H^ll.
unto the Corinthians, to be nothing else but metaphorical, the voice of the
Angel, the loud Cry, which shall be by the Angel formed; As a General by
Trumpet calls together his Army, so God will cite all the world to his Tribunal;
or as at Mount Sinai, to the giving the Law, one people were called together
with a Exodus 19. 16.
loud noise, or trumpets, so much more when all the world shall be called
together, the Majesty and terror of the appearing of Christ.

If we take it here brethren, of his particular coming to particular souls, to
gather them to himself in part before that day; which I know not that it can be
excluded from being a part of his meaning, then the voice, the cry, is
otherwise to be understood.

1. Then, It may be meant of the warning words which the Lord gives his people
by the Ministry of the Gospel every where in his Churches: specially indeed
brethren, this has been the voice of all the Messengers of Christ ever since
his first coming, that he will come, and come quickly, his last and general
coming will be quickly, but his coming to us particularly will be -- quickly.
Now the importunity of them that call upon us to repent, to prepare for the
coming of Christ to our souls by death, when we are like to receive our doom
for our everlasting state, this may be meant, cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy
voice. Or else, Isa. 58. 1.


2. Happily some Afflictions, God opens the mouth of some rod, some heavy
visitation, the rod cries, as it is in that place of Micah, Mic. 6. 9.
whether it be the affliction, the sickness, or stroke whereby the Lord takes
men away, this cries to men, repent: O prepare to meet the Lord Jesus, he is
coming, he is now even at the door; therefore go forth now to meet him, as
Hilarian chid his soul out, egredere O anima, egredere. Sometimes the Lord
sends a long and a loud cry, a grievous, and heavy visitation upon many of
us, yea upon his own dear children, as I have known some, the Cry has been, he
is coming, go forth to meet him, make ready; Or if it be a stroke that he
removes again, before we go hence, and we recover strength again: yet the Cry
of it is, Behold he comes, go forth to meet him, for we know not whether death
be not in the cup of affliction we drink at any time.

Thirdly, Then for the relative consideration of the Cry, with respect to his
coming, whereof it is a warning: It is to be considered, whether it be so
immediate, yea or no, as there can be no time of preparation after it, which
seems not to suit with the parable here. It seems by the parable, if I may
insist so much upon these particulars, 1. That there was some time between the
cry and his coming, as there is some time between the Harbinger, and the coming
of his Lord, whose way he prepares; because the Virgins here seem to have some
time to trim their Lamps, even the wise virgins; and for the foolish, it should
seem by the parable they had some time to trifle away, in buying, or going to
assay it; but this I will not press, or urge too much, only sure it is, that
the wise virgins being found asleep, after the warning, had time, and a heart
given them to prepare to trim them. And therefore, If we understand it of them
which shall be found alive at the last day, remember this: Some it may be will
not be so asleep, and yet need some preparation too. Some may be asleep, and
therefore will need some preparation. Now it is said, that at the voice of
Christ then coming with his Trumpet, 1 These. 4.
those that are alive, shall not prevent them that are asleep, go to heaven
before them, But the dead in Christ shall rise first, and what time there will
be for it, or whether in a moment, I am not able to determine: Or whether they
shall in a moment be changed, soul and body, that are alive, and so made ready
to enter with him into glory? Or whether there shall be time for the working of
it, I cannot say, but if their Lamps want trimming, their graces want
furbishing, they shall have it. But if by the cry then you understand the
Gospel preached, then they may have time enough. 2. If there be time between
the cry, and his coming, to take his own to himself, it seems not to be much;
but how much, or how little we cannot say: If the cry be the sickness, or
messenger of death which is sent to them; there is usually some time, and not
very much given, sometimes more, sometimes less. And so were the word
importunately pressed, an awakening word, to rouse the poor secure people of God,
there may be more or less time between this cry, and Christ his taking them to
himself, but some time it seems there is for their trimming of their Lamps. But
so much for Explication.

The Arguments now, wherefore there is such a cry before the coming of Jesus
Christ.

The great reason is clear here in the Text; It is because men are asleep, many
of them, both real Saints and formalists, they are Reas. 1.
asleep, and deep asleep; and therefore there comes a cry to awake them, it is
not an ordinary voice will do it, but a Cry. Some Boanerges, a son of thunder;
to raise poor sleepy sinners, that he may not take them in a sleep. Let not men
think, though now they have a still voice of the word, and they can make a shift
to sleep notwithstanding, they are Sermon-proof. If this will not awaken, he
will have another cry that shall avvaken them, he will roar upon them out of
heaven, thunder upon them, but he will vvaken them. While men are asleep, they
are not fit to meet the Lord Jesus in his coming to judgment, whether it be to
acquit them, or to condemn them: If it be in mercy, to take them to himself;
while they are in a sleep, they are not fit to meet him their Ornaments are
laid aside, their Lamps want trimming, as the Text has it there; and therefore
they must be awaked. Besides, they are not fit to take notice of the infinite,
and unsearchable riches of his grace manifested therein to them, in gathering
them to himself; if we should be called for in some f^ame that we are in
sometimes, truly we should not be able to take comfort in our meeting with him,
nor would he have any glory in our departure; and therefore usually he does
awake his people, stir up their graces, that they may shine, and be active when
he comes to gather them; and then if he come in judgment, as against these
foolish virgins, to blow out their Lamps in obscure darkness, except they be
awake in some measure, and their Consciences opened, they will not be sensible
of it; but when the Conscience of an hypocrite is a little rouzed; O what
fearful pre-apprehensions there will be of the displeasure of Christ! they are
not fit to receive the sentence of condemnation, except their Consciences were
rouzed; and therefore the Lord does oftentimes, if not always, awaken the
Conscience; the heart was never awake, but always asleep; but the Conscience
has been asleep, and now it must be awaked, ut sentiat se mori; It never
troubled the foolish virgins, though their Lamps were gone out, all the while
they slept, and if they had dyed in that sleep, they had as certainly perished;
but not so sensibly, nor so severely, as knowing the terrors of God which
belong to them before; and the Lord will have them to lie down in the confusion
of their souls, for their folly, in resting themselves contented with a
profession, without the possession of Jesus Christ; without this oil in their
vessels.

Another ground may be, for the Majesty of the coming of Christ that there may
be the more reverence, and awe of his Majesty, Reas. 2.
therefore he has a Messenger going before his face, as Princes use to do; and
happily in their Marriages of great persons, there might be some such thing,
surely this is one reason wherefore he comes at the last day, one piece of the
glory of his appearing, the voice of the Archangel, the Trumpet of God; so the
cry that goes before, it is much for his honor and Majesty, that all the
Messengers he sends Either Afflictions, or Ministers, all their Message almost
to his people is to prepare for his coming, to fit them for that appearing.

To render hypocrites inexcusable, since they have a cry going before them to
awaken them out of their sleep, to set them awork Reas. 3.
to get their grace, this oil in their vessels, they might have said if they
had been taken asleep; why if they had had any warning, they would have done as
others did: but now they are awaked, rouzed by this cry; and yet alas, they
cannot get this oil in their vessels, they slept away their opportunity, the
Gospel must be preached for a witness to all Nations; and now they can have no
cloak for their sin, for their unreadiness for his appearing, the Mat. 24. 14.
lord will manage his affairs so, as that every mouth may be stoped, and
confess before him.

That none of his own may be ^left; therefore he sends a Cry before him, for
none that are unfit for entrance with him into the Reas. 4.
Marriage, shall enter into it; no soul shall go to heaven in a sleep; they are
not fit for it, as you heard before, nor when he comes will he wait upon any;
now is the time of waiting to be gracious to poor souls, then is the time of
recompense, either love or displeasure: ^e will not tarry then; and therefore
it is said here in the Text, those that were ready went with him in to the
supper of the Lamb, into the marriage, those that had their Lamps trimmed, and
the door was shut; if the Saints themselves should not be found ready in some
measure, he would not then stay; love is impatient of delay, then; now he would
not lose any, and therefore he is long-suffering, and patient, long before he
comes; for that very end, because he would have none of his perish: so also
for the same reason does he thus warn them by a Voice, a Cry, to rouse them,
awake them, lest if they should be found unready, they might miss of entering
with him.

For the Application:

Then brethren let us take notice of the goodness and tenderness of the Lord to
his own people, in awakening them, though it Use 1.
may be it may disease them a little at first, to have such a cry in their
ears, as not to suffer them to sleep when they would nestle themselves upon
their pillow; he is loath to leave them behind, he will not lose any of them,
and therefore he rouzeth them: If Jesus Christ had left his Church in Cant. 5.
Or his Disciples sleeping, and gone his ways, their condition had been sad. If
death had come upon poor David, while under that guilt in the matter of Vriah,
and in so deep a sleep, how sad had his condition been? and so for Jonas, if
the belly of hell had been his grave, the belly of the Whale, and he had not
been awaked out of that sleep, what had become of him? he had miscarryed for
ever, or at least he had suffered great loss; and therefore it is much
tenderness in the Lord to his poor people, that he will not let them sleep, but
he rouzeth them up.

2. How easy should this make, and how should it sweeten the severest of Gods
dealings with us, to awake us? Suppose we have a dreadful sound in our ears,
when nothing else will do it, the terrors of God displayed, and set in battle
array against our souls, God writes bitter things against us, and all little
enough to awaken us, we are so secure it may be; It must be the louder voice of
the rod that must do it, if other means will not; and this seems Job 15. 21.
not joyons, but grievous at present, but it brings forth the peaceable fruits
of righteousness. O! the end will be sweet, when the soul thereby shall be
awaked, and kept awake, and ready for the appearing of the Lord Jesus. I know
the people of God would Heb. 12. 11.
not for a world that day should come upon them and find them in such a frame,
so heavy; so listless, so untoward as they are sometimes, and know not how to
shake it off; I, but give the Lord leave to shake it off, bear then the Cry,
though it be loud sometimes, and seem offensive, if this be the end, to awaken
thee: O why should not thou bear it thankfully and cheerfully?

3. If there be a Cry going before his coming, Then brethren see whether or no
you have not had this Cry in part sounding in your cars, and what use you have
made of it, has it awaked you, or not? The Gospel, it is here the voice of the
watchmen, that continually stir you up, and tell you the day of Christ is
coming, is at hand; If not the general, yet your particular day, the day of his
coming to our souls particularly cannot be far off: this is the daily cry in
our ears; and O that we could cry louder, and lift up our voice with more
affection to your souls; but as such poor worms are able, we cry to you, we are
messengers sent before his face, the Cry is, behold he comes, go forth to meet
him: Now brethren where are you? Are you upon your beds still? How many have
been awaked by this awakening word, the terrors of the Lord against them that
sleep? Have you done any thing to your further sitting for heaven? Can you with
comfort go forth to meet Jesus Christ, open to him when he knocks? Surely you
have not made use of this Cry that has been made; Ah, how many are sleeping as
deeply as ever, and do not yet dream of his coming, though they know not but
that he is at the door, and this night their souls shall be taken from them!

4. Then how should this stir us up every one to attend to the cry that is
made, and obey it; now you have the cry made in the word, this is our
preaching, to awaken you. Look not upon Sermons only as the affectionate
discourse of a poor creature that wishes well to your souls, but look upon it
as the warning word of Jesus Christ, as the Cry that goes before his presence,
afterward himself w^ll come, and that speedily, and how soon you know not, and
as he finds you then, so it will go with you. O that the Lord would speak by
his Spirit, and rattle you up a little poor sleepy souls, both wise and foolish
virgins, not that I desire the grief of yours or mine own soul, for if I make
you sorry, who is it that must make me glad, but you that are made sorry by me?
as the Apostle says: Yet dear friends, as I hope, I could be contented rather
to be shaken out of a sleep my self, then be found sleeping at the coming of
Christ; so had I rather it should be with you: how shall I bespeak your poor
souls this day? I would fain prevail with one poor soul, to shake off this
drowsiness and sloth, and sleepiness that is upon us; O arise, arise, for your
souls sake, for your peace sake, as you tender your comfort, now you hear the
Cry going before him; think with your selves sometimes, Can you look Jesus
Christ in the face with such a frame of heart as you have every day? O arise,
arise, will such sleepy souls be fit to sing Allelujahs to eternity to God? O
arise, arise Deborah Judge. 5. 12.
to sing praises to the Lord, awake then that sleep, you cannot else be fit
for heaven: this the first.

Consider secondly, If this Cry will not awaken you, you shall have a more
dreadful sound in your ears, happily ere long some sad blow or affliction, as
there in Job, Elihu says God speaks once, yea twice, but man regards it not;
often, but to no purpose; what then? Job 33, 14, to 19.
Why then he chasteneth him with pain, and the multitude of his bones with
strong pain, and opens his ear, and seals instruction to (...) ^oring of his
ear costs him something; Why will you put the Lord to it to speak louder, and
more terribly to you? for if you belong to him, awaked you must be, or if you
do not, awaked you shall be some way or other; and if this will not do it,

3. Death shall do it, and O how sad will it be for a man to go on securely,
and not to behold his unfitness for the appearing of Christ, until just he be
upon him? but if that will not do it, Sure I am the everlasting burnings will
awake you sinners, if you never wake until then. O the Lord forbid you should
have hearts so desperately hardened from his fear, as never to awake until
there be no remedy, no providing for your eternal state. O therefore arise,
arise as those Virgins did here in the Text; yea, though they were but formal
professors, yet they arose, their Consciences were awaked, and somewhat they
did, though they fell short; what will become of you then, that never rise, but
will sleep, let the Lord Cry, and though the trumpet sound louder and louder;
you look at the terrors of God, as the horse that rusheth into the battle,
looks at fear, that which is a fear to Job 39. 22.
others. Ah dear friends, it is no mocking at these things, your precious souls
lie at the stake; therefore as you love them, beg of God a heart to tremble at
this his Cry which is going out before him; how did all the Congregation
tremble when the Lord sounded Ier. 8. 6.
upon Mount-Sinai at the giving of the Law? do but think how terrible the
coming of Jesus Christ will be, to avenge himself upon sinners that violated
this Law, and are not found in him! O this will surely awaken you when you
shall have little list to sleep Exodus 19. 16.
or rest any more for ever. But the Lord give you rather to hear this Cry, to
have it sounding in your ears continually; that you may recover strength before
you go hence, and be no more seen, that with the wise Virgins, having your
Lamps trimmed, you may go in with the Bridegroom into the Marriage.

FOR THE SEASON of this coming of Christ, its preparation to it, It is at
Midnight; a time later then they thought of, and sooner then they expected; it
is spoken by way of accommodation to the Parable, as the other was before, they
fell asleep, the Virgins did, and in the deepest of their sleep the Bridegroom
comes, they are raised up to meet him. Note from hence.

That Jesus Christ his coming to many poor souls will be at Midnight, Or his
coming ordinarily is at Midnight. What this coming Doctr.
is you have heard before. All the difficulty here is to understand what is
meant by Midnight. Some have taken it properly for the Midnight, that part of
the natural day, when the Sun is farthest off us, and when it is darkest in the
night; and Jerome is said to report it for an A. ^radition, that Christ should
come at Midnight, and because it is first in the order of nature to know the
day, before the hour; therefore the day was pitched upon, and that was the even
of the Passover, when it is said, that the Primitive Churches did watch
constantly yearly that night, expecting it, whereby it should seem they knew
not the year, but every year stood upon the watch at the same time; but
methinks the year is first in order to be known before the day, and the day
before the hour; but surely this was vain, and a mistake of theirs, Mat. 24. 36.
for our Savior says, that of that day and hour knows no man.

Therefore we shall understand it here by way of Accommodation to the Parable;
and first then at Midnight siguratively may import in the first place an
unknown time, it was not revealed before hand at what time he would come; our
Savior says, If the good man had known when the thief would have come, he
would have kept his house from being broken; of that day and hour knows no
man, says our Savior, speaking of his coming in general: it is a Luke 12. 39.
secret thing, belonging to God, he keeps it in his own power, as he says
there in the first of the Acts. And for the particular Act. (...). (...).
day of his coming to us, it is not known to men for the most part; indeed
Hezekiah his case was extraordinary, to have his limits set him so long before,
to know the number of his days so long before hand, else ordinarily the people
of God know not the time, or very little before they depart, or be called for.
As these Virgins here, when they were asleep; alas they knew not what time it
was that the Alarm came, the Midnight is usually the most unknown time, or at
least a time wherein the coming of Christ is most unknown, for to that indeed
the ignorance is rather to be referred, though persons asleep at midnight know
not the time of the night, nor any evil, which is ready to surprise them at
that time.

2. The midst of a man's life is such a time, as the coming of Christ is not
looked for: Now this is more then the former, for though they had not known the
time; yet they might have waited, and expected every hour when he would have
come; but they, because it was uncertain, looked not for it: in a day he looked
not for him, Luke 12. 46. It is likely they had looked for it, but their
waiting was wearyed, they went forth to meet him at first, with their oil, and
Lamps, the wise Virgins, until they thought it long, for it is in respect of
their opinions, that he is said to delay his coming, as you have heard; Well,
now their watchful eyes were sealed up with sleep, so that he came later then
their expectations, and he came sooner then their expectations also, for they
were surprised by the Cry, before they were aware, just as a servant that has
in the beginning of the night expected his Masters coming home, and a good
while waited for it; now he gives over looking for him, so his Master comes
after his waiting, and yet before it too, for when he is at his rest, and
before he awakes again to return to his waiting for his Master, he comes upon
him, this is the very case: a child of God it may be at the beginning when the
impressions of God upon the heart are strong and fresh, he expects the day of
Christ his coming has it much in his eye; but after awhile, when he sees he
comes not, he lets down the watch, and grows more remiss by far, and when
he is in the depth of that sleep, before he renew his watching likely, the Lord
Jesus comes upon him.

3. A little more particularly, which is but the beating out of the former, he
comes at the midnight of men's lives, that is to say, at such a time of their
lives, as they neither hoped for it, nor feared it, for the expectation of the
coming of Jesus Christ does diversely affect men, according to the different
conditions of their souls, if they be such as are ready for it, for his
appearing habitually ready, and actually ready; that is to say, such as have
his grace in their hearts, oil in their vessels, and that grace does not lie
sleeping there, but it is in act, and lively, and the affection flaming toward
heaven, and the eye upon the recompense of reward, such a man, he will act his
hope for that day, look for it with hope, and with desire, because he expects
then a Crown of glory, a fullness of joy unspeakable, everlasting
bosom-communion with 2 Cor. 5. 6, 8.
Jesus Christ; knowing also, that while he is present in the body, he is absent
from the Lord, his looking for the appearing of the Lord, is I say with hope
and desire, because it is the day of his reigning, the accomplishment of it,
when the God of peace shall bruise Satan perfectly under his feet, with whose
temptations it may be, he is even wearyed out, and therefore as a laboring man
longs for the shadow of the evening, so does he desire it: Now a child of God,
he may have the root of this grace of hope, for the coming (...), as Thcophil.
Romans 8.
of Jesus Christ; but while he is asleep, his hope is not in act when it should
be, he does not stretch forth the neck as one earnestly expecting it, (...), he
does not lift up his head because his redemption draws near, and his
salvation is nearer now then it was when he believed, alas his hope is asleep
with him. A woman espoused expecting her Husband to come and Marry her, desires
the day, but in the mean time falls asleep, then her desires and hopes cease,
looks not for him all that while, and in that time he comes.

On the other hand they fear it not neither, for they are asleep, and so their
expectation cease; as prisoners, they fear the coming of the Judge, they have
a dreadful sound in their ears, and fear exceedingly when the Judge will come
to deliver them up to the tormentors, to the execution, Sentence being past
upon them; but if they fall asleep now, their fear cease if their sleep be
fast; so a man that dwells in a place of danger for robbers, he may expect them
and fear; and yet if after a while of waking, they come not, he falls asleep,
he fears them not then, as he would do if he were awake, in an hour he thinks
not of it, Luke 12. So wicked* Luke 12. 40.
men and hypocrites, formal professors, if they be conscious to their
conditions at any time, as when an hypocrite has his Conscience enlightened at
first, why then surely there cannot but be a fearful expectation of the coming
of Jesus Christ to judge them; but when once they fall asleep, those
impressions they had, wear off by degrees, then they fear not, though they have
as much cause as ever they had; so then, the Midnight is a time not expected.

The Arguments whereby this may be confirmed. First, It is for his own glory,
to come in such a time, unknown. The glory of Reas. 1. Prove. 25. 2.
God is to conceal a thing, but the honor of Kings is to search out a matter;
here is an opposition of persons and actions; the persons opposed are Kings,
and the God of Heaven, the King of Kings; the honor of Kings, is to search out
a matter, they are men of poor, shallow apprehensions, and little knowledge;
and therefore they had need to search to find out a matter; but now the Lord
he is an infinite unsearchable wise God, and he knows all things, and it is
for his honor to keep some things secret, that he may be admired, reverenced,
adored, his unsearchableness acknowledged. No further then he pleased, were the
mysteries of himself and his so^ revealed to the ages before, nor now at this
day, much he has reserved for another time and place; and that is, the time of
his coming, his own secret, which belongs to him, he has kept in his own
power, and it is for his honor so to do. And this is the first.

2. Therefore he will come so suddenly and unexpectedly, as Reas. 2.
I may say, at Midnight, that many, yea the most of men, that men might learn
to watch, to be always ready; this is abundantly proved, by the many
exhortations of our Savior to his Disciples to watch, enforced by this very
Argument; therefore also be ye ^at 24. 44.
ready, for in such an hour as ye think not, the son of man comes, even as a
thief in the night. In the foregoing Verse: Behold I Rev. 16. 15.
come as a thief, says he, blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garments, lest he be found naked, and they see his shame. Whether this be
understood of his last coming or no, if any coming of Christ, being sudden,
unexpected, uncertain, it should teach us to watch; and is not this the Use
which our Savior makes of it in the thirteenth verse of this Chapter? And so
in that Epistle to the Church of Sardis, If therefore thou shall not watch, I
will come on thee as a thief. The reason why he tells us he will come Rev. 3.
like a thief, suddenly, in the time least suspected, is to deter men from
sleeping and security; for if they lie to sleep, it will be such a sudden
surprisal, but if they watch and be ready, it will not be so unexpected, and
this is a reason, I say, wherefore the Lord keeps it secret and uncertain
when he will come, that men might watch. As Caesar, it is said of him that he
would never let his soldiers know the time of his removal, or the time of his
Onset, scil. Vt paratum, and intentum momentis omnibus quo vellet state
educeret. So the Lord Jesus, who is the Captain of our salvation, he lets
not us know when it will be, that we might Heb. 2. 10.
expect it always. If men should know that Jesus Christ would come to call for
them but sixteen years hence, or six years; alas, how bold would they make with
him ordinarily, and spend five of the six in vanity, if not more; and truly
such is the corruption of our hearts also, that that very thing which our
Savior, who well knew the constitutions of men, and what might be the most
likely Argument for watchfulness, lays down this, of the uncertainty of it,
unexpectedness of it, if men sleep, surprising them, yet we will make bold, and
venture at all, in so much that he seldom comes to a soul, and finds him
watching.

3. To make his coming like an evil snare to sinners, to hypocrites. So it is
in that place of Luke, take heed your hearts be not overcharged Reas. 3. Luke
2^. 35.
with cares of this world, etc. and that day come upon you as a snare; A snare
you know, is a sad thing, and that which suddenly E(...)es. 9. 12.
and unavoidably seizes upon the poor beast or bird; they are taken in an evil
snare, when they are sleeping, and so brought to ruin, this is the case, it
comes on them like a snare, like a Net, from on high, as snares rained from
Heaven, no avoiding them; or ^
else as a snare hid, when men think nothing, or the beasts are at their prey,
and delighting themselves in that, before they are aware the foot or neck is in
the snare, and there is no breaking of it, it is too strong a snare.

4. Then usually hypocrites and sinners are at the worst, and the ^eas. 4.
people of God after their awaking, and stirring up, will be at the best;
sinners at the worst, when they have settled upon their Lees in security, and
sleep for a while, the foolish virgins never (...)d a heart awake toward God;
their heart never answered that Call, Awake thou that sleep, their eyes
indeed were opened, and they walk^ up and down as men may do when the heart is
asleep; they had their Lamps, some show, some formality, but now when this day
surprizeth them, all is gone, their form perishes, or at least will stand them
in no stead, their Lamps were gone out; and therefore this is the very nick of
time wherein the Lord Jesus will surprise hyporrites, and give them their
recompense of reward. The people of God that sleep, it is true they are unready
when the Cry comes, but O how will this humble them, to be found sleeping, and
what is the top of the Ladder but humility? when will the ^oul be fittest to
e^alt Christ but then? and so when their Lamps are trimmed up again, they will
shine more bright then before, and therefore then also will be a time for his
coming to them.

1. Then by way of Application, this may inform us how it comes to pass so
many in the midst of their plots and purposes Use 1.
are taken away, without any hope in their death; surely every man would be
happy, they would have heaven, but they think it is time enough to look after
that when they have nothing else to do. O if they had compast such a thing,
such a Land, and such a House, gotten such an inheritance, then they would lay
down these things, and prepare for heaven! and so the milk of their breasts,
and marrow of their bones, they lay out upon their youthful Lusts, and think
their old age time enough to mind those serious things; But the day comes upon
them at unawares, and snatcheth them away in his wrathful displeasure, in the
midst of their endeavors for the world, plucks them away from their place, and
it knows them no more. Go to, ye that say, we will go to such a City, and
buy, James 4. 13.
and sell, and get gain; whereas they know not what is in the womb of a day;
hence it is, that so many perish from the way, they are cut off in the midst,
and never reach their expectations, and so remedilesly perish. This day comes
upon them as a snare, when they are sitting like so many Birds, pluming
themselves, feeding, and sporting, and singing, it comes upon them, and they
are carried away to their place. Ah dear friends! what sottish, stupid, and
strange presumption possesses poor sinners hearts, as if they were of the
Counsel of God, as if they knew the number of their Months before hand, as
Hezekiah did, and therefore might make bold to lavish out week after week upon
their lusts? do you know whether this night the snare will come upon you? O
that Sinners could but lay these things to heart, that they might not perish
like Beasts overtaken i^ an evil snare: but this is but the first.

2. It will be a word of Reproof of the boldness of some, who Use 2.
take upon them to know the time, and many wanton wits have dared to sport
themselves in so serious a thing, to foretell the year, one placing it upon
1533. others upon 1657. Alsted. Chronol. 1494. Pi^us Mirandula; upon 1905.
Nicol. Cusanus, upon 1700. and many others; See Trap upon Mat. 24. 36. Many
whereof time has already refuted, the grounds are weak of many of them, this
is to be wise above what is written, vain man would be wise, and herein he
shows himself a wild Job 11. 12.
Asses Colt indeed, to pry into the secret which God has kept in his own
power; no, no, it is unknown, the day, and hour, the longer, or shorter time,
there is no limiting of it by us, it will be at midnight, when men least
suspect ordinarily, but Acts 17.
enough of that.

3. It may teach us further, that when we least expect it, it is Use
likely to be nearest to us; a man would think this should be a startling word
to all poor sleeping sinners; you put away the evil day, the day of the Lord
far from you; it is never nearer to you than then; never are men usually more
unfit for that day, then when they put it far from them, and never is it
usually more near to them, then at that time. It is observed in nature, that
usually before an Earthquaeke comes to swallow up men, there is a great calm;
the air is quiet, and the wind lies, before the great rain falls. When was the
Old World more near destruction by that day of judgment from the Lord, then
when they thought least of it, put it farthest off, were most secure. It is
observed, the Flood came in the Springtime, when the Spirit of God, began to
renew the face of the earth, they had as fair, a hopeful, a fruitful year as
before; though there was one doubting Noah among them that dreamed of a dry
winter, yet when they were most secure, most deeply secure, then the Flood
came; when things were in their prime, and their hopes of corn, and wine, and
oil in their flower, the Flood came, and swept them away. And so Sodom, when
the Sun arose upon it, what fairer ground of hope? of a fair day doubtless they
expected it: they put off the day, but then it was nearest to them. So Laish,
secure before ruin, and Agag; so when they cry peace, peace, they Judge. 18. 9.
1 Samuel 15. 1 These. 5. 3.
shall do well, God proclaims war against them by his Messengers. Think of it
brethren, with your selves; how stand your hearts affected, in respect of this
day? are you not secure? do you wait for it, believe it? the less you fear it,
the more cause you have to fear it; or the less hope, and love, and desire, and
waiting there is in any of us to it, the more cause we have to fear it; for it
usually seizes upon men at midnight. Is it not midnight with some of us? do
not thou sleep thy fast, thy dead sleep? nothing will awake thee, thou make a
mock of all these things: The Lord give you but an eye to see, for the snare is
even coming upon you, it is nearest to such persons of all others.

4. It will be a word of Terror then, to all hypocrites and formalists, Use
and all sinners, in that this day of the Lord will surprise you and come upon
you at unawares. What makes death so terrible to poor sinners when they come
to it, but the judgment which follows it? so that let a sinner have warning
of it, and it is terrible, but when it comes upon a sudden and unexpected this
exceedingly adds to the terror of it, it amazeth, astonisheth. O what a
terror must it needs be to the old world! that when their hopes were in the
spring, in their verdure, then all on a sudden, the world was on a flood, the
fountains of the deep and the clouds above conspired to swallow them up; And
will it not be, think you, as great an astonishment, when the world at the end
shall look for nothing less, and before they are aware the world shall be on a
flame about their ears? O then the sinners in Sion will be afraid, and
fearfulness will surprise the hypocrite! put Isa. 33. 14.
as good a face upon it now as you can. How terrible is a sudden storm upon the
poor Mariners? which they never looked for, they are all inveloped in darkness;
the clouds and seas seem to come together. How terrible was the coming of
Gideon upon the Midiani^es Judge. 7. 19.
on a sudden at midnight, when all asleep likely, to see and hear so many
Trumpets blowing, so many pitchers clattering, so many Lamps burning! such a
cry, the sword of the Lord and of Gideon, all on a sudden! O how terrible it
was, it put them besides themselves, they knew not what to do, they thrust
their swords in one another bowels! O that we had but hearts to believe how
terrible a day it will be to us, if it overtake us as a snare. Yea surely it
will have somewhat of amazement, terror in it, to the people of God themselves
that shall be found sleeping, with whom it shall be midnight, in respect of
security; And though they may avoid the ruin and destruction of the day, they
shall have a share in the distraction and terror of it, but poor sinners, poor
hypocrites, poor formalists shall have the amazing terror, and never come to
themselves, never recover themselves, but perish for ever by it.

5. Then knowing the terror of the Lord we persuade men to this Use 2 Cor. 5.
11.
watching, which is the main thing intended in the Parable. And concerning
which you have heard somewhat already, having spoken so largely to the
Privation or defect of this watching, in the slumbering and sleeping of the
Virgins; Nor do I intend to insist largely upon this watching here, only here I
suppose it most naturally falls into this main part of the Parable. Watching
here, is as much as diligent taking heed to our selves that that day come not
upon us at unawares; As a man that watches against an enemy is surprised, he
takes diligent heed: so our Savior, take heed to your selves that that day
come not upon you as a snare, so take heed to your selves, and the flock over
which the Lord has made you overseers, etc. Watch therefore, says he, for
after my departure grievous wolves will enter. As a party of soldiers, Luke 12.
34.
when they would take diligent heed to themselves, lest they be surprised by
their enemy, they watch, they express it that way; so here then, The
Exhortation is brethren, to us all, To take diligent heed to our selves, lest
we be surprised by the coming of Jesus Christ; for we know not when he will
come, Acts. 20. 31.
there is no determined time, and if we take not diligent heed, it will come
upon us unawares.

You have had some of the Motives to press this duty heretofore, or the Caution
against sleeping; I pray you remember, how you cannot be too often put in mind
of them; surely our Savior comes over with it so often, again, and again; you
have heard the danger you are in while you sleep. But we will rather take up a
Consideration or two from hence.

First, the difficulty of the duty, so continually to take so diligent heed; If
the good man had known what hour the thief would have come, he might more
easily have watched to have prevented him; it is much more easy to hold out
such a watch for a while, then constantly, now every hour being in danger,
because we know not what hour he will come, this is more difficult; which
should not discourage us, but whet us on to double diligence. Jam per periculum
anim^ Alexandri; It is an easy thing to be a Christian as many are, lazy
droans, listless, sleepy Professors, that alas, alas, would scarce ever be
found upon their watch, when ever he should come; But it is a matter of great
difficulty, and will work all your faculties to the utmost, to watch for his
appearing.

2. The dreadfulness of the thing; if you be surprised would you have Jesus
Christ find you with your ornaments laid aside, find you naked? how will you
hold up your heads, and look him in the face? either you will perish with the
foolish Virgins, (and I doubt that will prove the portion of many of our souls)
or else you will be saved; but you must run through fear, through some shame,
confusion, distraction, when you are taken unawares. Besides, you are not of
the night, but of the day, says the Apostle, that that day should not take you
at unawares, 1 These. 5. 5. And otherwise, we give not God the end of his
dispensations, which is that we might watch.

What then should we do? surely brethren, There are two things specially for us
to do, according to the scope of this Parable, which our Savior thus applies,
because the foolish Virgins, and the wise, both by their sleeping suffered such
loss; the one lost all their precious souls, all the world not being able to
recover them; the other lost their comfort, and sweet peace, and quiet, and had
much coniusion in their latter end, the soul being in a hurry to make ready;
when it should go forth to meet the Lord Jesus, should have nothing else to do
but to dye; Therefore this watching being opposed to both their sleeping, I
conceive there are two things specially in it.

First, That you be sure to have your oil in your vessels ready, that we have
grace in our hearts. Take heed to your selves diligently then in the name of
Jesus Christ, that you give not sleep to your eyes, nor slumber to your
eyelids; give not the Lord, nor your souls rest, until you have this
Communication of Christ to your poor souls; how many poor hearts that hear this
word, have not a dram of grace? though you have long had a name to be
Christians, yet that has been all, Brethren, What do you mean? can you dye
comfortably, hopefully, except you have grace in your hearts, this oil, this
Spirit of grace dwelling in you? will any thing else enable you to lift up your
faces before him, but his righteousness and holiness made over to you, imputed
unto you as an Inner, and Outward Garment, or Clothing? I have hope of you you
would not prove Foolish Virgins, and that you are not so careless as not to
regard whether you be found to have grace, yea, or no; If there be any such,
let me tell such a man, his Condition is next to desperate; the Lord smite such
sinners hearts; but if you do not care, there will come a time when you will
care, and every vein in your hearts will ache, when you shall find, alas, you
have trifled away your time, your day you had to get grace in, and now you have
none; Do you think brethren, to go to heaven without grace? must there be a
wedding garment to his Supper here, and must not there much more be a wedding
Garment upon them that come into that nearest Mat. 22. 12.
Fellowship with the Lord Jesus for ever? Do poor sinners eat, and drink
judgment to themselves, if they come without grace to the Supper? O brethren!
do you think he will endure you to enter, if you have not grace to sit with him
at his Table to eternity? No: believe it, Sinners shall not stand in the
Congregation Psalm. 15.
of the upright; O that the Lord would persuade you! How far are many of us
from the Apostles temper! he counted all things dung and dross, not worthy his
thoughts in comparison of being found in Christ; and do not we count these
things dung and dross in comparison of the world? if it were not so, surely men
would lay out some of their care, some of their thoughts some of their time for
the getting Christ and grace.

2. We must labor also to have our graces, to get and keep our graces in act,
in a lively frame, our hearts flaming toward the Lord continually; the wise
Virgins they slept, and while they slept, they could not watch; now they had
grace in their hearts, but they kept it not in use, in exercise, as they should
have done, and therefore they underwent much inconvenience, as you have heard;
and therefore our Savior exhorts us to watch, to take diligent heed, that we
run not the like hazard with them, no more than with the foolish virgins:
Therefore labor to get your graces lively: how should we think with our selves
often when we find a listless f^ame growing upon us: O what would my Condition
be, if the Lord Jesus should come this day to my poor soul? Labor to keep your
faith lively, your Love lively, so your humility and selfabasing, that you may
exalt him.

But alas, you will say, how can we do this? we are poor, imperfect creatures,
and therefore can we be always acting our graces? is it likely we should keep
them always in act? that is enough for Angels, and glorified Saints to do, who
are therefore called watchers.

I answer to this; It is true, it is not required we should always be acting of
grace, for then we should be able to do nothing else; then we should neither
sleep, nor follow the works of some of our callings, which require the
intention of the mind as well as the labor of the hand, therefore that is not
the meaning, nor indeed were we able to do it, our spirits would fail us. But
how then?

Why, We must be acting our graces when we are called to act them, when ever is
a time; Mephibosheth eats bread continually at David's table; not that he did
nothing else but eat, without any 2 Samuel 9. 13.
intermission, but at meal-times he did eat continually. Note brethren, we
should see to it, that upon all occasions we act our graces, upon every
temptation wherewith we are assaulted, we should act our faith, upon every
trial our patience, upon every manifestation of himself to us to act our love,
and humility, and thank-fulness.

But specially in our drawings nigh to him, then see to it that we have our
graces in act; which alas, how sar short do we fall of, as in our daily
performances, prayers, public, secret; So, meditating, reading, hearing,
receiving the Lords Supper, if we would have them bright, we must exercise them
at these times, how should we now renew our repentance, in washing Psalm 26. 6.
our hands in innocence, as clean as if washed in innocence it self, Genesis 35.
and so compass the Altar of God? How should we as Jacob his family, besides
putting away their Idols, change their garments also! we should labor to get
clothed with another Spirit, another frame then ordinary, when we come before
him Luke 12. 43. Mat. 25. 26.
upon these occasions. It is said concerning the Steward, which specially
concerns the Ministers of Christ; Blessed is that servant, whom his Master
shall sind so doing, giving every one their portion in due season; A slothful
servant is a wicked servant, our Savior says, he that receives grace in
vain, improveth it not, Isa. 64. 7.
stirs not up himself to lay hold upon Christ, upon special occasions; such
as are on foot upon such a day as this, oporte^ Episcopum concionari, says one
eminent in his time. The Lord has given his Spirit to all believing people,
they have the habits of grace, and he gives it them as a stock to trade with,
as principles to act for him in their places; O blessed is that servant whom
his Lord shall find so doing; he says not, whom his Lord shall find with grace
in his heart, but so doing; acting his grace. Ah blessed souls, whom he shall
find praying, keeping up those duties in a lively manner, whom he shall find
receiving the sealing Ordinances, and with a wedding Garment upon him, a lively
frame of spirit fit for it. You have the Spirit of Christ dwelling in you, if
you be his, and will you let such a precious principle lie idle, it is given to
mortify, to sanctify; O blessed soul that shall be found so doing, even by
the Spirit, to mortify the deeds of the Flesh; surely brethren, Rom 8* 13.
nothing will keep us more awake, then action will; if we be found sleeping, it
will not be comfortable to us, therefore look to the acting of your graces, I
beseech you.

Again, Labor to love his appearing so, as that we may wait for it; for indeed
if we love it not, we shall be apt to put the thoughts of it far from us,
labor either to love it, or fear it, according to thy Condition; if thy
Calling and Election be made sure, if thou know the things freely given thee
of God, then be ashamed that any thing in the world should lie so near thee, as
not to desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; renew these desires day
by day, nothing but the greater glory of God should make us willing to be here;
indeed action for Christ and his honor is of a high nature, and ought to have
great weight with us, as the Apostle has it; but yet methinks the burden of
sins should make us groan for it; methinks if we have an eye upon the
recompense of reward, the joy that is set before thee, that full enjoyment of
Jesus Christ, there should be a greater desire to be with Jesus Christ, knowing
you are absent; now where there is such a desire, and such a groaning, surely
that day will not come upon them so unexpectedly and terribly.

If we have not this assurance brethren, methinks then the fear of this day of
Jesus Christ should hold us in such bondage all our lives-long, it should so
keep us awake, we should have little mind to sleep, if we labor to keep upon
our hearts fresh* our own Condition, but we should be up, and working to make
our calling and election sure, and so we might be found doing; and surely
brethren, that poor soul trembling, that thus follows hard after Christ, if the
day come upon him before he have this assurance, yet shall it be more
comfortable to him, then to a man that has had more peace, and falls asleep in
the lap of it, and so is overtaken.

Verse 7. (...), etc.
IN the former Verse, we have a preparative Cry, behold the Bridegroom comes;
In this Verse we have the effect of it in part, which is general to them all,
both wise and foolish; then when that cry was made, that dreadful sound was
made in their ears, it startled them, rowsed them out of their sleep, they
arose from their bed of security, and one as well as another; all those
Virgins, those he had been speaking of, all those that slept, which were wise
as well as foolish, and foolish as well as wise. And that it is thus generally
taken, it is further plain; because afterward he comes to divide them, and the
foolish said unto the wise; while they were both asleep, the one could not
speak, nor the other hear; but now they were all rowsed, they universally
particle, they all arose, and trimmed, etc. It has influence upon both parts
of the Predicate. The words are a plain Proposition; the Subject is the
Virgins; the universality of the Subject, all of them, those Virgins that were
asleep before. That which is spoken of them, is double; they arose, and they
trimmed their Lamps. And we have also the time when they did this, then, then
when the Cry came, they heeded not what Condition their Lamps were in before.

There are two things mainly noteworthy in the verse, according to the two
sorts of Virgins, which divide this universal; all those Virgins, they were
wise and foolish; some of them were Virgins in deed, the other in profession
and appearance such; now it is very considerable concerning them both. That the
Hypocrite should ever arise out of such a deep sleep, considering that his
heart was never awake, is a matter worth our noting; and that he that had
nothing else but a Lamp, and that even now wearing out, yet should be trimming
of it up for heaven; On the other hand, and it is as observable, that the Child
of God has his Lamp to trim now at such a time as this is, when the Cry is
come, he is summoned to meet the Lord Jesus, who is near at hand. Accordingly,
I shall take up a double Observation from the words.

That an Hypocrite, a formal Professor may go very far toward Doctr. 1.
heaven and salvation. And I think this droppeth like honey from the comb,
without crushing, or wrong to the Text.

That a Child of God may have his Lamp to trim when he should Doctr. 2.
use it.

The first of these, A Hypocrite may go very far, his Profession may carry him
a great way, and yet fall short at last. You see here in the Text, God does not
pluck away the vizard at first, but lets them proceed; he could have
discovered them when he pleased: they take up their Lamps, and they go forth to
meet the Bridegroom; more then many will be persuaded to, that will hardly stir
a foot for Christ, they continue so doing, until the Bridegroom tarried so long
beyond their expectation; then indeed they fell asleep, then they rowsed again,
and trimmed their Lamps. All these put together, which are in the Text, will
make it appear, that a Hypocrite may go far, and fall short: A Doctrine never
more need for to be pressed then now: And therefore though you have heard, not
very long since much concerning it, and much more then I am able to speak, and
better for the matter, yet let me also put you in remembrance of these things
brethren, and the Lord open all our eyes in a thing so nearly concerning us
all. I shall therefore propose what I have to say by way of proof of the
Doctrine in several heads or degrees whereto a Hypocrite may reach; the Lord
give us all understanding in them.

First then, a Hypocrite, he may have much knowledge, much light, a head full
of notion, and this is one thing necessarily imported in the Lamps which the
foolish Virgins had. Some have thought their Lamps were dead, they had no
flame, no light, nor heat at all, but I see no reason of it; for it is said
their Lamps were gone out, which argues they were in before; but I think this
will hardly be denied, but a Hypocrite may be a man of much knowledge; do you
not see it in the Pharisees? were they not men of much knowledge and
understanding, able to teach others? they had Moses's Chair, and so the
Scriptures, the Doctrine of the Law, men of Mat. 23. 2.
great knowledge, and yet our Savior brands them for Hypocrites; that is, an
aerie religion that lies in the head. So the Jews, the Apostle speaks to them by
way of concession, yielding to them what they had, but showing them where they
fell short; thou art a Jew, and restest in the Law, and make thy boast of
God: as Romans 2. 17. to 21.
we do now, make our boast of Christ, that we are Christians, and cannot bear
it, to be accounted otherwise; and know his will, and approvest the things
that are more excellent, being instructed out of the Law; there is the
principle of their knowledge, not a light within them by nature, but to the
Law, and to the Testimonies; they had their light from thence, and so well
grown in knowledge, that they were confident that they were guides to the
blind, and therefore had no need to be blind themselves; a light to them which
are in darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of Babes. And not only
he is confident of it, but the Apostle yields it, that he had the form of
knowledge, and of the truth in the Law, and then he reasons ex concessis; thou
which teach another, teach thou not self? etc. We glory in these days, as
much in our light as ever they did; never such times of light, though for my
part I cannot see but much that passes for light, is gross darkness; but
suppose it be so, there may be light enough, a shining Lamp, and yet but a
foolish Virgin; surgunt indocti, and rapiunt coelum, and nos cum doctrinis,
etc. I know it is true, where a people are void of knowledge, they must needs
perish; God will not be merciful to them, Isa. 27. He has a controversy,
because there is no knowledge Isa. 27. 11. Hos. 4. 6.
of God in the Land, Hos. 4. and where no vision is, the people perish; they
perish for want of knowledge, which comes by vision, and yet it is not
knowledge alone will stand them instead; the Devils are called, (...) and that
for their knowledge, and yet are (...) for their malice; thou may have enough
then to light thy Lamp, and yet have no Oil in thy vessel; remember this.

Secondly, A Hypocrite may have not only knowledge, but his affections may be
stirred also; he may be warmed in the Lamp, before it be extinguished; there
was heat as well as light. Some have light without heat, such are mere notions;
others have heat without knowledge, and this is not good so far; but the
Hypocrite he may have light, and he may have heat and affection also, and yet
be a foolish Virgin when all is done. Let me speak a little to some affections,
among many others, which they may have. As,

1. They may have sorrow for sin, being convinced of it, and what it exposes
them unto; How does Darius, when he had signed the Decree against Daniel, and
his kingdom lay at stake, his people would rebel, if he executed not the
Decree, he labored to deliver him, he was sorry for what he had done, and he
could not rest, nor sleep that night, and early in the morning comes with a
lamentable tone to him: O Daniel, servant of the living God, art thou yet
alive? There may be a spirit of bondage to fear, or witnessing to a man that he
is in a condemned state, which is not succeeded with a Spirit of Adoption:
Sinners, you may have your Consciences so galled sometimes with the Law, that
you cannot rest, but cry out of sin; O sin, sin, what a bitter thing is sin;
yea so far may this sorrow prevail, that it may make you vomit up your sweet
morsel, make you make restitution with Judas; God may so fire the Coal, you
cannot hold it in your bosom any longer: the fire of Gods wrath upon Judas,
even melted his pieces, they were too hot for him to hold, and yet but a Judas
still: And I tell you brethren, this is much, a strong effect of those troubles.

2. There may be some desires, and seemingly earnest desires after things
really good, and which bring to salvation: as those there in that place of
John, were they not much affected, Ioh. 6. 44.
when they cried out, Lord evermore give us of this bread? As very a wretch as
Balaam was, yet he had his wishings and wouldings: O that I might die the death
of the righteous, etc. O how beautiful are his Tabernacles, etc. he Number. 23. 10.
seems to be taken with them, or desires to enjoy that communion and
fellowship with them in their Ordinances: how beautiful are they? And the young
man in the Gospel, had he not good desires? and is it not said, our Savior
loved him for that good that was in him, though not with that special love of
pity to save him, that we read of? his desires carried him out far, and yet
never reach heaven; I doubt not brethren, but many of us this day have
sometimes some good desires, and you would have it go well with your souls; you
may cry out sometimes with the multitude, O Lord evermore give us this bread,
you would be loath to part with the Ordinance of Christ, it is good; but all
this may be in you, and yet you may be hypocrites, foolish Virgins; O that you
could lay it to heart.

3. There may be also some hope, we read often in Job, of the Job 8. 13. 14.
hope of the Hypocrite; he has certainly an hope for heaven, else he would
never be at so much pains, as many a Hypocrite is at, as you shall hear
afterward; would the foolish Virgins, think you, have done so much as they did,
if they had not had a hope? when hope expireth, all endeavor gives up the
ghost with it.

4. There may be also a joy and delight in holy things, as those that kindled a
fire of their own, in that place of Isaiah, says the sa. 50. 11.
Text; They walk in the sparks of their own fire, that is to say, they delight
themselves in it. And surely brethren, the Galathians, when they would have
plucked out their eyes for the Gal. 4. 15.
Apostle, they had no ordinary rapture upon them; and yet alas, how did they
apostatize some of them? And is is not sad, to see in our days many, that the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, whom he has made instruments of God to their souls,
they have been as dear to them as their eyes, and what is it come to with many
of them? are they not come to cast off all? what shall we think brethren, of
such, in such cases? According to the hope, so is the joy; if the hope be
sound, so is the joy; if Romans 12. 12,
the hope be false, so is the joy which springs from it; the Lord hinders it
not happily, does not damp, and overcast the soul; and O how Satan endeavors to
water such a plant as that is! for what more available to lay a soul asleep
then this? he has joy in holy things, this is an high attainment indeed, they
take delight in approaching to God. And we read in Heb. 6. that such as fall
Isa. 58. Heb. 6.
away, may have a taste of the joy of the world to come; such a temporary
faith, the light of it does convince, and show us things worth the rejoicing
in, and then a false hope of a title to them, when it is no such matter; it
will raise the spirit to rejoice; Well, this is no ordinary pitch of
affections, and yet but a Hypocrite; the stony ground received the word with
joy, and they rejoiced in John Baptists light for a season; Thou art unto them
Mat. 13. Ezekiel. 33.
as one that has a pleasant voice, etc.

5. There may not only be those affections and others, but the fervor of them;
a man's affections may seem to be boiled up to a great height: Zeal for God
seems to be much, this is Jehu his case, how hot and zealous was he for God?
and so Judas 2 Kings 10. 16.
seemed very zealous of good works, when he would have had the box of ointment
spilled. Ananias and Saphira seemed to have more heat of love then others, to
sell their possessions to be with the forwardest, and yet you see what became
of them; and so may we brethren. Not but that zeal is exceedingly to be
commended, and lukewarmness is the most loathsome temper to the Lord, he will
spue such a man out of his mouth; yet there may be this fire, which is not of
Gods kindling. The false Apostles did zealously affect those Christians to whom
the Apostle writes, Gal. 4. 17.
they seemed to be men of more then ordinary love, and warm affections to their
souls; but yet they were but false Apostles, they did it enviously, to work the
Apostle out of their hearts, so to hinder this work among them. Well remember
this, such as are more forward then others are, there may be heat, as well as
light, and yet but foolish Virgins, but hypocrites* when all is done.

Thirdly, An hypocrite, he may be careful in avoiding much sin; not only in an
imperfect will, which is overcome by an interest, such as Herod and Darius had,
who were wretches, though not so properly hypocrites; but an hypocrite may go
as far as they surely, they may forgo their Idolatry and gross wickedness, as
Simon Magus left his Sorceries; and these virgins, therefore they are Acts 8*
called virgins, though foolish virgins likely, though I will not build much
upon it; but yet we see the unclean spirit may go out of a man for a time, and
yet enter again; he may forsake his gross pollutions, and yet return to that
folly again, wallowing in them as the swine and the dog, in that second of
Peter; there is an 2* Pet. 2. 20.
escaping the pollutions of the world, and yet notwithstanding a returning to
them again; he that stole, steals no more: I was a drunkard may some one say,
but now I thank the Lord I am none; I was a filthy wretch, but now I am filthy
no more, this is very far, and yet all this may be but hypocrisy* a profession
and no more, in the end we may appear to be foolish Virgins.

Fourthly, An hypocrite may have conflict within himself concerning sins, that
others can take no notice of, and this is more then the former; there may be an
inward* regretion and re(...)ctan^y against our secret evils; the Conscience
being enlightened and di(...)ng, those vain thoughts should be abandoned; this
pride of heart is loathsome against God, it quarrels with the Affections and
Will, if it be a sin a man would keep, and so there is a busle in the soul, and
many of us may mistake our selves, and think it is the lusting of the flesh
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh in us, when it proves
nothing so.

Fifthly, They may also do much, many duties and services, be much in action,
not Napkin up their Talent, but act, and act much, as the foolish virgins, you
see they went as far as the wise, for ought appears, step for step. Did not
Judas act as well as the rest, following Christ up and down, going forth to
preach the Gospel as well as the rest? did not Jehu act in an high manner for
God? Come and see my zeal for God, he did much more then many would 2 Chronicles. 24.
do. And did not Joash reform much in Jehoiadah^ time? he was zealous for the
Temple of the Lord, and blamed (...) Priests, they were not so forward as
himself was, and yet what (...)d he at the last? have we not fearful examples
in our own times, how many diligent Christians, as they seemed to be, and yet
alas how went they out? yea truly I will say one thing more, sometimes there
may be a doing, very great self-denying actions: Was not that a self-denying
action of Rehoboam, and far greater then this of Jehu? 2 Chronicles. 11. 4.
he had an Army ready to fight with Israel when they revolted, 180000 fighting
men, and yet when the word of the Lord came and told him it was of God, and bid
him cease, he obeys, though a kingdom lay at the stake, and he was in so fair a
posture for it; and yet he is but a Rehoboam still, and one that forsook the
Law of 2 Chronicles. 12. 1, 2*
his God when he was strengthened, though before he made much of the servants
of the Lord.

Sixthly, An hypocrite may have the assisting, enlarging presence of God with
him in his service. They had preached in the name of Christ, his presence had
been with them also, and yet you see they are cast out: It is said of Saul,
that he had another spirit Mat. 7. 22.
given him from that day forward, a spirit to gift him for the government, and
when God had rejected him and his service, the spirit departed from him, and an
evil spirit vexed him; he had a more then ordinary presence of God with him,
and yet but a Saul, a 1 Samuel 10. (...).
wretch; many a Minister that preaches your souls to heaven and salvation, may
perish himself: he may have great gifts given, and much of Christ his presence
with him in the exercises of them, and yet perish for all this. As the Nurse,
though for the present eats dainty fare, not for her own sake, but the sake of
the great man's child whom she nurseth: So may it be with us, the Lord prevent
us with his loving kindness. And you that are Christians, God may give you a
gift of Prayer, a gift in conferring, you may be eminent therein, God may
assist you much therein; It is for his peoples sakes that he will build up
thereby, refresh thereby, your selves may perish notwithstanding. O brethren,
Is not this fa^ that an hypocrite may go?

Seventhly, He may hold out very long, and yet in the end prove but an
hypocrite, and this is the saddest of all the rest, and this you see plainly
here in the Text, the foolish Virgins had well nigh gone to the end; when the
Cry came they were found with the wise, indeed in a sleeping condition, but
they were as forward as they for externals, had not their Lamps gone out; it is
strange to (...)der that Judas should be such a rotten creature at the heart,
and yet should follow him so far; many of his Disciples were quickly offended
at him and went backward, and never walked with him again, but Judas went far;
it may be we may think the better of our selves for our continuance so long in
the ways of God* it is good if it be right in the root, so that it hold o^t to
the end* Hypocrites may hold until they come, as I may say, within the sight of
heaven, or the p^ice of the Goal, and then they tire, and give up: Joash, how
long did he continue following God? it was a long passion, considering it was
not a new nature in it that was the principle* a torrent without a Spring to
feed it, to run very long indeed; and so it may be with many a poor soul: do
but consider under this head two things.

1. They may continue and weather out a persecution, endure the storm, and yet
perish in a calm; may have endured persecution for Christ his sake, for his
name and cause, and yet alas, fall short: Mat. 13.
as for instance, the third sort of ground, it was not scorched with the Sun
when it was up, but continued, and yet alas, brought not forth fruit to
perfection, for the Thorns choked it; he not only withers like the Bull-Rush,
before other hearts, but sometimes like a tree, he continues and abides the
heat of the Sun, Job 8. 17. And that Alexander that endured so much for the
Apostle, hazarded his life for him, Act. 19. 32. is thought by some to be that
Alexander which did him much evil, of which he complains 2 Timothy 4. 14. And have
we not too much sad testimony of it in our days, such as endured much
affliction and persecution from the opposers of Gods people, yet now have
turned their backs upon that truth for which they suffered.

2. Consider yet further, they may continue so long, as though they fall asleep
with the wise Virgins, yet to rise again with them, they may be deeply seized
on by security; and a man would think that then an hypocrites profession should
come altogether to an end, he should never open his eye more; and yet you see
the foolish Virgins after this, the Cry awaketh them as well as the wise
Virgins, and they bestir themselves as well as the wise, to trim their Lamps;
their Consciences had been awaked before, though their hearts were never
thoroughly awaked; Some Will and Affections they ^ad, but never through, and
prevailing against the ^lesh; well, that which was awake, falls asleep, and yet
it holds out to be awaking again, and trimming up their Lamps again, as if none
were more likely, nor fairer for heaven then they, until they find upon the
trial, alas they were going out. Well then brethren, we may continue through
changes of times, through changes of our own hearts, we may have sleeping fits,
and rise again out of them, and s^ir up our selves, trim our Lamps, and yet
prove but foolish Virgins.

Eighthly, a foolish Virgin, or an Hypocrite may carry it so, as that the
Saints have a good esteem of them, yea, the most searching of Gods people, as
some have a more piercing eye, and can see further into an Hypocrite then
others can, as the case may stand; but indeed some hypocrisy is of so fine a
thread, that it does e^ fingere aciem oculorum, some Hypocrites are double and
treble guilt, so that they are not so easily discerned to be copper, until it
come to wear off, and it holds long; the Disciples of our Savior, even he that
lay in his bosom, could not discern who was the Traitor by any thing that
appeared; they had as good thoughts of Judas, as they had of themselves, there
was their simplicity and love, and yet he proved but a Judas, he walked with
them, ate the Passover with them, if not the Supper with Mat. 27. 23.
them. Thus we may have a name to be alive among the people of God, and yet be
but dead; as it is said of that Church in the Revelations. Rev. 3. 2.
And so the wise Virgins you see, walked hand in hand with the foolish, they
pass for all alike; and no marvel, when a man has so much knowledge, such good
and stirring affections, so full of action for Christ, walks so unblamably,
suffer for Christ, hold out so long, no marvel if the people of God in love,
which thinks no evil, do judge well of such persons.

Ninthly and lastly, they may also upon all these grounds foregoing have a very
great confidence of the goodness of their own condition; the foolish Virgins
had admittance into the fellowship of the wise, walked with them, with their
Lamps burning and shining; we find not that they suspect themselves at all,
until at last they awake out of this sleepy condition of theirs, and then they
see their Lamps are gone, or going out. I deny not, but an hypocrite may
sometimes be self-condemned, as the Apostle speaks of Heretics, after the
first and second admonition reject, for fundamentals are so clear, that if he
^earken not to the first, and second admonition, according to the Rule of
Christ, in clearness, and meekness held forth, then he must needs be (...),
condemned of himself. If our own hearts condemn us, says the Apostle, ^it. 3.
11.
God is greater then our hearts. But yet others may go on, and not suspect
themselves. There is a Generation, says Solomon, that are pure in their own
eyes, (as they judge of themselves) yet are not washed from their filthyness.
It is worth the noting, that all the Prove. 30. 12.
Disciples were more forward to doubt their conditions then Judas, for they all
asked, Is it I Lord, is it I? and our Savior was Mat. ^7. 2^.
fain to set it on with a terrible threatening, It were better for that man that
he had not been born: and then he comes out with it, Master is it I? thou have
said it, says Christ; if he suspected himself before, yet he kept it close
however. The hypocrite may hold fast his duties, gifts and performances, as his
house when it begins to totter; he may hold them by his teeth as it were; as
the godly man holds the practice of them, and will not let them go, so a
hypocrite holds his confidence in them, and will not let ^ob (...). ^5.
it go. The world gives him a good testimony, the Saints they bear witness to
him, Satan he applauds him, his own heart flatters him, no marvel if he build a
confidence upon all this; and therefore the foolish Virgins here, how confident
were they, not only not suspecting their condition all this while, but when
they saw that their Lamps were out, yet they go and cry for mercy, with what
confidence, Lord, Lord open to us; though now they saw they had been hypocrites
all their days, yet so high were their hopes and confidence. You see then
Brethren, a hypocrite may go very far. So much for the Doctrinal part.

For the Application then of this Doctrine: How sad is their condition, if a
man reach to all this, and yet fall short of heaven? Use 1.
What shall we say of many of us, that have nothing almost of all this to say
for our selves; have not so much as Lamps, so much as a profession of Christ?
It is true, we have the name of Christ upon us, but what have we else? If a man
may have so much knowledge and fall short, what shall we say to such as have no
knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, as sottish and ignorant as if they never had
heard of Christ, of heaven or hell almost? It is true, a less measure of
knowledge, for the quantity, may prevail more upon a man's heart, then a greater
sometimes; but where there is no knowledge of God, Jesus Christ will come in a
terrible manner against such as know him not, as well as those that obey not
his Gospel. It may be you have some knowledge, yet alas, where is your
affection? you fall short of hypocrites in that: how many in this Congregation,
that never knew what one heart-pang for s^n meant? do not dissemble before the
Lord, did thou ever mourn either Legally or Evangellically? And so for
desire, have you thus desires toward the Lord and his ways? are they such a
delight to you? thou have heard his word many a hundred times, and did never
taste any sweetness, any savor or relish in it at all. Say, are not many of us
so far from delighting to draw nigh him, it is the most burthensom day in all
the week, the Sabbath is, we care not how seldom it comes; but I hope better
things of you in this particular for the most part. If you have such
affections, do you not, many of you, wallow in your filthyness? Indeed it is
strange to see how some men have a tongue to speak for Christ, and seem to be
wonderfully affected with any dishonor put upon him, and to be great disputers
for his Ordinances and Sabbaths, ready to fly in the faces of them that speak
against these things, and yet themselves are very Sinks and Puddles of
uncleanness; will be drunk, will be filthy, will swear, and lie, and come and
stand before the Lord, as if they were delivered to do all these things: what
will become of thee? if a foolish hypocrite shall perish, where will thou
appear? It may be, if thou avoid these gross sins, thou make nothing of a
secret lust, so be thou can hide it from the eyes of men, thou despisest the
presence of the Lord with thee in thy secret place.

Again, it may be thou have done something for Christ, but thou could not
suffer for him, but turn, and shift, and deny him before men: O, far before
thee have many gone, and yet perished, never reached heaven. It may be thou art
so gross, that even the people of God themselves can discern thy hypocrisy,
and thy own heart may condemn thee: Well, if others that have out-stript thee
in these things fall short, where will thou appear? thou come behind the
Pharisees far enough, and they enter not, they fall short; what will become of
thee? If the Virgins, because foolish Virgins, are not thought meet to enter
into the Marriage-Supper, the door is shut against them; What will become of
thee that art an arrant strumpet-soul, that have thy gods, thy Idols to
worship, thy gold, and thy belly, thy sport and pastimes, to which thou
devotest thy self, so that thou can not come under the notion of a Virgin? O
that the Lord would make men sensible! If such as take all this pains for
heaven fall short, what is like to befall them that never set foot forward
toward it?

Then, It may serve to stir up every one of us, that hears this word this
day, to take heed, be not high-minded, but fear, as the Use 2.
Apostle says. You see how far a hypocrite may go; It may be further then many
of us have gone; what need then had we to look to it, that that we have, and
that we do, be in sincerity and uprightness; for then it will hold out with the
wise virgins. To you that make a profession of Jesus Christ and of his ways, I
direct this Exhortation to you especially: And I shall back it with these two
or three arguments; and then propound some few considerations to be made use of
here in the trial.

1. Then consider brethren, What ever men judge of you, or you judge of your
selves, through mistakes sometimes, yet God he sees through all. It may be,
the cobweb is so thick woven, that the piercing eyes of the most judicious
child of God cannot see through it, but God can see through it. And so the
foundation of the house, he sees to be upon Sand, when it may be the people of
God cannot discern it. We are exceeding apt, secretly to bless our selves when
the people of God think well of us; and if we may be but admitted into their
fellow ship, we are well; it is a thing to be eyed in its place, but to make
this our rest, is desperate; alas, they have so much to do at home with their
own hearts, they cannot have so much time to pry into the actions of others;
nor if they do, to enter into the heart of any; and charity binds them to think
the best, where there is no discovery to the contrary; but what if all the
Saints should admire thee, and look upon thee as a most precious glorious
creature? Yet the Lord sees thee to be but dung, and dross, and rottenness: Men
look upon the outside of the Sepulcher, God pierces to the rottenness within,
his eyes behold the evil and the good; let it lie never so deep, the ends, God
discovers them; Did you at all fast unto me, Prove. 15. 3.
says the Lord? no, but to your selves. So the Pharisees, they had covering
upon covering to hide their rottenness with, but all would not do; they had
their long garments, long prayers, and many good actions which they did, and
much zeal which they seemed to have; and yet God sees through all this, and
calls them wretched hypocrites when all is done, and tells them for what end
they did it, to devour widows houses, and to be seen of Mat. 23.
men. So God saw the Idols of their hearts, though the Prophet could not. Our
Savior knew their hearts, and would not trust himself unto them. Would it not
be a confusion to you, if the Ezekiel. 14.
people of God should see your hypocrisy? how would you hold up your heads
before them? Ah brethren, how will you lift up your faces before the Lord then,
who searches the hearts? If you be found with no oil in the heart, in the
vessel, only a Lamp, a show, he can, he will search it out, and that your souls
shall one day know. And therefore it concerns us now to search.

2. The great danger of hypocrisy in profession in these days, now the times
smile upon it, for indeed, let hypocrites pretend what they will, they are
sensual, and it is their belly they serve, and not the Lord Jesus, and
therefore as the times sway, you shall have them bow; where the loaves were,
there those hypocrites would be, they followed not the Ordinance, the bread of
life for it self, but for the loaves, they subjected it unto their bellies; the
Bull-rush will not grow, except it have much mire and water; no more will an
hypocrite, except he has his advantages ordinarily, though sometimes they may
go through persecution; yet that is somewhat more then ordinary. O how Judas
loves the bag, more then the Master, it was that that kept him so close to
Jesus Joh. 8. 11.
Christ: he had a sweet place of it while he had the bag. WelL, If ever men's
souls were in danger of being undone by hypocrisy, now is the time Brethren;
And now it is the more hard to discern whether we follow Christ for the leaves,
yea ^r no: therefore upon that account also, we had the more need to search and
try our hearts, whether we be sound at the bottom or no.

3. The danger of the cure, if we be pocrites: Indeed in this respect the
condition of a profane man is better then a close hypocrite, his distemper is
more apparent, and his own conscience cannot but judge him of many things; but
now many times a hypocrite sees not his hypocrisy, though sometimes he do: it
may be at the first if he had hearkened to the voice of his conscience charging
him with hypocrisy in this and that, he might have kept it tender; but
smothering it, at last it grows silent and harder seared, and the eyes by
degrees are blinded, so that he sees not his disease. 2. It is so like to
uprightness of heart, that it is scarce discernable to the Physician that
should be instrumental to heal it: Morbus vix sanabilis, says one, qui
sanitatem imitatur, and then when it is discerned, there is much more goes to
the healing of an hypocrite, then another sinner; he must first be emptied of
himself, whereof he is full; he must be untaught, before he can be taught any
thing of Christ. 3. If he do see his disease, he is usually unwilling to have
it healed, he likes it better to keep his lusts, secretly to have the delight
of them, and pleasure of sin secretly, and yet the show of godliness. Like a
s^urdy Rogue, he has a sore, and he knows it well enough, but he cares not
for having it healed, because it is his Plow; it is that which brings in his
profit or advantage, by moving others to commiseration; but many times, such
persons as these dye of their wounds, and when the^ would have them healed,
they are fostred so and corrupted, there is no healing of them. The Lord grant
it prove not the case of our souls.

Why, but you will say, how should a man know then (If a Object.
hypocrite be such an one that may go so far) whether he be an hypocrite or no?
for it may be you will say, for ought I perceive, an hypocrite is gone so far
that I doubt I shall hardly reach it. For answer to this, I shall say these few
things.

First then, for matter of affection, for knowledge, I think we Answ.
can hardly make that Characteristicon, because it is common to both; and when
men speak of it as a practical knowledge, an humbling knowledge, a warning
knowledge, etc. These are the effects of it. But knowledge considered as
knowledge, it is alike, though the Spirit of the Lord do shed it abroad upon
some men's hearts and affections, so that it works there mightily, and remains
imprisoned in some men's heads and understandings. Therefore for the Affection,
I cannot stand to give account of every affection spoken of before, but for
That of mourning for son, which is specially considerable, you have heard a
heart may be troubled for sin, and it is questionless true. But how shall we
know then, whether our trouble for sin be right or no, or whether we be
hypocritical therein? Truly Brethren; If ever we could look upon Jesus Christ
crucified by his sins and for them, with such an eye of faith, and so mourn
over him crucified by us, Z^^h. 12. 10.
and yet for us; this surely none else can work, but the spirit of grace, it is
a special fruit of it, in that 12. of Zach. It may be thou have been a poor
creature, much vexed with thy sins, and weary by reason of them, and weary of
thy groa(...)ing and trouble; but have thou ever had a sight of Christ
crucified, and mouraid over him whom thou have crucified? This is the
bitterness indeed, that a hypocrite cannot reach unto.

Secondly, Though an hypocrite may avoid many sins, yet he will have some lust,
some Dalilah, some little one, and his soul shall live. Now if a man regard any
iniquity in his heart, be it never so plausibly maintained, have he never such
fair pretenses for what he does, that man is a hypocrite, and God will not hear
such a man's prayers. If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my
prayers. Judas must have his covetousness, he could Psalm. 6. 18.
forego all other. Herod must have his sisters daughter, all else he can
forego. If there be any one lust, wherein thou sparest thy self, keep it
under thy tongue, be it never so secret, thy heart is not right. It may be a
man would think, that the sin of his constitution he may give himself a little
liberty in, and this is thy plea, It is my temper, to be vainly merry, a man's
temper to be wanton, to be foolishly jesting, and men will plead their nature
for it; why truly so might Job, he made a covenant with his eyes: David, I kept
me from mine iniquity, whether the sin of his nature, Psalm. 18. 23.
or his present condition, that is to say, revenge upon his enemy, when he had
him in his hand. So the sins of a man's place, Job kept himself from them all;
he did not oppress, wrong his man Job 31. 21.
servant, despise his cause, oppress the poor when he had his help ready* in
the gate to have sided with him. If men shall in any case, though they have
never so urgent temptations, allow themselves in any sin; surely such men are
hypocrites and no better.

Thirdly, an hypocrite will do much, but he will not do all; he never has
respect to all the commandments of God. Why but you Psalm. 119. 6.
will say, No more can the most upright man upon the earth do all. Not Legally,
but Evangelically he may, he may aim at all; though the Commandment be
exceeding broad, he may search after all, that he may do them, he may endeavor
it, though he cannot reach it, I have a respect to all; and where he comes
short, that is his burden, that is matter of mourning to him. Take it in two
or three particulars, that I enlarge not too much.

1. It may be an hypocrite will be wonderful strict in the duties of the first
table, which we call ordinarily religious duties, as praying, reading, hearing,
etc. But you shall find him very slight and slack in the duties of the second.
Those in the 7. of Matthew, they would Preach and Prophecy in Christ his name,
but yet they would work iniquity with both hands. Judas would pray with Christ,
Preach for Christ, receive with Christ, but he would then cousen and defraud,
made no conscience of secret thievery. And it is very plain in that first of
Isaiah, who were more forward then they in their sacrifices, abundant in their
worship, multitude of their burnt-offerings and solemn assemblies, but in the
mean time their hands were full of blood, they made nothing of ^sa. 1. 10. to
17.
that. And is it not so with some of us, we are frequent in hearing, frequent
it as much as others, and yet notwithstanding make nothing of the duties of the
second table, drunkenness is nothing, though wine be raging; make nothing of
railing, reviling, of covetousness, which is Idolatry; he will hardly make a
Covenant with his eyes, as Job did: makes nothing of uncleanness, if not
outward in act, yet contemplative, of a wandering eye, and wandering heart; and
so of deceit. O this is dreadful, let not that man deceive himself, certainly
he is an hypocrite, and though he may go far, yet he will be sure to fall short.

2. An hypocrite in his obedience, he will be much about little inconsiderable
things. Some ceremonious things, or the like, more then the weighty matters of
the Law; so the Pharisees, they forsooth Ioh. 18. 28.
would not come into the Judgement-Hall, because it was the preparation to the
Passover, lest they should be defiled, and not fit for the Passover; but they
made nothing of the greatest moral pollution that could be, of falsely accusing
the most innocent person, and prosecuting him to the death, this they made
nothing of: and so they scrupled not to give thirty pieces of Silver, Mat. 23.
23.
as a price for Jesus Christ, that they might bring him to death, but when they
had done, they would not cast it into the Treasury. The Papists, they make much
ado, it is a grievous offense to violate one of their fasting days enjoined by
the Pope, but to murder Christian Princes under the notion of Heretics, they
make nothing of that; this is the condition of many a poor creature, Mint,
Annice and Cummin they must tithe, these externals and ceremonials; a Gnat they
strain at, but a Camel they can swallow.

3. Another thing in their obedience is this; an hypocrite, he can be contented
to take up the easy part of Christianity ordinarily, but not the difficult,
that which is more inward and laborious: they can come to hea^ the word, to
confer with the people of God, to receive, etc. But the inward part, the great
duty of self-examination, alas they are strangers to it, that high duty of
spiritual contemplation, that of keeping their hearts with all diligence,
because out of it are the issues of life, this they are Pro^. 4. 23.
strangers to, they cannot down with these things; to forgive injuries from
their brethren, this is a hard duty, to love their enemies, yea to love them
that think meanly of them, despise them, as well as those that think more
highly of them, this is no easy duty; here the hypocrite will give others
leave to take up this part ordinarily: truly Brethren, Search and see, is it
not so with Mat. 5. 44.
some of us*

4. Another consideration is this, An hypocrite makes not Jesus Christ his
last end, he does all for self ends. Who do seem to be more Religious then the
great Questionists of the times usually? yet the Apostle tells us, if they
consent not to the wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the Doctrine which is according to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing,
doting about 2. Tim. 6. 5(...)
Questions and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railings, evil
su(...)isin(...) and perverse disputings, of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness; there is the root of
all this Brethren, of all this zeal and contention, supposing that gain is
godliness; was not this the argument whereby the Devil would have proved Job an
hypocrite? if thou touch all he has, he will curse thee: does he serve Job 1.
thee for naught? he has self ends in it. O surely brethren, if our hearts
condemn us, and tell us We work for our penny in the Vineyard of the Lord, we
serve for our penny, it is not right; it may be we may pretend the glory of
God, and may seem to take a right aim for God and for Christ, but like a
deceitful bow, we turn aside, and have somewhat else in our eye that sets
the wheels awork, when the glory of Christ will not; O this is Hos. 8. 7.
gross hypocrisy. So those in Mat. 7. they prophesied in the name of Christ,
but not for his name, but for themselves; and though a child of God may be
pestered with such thoughts creeping in upon him, yet he suffers them not to
lodge with him, but whippeth them, and gives them their pass, he mourns under
them, prays for pardon of them, and healing and subduing of them.

5. Another thing is touching the conflict which the soul may have with sin.
How may we know whether that be right or no? An hypocrite may have some regret
doubtless in sinning, until he has hardened his conscience so by custom, that
he is past feeling.

Do but mind these two things. 1. Where the quarrel lies, where the battle is
fought; Is it between the understanding, the judgment, or the conscience
convinced, and the will? or is it between the will and the will, the affections
and the affections? the former may be in an hypocrite, the other is not. Peter
had this conflict between his will and will, he should be carried whether he
would not, that is to say, to be martyred; Why then, if he were altogether Joh.
21. 18.
unwilling, how could he be a Martyr? No, he was willing, and yet unwilling;
there is a lusting of the Spirit, and a lusting of the flesh; it is not for
nothing that the Holy Ghost expresses it in those terms, he does not say the
spirit judges one thing, and the flesh lusts after another, but there is
lusting on both sides, the flesh against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh, and those Gal. 5. 17.
two are contraries; and they are in the will and affections, and therefore as
contraries, they must needs fight until one be subdued; the Apostle says, with
his mind he served the Law of God, Romans 7. ul^.
and with his flesh the Law of sin; but mind, there is not meant the
understanding as distinct from the will, as sometimes it is understood, but it
is understood of the regenerate part set in opposition to the corrupt part in
the soul, and the one fighting against the other, so that the things we would
do, we cannot do many times. Consider then, Is it thus with thee? carnal
affection carries thee out this way, but thou have not only a judgment to the
contrary, but thy affections and will carries thee to the contrary, and thou
art not always overcome, but ordinarily prevailest: O this is a sign of an
upright heart.

2. Consider in this conflict also another thing, Whether you ^e not
treacherous, always holding on the side of sin. So an hypocrite will be; he has
some regret against sin its true, but yet he favors it, and would willingly
excuse for it, palliate and plead for it; and O how glad such a man is, when he
has but any Scripture that will seem to make for it, that he may have but
liberty for his lust; as a covetous man, O how he is more then ordinarily
pleased with those Scriptures which seem to make for it; and such a man holds
in with sin, and will not come to the light, but hates it, is willingly
ignorant of some things, libenter ignorantur, ut liberius peccent. Is it thus
with us brethren? believe it, if it be, we have cause to fear all is not right
with us, we are unsound at the heart, and though we may go far, yet the end
will be rottenness.

Again lastly, See to it whether we love anything else more then Christ: If
House or Land, or Father or Mother, or nearest relations, or life it self more
then Christ, we are hyporcites sure, and this is a thing will not be so easily
known, specially by such as with ^eter, denied him, being ashamed of him; it
may be upon a slight account; O happy is he that can afterward say as Peter,
Lord, Mat. 10. 37.
thou know all things, thou know I love thee; though I dealt so unkindly
and unfaithfully with thee for the time past, yet now sure I am I love thee,
and that love preferred Jesus Christ before his life. If the heart be but
upright, if there be never so little at first, yet it will grow, it will
continue, the Seed of God will abide. And if never so much, if the heart be not
right, it will fall short of heaven, as these Virgins, they went far. Well, the
Lord give us understanding in these things.

Verse 7. -- (...).
WE have done with the former member, that is to say, the foolish Virgins
trimming their Lamps, going so far in a profession of Christ, and yet fail when
all is done. Now we are to consider the second member included in this general;
and that is, that Believers are now to trim their Lamps; the wise Virgins were
now to do it as well as the foolish; the real, as well as the formal professor.
I will only briefly note two things from this clause of the Verse.

First, That though a Believers profession may decline and grow low, and that
toward his latter end, or after he has long professed Jesus Christ, yet it is
not altogether extinct; it wants trimming indeed, but it is not out with the
foolish Virgins.

2. When this profession grows thus low, it is the Believers duty to renew
it, to trim up his Lamp.

Of the first in the first place, wherein are comprehended three notes, which
for brevity sake I wrap up into one; partly, because some of them have near
affinity with what has been already delivered; and partly, because I would not
dwell too long upon the Text.

First then, That a Believer his profession may decline and grow low, and need
a renewing. 2. That it may come to this pass after he has long professed, or
near the time of his Calling for. And 3. That yet notwithstanding it is not
extinct altogether, as the profession of the foolish is, of which afterward. A
word or two briefly to each of these.

First, That a Believers profession may decline; which is somewhat of kin to
what we spoke before, and therefore the less here. The Lamp may grow low.

First then, The light which appears to be in the Saints may grow low. It may
admit of mixtures, sometimes of darkness which much dimmeth the light. I mean
they may be much corrupted in their judgments, and turned aside from the
simplicity of the Gospel of Christ; this is clear in the Galathians their ^ase,
ye Gal. 5. 7.
did run well, who hindered you, what was the matter? It was an error and a
gross one crept in among them, to set up the Law and Moses with Christ, as
necessary to Justification and Salvation: What a^mist is here about the Lamp?
this made it twilight with them.

2. The lightsomness and joy of faith, this also may wear away in great
measure, yet not altogether; the faces of the Saints do shine by a reflection of
the countenance of God upon them, as the face of Moses did, when he had been
with God in the Mount; but alas, though they walk long in the light of his
countenance, may it not be lost* as we find the Psalmist complaining, Psalm. 51.
1^.
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation: he had it before, but now he had
lost it, both which are employed in that word restore: And do we not find it in
that 50. of Isaiah, Who is there among Verse 10.
you that walks in darkness and s^eeh no light? Where is the lightsomness of
the Lamp then? the pleasant paraphrase upon the works of the grace of Christ in
their souls, so that they can see nothing at all. Look what comfort it is to
have a ^ight or a Lamp in the darkest night; such comfort it is to have the
smiling presence of the Lord. But now this is lost, thou did hide thy face,
Psalm. 30. 7.
and I was troubled; Gods face was clouded, and his face was covered.

3. Believers, as they may lose in a great measure their joy of faith, so may
they lose their confidence of hope, so that they may be ready to say many
times, their hope is even perished from the Lord, and has God forgotten to be
gracious, and will he be merciful no more? this you may see in many cases of
the Saints. David, I shall one day perish by the hands of Saul. O I shall never
see 1 Samuel 27. 1.
through this world of wickedness that is in mine heart, but sooner or later, I
shall be swallowed up by it.

4. A Believer may lose the degrees of those graces which are radical, and
which indeed more principally are like the oil in the vessel, yet that may grow
low, and then no marvel if the Lamp which is fed by them do grow low also. As
that of their faith, how low may they grow in faith? Indeed our Savior has
prayed Luke 22. (...).
that their faith fail them not altogether; but in a great part it may,
decline. We see it in Asa, one while he could trust in God when a great host
of the Ethiopians and Lybians come against him. By and by, when he was not so
hard put to it, he rests upon the King of Assyria, for which the Lord reproves
him by the Prophet. 2. Chro. 16. 8.
Where was Peter's ^aith when a little carnal fear turned him aside in so sad a
manner? and indeed it is the want of faith in the people of God, that is the
very root of all those turnings aside from the Fountain to the broken Cistern,
from God to the creature: And so that of love as well as faith, faith works by
love, and this also may de^line. You find the Church of Ephesus, She Rev. 2. 4.
had left her first love; and that Angel of the Church also, he had it may be
heretofore been full of love to Jesus Christ, and that love very laborious in
feeding the Flock of Christ, but now his love was remitted. May not every man's
heart Seal to this, that the Love of his Espousals to the Lord Jesus, the love
of our Jer. 2. 2.
youth, those springing affections are gone?

5. Another is this, A Believer may lose the fervor of all those holy
affections that he has had, his desires, his delight and joy, his anger and
hatred against sin, loathing and abomination; time has been, we could have
cried out for the living God* their souls break for the longing they had to
God; but now the Chariot wheels drive more heavily. We have felt sometimes the
babe springing in the womb; but now we can hardly feel in, our affections
languish toward Jesus Christ. Solomon once had a zeal for the house of God,
when he laid out himself in building a house for his name, (...)* King. 11. 33.
but what was become of that zeal when he could build a house to Chemosh the
God of the Moabites; in favor of his Moabitish wives where was his zeal then?
So Laodicea was grown lukewarm, theywere hot at first.

6. The outward acts of grace, they may be remitted; which indeed are a great
part of the profession. It is not a bare confessing Jesus Christ the Lord* with
the mouth, that makes a profession, but a suitableness of conversation,
walking in Christ Jesus the Lord; now there may be remission of these acts. The
acts of a moral man; which he elicits from the power of nature by moral
precepts, or the power of Education, are called sparks, in that of Isa. which
are of a man's own kindling; and the works of holiness and Isa. 50. 11*
righteousness in the Gospel, is called the light of a Believer, which shines
before others, and is indeed the main thing, let your light so shine before
men; that they may see your good works. Now I say, Mat. 5. 16.
a Believer, he may have interruption in this remission, in this he may either
neglect them, or else do them in a slight manner, and that ordinarily. So the
Apostle speaks to the Philippians, that Phil. 4. 10.
their care again toward him had flourished, by which is employed it had
flourished before, but now it had languished and faded, they had not put it
forth for him as they might have done; but now it revived. As a man in a fit of
passion has not the use of his reason; so the best of the Saints when the
wills or lusts of the flesh prevail, (as they may in the best) they have not
the use of their spiritual part. But so much for the first thing. I am brief,
because I have had occasion to speak much what to the same purpose before.

The second will be this, That these declinings may be in the people of God,
even near their end, and the coming of Jesus Christ. This will be justified by
the Parable, here the cry comes which rouseth the wise Virgins, and when they
awaked and came to themselves, their consciences were awaked, then they saw
that their Lamps wanted trimming, they burned low; when they should burn the
brightest, they are dim and dull; you need not much to be said for the proof of
this part of the Doctrine, for of Solomon after he had lived long, and followed
God, and had had extraordinary 1 King. 11. 9.
appearances of God to him again and again, public and privately; yet when he
was old, says the text, and should have grown better, he then began to love
many wives, and then fell to countenance Idolatry, which is a blemish upon him
to all posterity. And so you see it in Asa his case, a good man, and a man very
forward and diligent for the reformation; and yet in his last days, see how
many failings are noted of him, his unbelief, resting 2 Chronicles. 16. 10.
upon an arm of flesh, his imprisoning the Prophet that reproved him, his going
to the Physicians and not to God, his oppressing of many of his people; the
lower he ran, his day ran, the more dregs he ran, he ran not clearest at the
bottom. So Sampson, Judge. 15. 20. Chapter 20. v. 16.
some twenty years after he had been overtaken with a Philistian woman, and
likely repented of it; yet twenty years after, he goes in to an harlot there.
And the

Reason is plain for this, because that grace at the best, when it is Psalm. 51.
at its perfection, it is but a creature, and depending upon God as the beams
upon the Sun, and as the stream upon the Fountain, and therefore no longer then
he is pleased to feed it, will it subsist; let our vessel be never so full of
oil, our hearts never so full of grace, yet it depends upon the Lord Jesus and
his fullness; and 1 Chronicles. 29.
the Spirit, like the two Olive trees that empty the golden oil into the
vessels, uphold me with thy free Spirit, says the Psalmist. And, O that the
Lord would keep this upon the frame or imagination(...) of their hearts for
ever. Thou maintainest my lot, Psalm. 16. Psalm. 16.
Now if he withdraw and forbear to empty out of that fullness upon us, let our
conditions be what it will, alas grace will languish, our Lamps will burn dim.

2. Because (truly many times) this is the time the people of God grow most
secure, they have long followed hard after God, and now they think they may
slack their pace a little; we are exceeding prone to set up grace received in
stead of Christ; when our mountain is made strong we lean upon it, whereas we
should only lean upon our beloved; as the Church. And then no marvel if he let
us see, to our sorrow, that grace is but a creature, and loseable in its own
nature; the child gets most falls, when it thinks it can go it self
without any holding; and this much for the second.

The third thing is, That though the Lamps of the wise Virgins come to want
trimming, to burn low and dim, and at such a time as this, yet they are not put
out; which is the complaint of the foolish Virgins in the following verse. The
declensions of a godly man, at the worst they are recoverable. An emblem of
this, was the fire upon the Altar in the Sanctuary, it never went out after
once Levit* 6. 12. and 13.
it was kindled. It is said of the good woman's Candle, it goes not out by
night; she may sleep it may be, but it is by Candlelight; as persons that
intend to rise again, and happily not to sleep long, will sleep by a Candle.
Believers may fall asleep, and the Candle may burn dim, but yet it goes not
out. Prove. 31. 18.


Indeed it is true, a child of God his profession of Christ may be at such a
low ebb sometimes, as scarce to be visible. A candle in the socket sometimes
will burn so low, that a man would think it were even out, but it rises again.
So we would have thought Peter's profession had given up the ghost, when he
denied and forswore his Master, in such a sad manner. And so David, his
profession was very low. And so some of the Martyrs that subscribed a
recantation, Trapp his Com. place of Apost.
as Cranmer* So Tho. Whittle and Benbridge, Bilny and others, Fullers lives,
page 122. now we could hardly see the light, yet it broke forth again, and
shone gloriously in them all.

Again, It cannot be denied but that a child of God may decline and lose diverse
degrees of grace, which for ought we know he may never recover again, never
have his Lamp trimmed up as it was before; but yet, it never goes quite out.

And so for comfort, they may live and dye happily, without the light of his
countenance, and yet their Lamps burning. Our Savior himself dyed without the
sense of the Love of his Father, he had his supporting presence, but not that
sweet refreshing presence, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? for this
is Mat. 27. 46.
not necessary to the being of a Christian, as to believe with the heart, and
confess with the mouth is, in persons grown.

Now that it is so, that their Lamps do not go out, neither the light nor heat
altogether, nor the acts of holiness and righteousness toward God and toward
men, are not altogether lost and laid aside. It will appear,

First by Scripture, the path of the just is as a shining light, which Prove. 4.
18.
shines more and more to the perfect day; Some interruptions there may be, but
yet it shines more and more; the Sun runs his race, though now and then a
cloud intercepts his comfortable beams from the earth. And that of the
Psalmist, his leaf shall never Psalm. 1. 3.
wither, the leaf is the profession, he shall not wither but be green. An
hypocrite indeed like a Bull-rush will wither, as we shall see by and by, when
the mire and the water fails; but a child of God withers not. There are two
Conditions which usually wither men's profession, but the child of God stands it
out in both. 1. In a prosperous state, that uses to choke the word; they that
will call upon God in the day of distress, in their afflictions will seek him
earnestly, yet when his hand is taken away, they no more Hos. 5. 15.
remember* the Lord their Savior; but a child of God now in his prosperous
condition, he loses not his profession altogether, though the Lamp may be
damped, yet not extinguished. And 2. For adversity, that indeed is a trying
time: all this is come upon us, yet have we not dealt falsely in the Covenant;
will the hypocrite Psalm. 44. 17.
always call upon God? he will not call upon God always, nor wait for him. Yea,
the time of affliction usually is an advantage to the people of God; if ever
their Lamp burn brighter then another, it is in the dark and cold night of
persecution and affliction; a Torch, the more knocked against any thing* the
more it burns.

Secondly, Because they have within them a Spring of oil that feeds the Lamp,
therefore it goes not out. It is set forth in another metaphor in that place
of John, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of water, springing up to eternal
life. Now where there is Joh. 7. 38.
this within, the flame will live while there is oil to maintain it: It is like
fire in a man's bosom, he cannot carry it so surely, but it will discover it
self as fire in the bones, as the Prophet speaks of the word of God. And,

3. Because that cruse of oil is continually supplied by the Spirit, and from
the fullness of Christ, therefore it never fails. If the oil in the vessel could
fail, then the Light in the Lamp might fail, but it fa^ls not; and why? not
because it is not perishable in its own nature, being but a creature, but
because it is kept by the power of 1 Pet. 1. 15.
God; we are kept by the power of God to salvation; alas, if it were in our
keeping, we should quickly, with the Prodigal, run our selves out of all, as we
do in a moment lose the most precious frames the Lord is pleased to put upon
us, but it is kept by that power, none is able to pluck them out of this hand
of the Father and the Joh. 10. 28.
Son. Sin is strong indeed, strong lusts; and Satan is strong, a Lion, a
Dragon, a Prince of the power of darkness; and Armies of lusts he has warring
in our members, a great strength, and all these pluck at us, but they cannot
pull us out of this hand of Christ. And thence it is that their Lamps are not
put out in obscure darkness. O how fain would Satan blow out the Candle, that
we might walk in the darkness, not knowing whither we go; but it is held in the
hand of Christ, and it is above the reach of his poisonous breath to do it. A
damp of lusts from our own hearts, if any thing would do it, this would, and it
makes them burn very dimly and blew many times, but yet cannot overcome; the
Lamp may want trimming, but it is not out.

For the Application then of this Doctrine. If it be so, that Believers are
subject to such declinings, yea when they should be at Use 1.
the best, in their latter end, when they should bring forth fruit in old age,
that then they may be ready to wither, or in a great part, the leaves, their
profession may change color, and lose its greenness: What should this teach us
all in the first place, but to take heed of placing our confidence in any thing
which may fail us. If any thing on this side the Lord Jesus himself might be
trusted in, it might be grace, for there is not any other so near approach to
God, without which Angels were but Devils, the very perfection of Saints and
Angels; And yet because it has its imperfections, therefore it is not to be
trusted to. Nothing indeed is more spiritual then grace, the choicest
communications of the eternal spirit to the Creature, but yet considered in
comparison with the God of grace, it is but flesh, if it be rested upon; the
strongest mountain, that a man would think should never be shaken, yet sin and
Satan, if the Lord permit, can get under it, and blow it up. Yea, if our grace
were perfect, yet we might not rest in it, because yet it has its comparative
imperfections, it self being but a derivative, and dependent Being upon the God
of grace at the best; it is but a stream, a beam, though nearer the Sun, and
nearer the Fountain; and but the water of a Cistern, and if whole before, yet
this resting upon it, would make it a broken Cistern. Well then bretbren, if
our profession flourish never so, if it be spring time with you, trust not in
it; for there may come a fall after this spring, there may come a time of
scorching heat may make you wither, in a great part at least. Though your Lamp
burn, and shine never so gloriously, and the light be great which arises from
these sparks of Gods kindling, you see it may come to want trimming, to burn
more dimly, therefore trust not in it.

2. It should teach us then to live by faith, in respect hereof. Alas brethren,
we are withering every moment; if we have not waterings every moment, what
would become of us now? whence must this come, but from the fountain of Israel,
the Isa 27. 3.
eternal spring and fullness which is in Jesus Christ? Of his fullness we
receive, says the Evangelist: What made the difference between Ioh. 1. 16.
the rest of the Disciples, their profession of him, and Peter's? all their
Lamps were damped in that hour and power of darkness, it was so great and
gross; but his was almost gone and giving up. And for those acts, the flame was
even out, but that the Lord blew it in again by the breathing of his spirit, O
Labor to live by faith in Jesus Christ, for preventing grace then, that we may
not be removed from our stedfastness. The Apostle had a strong persuasion, that
neither life nor death, the intisements Romans 8.
of the one, nor the terrors of the other, should separate him from the Love of
God in Jesus Christ, O it was that love he hung upon! You see that grace it
self, which is the oil in the vessel, which seeds the Lamp, is loseable, and
therefore much more the external fruits and effects of it. Now if the power of
God do not keep us we are gone, therefore we must hence learn to live by the
faith of the son of God, as the Apostle did, not by sense nor what we fee^;
though never so much, yet that must not be our life, or Joh. 14. 19.
if never so little, that must not be our death, but still live by faith in the
son of God, who lives for ever, and therefore his people shall not dye, nor
their Lamps be put out in obscure darkness.

3. Consider then, have we not declined? have not our Lamps Prove. 20. 20.
burned much clearer then now they do, has not our light been clearer then now
it is, and our warmth been more then now it is? this is matter of humbling to
us. Have we not received much mixture of error in these erting times? we cannot
imagine how much darkness it brings upon our Lamps, to have one error mixed
with much truth. Besides, may not the Lord Jesus say to us all, I have somewhat
against you all, in that you have left your first love? Time was, when you were
zealous for the house of God, and it ^^v. 2. (...).
did even eat you up; now you are grown to a Gallio's spirit, care not for
these things; Now we seek our own things, and nest our selves in security, it
is well with us, and therefore we consider not the danger poor souls are in, by
such as go up and down with the power of delusion, few mourners in Zion for
these things. If the Church were under persecution, it is likely we should
lament; truly I look upon its present state as more destructive to it; so many
Vipers ^ating at the very heart, and bowels of Religion; where is our burning
of zeal for God against these things? sure it should humble us.

4. We see that Believers may decline, and these times do give an abundant
proof of it; how many that have been as burning and shining lights, have been
benighted, and inveloped in the most Egyptian darkness, entertaning the most
desperate opinions, walking after their own Lusts; and yet afterward have been
restored? O how should this make us fear before him! be not high-minded, but
fear; here thou see one, and there another, Romans 11. 20.
their lamps next to a being quite extinct, yet thou have light and heat
maintained; O boast not thy self, lift not up thy self, but fear before the
Lord: humility indeed is a kind of a nurse of the graces, conservatrix
virtutum, as Bernard says. If he spared not the Angels in their pride, will he
spare thee? A Novise is in danger of falling into the condemnation of the
Devil, in danger of being puffed up; He gives grace to the lowly, but
resists the proud. Some do observe that word, be ye clothed with humility, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
(...), be ye clothed; the word comes from a word signifying a knot, because
it ties all together (as I may say) and so 1 Pet. 5. 5.
knitteth the graces together, as pearls upon a Braslet, if the knot be broken,
they are quickly lost. It is indeed brethren, the thief in the candle, the
great waster; the Moth in the cloth consumes it, and spoyleth the beauty and
strength of it. It is the worm at the root of the Guord, it will smite it, and
we see it by sad experience, when men grow so proud, and pretend to Angelical
perfection in our days, they fall as low as hell, and brutish bestiality in
their lusts. O therefore let us labor to walk humbly with God, be not
high-minded; though at present we stand, and flourish, and shine, and burn, we
are liable to declinings.

5. If we be so liable to declinings, then it should teach us so much the more
to be diligent in improving. I am sure the Apostle gives it as a preservative
against declining and apostatizing; But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; grow in grace, and in knowledge; knowledge
is that whereby the Lord does reveal himself to his people, from grace to
grace, as you have it in that place of the Apostle, whom beholding 2 Pet. 3.
17, 18.
as in a glass, etc. But observe here, keep your selves, that is, fall not from
your own stedfastness; and how should this be? One means is to grow in grace;
If we would not have our Lamps burn dim and low, we must labor to supply them,
so as they may increase; the path of the just is as a shining light, which
shines Prove. 4. 18.
more and more to the perfect day; and the wind of that Spirit, which blows
where it lists, it rises higher and higher, as some note. Joh. 3.
O see to it then, ordinarily while the fruit is in growth, the leaves wither
not, nor the fruit falls, except in some great storm or wind. Labor to grow
then, first in bigness, then in sweetness; grow more mellow, sweet, full of
love, humility and self-denial.

6. If we be so liable to decline, it should teach us to avoid all those things
which tend to a declining, else we shall never avoid the thing it self; we must
take heed of sleeping then; for though our Lamps be never so bright when we
begin to sleep, when we awake, they will burn low, if not extinct, and will
have great need of trimming up. Security is the undoing evil in all things;
where was the joy of David's faith when he began to be secure? Psalm. 30. 7. Take
heed of putting off the day of his appearing, that will gender to security, and
that security will bring a neglect of our Lamps, and then they will grow low
and decline.

2. Take we heed of false Teachers, try the Spirits, whether they be of God or
no; they have a strange influence upon the life and liveliness of men's
profession; were they not these that hindered the Galathians? Ye did run well,
who has hindered you? who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
truth? Ye did run Gal. 5. 7. and 3. 1.
well, in the (...). the raze wherein they had Lamps or Torches; but who has
hindered you? The Apostle Peter makes it the immediate cause of the
backsliding, and declining at least, if not utter apostasy: Beware, says he,
lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your
own stedfastness, (...), 2 Pet. 3. 17.
is to be carried out of his way, to go with another; the power of error is
greater then we are aware of. The Apostle speaks thus, This I say, lest any man
deceive you (...) with enticing words beguile you. They have cunning Col. 2. 4.
craftiness, (...) cogging with the die, Satan changing himself into an Angel
of light, and his Ministers into Ministers of light, and Ephesians. 4. 14.
cogging with the die, like cunning and deceitful Gamsters: how easy is it to
deceive the hearts of the simple, yea the hearts of his, but that they are kept
by that power? But a great way they may prevail, and so we may lose our
stedfastness; and therefore take heed what spirits we give ear to. Alas, do we
not see in our days, what fearful work Satan has made among Professors? how
many have their Lamps quite put out, that went for zealous Christians, are
become mere Atheists? how many have suffered a great abatement in their zeal,
and vigor, and life, and closeness of walking with God by this means? O
therefore take heed of falsehood at the beginning.

3. Take we heed of learning their ways, by conversing with dead-hearted
Professors, where there is not that life and power, that light and heat, but a
cold, lukewarm frame; for such as our Company is, such shall we be in a great
measure; why, must men make no friendship with an angry man, lest he learn his
ways? And truly brethren, a formal Professor, a loose Professor, that has
little of the power of Godliness upon him, he is a quench-coal, and by degrees
you shall find your selves growing to a more listless indifferency, then
before; therefore though you may pity them, pray for them, stir them up, and
provoke them as occasion serves, yet that inward familiarity, as to lie in
their bosoms, which will be followed with a conformity to them, take heed of,
you shall find it will work a declining.

4. Take heed of deceiving our selves with false measures and weights. The
Apostle tell us of some that compared themselves 2 Cor. 10. 11.
with themselves, and were not wise; or comparing themselves with some others,
which are happily behind them, this makes them slack So the Church of Laodicea,
what was the reason Rev. 3. 17.
of their lukewarmness? they lost their love, the heat and burning of their
Lamps were gone, whatever light they had, why they thought they were rich, and
had need of nothing, they needed not that eye salve to buy of Christ, nor gold,
nor raiment. O this is the desperate undoing sin indeed, when men think now, O
they bless God they are rich, it is for others to press forward, they need not
walk so painfully as others, their corruptions are more subdued then others, Si
dixisti sufsiciat, periisti. See Phil. 3. I forget what is behind, etc.

5. Arm your selves against the smiles, and discouragements of the world, for
though like Sampsons foxes, they look with their faces contrary ways, yet the
effect is one and the same; not to fire, but to quench that light and heat that
is in a believer, for the smiles of the world are her embraces, she does use to
smother with them, and as I may say, overlay a soul; when David's mountain was
made strong, and by Gods favor too, then he began to Psalm. 30. 7.
be secure, to fall asleep, and his Lamp was almost gone, when God hid his face
from him, his comfort was lost in a great measure. How many Demas's are there,
which forsake the work of Christ for this present world* yea, indeed many that
can endure the frowns of 2 Timothy 4. 1^.
the world, yet are overcome by her smiles; Jesurun kicked not, Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
nor forgot the God of her salvation, so much as when she waxed fat. So in that
of Nehemiah; they took strong Cities, and a fat land, N^^. 9. 15, 16.
and possessed houses full of all, wels dug, vineyards, and olive-yards, and
fruit trees in abunndance; so they did eat, and were filled, and became fat;
and delighted themselves in the great goodness; notwithstanding they were
disobedient, and rebelled against thee, and cast thy Law behind their backs,
etc. and slew the Prophets which testified against them. O wat^h against this,
take heed we do not abate our earnestness after more and more of Christ, lest
while we are panting like the Heart after the water brooks, we take up with a
drop, for all the Creature Comforts in the world are no more, and our thirst
after spirituals be more cooled, and we solace our selves under our Guord,
instead of the Aple-tree, the sweet shadow of Christ. And to this end, always
keep fresh upon your hearts the love of Jesus his smiles; when the Diamond is
present, the Lodestone cannot draw.

Again, Arm we our selves against the frowns of the world; discouragements we
must expect to meet with sooner or latter, specially if we do not like a
hollow-hearted bulrush bow and bend, and comply with every thing, a notable
emblem of an Hypocrite; If we stand firm like an Oak or Cedar, we shall feel
strong gusts; It may be some of us have known what they meant* and some have
had experience of their weakness to bear up against them. O how should this
humble us, and make ^s double our watch! Satan will raise a storm, if the Lord
permit him; thinking on a sudden to blow out our Lamps, but we must arm against
it, and be sure to go on, though it be weeping; As the Milch-kine that carried
the Ark up from the Philistines 1 Samuel 6. 12.
to Bethlehem, they had their Calves left at home, which were a strong
avocation, and yet says the Text, they went strait forward, lowing and
lamenting after their Calves, but yet they went forward. It may be we may be
put to it; as that Marquess of Vioum in Italy, even Galeacius, that forsook
house, and lands, and wife, and children* and all for Christ. It may be we
cannot do it without some reluctance, yet it must be done; it may be we shall
have many discouragements from our own hearts, strong temptations, violent
temptations; happily more then ever yet we have had, so that we cannot go on but
weeping and wailing* yet resolve upon it, by his grace, however we will go on;
such a well-grounded resolution, often renewed with a waiting upon the Spirit
for his strength to perform it, will carry a man on far.

6. Be sure not to neglect the Ordinances of Christ, nor be slight in the using
of them. And one of the two I doubt we are often guilty of, and therefore we
may thank our selves for much of the deadness that grows upon us daily: these
are the golden Pipes, whereby this Oil is conveyed continually from the Lord
Jesus, for the keeping our Lamps alive and lively. Would you not wither, but
continue your verdour and greenness? you must keep close to the waters of the
Sanctuary; they shall be like Trees Psalm. (...). 3.
planted by the rivers of water, his leaf shall never fail; he that delights in
the Law of God, meditates in it day and night, there is private conversation
with God. And they that are planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in
the Courts of our God, yea in old Psalm. 92. 13.
age they shall flourish, and b^ing forth more abundantly, when many times it
is the declining time. A diligent, careful, serious use of all the Ordinances,
with an eye to faith, seeing through them all, but as empty pipes without his
presence to fill them, this exceedingly conduces.

7. Be sure your aim be as high as heaven, and the perfection Gal 6.
which shall be at the resurrection of the dead. So the Apostle, Not that I
count that I have attained, but I press hard forward, I hill. (...).
and all his diligence was, that he might attain the resurrection of the dead;
by a Metonymie of the Adjunct, it is put for the perfection of that (...)a^e at
the resurrection; see how high he aimed at, and therefore he did not languish,
nor loi^^r, nor stay in what he had received, but pressed hard forward toward
the mark of the pri^e of the high calling; he that aims short, even at so
much as will serve his turn, and compass his design, when he has done that,
there is an end. But I a^m at perfection, says the Apostle, and so should we
if we would keep our Lamps alive, never rest.

8. Be much in prayer; pray hard for the supplies of his Spirit, he has
promised them if we ask; importunity will prevail if we be Strangers, much
more, if Children; it is the spirit, that keeps all alive, and therefore pray
for more and more of this Spirit of Jesus Christ. See how Moses follows the
Lord with request upon request, when he had been in the Mount, and seen Exodus
33.
him face to face; one would think this was enough to have stopped his mouth
for a great while; no sooner was he come down, but he is praying for the
guidance of that good Spirit, O Lord, show me the way where in thou would
have us to go; well, God grants him this, this satisfies him not, but he must
have Gods presence with him, an Angel would not serve his turn, but his
presence he must have, and when this was granted, this would not serve his turn
neither, but then, O Lord show me thy glory: Prayer is the richest trading for
heaven: Build up your selves, praying in the holy Ghost. Ah it is the prayer of
faith that fetche^h in rich supplies from the Lord continually. Jude 20.


9. Take heed of grieving this good Spirit then, when we have his presence, by
any willing transgression: this grieveth him, our Ephesians. 4. 30.
unthankfulness, and slighting of him, minding the world; grieve him not, for
if he depart, be sure our Lamps will be but in a sad taking.

10. Then every day we must be trimming; the Lamps of the Exodus 30. 7.
Sanctuary were dressed or trimmed every day, he made them well, as the Original
word signifies, they were disordered; burning every night, there was somewhat
wanting oil, and raising the week likely, and removal of dross from them, which
they might contract; he dressed them, and made them ready every morning; the
morality implied in this Type, surely is this; that we should daily dress up
our Lamps, they will need it every day; renew our repentance, renew our
resolutions, our walking clos(...)r with God, to love him, etc. daily endeavor
to draw nearer to him; neglect your Lamps but a week or so, and see what
fearful work there will be.

Again, such then as can say with Moses, they have lived thus long, and their
sight fails not, nor their strength, etc. They have great cause to bless the
Lord.

But though a Child of God is thus apt to decline his profession, thus apt to
grow dim, his Lamp to want trimming, yet it never goes altogether out: And
what use should we make of this.

1. It reproves that opinion of falling away utterly from justifying and
renewing grace; the condition of all believers is here set Use.
down by the state of the wise virgins, their Lamps indeed did decay, and
suffer an impairing, but not altogether dye; No, this spring of grace, once
sprung in the heart, springs up to eternal life, though some interruptions
there may be; did he pray that Ioh. 7. 38. Luke 32. 32.
Peter's faith should not fail him, and did he not pray for all believers?
indeed his faith did as near fail him, as ever man's did, but yet it revived
again, and so David, and others.

2. Yet do not abuse this Doctrine of grace, as our hearts are exceeding apt to
do: If we cannot fall away utterly, then if once, Be sure, we have the root of
the matter in us; if once we have Oil in our vessels, it will never be
altogether spent, our Lamps will never be blown out. This is dangerous and next
to desperate; and therefore the Apostle in a like case, with a kind of
abhorrency at the thought of such a thing, speaks thus; shall we continue in
sin, that grace may abound? God forbid; because he has made Romans 6. 1.
us partakers of the sure mercies of David, that will never fail, shall we
therefore neglect our worthy walking of them? it argues a very ungodly frame of
heart where this is to be found. We should the rather be encouraged, our hands
strengthened, to Phil. (...) 12.
work out our salvation with so much the more earnestness; were it not a very
unchild-like and wretched frame of heart for a child to say: Well, I know my
fathers heart toward me, let me do what I will, he will not cast me out of
doors, his inheritance is sure; he may happily be mistaken, and prove himself a
Bastard and not a Son: And so it is here, Gods Children have all of them such
child-like dispositions in them, as they will hardly dare to make such an use
of such a rich treasury of grace. Or if they do, they are like to smart for it.

3. A word of strong Consolation to many a poor drooping soul; If once thou
have but grace in thy heart, the oil in thy Vessel, it is never lost again,
though in its own nature it be loseable. Thou art afraid some temptation or
another from Satan, the world, or thy own heart will blow it out; some blast or
other will wither thee; O thou shall never be able to keep thy Lamp burning in
the midst of so many contrary winds of lust and corruption; but though thou
can not keep it alive, the Lord can do it, and he will do it. Indeed while
the Virgins slept, for any care they took of their Lamp, it might have gone
out; but the Lord kept it burning though it were but low, and needed dressing.
Be of good courage then, poor drooping foul, and he shall strengthen thy heart;
did thou ever know of any that had this oil in their vessels, that had the
real work of grace upon them, that did quite extinguish and dye? surely thou
did not. If the Lord do but seal it up to thee, that thou art one of the wise
Virgins; believe it for thy everlasting comfort, thy Lamp shall never be put
out in obscure darkness.

4. What shall we render to the Lord for this unspeakable grace toward us? how
has he lifted up our condition above innocence it self in Adam? he was made
liable to fall away, and the Lord did not engage himself to keep him; we are
made now in the second Adam in a surer Condition, we have a better tenure in
Jesus Christ, which is the root of our stedfastness and standing; because he
lives, we shall live. If Jesus Christ could die any more, then might the
Saints that are in him, dye again altogether, Ioh. 14. 19.
when once they are implanted into him. O he lives for ever, and that Spirit
of Christ which lives and dwells in Heb 7. 25.
his people, it never dies and fails, and he has made it the very tenure of
his Covenant, he will put his fear into their hearts, Ier. 32. 40.
that they shall never depart from him. We it may be that know not what it is
to be almost gone and blown out, at the brink of obscure darkness, know not
what that mercy is; but such as have been made to believe that God would cast
them into the bottomless pit, that he would utterly destroy them, and forsake
them, O how sweet a truth must this needs be! that though their flesh and heart
fail them, yet God will never fail them, whatever he Psalm. 73. 26.
may seem to do for a season; but so much for this Doctrine.

The second Doctrine is this: When a Believers profession grows Doctr. 2.
so low, and he is declined, specially at such a time, it is his duty to trim
his Lamp, to renew his profession, to look after a restoring. So here, they
arose, and trimmed their Lamps, when the Cry came; and this did the wise
Virgins as well as the foolish. Concerning the foolish Virgins I have nothing
here to say, nor shall I trouble my self, or you with what happily might be
spoken of the Hypocrites trimming his Lamp, wherein it differs from the
Believers. The wise Virgins trimming, I have spoke the last-day to that
purpose, showing how far they might go. But I will speak here to the wise
Virgins, because I would not dwell too long upon these things.

So you find Solomon: his declinings were great, and that at his latter end;
but he arose again, and repented, as appears by his Book of Ecclesiastes, and
Proverbs, etc. written after this his backsliding, as is generally conceived.
And so the Church of the Philippians, their love and care of the Apostle
suffered a nipping, Phil. 4. 10.
a winter, and had ceased to flourish as formerly, but they renewed it again;
It has flourished it again, says the Apostle: Eurychus may fall down, and
almost beat his life out of him, but it is still in him, and there must be
means used to draw it forth, as there is pains taken with Trees that have a fit
of barreness come upon them; Spiritual life runs to the heart, and there
appears little or nothing without, sometimes; as conquered men do from their
outworks to the Tower; but it must be brought forth again, we have a command
for it, to those two Churches in the Revelations, Sardis had a name to live and
was dead; likely the most of them were dead, and yet there were some things
remaining, Rev. 3. 2.
which were ready to die, and these must be strengthened, the things which
remain, which were ready to die; for their works were not perfect before God. O
it was hypocrisy that did eat them out of their life of Godliness, its a
consuming thing indeed. And so the Church of the Laodiceans, their love was
waxed Lukewarm, neither hot, nor cold, neither dead altogether, nor lively;
now says the Lord, be zealous therefore, and repent. But you will ask me here,

What it is to trim these Lamps that is here required? I will speak but to two
or three particulars.

First then, In the trimming of the Lamp, there is usually a supply of the Oil,
if it wanted; as when it has burned long, if it be not supplied, the oil being
spent, it will not live, except it be supplied. And it was high time for these
Virgins now to be awaked hereunto, they might else have slept until all had
been spent, and the Lamp had gone out, as well as the foolish; grace being but
a Creature, it lives by a continual supply of the Spirit of grace, the first
cause of it. So then in the trimming of the Lamp, there must be a fetching in
of more grace, a recourse to the fullness that is in Jesus Christ; for the Lamp
is ready to languish or dye else for want of oil.

2. There is a stirring up also of the grace which does remain, some oil
remains, that must be made ready, the ready passage between the Vessel and
the Lamp, the heart and the conversation; it must indeed be cherished; for
being little, happily it is ready to dye, like a spark among much ashes, stir up
the gift that is in thee, there is none that stirs up himself to lay hold
upon 2 Timothy 1. 6. Isa. 64. 7.
God. The wick in the Lamp must be raised, it being burned low, so it is in
this case. It may be, in such a declining condition of a poor soul, there is
more grace lying deep, and low, lying asleep in the habit, more then the soul
is aware of; this must be stirred up, faith stirred up, and love to Jesus
Christ, and his people stirred up.

3. In the trimming of the Lamp, there is a taking away the filth, and the
dross that it gathers, and snuffing the wick which would hinder the light and
burning of it, that it would be very dull and dim. Now what is this brethren,
but the putting away those iniquities, repenting of those evils; whatever they
have been that have thus far prevailed against their profession, that security,
that carnality, that self-confidence, those things which laid them asleep,
which choked the Lamp, that it could not burn. Whenever we are under any
declining, do but search and see, commune with your own hearts, and you will
find there is some evil which lies close, some soil we have gathered, and
hereby the spirit of grace has been grieved, and he is departed from us. Now
this snuff must be taken off, deal not gently with it, this filth and dross
must be removed, if we would trim up our Lamps.

For the Application then of this briefly in a word.

It may serve to stir us up every one to this duty; If our Lamps Use 1.
be at present, or shall hereafter come under any declining. Alas brethren, do
we not slumber and sleep often, and neglect all this while the trimming of our
Lamps, and will they not quickly burn low and dim, and need a serious trimming
of them? I doubt this duty will be incumbert upon us, and required of us oftener
then we are aware of. Do we know how soon the Bridegroom will come? his voice
goes before him, we have often heard, but have we trimmed our Lamps to this
day, are our professions more glorious then formerly? And for Motives hereunto,
consider,

First, Such a restoring is a thing feizable, hough the duty be Note.
thine, yet the work is Gods: he engages to help, yea to do it indeed, he
restores my soul, says David, and it is for his own name Psalm. 23. 3.
sake; for the glory of his Grace. David had many decays and backslidings,
witherings, and faintings, but God restored his soul still; and he is as ready
to do it for his people now, as ever he was; therefore do not say, alas this is
a work too difficult, or hard, or there is no recovery; my Lamp is so near
extinct, as there is no hope for me; he that kindled it at first is able to
restore it. It is indeed a work of some difficulty, and will cost you
something, but yet it is feizable. Peter was at as low an ebb as ever poor
Believer was; Ma^k. 16. 11.
what was become of his profession? and yet Peter is recovered, and after the
recovery owned as eminently as any of the rest, and more for his Comfort. The
lost groat was found again, and the Luke 15. 6, 9, 24.
lost sheep was found again. And so the Prodigal Son, he ran far, and lavisht
away his Patrimony, and yet he is restored again; the winter may deform the
face of the earth, but the Spirit of God can renew it again in the Spring; now
he has promised to give this Spirit, and he sends forth his Spirit to find
out the lost Child, the lost sheep, and therefore there is encouragement.

2. Consider, until this be done, you are not fit for Heaven, nor to enter with
him, you are not ready: the wise Virgins trimmed their Lamps, and then they
were ready, says the Text, and they that were ready went in with him; happy
creatures that are found ready with their Lamps burning at that day of his
appearing, which we know not whether it may be at hand. A wicked man is not fit
for heaven upon any terms, it would be a place of no rest unto him, no more
then the Air is to the fish, or the water to a man, they are not con-natural;
and truly no more is a gracious man fit for heaven while his Lamp wants
trimming. Heaven is the inheritance of the Saints in light, and is he fit for
it that is even going out in darkness? O no, the Lamp must Col. 1. 12.
be shining and burning bright, or else there is no suitableness to heaven.

3. Hereby God will have much more glory by you then otherwise he is like to
have; for mind you, it is the shining of our Lamps, the glory of our
conversations, suitable to our profession, that gives occasion to the men of
the world to glorify him; so says our Savior, Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your Mat. 5. 16.
good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven: This is all the Lord
expects, that he may be acknowledged, and have the glory of all his grace of
us; we have the sweet and comfort, and everlasting advantage of it; and it
cannot but be upon every believers heart to glorify God, it is indeed the end
of our coming into the world; now we cannot glorify him so, while our Lamps
burn so low, we are under declinings, but when we are fruitful and abound in
it, as our Savior says, herein is my father glorified, that ye bring forth
much fruit; this is that which God is glorified Joh. 15. 8.
by. It may be, we have some few good works; but they are but a few, and so
few, that scarce any can take notice to glorify God for them; methinks this
should stick much with us. Specially the nearer we come to glory our selves,
the more should we mind the glory of God, the more zealous should we be for it.
O begin to lay about us to glorify him here, learn the work of heaven for
ever, if not before, yet at least now we are ready to reap the wages of heaven,
the glory and joy unspeakable, and Rivers of pleasures for evermore.

4. Consider, Is it not a shame for us brethren, whose salvation is much nearer
now then when we believed, began to believe that our light should not be more
dim, our heat more abated, our zeal for God, the fervor of our affections;
surely it is a very great shame: as if the nearer we come to the enjoyment of
God, the less desirable he were; time has been when we have some of us
followed hard after God, it is well if we have mended, or held on our pace; the
time has been happily when our Conversations have been bright, and a beauty of
holiness appeared in them, and others have taken notice of it, and glorified
God; it is well if we be not grown Lukewarm. O what a shame is this, the
nearer we come to the Sun to be the colder: has not the Cry passed and awaked
us, and do we not find that our Lamps are dim, and we are in our profession
very low? O look to it, that our last days be our best days, and we go not out
like a snuff.

But you will ask me, what should we do to trim up these Lamps of ours?

First, You must remember from whence you are fallen, look up to the top of the
hill where once you were, and now you are undiscernably Rev. 2. 5.
tumbled to the bottom, you know not how: O how much ground have you lost,
search and try brethren: Commune with your hearts: Consider your ways, as David
did, and turn to the Lord. It will exceedingly shame us, and that shame be a
spur to us to consider how far short we are of that love, that zeal, that
diligence and closeness of walking.

Secondly, We must repent of it, we must be humbled for our former
miscarriages, our declining to lose our first love; the more love we have
received, the less we return to him again: Is not this unworthy? Besides, how
much might we have honored the Lord, if our light had shone before men, if
there had been a Majesty of holiness always upon our conversation, such as
sometime happily there has been, and is not this matter of humbling?

Thirdly, Then we must do our first works, It is not a sorrow only for our
miscarriage that is enough, but we must do our first works; If we have been
zealous before, and now are become Lukewarm, be zealous and amend, do our
first works; we have Rev. 3. 19.
been more diligent and close in our walking with God, now we are more remiss,
we must remember whence we are fallen, and do our first works. O why should we
not labor to exceed the love of our espousals, when we followed so hard after
him? our souls panted as the chased Heart after the waterbrooks; and this it
may be before we had many hints of his love, some sight of him likely, else we
should not follow him, some touch upon our hearts, as in Elisha his case, and
Saul's; the people whose hearts God touched, 1 Samuel 10. 26.
they followed, but did one taste of his love? then draw thee out so earnestly;
and now thou have had many a smile, many a sweet refreshing from his presence,
many a Ring broken between Jesus Christ and thy soul, and will thou not now be
as diligent and as earnest in following after him? it is the nature of true
Grace, that as it comes from heaven, it will never cease until it reach to
heaven again.

Fourthly, We must beg earnestly of the Lord to work this and all our works in
us and for us; It is he that restored David his soul when it was even lost; and
so he does ours: he makes them to return when they are even giving up; O give
him no rest, until he send forth his spirit, and give thee to be filled with
that spirit, Psalm. 23. 3.
with might in the inner man, that thou may burn and shine, and the fullness
and fruitfulness, the burning and brightness of thy conversation may be a
witness to all that behold it, that of a truth the Spirit of Jesus Christ is in
thee. He is wonderful ready to help in such a case above what we can conceive;
for it is he indeed, in case of such backslidings, that puts words into his
peoples Hos. 14. 1.
mouths, when they have nothing to say, and cannot look up, nor hold up the
head for shame, nor look their God and Father in the sace, they have so grieved
him, and shamed their profession; yet then the Lord puts words into their
mouths, in that fourteenth of Hosea; It is the very case of the Prodigal, for
he was a Son, and therefore calls God Father in his return, denies not the
relation, nor calls it in question, notwithstanding his unworthy, carriage
toward him, but he had misspent all, as sadly as thou have done likely; and yet
when he came and returned, his Eather gives him the meeting, and runs and
falls upon his neck and kiseth him, and was ready to make up all again;
therefore go to him, be earnest with him, and see if he make not your Lamps to
shine again gloriously; and swallow up that glory in his greater glory, his
presence for ever.

Verse 8. And the foolish said unto the wise, give us of your Oil, for our
Lamps are gone out.
IN this Verse we have another part of the Parable, wherein we have, upon the
awakening of the conscience of these hypocrites and formal professors, and the
discovery of their condition, their request to the godly, their Application of
themselves to them, and the reason of that request. The request, Give us of
your oil; the reason of it, for our Lamps are gone out. The reason being first
in order of nature, as the cause of the other, the root from whence the request
does spring, we will begin to speak a little to that.

(...), They are extinct, or they are going out, and yet we have not a supply
to keep them alive, they are gone; and for their own part, they had no oil in
their vessel to do it with; the Note from this Clause is,

An hypocrites profession will not carry him through all Conditions. Doctrine.


These foolish Virgins made a shift to satisfy themselves, and blind the world
with their Lamps which they carried, and went as far with them a great while as
the wise did, but the end is that which differenceth persons conditions; as the
Holy Ghost speaks by the Psalmist, Mark the perfect man, behold the upright,
the end of that man is peace; he does not say, mark the perfect man; for in his
life time he has such a distinguishing Character; his life is peace, and the
other is trouble: No, but the end, whatever his life has been before, his end
is peace.

This is a clear case, his profession will not carry him through all
conditions, and that for these two reasons. One of them will be sure to meet
with them all; for either, 1. Their profession fails them before the day of
death, and so carries them not through; or else, 2. At death.

First then, ordinarily; I think it is a truth, that a formality, or profession
of Christianity, if there be no more, does fail a man, and is discovered to
others and to himself, so that though he has rested upon it, and made it his
hope heretofore, yet now it fails him: Here you see it is the very case, when
the cry came to prepare them, to awake them, that they might fit themselves for
his appearing; which is infinite mercy that he did not rather surprise them
while they were in this sleep and security: Now I say, before the Bridegroom
himself came actually to fetch them that were ready, it is discovered to
themselves, and they see they are hypocrites. And it is discovered to others
that their Lamps are gone out, they are themselves made the Publishers of their
own shame therein. You know Judas was discovered, unmasked before his death,
and laid open to be what he was indeed; a thief, a wretch, a traitor. And so
those many Disciples that followed Jesus Christ, he knowing their hearts not to
be right, delivered such a trying word as gave them offense, and they went
backward, and Joh. 6. 66.
walked with him no more.

And the Reason of this is very plain, Because they have not a spring within to
feed their profession. As far as the spring they have, or the wet, or mire,
they move by little; as far as that will carry them they will go, but then not
a step further. A beast, and a servant, or a child follow a man; the one
follows him for a bottle of hay, so soon as he lays that down before him, he
goes no further after him; but the son follows him home, and will not be
shut out by any means. As happily now, while Religion thrives, he will be on the
Sun-side of the hedge, where it is warmest, he is a Summer-bird; suppose now a
time of tribulation Job 27. 10.
come for the word sake, will he abide? No, he withers as the sandy ground, in
the 13. Matthew. Will he delight himself in the Almighty, and always call upon
God? No, their profession are like Job 6. 15.
Jobs friends, deceive him in the day of trouble; as a brook, and as the stream
of a brook they pass away, like a loud flood, make a great show, run very
fiercely, carry all before it for a time, but it is presently dried up, because
it has no spring to feed it; as some note, that in Peru there is a
diurnal-River, which runs in the day with a great stream, but in the night the
channel is dry, because in the day the Sun melts down the Snow upon the
Mountains, and that makes a great stream, but in the night it cease. In
grace now it is otherwise, there is a principle within, there is the Spirit of
grace dwelling in the hearts of Believers, and this supplyeth them continually;
there is a new nature, and that is a thing durable. But,

Secondly, If it fail not before death, as here it does, yet some passions
being longer then some, Joas^ held out long, yet he was discovered before
death; but suppose they continue longer, yet 2 Chronicles. 24.
usually they will not carry them through death; men may make a shift to live
by a form, but they cannot dye by a form: indeed affliction opens many men's
eyes to see that they were but rotten; counterfeit gold will not endure the
fire, or not the seventh fire at least, fire is of a searching nature, and yet
notwithstanding some they pass this trial, and are not discovered until death,
and then it fails them. If Balaam dye his own death, and not the death of the
righteous, what a miserable creature will he be? Numb. 23. 10.
And death does open many men's eyes: O what laboring is there then many times
to be spared a little, that they may recover strength before we go hence and be
no more seen. All the life Psalm. 39. ult.
time they thought all was well, but now they find they are deceived, their
Lamps are gone out. O brethren, the valley of the shadow of death is full of
such damps, as every Lamp will not endure, every profession will not abide, but
it overcomes them. But happily they may go down quietly, and go away with
confidence in their conscience; a strange confidence have many poor blinded
hypocrites, whose consciences are seared, Yet,

Thirdly, Be sure brethren, It will not carry them through the Judgment; after
the death the Judgment; we may make a shift to pass through this world, and
happily delude our selves, and think all is well; and through death, and yet
never dream of our misery; but if we be hypocrites, be sure that a form will
not endure to appear in Judgment, before the ever lasting burnings, the
consuming fire. There the Lord will examine men's hands, what ever their
professions have been, and their hearts; as it is said of Tiberius, when he
examined a fellow that pretended to the Crown, he was so confident and cunning,
he could not trap him in his words; at last he examined his hands, and finding
them hard with labor, he found him to be but a servile mechanic fellow; he
was then so startled, says Mr. Caryl, that he had no more to say. So the Lord
will examine men's works then, and the principles of their works from which they
acted, and they shall be forced to confess they are hypocrites, and their
mouths shall he everlastingly stopped, depart from me ye workers of iniquity;
you tell me ye have preached in my name, or prophesied, etc. let me see your
hands, you are workers of iniquity.

For the Application then, What a terrible word to all formal professors, who
have only a Lamp, a form of godliness, but deny the power of it in heart and in
their conversations. Let all such, if any such be here present, know,

First, Your profession will fail you sooner or later. You think when you have
done so many duties, you have acquired such gifts, and such supposed graces of
the spirit, and (...)w all is well, these are enough to lift you up to heaven,
a Tower, a Ladder that will reach to heaven. But alas, it is not so, it is but
a Castle builded Mat. 7. 22.
in the air, they are lying words you trust in, who cry, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these. You are his
people, and have his Ordinances; a Job 8. 14.
fine web a spider weaves, takes great pains, spins it out of her bowels; but
alas, it never comes to any thing, it will not make a garment to cover their
nakedness from the Lord Jesus. Hypocrites rest in a formality, and some
observances of the Law, as if it were their hope that should secure them from
all storms and injuries whatsoever, but alas it will not, these things will
fail.

Secondly, Is it not worthy observation also, that an hypocrite, if he go to
decay in this life, his hypocrisy be discovered, he decaies quickly, suddenly,
more suddenly then another man ordinarily; therefore he is compared to a
Bull-rush, that withers before any other plant when they are once blasted and
cursed; as God does curs Job 8. 12.
them many times, alas the next day they are gone and withered; as the tree
that was dried up by the root, which the Disciples wondered at; a sad thing
to-have leaves without fruit, a form without Mark 11. 21.
power; the withering curse does light upon them soonest, sooner then profane
persons, and how quickly are they withered? they are like the grass upon the
house top, that withers before it grows up.

Thirdly, It will be sure to sail a man when he has most need of it; as in the
hour of temptation, the hour of affliction, the hour of death, and the hour of
judgment; in all these usually it fails as a man, standing him in no stead^;
as the brooks run in the winter when there is no need of them, but in Summer
when the traveller is ready to perish for thirst, then are they dried up, in
that place of Job: Like the Apples of Sodom; if a man come to touch them, would
be refreshed by them, they turn to dust: Job 6. 15.
poor creatures think they have faith until an hour of temptation or
affliction; when they should act it, then they have none: So they think they
have love and bowels, but when an opportunity is offered, and they have most
need of them, then they fail; like the house there in Matthew. 7. It was builded
as fair to see to as another, as the wise man's house, and served him while it
shone upon his Tabernacle, but when once the storms arose, the winds came, and
the waves beat against it, alas it fell, and great was the Mat. 7. 25.
fall thereof.

Fourthly, that which will set an edge upon all the former, is the sad
disappointment of the hypocrite or formalist in all this, for his hope is cut
off like a spiders web; there are two Pillars he leans upon, as Sampson upon
the Pillars in the house; the Jachin and Boaz: What are they, but the good
things of this world, and life eternal; and alas, both fail him. For the good
things of this life, they many times leave him; the mire and the water which
made the Bull-rush to grow, they are dried up, and what is become of his hope
then? he leans, lays hold on his house, and is loath to* let it go; but let
him hold it as fast as he can, yet down it (...) 8. ^5.
must go, when the Lord comes to manifest his displeasure against him.

Secondly, For things eternal, those he expects, and is as high, until he be
discovered to himself, in his expectation of heaven Isa. 29. 8.
as any other; but alas, he is but in a golden dream all this while, as an
hungry man dreameth he eats, etc. but it is nothing Job 8. 14.
but a fancy, when he awakes he is never the fuller, but rather vexed so much
the more, being disappointed; for a man to have his hope cut off, is the
greatest cut in the world, nothing breaks the creatures heart more then this. O
how great hope may a Minister be raised to, being an instrument in the hand of
God to save others, that he also shall be saved; they themselves have means to
castout the Devil, and shall they go to the Devil? It is indeed the very
emphasis of damnation to be cast down from Mat. 7. 22.
such a height of hope, to be so near to heaven in their hopes, and yet
miscarry.

O, how should this make us afraid of hypocrisy and formality, which is ready
to creep upon us? how bitter a thing is it in the end to hypocrites, yea to the
people of God in their way, when God opens their eyes to behold it in its
colors? therefore let us be exhorted every one of us to take heed of it, lest
it be found in such prevalency among us, as to denominate us hypocrites:
believe it brethren, If we be hypocrites, our duties will not commend us to
God, be they never so many, never so plausible, because our hearts are not
changed, which is a notable sign of an hypocrite; he does much duty, but never
reaches to a better heart, is not changed from glory to glory; but he prays
and sins, and weepeth and sins, gets no strength against corruption.

Again, an hypocrite, he will rest and lean to his duties, he leans to his
house, which is of his own building. Now truly Brethren, true grace where it
is, if we should lean to it instead of Christ, it would not stand, much less a
counterfeit; the believer he rests upon God alone, his presence in the Valley
of the shadow Psalm. 23. (...).
of death, not upon his house, upon the web of his own weaving, but would be
found in Christ.

And lastly, how much comfort is here to a poor child of God, though it may be
he flourish not so, and have not such a glorious show and formality, such a
complete form of godliness as another, yea his own conscience bears him
witness before the Lord, that his heart is right before him, and he has a
power of grace upon his heart, to subdue that to the Lord. Surely brethren, it
is much rather to be chose; a little spring, then a great swelling torrent, for
there is a living principle, it will continue and hold out, it will not dry up
in the day of drought and disappoint our hopes, but as great Rivers in their
heads are small streams many times, so here it will increase and grow from one
degree to another, to a place of broad Rivers, until it empty it self into that
fullness, and so of glory to all eternity: Look to the truth of it Brethren, if
there be oil in the vessels; you see the wise Virgins, though they had their
Lamps to trim, yet they were not gone out; but so much shall serve for this
Doctrine.

(...) Having considered already, that a form of godliness without the power
will not carry the hypocrite through all conditions, it will fail him sooner or
later; I am now to consider of their reflection upon this failing of their
Lamps, They were out, and they saw that they were out; and thence it is that
they go a begging for oil; the note I will raise from hence shall be as
comprehensive as may be, we will hasten; It is this,

Though an hypocrite may long be hiding himself, yet at last, when Doctrine.
it is too late, he shall be discovered to himself; this is the very case of
the foolish Virgins in this place. There will be two or three things
considerable if we take the Observation asunder. As first; That an hypocrite
may long lie hid from himself. 2. That at last he shall be discovered to
himself. 3. That ordinarily this is when it is too late.

For the first, That they may long lie hid from themselves; this is plain from
the Parable, for how long did the foolish Virgins walk with the wise, and
thought their penny as good silver as theirs all this while? but they were
asleep; they had good thoughts of Psalm 30. 7.
their condition, else they would have had little lift to sleep; the wise
Virgins would hardly have slept if they had not had some assurance, their
mountain had not been made strong by the favor of God; and the foolish, as
foolish as they are, would hardly have slept, if they had not had a good
opinion of their conditions: If their consciences had been awaked, and their
worm gnawing; could they have slept if they had seen their danger, now to have
their portions with hypocrites, being such themselves? In that place formerly
mentioned, you have seen, the hypocrite has a hope until it be cut off, and
his confidence is great, he leans upon Job 8. 14, 1^.
his house; as the foolish builder in the Gospel, he thought his house a good
security against all storms whatsoever. And so does many a poor Formalist think
his form of godliness, the green gourd shadow enough from the everlasting
burnings. Did Judas Mat. 7. 26, 27.
suspect himself? he was not so jealous of himself, as it should appear by the
story, as the rest of the Disciples were, but was last in the enquiry. And it
is likely enough, Jehu when he proclaimed his zeal for God, spoke as he
thought, poor man; what was Mat. 26. 25.
under those broad leaves of that profession, yet appeared not. As Hazael, Is
thy servant a dog? It may be if one had told Jehu how afterward he would play
the wretch and the carnal Politician, and build the things he now destroyed, or
do Gods work to the halves, no farther then his own interest led him, he would
have thought as strange as Hazael did.

Now the grounds of this may be such as these, in a word or two.

1. The depth of our own hearts; hypocrisy, of all other works of darkness,
hates the light, and therefore if there be any more deep and remote corner of
the heart then another, there it lurks. Joh. 3. 19.
O says the Holy Ghost, the heart of man is deceitful above all Jer. 17. 9.
things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? the most sharp and strong
sight, the most eagle-eyed creature in the world cannot find it out to the
bottom: indeed Brethren, there is darkness and depth enough in every one of our
hearts to deceive all the world; the most piercing discerning spirits are
blinded and deluded* as Juglers, they say, can cast mists, and make a man
believe strange things, when it is nothing so; but that is not so much, but the
depth of the cunning of the heart is such, that they can deceive themselves. It
is great cunning to deceive others, but if that cunning be yet outwitted, and
be deceived by it self, this is more. Yea, I will say it Brethren; with a holy
reverence, that if any thing in the world could lie hid from God himself, it
would be the cunning heart of a sinner: If there be more difficulty, or could
be, in Gods discerning one thing then another, here it would be, and therefore
his knowledge of the heart, is set forth by a searching of it; indeed he
knows all things, but after the manner of men he speaks; if men cannot easily
find a thing, it lies hid in the darkness, in some corner; then they must
search, as searching for the lost groat; or else if they would find out any
thing to perfection, then they search: So here it notes the perfection of Gods
knowledge of the heart, and withal the difficulty of the finding out the
heart, though not to himself; yet after the manner of men, if any thing were
difficult to God, this would be. If any man seem to be religious, and bridleth
not his tongue, his Religion is in Jam 1. 26.
vain, he deceives his own heart; he is a cunning Jugler indeed, that can
juggle himself into a belief of his own juglings, etc.

2. From the subtilty of Satan: All his care is to keep a poor soul in
ignorance of its condition; and how does he be(...)ir himself he knows, if
once the disease be discovered, it is in a way to be healed, and therefore it
is said of sinners altogether in darkness, that they are under the power of
Satan; to turn them from Acts 26. 18.
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; while they are under
darkness, they are under the power of Satan, he can lead them whither he
pleases, for they know not whether they go, as the wise man speaks. And that
is the reason surely, that Antichrist, that firstborn of the Devil, by might
and main keeps his Proselytes in the dark, takes away the Key of knowledge
from them; he knows if once the light should break in upon them, it is very
great hazard but they would break out from him, from that bondage and slaverie
that they are in to him; therefore Satan will be exceeding industrious, and how
will he fill a poor creatures heart with false reasonings concerning his
Condition? O if there be any stirring or conviction at any time, how does he
labor to lick them whole again, to make up the breach the Word has made in
their consciences, himself will turn Preacher and pretend to the tongue of the
Learned to speak a word in due season, and put on the garb of an Angel of
light, and preach peace, peace; O he is a cunning dauber, specially having our
hearts on his side, and therefore as ready to be beguiled, as he is to deceive
us.

3. From the similitude of a form of godliness, to the godliness it self. It is
true, life cannot be pictured, but yet a man may be drawn so to the life, as by
a dim sight, or by the help of a mist cast before the eyes, and wires whereby
such poppets may move, we can scarce discern it from a man. Similitude is the
mother of mistakes, therefore the Romans made their Ancilia so like to that
which they say fell from heaven, that if any might steal it he might seem to
one to be mistaken: how like brethren is gilded brass to gold? how like may a
Bristoll-stone be to a pearl? how like to a Saint was Judas? the Devil is Gods
Ap^, and he will imitate his work. And therefore for sincerity it self he has
a^ counterfeit; which looks as like it as can be. As when men shall seem most
self-denying for Christ, or forgo all, and give away all they have to the poor,
as if they would become mendicants indeed, this is very much, and yet they
might do this, give all to the poor, and give their body to be 1 Cor. 13.
burned, and yet not have love to Jesus Christ; can there possibly be more love
shown then in this? and yet you see there may be counterfeits in that also.
This is the third Argument.

And they do from hence deceive themselves. Such as will run Jam 1. 22.
from Sermon to Sermon, and with much seeming delight hear the word of God, are
affected, moved; but they do it not, deceiving themselves with a paralogism, a
false reasoning, for they are ready to conclude, O surel should not have such a
desire to be up early and seeking after Christ, as they think, though indeed
they seek him not, nor his face, but somewhat else in the Word; they should not
delight in approaching to God, as you have heard, if there were not theroot of
the matter in us; but they look not at the doing of the Word, the main thing,
and therefore Isa. 58.
they delude themselves with this self-reasoning. So the fool building his
house upon the sand from the foundation upward, they are as like one another as
can be, and as likely to stand out a storm, and therefore they reason from
hence, surely they shall hold out; if the wise man's hope will shelter him,
theirs will shelter them. But alas, here is a paralogism, they look not at the
different foundations, the one upon the rock, the other upon the sands; the one
receiving Jesus Christ, but as Jesus it may be; the other as Jesus and Lord:
the event shows, that a deceived heart was their undoing.

Fourthly, Because alas, the hypocrite usually is not much in searching of
himself. Surely, if Gods knowledge of the heart be set forth to us as a
searching of it, it will imply so much; we should search our hearts, else we
shall never know them, for he speaks after the manner of men, with a special
respect to the heart-knowledge; there they search as men do for hid treasures,
for what they would find, and lies secret. A cunning cheat looks like an
honest man, until he be searched into, and thoroughly (...)ed, a slight
examination will not find him out; and so truly will many a rotten heart go for
an honest and good heart, until there be a search: Hypocrites are like
Sepulchers, which appear not; they are fair and beautiful, being painted
without, but it appears not Mat. 23. 27.
what they are within; if you would see what a Sepulcher is indeed, you must
break it up, and down into it with a Candle, and search it out; there you shall
find loathsome rottenness, and dead men's bones. Now I say, an hypoerite
oridinarily is not diligent in this work, and therefore his heart deceives
himself, and this arises from several grounds. Happily, 1. He is too sloathful,
he is not one of the diligent laborious Christians that will take pains in this
work. If an overly view of men's hearts would do, every one would search, but to
rifle every corner of their hearts, and when the heart turns the back
tergiversatur, is loath to answer to the Queries which are put to it, but
flings an hundred ways up and down, and no hold of it at all; now in such a
case he is a diligent Christian indeed that will not be bastled, but will urge
it home upon the heart, and will have an answer better or worse; and thus from
time to time an hypocrite will hardly take pains in this great work; and
therefore no marvel if his heart deceive him, and he be hid form himself. 2.
Happily, he is confident of himself, as in the place of Job; and who almost are
men of more flourishing hopes then the hypocrites? were there any deadly doubt
of their Job 8. 15.
condition, then the Pharisees; and yet were there any more rotten then they
were? they thought if there were any men should go to heaven, they were the
men; men of such knowledge as they were, and such duties and strict lives as
they were, was it possible they should miscarry; and you see how bold they are
to plead it at the last day, as in that 7. of Matthew. Now that which a man
thinks he has already, or thinks he is sure of, he will not trouble
himself to enquire after it, it is but needless labor: If a man be sure, as he
thinks, he has his groat, he will not light a Candle and seek it. 3. Because
happily they have sometimes some of them misgivings of heart; sometimes
hypocrites may, and therefore they may be loath to come to search, they suspect
themselves, some do, and yet not so strongly, but that they have a false hope
to balance their fear, and to prevail. A Bankrupt, he that suspects it, has
no mind to cast up his accounts, he had rather do any thing; they may, I say,
some of them lave such misgivings, which though they be not so clear as to
amount to a knowledge condition, and to put them on to a recovery out of it;
yet they may be enough to make them loath to search. A man is loath to search
his coin, he suspects he shall find many bad pieces there, and happily thereby
prove himself but a beggar; finding all brass instead of gold. A man is loath
to take up the gravestone, he may suspect what he shall find within, which he
is not very willing to see it may be, nor to endure the stench of it, and
therefore pleases himself with the paint and outward beauty of it, and
therefore no marvel if it be hid from his eyes.

Fifthly, It is a righteous hand of God upon hypocrites, they are even paid in
their own coin; that since they have deceived others with fair shows and
pretenses, and endeavored, as I may say, to deceive the Lord himself, that
they should deceive their own souls, and should be hid from themselves; that
they may go on the more securely, until they see by woeful experience, that they
are tumbled into the pit. And surely this was one of the things which were hid
from Jerusalems eyes, the things which belonged to her peace; the first, i^ not
the chief thing, was the knowledge of her self, Luke 19. 42. is a choice place;
of saving as well as moral knowledge; now they had neglected their time,
employed; the hypocrites drew near God with their mouths, when their hearts were
far from him, thinking to put off God with such Idol-worship, as if he had not
been a God which searched the heart, and could find it out; therefore the Lord
tells them; well, says he, now the things which concern your peace are hid from
your eyes, and this is one of them among the rest, the knowledge of Christ, the
remedy is the other main thing. O it is a fearful hand of God brethren, when he
gives them up to blindness of mind, so that they shall discern nothing which
concerns them, and so not know their own conditions: if the Lord hide, who
can find? as if he search, who can be concealed? But so much for this first
thing.

Secondly, At last he shall be discovered to himself: He shall see himself to
be but an hypocrite, this is many times so. I mean not only in hell, men's eyes
shall be opened, but at death, or before death many times the hypocrites eyes
are opened to see himself what he is. It is true, sometimes he may go down in
peace to the grave, such a peace as Satan, and an hard heart and seared
conscience gives; but yet you see here in this Parable, that before the coming
of the Bridegroom, they saw their Lamps were gone out, and that they wanted
oil, the great work, the grace in the heart, which before they cared not for. I
will not press it too far, and say, that because all the foolish Virgins here
see that their Lamps were gone out, therefore all hypocrites and formal
professors before their death, are discovered to themselves as well as to
others, that they are but hypocrites, but it is so many times, and ordinarily;
surely else I know not what can be the meaning of this part of the Parable; was
it not so with Judas? was it not discovered to him when he was detected, and
his conscience so wounded that he could not but go and proclaim himself a
wretch, a traitor to his Master before all the Court? if he were so blinded
before, by lust, by covetousness, as not to see what he did, yet now his eyes
were opened, he saw what his condition was; and the terror of it was such,
that he went and hanged himself.

But how and when does the Lord discover hypocrites to themselves? Why truly
brethren, happily in the hour of affliction, then the Alchymie gold being not
able to endure the seventh fire, discovers it self what it is; so the
hypocrite, will he pray always? Or in the general, by any other means whereby
the Lord blasts their profession, and makes it wither, then they come to see
it was but a gourd, under whose shadow they delighted themselves; so you see
God does blast their profession. Here it was not until their Lamps were gone
out that they saw it, that they wanted oil; while they could sparkle and walk
in the light of their own sparks, and think all is well with them; while they
can maintain their profession, and keep up duties, etc. happily, they see not the
hypocrisy lies hid under those broad leaves, but when they wither, and they
become as trees twice dead, then happily they come to see it. Not that always
those whose professions wither, do see themselves to be hypocrites neither, for
they may turn down right profane, as many poor creatures have done, and
returned with the swine washed, to the wallowing in ^ude 20.
the mir^, and grow past feeling, the conscience much seared and 2 Pet. 2. 20.
hardened; but yet many times this is a means whereby God does discover
hypocrites to themselves; sometimes they have had somewhat of a presence of
God, and now they have none, now their leaf falls; now as Saul, they have no
answer from God, Ephesians. 4. 19.
neither by Vision nor Prophet, and now they see the woeful case 1 Samuel 28. 6.
they are in; now they are plucked, as I may say, of their plumes, their
nakedness appears. Not that a child of God may not want his presence, and a
great while too, but there is then a sickness of love for him, a mourning after
him ordinarily, or a sad complaint that they cannot mourn after him; but an
hypocrite, he finds a want of the former presence, and his heart is little or
nothing troubled for it, he is contented to let it go.

Secondly, It may be sometimes without any such affliction; yet the Lord may
discover to an hypocrite that he is no better, that he is rotten at the heart;
though the guilt wear not away, yet he can show the soul that it is but
Alchymie; though the paint of the Sepulcher continue, and be not washed away,
he can show a man that he is an Hypocrite; not but that a Child of God may
think himself an Hypocrite, sometimes under temptation, but he is not so; but
when God reveals it to the soul, he sets it on with an evidence indeed
that it is so.

But why does the Lord then discover Hypocrites before the day of the discovery
of all things? why truly it is,

First, That they might have a taste of that bitter Cup which they are to drink
the dregs of to all eternity; the Hypocrites Cup, if any be more deep then
other, this is it; and if any more deadly dregs in it, this is it. Now God will
kindle a beginning of hell in their consciences, that as the Saints have some
fore-tas^s of heaven, and the joys to be revealed, to sweeten their Cup of
affliction, so Hypocrites might have some of the gall and wormwood, to
imbitter all their delights in this world. What comfort Mat. 27.
had Judas of his thirty pieces of silver, when God opened his conscience, and
let him see his condition? what an hypocritical, dissembling wretch he had
been, to betray the Lord of life and glory with a kiss, a sign of love, and a
bloody traitorous heart; to sell his Savior, whom he had followed so long, and
acted by commission from him so long, and his Master that had never done him
hurt, but good, to sell him, the Lord of life and glory, for thirty pieces of
Silver? O this could not but gall, and cut him to the heart! the Devil helped
him to a booty indeed, but God added this sorrow with it. Indeed of all sins,
God has not revealed himself so terribly against any in Scripture as this; and
therefore when the soul comes to see it, that has any knowledge of the
terrors of the Lord displayed against it, he must needs be for the present in a
hell above ground; this shall they have of my hand, says the Lord, they shall
lie down in sorrow; Yea, and sometimes he anticipates their death, and they
live in sorrow, and woe, and misery; God does (as I may say) set a mark upon
them, as upon Cain.

Secondly, That they might be warnings to others for ever, to take heed of
Hypocrisy; for when men that regard the work of the Lord, and consider the
operation of his hand, shall behold a Judas hanged up in Gibbets, being made a
Magor Missabeb to himself; does it not preach aloud this Caution, to take heed,
and beware of hypocrisy? these things, says the Apostle, were 1 Cor. 10.
written for our ensamples, that we might not do as they did; so are these
things acted for our ensamples, that we might take heed; or, if they have not
such terrors, but their professions are blasted only, and wither, and they
prove fearful creatures, their latter end worse then their beginning; is not
this a warning written in Capital Letters, that he that runs may read? O take
heed of rottenness at the root, for all our fruit will give Isa. 5. 24.
up as the dust, as the Apples of Sodom, we shall wither and come to nothing,
and go out like a snuff, as well as them, if we be not sound at the heart.

Thirdly, It may be a stumbling block to some others, who are ready to receive
any prejudice against the ways of Christ, and therefore they shall have a block
to stumble upon. O here you see what becomes of this preciseness and
flourishing profession of Religion, it is all but rotteness at the root, it is
better to take on fair and softly; a soft pace in religion, says the Moralist,
or civil, honest Man; as good continue in a mere wallowing, as being washed, to
enter into it again; yea better, says the profane man, and therefore he
satisfies himself in his carnal state, which is wosul; for suppose some
professors wither, yet do all? Some, they keep their leaf, it shall never fail;
some lose their verdour, but recover it again; and what if some wither? will
you therefore offend against the generation of the upright? saying, they are
all of the same stamp. God forbid. It is a sad thing, to consider how many poor
hearts are hardened in sin upon this very account, which adds to the
Hypocrites doom; but what if a discovered Hypocrite be so vile, the condition
so dangerous? is not their own as dangerous? if thou be profane, and a worker
of iniquity, there is no more entrance into glory for a Dog or Swine, then for
a Goat; no more for workers of iniquity, that professedly commit iniquity, then
for them who profess longer, do much in his name, and yet when all comes to
all, they are found but workers of iniquity, though secretly; but so much for
the second. Mat. 7. 22.


The third and last thing considerable in the Observation, is, That many times
it is too late, when Hypocrites are discovered to 1 Cor. 6. 9.
themselves; this is plain in the Parable; for the foolish Virgins all the time
of the getting oil in their vessels, they complain not, not see their want of
it, nor the going out of their Lamps, but only when it was too late; for before
they could get it, the gates were shut.

We must not here understand it generally of all Hypocrites, as if none might
be discovered to themselves, while there is hope, and so as to recover
themselves; for then it would follow, they should none of them be pardoned; for
the Lord Jesus is the Prince exalted to give repentance and remission of sins;
Now if Acts 5. 31.
they never come to know themselves to be guilty of this great evil, even their
hypocrisy, how should they repent of it? and if they repent not of it, how
should it be pardoned? It is true indeed, there may be hypocrisy in a Child of
God, which he may acknowledge only in the general among his secret sins, which
he knows not of; but I think, where hypocrisy is so reigning a sin, as to
denominate a man an Hypocrite, he must surely come to the knowledge of it, and
acknowledge it before the Lord, or else how can he hope of pardon for it; now I
say, there is pardon for all manner of sins, only that against the Holy Ghost
excepted; and therefore sure, some Hypocrites God does uncase* and unmask, and
rip up, and show them the abominations of their hearts, that they may mourn
over them, and mourn after Jesus Christ, and loath themselves for it, and so be
pardoned; therefore remember this, lest if God should come now, and open any
painted sepulcher, any rotten-hearted Hypocrite among us, when we see our
wound, we should faint away; for though many times it is so, that God discovers
it not to Hypocrites until it be too late, yet sometimes he does, and the sin
in it self is pardonable; therefore there is hope concerning this thing in
Israel.

But for the making good this assertion, consider, either they are discovered
not until judgment, or else not until death, or else not until their day of
grace ^e expired many times, though it be before death.

1. If they be not discovered to themselves until judgment, God never
reproves them of their hypocrisy, and sets it in order with all its
circumstances, and aggravations, until the day of judgment, when the secrets
of all hearts shall be displayed, and all the nasty corners of sinners souls,
all the hidden things of darkness, then surely you will all acknowledge there
is no remedy; it is past help; there remains nothing then, but a fearful
looking for of their doom; and some may go down in peace to the grave, (that is
to say) not a peace of God, but of Satan; a security and stupidity of
conscience, knowing nothing of their fearful condition, which others also which
are not so much as Hypocrites, may do.

2. If it be not discovered until the day of death, or the time of deaths
approach; then, though not always, yet ordinarily, I believe it is too late, and
that is not a time that ordinarily* God is found, or will be found; for indeed,
if it were, then there would very few perish out of the visible Church; every
man almost, except a very desperate, ignorant, profane wretch will have God,
and Christ, and mercy in their mouths, and many liftings up of eyes and hands,
though they do but dissemble, and flatter him with their mouths; as is proved
by too ordinary experience; come to many a poor creature upon his death, and
you would think him a Saint, a true penitent, and that if God would restore
him, sure he would never return to his folly again; but alas, alas, experience
proves how quickly such men return to their vomit again, to their wallowing in
the mire again, and lay out their strength, and time, and meats, and marrow,
and money, and all upon their lusts, with as much eagerness, if not more then
before, and prove very Devils incarnate; or at least; grow as listless and lazy
in seeking God after their restoring as they were before, though in the time of
visitation, then they would seek him early, and nothing but seek him*

3. He may discover Hypocrites to themselves before death likely, and yet many
times the time is past; for the understanding of which, brethren, we must know
that every Professor, and all professing people, who have the means of Grace,
the Sun of righteousness rising upon them in his Ordinances, whether he arise
upon them in their hearts, or no, this makes a day of grace; Luke 19. 42.
Jerusalem had her day, as you have it in that of Luke. Now this day may be
conceived to be either revealed, so as that we may judge of it according to
Scripture, or else secret, which God has reserved to himself. The revealed is
usually bounded by the time of a man's life, or the continuance of the means of
Grace to a people at least: all that while according to our estimation, Gods
patience waits upon men, upon formal Professors, to see, Acts 1. 7.
if they will repent, and amend. Or else 2. There is a secret day which God
has kept in his own power, (that is to say) he resolves with himself;
however, it may be the means of Grace may continue longer to a people, yet if
they stand it out such a time, so long, he will never make them available to
their souls. So the Jews in that their day, O that thou had known, says our
Savior, in this thy day, but now they are hid; mind you, now they were hid,
they should never have a sight of them; though they might have the means of
Grace, the Gospel preached to them yet longer, as they had, yet the things
which belonged to their peace, were hid from their eyes. And so it may be with
an Hypocrite, for ought I know, the Lord may open an Hypocrites eyes, convince
him that he is an Hypocrite, and yet the time be past of his recovery. So the
foolish Virgins, you see their Lamps went out in obscure darkness
irrecoverably, though there seems by the Parable, to have been a further time
before the judgment, a time wherein they did use some impertinent and improper
endeavors for their restoring; they went to the wise Virgins, and them that
sold, of which afterward; not to Jesus Christ that was hid from their eyes, or
else if they did, it was to no purpose; you see they missed their aim, and then
brethren, one of these two things will be the effect of it. Either,

First, The heart will sink and die within them through some despair; either
when God has opened this wound in their Consciences, they will die of it;
their life, and souls will go out at the wound, as you see in Judas's case; he
could not so much as look to Jesus Christ, that he might be saved; but his
heart was sunk within him, when he saw how he had played the wretch with Jesus
Christ, selling his Savior for so small a price, when he had pretended so much
love to, and to value him at a so low a rate. Or else,

Secondly, The heart will grow desperately hard, and Conscience seared
afterward, that it will be past feeling, and so commit all iniquity with
greediness; and yet with a brazen face, and with the highest confidence, come,
and cry, Lord, Lord, open to us, as it is here in the Parable, and in the
seventh of Matthew; after a thaw, it will freez harder again, and then
Conscience will be covered with a stone, as it said in Job.

And surely brethren, the reason is plain, why the Lord does not ordinarily
discover Hypocrites in his Church until it be too late; for a just recompense
of their hypocrisy; his soul abhors hypocrisy more then any thing; their
Sacrifices, and solemn meetings are an abomination to him, he is even weary to
bear Isa. 1.
them; why? because they drew near him with their mouths, honored him with
their lips, but the heart was wanting; that which God looks at as all in all,
in our services; and therefore they were like dead carcasses, however garnished
with many, pretty, sweet flowers, common gifs, and very taking manner of
performances of them, yet they are but dead Carcasses, and therefore he abhorrs
them; and therefore no marvel, if he seal up men under such a Condition until
it be too late. The Lord intends not mercy to such a soul, such a people,
though their own hypocrisy and iniquity intervene as the immediate cause of
the execution of this purpose, and therefore it is, that he lets them walk
in their own sparks, the light of them please themselves with their Lamps,
their profession, until they have trifled away the season of grace: A sad
consideration for Hypocrrites.

For Application of this; Then it may serve in the first place for a startling
word to all formal Professors; the Lord make it an Use 1.
awakening word. I doubt I speak to many sleepy souls; our voice is not loud
enough to pierce the ear in the heart, and therefore, O that he would do it.
Brethren, if I seem uncharitable to you, it is my love to your souls, it is for
your sakes, else I have no such delight to speak things so cutting and wounding
as these are, I fear brethren, in such a multitude of Professors, that many of
us have no more but a form of Godliness, and many of us not so much; but I
speak not so much to them. You see that five of them were foolish, and they had
nothing but Lamps, a Profession; I cannot conclude from the equality of number,
that there are as many wise as foolish, or no more foolish then wise; but many
foolish there are, that we may conclude, and yet we expound it according to the
Analogy of faith, they are more by many then the wise. You may then brethren,
be very confident of your estate, rest as securely as if you had the greatest
assurance of your Condition; the foolish Virgins slept as soundly as the other,
suspected their Conditions no more then the other, nor so much neither in all
probability. You think, brethren, that because you conform to Gods Ordinances,
you have some knowledge, and there is the light of the Lamp, though it may be
but little, a Glowworm, or the Moon, no heat in it, no affections to Jesu;
Christ, you never felt your hearts burn within you when he conversed with you:
never knew what it was to be s^ck of love for him, to delight in him, and yet
you are secure, and think all is well with you because you hear, and read, and
keep the external part of Sabbaths, though you know not what it is to sanctify
it in your hearts, you think all is well: Alas brethren, I pray you consider,
did not Judas follow Christ up and down, and did more then many of us have
done, and yet at last appeared to others; and himself to be but an hypocrite?
though I discommend not, but encourage you to do these things, and to abound in
him, yet let me tell you, and O that God would speak it to your hearts: you may
do it, and much more, and yet be but Hypocrites: God looks not so much at the
multitude of your sacrifices, as he does at the frame of the heart, the truth
in the inward parts, at the Psalm. 5^. 17.
sacrifice of a broken and contrite spirit, that is to say, a heart made truly
sensible of its own vileness and emptiness, so that it expects nothing for it
self, but lies at Christ's foot for healing and mercy, and mourns after him. Now
I pray you brethren, you that are so confident of the goodness of your
condition, in the midst of all your Sabbaths you keep, and duties you perform,
have you ever found such a heart, yea or no? O that the Lord would awaken you:
yea, are there not some that ground their confidence upon their own security,
because they never doubted, never suspected themselves; they can bless God for
it, they have always had a good heart toward God, and they never had cause to
suspect their hearts and affections toward him, and shall they begin now?
Brethren, let me tell you, this is a truth in Jesus, that a notorious Hypocrite
may go on long, and never question his condition; yea, it is rather the sign of
an Hypocrite, that he never did question his condition. Was Judas ever the
better for his backwardness to question his condition, because he was the last
that we read, put the question, Lord, Is it I? Surely no, he was a Judas: the
Lord pity you, for you know not the danger you are in, poor, confident, secure
Creatures; You may take your selves to be sweet Christians, and yet be in the
gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity; your Lamps may burn long, and yet
no oil in the vessel, and at last go out; and then you will cry out with the
foolish Virgins, alas, our Lamps are gone out, our profession is gone, it will
stand us in no stead now.

2. Another word shall be an Exhortation to us all then, If it be thus, that an
Hypocrite may thus long lie hid from himself, and Use 2.
yet at last be discovered, and that when it is too late. O how should this
quicken us Brethren, to work out our salvation with fear and trembling! O be
not high-minded, but-fear. You see these foolish Virgins they had a glorious
profession, and we may in Phil. 2. 12. Romans 1^. 20.
our days come to the like pass, and when discovered, be made a Magor
Missabeb. O fear, and tremble before the Lord, lest this prove our own
condition; how should we be much in the great duty of self-exanimation and
searching, whether we have misgiving hearts, or no? yet let us search, if we
have misgiving of heart, that it is not right with us; O how inexcusable shall
we be, that we were so lazy, we would rather venture our immortal, precious
souls, then take a little pains to search, and secure their condition? Is there
any man that suspects his estate, that will think much of his pains, to spend
day after day, and time after time, to search into it, and if it be possible,
to secure it? Why what account do we make of our souls, brethren, that we can
be so wretchedly careless of them? do you believe you have souls? do you
believe they are immortal? do you believe it brethren, that they shall live for
ever in the enjoyment of God, or else in unexpressible misery? do you believe,
brethren, that hypocrites shall have the deepest damnation? And do you suspect
your selves to be hypocrites? and yet will not be persuaded to be at a little
pains with your deceitful hearts? yea, much pains and often, to secure the
eternal welfare of your poor, and yet precious souls?

2. Suppose you do supect your selves to be hypocrites, how do you make a shift
to quiet your consciences? do they not trouble you? are your hearts so
desperately heardned that you have no disquietness seizing upon you? can you
enjoy your selves? I believe you must needs then sometimes have a terrible
apprehension of wrath approaching, why will you not search? It may be you may
find your condition better then you expected, and so may live more comfortably
and sweetly then now you can; while you have such a suspicion of your selves,
your condition may be safe, but cannot be comfortable, and you cannot be
satisfied without this comfort in respect of your outward condition: Is that so
great in your eyes and this so little? O for sin and shame let us set a higher
value upon these things, be more afraid of losing our souls, then of losing the
world.

But then see if thou be confident of thy condition; either this confidence is
well grounded or groundless, and whether soever it be, there is great need of
searching still. If well grounded, Brethren, yet we must know that the renewed
searching and discovery of the soundness of our confidence, and the truth of
our condition, is that which will renew our joy in the Lord; our thankfulness
to him, for the impressions of these things upon our hearts, they are apt to
wear away with time, and therefore if we would keep them fresh upon our hearts,
the sweetness and safety of our condition, that our hearts may be more enlarged
toward the Lord; then we must be often perusing our evidences, and the grounds
of our confidence.

Besides, alas Brethren, how much does daily intervene, which is enough to
darken and cloud all; if we do neglect this great work of searching, it may be
within a while our hearts will be so overgrown with weeds, that we shall not
discern the root of the matter within us; so much ashes, that we shall scarce
find the fire; O therefore keep up this inward difficult differencing duty of a
diligent impartial search and trial of our selves.

And then if we be confident upon no good ground, we had most need of all to
search; yea, and how shall we come to know the grounds whereupon we are
confident to discern them clearly, except we search? it may be thou may upon
the search find, that thy condition is dangerous, thou art but a Formalist; is
it not better then that thou should know it, then be ignorant of it? is not
the knowledge of the disease half the cure, if it be curable? is it not better
to disease thy self a little now, then to go to hell in a golden dream?

Again, the time must come that thou must know it, when it is remediless, if
thou know it not; there is nothing hid that shall not be revealed; do not think
your Figleaves will always hold before the everlasting burnings they will
quickly scorch and burn, and then your nakedness and shame and confusion shall
swallow you up. s(...)it not better for a man to know his wound before it prove
incurable? surely it is.

Again consider yet further the higher your confidence is now, the lower will
your hearts sink when you come to see your disappointment; a fools Paradise,
the Proverb has it, is the wise man's hell: you are foolish Virgins, and please
your selves with a light of your Lamp, and can take as much delight as any
other upon the best grounds: remember Brethren, it will be the cutting of your
souls asunder, when you shall find too late, that you were so befooled out of
your immortal souls. You have had heretofore many of you the signs and marks
whereby you may judge in some measure of your condition, make use of them, and
the Lord give you to understand wisdom in the hidden part. But when you have
done all, this is the result, that you cannot find but your hearts are right
with him. B^g of God to search you, for indeed he only can search the deep
things of a Psalm. 139.
man's heart, as it is in that 17. of Ier. and so the Psalmist tells him, Lord,
for ought I can discern thou have made me willing to part with all iniquity for
Christ, to receive him as my Lord, but my heart is too deep for me, O do thou
search me and try me, that if I be not willing, thou would discover it to
me: If I be, that thou would seal it up to my soul; that which I know not
show thou me, etc.

Lest any poor soul should gather discouragement from hence, whose portion
discouragement is not, I will speak a word to Use 3.
such to stay their hearts. Some will be ready to say, alas, If this be so,
then sad may be my condion, for ought I know; I may long be hid from mine own
iniquities, and yet at last come to see I am an hypocrite and rotten.

1. Consider it may be so indeed oftentimes, and it may not be so; look not
only upon the black and terrible part of the cloud, but upon that which may
prove a door of hope to thy poor soul, therefore be up and doing, searching,
that thou may find out the uprightness of thy heart; and then be sure, though
thou may see afterward much hypocrisy in thy heart, thou shall never see thy
self to be an hypocrite truly. I deny not but a child of God may come in an
hour of temptation to misjudge his condition, and mistake himself for an
hypocrite, when his heart may be sound toward God; but if once sound, for ever
sound; thou never wilt lose it again, only be sure thou run not away with
mistakes concerning thy self.

2. If thou do now or hereafter see thy self an hypocrite, yet there is hope
concerning this thing to recover and restore thee out of this condition; though
hypocrisy be a dangerous sin, yet it is not desperate.

3. For the discovery of it when it is too late, which some may catch at, and
say, I, here is a word indeed, a killing word to my soul: for I cannot but
suspect or judge my self an hypocrite, now I see my condition, though I have
been led by a deceived heart all this while, therefore sure now it is past
time, for God ordinarily discovers hypocrites to themselves when it is too late.

First, be sure thou make not a false judgment of thy self, that thou be not
now under an hour and power of darkness, when thou can not judge aright of
thy condition, thou may upon the search be able to approve thy heart upright
to the Lord, though now thou take thy self for an hypocrite, be not rash in so
serious and everlasting a concernment as this is.

2. Thou bewailest it, mournest under it, and this is no sign of the time being
past; usually then God seals up men under hardness, if they sink not into
despair. Why, but did not Esau that sold his Birthright, when the Blessing was
gone, seek it with Heb. 12. 17.
many tears? yea, he sought the Blessing, but he sought not Repentance; they
were not tears of repentance for his wickedness and prophanness in selling his
Birthright, if they had, likely he had not miscarried; thou mournest, and what
is the matter? It is for thy hypocrisy: O thou would fain have a chan^ged
heart, a right spirit renewed in thee, this thou breathest after, this thy soul
breaks for longing for: be not discouraged brethren, this is no sign the time
is past. But blessed be the Lord, and magnify his grace toward thee, that he
has not let thee go on any further until the time might have been exp^red,
and the door of hope shut against thy soul; thus of this Doctrine.

The next thing is the Question or Request that the foolish made to the wise,
Give us of your oil, for our Lamps are gone out, etc. Give us of your oil. This
short Question is a double demonstration of their folly. First, that they had
their oil, their grace to get at such a time as this, when they should have
been ready to have entered in with the Bridegroom. Secondly, that they sought to
the creature, and not to Christ for it. Give us of your oil. From the first we
may note thus much.

It is very great folly to put off the getting of grace until the last: Doct.
Math. 6. 33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and these
things shall be added, says Christ, the Wisdom of the Father. Say our own
hearts, seek first the world and the pleasures of sin, and afterward the
Kingdom of God when there is no more content to be taken in these things; thus
we walk contrary to God, to Christ, and therefore surely that is folly. They
are foolish Virgins indeed that had their oil to get, when if ever, they should
use it. I will not stay upon it to give you more Scripture; But a few
Considerations by way of Arguments, which if not singly, yet put together, I
doubt not will amount to a demonstration of this folly.

First then, this shall be first, It may be had; though it be difficult, yet it
is not impossible, you see many daily (some at least) do obtain it: Labor in
vain, we count him a fool that will take it upon him to wash an Ethiopian, to
wash a Boil, it will never be white or clean; so if this were in vain it would
speak men to be wise that do neglect it, delay it, put it off; however it is
true, God knows who is his according to his purpose of grace, that we are not
to eye, but look at what is before Matthew. 11. 28. Zech. 1 3. 1. Revel. 22. 18.
us, in Scripture Rule, we are called upon to come to Jesus Christ, to look to
him, He is lifted up upon the Pole of the Gospel, he is held out Crucified
before our eyes, there is a Fountain, and not sealed but opened Fountain for
every one that will; there is enough in the Fountain, and it is freely set open
to every one that will, to come and take of it freely; indeed if this were not
so, there might be some show or color for men's putting off, or neglecting the
getting their grace; but it is to be had brethren, and is exposed to every one;
Proclamation is made to every creature without any exception.

2. That which is only worth the having in comparison, to neglect this; the
getting of this is folly: you would count him a fool in grain that should have
an Inheritance offered, or a rich Cabinet of Jewels, but he should please
himself with picking Straws, hunting Butterflies, or some such toys, this is
childish folly, these are not worth the labor (the pains) truly brethren, all
things you pursue while you neglect this, put off this, they are no better;
what is the Chaff to the Wheat? what is the Shadow to the Substance? what is
the Fancy to the Reality? and all the world is no more; with much fancy it is
said Agrippa appeared, this meat that perishes, the fat and sweet of all the
creature delights, they are but shadows to set forth the substance, Acts 25.
23. 1 Cor. 7. 31. Psalm. 63. 5. Prove. 11. 13.
My soul is filled as with m^rrow and fatness, this is really so: Yea truly
brethren, a form of godliness, though it be light of carriage, ^n empty thing,
and so may be had with more ease and less interruption to the stream of men's
hearts, which run naturally another way, yet it is empty and not worth the
having, and that poor hypocrites will know in the day of wrath* when they shall
find that this will profit them no more then riches, and therefore as the Wise
man speaks Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? so much more here a
form of godliness, it is not, it has no being: you would count him a fool that
should choose the Shell before the Kernel, a Core before an Apple. Well
brethren, these are the things that are worth the having. O it is precious; You
have heard how precious a Christ we may have, and from him arises the
preciousness of Faith, the preciousness of Love, and the preciousness of the
Promises; a dramm of Gold, a spark of a Diamond, is worth an houseful of dung
and dross; and such is all the world, yea, and a form of godliness, and all
things else, to a spiritual discerning eye; therefore sure he is a fool that
shall be ever laborious, and so expensive ^aying out his money his time and
substance upon that which is not bread, will not profit; upon dung and dross,
and let his gold and pearls pass. Phil. 3 8.


3. It is that which must be had of necessity, It is that one thing necessary,
without which there is no seeing of God, without grace no glory, no heaven in
heaven; if it be not begun upon earth no Luke 10. 42.
holiness, no happiness: There lies upon you all brethren, an undispensable
necessity to get grace, to have it, if ever you be saved; sure we do not
believe this, else we could hardly so put it off; you must have Christ, you
must have Faith, you must have Love and obedience brethren, or else you are
condemned; you So Lazarus.
may go to heaven though you be not rich, though you be not great, though you
be not of a name among men, which are things men do so greedily gape after; but
you can never go to heaven without grace, without Christ enjoyed; yea, you may
go to heaven without so much guilt as some have, such gifts in Prayer, in
speaking, such great endowments of a lower nature, but you cannot be saved
without you have this true gold; you must have bread or else you perish, you
may live without sauce, but you must have bread; what shut the Israelites out
of Canaan Heb. 3. 18.
but their unbelief? and what will shut us out of heaven but our unbelief? and
so consequently the want of all other grace.

4. Another Consideration will be this; it is so necessary a thing, as that all
things else will but help to sink us, all is vain without it, our Privileges
will sink us, our outward mercies, or Church mercies, and Gospel mercies will
but sink us so much the lower, as you heard well lately. It were better you had
never taken up Lamps, then to have no oil in your Vessels; better you had never
had the form, if you have not the power as well as the form; was not Judas a
more miserable wretch then such James 1. 26.
as never owned Christ? he is the son of perdition with a witness, an heir of
hell: that which now sinners most glory in, will prove intolerable to them
another day: Ah, woe to Church Members, woe to formal Professors above all
others, woe to such as Matthew. 10. 15.
hear, and read, and pray, and receive, and have not Christ; above all men in
the world, these are the fools, because they lean upon that which will not only
fail them, but wound them, sink them so much the deeper; and neglect in the
mean time that which should make those things useful to them, and for the glory
of God and their own eternal peace.

5. It is that which will not always be to be had, and therefore to delay is
very great folly; indeed if it were a thing of no value, a thing that men might
not miscarry in, though they go without it, it were not so much matter: or yet,
though it were a thing so absolute necessary, if they might have it when they
would, or had their wills at their command, that it were always to be had, a man
were not to be so deeply condemned for his neglect, but so it is brethren the
Market is not always; He that in one place says, Ho every one that thirsts
come, says in another Isa. 55. 1. Ioh 12. 35.
place, O Jerusalem Jerusalem, that thou hadst-known in this thy day; It is but
a day brethren, and will not last always, the night will come wherein no man can
work: why, is not this a great piece of folly then when men know the Treasury
will not always stand open, though now it do* nor the Fountain always be open
though Rev. 3. 18. Heb. 12. 17.
now it is; and yet will content themselves with their dry bottles and empty
purses in a poor condition as the Church of Laodicea: surely brethren, God will
not always be men's sinningstock, nor always wait upon them to be gracious,
though now he do, and then consider, is it not fo ly to put it off?

6. Yea, I will tell you brethren, It is that which will not long be to be had
by us if we lay not hold upon it; It was not long after the Israelites came in
out of Egypt before the Lord denounced Number. 4. 30. and 34.
against them, Said in his wrath they should not enter into his rest; though he
bore their manners indeed afterward, yet they had quickly lost their hope of
Canaan. Believe it brethren, God is now more swift and more peremptory in his
determination against souls in these days of Gospel Light then heretofore; O
how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation! says the Heb. 2. Rev. 3.
20.
Apostle; your judgment is nearer then when you had no profession, no name; If
a man continue a wild Olive, or prove an empty branch, he will not be long
endured: now if men did believe this, sure they would count it gross folly to
trifle away the season, specially being so short a season, and so uncertain a
season; who can tell if he putoff Christ, how soon his heart shall be sealed
up, and the everlasting doors of his soul have locks and bolts to clap upon
them, that they shall never lift them up to receive the King of glory, and then
they are undone for ever.

First Use then will be to reprove us all of this folly as many as are guilty;
how many poor graceless souls hear this Word this Use. 1. Luke 12. 19.
day? you think you are the wise men who by your wits can live, and by your
industry increase your selves for the world; but if you will believe God rather
than your own deceitful hearts, or Satan, you are fools; was he not a fool that
provided so industriously for many years, when he had not a day to live? This
night shall thy soul be taken away from thee, and not one thought nor act of
care for eternity, nor for his precious soul, though he might be sure he must
live to eternity, Psalm. 49 1^. and 13. you hope that your selves or else your
houses shall continue for ever, which makes you so industrious to build, and
enlarge, and beautify them, and fill them with treasures; Ah poor creatures,
that spin their bowels out to make a Cobweb, and one stroke with a Wing sweeps
it quite away, Psalm. 39 6. In vain do men trouble themselves, geting goods and
know not who shall enjoy them, whether themselves shall enjoy them one day, or
whether any of theirs shall enjoy them a day; but you are sure that you must
endure an eternity, your souls must last whether your houses do or not, either
with God, or separated from him, and yet you generally neglect them; are we not
fools? are not the most part of us such fools? many deal with God thu: so
youth, they must take their pleasure; in old age they will not take so much
pains, as Diong. when he took the golden cloak from Apollo, said, This garment
neither agrees with Summer nor Winter, in Summer it is heavy, in Winter it
has no warmth, etc: but because men have some secret reserves of others, that
they think will bear them out, they can ward off many such blows as these, they
never reach their hearts, because they have a privy coat of Male, some carnal
reasonings or other wherewith they oil their spirits, that this Ink will not
stick, will not take impression: therefore I will enforce this Use with some
Considerations, which I intend as to cut off the very sinews and strength of a
Formalists security.

First, We have not one day at command, this is that which men do not believe,
they think they have much time before them, specially those that are young; and
indeed old sinners dote in this point as well as others, they always think they
may live a year longer still, if they were never so old, yea, they promise
themselves long life, and then they cannot but believe themselves, they have so
good an opinion of the faithfulness and wisdom of their hearts; but alas, do
you not know the number of your months is determined, and have you one day at
Job 14.
command? Guido Bituricens. reports that one inviting Menodamus to a Banquet to
morrow, he asked him why he did invite him to morrow, he durst never promise
himself to morrow, expecting death every hour; we are but a breaths distance
from eternity; who can say he has such an interest in the dispensation of God,
as to say he shall live unt ll to morrow? who can say, that is in unbelief, but
he shall be in hell before the morning light, before another Sabbath, do you
not believe this? wherefore was that written, Thou fool this night, etc. but
for our learning, that sinners might hear and fear. Men have not leisure to
provide for their souls until they have filled such a bagg, compassed such an
estate, then they shall be at leisure, They must go to such a City, and buy and
sell, and get gain; but what James 4. 13.
if in the midst of all that thou be cut off and have not grace, what will
become of thee then? you cannot command a day; Can you say with Joshua, Sun
stand still and hasten not; or Sun go backward; will the Lord hearken to your
voice as he did to theirs, that so you may have a little time when your glass
is run, to work out your salvation with; O that ever we should be so vain to
believe our own hearts without the least ground in the world, and not to
believe God* where there is all the reason and arguments, and all the
experience in the world to confirm it.

Secondly, Remember this brethren, We have not God at command, the Spirit
blows not where we, but were it self lists; Ioh. 3. 8.
therefore Millers and Mar^iners will not lose the wind, they have it not in
their fist. This is a deep deceit in the opinion, that lays men to sleep, they
are so secure, putting off the main Work, they dream they have God and grace at
command, as if he were bound to give them grace and heaven when ever they shall
think they have enough of sin; O no brethren, he will not be commanded by us;
no sure: will he be always entreated by us? there is a time when he will not be
found. It is not your Lord, Lord, open to us, that will move him, if once the
door be shut against you; Then shall they call, but I will not answer* they
shall seek me early, but shall not find me; and what reason is Prove. 1 28.
there you should expect God should be at your beck when you have so long
resisted his Spirit in his Word and his Spirit stirring and moving upon your
hearts, whereby he has striven and taken pains with you, when the Lord had his
bosom open, his wing spread, his hands stretched out, his voice lifted up, his
Ambassadors sent to woo you you would not know when the grave and hell shall
swallow you up, or open for you, and you think you can have God at your call;
believe it, believe it, He will not be found, He is not at your command.

Thirdly, Remember this, That you have not your hearts at command neither, you
cannot always move toward God; this is usually a reserve to sinners against the
fear of the other; though God be not at our beck, yet he has promised if we
return and repent, he will accept, be it when it will; I, but what comfort is
this, except men believe thatthey can return when they please they can receive
Christ and close with him at any time; Can you so? Surely brethren, if this
were so* no man would hardly go to hell that is convinced there is a Christ to
be had, and salvation through him, and him alone: O be not mistaken, you know
not your selves; how many resolutions of reformation have many of you broken?
you see you cannot command your hearts, Ep^r im was sensible of it, O turn thou
me, and I shall be turned* can you think a good thought of your selves? what
Ier. 31. 18.
solly is it then for men presuming upon their own strength, which is none, to
neglect the season when the Lord offers his Spirit and grace, yea, and striveth
with us by his Spirit many times, and yet we will not, but put it off.

Then it may serve to stir us up every one to cut off all delays Use. 2.
whatsoever; and now brethren, while it is called to day, to get this oil in
your Vessels, that you may not have it to do when you should in the greatest
extremity use it: Alas brethren, I am a child and cannot speak, and O that the
Lord would persuade by his Spirit this day: now since he has given you another
Sabbath, and another opportunity to be called upon; what does the Lord yet say
unto thee? Seek his face, will you not be clean, will you not close with Jesus
Christ, O when shall it once be? O answer the Lord, and say, to day Lord Jesus,
to day will we close with thee, we will put it off no longer; blessed be the
Lord that has not taken the advantage against us, and put an end to our day of
grace long since: O admire that mercy, and now improve it, lay hold upon the
opportunity.

Shall I a little stir you up to this?

1. Consider I pray you, and believe that it is the greatest design of Satan to
fool us out of our salvation, to draw away from us day after day, until we
have not one day more to live; when God cries to day, to day, to day, If you
will hear his voice, harden Heb. 3. 7.
not your hearts: who is it think you that cries to morrow, to morrow, that
Corvina vox, as Augustine calls it, Cras, cras? Surely it is Satan that Lier,
that will not stick to contradict the Lord: and what is the devils intent in
this think you? does he mean you shall repent to morrow, as he says? no I
warrant you but when to morrow is come, it will be to morrow still, and the
next day, it will be to morrow still; and O how this pleases him to steal away
our precious time, and rob us of our lives, our day of grace, and our souls at
once. If you be ignorant of this device of Satan know it this day for a truth;
The devil cares not if all the world were such Christians in the future tense,
Semper vic(...), as Seneca says, but never live indeed; they will, and they
will, but never do it; the Lord make you wise to discern this cunning
craftiness of the wicked one.

2. Do but consider, How long a day of grace you have had many of you already,
you have even grown old under the means of grace, and yet are to begin to get
grace; me thinks this should shame us, and warn young, ones, for it is likely
many that are older thought they would repent and believe and close with Christ
long enough before this, but that to Morrow never came; if we had any shame in
us, it might wound us and shame us that Jesus Christ should wait so long upon
us, and we never had a heart to give him any entertainment yet to this day; If
many a poor soul had had but half the patient waiting upon them, what would
they have been long before this?

3. Though you delay the getting your grace, remember that your Judgment
lingers not, nor Condemnation slumbreth not, it 2 Pet. 2. 3.
comes on apace, whether you go toward heaven or no; there is a set time to
every poor soul wherein he shall get grace, or else not for ever; and how does
this hasten upon you, do you know how near it is? and there is a set time for
judgment to seize upon you, if you be found without grace: O therefore be
exhorted, now while it is called to day; there will be no Manna found upon the
seventh day; if you get it not before, you are undone, they found it so by
experience.

4. Do not expect brethren to have a second day of grace if you trifle away
one; if once the Apostles shaked the dust off their feet against a people, sad
was their condition; when the Apostles turned away to the Gentiles, and the Sun
set among the Jews, did it ever rise again? surely no. Though we have a day,
yet remember it is but a day, and one day, and no more: if we let it slip we
are und one, because we shall never have a second day: Foelix put off Paul*
when he was so far wrought upon, as to Acts. 24. 25.
tremble, he put him off until a fitter opportunity, but it never came for
ought we read; well, if the Spirit do move, and stir, and strive with thee,
take the opportunity, strike while the Iron is hot, thou do not know but this
may be the last hour of the day with thee, and that thou shall never feel any
such breathings more, but thy heart shall ever be like a dead Sea, and seared,
and past feeling any more.

5. Until then all our services are abomination to God; let our professions be
what they will, and let us think as well of our conditions as we can, believe
it breath en our Prayers, our. Hearings, our Receivings are abomination: what do
we do here to receive the Supper, if we have no grace, no faith, no love, no
repentance, can we be prepared? do we not imbrew our hands in the blood of
Jesus Christ? and is not this an abomination? were not the Sacrifices of the
Jews abomination, as if they slew a man, as if they cut off a dogs neck? was,
or could this be acceptable? (...). 66. 3.
did not his soul hate these things? and what are our sacrifices but the
slaying and crucifying Jesus Christ Ah, while we come with ungratious hearts to
those Ordinances, O how often has many an hypocrite had his hand in the blood
of Jesus Christ? every such service and duty he performs to God; and is not
this sad? is it not high time to look about us?

6. Lastly, If at last you do come to get Christ, and God will wait upon you
so to the last as to overcome you at the last, and you shall not mifcarry:
Suppose it be so, though this is not ordinary that men should so desperately
presume upon it, yet it cannot but be a grief and wound to you then to remember
how you have spent your strength in sin and upon your lusts, and now have
little or no time remaining, little strength to lay out upon his service; to
testify your love to the Lord Jesus; surely this will be a burden: And
therefore brethren, as you tender your souls welfare, as you would not be
cheated out of your souls, and held in a sools Paradise until it be too late,
or at least until you lose your comfort much of it, which otherwise you might
have. O now while it is called to day will you hearken to the voice of him
Psalm. 119. 60.
that speaks from heaven, even Jesus Christ, have thou not as much need to make
haste as David had? I made h^ste and delayed not to keep thy righteous
judgments; haste not thou as much need as Paul, he went presently, consulted
not with flesh and blood, but ^orthwith went to preach the Gospel; the
Disciples forthwith, Gal 1. 16. Mat. 4* 0. Isa. 21. 12. Psalm. 118. 2. and 3.
says the Text, Left their Nets and followed Jesus Christ; if they had
lingered, who can tell whether etc. O therefore let me bespeak to you in those
words of the Prophet, If you will inquire, inquire, return come; those that
either mockingly, or else fearfully asked, Watchman what of the night what of
the night, etc. when will this burden come upon us? we see it not, yet your
morning comes, and also the night; though you have a morning of flourishing
and light, yet the night as surely follows it, as the night does the day;
therefore if you will inquire, inquire, return, come: how many expressions here
are to show the vehemecy of the call? O come now, now, now away, come away,
come away; the dullness of them to whom it was made, if you will inquire,
inquire; every man will pretend a willingness to have Christ and grace, and
they will inquire after heaven if you will inquire, inquire; then says he, now
or never, if you mean to escape, lay hold upon salvation before it be past, and
no recalling of it; the word Inquiring: signifies an earnestness; this
inquiring, like the bubling up of a Pot through heat; so then, it may be that
God puts fire under thy conscience, and it begins to bubble, and thou art
restless; now if thou will ever inquire, inquire after Christ, and grace, 2 Cor
6. 2.
for this is the expected time, this is the day of salvation: while he thus
moves by his Spirit, there is hope he will be found; therefore as you love
your souls, trifle not away such a precious season.

There are three or four Considerations that I would propound to you, at
tending to the furtherance of this work.

First, That you labor with God and your hearts, to shake off your
^loathfulness; men would have grace and heaven, but they would have it drop
into their mouths; they would have Christ, but they will not follow him, nor
follow hard after him; you see many of the Israelites, when they were on the
other side Jordan, could have been contented for their ease sake, to have
continued where they were, if God would have let them alone; they had so many
enemies to encounter, and such a Jordan swelling to pass through, they had
little mind to it; and when they were on the other side, gotten over Jordan,
what did they do? Up says Joshuah. Many years after they came over Jordan
(some say Josh. 18. 3.
seven years after Judah had their lot, as long as the whole Land was in
conquering) and had conquered a great part of the Land; why are ye slack to go
up and possess the Land? they were contented now to have sitten still, and
taken their ease; and truly, I doubt it is so with many, they are afraid if
once they begin to stir and to close with Christ, O they shall have their
lusts, their sins about their ears, temptations thick and threefold; it may be
some have found some such thing when they have begun to stir, and therefore
they are willing to take their ease.

Secondly, Be sure you miss not an opportunity you might enjoy; do you know
where or when the Spirit of Christ will breath? Lie at the house of mercy, thou
know not when it may come to thy turn to be put into the water; O hear, and
hear as for your lives, and think with thy self when thou hear, that this
voice of God sounds in thy ears, O to day, to day, if you will hear his voice.

Thirdly, Take heed of hardening your hearts, as the Psalmist Psalm. 95. 7. Heb.
3. 7.
speaks, harden not your hearts. It is said of the people to whom that
Evangelical Prophet was sent, that they made their ears heavy: God said, make
their ears heavy, because they themselves had Isa. 6. 10.
^hut their own eyes, clapped to the windows, and would not admit the light; like
the deaf Adder, which they say, stops one ear with her tail, and closes the
other to the ground, lest they should hear the Charmer, and so be taken. Ah
Brethren, are we not guilty in this kind? we stop our ears, if we come to hear,
we fill them full of prejudice, or else we resolve what we will do before we
come; we resolve not to be taught by any Minister of them all, we are at a
period concerning our souls; and some are so desperate as to speak such words
as these are happily, or think so; if they speak them not, all the arguments in
the world shall not persuade them to leave their profitable sins, or their
pleasant lust, they will put it to the venture. O Brethren, how just is it with
God, when men harden their own hearts, especially if they have any stirrings and
convictions within, how just is it with God to say Amen to such resolutions;
you will not hearken to my voice, well, you shall never hearken to my voice:
you will have your lusts, well, you shall have them, and judgment and
damnation to boot, Acts 7. 51. they always resisted the Holy Ghost, and Ezekiel. 7.
and 9. and 12. they hardened their hearts like an Adamant. Acts 7. 51.


4. Cast away from you, Brethren, those nets and snares which entangle you, and
hinder you in this great work; as the Disciples did their nets when Christ
called them, they left all and followed him; Joh. 4. 28.
I mean not that every Christian is called to leave his employment, but such as
are called to be Ministers of the Gospel, I think are called to cast away
worldly encumbrances altogether: but thou must take heed they hang not so fast
upon thee as to hinder thee, be sure thou sit loose to the world, it will else
sooner or later be a pull-back to thee. O for such a resolution as Jerome had,
If his Father were weeping upon his knees, his mother hanging about his neck
his Brethren, sisters and kindred all with lamentation entreating Mark. 10. 50.
him to forbear, he would cast down his Mother, and trample upon his Father,
run over them all to go to Christ. Do as Bartim. then, Does he call thee? off
with the Cloak, away with that which hinders thy running to Jesus Christ; every
weight, and the sin which so easily Heb. 10. 1.
be sets us, as the Apostle says. If we come with the world rooted in our
hearts, it is five to one but we shall be tried as the young man in the Gospel
was; and as that other was, the Foxes have holes, etc. you hear no more of that
forward man afterward.

O but we are young, and therefore we may have time enough before us, it is
time enough for us to look after grace many years Mat. 19. 27. Mat. 18. 20.
hence. No my brethren, it is your duty to remember your Creator in the days
of your youth, while the milk is in your breasts, Ec^l. 12. 1.
and you have some strength to lay out upon Christ: The first fruits were not
to be delayed to be paid, Exodus 22. 29. A young Samuel seasoned so young, a
young Timothy, they may be eminent servants of Jesus Christ, when others at the
same years are but beginning to enter upon the work. Besides, is not thy life
as uncertain as another? do you not see that young men dye even as the old?
and young men are like to perish as well as old, if they be not found with oil
in their Lamps? and young men may enter with the Bridegroom as well as old, if
they be found ready. And therefore I pray you, for Christ's sake, do not so
deceive your selves, but while it is called to day, young and old, hearken to
this voice of God, and put no^ off this main work any longer.

Alas, but you will say, my case is the case of these foolish Virgins, I have
long made a profession, and I have my grace to seek, and therefore there is no
hope for me, a gray headed sinner, who have trifled away my time.

You know some were called at the 11. hour, Brethren, and endured not the heat
of the day with others, and yet miscarried not; while the day of grace lasts
there is hope, and while the Lord knocks by his Spirit and Word there is hope,
that to us appears to be a day of grace; and that thy spirit is moved, is yet a
further Argument. And therefore be of good courage, if he have given thee a
heart now at last to look after him; and though thou lingeredst with Lot, until
God was even fain to pull thee out of the burning, the everlasting burnings;
thou haste so much the more cause to magnify the grace of Christ toward thee,
that he would after so much abuse of the day of grace, look upon thee at all,
and when thou were as a dry stick, no strength nor vigor to serve him at all;
therefore God could have no eye at thy service, nor any thing thou were like to
do, but merely to exalt his grace, and therefore for ever thou may more
easily Conquer over-that temptation of resting in any thing in thy self,
priding thy self in any thing of thine own, and give him the glory of all, in
an humble walking before him.

The second demonstration of their folly is, that they went to the creature for
grace; They said to the wise, give, etc. Doctr.


It is a note or point of great folly to seek unto the creature: when men have
neglected to seek to Christ, then to go to the creature for grace; you see this
is the practice of foolish Virgins; how far we may urge this, I cannot tell,
but me thinks we do not put it too far, if we may stand upon it at all; Whether
they would now at last, being sensible of their want of the oil in the vessel,
the grace in the heart, they would have some of that oil which they had in
their vessels; or whether only somewhat to make their Lamps burn as they did
before, it appears not, nor yet what their highest and was in it, appears not;
if they aimed not at the highest end, Gods glory, and their own salvation, as
the ultimate end, then they were grossly foolish in that respect; for to miss
the end is the most fundamental point of error and folly; but if they be
supposed to aim right, yet there is this Argument of their folly in the very
Text, which shall be all I will say for the confirmation of it.

They take not the right means for the accomplishing that end, and therefore
they are foolish; for wherein does folly consist else but chiefly in this; they
find not out or use not the right means, for the attaining of a right end. Now
was this a right means, to go to the creature, to the wise Virgins for oil?
Give us of your oil; this argues either desperate ignorance, that they knew
Joh. 1. 16.
not whither to go to get oil, that they were ignorant of the Fountain of
Israel, the fullness that is in Jesus Christ, from which fullness his people
receive grace for grace; and such blindness as this to be in men that profess
Christianity, it is very strange, and argues great stupidity and folly; or else
if they did know it, they had no heart to go to him, they would not; if they
could get it otherwise well and good, and bring oil to him, they had hope of
acceptance, but they would have none from him, and this would argue a worse
kind of blindness: But of these things we will not spend our conjectures, nor
in such uncertainties. Whatever the case is, sure it is, that they went not to
him, but to the creature for their oil; from the Sun to the beam, from the
fountain (...) 2. 17*
to the stream, and so to the broken Cistern: and is not this folly?

This then will teach us thus much, That the Papists are as like these foolish
Virgins as they can look; poor creatures, those merit-mongers and
money changers that fill the Temple of God; do not some of them sell, and
others buy their pardons and indulgences? do they not go to the Church-treasure
of merit, to make up what is wanting of their own, and not to Jesus Christ in
the hour of their necessity? I know not what some of them may do, and some
others I believe may be wiser in this thing, but surely many poor creatures are
led away with this wicked error; I cannot call it better. Surely Brethren, If
any be the foolish Virgins to the life, the Papists are, some of them, if they
be true to their Principles.

2. It may serve to reprove many among our selves, that put off all the work
which concerns their souls; live as if they cared not for God, nor regarded
him at all; the people of God, and Ministers of Christ are the object of their
scorn or disregard, they slight them above others; but when an hour of
destruction comes, O then, when they are ready to dye, the Minister must be
sent for, and he must speak a word of comfort, right or wrong; they are ready
to think, I doubt, that as much is in it, as in a Popish Absolution, according
to their conceit then, as if it were in their power, or they were in Christ's
stead to give them grace; they hang much of their confidence upon them: This is
just like the foolish Virgins. Brethren, the Lord deliver poor souls from such
an end as God made with them, as you have it in the Parable here. It is the way
indeed to stop our mouths, to hang too much upon any creature.

3. It may be we are a little better instructed many of us, then to think that
men can give grace; But it may be we expect it from Ordinances, which alas are
but empty pipes, though they be golden and precious pipes; this opus operatum
sticks closer to us, then we are aware, many of us, I doubt. If men did not
look for it from Ordinances, would they not labor to bring better frames of
heart with them, and bring the Lord along with them to the Ordinances, that his
presence might fill them? Well, let us take heed of this Brethren, sit not down
by broken Cisterns, for they all say it is not in us, the Word says, and
Prayer says, and Receiving says, it is not in us, we can give no more then we
have, we are but the means. And therefore let us all learn to be wise in this
point to salvation, go where it is to be had, to the Fountain, his fullness,
Jesus Christ is the Olive Tree, he that emptieth himself into the golden pipes:
O therefore in all our wants of grace make out to him, eye him in every
Ordinance; the fatness and sweetness must come from the root and not the
branches, therefore look to it, Brethren, that we be in him, abide in him, live
by faith in him, in Ordinances above them. Yea, when we have most refreshings
in them, remember who it is that has filled them, lest when all is done, we
prove our selves but foolish Virgins.

But so much for this Doctrine.

Verse 9. (...) --
HEre we have the wise Virgins answer to the foolish Virgins request; their
request was, that they might have some of their oil, because their Lamps were
gone out; to this the wise Virgins answer; wherein we must note concerning the
reading of the words, they may be read two ways, either by way of redundancy,
yielding to the cutting off that particle (...), [but] go you rather to them
that sell; and then the words are read thus, lest there be not enough for you
and us, go you rather to them that sell: Or else by way of Elypsis they are
read, and then the defect is to be supplied, as in our translation, not so,
lest there be not enough for you and us; not so, are not expressed in the
Original, but are supplied, as you see they are written in another Character:
Such defective speeches are ordinary in Scripture, as in that of Abraham and
Sarah, when Abimilech asked him, What say thou, Genesis 20. 11.
that thou have done this thing? and he said, because I thought that surely the
fear of God is not in this place, and they will slay me for my wives sake: here
somewhat is to be supplied, his resolution to dissemble his wife, that is
concealed and supposed, and only the reason expressed; and so it is here. Now
which way ever we read the words, the sense is the same still, and in both, the
denial is employed, and but employed, yet necessarily employed, for without it the
sense is not full nor clear: as if we should read them thus, lest there be not
enough for you and us, but go and buy for your selves; there is not a complete
sense; but read them either of the other ways, and the sense is full and
plain, as by adding the denial, as in our Bibles, not so, lest there be not
enough; or else by cutting off that (but) that (...) thus, lest there be not
enough for us and you, go and buy for your selves: here the denial is employed
also, and must be understood. But because generally they are read as in that
translation, by the most learned and godly, as Beza, Grotius. So then the
denial being here necessarily supposed and supplied, from thence I would take
up this Note.

They that go to the Saints for grace, for oil, are like to have* a denial.
Doct.


Here at last they went to them; when they had spent their time and opportunity
of getting grace, they go to the wise Virgins for grace; but they were too wise
to give an yielding answer to such a request. Indeed so far is that rock, the
Lord Jesus, higher then we, that we are exceeding prone rather to take up
nearer, and any where, ready to hang our hopes upon every hedge. You see the
Prodigal, as long as ever he could hold out, he would never come unto his
Father. The poor man in the Cospel Mat. 17. 16.
brought his child to the Disciples first, to have him healed, before they went
to Christ, until they found them empty, that they were Physicians of no value,
healing was not in them; and so it is with us all: If we can have grace by any
other means, we would not come to Christ, such is our natural enmity against
him, such is our despondency many times when we come to be sensible of our
condition. But alas, every creature, if they understand themselves, must needs
say, it is not in me to* give, as Peter said in another case of healing, Why
look you upon us, as if we Act. 3. 12.
had healed this man by our holiness. But let me give you some few
considerations to make it out; and then we will apply it.

First then, It is above their fullness; though many a child of God have a great
fullness of grace indeed, be ye filled with the Spirit, and not with wine, says
the Apostle; and so that you may Ephesians. 3. 19.
be filled with all the fullness of God: there may be an abounding of grace, yea
of all grace toward them, that in all things, always, they might have an
all sufficiency, though I think there are but very few that here below do know
by experience such a fullness, by comprehending the height, and depth, and
breadth, and length of this love of Jesus Christ; but suppose every child of
God be thus filled, every wise Virgin sooner or later, yet it is not a fullness
of redundancy, that is to say, such a fullness, as that from it there can be
spared any thing for another, as we shall add by and by. It is but the fullness
of a Cistern, not of a Fountain, which can still shed abroad, and be full
still; So it pleased the Father that all fullness should dwell in Jesus Christ:
All fullness, that of his fullness Col. 1. 19.
we might receive grace for grace; Of his fullness, he is the fullness of the
Sun, the fullness of a Sea, of a Fountain, and such is Joh. 1. 16.
no creatures fullness, there can be no redundance.

Secondly, As their fullness is not enough, so also have they not a strength and
power to communicate of their grace to another, no more then a man can devide
and part his life between him and another that is dead, it is above his power,
and therefore in Scripture usually it is called a new creature, to show us the
great transcendent power, whereby Jesus Christ is formed in a soul: It is 2
Cor. 5. 17.
the Fathers proper work, through the Son, by the Spirit; the Father gives it,
the Son purchases it, the Spirit applies it and works it; Create in me a
clean heart, O God, renew a right Spirit Psalm. 51. 10.
within me, says David; holiness is a creation, and peace is a creation, he
will create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace; a creation is Isa. 57. 19.
of nothing, or somewhat utterly unfit to receive such a form or being, so that
the fruit of the lips they are weak, and cannot reach such an effect, it is
Gods Almighty power, and the same Ephesians. 1. 19. and 20.
power that raised up Jesus from the dead, that must raise a dead soul to
believe in Jesus Christ. When Rachel would have of Jacob that which was beyond
his power to give, he says, Am I Genesis 30. 2.
in Gods stead, that I should give thee children? So may the people of God and
Ministers say to some sometimes, who come to them as if they could give them
peace or comfort, and expect that as soon as ever they speak a word, presently
all their doubts and fears should be quelled and subdued; no, no, it is too
heavy a weight you lay upon them; it is a thing above their reach. This the
second.

Thirdly, If they were able to do it, they have no authority, no commission to
do it, and therefore they may not do it; Jesus Christ Isa. 61.
was anointed for this very end, to do the thing, I come to do thy will O God,
in the 40. Psalm. and what is that will? Why, that none that the Father has
given him should be lost or perish, but his blood and Spirit should be given to
them; grace and glory should be given to them; this is the will of God, even
your Sanctification, and 1 These. 4. 3.
this will he came to do, it was that the Father designed him to; to deliver
his people from their sins, therefore was the spirit poured out in such a full
measure, yea without measure upon the head of this our High Priest, that it
might run down to the very skirt of his garment, to the very lowest Christian
that belongs unto him. It is not every member in the body, nor any other, but
Psalm. 123. (...)
the head which is made the seat of the animal Spirits, to communicate them to
the least and lowest member: Now it is not what men are able to do, but what
they have Commission to do, that is authentic: If they were able, there is no
Commission, the Lord Jesus only came Authorized to open the Prison doors, Isa.
61.
to Preach deliverance, and to give deliverance to the Captives. This the third.

Fourthly, If all these did concur in men, yet they might want a heart when all
is done, and then all the rest would avail little to us in our necessity; and
though it be true, the Saints do retain bowels of mercy, and do put them on,
and long-suffering and patience, Numb. 20. 10.
yet alas, how short-nostrilled are the best of the Saints, in comparison of
God: Moses his patience was at an end, yet the weakest man, and had often
interceded for them; yet ye Rebels, must we fetch water out of the rock for
you? though the murmuring was not against him, but against God. If a sinner put
off getting grace and coming to Christ until the last, our patience will hardly
hold out so long, let the power of my Lord be great, as thou have said, etc.
herein our weakness does much appear, we are ready to cast off and give up men
if they come not in quickly, and if afterward they do come in, we are ready to
shut our hearts against them. But if there were a heart, yet there is no power,
and that will answer all; therefore if we go to the creature for grace, we are
like to have a denial.

Before we apply this, or else as a part of the Application, shall be to speak
somewhat by way of satisfaction to a doubt. This seems to cross the
Scriptures; are not the Saints bound to communicate one to another? to do good,
forget not; is not this of a larger sense, then merely giving a little of our
estates to them, if in want? So again, when thou art converted, strengthen thy
Brethren, says our Savior to Peter; and, how can you say then, Luke 22. 32.
that if we go to the Saints for grace, we are like to have a denial?

To this I answer, the Saints may and ought to communicate their experiences to
others, as their necessity requires; the humble shall hear hereof and be glad;
how? when his soul made Psalm. 34. 2.
her boast in God. And so again, the Psalmist as a type of Christ, He brought
me up out of the horrible pit, out of the mierie clay, and Psalm. 40. 3.
set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings; he has put a new song in
my mouth, etc. And what then? Many shall see it and fear, and shall trust in
God: And so says the Apostle, That 2 Cor. 1. 4.
ye may comfort others with the comforts wherewith your selves are comforted of
God; this is doubtless a duty, to communicate our experiences, and also to
exhort one another while it is called to day, as the Apostle has it; and to
reprove one another, this is a duty, but this is far from giving of grace: For
the more distinct Heb. 3* 13. Lev 19. 17.
understanding therefore of this note, only two or three particulars.

1. For any merit of our works we cannot give, for indeed there is none at all.
If we deserve any thing at the hands of God, it Lam. 3. 22.
is wrath and ruin, it is mere mercy we are not consumed every time we
approach this consuming fire with our filthy garments upon us, because his
compassions fail not; when we have done all commanded, if we could do it, we
are but improfitable servants; Luke 17. 10.
but alas, how infinitely short do we fail of what is commanded in many things;
in all things we offend all, for who does any thing as he should? and our
sufferings of this life are not worthy to be compared to the glory: there must
be a proportion in merit, now they are light, that is weighty, they are for a
moment, that is eternal, Romans 8. 18.
and a far more exceeding and eternal weight. Now no man can give that which he
has not.

2. The glory of our works; That we cannot give away that is the Lords, that
others may see them, and glorisie your Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 16.

3. The influence of them upon others hearts. That, we cannot give neither, we
may speak and do, plant and water, but it it God that gives the increase; the
husbandman may plough, and sow, 1 Cor. 3. 6.
and harrow, but he cannot give the rain of heaven, former and later, he cannot
give power to the seed to dye and rise again, it is beyond his reach; who can
touch the heart but the Lord, he is the God of the Spirits, whose dwellings are
with our spirits especially, and he can fashion them as he pleases, but this
is not in our power, and therefore no marvel if they that go to the creature
for grace, they miss of their purpose.

For the Application; this reproves then the Papists, who take Use 1.
upon them to give, or which is worse, to sell grace, to sell merits, to sell
pardons of sins past, yea and for sins to come also; are these like wise
Virgins, they would not take upon them to give any of their oil to the foolish;
if any were wiser then others, me thinks they should be afraid to buy and sell
heaven, and pardon, and merit; the Church of Rome indeed is not like the wise
Virgins: This gave such offense to Luther, he could not brook it, but it was a
great occasion of his casting off the Antichristian yoke.

Do but consider two or three things, wherein it may appear how much they are
too blame in this respect.

1. They take upon them the office of Christ, intruding into those things which
are above them; he inviteth, Come to me, Mat. 11. 28.
and I will give you rest; I counsel thee to buy of me wine and milk without
money, or money worth. No, say they, come to us, to our treasury of merit,
though they pretend to make the blood of Christ the substractum, the bottom of
their treasury; which to me, makes the matter so much the worse, the abuse of
the name Rev. 3. 17.
and blood of Jesus Christ to so high a wickedness, as selling and buying
pardons for money, being most abominable. Christ calls poor sinners to him, and
they call them to them, so that they usurp the power and authority of Christ.
Let them see to it.

2. Yea that which is given freely by Jesus Christ, they would sell for money;
for money they would sell pardons for never so many years to come; strange
prodigious fopperies are there reported concerning them; Without money, and
without price; but Isa. 5. 1.
they will have money for their Pardons and Indulgences: Was not this a
Declaration infallable, that Simon Magus was in the gall of Rev. 22. 18.
bitterness and bonds of iniquity, because he would have bought the gifts of
the Holy Ghost for money; yea the power of giving the gift of the Holy Ghost to
others, and is it not more dangerous then; to buy or sell the grace of God?
that which is saving Acts 8. 23.
for money; to pretend to it, for do it they cannot. Simon Magus his great
guilt was this, that he would have the power of giving the gift of the holy
Ghost, as the Apostles had, that so he might make a rich trade of it, to sell
it to others, as he himself had bought it; and truly those that will buy in
such cases, will not stick to sell: O how much more then are these men in the
gall of bitterness, that shall sell grace, sell pardons, sell merit for money!
Surely the wise Virgins refusing to give, would much more have abhorred this,
to sell the Gifts of the holy Ghost for money? What got Gehezi by making that
which was 2 Kings 5. 25.
free, mercenary.

3. They wrong the Saints exceedingly, such as were so indeed, whose merits
they pretend to sell; for if they were wise Virgins, they had none to sell; if
they were foolish, none can question it, but they had none at all; and if they
were wise, and had never so much, yet they had none to sell, none to give.
Surely God is not more tender of his Name in any thing, then in his Grace, not
more tender of wrong any where, then here, and his people are not more tender,
or should not be more tender any where of wronging him, then here in his Grace.
And therefore surely those that are Saints indeed, will be little beholding,
they shall have little thanks for their labor.

4. Besides that, They do but delude poor souls, and so bring their blood upon
their heads; alas poor deluded creatures! they make account they are enriched
out of a treasury of the Church, and their iniquities are done away, and to
their woeful and everlasting confusion, they will find one day, this has but
increased their guilt and condemnation. Woe be to them that go down to hell with
the blood of so many poor deluded Creatures upon their heads; the Devil deludes
men, makes them believe he gives them great things, great sums of money, and
when all comes to all, they prove but leaves; thus do they carry on poor souls
in a golden dream, until they awake in hell, in remediless ruin. Well, If
there be any such here, that hears this word, I would advise them and entreat
them, to take the Apostles advice to Simon Magus, O pray, if it be possible,
that Acts 8. 22.
this thought of your heart may be forgiven; it is, that you should either buy
or sell, give or receive from the Creature this Grace which is proper to Jesus
Christ, and to him only to give: you have infinitely wronged a gracious
Savior, you had need to bleed over him, to mourn over him, to be deeply
humbled indeed for it.

Again, How should we then bless the Lord, that we are delivered from this
Antichrist, darkness and bondage; that it is given to us through rich grace, to
see this, that we should not go to the Creature, but to Jesus Christ. Our
Forefathers were under this bondage brethren, many of them, and so might we
be, but that Grace has made the difference; and what had become of us then? he
has showed us wh^^ ^s good, and what is right, when they are left in Egyptian
darkness; and what is the best thankfulness for this brethren, but to improve
this Ioh. 1. 16
our privledge, that we have a Fountain, fullness to go to, who cannot, who will
not say that he has nothing for us, that he has but enough for himself, for
he has enough for us all, being the Olive Tree, the fountain, the Sun of
righteousness. What should we do; but make use of Jesus Christ, and much use of
him? he has much to give, he has a fullness of great redundancy, and he has a
commission to give it, and power to conveigh it, and a heart as long as his
power, and commission to give, and to give freely to every poor Creature that
comes. If you go to men brethren, you are like to have a denial; the wise
Virgins, they say they have it not to give; if any be so foolish and proud, as
to think they have any to give you, and you so foolish as to believe them, alas
you are but deluded; but the Lord Jesus will neither deny you, nor delude you,
you shall have, if you come to him, buy wine and milk, yea this oil of grace,
yea you shall have abundantly, he came that his people might have life
abundantly; Eat and drink Isa. 55. 1. Ioh. 10. 10. Cant. 5. 1.
abundantly my friends, says he there in the Canticles, and freely shall you
have it without money, or moneys worth; be as poor as as you may be, it is all
one, you shall have enough to enrich you, and no delusion, but a reality. O who
would not then go to the fountain, rather then to a dry bottle, a broken
cistern, wherein no water is! you shall have a denial from the Creature, but
Christ never denied any that came in the sense of his wants, and waited upon
him for supply; and so much for this.

Lest there be not enough for you and us; they might well doubt indeed, whether
there would be enough for themselves and them, for even now their own Lamps had
need of a supply; though the form of words seem to carry a doubtfulness in
them, there might be enough, and there might not; yet I cannot believe, but the
wise Virgins knew full well, and so they do know at this day, that there is not
enough for them, and others; This is most suitable to the Analogy of Faith in
other Scriptures.

The Doctrinal Note from thence, will be this; There are none have any
surpl^sage of Grace, or more then will serve their own turn. They have none to
spare, lest there be not enough for you and us; and that this is so, other
Scriptures plainly speak; If the righteous scarcely be saved, says the
Apostle; the righteous, be 1 Pet. 4. 18.
he as eminent as he may in righteousness and holiness, yet he is scarcely
saved, so as through many difficulties, many a hard pull he has, when all is
ready to fail him, but that God never fails him, else all were gone; His flesh
and his heart fails Psalm. 73. 26.
him many times; Strive to enter in at the strait gate, says our Savior, for
many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able. Suppose that some men strive
more then others, yet all will be little enough, they shall hard and sharp be
saved; they have none to spare; he that gathered much had nothing over; says
the Text, Luke 13. 24.
concerning the Manna; though some are more industrious, painful Christians
then others, yet they have nothing over: the very Angels in Heaven, that have
such a fullness as no Creature on earth yet has, yet they cannot spare a jot of
their fullness, though they be so full; not a jot of their holiness; how much
Exodus 16. 18.
more we then?

First, Let a man begin never so young, to look toward heaven, as young
Timothy, and young Sam. and yet they shall not have any more then what is
necessary for themselves to have; a man would think, he that begins so young,
should in time grow to be exceeding rich in faith and good works, that if there
were any works of supererrogation, these should be the men; but yet we find not
in Scripture any of them in so high a strain. 2. If a man be never so earnest,
diligent and forward, zealous for God, though he serve the Lord instantly night
and day, yet shall he have no grace Acts 26. 7.
to spare. David was a man of strong affections, as most Christians, and as
warm they were toward God, as strong were his Psalm. 63. 2.
desires after him, and love to him, as will appear by his spiritual
breathings, and was as much in following after God, and after grace; in so much
that when he was debarred from the Tabernacle, and Ordinances, where he used to
behold the goings of God, the way of God, his glorious power and grace; when
shut out from these, how sadly does he take on? you may see then by the stir
and disquietness of his heart in the interruption, that he was strongly bent to
follow after Christ, and yet at the close of all, had he any to spare? Yea, 3.
Let a man continue so to the end, if it were possible, without any interruption
in his growth, and yet he shall have no grace to spare; had the Apostle any to
spare, who was a man labored as abundantly as any other? yea, more then they
all, and yet he was nothing, and when all was done, he would be found in
Christ, not having his own righteousness upon him, he had not yet attained the
resurrection from the dead. But then, Phil. 3.


2. For the opening of the Point, let us note this also; That though a
Christian may have more gifts of Grace then may be sufficient for Salvation,
yet he never has more, especially saving grace, then is needful. I mean he
has none to spare; a man indeed happily might spare some of his gifts, but none
of his Grace; though it is true, whatever Talents the Lord bestows to fit a
man for his Condition, his place, he should be answerable to the Lord, and so
they are necessary to the fruitful carrying on of his Calling or Condition, yet
to heaven they are not so necessary; but all the Grace a man has, is necessary
for him, so necessary, as he can spare none: especially that Grace which is
more particularly a man's own (if I may so call it) and that is, sincerity and
uprightness of heart; others do partake with us in the sweet effects of the
other Graces, of faith and love, etc. but the sincerity of all without the
rest, are nothing: this is more especially our own, and who is there that could
ever say, that he had so much uprightness of heart, that he could spare any of
it? can a man spare any of his life? this is the life of Religion and Grace.

3. Another thing to make this out, will be this: The greatest Grace where it
is given, usually has the greatest corruption to wrestle with; a spring-tyde
of Grace, a spring-tyde of Corruption: strong workings of the spirit, strong
lustings, of the flesh, and strong temptations, such as many of us never knew
what they meant: so that a Child of God indeed that is proved, knows that he
has little enough for himself, though it may be God has given him more then
to many others; where sin abounds, Grace abounds: may there not be temptations
to exercise the strongest Faith? Some Goliah-lust, or another, which requires
all their faith, and humility, and patience, to encounter with it; we never
turned Gods treasuries of temptation, to know what he has in store for poor
souls.

4. Let a Child of God have never so much Grace here, yet he Phil. 3.
falls short of the resurrection of the dead; short of that pitch which he ought
to aim at. Indeed if men could reach this fullness of the measure of the stature
of Christ, and go beyond it, then there might be some thoughts of having
somewhat to spare; but until then, we are always on the wanting hand, sure,
always under emptiness. Now though some be so bold, as to plead for a perfection
in our days, we see by a divine hand upon them, they are let loose to all
manner of wickedness, and except that were the perfection, I understand not
what perfection they are capable of.

5. When they have attained to the top and pitch, (brethren) yet alas, if God
should enter into judgment with us, we should never be able to stand, as you
have it; therefore the Apostle would Psalm. 143. 2.
be found in him, when he had done all; surely then brethren, if when all is
done, there is such an imperfection, incompleatness, as to justification, and
eternal life, that we must go out of all, deny all, as we have heard, then no
man surely has any grace to spare.

For the Application then, It is a reproving word to as many as Use.
are ready to think they have enough. The Papists tell us of works of
supererrogation, and I believe that piece of Popery may cleave to some of us
faster then we are aware; but let us take heed of it; when we begin to be so
full, as we think we run over, and could spare any of what we have, and we may
therefore sit down and breath us. Believe it, this is the way to make the Cruse
of oil give over running; as long as they had an 2 Kings 4. 5.
empty vessel, the Cruse ran, but when all were full, it gave over; God will
not in vain pour out this precious oil of his Spirit, to have it lost upon
proud Creatures, and bury the Glory of his Grace in an unthankful, proud heart.
That Ancient could say, and likely by experience, Si dixisti, sufficit,
periisti; and may not many of us say so, did we ever get good by it? it is the
ready way to go backward, to tumble to the bottom again, when we think we are
got high enough, higher then this or that Christian; the Apostle says, God
resists the proud, but he gives Grace 1 Pet. 5. 5.
to the lowly. The Heathen could say, even Plato, that a proud man is void of
God, without God, God is far from his thoughts, and he is far from the favor
of God; and indeed so it is, God knows such a man afar off, at a distance, he
shall have no Psalm. 138. 6.
close familiar communion with God. Well, the Lord reprove us, as many as are
guilty in this kind.

2. It may serve then, to press with the Apostle forward toward the mark of the
prize, etc. O how lazy are most Professors! who Phil. 3. 13. 14.
walk as if they never cared whether they reach perfection, or the fullness of
the measure of the stature of Christ; as if we were unwilling to grow too like
heaven, for fear we should be taken from this earth sooner then we are willing
to depart. O what earthly, heavy, drowsy spirits have we! how slowly do we
drive? What, is heaven nothing in our eye? the enjoyment of Jesus Christ
nothing to us, that we make no more haste toward him? O then, as the Martyr
said, haste after as fast as we can; Take heed of such a thought, you have been
diligent long enough, you may now slack your pace, you are pretty well for one;
believe it brethren, nothing will sooner quench the spirit then this: nothing
will sooner damm up the fountain, and shut out the light; you can never have
too much; It may be you have (through rich mercy) what carries you (in some
measure) through your present condition, you know not what you shall meet with:
believe it, before we die, we shall have exercise for every degree of our
Grace, our Faith, our Love, we shall have nothing over. It may be with thy
measure, which is less, thou may make a hard shift to get to heaven; but why
should we not all press after a more abundant entrance into Glory, which 2 Pet.
1. 11.
will be much more for the Glory of his Grace, and much more for the comfort of
our souls? Well then, place that behind you brethren, which we have attained;
as Jehu in his furions march caused the Messengers, as he reached them, to turn
behind him still, and so went on; let not our eying what Grace we have
received, be any further then to thankfulness; take heed of poring on them to
pride, for that is the way to decline; who knows how much one thought of
pride does cast us behind hand, if the Lord take the advantage, for he
resists the proud above all others; cast them behind then, stay not, rest not
until we come to the resurrection of the dead. And then,

In the last place, It may be an encouragement to some poor trembling hearts,
who it may be, when they hear this word, are ready to lament themselves. If
this be a truth, that they that have most grace, have none to spare; what a
condition then are such as I in, who have so little? If they have occasion to
use all, and little enough sometimes: What will become of me, who have so
little, like a grain of Mustard Seed? If the Cedars of Lebanon have no strength
over much, but are ready to be blowed up by the roots, all they can do is but
to stand to the utmost: What shall such a bruised reed as I do in the contrary
winds of temptation and corruption?

First then, do not judge amiss of thy condition, thou think such a one is
so and so eminent for grace, an Oak of Bashan, a Cedar; God judges not as man
judges, thou may have more humility, and more love to Jesus Christ; there
may be more sincerity and truth in the inward parts, in a poor creature, that
has little parts or gifts to make a glittering to dazzle the eyes of men;
Herein lies the strength or weakness of the soul indeed; Look to this then, and
gaze not so much upon glorious outward appearances.

2. Remember that thou are not accepted for the greatness of thy grace
inherent. God does not give his Spirit and such graces, in a greater and a
smaller measure to some then to others, and then accept accordingily; he
accepts in Jesus Christ, and every poor believing soul does enjoy whole
Christ, his righteousness fully imputed to them: Therefore this is your
acceptance, and herein you are alike, blessed be the Lord, that in this, which
is the main thing, he makes no difference between the strong and the weak,
though one man may more strongly and clearly apply him, and have more of the
comfort, yet thou may with a trembling hand, hold him as surely; or rather he
will hold thee, if thou can not hold him, for the embraces are mutual between
Christ and a poor believing soul.

3. If thou have not so much as another, thou shall not likely have so great
trials, so great things to do with it, thou shall not be tried above what he
will enable to bear, and he will make a way to escape also. If his grace be
sufficient for thee in all conditions, what matter is it? only press hard after
more and more, whatever thou have reached too; and at last thou shall attain
the end of thy hope, the salvation of thy soul, and in due time thou shall
reap, if thou faint not.

Verse 9. -- (...).
HEre is the third part of the answer of the wise Virgins to the foolish
Virgins question: Which is not to be understood as a serious advice from the
wise to the foolish, directing them to the ready course to procure oil to
themselves; except we could understand by them that sell, Jesus Christ, or
Father, Son and Spirit, who sells, and would have us buy of him without money
and without price, Isa. 55. 1. for the Bridegroom, Jesus Christ, seems to be
distinguished here from them that sold, according to the meaning of the wise
and foolish Virgins here; but for that I shall leave it. If that may be the
meaning of the wise Virgins, surely the foolish Virgins understood it not; for
it appears not that they went to him to buy, but used some other impertinent
endeavors; as they went to the wise Virgins before, and not to Christ. Here is
little ground for Papists to bottom their Doctrine of perseverance to be
attained by their own industry and pains; for always his price is not
comprehended from being, if it be from God, from Jesus Christ; it is always
excluded, Come buy without money, or without price, as before, except they
purchase it of men. But we may understand these words, as many godly, learned
do, for an upbraiding, a mocking, an Ironical consent, as there are many
instances in Scripture; Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee; but remember, that for all these things God will bring thee to
judgment. And so that of Eccl. 11. 9.
Elijah, he is a God, cry aloud, he is either in a journey, or talking, 1 King.
18. 22.
or some such thing, that he cannot hear. And so Micaiah spoke to Ahab, Go, and
prosper, and the Lord shall deliver it into thy hand. 1 King. 22. 15.
And that of Jesus to his Disciples, sleep on now, take your rest, which Mat.
26. 45.
is Ironical. So as when Ahab would be humoured, the Prophet speaks after his
mind; if so, as it should seem, he might perceive he spoke not as he meant, how
long shall I adjure thee to speak nothing but that which is true in the name of
the Lord? So these foolish Virgins, they would have their grace from a
creature, and the wise answered them according to their humor, and Ironically
yield to them, to send them to others, though themselves had none to part with;
Aug. Ep. 120. and Calv. so understood them; and so does Beza and our Annot.

The Note I would briefly hint to you from hence is this;

That such as trifle away the day of grace, and are not serious in the work of
getting grace, the time shall come when they shall have Doct.
none to pity their misery.

If men may expect pity or compassion from any; it is either from the Lord,
who is a God of bowels, and unspeakable, unsearchable compassions: Or else from
the people of God, who as the Psalm. 86. 15.
children of God, do put on bowels of compassions, as the Apostle speaks, they
are cloathod with bowels, so that their compassions are eminent, and to be seen
by them that have to do with them; but Col. 3. 12.
yet the time may come brethren, if you now neglect so great salvation as is
offered to you, held out by Jesus Christ himself the Son of God, speaking from
heaven, not from the earth, that you shall have no pity from the Lord; no nor
from his people: from God, that is Heb. 2. 3.
plain. I will but name it, because it may seem impertinent to the Text; yet if
it serve to no other purpose, it may serve to show us, that the Saints, if they
do not pity in some cases, where it is evident the day of grace is past, and
men have wretchedly sinned it away, that they have the Lord for their pattern
for it, therefore I mention it; Then shall they call, says the Lord, and I
will not answer, they shall cry, etc. I will mock when their fear comes, and
laugh at their calamity; Prove. 1. 26. It is spoken after the manner of men, and
shows the heavy aggravation of their misery, that the Lord shall be so far
from pitying them, that he shall laugh at them. So in the 2. Psalm. where the
Anointed of God is lifted up upon Zion, there are some that will not be bound,
will not have him to reign over them, count it a bondage, and a grievous one
indeed, the Lord shall laugh at them, he shall have them Psalm. 2. 4.
in derision. But for the people of God, they expect it may be to be pitied in
such a condition by them, but they may meet with nothing but a mock, though a
holy one; and indeed there is need of much holiness, and in act too, to mock
and not to sin; So here you see, and so the Prophet by a spirit of Prophecy,
go and buy of them that sell. But lest this may seem to be ground enough to
build it upon, because it is of doubtful interpretation. therefore take another
Scripture, where he speaks of the Destruction of persecutors of the people of
God, such as Doeg was, and there is the like reason for hypocrites, when
discovered undenyably, and their Lamps gone out; as here, the righteous shall
see it Psalm. 52. 5.
and fear, and laugh at him; when God should destroy him for ever, and pluck
him out of his dwelling place, and root him out of the Land of the living, then
the righteous should see it, and laugh at him, have him in a holy derision; yet
with an holy awe of that glorious and fearful God, who was so just in his
judgments upon him.

And is it not just with God it should be so, When such hypocrites have in
their hearts despised the long-suffering, and patience, Reason.
and tenderness of the Lord waiting upon them; and made a mock and a jest, it
may be, at the entreaties of God, at the earnestness of the Saints, and their
pressing so hard forward, that now themselves in extremity should be mocked at
by the people of God themselves?

This may be then in the first place, a warning-word to all such trifling
professors, as all the while Jesus Christ stretches out Use 1.
his hands to them, even all the day long, they will not come to him, they will
sit under the shadow of their own gourd, while it is green, and not under the
shadow of Jesus Christ; they will sit by their own bottle, their own cistern,
and not come to the Fountain which is opened for sins, for uncleanness.
Remember Brethren, there will come a day upon you, wherein (to the Ez^k. 13. 1.
cutting and wounding of your souls) you shall be sent to those empty things
for comfort. Papists will not now be persuaded but there is enough for them in
their Church-treasurie, and lay out their money upon them; but when the Lord
shall show them their treasure is empty, there is nothing in it, it will not
reach to pay the uttermost farthing, no no^ one farthing will it reach to pay,
then will the Lord and his people send such poor deluded souls to their
Merit-mongers, to their indulgences; Now go to your treasury of Merit, for
some sucker and r^lief; now go to your dry bottles, see if there be any drop of
water there to cool your tongues, your inflamed souls with the displeasure of
the Lord. As the Lord in the day of his peoples deistruction, sends them to
their Idols which they doted upon; in a mocking way at their callings, I will
save you no more, go to your Idols, your gods that have eaten the fat of your
sacrifices, etc. You have made lies Judge. 10. 14. Deuteronomy. 32. 37.
your refuge, now go and shelter your selves under them; now go and see whether
your gourds will shade you from the scorching of the everlasting burnings? O
how this will grate and gall a guilty conscience, every such word will speak
confusion and hell to the very heart of a sinner, and this is that you must
expect. You that now cannot down with a searching powerful Ministry, can abide
the shining, but not the burning of a John Baptist, that will deal faithfully
with you; but you must be daubed and bolstered up, you must have such as will
speak peace, peace to you, right or wrong; the time will come when God shall
show you that this has been the ruin and undoing of your souls; and then in
contempt and scorn you shall be sent to them, Go now to your
Parasite-Preachers; when the consoience is all on a flame, and you see your
Lamps are gone out, and the Bridegroom is ready to come, and there is but a
step between you and hell* Ah the woeful condition of such a soul! then may the
Lord and his people say, Now go to your daubers, now see if they can heal your
breaches, see if they can bind you up, if they can cool you and quench you? you
shall have it of Gods hand to lie down in sorrow: Isa 50. 11.
and then see whether your daubers with untempered mortar, shall lull you
asleep? O how grievous will this be from the Lord, when they shall have nothing
but derision from him, and from his people! Now, the people of God will pity
you, and pray for you, but the time may come, if you know not the things which
belong to your peace in this your day, that they shall laugh at you, they shall
in a mock, a holy scorn, send you to your false refuges for help; Go to them
that buy, go to your flatterers, see if they can comfort you.

2. This then is a comfort to the people of God, that are now guided by the
holy Spirit to go to Jesus Christ, to the Use 2.
Fountain indeed, to hang their souls upon him, replenish themselves still from
his fullness, as it is in that first of John; because Brethren there will come a
day of distinguishing between such as have made the Lord their hope, their
strength, Joh. 1. 16.
and such as have dallyed and trifled; and as the one shall have a mock from
God, and from his people; the Believer that has been used to make the name of
the Lord his refuge, he shall then find acceptance, find a free access, What
time I am afraid, says the Psalmist, I will trust in thee; do thou not love
Psalm. 56. 3.
to be flattered? would thou have thy soul dealt faithfully with, and not
gently, as is said concerning Absalom; happy art thou: when others shall be
sent to their broken Cisterns, thou shall be admitted to the Fountain, to the
fullness of Jesus Christ, to which thou usually had recourse: as the wise
Virgins here, they trimmed their Lamps, they got a new supply of oil; but the
foolish are sent to them that sell, to their flatterers, their Mountebanks,
their money changers, to see what they can afford them.

In such a time as this, thou shall come to the true Physician, to the
high-treasurer of heaven, etc.

Verse 10. (...) --
HEre it seems they had no more wit then to go to buy of them that sell.

How difficult is it to beat a man off his creature-confidence and Doctr.
refuges which he has for his soul?

For these foolish Virgins here, they had kindled sparks of their own, and
walked in the light of their own sparks a great while, and all that while it
was an exceeding hard matter to persuade them to the contrary, but their penny
was as good silver as other men's; to persuade a painted hypocrite, while his
paint lasts, that he is but a Sepulcher, and full of rottenness, and no resting
in that conditlon, is as hard, as to persuade a man that looks upon his money
baggs, he is a beggar. But now a man would have thought when this Lamp had gone
out, and they saw their sparks of their own kindling would not endure to
eternal life, that then they should have bethought themselves of a higher born
flame, a higher principle that would endure to get that oil, and that fire from
heaven that would aspire, and never rest until it reached heaven: my meaning
is, that when they saw the profession and form which they could by their
industry and parts work out of themselves, went out and failed them, they
should have thought of going to a higher principle, but what do they do? they
go to the creature you see, to the wise Virgins for oil, and there they have
another repulse; they had none to spare for them: By this a man would have
thought they might have taken a hint, that sure it is not to be had then from
the creature, we must look higher; if any creature could furnish us, tht wise
Virgins, the Saints indeed could furnish us; but we have knocked at their doors,
and it is not to be had there. And do they now bethink themselves of going to
Christ? no, not at all. Let it be considered yet further, that they had a very
sharp blow, to rap their fingers off the creature, which a man would have
thought should have made them afraid of ever laying hold upon an arm of flesh
again, for this Irony, or holy mock of them, go to them that sell, if they
understood it so, was a reproof as full of Vinegar as can be. As that of our
Savior, sleep on, now, (says he) take your rest; now they are at hand, let us
go hence; they had little list to sleep Mat. 26. 45.
after such a reproof as that: and yet we see these foolish Virgins are so
stupid, that this mock of them, it beats them not off at all, but to the
Creature they go still, to try whether there be any oil to be had among them
that sell; the flatterers and merit-mongers, they think not of going to Jesus
Christ.

And whence does this appear brethren? but first, From our corrupt nature,
which has departed from the Lord, and is now full of enmity to him, and is loath
to return to him; so proud we are, that as long as we can find any thing in our
selves, we will go no further; but when we see our own gourd is withered, our
torrent is dried up, such is the enmity of our wretched hearts to God in the
way of his Grace, that we would go any whither for succor rather then to God,
to Christ; the Jews would not Ioh. 5. 40.
come to Christ, that they might have life; they might have it for coming for,
but they would not, they would take any pains in their own works; men will
rather put themselves to any penance, mortifyings and maceratings of the
flesh, as the Papists some of them do; will be at any charge for their
indulgences, from men, rather then they will go to Jesus Christ. Thus the Lord
complains of his people, that they did wander from mountain to Ier. 50. 6.
hill, expecting help here and there, but forgot God their resting place. The
Raven would not return to the Ark, if she could get a place to rest any where
upon the earth, though the Dove had no rest any where else but in the Ark. Ah
what woeful natures Genesis 8. 7.
have we brethren! so contrary to the God of love, and fullness of bowels and
compassions; surely we can see nothing in him, wherefore we should be so
averse, but the pride and rebellion of our own desperately wicked hearts; how
should this exceedingly humble us!

2. Not only nature, but it should seem, they were accustomed to it also, and
that increased the natural inclination to it; at first their sparks were of
their own kindling, they would have fire out of their own flint, and oil from
within: well, this failed you, so they went to the wise Virgins, and were
habituated in it, it was a rooted evil, and well watered; and therefore no
marvel, if at the very last, they thus go to them that sell, Can the Ethyopian
change Ier. 13. 23.
his skin, or the Leopard his spots? no more can ye that are accustomed to do
evil, learn to do well; here is a first nature, and a second nature, nature
upon nature, and what is harder to carnality then nature, while it remains
unchanged? naturam expellas, etc. You may keep a Woolftame, and train him up
like a Dog to follow you, but he will retain his woolfish nature still, and if
he have occasion, will manifest it; where a Creature has been used to betake
it self for refuge, thither will it go in time of need, the Chicken to the
wing, the Conies to the rocks, the Fox to her holes, and the Child of God to
the rock; what time I am afraid, Psalm. 56. 3.
I will trust in thee, as before; and poor Hypocrite to the Creature, this or
that, somewhat in himself, or somewhat in some other, as you see: for this he
is accustomed to, to go to his prayers, to the opinion of flattering persons,
etc.

3. Another reason may be this, in Professors that have long rested in a
formality, and now at last come to see their nakedness, God plucks off their
plumes, lets them see they are naked, and yet they go not to Christ, it may
be, because he holds their eyes, hides this wisdom from their eyes: alas, if
the Psalm. 16. ul^.
Lord show us not the path of life brethren, we can never find it out our
selves, we shall grope at noonday, though we have never so Luke 19. 41.
much glorious light about us, and Christ be held out never so plainly to us:
we shall grope and wander, and never have a heart to come to him, as it is said
of the Israelites, God did not give you to this day, a heart to understand. O
says the Psalmist, Teach Deuteronomy. 24. 4. Psalm. 86. 11.
me thy way, and I will walk in thy truth. Now God and Christ, in a just
displeasure against us in such a case, may hide himself from us, and will not
be found: either we shall not have an heart to seek him at all, or else not an
upright heart to seek him, and therefore though we seek him, he will not be
found.

As this should teach us all to be humbled before the Lord for wickedness and
averseness of our hearts to Christ, that we will not come to him, so long as we
can get a drop out of our dry Bottle: we will not come to the Fountain, but
wander up and down, and weary our selves to seek rest anywhere then in Jesus
Christ. Have thou been a Prodigal, and have thou known this by experience? have
thou shifted, and shuffled, and lick^ thy self whole as often as thou could,
and born it out by head and shoulders, the Convictions thou have had sometimes,
when thy Lamp has been dying? O how should this teach thee now, if the Lord
have, notwithstanding this, showed thee the path of life, showed thee the
Fountain, the Olive, whence the oil is to be had indeed: this should teach us I
say, to loath our selves: Ah wretch, wretch that I am, that should carry such a
heart toward Jesus Christ!

2. It may serve to advance and magnify the justice and mercy of the Lord: on
Hypocrites justice and severity, that since they have loved to wander from
Creature to Creature, and would never come to Jesus Christ. Now at the last,
when they must come to close with him or never, he should be hidden from their
eyes: Is Ier. 14. 10.
not this a righteous, a severe hand? are they not paid in their own coin? the
Lord grant we fall not any of us under this stroke of Divine justice, to be
left and given up to a wandering heart, because we love to wander. O methinks,
this severe hand of God upon them, lying upon them to the very last, should
affright poor Formalists, that have nothing else but a few broad leaves to be
their refuge: when these wither, what will you do? what must shadow you from
everlasting burnings? you will say Jesus Christ; but do your hearts say so
indeed? and why do you not now make sure to close with him? for if you wander
thus up and down from Creature to Creature, who knows whether he may not make
you examples of his displeasure, and suffer you, yea, give you up to wander, as
those foolish Virgins, that you shall never be able to look after him, because
he will never look after you again.

And then it serves to magnify the mercy and grace of Jesus Christ, that
notwithstanding this be the natures all of us, and we practice accordingly, and
have made many a poor shift likely to quiet a guilty, accusing, galled
Conscience, sometimes with one, sometimes with another shift, sometimes with a
duty, a prayer or tears; O if we could but weep for our sins, all would be
well; this would make a calm, and we are at peace; sometimes the opinion of
others, or sometimes our own opinion of holiness and our selves, to which we
have done all that we have done it may be. Well, that after all this, now the
Lord Jesus after so long being slighted, and such forms, and duties, and
fig leaves, and any broken Cisterns, empty Bottles, and husky vanities,
preferred before him, that yet he should manifest himself to such, to any of
us, and give us that true oil of Grace in the heart, whereby the sinfulness and
emptiness of all our former shifts have been discovered to us. O what shall we
render to the Lord for his love! behold what manner of love is this, that will
overcome all our slighting of him, that will not let us alone under our fading
gourds, until he bring us under his own shadow, and never suffer us to wander
up and down from him any more; have our souls tasted of this his love? O bless
him, magnify him, make your boast in God, let the humble hear thereof, and be
glad, live Psalm. 34. 2.
his praises; what, can you do too much for him who has thus loved you? but so
much for this.

(...). Here we have had the sad surprisal of these poor Creatures, that have
their Grace to get, at the last they are taken, before they are ready for
Christ; for alas, their Lamps ware out. Let men put off the coming of Christ as
long as they will, and trifle away their day of Grace, though he tarry a while,
yet he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. Well, now he comes.

But that is not all neither, he comes upon them, not only while they are
getting their Grace, but while they are seeking up and down to the creature for
it, and never look at him at all; and this makes it so much the sadder indeed,
when Jesus Christ shall come to judgment, particular or general, to find men
with their backs upon himself, and their faces upon their formalities and
profession, upon their flattering false Teachers, that at a venture cry peace,
peace, though there be no ground; will it not be sad brethren? The Lord help us
every one to look to it, for I intend not to stay upon this; either we are such
as seek our oil of Jesus Christ, we live by faith in him; or else we seek to
the Creature, we hang our hopes upon somewhat else; if so, whatever it be that
relieveth us in the time of our trouble on this side Jesus Christ, this is the
object of our whoredom; Now shall the Bridegroom find us in the very act of
whoredom, playing the whore, in departing from him, and will this be peace or
comfort to our souls? How will you lift up your faces before him? brethren, how
can a Woman that pretends faithfulness to an Husband, if he take her in the
very act, how can she hold up her head to him? O the confusion and amazement
will be upon us, if Jesus Christ find us in the like Coudition! can you think
how poor creatures will hang the head, and be filled with their shame, whether
shall they cause their shame to pass from them?

O then brethren, If you have neglected the day of Grace, and while oil has
been offered you, and that upon easy terms, without money, and without price,
and now you be convinced of your want of it, because you know not how soon it
may come upon you. Let me beg of you, that whenever he comes, he may not find
you going up and down to buy of the Creature, but coming to him, waiting upon
him, (as the Apostle did) that you may be found in him; hence the poor thief
upon the Cross found mercy, Phil. 3.
though it were at the last. O take heed of deceit here, for every one will
say, that they have no other hope but in Jesus Christ, and him they wait upon
all the day: O that it were so brethren; but I doubt he will find many of us
going to buy, when he comes, and not of him, but of them that sell; then they
are running to their flattering parasitical Preachers, then they must have an
absolution, a comfortable word, though they have lived never so wretchedly, as
if a few comfortable words of a daubing Mountebank, would transform them from
Devils incarnate, into Saints in a Moment, which is not much better (if any
thing) then the Priests mumbling over the bread and wine, to change it into the
body and blood of Christ. Then when Christ is coming, the Bridegroom comes;
does he not find many running then to a prayer, then to a Sacrament? if they
can but have that, they think they are secure enough; poor ignorant creatures!
what is this, but to go and buy of them that sell, instead of going to Jesus
Christ? Well surely, as this will much concern him to find men so undervaluing
him, who is a Savior to the utmost, to go any whether, rather then to him; so
will it be confusion to your souls, if you be found in the very act; there will
be no denying, no excusing of it; you will have nothing to say for your selves;
therefore let us be warned to take heed of this. But so much for this.

Verse 10. -- (...).
IN this Verse you have a twofold observation of the coming of the Bridegroom:
His coming is, to make a full distinction and separation between the precious
and the vile, the end is the differencing thing, Mark the perfect, etc. the end
of that man is Psalm. 37. 37.
peace; hypocrites and real believers promiscuously go in and out in this
Church Militant, this heaven upon earth; but now there shall be a difference
put; to some the door of heaven is opened, and they enter, to others it is
shut, it is clapped against them.

We will in the first place a little consider the first, they that were ready
went in with him unto the Marriage. There are diverse things Note-worthy in this
little clause; I shall but briefly run over them. 1. Some then it seems are
ready for entrance into glory. 2. Such as are ready do enter. 3. That they
enter with Christ, with the Bridegroom. And 4. That this glory is set forth by
a Marriage, or a Marriage Feast, as the word elsewhere imports, of which
afterward.

I will wind up the two first into one Note or Doctrine.

That such as are ready when Christ comes, do enter into Doctr*
glory.

This is sufficiently clear from the Text, the Parable setting forth the state
of all the Saints as they shall be differenced from hypocrites at the day of
their appearance before Christ, for it is the Kingdom of heaven is here
compared to the Virgins, the Church visible, to the wise and foolish, the
Church invisible to the wise Virgins, so I understand it. Now these wise
Virgins, they were ready prepared for the entrance in to the Marriage, though
the foolish were not; they that were ready, that is to say, all the wise
Virgins, they entered in; so that this reaches the condition of Gods people in
all times and ages, who are a part of this Kingdom; The Israelites, when God
had proved and prepared them, by enuring them to the wilderness, to so many
hardships, then they entered into Canaan. (...) not before forty years; they
wandered before they must enter, but when once prepared they enter. So the
Apostle, when he had finished his course, and fought the good fight, then he
was ready to enter, and he entered into glory; therefore it is, that it is said
of the righteous, he is gathered like 2 Timothy 4. 7.
a Shock of corn in his due season: that is to say, when it is Job 5. 26.
fully ripe and ready to the sickle; a wise husbandman will not reap the field
while it is green and unready, no more will the Lord gather his Saints to him
until they be prepared; they must hang in the Sun so long, and endure the
nipping of cold and injuries of weather so long, until they be ready, and then
they are gathered.

Two things I shall do before I come to the Application. First, a little
inquire what is meant by this readiness; and herein indeed only put you in mind
of what you have heard in a great part, while I have been upon this parable
already, and all of it doubtless at other times you have heard again and again;
but I would put you in remembrance, as is necessary; and then, 2. The arguments
to confirm this point, and so to the Application.

First then, a man is ready, or this is a part of it, when he has gotten this
oil in his vessel, without this no readiness; though the foolish Virgins be
awaked after their long profession and falling asleep; yet you see they are
unready, and are all in a hurry, as people unready use to be; when the
Bridegrom comes, they are going to them that sell, that they might buy oil,
therefore they were unready; my meaning is Brethren, until a man has received
from the Lord the spirit of holiness to dwell in him, to be a living Cruse of
oil that never fails, to be a spring of grace in his soul, to water, and
refresh, and supply him in all his conditions, a man is not ready to enter.
Paul was a chosen Vessel, but though he: was a strict man, (I pray you mind it
Brethren) I doubt stricter then most of us, the strictest sect of the
Pharisees, and touching the Law blameless, at least in the Pharisees sense, in
the outward observance of the Law, which is more then many can say. Well, now
when the Lord meets him going to Damascus, If he had called for him out of
the world, had he been ready Heb. 12. 14.
for him? surely no* woeful had been his condition: there must then be a
holiness, without which there is no seeing God. This is one thing then, he that
has the root of the matter in him, the seed of God in him, he is ready in
part, so far he is prepared.

2. There must be also the brightness shining, the activity of the graces, they
must be in act, or stirred up and bettered before we can be ready, for the wise
Virgins were not ready, though they had oil in their vessels, because their
Lamps were not trimmed, their oil grew low, must be supplied, therefore they go
about that work in the first place; If Christ had come and given them no
warning, but taken them sleeping, they had been all unready, therefore you
shall find still in Scripture, the graces of the Saints smell sweetest, and be
most lively usually toward their latter end: When was Paul, or David, or any of
them more sweet? they must stand with their loins girded and Lamps burning,
else they are not ready altogether.

3. There must be mortifying of corruption, a subduing of iniquity in a good
part, in how great a measure is hard to say: It is true, at the first when we
believe, sin has its deadly wound, but it many times recovers in a great
measure, and strugleth hard for life; it must have many a thrust, a blow by the
sword of the Spirit, wielded by the hand of faith before it will die. When our
Savior saw how lively that pride and ambition was in his Disciples, he tells
them, they must be converted, and become like little children, in respect of
that emulation, before they could enter Mat. 28. 3.
into the Kingdom of God. When sin had gotten such a hand over David, had he
been fit to have dyed then, to have entered into glory then? though I believe it
cast him not out of the state of grace, yet it laid him in a swoon, and
prevailed much against him; now was he ready to enter while sin was so strong?
surely no: We must first overcome, before we sit down with him in his Throne;
we must fight the good fight, of which this is a great part; and Rev. 3. 21.
how low the Lord will have our corruptions brought, and how much deadned he
will have the root of sin, before he tumble down the walls of these Tabernacles
of clay, we are not able to say.

4. A man is never ready until he can go out of all this, and the main thing
with him is to be found in Jesus Christ, etc. This is indeed the first and
last, upon the matter, of all, for Christ is all; we are ready then to go in to
our heavenly Father, when we have our elder Brothers garments upon us, when we
have put on Christ, which is for holiness, as you have heard, and for
redemption from our sins, our vain conversations, our foolish and hurtful
lusts. But withal, if we have him not on, and girded close to us for
righteousness, we are not ready; if we have him on, but he sits loose upon
us; therefore you shall find this was the main thing the Apostle Paul minded
and strove after, that he might be found in Jesus, not having his own
righteousness upon him, he speaks of the day of death and appearing before him,
the resurrection, that he may be found then in Jesus. When we have done all, if
we deny not all, we undo all again, this only will terminate the sight of the
Father, he will see through all other coverings whatsoever; therefore the
Apostle prays that One siphorus may find mercy in 2 Timothy 2. 16.
that day. It is mercy then that must stand us in stead, even when we have done
all. Remember this brethren as a fourth part of this readiness.

5. A finishing our work; so our Savior, I have finished my work, etc. Joh.
17. 4, 5. and thus Paul; I have finished my course, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 7. And thus
David, Acts 13. 36. served his generation, etc.

Now these are the readinesses for an entrance. But we must know that some of
the Saints have not only an entrance, but an entrance is ministered to them
abundantly into glory, they go with 2 Pet. (...). 11.
a full sail, not only make a shift; though it is true, they have no oil to
spare from themselves, for they can spare none of their abundant entrance, it
is that wherein God is most glorified in them, and this they cannot part with,
and themselves have greates comfort in. Now this is not common indeed to all
Believers, I pray you mind that, lest any poor soul should be causelessly
discouraged, because he finds not that readiness for it, to which afterward
we shall speak.

First then, to this abundant entrance into glory, as a readiness or
preparation, there is required, besides a faith in Jesus Christ for
righteousness, holiness, redemption, a knowledge reflecting, whereby they know
that it is thus with them; many a poor soul has the salvation of God near him,
and Jesus Christ in their arms, and knows it not, and is weeping after Christ
when he stands by him, as he did Mary; and it may be, if they should now die,
they would think themselves undone, the terrors of God are ready to cut them
off, the fear of what would become of them; and yet they shall have an entrance
into glory too, they would not miscarry, but they pass as through a narrow
pinching wicket: But now a man that has a persuasion, he has an abundant
entrance into glory; there must be then to this readiness, a making the calling
and election sure, by adding faith to faith, and grace to 2 Pet. 1. 9, 10.
grace, as it is in that place of the Apostle Peter. Then when Simeon had
gotten Jesus Christ into this arms of his faith as well as of his body, and saw
his salvation with the eye of faith, as well as of the body, then he cries
out, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace. Now he was ready to
enter into glory. And so the Luke 2. 29.
Apostle Paul had such a persuasion, and therefore he was ready, henceforth
there is laid up for me a Crown of glory, etc.

2. There goes many times, if not always, to this abundant entrance, as a
readiness or preparation to it, an earnest waiting of Ioh. 14. 14. (...) hill.
1. 21.
the soul for its change, a desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which
is far better: There is many a poor heart when the body of death weighs them
down, and tries them, groan earnestly, and could be contented to dye, that sin
might dye with them. As Sampson said, let me even dye with the Philistians, if
no other way will destroy their lusts. But alas, when they are to seek in point
of assurance, they look upon death as a dark passage that leads them they
cannot tell whither, this makes them fly back, this kills those desires,
nippeth them as soon as they put forth, they come to no maturity: But now when
a man has the right art of believing, notwithstanding his body of death he
groans under, as the Apostle, that yet he is persuaded through Christ it is
pardoned, and shall be utterly dissolved and not hinder him, then he can bless
the Lord, and desires with Paul to be dissolved. So many of the Patriarks it is
said of them, they dyed full of days, 2 Cor. 5. 4. ^om. 7. 24. Job 42. 17.
Genesis 25. 8.
satisfied with days; that is to say, they lived as long as they desired, they
had now a desire to be at home, knowing that while they are present in the
body, they are absent from the Lord, from that near, and sweet, and full
Communion with him, whereof they have had a little taste and earnest, but if
they know not that they shall be present with him by departure* but for ought
they know, more separate from them, no marvel if they go to death with drawing
back.

Yet I deny not, but a child of God may be ready before he desire it; And may
desire it before he be ready for this entrance. I say, a child of God may be
ready before he desire it, as in the case before mentioned (and upon other
grounds, as Hezekiah and David, that I may declare thy power to this
generation) may be ready Psalm. 71. 18.
and not have such an assurance, but he is not ready for an abundant entrance,
until the Lord come with a full sealing of his love to his heart.

2. He may desire it before he be ready, as in some passionate impatient fit,
as Elijah, 1 King. 19. 4. weary of his life, the King persecuting him, and
thinking he should fall by his hand, would have God take away his life from
him, but he had not yet done his work. And so Job, God had not yet done with
him, he must pass through more changes, and prosper and flourish again, and
hold forth his name to that generation before he departed, he had not done his
work. But I speak of the serious, settled, well-grounded frame of a Believers
heart, upon a sound persuasion of the Love of God in Jesus Christ, and a
knowledge that he has finished his course, then for such a one to wait for his
change, when the blessed hour will come, is a part of readiness for an
entrance, an abundant entrance into glory. But this is not the portion of every
child of God; many Suns set in a Cloud, etc.

For the second thing, which are the arguments of the point, they are such as
these. First, because else Gods work would be in vain, he has prepared an
inheritance for the Saints, a Kingdom 2 Cor. 5. 5.
prepared before the world was; and his work upon our hearts, what is it but to
prepare us for this Kingdom? as the Apostle speaks, he that has wrought us to
this self-same thing, is God, he has wrought us to it, there is no
suitableness between heaven and an ungracious heart; a glorious Kingdom, and a
vile filthy spirit; therefore the Lord takes much pains with us to purge us to
himself, to purify us, to adorn us with the rich graces of his Spirit, and all
is to work us to heaven, to salvation, to prepare us for this entrance, and
therefore when God has done this, shall his work be in vain? surely no: not a
soul that is so wrought up by the Lord to a heavenly frame, and temper, and
nature, that shall miss of an entrance, when it is thus prepared, else Gods
work were in vain, the greatest work of God.

2. Because else the Lord Jesus would fail of his purchase and prayer for his
poople, who did buy us at so dear a rate as his own most precious blood; was it
think you, to suffer us for ever to be at such distances from him, whom he so
dearly loved? did his love to us draw him out of heaven to us, and will it not
(think you) draw us to heaven to him? he will not have his Spouse that he has
redeemed with his blood, to be absent from him any longer then is needful for
his Fathers glory and their good. It is a fruit of his death and of his prayer,
Father I will, that where I am, there Ioh. 17. 24. Chap. 14. 3.
they may be, for they are the fullness of Christ, and he accounts himself, as
I may say, imperfect without them: and therefore he will have them there.
Indeed Brethren, so dear is the heart of Jesus Christ to his people, that he
would not suffer so long an absence, at so great a distance from them, but that
there is a necessity in it; though at his first pitching his love upon us, he
looks at nothing, but notwithstanding all blackness, and deformity, and
loathsomness, his love overcomes all: Yet before they come to this Communion
and fellowship with him, they must be purified with spices and odors, as those
were for the King of Assyria, and for other holy ends.

3. Because else the promise of God, and hope of the Saints would Ioh. 6
fail, and heaven and earth shall sooner fail, then the word of promise. Christ
has promised not only to give life, but eternal life; God has promised to
give not only grace but glory; there is a Crown laid up in the purpose and
promise of God, and if they should miss of this, they would be made ashamed of
their hope; now this cannot be, the Psalmist prays, that he might not be
Psalm. 84. (...).
ashamed of his hope, which is virtually a promise, it shall not be; never any
yet were disappointed that hoped upon right grounds* Indeed if men make
Promises to themselves of heaven, let them live after the imaginations of their
hearts; or whether they truly believe or no, their own promises may fail, but
Gods promises never fail, nor a lively hope founded upon them.

4. That the poor, weary, tossed, afflicted people of God may have rest in the
bosom of the Father and the Son, and holy Spirit, there Heb. 4. 9.
remains a rest to the people of God, they have not their rest here, expect
it not; but either from within, or without, or both, we have our troubles; the
world casts them out as the offscouring of all things, they are the
despised, hated, mocked people; the song of the drunkard, the laughing stock of
the world, and therefore because they cast them out, the Lord will receive
them. If we have not persecution without, we shall have our exercises, what
between corruption and temptation, and sometimes the terrors of God, and sense
of his wrath, sometimes breaking bones, hiding his face from us; there is no
rest until we come to enter with him; now we lie among the pots, but then we
shall indeed be made glorious, like the wings of a Dove in sulness. Now this is
agreeable not only to the truth, but the goodness, tenderness, bowels of the
Lord to his people, that his poor afflicted People should rest with himself,
when he has by these filings, and scourings, and siftings, and turnings up and
down made them meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light. So much for the
Arguments.

For the Application of this, that they that are ready do enter into Glory.
First, it serves to show the blessed condition that the diligent, lively,
prepared soul is in; heaven Gate is ready to receive such a soul: the bosom of
Abraham, of Christ opened ready to receive him, he shall enter; they have this
privilege, that many that profess Jesus Christ have not; many shall seek to
enter, but shall not be able, that strive not, as he does: Blessed is that
servant (says our Savior) that his master shall find Luke 13. 24.
watching, shall find ready for his coming: why he will not leave Luke 12. 37.
any such soul behind, they shall all enter into glory: how blessed a condition
this is, may appear by many considerations more.

2. Such a soul as this cannot be surprised, so far as he is ready, he is never
surprised: surprizals are terrible: if Jesus Christ had come without any
warning upon the wi^e Virgins while sleeping, it had been terrible to them,
though they might have entered with him also; but if we be ready, that day will
not take us at unawares: indeed if a child of God be once ready, he cannot be
altogether surprised more, though in part he may, if he carry it not the
better; he will be still habitually ready, if not actually; so the foolish
Virgins were not. They still have the root of the matter, though it may be
under ground, and hid from their eyes, and is not this a blessed thing? as often
as you think of the coming of Christ, to think, now let my Savior come when he
pleases; I am through rich grace ready for him. A servant, when his work is
done, a Spouse, when her ornaments are put on, and the house trimmed, and all
ready for her Bridegroom, now come when he will, I am ready for him; before the
thoughts of his coming are troublesome and painful, now they are pleasant and
delightful.

3. When death comes, how shall they lift up their heads with comfort, because
their Redemption draws near; O how will they be able to welcome death,
welcome Jesus Christ, welcome the kingdom of heaven! it is their entrance into
a kingdom, Luke 21. 28.
though it be bitter indeed, and terrible to the wicked, and though there be
some reluctance in nature against death, and a Paul would rather be clothed
upon, then dissolved; and since it is the birth of sin that brought it into the
world, no marvel if 2 Cor. 5. 4.
Grace it self have no delight in it, yet considering that it is an entrance
(though narrow and pinching) into Heaven, into Glory: the Saints that are ready
for it, they can bid it welcome. As a poor, weary, tossed Mariner can bid his
Port welcome, though there may be some fear of Rocks, or the like in his
landing.

4. Are they not blessed souls that shall enter, that now all their distances
between them and Jesus Christ shall be done away? now he whom your souls loved
and longed for, yea, your souls have many times broken within you, for the
longing for him, now he comes to take you to himself, that you may be with
him, near him, always in his bosom. Is not this a blessed Condition? what tends
all your striving, and running, and fighting, your wrestling, praying, and
weeping to, but this? now the end of your hope, the salvation of your souls
comes upon you: blessed, yea for ever blessed is such a soul: if Christ and
heaven, the Father, Son, and Spirit enjoyed in an unspeakable bosom-communion,
will not speak a man blessed, nothing will: but thus much for this first.

2. Then methinks brethren now we should be putting the question to our own
hearts now, whether we be ready or no? O here is blessedness Use. 2.
indeed! you cannot but judge that man or woman (though a man of sorrow while
in the world) happily through temptations, and a heavy body of death, yet that
shall enter in Glory when all is done; sure you cannot but judge this man a
blessed man, that is ready for it, for he, and he only shall enter. And can it
be but you should reflect now, and enquire of the Lord, and of your own hearts?
Lord, am I ready for this coming of Jesus Christ, or am I not? for one of the
two I am; Dear friends, I shall not use any more arguments to you, but these
two or three considerations.

1. How uncertain this coming of Christ to you, to call for you, is? do you
know when he will appear? do you know brethren, whether you shall be warned
again, called upon again to prepare for his coming? this may be the Cry, it may
be the Cry is past with many of you already: is it not high time to awake, to
look about you, to consider whether you be ready or no?

2. To consider, That there will be then no time given to prepare. If you be
ready, well and good, you enter; if not, you are shut out, as afterward we
shall speak. O then, how can we satisfy our selves, and quiet our Consciences
with an ignorance, how it is with us? It is high time surely brethren, to
enquire.

3. Except we do enquire, we are not likely to take a course to make ready: he
that thinks he is ready, or cares not whether he be ready or no, if he be
unready; now he is like to be unready, for such a man will not set about the
work. O that the Lord would therefore persuade you this day to consider with
your selves, are you ready, or are you not?

4. There is very great need of this enquiry, because alas, many are ready, and
think they are unready, and then cannot have the comfort of their Condition,
except they come to see to it in some measure. 2. Others are ready, and know
it, but are not so thankful for it, have not the sweetness of their condition
so fresh upon their spirits, because they do not oftentimes review their
condition. 3. There are many that are unready, and think themselves ready: and
O how is it likely it should be better with them, until they come to know how
the case stands with them? will any go to buy Gold that they might be rich, or
white Raiment that they might be clothed, until they see they are poor and
naked? surely no. 4. Others are unready, and though their hearts misgive them
they are unready, yet they care not much for it; or else, they know not how it
is with them, and they are contented to be ignorant. Now except the Lord
persuade us all brethren, to look into our state, it is never like to be better
with us: such as we are, such shall we be found at the appearing of Christ,
yea, every day farther and farther off.

Therefore shall I beg of you brethren, that you would consider it, set some
time apart, it is the weightiest business you have to do in the world; you will
have a time for all other necessary things, your eating, drinking, managing
your civil affairs; and is the soul-concernment the least, that you should so
slight it? Well then, will you this day retire your selves, deal effectually
with your hearts? what if this night you should be taken away, or you should
never see Sabbath more, are you ready for the coming of Jesus Christ? I doubt
our hearts would answer no; alas, our work is to do: alas, how many poor souls
that have not a Zech. 12. 10.
week, a month happily to live, yet have not one dram of Grace! O put that
question, have you this oil? have you the Spirit of Grace and Supplication
given to you? have you Christ dwelling in you, and transforming and changing
you into his image from Glory 2 Cor. 3. 18.
to Glory? Ah dear friends, what mean our loathsome conversations then? what
mean the vileness of our hearts, the fullness, and rottenness, and sin that is
there? are you mortified in any good measure, or no? It may be you have
forsaken the pollutions of the world, but is the heart of sin killed, has it
its deaths wound, out of which continually the life and spirits of sin are
emptying, are you weary of it? do you loath it, and your selves for its
vileness? O do not deceive your selves.

Again, Are your Graces lively? It may be thou have a spark, but it is buried
in the ashes. Indeed I doubt brethren, these times of prosperity to the Church,
bury more Christians alive, then any days that ever we saw: why now, are we
ready? are our Lamps burning, our loins girded? O how active, and stirring, and
lively are the Graces of the Spirit in some, over they are in others! you are
so far unready for the coming of Jesus Christ, and so far it will be
uncomfortable to you; besides, do ye live by faith above all this for
righteousness, else we are not ready? Is this the top of all, that we might be
found in him? (says the Apostle) search and see, take heed, you have to do
with desperately wicked and deceitful hearts.

Again, Are we ready for the abundant entrance? how few of us have this
persuasion? our calling and election is not made sure; we do not know what
would become of us, if God should call for us: how can his coming be
comfortable to us? we are so far from waiting for his coming, that every
thought of it goes cold to our hearts; that which should most warm us, refresh
us. O brethren, let me beg of you for Jesus sake, no longer to slight this
great and necessary work; give your hearts no rest, until you see whether you
be ready or no. Suppose you shall find your selves unready, it is better to
know it in time, then when it is too late: now there is hope, if you be not
ready, you may obtain mercy: you may make the more haste to get ready, that
that day may be a blessed, a comfortable day to your souls.

3. Then brethren, If we be not ready for his appearing, shall I Use 3.
beg of you brethren, for Jesus sake, and for your poor souls sake, that you
would now resolve whatever business be done, you would not leave this at six
and sevens. It is the one thing necessary you have to do: nothing will yield
you a dram of comfort, nor arm your hearts against the fears of death, but
this; nothing will give you entrance into Glory, but this. Indeed if riches
would be an entrance, or he that keeps the doors, and opens, and no man
shuts, could be bribed with the multitude of gold, it were somewhat for men
to heap it up as the dust, and raiment as the clay; if men were admitted
according to their glorious apparel, or if the riches of the head, and
treasuries of humane knowledge would do it, Scholars might do well to spend all
their time in searching after that, and none, or little or none to make ready
for the appearing of Jesus Christ: but surely brethren, surely you will find,
nothing will find an entrance, but readiness for his coming. The Lord give you
believing hearts this day: how unwearied are men for other things which are
trifles, and will not profit, and not one hour in an hundred spent seriously
with their own souls? And though some men have more time then others, yet
surely brethren, he that is most busy, must find time for this great work, or
misearry. O therefore labor, press hard after it, use all means possible, you
must take pains brethren; such unready hearts as we have, will not be had in
readiness without much and constant pains-taking: As a Garden that is quickly
overgrown with weeds, it must be taken pains with again and again; so here,
etc. And so in keeping an house clean and ready, there must be pains taken with
it. Ah brethren, except your souls follow hard after Christ, you will never
find him to your comfort. The Lord touch your hearts, and then you shall find
him.

Again, you will say, Why I hope I am ready; Well then labor to maintain this
readiness. Alas, how soon is the sweetest frame lost? think not, I have now
done the main work, therefore you may take more liberty then other men, now you
may indulge your selves, take more ease, more liberty about the world, then
other men. Alas brethren, how soon will the world, and cares of it overcharge
you? how hard a thing is it to buy, as if you possessed not, to use it, as if
you used it not? and if you be overcharged Luke 21. 34.
with the cares of the world, this day will overtake you at unawares. Yea, I
tell you brethren, if that day take you at unawares, as I doubt, if it should
come at any day upon us, it would take many of us when we are overcharged: O
ease your selves of some of your burden, have no more to do then will give you
leave to maintain your communion with God, and make sure of the main thing, to
get your souls ready, and keep them ready for the appearing of Jesus Christ: O
that we would be persuaded to this end, to have every day some converse with
this his coming, and to labor to work the thought of it upon our hearts, that
accordingly we may be affected with it, as we find our selves ready or unready,
and so be carried out to make provision for it.

And how should we willingly submit to any dealings of God with us, that tend
to make us ready. Therefore the Apostle would have them count it all joy, when
they fell into many temptations or James 1. 2.
trials; this is the knocking of the torch, this is the snuffers which must
take off the wick of our Lamps, and so trim them up; we shall find one day, we
have more cause to be thankful for our afflictions, if sanctified, then for the
contrary dispensation: I do verily think there is nothing here below helps us
forward more. And labor to see all working together for this great end, that
we may be found ready at the appearing of the Lord Jesus. And labor for a
readiness, for an abundant entrance into Glory. As the Apostle exhorts them.

And though at present thou can not find thou art ready, be not discouraged,
for thou may be ready in a good part, and for the main, and yet not know that
thou art ready: only stick not here, let not fear so overcharge thee, as to
hinder thee, and weaken thy hands, but make it thy work with thy whole might,
to make ready for his coming, pray hard, study thy heart much, stir up thy
soul, and the graces that are there; though much corruption do appear, and the
ashes fly about their ears in this searching, yet search and try, and yet not
so much blow the little spark as to blow it out, but labor to cherish it,
increase it; O Lord increase our faith; then corruption will down, then
communion with Christ will rise higher and higher, for it is with us indeed
according to our faith; therefore whatever we do, take heed of what weakens our
faith, of discouraging, desponding thoughts, study promises, the necessity of
God in Christ: O the unsearchable treasures of comfort that are in every
promise, in every letter of his Name! Labor to live by faith brethren, and as
that grows, all the rest will come on; and thou will come at last to be
sensible that thou do believe, to feel it, and know it, and then thy
readiness for Christ will be more then ordinary, and thy entrance abundant into
this Glory.

The next thing we are to consider in this coming of Christ, is, that they went
in with him to the marriage, (...) Verse 10.
The note will be this.

That such as are ready for the coming of Jesus Christ, they go in with him to
the Marriage with the Bridegroom. Doctr.


Here is to be noted then. 1. The Marriage; and 2. The going in with Christ the
Bridegroom to the Marriage: and some what said for the opening of them. And
then we shall confirm the Doctrine, and apply it.

First, The Marriage here, what is meant by that? Here then by Marriage, we may
understand a Marriage Feast, the consummation of the Marriage, and the
Marriage Feast, made in token of joy: nothing was more ordinary then this, at
Marriages to make feasts. As in the example of Sampson, at his Marriage they
made a feast. And so Laban made a feast of seven Judge. 14. 10.
days long for the Marriage of his daughter, fulfill her week, and then I will
give thee the other also. And so again in Cana of Galilee, Genesis 29. 20.
you see they were at a Marriage Feast. So now at the Marriage of the Lamb; of
the Lord Jesus, there is a feast, a Marriage Feast: Yea, but you will say, this
is not ground enough to understand here by the Marriage, a Marriage Feast, for
they are distinct things: It is true, they are distinct, but yet in ordinary
practice they were not separated one from another, but went so together, that
usually in Greek and Latin, the Feast is comprehended under the word for
Marriage, if not principally signified in many places. So in that of Laban, he
made a Feast, says the seventy Interpreters, he made a Marriage. So there was
a Marriage in Cana of Galilee, (that is to say) a Marriage Feast was made
there. And so it seems the Syriach renders it usually in the New Testament by a
Feast; as Grotius upon this place, and Matthew in the beginning notes.
Therefore here by Marriage, we will understand a Marriage Feast; Ioh. 2.
So Esther 1. 3. The King made a Marriage Feast.

Now the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a Feast, both the kingdom of Grace,
and the kingdom of Glory. The kingdom of Grace is a Feast, and a rich Feast,
full of royal dainties, as you may find by several Scriptures; In that of
Matthew, The Mat. 22. 4.
Kingdom of Heaven shall be compared to a certain King, who made a Marriage for
his Son, which the Syriach well terms a Marriage Feast or Banquet, which
Matthew calls a Dinner, and Luke calls a Supper; and indeed it is both, for the
Father, Son, and Luke 14. 16.
Spirit do come in, and dine and sup with us; they do continually eat bread at
his Table, as Mephibosheth did at David's Table, 2 Samuel 9. 7. So it is clear,
Behold I make a Feast of fat things, of wine on the Lees, a Feast to all
Nations; what is that, but the Gospel Isa. 25. 6.
of Jesus Christ, and the Ordinances thereof, and Christ held forth in them to
be a Feast to every one that will come to him, as the carcass is to the Eagles;
as the Lord sometimes in Scripture invites the fowls of heaven to a Feast he
makes for them, (that is to say) Mat. 24. 28. Ezekiel. 39. 17.
to the dead carcasses of his enemies; but here, to the carcass of his Son, who
is slain for Sinners, a crucified Christ is the carcass, he is the fatted Calf
indeed, he is the kidneys of the wheat, the fat, Deuteronomy. 32. 14.
the finest of it: his flesh is meat indeed, and drink indeed. Now this must be
spiritually understood, not carnally; the Kingdom of Romans 14* 17.
Heaven is not in meat and drink, much less in eating and drinking the flesh
and blood of Christ, carnally, as the Papists say, but spiritually: It is joy,
peace, and righteousness, joy in the holy Ghost, here is the Feast. If here
below we must know that this Romans 14. 17.
Feast may be looked upon, either according to the externals, or else the
internals of it; and yet in both respects spiritual; The Jews that fell in the
wilderness, did all eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual
drink and yet they fell in the wilderness. 1 Cor. 10.
The ordinances, the word, the sealing ordinances, baptism and the Lords
supper, sitting at the Lords Table, these are the externals of the Feast, that
many Carrion-Crow may come to. And you see there in the Gospel, He that had no
wedding garment upon him, yet came to the Feast; Sure he went no further then
the externals, you see he is cast out into utter darkness.

Now this may be called the Marriage, or the Feast, because here below they are
necessary for us as signs of that spiritual communion; the Lord sees it good
we have these royal dainties thus represented to us by visible, sensible
things, because of our weakness; and to magnify his own condescending Grace to
us, to make that mystery of salvation by a crucified Christ, which all the
reason in the world cannot fathom; and that which neither eye has seen, nor
ear heard, yet in a sort visible to the eye, and to be perceived by the ear,
that we might even in Isa. 64. 4.
this sacramental sense even touch, and taste, and handle (as I may say) the
word of life.

2. As they are seals and pledges of this spiritual communion, being seals of
the Covenant of Grace whereof Jesus Christ is the sum and substance, it seals
it up to a believers Faith, and so stands us in great stead: And,

3. It is a means of our spiritual communion, the Conduitpipe that runs wine,
the dishes that hold the dainties, though but gold, as Kings and Princes use to
be served up in such State, yet it is not them we feed upon, they are but the
means, the vehicula, and therefore because they have such a respect to our
spiritual communion with Jesus Christ, they may be so called.

But secondly, the internal communion with Jesus Christ is that indeed which is
the Feast, the Marriage Feast, even here below, to eat and drink the flesh and
blood of the Son of God, which gives life, and maintains life; this is the
Feast, Eat and drink, yea drink abundantly, says the Lord; I shall be
satisfied abundantly with the goodness of thy house; abundantly Cant. 5. Psalm.
36. 8.
satisfied, watered, inebriated with the fatness of thy house: what is that?
not merely with the Ordinances, no; but with Christin them, beholding his might
and glory in the Ordinances, the mighty prevailing of the Spirit of Christ
against our unbelief, Psalm. 106. 4.
to quiet all our doubtings, O it is this, to see the good of the chosen of the
Lord; those choice inward refreshings which the poor believers have from the
presence and powerful workings of Christ in them, to the joy of faith, and to
strengthen against corruption, to strengthen for action, for suffering his
will, this is that they cry out after, even after the living God, to enjoy him.
And all this is but the Kingdom of God below, this is but the first course, as
I may say, of this feast.

For secondly, The Kingdom of glory as well as the Kingdom of grace; which is
that now I am to speak to; this is a feast, a Marriage here called, that is to
say, a Marriage Feast; for what is the Kingdom of grace here below, but a
foretaste of heaven? as Grotius upon Matthew. 22. says. As in the Marriage Feast
at Cana of Galilee, contrary to the usual manner, our Savior kept his best
wine last; so it is here, as by and by we shall see here the wine, the spirits
indeed. But a little to prove this by a Scripture or two, that it may appear
plain, ye that have continued with me in my temptation, I appoint to you a
Kingdom, as my Father Luke 22. 29, 30.
has appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table, in my Kingdom:
So many shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom Mat. 8. 11. Exodus 32. 6.
of heaven; sit down, (...), their table jesture, Joh. 12. 2. they that sit at
the Table are Guests: But now eating and drinking in Scripture many times do
signify a feasting; and so it is here to be taken: and let it be noted by way
of further Judge. 9. 27.
proof, that the Jews did not ordinarily drink wine, except at their feasts,
and then they did drink abundantly, if the observation of some be true, as
Piscator in his Schol. upon Math. 26. 29. cited by Mr. Brinsly; but whether so
or no, sure we are, they did use to drink more liberally then, eat the fat and
drink the sweet, when it was a good day or a merry day to them; for his heart
was merry, his heart was good; and the sadness of the heart was Neh. 8. 10.
called the evil of the heart in the Hebrew often; insomuch that the ordinary
word in the Hebrew for a feast, is a drinking, (...). So in Ahashuerus his
feast is called, and Labans feast is called a drinking; and it appears by the
abundance of wine our Genesis 29.
Savior made at the Marriage Feast at Cana of Galilee. Therefore you shall
find that the feast which Christ makes is a feast of wines on the Lees well
refined; come and buy wine and milk without Isa. 25. 6.
money, and without price. And so for this Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 26. 29.
this Marriage Feast at the height, is called a drinking of new wine with them
in the Kindgom of the Father, that is to say, the Kingdom of glory, called his
Fathers Kingdom; because at that day, that is to say, at the day of the
resurrection, he will give up his dispensatory Kingdom to his Father, that God
may be all in all: 1. Cor. 15. 24.
And for other reasons, but I must not stay upon that. Well, here he will drink
new wine with them, which is nothing else but a periphrasis of this feast, this
Marriage Feast in heaven. The cup of blessing, the cup of consolation, the cup
of health or salvation is the feast of Christ here below: but this now must be
drunk new in the Kingdom of his Father; there will be a new feast of wine, a
feast of new wine. And so much for the proof of this.

Now we must understand Brethren, that this feast in heaven is not any corporal
thing, I hope it is needless to tell any of you this; the heathens dream of an
Elysian-field, and the Mahometans of their carnal delights after death, those
are poor husks, that will not satisfy a soul of a child of God here, they are
sordid and infinitely below a heaven-born spirit; no, it must be somewhat of as
high a nature as the spring from whence they come. Why you may judge what it is
in the General Brethren, though particularly we know not what we shall be: What
is the Kingdom of heaven here below, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost, the sweet and spiritual communion with Jesus Christ, the Rom*
14. 17.
fellowship of his death and sufferings, life and resurrection, whereby we are
in part changed into his Image? that a man lives upon will change him
ordinarily, therefore the King, you know, would have the children in Dan. fed
with a portion of his meat; generousspirited wine, will beget more and better
spirits then course and cold, etc. So here, by this communion we are changed in
part, 2* Cor. 3. 18.
though alas, in how little a part. But now in heaven Brethren, the same
communion heightened, it shall be so powerful, as that we shall be like him
indeed; then shall we be like him, this we know, says the Apostle.

I will instance in a few things Brethren: Then will there be the love of
Christ manifested to us. It may be thou have had thy heart touched with him,
and thou know not what aileth thee, poor soul, but follow him thou must,
thou can not give him over, thou art sick of love for him; but thou have
scarce ever had a good Cant. 1. 2.
look from him, little of his love, or as thou think, none. Now Brethren,
will it be the Love of God in Jesus Christ to us, that will be the feast
indeed, O thy love is better then wine; it is better, it is spirits, it is
life, it is that which gives life, and keeps life, and fetches life again
when it is even going; this then is the feast, the love of God in Jesus Christ
to thy poor silly soul, that thou look upon as neglected by God, and
neglected by men, no man cares for thy soul. Believe it Brethren, you that
follow Christ thus, you shall have a time of making out his love to you, and
this will be the feast, the Love of God will answer all the dainties that can
be devised, a complete feast, it is virtually all. Even among men you see, Love
will turn a dinner of herbs into a feast; O how much more then where Love it
self is the filling of Prove. 15. 17.
every dish!

2. The souls joy in this love, not to speak of the souls returns of love
again, and praises, hallelujahs to eternity, which are the fruits; but the joy
in this Love, it consists here in joy, in that place to the Romans; can it
chose but be joy to a poor soul think you, to see the heart of the Father.
opened to us in Jesus Christ, his Romans 14. 17.
bowels of Love all shed abroad upon us? therefore the Kingdom of heaven is so
expressed by joy, enter thou into thy Masters joy, or the joy of the Lord. But
to speak a little to soul-heightning Mat. 25. 23.
considerations of this feast in those particulars, that we might get our
hearts in love with heaven, with this feast.

First consider, It is now Brethren to be more immediate, then here below, it
is new wine, the most excellent in its kind, that is reserved until the last;
the excellency of this feast of wine in heaven will appear by this among other
considerations: That the Communion shall be more immediate, Dulcius ex
ipsofonte, waters are most sweet out of the Fountain immediately; now God shall
be all in all when the Kingdom is given up to him, he shall be instead of 1
Cor. 15. 24.
all Ordinances; Now indeed the Conduits run wine, and we may drink, and that
freely, but yet it is not so immediately, we are indeed not fit for such a
condition; we must make use of them until he come again, use these shadows and
types; So that the communion is not so immediate(...) N(...)e see him not as he
is, but then we shall, says the Apostle (...) more through a glass darkly, 1
Ioh. 3. 2. 1 Cor. 13. 12.
and sullyed glass by our polluted breath our corrupted hearts do sully
Ordinances, else we should see him much more brightly then we do; but there
shall be no more need, but face to face. If the beauty of Christ his love do
take us so, when we have but dark hints of it, as a face in a dim glass: O what
will it be when we shall see him as he is? we shall not need the pipes any
more, but even go to the Fountain, the Rivers, the Seas of Love.

2. More sincerely, it is now altogether without mixture: Alas Brethren, we now
eat the Lord Jesus our Passover, and feed upon his love, but all the while it
is with sour herbs, there is a mixture of grief when we look upon our crucified
Savior. Crucified by us and for us, and so his love is better then wine now to
Cant. 1. 2.
us; but alas, there is some gall or Vinegar mixed with it; some sin, some
temptation, some affliction without, that weakens the comfort the soul might
take in the love of Jesus Christ. But in heaven there shall be none Brethren,
no mixture at all, here the Lord gives us a cup of trembling to drink, a cup
of mixture: Psalm. 75. 8.
that is to say, ready prepared wine, and his people drink round of it usually,
and he sees it necessary; there must be some Acrimony, some salt to keep us
from corrupting, before we come to our glorified state, and so be able to bear
that his love without any mixture at all of the contrary; No anger, the meat
sweet, the sauce sweet, the wine sweet, the bread sweet.

3. More fully, infinitely more fully; if I may so speak of that which a
finite, though a glorified creature is capable to receive: Now we have a drop
or two Brethren, but then our fullness, then the narrow-mouthed vials shall be
enlarged to receive more fully, and to express more fully to Jesus Christ again
in his high and everlasting praises. What is that which comes through the
Conduit to the Fountain? the Sea it self. Ah Brethren, here we are at a loss,
we do not know what the Lord has to pour out upon us, the fullness of his Love
in Jesus Christ, so as that we shall be swallowed up. It is so much here, that
the Apostle admireth it, behold what manner of love is this, that we, poor
worms, should be called the sons of God? then they shall admire much more; but
(...) Ioh. 3. 1.
alas, the measure does not appear, it cannot enter into the heart of man, it
is too narrow, and the love too great, it cannot enter into his heart to
conceive: Some of the Saints have had so much of love manifested, and joy in
that love, that they have been fain to beg of God to hold his hand, they could
hold no more; and so great, as to quench the flames, that they could not hurt
nor pain them, they could feel nothing; O sure this was a flood, that Psalm. 16.
could put out such flaming torments. But yet this is nothing, it appears not
what we should be, at thy right hand there is fullness Mat. 25. 23.
of joy; and so much, as that the Saints are said to enter into it, it cannot
enter into them, they are swallowed up; O this will be a full feast indeed;
here there will be an abundant drinking. And it must needs be so, Brethren, if
we consider;

1. What it is that makes this feast; or first, that it is a feast; it is not
an ordinary meal: Now you know men at a feast do more liberally provide for
their friends here below, it is a feast indeed, but nothing to this.

2. Who provideth this feast; it is not a poor man's feast, but the feast of a
King; such a feast you see Ahashuerus made for his Princes; now a King will
make a feast like a King; Princes have Hest. 1. 3.
their names from liberality and free, with a free spirit, thy Princely spirit,
all those as a King did Arauna give to the King, liberally, 2 Samuel 24. 23.
freely; it was a great gift freely given. So here, it is a King that makes
this feast; Kings usually have larger, more noble spirits, as they have larger
purses, and therefore at their feasts they use to show the Magnificence, and
glory of their Kingdom. And so does God here Brethren; A King, yea the King of
heaven, the King of glory, the King of Kings, and King of Saints, he will show
the glory of his Kingdom, and his magnificence, the excellency of his greatness
in making this feast; therefore surely there must needs be fullness of love and
joy.

3. It is a feast, not an ordinary, but a Marriage Feast, and such used to be
more then ordinary also, being a time of greatest rejoicing; you see the
Marriage feast at which Christ was, what an abundance of wine there was turned
from water by our Savior; if you compute it, it will appear some 300. gallons
full; six water-pots, holding three measures a piece or two, and each measure
an hundred pints; very great store indeed.

4. It is a feast, a Marriage Feast, not only for a servant or friend being
married, but for a Son, the only Son, a Son and heir of all, a beloved Son,
most dearly beloved; all these surely will exceedingly heighten the
considerations of the fullness of the feast brethren, the fullness of that love
which shall there be manifested, and of the Believers joy in that love; these
things are heightened to us in that place of Matthew: Indeed the very feast here
Mat. 25. 34.
in the Gospel is heightened by these considerations; but much more then this.
Yea,

5. Consider yet further, It is a Marriage Feast, for which preparation has
been making from eternity, God has been providing for it, Come ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the world; in these
things he would have us surely to understand the decree and purpose of such a
thing: And withal, we may note the greatness and magnificence of the feast. You
know men if they would royally entertain a Prince, they make provision long
before, and as long as they can, to get all about them, the rarities that the
earth or Sea affords, specially if a King be the provider. O Brethren, the Lord
has been laying in, as I may say, this wine, preparing it for us from
eternity: therefore surely it will appear in an unspeakable fullness.

Lastly, It will be more constantly, without interruption; and lastingly,
without any end: No interruption at all; here we have our vicissitudes, now we
have a sweet cup, a draught, a full draught, Cant. 2. 5.
a flagon, it may be to stay us when we are sick of love; by and by we have
nothing but our wormwood and our gall to chew upon; now we can behold him, have
a glorious view of him, and our hearts ravished with it; by and by he is upon
the Cross nailed by our sins, and we cannot but look upon him with a mourning
eye. But there, Brethren, shall be no interruption, nothing but eating and
drinking this Love of God in Jesus Christ. All his thoughts will be love to us,
and all our thoughts love and joy: no room for one sigh, for one tear of
sorrow, for one groan any more: and then, it is not for a term, and then to
end, but it is for ever, at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.
Psalm. 16.


For the time when, and the place where this shall be; It will be at that day
in the Kingdom of the Father: It will begin at the souls going to the spirits
of just men made perfect; it goes to Christ, this day thou shall be with me in
Paradise; it goes to the bosom Mat. 26. 29. 2 Timothy 4. 8. and 1. 12.
of the Lord Jesus, to Abraham's bosom; and begins this feast. But the
fullness of it is not until the glorified body shall be united to the glorified
soul, and then both together shall be filled with this fullness of love, and
fullness of joy to all eternity.

For the place, It is in heaven, where Jesus Christ sits at the right hand
of the Father: There Stephen saw him, and there he abides, where he is, there
the Saints will be; some think this is Luk 22. 12.
typified probably by the upper Chamber where they did eat the Passover and
the Supper; but no more of that.

Now the second thing comes under hand, that is to say, That they go in with
the Bridegroom to this feast. Wherein these things will be considerable.

First, How he brings them in unto the feast. And then,

Secondly, Why it is so. And then somewhat to the Application.

First then, he may be said to bring them in, and they to go in with him into
the feast, because he is the meritorious cause of their entrance into glory: As
he is the entrance of a Believer into the Ephesians. 2. 18.
grace wherein we stand, as the Apostle speaks, so also into the glory. There
is no acceptance with the Father, no access, but in Romans 5. 2.
and through Jesus Christ; as a poor creature has no admittance into the
presence and table of a King, but that the son takes him by the hand and leads
him in; the Lord Jesus then is the meritorious cause, he went to prepare a
place for us. Ioh. 14. 2.


Secondly, he does now, as I may say, when a soul is brought to His ascension
and return to fetch them.
heaven, after the manner of men, I may say, he does receive it, and so present
it; they go in with Jesus Christ. But,

Thirdly, And chiefly at the last day, at that day he shall come again with his
glorious Angels, to gather all the Saints together, and so to bring them to his
Father, to deliver the Kingdom up unto him, to present them as a Spouse without
spot, or wrinkle, or any Ephesians. 5. 27. 1 These. 4.
such thing; thus he shall appear the second time without sin, to them that
look for him, and so they shall for ever be with the Lord.

Fourthly, He brings them unto the Marriage, they go with him even into those
joys, unto that eternal bliss and glory he leads them into, and there sits
down with them at the Marriage Feast, eating and drinking with him this new
wine in the Kingdom Heb. 9. 28.
of the Father; It is not only his bringing of them, or their going in with him
into the place where these glorious manifestations of God shall be for ever,
but even into the very depth of those discoveries, and there he sits down
with them.

For the Arguments, Besides that none else could do it for us, as you heard.

First, His faithfulness to them requires it, He has promised he will never
leave them, until he had fulfilled for them all the good that he has spoken;
now this is spoken, that he will give Ioh. 6. 54.
them glory as well as grace, that he will give them eternal life, and raise
them up at the last day, else he were not a faithful High Priest nor a faithful
Savior, if he should leave them short; you know it was his last Will and
Testament, in that place of Ioh 17. and will he see his own Will and Testament
violated? Father, I will that where I am, they shall be also; now they cannot
Ioh. 17. 24. Ioh. 6. 39, 40.
come to be where he is, except he bring them with him, as the Apostle speaks,
they shall enter in therefore with him; having undertaken to save them, he will
do it to the utmost: yea, it is the will of his Father also, which he has
undertaken to see fulfilled, therefore how can he be faithful except he make it
good to the utmost? this is one.

2. His own Communicative, He is not willing to be alone in the enjoyment of
this glory wherewith he is glorified with the Father, he would not ingross
those delights and pleasures which are at the right hand of the Father for
evermore, but would Ioh. 14. 16.
communicate them to some; now he is in heaven, and his people upon earth, yet
he would not be alone in those comforts, but though himself must sit at the
right hand of his Father, yet he sends the Spirit the Comforter to his
people, to give them a taste, an earnest of those joys of that Feast that is to
come; indeed so much joy, that it is unspeakable and full of glory to many of
the people of God: many Saints are, as I may say, in heaven upon earth; the
Lord Jesus would not eat and drink abundantly, and let his people have none,
that were unkindness indeed; where there is little goodness in a creature, as
all in the creature is but little in comparison of him, Job would not eat his
Job 31. 17.
morsel alone; so will not he Lord Jesus, but he will have his people to go in
with him to the Feast, to the Marriage, and drink wine with him, as you have it
in the Canticles, He has eaten his honey and honey Comb, and drank his wine
and milk, and what Cant. 5. 1.
then? Then drink ye, O my friends; yea, drink abundantly, etc.

3. Because they have set their love upon him, therefore he will put this high
favor and honor upon them; as it is in the Psalms, Because he has set his
love upon me, therefore Psalm. 91. 14.
will I be with him, and deliver him, and honor him; with long life will I
satisfy him, and show him my Salvation. Give him to enjoy it, and not only
here but hereafter: The Saints they do love the Lord Jesus, every one of them,
their hearts are set upon him, and they cleave to him with full purpose of
heart in all conditions; as the Disciples did, they continue with him in Luke
22. 29.
his temptations; in his poor condition, in his imprisoned condition; therefore
he appointeh them to sit down with him: And so you know they are not every one
that is admitted to a Marriage Feast, they were the friends of the Bridegroom,
or of the Bride: there were thirty young men attending Sampson, these were at
the Feast among others: And so, who goes to the Kings Banquet of wine, but the
Kings Favorite, even Haman? Esther 5. 5.
he goes along with him, he puts it upon him as a great honor; and this is
the glory of Jesus Christ, the honor which he does to the man whom he delights
to honor, who has set his love upon him, even to bring him in to the Feast,
the Marriage Feast; he has not been ashamed of him before men, nor will the
Lord be ashamed of him before men and Angels, and his Father, though while he
was here below, it may be a man full of infirmities; so the Saints are called
his friends in many places: 2 Chro. 20. 7. Mat. 12. 50.
Abraham my friend: Ye are my friends, Ioh. 15. and so his Mother, and
brethren, and sisters they are called these are the Favorites which must needs
be at the Marriage Feast.

4 For his glory as well as for theirs: Indeed his glory is theirs, Mat. 5. 16.
and theirs is his; now the Lord Jesus comes to be made glorious in his
Saints, when the light of the Saints shines before men, and they see their good
works, he is glorified; the virtues of him that calls them out of darkness to
light are showed forth: but alas, this is with so many cloudings and
interruptions, it can scarce be called a glory; He shall come to be glorified
in his Saints, says the Apostle; will not the fullness of the Saints being
brought 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ephe. 1. 2. and 3.
in, be his glory? they are called the fullness of Christ; so that he accounts
not himself full without them, but to be, as I may say, imperfect, without some
of his Members; now at that day he will bring them all, and then he will be
glorified indeed in them more fully then ever; then the general assembly of the
first born H^b. 12. 23.
being gathered together, how much honor will he have in it? that by his
death, by his blood he has redeemed such an innumerable company, that he has
by his Spirit sanctified them, kept them alive, cheared them, comforted them,
raised them, and brought them together, and put so much glory and beauty upon
them all; herein he will be much glorified: and that every one of them shall
have to the full, be filled even to admiration of him; will not this honor him
exceedingly, acknowledge and hold forth the glory of his grace before his
Father and 2 These. 1. 10.
Angelsglorified?

5. He will exceedingly rejoice in them, as well as they in him; he spoke those
things, made that prayer in the world, that they might have his joy fulfilled
in themselves: his joy efficienter, and his joy subjective, for herein he did
and does rejoice exceedingly, Ioh. 17. 13. Luke 22. 15.
surely according to his desire to communicate with his people, which is
according to his strength of Love to them, will be his joy in the communi^n,
therefore says he, thy love is better then wine; to see his own love take such
an impression upon our hearts as to draw out our love to him, this is a great
joy to the Lord Cant. 4 10.
Jesus. I desired with desire to eat this Passover with you, says he to his
Disciples; great desire, so great joy: so says he, I have eaten my honey and
honey comb: he does, as I may say, feed upon the graces of his people, that is
to say they are pleasing, delightful Cant. 5. 1.
to him, even when there is mixture in them. O what will it be then when there
shall be no honey comb, no wax, no imperfection, when grace shall be glorious:
will it not be his joy and delight to pour out of his love, and manifest
himself in the most open glorious manner to his people, and then to behold
them, to be filled with love, swallowed up of this love, and filled with this
joy? yea, swallowed up with that also, to see their faces to shine gloriously
with grace, and joy, and comfort unconceiveable O this will be joy to him!

6. Because indeed the Saints they are ready to enter in with him; they are his
Spouse, though here considered only as Virgins waiting upon the Bride, yet they
are the Spouse; and sure, if any must be brought to the Marriage Feast, the
Spouse must be there, the Angels shall be rather attendants; the Saints shall
sit down with Jesus Christ at his Table as his Spouse for ever: as the poor man
in the Parable, his wife is compared to an Ewe Lamb, which did lie in his
bosom, and eat and drink with him; so shall the Saints surely, because of this
relation of theirs 2 Samuel 12. 3.
to the Lord Jesus. Ah, blessed are ye Believers, ye that are ready for the
appearing of the Lord Jesus.

Again, Now the Saints are made ready for this glory; now we are not able to
bear it old Bottels will not hold this new Wine that he will drink with them in
his Fathers Kingdom: strong Duties were too strong for the Disciples then in
their minority, as I may say, how much more the Duties of heaven, everlasting
Hallelujahs, and admiring of God in Christ: therefore they must be changed
before they can be fit for that feast; a little joy now would swallow us up, so
as to unfit us for any thing: Alas, the Apostle, like a wise Nursing Father,
would not give strong 1 Cor. 3. 1.
meat to babes, they could not bear it: and so our Savior, when upon the
earth, they could not bear many things, therefore he fed them with milk; if you
should give strong meats to children, and wine, what would sooner ruin them?
therefore says the Apostle, I speak the Wisdom of God in a M^sterie among 1
Cor. 2. 6. 2 Cor. 12. 4.
them that are perfect, yet he had some things which he saw in his Vision that
he could not, or might not utter to them; likely they could not bear them. You
see Israel could not endure to behold Moses face when it had but a beam of the
divine glory within the cloud reflected upon him; and the glory of the Angel
astonished John* so eminent a man in says, and love and holiness: therefore I
say, we shall then be fitted for this Communion; Exodus 34. 33, 34.
the old Bottles be made new, the capacities of soul enlarged, the mouth opened
wider then we can conceive, and the body raised in power. It must be an
extraordinary stomach, brethren, that can continually sit at a Feast and d^gest
it and never be satiated; therefore it is that the Marriage feast, the fullness
of it, is reserved for heaven, and heaven is so compared in Scripture.

For the Uses of the Doctrine, First then, Behold what manner of love the Father
has loved us with, that we should be made the Favorites, a people so near to
him, that he will take any of us with him into the Marriage. The Apostle
admireth the condition of the Saints for what they have in hand already: What
manner of love is this, that we should be called the Sons of God? 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
that is to say, made such; his Word is operative, he calls things that were
not, as if they were; but says he, this is not all, it does not yet appear
what we shall be, until Christ who is our life Romans 4. 17.
appear, then shall we appear with him in glory: the Saints in heaven, though
their apprehensions, as well as the rest of their capacities shall be enlarged,
heightened, perfected, yet shall not be able to comprehend the depth of the
river of pleasures at the right hand of God, no more then a Vessel that is put
into the Sea can comprehend the Ocean, and therefore they shall admire it, then
the Lord Jesus shall come to be admired in all the Saints, their fullness will
be unspeakable, greater then that of the Saints 2 These. 1. 10.
here; though sometimes they are filled with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory;
yet alas, in both conditions far short of comprehending it, therefore we should
admire it, Such things as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can enter into
the heart of man, God has prepared: Do you not see how Haman glories in it,
Isa. 64. 4.
though he had little cause, if he knew all, that he among all the Courtiers
was invited to the feast of Wine to the Queen; he accounted it an high favor,
a significative testimony of his especial love to him above others. Ah
brethren, you that are Saints indeed, let me speak to you all in the words of
the Angel to Mary, you are highly favored of God, you shall all be admitted to
this Marriage Feast; be thou as poor in outward condition as may be, and as
poor in Spirit as may be, never so low in thine own thoughts, thou shall enter
into this Marriage Feast; thou think with the poor Publican, Thou art not
worthy to come near the place where his honor dwells, nor lift up thy eyes
toward heaven, nor be reckoned among his people, nor come to his Table here
below: Well, be thou as vile as thou can in thine own eyes, thou shall enter
with the Lord Jesus into the Marriage Feast, if thou be ready for his coming. O
admire this Love! the Lord help poor weak creatures unbelief in this point,
that they may admire it; what, will he admit such a one as I? such a vile
creature? such a grieving creature to his holy Spirit? yea, such as he has
once pitched his heart upon to love them, they shall enter with him into this
feast: Says Mephihosheth, What is thy servant, thou should look upon such a
dead 2 Samuel 9. 8.
dog as I? etc.

2. If this be so, that the state of Glory, or Kingdom of glory, into which the
Saints enter with Christ, is such a Marriage Feast, it shall be an invitation
then to poor sinners to this Feast, this Marriage: Wisdom has builded her
house, hewn out seven Pillars, killed her beast, mingled her wine, made it
ready, a cup of Prove. 9. 1, 2.
mixture, that is to say, a cup made ready, and now sends forth her Maidens to
cry, turn in ye simple ones, etc. O that the uncircumsicion of our hearts, that
are the Messngers may not hinder: but the Lord Jesus by us, brethren, does
invite you sinners to this feast. he would fain have his Table full of guests,
how welcome would he make man, woman, and child; if they would but come, he
would cast out none that comes to him; no, no, in Ioh. 6. 3^.
any wise whatsoever, as I have told you sometime from the Text. But for the
better understanding of this Exhortation. I will note two things, and then a
little further press it upon us

First then, That we do not invite you to this Feast, this Marriage in heaven,
to enter in with Christ, continuing such as you are, in your blood and
uncleanness; but we do first invite you to come to Jesus Christ here on earth,
that so you may enter in with him into the Marriage; your union with Christ,
and your communion with him must begin upon earth, though it end in heaven; and
this communion here is twofold, though both spiritual; it is internal, and,
external; internal, a fellowship with the Father in the Son, a fellowship with
Christ in his death, the power of it, that we may dye to sin, and be free from
the condemnation. God will not have this Marriage Feast for his Son in heaven
filled with Goal Birds, condemned creatures, such as have their bolts and
fetters upon them, the nastiness of the prison upon them, the evil savor of
their sins upon them, such as have their prison clothes, their rags, by the
exactest righteousness that ever creature performed. upon them; no, no, you
must first come to Jesus Christ, have these bolts knocked off, He it is that
loses the prisoners; you must first have your ^ilthy garments taken away from
you, and be robed with the royal apparel, such as is put upon them whom the
King of Heaven delights to honor with so near an aporoach to himself for ever:
you must have the savor of his Ointments anointing Zech 3 2.
^our head, his Spirit poured out upon you first brethren; as they used to
anoint their heads with sweet oil at their seasts, before you can come to that
feast, sinners, do not think you shall crowd into heaven in the condition you
are in; but be persuaded in the Name of Jesus Christ, first to come to him, to
get your hands and hearts, and all washed in innocence it self, in the blood of
the spotless Lamb, else believe it, there will be no entrance for you.

(2.) There is an external communion also, which men that have no more but a
profession may have: eating the spiritual bread, and drinking the Sacramental
feast brethren, which the Saints ought to come to, have communion with; the
Lord Jesus and his people will, until he come again; it is not an indifferent
thing, 1. Cor. 10. 1 Cor. 11. 24. Acts 15. 9. Mat. 26. 29.
Do this in remembrance of me; and as often as you do it, ye keep in
remembrance the Lord his death until he come; Now brethren we do immediately
invite you to come to Jesus Christ, to close with him, that you may be washed
and cleansed through faith in his blood* and have your hearts purified by faith
in him, and then to this Sacramental Communion with Jesus Christ, which is a
sign and pledge of this Marriage Feast in heaven, as plainly our Savior tells
his Disciples, I w^ll hence^o^th drink no more of this fruit of the Vine, until
I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom. Well, this is but the first.

Secondly brethren, that by your now coming in to Jesus Christ, you do, as I
may say, take up your room in your places before hand at his Table in his
heavenly Kingdom: In which respect the Saints now are said to sit together in
heavenly places, Ephesians. 2. 6.
and hereby you will come to have fellowship with the Lord Jesus in his
Resurrection and Ascension, and his Work in heaven, which is, to prepare a
place for his people (and as I may say) to keep it for them; and as one sweetly
expresses it wri^ing as I may say every ones name over his Mansion, over his
Place, even with his own blood, that none shall take it from them over their
heads: If Jesus Christ prepared not a place for you Ioh. 4. 2.
in heaven now, brethren, you will find no room at his Table.

Therefore now brethren, Let me press this Exhortation upon you, that you would
come to him, now, even now, while it ^s called to day, it is his voice brethren
that speaks to you; O that your ears were bored to hear, the fatted Calf is
killed, the Lord Jesus is Crucified for sinners, the Wine is mingled, all is
ready, there wants nothing now but your coming to Dine and Sup with Jesus
Christ: yea, indeed but your opening to him, Rev. 3. 20.
he knocks, he will come to you, to feast with you, bring his royal dainties
with him, and his wine of the Kingdom, his Royal Wine with him. O his love,
which is better then wine, if you will but open to him; O do not nectere moras
now; can the Lord Jesus, brethren, find in his heart to have his blood poured
out, to become royal Wine indeed, full of spirits, sweet and cordial to a poor
fainting soul, to give his own flesh to eat? which is bread indeed, it is
virtually all dainties: therefore the Scripture sets it forth by Wine and
Milk, and Honey, and Bread, and Marrow, and Fatness, the fat of the Kidni^s of
the Wheat, by Apples and Flagons: Is he willing* brethren, to be the Feast to
be fed upon, and shall we not come? O therefore come where the Carcass is;
follow not your Carrion any more, the stir^king loathsome delights and
pleasures of sin for a season: Be ye no more drunk with wine, but be ye filled
with the Spirit of Ephe. 5. 18. Psalm. 36. 8.
Christ, says the Apostle; be Inebriated, as some read it; abundantly
satisfied with the goodness of his House, and with the flowings of his heart
toward you poor sinners.

But me thinks now I hear the returns that sinners make to Jesus Christ, to
this invitation; say some, I have a feast already, Stolen waters are sweet, and
bread eaten in secret is pleasant, Prove. 9. 17.
and shall we forsake these delights we have in the world for we know not what?
Ah poor souls, you know not what you say, if this be the language of your
hearts. If you mouths were not much out of taste, you would never judge sin a
sweet thing; a poor child of God that has his taste healed, though but in
part, he drinks nothing in the world so bitter to him as sin, that which
goes down so merr^ly with many. Were not the Number. 11. 5.
Israelites mouths much out of taste, when they preferred their Onions and
Garlic, stinking things of Egypt, before their sweet, their heavenly Manna,
their Angels bread, fit for them to eat, or which came by their Ministry.

(2.) Remember this brethren, though it be sweet to the taste, it turns to
bitterest gall; as the Wise man speaks of wine that moves it self aright, it
sparkles, is lovely, sweet to the taste, at last it biteth like a Serpent, and
stingeth like an Ad^er. Prove. 23. 27.
Behold such are all the delights of sin; and whether you believe it or no now,
you shall be sure to feel it after a little season, for your pleasures are but
for a season. So that you know not what you say, if any thus excuse himself for
coming.

Again, Shall you change for you know not what? Indeed you do not know, for eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man to
conceive, before he has had experience of it himself. O that I might but
persuade you brethren Isa. 64 4.
to make a trial, and if you do not find one days communion of Jesus Christ be
not worth a thousand with your companions in sin, then believe not this Gospel
any more; there is much sweetness indeed in the breasts of the world, to a
wordly Palate: O what drink, golden drink do poor Earthworms drink? and this
is their Nectar. Believe it brethren, if the Lord do but bring you, and set
your mouths to the wounds of Jesus Christ, set your mouths to the sweet
promises of pardoning grace, and purging mercy, to draw from them strong
consolation, you will find the other but Gall and Wormwood to you. O let them
perish, says Galeac. and his money with him, that prefers all the world
before an hours communion with Jesus Christ.

I pray you therefore do not excuse your selves with them in the Gospel, I have
bought this, and that, and I cannot come, I Luke 14. 18. Phil. 3. 8.
have so many Custodiums, I cannot mind these things, I have so much to do in
the world, and it is to be minded. A poor ditchwater, that is preferred before
this Wine of the Kingdom; will dross and dung, meat and husks, which is Swines
meat, nourish your souls to eternal life? make as much account, brethren, of
these things as you will, to slight now the matters of eternity, time will come
when you would give all the fruit of your labors, if it were a thousand times
more, for one sight of Jesus Christ, one taste of his love, one hours communion
withhim, before you go hence, and be no more.

Alas, But some will say, I am a poor sinner, the vilest filthy creature, lame,
and blind, and have all my life time been feeding with Swine upon husks, and
swill, and trash, these delights of sin and pleasures of the world, O my days
are consumed in sin; and does he invite such as I? and may I come? Yea,
brethren, you find the poor, lame, and blind from the hedges and highways side
were invited to his feast; if you come but to Mat. 22* 10.
Jesus Christ, he will open the eyes of the blind, he has eye^alve for you, and
he will be legs to the lame, and clothing to the naked, if you do but come to
him, put on Christ. It is not any other infirmities, (which will abide upon the
best of Gods people in part) that can exclude us, or cast us out, but only the
want of the wedding Garment; if a man be never so well furnished Romans 13. 14.
otherwise as he thinks. O therefore come Brethren, the Feast is made for
such as you, you are invited to it; the simple, the man void of understanding,
(that is to say) the sinner, for sin is folly in Scripture Phrase; you are
invited to turn in this Prove. 9. 4.
day to the Feast, the Marriage Feast which is begun here upon earth, but will
end in heaven, therefore be not discouraged.

Ah but you will say, I have no such appetite to the Feast, to hunger and
thirst, and is there any invited to come to it, but such as have an appetite?
what shall they do there? I answer, no marvel thou have no great appetite,
until thou have more communion with him, if thou have had any: And no marvel,
if thou have no appetite, if thou have never been with Jesus, for thou have so
long lived upon trash, that it takes away the stomach to the sweetest and
wholsomest food in the world. But withal remember this, who ever will, is
invited to come, brethren, and take freely. It may be thou do not find, poor
sinner, Rev. 22. 18.
such a strong desire, such a breaking of soul for longing; but have thou a
Will? would thou have Christ, would thou have his body, this meat indeed;
this blood, this drink indeed; this wine of the Kingdom, and begin this Feast,
this Marriage Feast upon earth; why do thou not take him then? come, and take
it freely; O that this might be the day of his power, to many of your poor
souls, that you might become a Psalm. 110. 3.
willing people, that you might have a heart to close with him, to take him
upon his own terms, that you might begin your heaven upon earth, your communion
with Jesus Christ.

I will but add one word more, and that is this; It is no indifferent thing,
whether you close with this invitation or no? there is a necessity lies upon
you to come to the Marriage Feast, except you resolve upon it to perish for
ever; God he was wroth, and sent forth his armies to destroy, etc. Ah what
gnashing of teeth will there be to poor sinners in hell, Math. 22.
when they shall see their neighbors, who heard this Gospel with them, sit
down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob at the table of Christ in his kingdom, and
themselves cast out! Ah brethren, Mat. 8. 12.
I beg for you a believing heart, you must either feast with Christ, or starve
for ever with Satan and his Angels, and then not a drop will be had to cool
your tongues; now flagons Luke 16. 24.
are tendered you, now wine and milk without money and price, now rivers of
pleasures at Gods right hand, and fullness of joy is promised you, is held out
to you, comes a begging to you; Ah then, then brethren, shall you beg for a
drop, and shall not have it; rivers of burning brimstone will be your bathing,
when the Saints are swallowed up of those rivers of pleasures at his right
hand; then will you be chewing upon your gall and wormwood, then will you be
breaking your teeth upon your gravel, when the Saints are drinking this new
wine in the kingdom of their Father with Jesus Christ. Ah think of it brethren,
think of it; you have now your good things, many of your eyes stand out with
fatness, you spend a world upon your lusts, live like Epicures, wantonizing in
the abundance of your enjoyments; how woeful will that sentence be! Son,
remember, thou in thy life time had thy good things, Luke 16. 5.
and now thou art tormented; had thy wine and drinking unto drunkenness, now
the stings of it abide upon thee; the Saints have their worst first, and the
best kept until the last; but you have your consolation in this world, and the
wine of astonishment Luke 6. 24.
will be your portion for ever, if you will not be persuaded. Therefore take
your choice brethren, I set life and death before you, and consider of it, How
will you escape, if you neglect this great salvation? you may now be received
to the Feast, Heb. 2. 3.
the door stands open, it will not always be so, it will be shut against you. O
how will you answer it another day before the Lord Jesus, if you now trample
under foot his blood, and precious offers of his Grace, though by the hand and
mouth of a poor worm like your selves?

Thirdly, Then Brethren, let as many as have received power Use.
to believe in the Lord Jesus, and so are admitted to the beginning of this
Marriage-supper upon earth, to inward fellowship with Jesus Christ in the
Graces of his Spirit, and merits of his death and resurrection, labor
brethren, to prepare your selves for this Feast in heaven, by feeding heartily
upon these dainties upon earth; the more men eat and drink, the more their
stomachs are extended usually, and the more they will receive; surely it is so
in spirituals, the more a soul feeds upon Christ, and the more abundantly he
drinks, the more he may, it enlarges the desires; Hitherto (says our
Savior) you have asked nothing, little or nothing; Ask, and ye shall receive,
that your joy may be full; Ioh. 16. 24.
the more abundantly the soul is satisfied with the goodness of the house of
God, the more will the mouth be opened to receive; now, as our capacities do
enlarge, so much the more fitter are we for this Marriage Feast. O therefore
let us not come to the table of the Lord brethren, this sign and pledge of that
Marriage Feast in heaven, but with mouths opened, souls enlarged, that we may
eat and drink abundantly, he that comes hungry, will hardly go away without
his fill; we come with narrow hearts, mouths half-opened, and therefore go away
with little or nothing.

Fourthly, This should much edge our desires after Heaven, and Use.
the glory that is to be revealed: it is a feast, who is not willing to go to a
Feast, if he be hungry and pinching? and yet alas, how backward are we for
heaven? how do we hang back? it is a sign we have little desire after that
fullness of communion with Jesus Christ, all is not right with us, we are not
ready, when we can be contented to sit down by the pipe, and may go to the
fountain, to the rivers, the ocean of unspeakable delights in the Lord. O
therefore brethren, eye heaven more, and the Glory of it, this Marriage Feast;
the eye affects the heart; though it is true, it does not appear distinctly
what we shall be, yet some hints are given, whereby we may conceive how
transcendent the delights of heaven will be above all we enjoy below. What
Solomon dehorts men from as an occasion of lusting after wine; look not upon
the wine when it is red, when it giveh his color in the cup, moves it self
aright, when it sparkles, and Prove. 23. 27.
has a pure color, if you look, you will be enticed by it. But here is a
feast of wine, of new wine, more excellent, transcendent, full of spirits and
vigor; look upon it brethren, with the eye of faith, and serious
contemplation; sometimes behold how it sparkles, what a spirit there is in this
wine, that to all eternity makes the Spirits of the Saints to exult, and
triumph in his glorious praise, a duty so far above our cold and heavy frames
here below. O methinks this should somewhat quicken us, and raise our desires
to heaven, to be with Christ, drinking this wine new with him, in his kingdom,
that here we drink only sacramentally; and these are not deceitful meats, your
expectations cannot be so high of heaven, but you shall find abundantly more to
admire.

Fifth Use shall be a word of comfort and encouragement to the Use.
people of God according to the necessities of their various conditions, if so
be that the Saints shall enter in with Christ unto the Marriage, unto this
Feast.

First then, Here is matter of encouragement against the troubles and
afflictions the Saints meet with in the world, and from the world. It is true,
this is a time wherein at present the world smiles upon Religion, but they are
but like the Crocodiles smiles, ready to devour them notwithstanding, yea
indeed, her very embraces are killing. But if times should but turn a little,
the world would be the world still, it hates the Saints, and it would discover
it self, what it is, more plainly then now it does; the times will not bear
hostility against the people of God: but suppose such an hour of temptation may
come upon us, this may encourage us against it (brethren): What though the
world may give you gall and vinegar to drink, as they did to Jesus Christ
before, you are now going ready to enter in with the Bridegroom to the
Marriage Feast of new wine, and drink with Heb. 12. 2. etc.
him at his Table in the Fathers kingdom to eternity. Indeed brethren, there is
so much refreshing to a poor creature in this Feast of wine on the lees upon
earth, in the Church, in this poor and dark communion with him, that it is
enough to allay the bitterest cup which God puts into his peoples hands to
drink; witness this comfortable Prophecy, Though you have the bread of
afflictions, and water of adversities, yet will I not remove your Teachers any
more into a corner; give wine to him that, etc. Isa. 30. 20.
Prove. 31. 6. This will sweeten all; one taste of honey and sweetness at the
end of the Rod, (and all wicked men are but Gods rod to chasten his people) I
say, this taste enlightneth the eyes, reviveth the poor drooping fainting soul;
Ah what are the Luke 22. 28.
joys of Heaven then! Again, suppose it be not a persecution for righteousness
sake, but it is from the hand of God for thy sins that thou smartest; yet this
brethren, methinks if our hearts were more upon it, would allay the smart;
there will be a time, when there will be no room for one sigh, nor one groan
more, no interruption will be in your joy. Yea, suppose it be sin that most
troubles thee now, and temptation, and this is a bitter thing indeed to a
gracious heart: O remember brethren, that in the Marriage Feast there will be a
swallowing up of all these things.

Secondly, It may be encouragement to a poor soul that longs, and presses hard
after a fuller communion and fellowship with Christ, Romans 8. 17.
and cannot reach it; but still let them attain to what they can, their desires
are higher, and reaching after more; and that desire 2 Timothy 2. 12.
speaks emptiness in part, and hunger, and that has pain, the soul must needs
be restless in such a condition. O remember brethren, there will be an entrance
into the Marriage Feast, where you shall ever be with the Lord, you shall be
ever drinking with him this new wine in his Fathers Kingdom, at his Kingdom:
suppose there be not that to satisfy and fill thee, in the pipe (though the
Conduits run wine, and the Ordinances be a feast of fat things) still thou
would have more; there brethren, your desires will be swallowed up, your
enjoyments will be above your desires. I know it is a sight of Christ crucified
sitting with us at the Table, which is the reviving of the poor soul; but alas,
he quickly loses that poor imperfect glimpse he had of him; but there shall
thy eye be satisfied with seeing him in his glory, and thine ear with hearing
his blessed voice: there shall thy soul be filled indeed, and always filled,
because always swallowed up in this fellowship and communion with the Lord Jesus.

3. It is matter of encouragement to such, as it may be, are not admitted to
every dish, or every course in this Feast of fat things, this Marriage Feast
upon earth; it may be the people of God may not be satisfied in some, to admit
them, though the Lord have received them, it appears not to them; it may be
their own spirits are not free to enjoy them in such a way as they are to be
had in the places where they live, some stumbling block or other is in the way,
which they cannot get over, and so they mourn after them, but cannot enjoy
them. O that God would remove all stumbling blocks, and help his people so to
prize them, as not upon every slight matter to be kept from them: but suppose
thou can not come poor soul, and yet thy soul longs for them, and happily more
then many that do enjoy them, if thou could without sin. Be of good comfort,
though it is true, thou may lose many a sight of Jesus Christ sitting with
his people at the round table, and thou know not what thou losest, yet if it
Cant. 1. 12.
be mere tenderness of Conscience which keeps thee off, and not perverseness,
thou have sure much of the inward fellowship and communion with Christ,
otherwise he can, if he please, supply it otherwise; but however, though not
admitted among men, thou shall enter in with Christ unto the Marriage-supper
for ever, and this will make amends for all. Though far be it from me to
strengthen any man's hands in the neglect of the Ordinances of Christ on earth,
and take heed, that our excuses will speak loud enough for us in Gods ears,
whatever they do in man's. But if thou can not be admitted to the pipe, Is it
not a comfort that thou shall be admitted to the fountain, to the sea? O
methinks this should put on such above others, make a virtue of necessity, and
so much the more long for his appearing to thee, that thou may enter in with
him to the Marriage Feast.

Fourthly and lastly, It may serve to allay the bitterness of death: It is a
bitter thing, not only to the wicked; it is bitter, it must needs, having the
sting of sin in it, and being a trap-door, 1 Samuel 15. 32.
(as I may say) to let them sink or drop into the everlasting flames, this must
needs be bitter: But to the Saints it is in some sort bitter also, nature is
dissolved by it: it is the fruit of sin, and we find by continual experience of
the Saints, that there is a hanging back; But methinks, this consideration,
that it is an entrance into this Marriage Feast, should much sweeten it to a
child of God. Our Saviors death was the bitterest that ever was endured, O it
was a deadly cup, but this was it that sweetened it, the consideration that he
should drink this new wine with his people in his fathers kingdom, there feast
with him for ever: for the joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross;
so brethren, do but set before you continually this joy, this pouring out of
this love Heb. 12. 2.
of Christ upon your souls, those immediate, sincere; full, constant, and
eternal delights of your souls in the light and love of the Father, and of the
Son, and see if it swallow not up the bitterness of death unto you? But so much
for this Doctrine. -- (...). Here is the second Consideration of Verse 10.
this coming of the Bridegroom, a doleful consideration it is to all such as
were not ready, for the door was shut; what is the sense of shutting the door
in the Parable, I suppose is easily understood, (that is to say) an entrance is
denied to them that were without; as well as they that were within, were shut
in by the shutting of the door. But I conceive that is the thing meant here;
the scope of the Verse being to show the different end of a believer and an
hypocrite; the one is received into the Marriage Feast, the other is shut out,
the door is clapped against them.

The Doctrine will be a sad word; it is this, That the Gate of Doctr.
heaven, or the door will be clapped against all formal Professors, and foolish
Virgins that are not ready to enter with Christ; for this is implied in the
other part of the words; they that were ready, entered with Christ into the
Marriage, and the door was shut; upon whom? surely upon them that were not
ready for that his coming; whatever hopes they are big with, now they prove
abortive. There is a door of entrance into Heaven, and an outer door, (as I may
say) which I may call a door of hope, which the Hypocrite has not, when it
comes to a pinch, not a well-grounded hope, The wicked is driven away in his
wickedness, but the righteous has hope in his death. There is a door of hope
Prove. 14. 32.
to him, but none to the wicked; but his hope which he had before, many times
at death, is like the giving up of the Ghost; Job 11. 20: Rev. 22. 15.
without are dogs, etc. either filthy persons, such as with the Dog returns
to the vomit again, after their sorrow, and vomiting up their sweet morsels;
such as with the Dog are sometimes 2. Pet. 2. 22.
sin-sick, and seem to repent, to vomit up the bottom of their stomachs, but
return to it again with delight after their repentance, and tears, and prayers;
these are shut out. Dogs also, who are they, but such barking, biting,
foul-mouthed, false Teachers? such as the Apostle speaks of, Beware of Dogs,
evil workers, of the concision; beware of such as would bring in the Phil. 3. 2.
circumcision as necessary to Salvation; beware of these, they are Dogs, though
they may seem never so zealous and holy, have a sheep-skin upon them, they are
Dogs, and Woolves, and all manner of workers of iniquity, as Sorcerers,
Whoremongers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie. Why, you
will say, these are not Hypocrites sure, they are downright profane persons?
brethren, a man may live in these sins many of them, and yet carry a fair show,
but the gate shall be shut against them, whoever they be. As for Adultery, or
whoring, though men be not guilty of the outward act, is there not
heart-adultery? is there not contemplative wickedness? against which Job
resolves, I made a Govenant with mine eye, why should I think upon a maid? he
that lusts after her beauty in the heart, commits Job 31. 1.
adultery with her in his heart; yea brethren, by the thoughts, the very
spirits (as I may say) and oil of sin are squeezed out, or extracted, as in a
Limbeck, and that is more deadly and dangerous; Prove. 6. 25. Mat. 5. 28.
a man may eat a thing, and do him no great hurt, but the oil of it is deadly,
happily. So the Murderer, it may be many a man that has a form of Godliness,
never imbrued his hands in blood, but his heart has been steeped in blood,
full of envious and malicious thoughts, he can with wishes and desires of
revenge and malice murder and bury all his neighbors. And so, though it may
be we make no pictures of Images, or fall down before them, to give them any
absolute or relative worship, yet we have Idols in our hearts, we love money,
are covetous it may be, and this is idolatry, and fall down to our own parts,
our own gifts, and live in this, like it well; these brethren, shall have the
door shut against them, and such as love and make lies, though officious lies,
to help others; nothing more ordinary in men's Callings and Shops, then to lie,
and speak falsely for a little advantage; and yet it may be have a color, and a
show of Profession, and allow themselves in these things; They shall be shut
out, the door shall be clapped against them; many shall seek to enter, but shall
not be able. No marvel, for the Gate is not only strait, but shut against them;
it is strait, Luke* 13. 24.
when it stands open in men's lives, and they will not strive, and therefore
fall short. But now this strait Gate is shut against them, and therefore they
cannot enter. But so much for the proof of this Doctrine; I shall not stay long
upon it, nor indeed is it needful, having spoken before to their surprizal.

Only a word or two brethren, for the opening of the Point, and then to confirm
it, and then some short application of it to our selves. For the opening of it,
What is meant by the unreadiness here supposed? for it is against them that the
door is shut; And then the shutting of the door, what is meant by that? First
then, What is meant by this unreadiness? I hope you have not altogether
forgotten what was spoken lately to the readiness of a poor creature to enter
in with Christ to heaven, which if you remember, you may easily conceive what
it is to be unready; we will not speak to the readiness for an abundant
entrance, but only for an entrance into heaven, and you remember they were such
things as these.

1. There must be a pardon of a man's sins, a righteousness of faith in the
blood of Jesus Christ, else a man is never ready; Every Zach. 13. 1.
unbeliever therefore is unready, let him be as specious in his shows and
pretenses as he may, yet he is unready, he is in his sins condemned, etc. Joh.
3. And though the Gate of mercy, and the kingdom of Grace ^^and open for
sinners to come to Jesus Christ, yet the Gate of Heaven, whereby an entrance is
made into Glory, stands not open to any, but such as are pardoned, have the
robes of their elder Brother, the Lord Jesus, Joh. 8. 21.
upon them. Ah how sad a word is that of the Jews, ye shall die in your sins;
then surely brethren, they are not ready for heaven, the door will be shut
against them.

2. There must be a dying to sin, as well as a pardon of sin, before we can be
ready; as you heard; the roots must be withered before the wall be tumbled
down; therefore every unmortified man or woman is unready. Hear this word of
the Lord, ye whose Lusts are yet in their full strength, your pride and
hardness of heart, and sensoriousness, your looseness and wantonness, you that
walk with a froward mouth, and perverse lips, Prove. 6. 12. and 18.
whose hearts devise mischief, whose feet make haste to do evil; it is an ill
sign that the old man is mortified, you are an abomination to God, as the wise
man speaks, and will he not clap the door against all such workers of iniquity?
no evil can dwell with Psalm. 5. 4.
God. Ah brethren, you that cherish that old man of sin, (as I may say) rub
him, and chafe him, and pour wine, and strong drink into him, aqua vitae, and
spirits into him; by your meditations of sin, vain thoughts, lustful, proud,
passionate thoughts nourish your sins ordinarily, and so blow up the coal into
a flame, you are far from mortifying your lusts: instead of bringing water and
the blood of Jesus Christ, to kill your sins, you bring to the flame: well, all
unmortified persons are unready, let our profession be what it will, the door
will be clapped upon such, I mean such as are altogether unmortified, have done
nothing in the work. I know a child of God may not be so mortified as he
should, and sometimes for some acts may cherish sin, use the bellows to the
fire within, but it costs him bitterness afterward; he lives not in such a
course: If he do, it is good for him to be jealous of himself how the case
stands with him.

Thirdly, He is unready that has no real holiness put upon him, without it
none shall see God; he knows his prima facie, as I may say, he can see the
image and comeliness upon a soul if it be Heb. 12. 14.
there: If not, he will not own any bastards, any supposititious children,
changelings that Satan lays in the lap of the Church, as I may say, and rocks
in the Cradle of security, but the Lord will shut the door against them. This
real holiness, you know what it is, a conformity to the will of God in our
understandings, 1 John 1. 5.
light as he is light, and no darkness in him. In our wills and affections,
conformity to his will revealed to us. A holy disposition of heart to do his
will, suffer his will, and delight in it; which occasioneth our grief when we
cannot; well, this is holiness. Hear this then ye that never mind the will of
God, purblind ignorant creatures, stubborn rebellious creatures, you that have
iron sinnews and brazen faces, which refuse to return or to be ashamed, though
the Lord do blazen your iniquities before you continually by his Heralds, which
cry aloud, and teach Jacob their transgressions, and Israel their sins, and
spare you not, nor spare themselves, yet you refuse to return, and to be
ashamed to conform to Isa. 58. 1.
the will of Christ; you never were brought to that sweet submissive frame of
Paul, Lord, what would thou have me to do? Acts. 9.
Well, believe it, thou art unready, the gate will be clapped against thee.

Fourthly, Then others are unready; And who are those? Such as have received
work to do, and they have not done it, men of no action for Christ; then the
Apostle was ready, and our Savior, when they had done their work he gave them
to do: Christ had wrought out a perfect righteousness for his people, and
therefore he went up to heaven, and the world sees him no more, Joh. 16. 8, 9.
and this the Spirit convinces the world of; if he had not done that work
perfectly, heaven would not have held him: Remember this then Brethren, they
are unready that have not done their work, whether Magistrates, Ministers, or
private people: He gives to his servants, some five talents, some ten, some
two, some one; mind you, he that had but one, happily out of envy at others who
had more, or dejection and discouragement, or thinking he had little, and
therefore could do little good with it, hid it in a Napkin, and did not trade
with it; and therefore, was the gate open to him? No, thou wicked and sloathful
servant, says the Mat. 25. 26.
Master to him, etc. and so he is cast off; the merchandise os wisdom is better
then the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof then Prove. 3. 14.
fine gold: that is to say, the great gain and improvement that comes by using
the wisdom and knowledge, the gifts and graces which God gives us; O the
tongue of the just is as choice silver, and the lips of the righteous feed
many. Do we do our work Brethren? Prove. 10. ^0, 21.
or have we never set stroke in it? God has given some charge of souls, how
little have they done in it? Masters of Families have the charge of children,
of servants, their souls, you have done nothing, you have gifts and parts
enough for every thing else. Well Brethren, such shall be shut out also.

Now to show you two or three sorts of persons, who will likely be unready in
some, or all these respects.

First then, all such as trisle away their time in the world, spending their
strength for that which profits not, laboring for the Luke 14. 18.
meat which perishes, which will not endure to eternal life: you see the world
was that which kept them from coming to the Feast in the Gospel, one could not
have while, another could not have while: a man cannot have two treasures,
except he had two hearts, two contrary treasures, earth and heaven both; and
where the treasure is, there will the heart be also; therefore Brethren, Mat.
6. 21.
while men are so altogether taken up with the world, they cannot but neglect
the main thing, and so are found unready. ^et worldlings hear this word and
tremble, if any others be likely to be found unready, you are the men. Even the
people of God themselves, if they be unready in part, it is the world likely
will put them out of order, off the hinges; take heed, says our Savior, your
hearts be not at any time overcharged with the cares of this world, because
there is no time but that day may overtake Luke 21. 34.
you, and then you will be taken unawares; therefore much more a man that is
drowned and buried in the world, he will be sure to be unready.

Secondly, Such as do but dally with God, and Religion, and the things of
eternity; they spend themselves and their strength to feed a formality, to put
forth broad and pleasant leaves, and there is all; but for faith, and
repentance, and the great works of a Christian, they scarce ever meddle with
them at all; they go to the creature here with the foolish Virgins, go to the
opinions of others, to the graces of others, to their flattering parasite
Preachers, to be seared and daubed up; such as these are likely to be found
unready, none in more danger then a formal professor.

Thirdly, Such as fail in the midst of their Christian course, as you see these
Virgins did; usually such are hardly recovered again, for you see how they
wandered up and down from mountain to hill, from creature to creature, and come
not to Jesus Christ. So in the Gospel, when the unclean spirit is gone out of a
Mat. 12. 43.
man, etc. Such are like to the Laodiceans, spised out of the mouth of God,
which none returns to again; the Dog returns to Rev. 3. 17.
the vomit, but not a man; our time is fruitful in experiences of this kind;
you see the door is here shut against those Virgins which failed, I mean it of
a total Apostasy, not partial declinings; such the Saints themselves had, the
wise Virgins, but the other lost all, true saving grace they had none, their
form, their profession, it went out, and then they were in darkness, could not
expect the coming of their Lord with their Lamps burning. So much for the
opening of it.

The door is shut, the meaning of this is no more, but that an entrance into
heaven is denied unto them that are not ready, there is no mansion made ready
for them that are not made ready for these mansions: the Lord Jesus he is the
door into the Church, Ioh. 14. 2.
the Kingdom of grace, and into the Kingdom of glory, as you have beard, they
that enter, must enter in by Jesus Christ, have access by him; now he will shut
the door, that is to say, shut up his bowels and tender mercies for ever;
though they have been Joh. 10. 17.
opened to poor sinners here upon earth, then they shall be shut up, he will
have no more compassion on them, but when they cry and call, shut out their
prayers; they have clapped the door of their hearts and locked them against him,
and now will he shut up Prove. 1. 28.
his heart, and lock it against them for ever. Time was when the Jews might
have found Jesus Christ, but now, says he, ye shall seek me, and shall not
find me, but shall dye in your sins. Indeed Brethren, Ioh. 8. 21.
the door may be shut against a man here on earth, after Gods waiting upon a
people to be gracious to them, he swear in Psalm. 95. 11.
his wrath, they should never enter into his rest, which was a type of heaven.
And so those that were invited to the feast, they shall not taste of my
dainties, says the King, for they are not worthy; If men refuse and reject the
Gospel, either professedly or in practice, no marvel if the Lord turn the key
of heaven gates upon them, and they be shut out, without any more hope for Mat.
22. 7, 8.
ever.

For the Arguments to confirm this a little.

First, Because this feast in heaven admits no Guests without a wedding
garment, without holiness no entrance into heaven, no man Heb. 12. 14. Ioh. 17.
3.
shall see the Lord, except the Lord Jesus have known them, and they have known
him, which is life eternal: for so the Apostle puts them together, we know that
we know him, or rather are known of him, else Brethren, there is no entrance,
he knows no man, will acknowledge none then, but with a wedding garment here,
in the administrations of the Kingdom of grace; a person may creep into the
feast withont the wedding garment indeed, for the word preached, it is for all,
but the distinguishing Ordinances men may be admitted to happily, though they
have no wedding garment, as you have it in that place of Matthew, but he shall
not abide there, but shall be cast out, he will bind him hand and foot, and
cast him out; though he ^eaveth the admittance Mat. 22. 11, 13.
of them into the visible Church and visible communion in his ordinances to us,
who can judge but according to appearance and by the rules of charity; yet
himself comes and vieweth the guests, and who are fit to be owned as the
guests of heaven, that shall have entrance there, he whose eyes are a flame of
fire, or like it, piercing into the inwards of our souls, to see what our
spirits are clothed with. And if he takes it so ill of them that creep into
the Communion of his Saints and Ordinances here below without a
wedding garment; Surely then, he will never admit any to this feast of new wine
to eternity, without such a wedding garment.

Secondly, Another Argument or Consideration to make this out, may be this,
they that are unready shall not enter, the door shall be shut upon them,
because they have neglected, despised the Lord Jesus, who is the door, and has
the key of David, and opens Rev. 3. 7. Romans 10. 21. Isa. 65. 2.
and shuts, therefore now, they shall be rejected; the door has stood open
all the day long, all the day long has he stretched out his hands to a
rebellious and gainsaying people; he would have gathered them, and they would
not, therefore now he will not; now he will despise them, as they have despised
him, and there is all the reason that can be, that they that would have none of
Christ, by whom alone there is access to the Father and to this glory, that he
should have none of them neither; they have resisted the motions of his Spirit,
the Holy Ghost offering to convince them, and now he will resist them, clap the
door against them.

Thirdly, Because now the time of our working and Gods waiting is at an end;
God has long waited to be gracious to us, but now there is an end of waiting,
he sees it would do no good, as long as sinners could for sorrow, or pain, or
death, hold their vanities, keep their sins, their sweet morsels, they would
never spit them out, therefore now he will wait no more; though men were
unready when Christ comes, yet if he would stay a while longer, wait a year
longer: O if it might be but a Sabbath, but a day, what new creatures would men
become? they will promise fair: No, no, the time of waiting is done, he will
not stay a jot, they have had warning enough, the cry has past before him
often enough, Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet him, but you
have not taken the warning; now when he comes and receives his own which were
ready for him, no more waiting, the door is shut. Though here in the Kingdom of
grace God may be Luke 13. 7, 9.
entreated to spare a barren tree or Vineyard a year or two longer, yet when
the time of waiting is at an end, and he sees nothing will do, he will down
with them by the roots, into the fire with them; so it is no time for us to
work then, to think of putting on Christ then: if we would gather Manna, it must
be upon the six days, there was none to be found upon the seventh. If we
understand this of the day of the resurrection from the dead, then it is clear,
as the tree falls so it lyoth, either hell-ward or Exodus 16.
heavenward: But if of the time of death, truly Brethren, how ever this may
sometimes through the exceeding riches of his grace be a time of repentance and
faith to some, yet ordinarily it is not so. Alas they have enough to do to bear
the weakness upon them, they can mind little else; or if they do return, it is
but feignedly for the most part, with Judas; and usually, when a sinner has so
long trampled under foot the blood of Jesus Christ, the Lord gives them up to
hardness of heart, that they shall never repent or believe, seeing, they shall
see and not perceive, Isa. 6. 9.
etc. least they should be converted and he should heal them, as it is there in
the Revelations, Let him that is filthy be filthy still, let him Rev. 22. ^1.
that is an hypocrite, be an hypocrite still, this is fearful indeed. So much
for the Arguments.

For the Application, Then Brethren, What have we all of us to bless the Lord
for, that yet the door is not shut against us, as we may hope; indeed if God
have sealed up any heart under hardness, because of its long resisting the
Holy Ghost, woeful is his condition: but does he not breath now and then, and
stir and strive, that is a good sign he has not done with thee yet, his
waiting and striving time is not over, he has not given thee over yet, etc.
What have we to bless the Lord for? what are our lives Brethren good to us for
in any respect besides, but that we might work out our salvation, make sure of
God, and Christ, and heaven, get our wedding garment on, put on the Lord Jesus
for righteousness and holiness, that our nakedness may not appear, for heaven
will not bear the nakedness of a sinner; now, though sinners have neglected
this opportunity, alas how many of us have we are exceeding busy, making
provision for our lusts, our pride, our luxury, our backs, our bellies,
provision for our wives, our children, but none for our poor souls; and yet
notwithstanding this, he waits, the door stands open: If you had many of
you been cut off a year or a month ago, and the grave had shut her mouth upon
you, would you not have found heaven shut against you, and hell opening her
mouth wide for to swallow you up? Yea Brethren, if this day he should come, Ah
I fear, I fear, Brethren, as secure as many of us are now, and sure of our
conditions, we should find the gate clapped against our souls: O therefore
Brethren bless the Lord, admire his patience and long-suffering, that yet
draws out our day of grace, that yet holds his bowels open, his arms open
to receive us. This is the first.

Secondly, Then it may serve to lay before us the doleful condition of poor
trifling creatures, trifling professors, that notwithstanding all the ado they
make with their Lamps, trimming of them, and going up and down to buy, they are
found unready, the door is clapped against them; the Lord grant that none of your
poor souls may ever see that woeful day Brethren, you will then know to your
bitterness and sorrow, what it is to sin away a day of grace, an opportunity,
while the door stood open to receive you: Ah surely there will nothing wound
poor sinners more then this, the time was, I might have been happy, I might
have had heaven, the bowels of the Lord Jesus stood open to me as well as to
others, but now alas it is past; did it make the Lord Jesus weep for Jerusalem,
and was not her condition sad then, and will it not make your hearts bleed? O
sure it cannot be, but every Luke 19. 42.
such thought to Esau, profane Esau, poor Esau, when the blessing was gone he
sought it with tears, every thought sure of this time was, I might have had the
blessing, but wretch that I was, I sinned it away, I despised it, preferred a
mess of pottage before it, and therefore now there is no recovery of it. Every
thought sure in hell, that heaven gate did stand open to you sinners, you had
as fair offers of grace and as long a season and opportunity to close with
Christ as others, but now they are gone, will fetch blood from your very hearts
and souls: O the condition is sad and doleful!

Thirdly, It shall be a word of Exhortation to us all, that we would lay these
things to heart, It may be we have not so much minded them; If this be true
Brethren, What need had we to look to it, that we be found ready to enter?
which is an Exhortation. I have already pressed upon you, there is a promise left
of entering, and a threatening also that some shall not enter, even as many as
are not ready; you see it here by the wise Virgins who enter, and the foolish
against whom the door is shut; and the Apostle to the Hebrews, Take heed lest
any of you fall short through unbelief, Heb. 3. 18.
as those fell short; the Apostle makes that use of it, to warn the Hebrews,
though Disciples in profession, and many of them doubtless in reality such; so
here from this example, I desire Brethren, both mine own and your hearts may be
quickened to look about us, lest when all comes to all, we have the gate of
heaven clapped upon us.

1. Then you that are yet in the gall of bitterness and the bonds of iniquity,
have yet your filthy garments upon you, your rotten Acts 8.
filthy rags of your own services, duties, prayers, alms, as if those were a
wedding garment; you that are more profane it Zech. 3.
may be, and cloth your selves with violence, as with a Cloak, and with
cursing, as with a garment; and so for all manner of Psalm. 73. 6.
profane persons, I would beg of you for Jesus Christ sake this day, you would
consider this doleful word, the gate will be shut against you, if you be found
unready for the appearing of Christ. Now there is none of you but your
consciences will tell you, that Psalm. 109. 18.
you are not ready for it; can a drunkard, a swearer, a blasphemer, be ready
for the coming of Christ? can you hold up your heads sinners, when he appears,
and look him in the face with comfort? Ah no. Either men believe not this
coming of Christ to them, or else because it is not present, they put it far
from them, therefore they are not affected with it. O that I could preach this
day Brethren, as if hell were at sinners backs, as if the Lord Jesus were at
your backs now ready to call for you out of this world, that you may be a
little startled. That I would beg of you, shall be this, that you would without
any more ifs and ands, without any more delays, set about this work, to make
ready for his appearing, lest the gate be clapped upon you; you have too long
delayed it already, therefore now, if ever, set about the work.

What would you have us to do? you will say; I answer Brethren, without any
more delay, to consider your ways, and turn to the Lord, to repent that you
may believe, and believe that you may repent. O that you might have hearts to
believe this terrible threatening, that so your hearts might be shaken (sinners)
out of your security; for this is the reason you make nothing of all these
things, you do not believe that there will be a shutting out, or you do not
consider it, and that your selves are as likely to be the men that have the
door shut upon you as any others; O therefore learn this day, a necessity of
believing, if you would not be shut out, a necessity of repenting; you see they
were shut out by reason of unbelief. I know what answer your hearts Heb. 3. 19.
will make to this, If believing will do it, you will never be shut out, for
you do believe, and will believe, and have believed; always you have had a good
heart, and a good faith toward God and Christ; Brethren, I tell you, that you
never looked upon the Brazen Serpent for healing, if you were never wounded; It
is for them thatare wounded. You that are all faith now, before God have
touched your hearts, and set your sins in order before you; if ever God come
and show you your guilt, there will be nothing but doubting, and fears, and
terrors; It is an evident sign to me, that a sinner never did believe, because
he makes so light a matter of it: No, no, Brethren, you do not come to him
indeed: the door stands open now, and you are invited to come and enter in by
the door, by Jesus Christ, into the Marriage Feast, but you do not come to him;
O therefore be exhorted sinners, now while the door stands open, to come and
enter in, take heed you fall not short by your unbelief; and then upon this
faith in Jesus Christ will follow a Gospel-repentance, a melting and mourning
over the Lord Jesus, whose love and bowels you have abused, and the love of
Jesus Christ will constrain you to another course of life then you have led,
quite contrary, you will not be the same men: O break off your sins by
righteousness, be abrupt Dan. 4. 27.
in your repentance, in greatest haste; men think it is hard to break off in
the midst of such a design for the world, or suddenly to leave their companions
in sin, but by degrees they will do it; O break off, etc. Again,

Secondly, For you that have somewhat more then ordinary of a profession of
Jesus Christ, I beg of you to look to it Brethren, that you have the main
thing, lest when all comes to all, the door be shut upon you, as upon those
foolish Virgins; me thinks if we did but consider how many poor souls of great
hope have gone out and sunk under such a sad disappointment as this is, it were
enough to startle us all: O look to your footing Brethren, for Jesus sake look
to your Evidences, the day is coming, that if we be not ready, there will be no
entrance for us, let us pass for what we will here among men. I cannot stand to
press these things, I have already spoken much to the same purpose before.

1. I pray you consider, that upon this moment of time, (for our lives in
comparison of eternity are no more) a hand breadth, a shadow, a vapor, nothing;
you that have lived thirty, sixty Psalm. 39.
years in sin, now it is past the season you have had in your pleasures, what
is it but like a dream when it is past? but as short as this time is, upon it
depends eternity; he hangs the heavyest weights upon the weakest wires: O
Brethren, me thinks if men did but believe this, and it were present now and
then upon their thoughts, there is an eternity to be enjoyed or lost, an
eternity to be endured or avoided, an endless happiness or endless misery; this
should make you see to it, to make sure you be ready, lest this gate be shut
upon you: Brethren, you live to eternity, and you dye to eternity; how careful
was that Painter of every line, very exact, took much time to draw a piece, O
says he, Eternitati pingo. As you live here, so shall you live to eternity: If
in sin, Brethren, you shall lie down in an eternal bed of sorrow, in
everlasting burnings shall your souls be rouled up together; if you make it
your work to make ready, to be found ready for his appearing, there is an
entrance into everlasting joys, a feast which never shall have end.

2. Though time be short whereupon eternity depends, yet you have time
Brethren, though it is true, none but the present time be yours, that which is
past is gone, that which is to come, you know not what it may produce, whether
you shall see it or no, but you have a time, now while it is called to day; Ah
Brethren, some of us have had a long day, our day of grace has had already,
some six, some seven, some eleven hours, and yet it is day with us, we have not
wanted time, but we have wasted it, trifled it away, but since yet there is
time, let this stir us up: O the long-suffering of God should lead you to
repentance: Ah blessed Romans 2. 4.
are your ears, for they hear, and your eyes, for they see; Brethren, they see
a crucified Christ held out before you, with his arms stretched out all the day
long ready to receive you, they see the door open, stand open for poor sinners
to come: Your ears, they hear the joyful sound, now you are called upon, and
entreated to be reconciled, to believe. Well, you cannot say, sinners, another
day, but that the Lord gave you space to repent, space to make sure of heaven,
but you neglected it.

3. This opportunity and season, it is headlong, it stays not^, makes haste;
and to keep pace with your season of grace, you must make haste, and if it be
once lost, it is never recovered again. O therefore Brethren, with the greatest
haste I beg of you, to set about this work, lest at last you cry out, all too
late, all too late, as it is said of a Lady that likely spent her time vainly;
but when she came to her deathbed, O then she lamentably cries out, O time,
time, a world of wealth for a moment of time, an inch of time. Opportunity is
bald behind, there is no hold to be taken of it, only by redeeming it; double
your diligence, if you have lost a great part of your season; have you been
idling and loytering a great part of the harvest? Now therefore lay about you
so much the more earnestly, for the opportunity cannot be recalled when once it
is past, that is the third. O what would the damned, that have been damned from
under such means and mercies as you enjoy, give for one of their Sabbaths, for
one of their Sermons, for one of the many days you enjoy! but it is past help.

4. Consider Brethren, If the door be shut by Jesus Christ, none else can open
it; and he will not himself open it any more, and what will become of you then?
It may be sinners think this is not so sad a word, that the door shall be shut,
they think they can bring a golden key of their own that shall open it: No, no,
believe it Brethren, it is the key of David only that can open and shut this
door, and this Jesus Christ alone has the Wards of, Rev. 3. 7.
your keys are not fitted for this lock; he shuts therefore, and no man
opens, none else whatsoever opens: Nor will he open it himself any more to
them, he knows full well upon whom it is that he shuts the gate; he
knows who are, and who are not his; who are ready, and who are not. O
therefore Brethren, I beseech you consider it, now while you have time, before
it be too late, while there is hope concerning this thing; O let not the world,
Brethren, nor your sinful pleasures eat out all your time, consume your season
of grace, except they could open the gate of heaven for you; if they could, it
were somewhat indeed for men to baffle so with Christ, and trifle away their
souls as they do; but if you will not believe, nor be persuaded by any thing
which in so much weakness can be said, nor by what is delivered in a better
manner by others, you shall see it to your sorrow, when you come to heaven gate
and find it shut against you. O then you shall know Brethren, what it was to
have such a warning, to flee from the wrath to come, and not have a heart to
embrace it. Thus much for this Application, and this Doctrine.

Verses 11, 12. Afterward came also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord,
open to us; but he answered and said to them, verily I say unto you, I know you
not.
I Would take up two or three brief Notes from these words.

That men may come very near to heaven, and yet be shut out, never enter into
heaven. Doctr.


Which, though it be much what the same with a former observation, I will speak
a few words to it here, if it were nothing else but to refresh your memories,
and but a word or two of it. It is plainly taken up from the Parable here, the
foolish Virgins they kept their Lamps burning long, until the very point of the
Bride-grooms coming; yea not only so, but when the door was shut and others
received, which whether it be at the day of judgment, or at each particular
souls particular day, we will not now enquire; but yet they come (mind you)
after all this, and they bounce against heaven gate, as I may ^ay, they cry,
Lord, Lord, open to us; they would have heaven, and come to the very gate, as I
may say, and they seek it of Jesus Christ too, and they are very earnest in it,
the doubling of the expression imports; it is not a cold frozen prayer, such as
many an hypocrite, yea sometimes many a child of God puts up, but an earnest
cry, Lord, Lord, O Lord save us, shut us not out, save us, we perish, we sink,
hell opens her mouth to swallow us up, O quickly open to us, or we are gone.
Did not Israel come out of Egypt, and march through the wilderness, and through
many difficulties, and enemies, and temptations there, and come to the very
borders of Canaan, and yet fell back again, were turned into the wilderness
again? the Lord swear they should never enter into his rest: Many run, says
the Apostle, but all obtain not; yea some do run to the very last, until 1 Cor.
9. 24.
they be even within sight of the Goal, and yet there sink and perish. So Joash
did, he ran far, and yet fell short when all was 2 Chro. 24. 2.
done. And when many fell back from Christ, Judas continued with him, the Bag
its likely kept him more then Christ; but he Joh. 6 66.
continued until the very last, and then perished. There was but one step, as I
may say, between the young man in the Gospel and heaven, he went very far, did
much, he had kept all those things from his youth; yet there was one thing
wanting, which he could Mat. 19. 20.
not reach too; our Savior convinced him thereby how short he was, and had
need of a Savior; but we find not that he came to him any more: How near was
Ananias to the Kingdom of God? he professed Christ in those persecuting times,
owned him, but it seems his love of the world and distrust was not killed; he
went far as well as others, to sell all he had, and to lay it at the Apostles
feet, a very great piece of self-denial, only a little reservation in
hypocrisy you see, carried him aside, and he perished. To make this a little
better appear, consider,

First, That the light and principles of nature will carry a man very far; how
far did many of the Heathens go? how Saintlike would they speak? and how
heroically and self-denyingly would they act many times? Yea, and some of them
in their whole course, to the shame of most Christians; the sparks of our own
kindling will rise and fly upward, but yet they fall short: Isa. 27.
Because alas, 1. It leads us not to Jesus Christ, and by his own strength no
man shall prevail for heaven, but he must lay hold upon the strength of God in
Christ. The Doctrine of Jesus Christ is a mystery hid from ages, from all
people, but where the Lord is pleased by the preaching of the Gospel to make
manifest the savor thereof. Now there is no other name, but the name o^ Jesus
Christ whereby men can be saved. 2. Because alas, there is not any of them but
they hold the truth in unrighteousness; though Acts 4. 11.
they do much, yet they have a light more abundant in them then they walk up
to. It is imprisoned in their understandings, not shed abroad upon their
hearts, so that they could see nothing but folly and that which is worse. And
so every one must needs be condemned of his own heart.

Secondly, Common grace and gifts of grace, that will carry a man very far,
there is a taste of the heavenly gift, and the powers of Heb. 6. 4.
the world to come; and this will seem to enliven and warm the affections, and
carry out a man to do great things; as those foolish Virgins had, and so
Ananias, and others.

Thirdly, with all these, a man's secret false ends concurring, help to carry on
a man far. Judas had the bag, which he loved more then Christ, and as long as
he had the bag he was well enough, he could follow on; so long as there were
loaves to be had by following Christ, what multitudes follow him, and throng
upon him? Our Savior knew their deepest ends, though happily they saw them not;
their hearts were too deep for themselves, but not for him. So many ends, so
many springs and weights there are upon Ioh. 6. 26.
a man, which will add somewhat of strength to him in his course; they are
indeed the marrow of the bones that moysten them, and give life and vigor to
his actions. So it may be a man cannot keep his conscience quiet, it is roused
a little, and is dogged, and snarls, and it will not be quiet, except he stop
the mouth of it with some duty and service, and following the ways of God as
to the externals. And so a man's glory and honor, specially when Religion is in
repute, it is a dishonor to be esteemed otherwise; men's reputations will carry
them further then we are aware of. Yea, if the ways of God were
discountenanced, yet a man may go far in them upon this end, to have his name
much set by, as a courageous heroical spirit, he may suffer much, and yet not
love Jesus Christ: It is then, love to himself, to his honor, or somewhat else
that is the ground of it; but alas, Brethren, when all this is done, it may
carry a man near the Kingdom of heaven, but he shall fall short. And that upon
these two considerations.

First, because, though they may come near Christ, and happily delude themselves,
and think they have him, yet they never were ingra^ted into him; and historical
faith and temporary, that will comply with the times, a man may have, and
miraculous too, and yet never implanted into Christ; and then, though a man may
come near the Kingdom of heaven, yet if be he Christless, he is undone, he must
needs be shut out. The Lord will in giving those gifts, those common gifts of
the Spirit to men, honor himself by them; he will have glory, but they may
never have the comfort of them, they may tend to their further sinking and
condemnation.

Secondly, because that all those things, though precious in themselves, yet
they never change a man's heart, it remains the same still, so they never do
him real spiritual good; Judas a traitor, a Devil, though it appeared not to
men, because clothed over with so many common gifts and graces. And so Ananias
his heart was not thoroughly changed. Alas Brethren, the giving of these gifts
to men, whereby they do much, as a gift of prayer, or a gift of prophesying, or
preaching, whereby they do much, and pass for eminent persons with men, they
are but like flowers laid in a window, as Doctor Preston compares them, they
grow not; Or else, as outlandish plants removed into another Country, they
grow not, they prosper not, because the soil is not changed; the grace they
have does not redundare in personam, make their persons good, no more then a
pearl in a swines snou^, changes the nature of the swine; the pearl is a pearl
and precious, but the swine is a swine, and filthy in her disposition. And so
beauty in a whorish woman, it is beautiful and lovely, but she is nevertheless
whorish and abominable; and therefore notwithstanding all the Seize of a
man by nature, by common grace, by his own ends, which will carry him very far,
put a great luster upon him, seem to bid fair for heaven, carry a man after the
things of God to the very last, it may be, yet it will not change a man, and
therefore no admittance for him, he is shut out when all is done.

First then Brethren, If a man may go so far and yet fall short, Use 1.
What will become of them that never set foot forward toward heaven to this
day? It is true, many come to hear the word now and then, or constantly; I make
account this is but little, when it comes to the doing, the practicing: What
have you done to this day many of you? the young man in the Gospel did all Mat.
19. 20.
those things, he thought, and that from his youth, and yet you see he fell
short: Thou never did any of those things, thou never did love the Lord thy
God, worship him as thou ought, make nothing of renting his name in
pieces, of profaning his day: what else means so many idling, so many
sporting themselves, so many walking up and down, so many drinking upon the
Sabbath Day? thy parents, thou never did honor them; thou have been an
unclean wretch, injurious, thy tongue taught to tell lies and speak folly, a
covetous wretch. Brethren, what do you mean? sure you will never come so much
as near the Kingdom of heaven: If any perish, you are the sinners are sure to
perish. They fell short that came to Canaan, what will become of you that never
came out of Egypt? if you are yet by your fleshpots, your Garlic and Onions
of Egypt, and will not be beaten off your loathsome delights of the flesh, your
mirth, and company, and gaming, and dicing, and drabbing, and drinking: Must a
man's righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Pharisees, or he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God; Do you believe Mat. 5. 20.
this Brethren? What will become of thee then, that art so far from what they
did? they prayed often, much, and long; they fasted often, they gave much alms,
paid tithe of all; they were no extortioners, nor unjust, but thou art such a
one; they were no drunkards, but thou art a drunkard; they were no unclean
adulterers, but thou art one; and yet they fell short, and where will thou
appear? the Lord show you how unlikely you are for heaven.

Secondly, this shows also the woeful condition of hypocrites, Use 2.
they carry a sair sail, and seem it may be to be driven with as fair a gale as
any; only there is a Leak spr^ng in the bottom, and they sink, or rock
themselves just in the very harbor; this is the saddest of all the rest, many
a storm they have ridden out, they have endured many a wave, and to split
themselves in the very harbor, within sight of the land; as a man miscarrying
just at the gate of the City of Refuge: O how high must such men's hopes have
been! and how low will their hearts sink now when so ^adly disappointed? hope
so disappointed makes ashamed, confounds the soul: as Esau his hopes were at
the highest, when he came with his Venison to his ^ather; this will kill the
heart. O Brethren, above all others, hypocrites will be clothed with the
deepest confusion, because they have been men of the fairest hopes for heaven.
Therefore it is said, he went away sorrowful; for it must needs be so, for he
was a man of more light then Mat. 19. 22.
others, and surely had a conviction that Jesus was the Messiah, and that it
would be advantageous to have him, and therefore coming Job. 27. 9.
so near to him, and yet put back, he went away sorrowful: another man would
have made nothing of such a repulse: hypocrites have great enlightnings, and
they have had a taste of the heavenly gift, as I may say, as Israel had a bunch
of grapes to taste the sweetness of Canaan, and encourage them to go in to
possess it. Numb. 13. 23.
O this, when God turned them back into the wilderness for their rebellion,
that they should perish there, was a great aggravation of their misery; if they
had never come so near it, and never tasted of it, they had not known what they
had lost, what they had deprived themselves of. So here surely Brethren,
hypocrites have many a taste, they have some glimmerings of heavens light and
glory, somewhat they have to draw them on to the very borders, therefore for
them to be turned off here and shut out, O sure it will much aggravate their
misery: Ah wretch that I was, to come so near, take so much pains for heaven,
and yet that I should miss it, will be the doleful ditty of hypocrites to
eternity.

Thirdly, It may teach all young beginners, that are now, as I may say,
starting in the race that is set before us, that you look to it, Brethren, you
be so furnished as to be able to run so as to obtain; 1. Cor. 9. 14.
you are now launching into the deep, O look to it there be not a privy leak
somewhere, though it be but small, yet it may make a shift to sink you even at
the very haven of heaven. Ah dear friends, it will be worth your pains to look
into the truth of your condition, though it cost you many an hour, many a hot
and cold fit, yet give it not over, be sure of this one thing, that you be
bottomed on Jesus Christ, and have his Spirit to dwell in you, his fear put in
you according to the Covenant of grace, and then you shall never depart from
him, you shall never fall short. If once you be but in him, you shall enter in
with him; the reason why these foolish Virgins entered not, they were not in
Christ, they had nothing but their own account, their own profession, and what
they could rap and rend, and get from the creature: alas, this was nothing,
though it might carry them thus far, it would not make way for their entrance
into glory; therefore let me beg of you to make this one thing necessary sure,
neglect this, and all is nothing.

Fourthly, It may teach all of us, even such as have not only begun, but gone
far, taken much pains for heaven, to tremble and fear, lest for want of a
little more, we fall short. Ah dear friends, Heb. 3.
if we would offer violence to heaven, it must be while we are here, when the
door is shut it is too late; therefore now let us press, and spare no pains,
and look to these two things.

1. That what we do, we do it in Christ, and for Christ; else what do we differ
in our work from the glistering Sinners among the heathens? And,

2. That our hearts be changed, and made better, and growing liker heaven every
day then other, else they will nothing avail us at all; we shall be shut out
notwithstanding all our prayers, preaching, gifts, performances, privileges;
nothing but an interest in Christ, and an heart sanctified by him, will give
entrance into heaven; but so much for this Doctrine.

Another Note I will take up from the Virgins crying to God, now when they saw
the Gate of heaven shut against them.

That the hearts of sinners are full of self-confidence and presumption; That
they could have an heart to cry to Jesus Christ to open Doctr. 2.
the door to them when it was shut, it is strange presumption and boldness
indeed, for they had not one word to say for themselves, why they should have
entrance, but only, Lord, Lord, open, etc. in respect of any pleadings of
Faith, or the Covenant of Grace they were dumb, not a word of this, but if they
had any thing to say, it was such as those in Mat. 7. had to say for
themselves; he had preached in their streets, and they had eat and drunk in his
presence; so here, Lord, Lord, open to us; why, we had Lamps burning until a
little before thy appearing; we walked in fellowship with them that are truly
admitted now into thy presence; we have endeavored to get some oil to renew
our Lamps, though alas, they found none; but however they would have heaven:
this is very strong impudence, and confident presumption that is in the hearts
of Sinners; the Lord Jesus turns them off, and they will not be turned o^f, now
they will offer violence to the kingdom of heaven, when it is too late.

Whence arises this? Happily out of the ignorance whereupon heaven is to be had,
upon what conditions; or else out of the presence of their eternal misery; now
they see they are sinking to hell, they begin to cry out for opening of heaven
Gate to them, now the Gate is shut upon them, they never cried before: but I
will not insist upon this.

Only a word or two of Application: First then, it is no marvel Use. 1.
brethren, if sinners are so full of boldness and presumption; now let us tell
them, that we will set life and death before them, as you have had it set
before you many a time, every Sabbath, every opportunity almost, alas, they
care not for it, they hang out a flag of defiance against God, they have made a
covenant with death, and an agreement with hell, and this they make account
shall stand, let the Lord say what he will; though he tell them, he will break
that Covenant, he disanulleth it in the day he hears it; for both they and
death are under his command, and therefore he may disanull their Covenant, he
is Sovereign over them all; yet they believe it not, they rage, and are
confident, for when the very overflowing scourge comes upon them, they are so
confident to go, and cry to God, when they see the very gate of mercy shut
against them: O say sinners, here we shall have peace, though we walk after the
imaginations of our own hearts, to add drunkenness to thirst; though God have
told such men, His anger shall smoke against that man, yet they are confident
Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
nothing will drive them to seek a Christ, to make their peace with him, to
accept of deliverance; and no marvel, for when they see the mouth of hell
opened for them, and the belly of hell moved for them, and the gates of heaven
shut against them, and they have no Christ to appear in, yet they have the face
and boldness, as to cry, Lord, Lord, open to us.

Secondly, It may teach us to have an holy jealousy, and an holy pity over
poor creatures that can be, and are upon their deathbeds, so confident, so
presumptuous, they can come to God without a Christ, having all their life long
trampled his precious blood under their feet, rested in their formalities, and
yet can cry out then to God to open to them, as if thy were the only Saints
upon earth, and were the only men of faith. Ah brethren, so they may do, and
yet be but foolish Virgins; how have they carried it in their lives: they would
never be persuaded to call upon God morning and evening, to pray in closet, in
family, to make sure of Christ, and yet now they will not stick to appear and
cry for heaven without him. O this presumption will not prosper, though
believing always prosper; you may have the Gate of heaven shut upon you, your
souls shut out for ever, and yet in your extremity have a Lord, Lord, in your
mouths, therefore look to it betimes, before hand; but enough of this.

The third Note of Doctrine is this; Though men will not come Doctr. 3.
to Christ for Grace, yet they will come to him for Glory. While Jesus Christ
is dispensing the Grace of the Kingdom, they neglect him and his Grace, they
are busied about somewhat else; but when he is to dispense the Glory of his
Kingdom, then every one will come to him; Luke 14. 18. They cannot come, but
now they will come. This is clear in the present case: These foolish Virgins,
they would not come to Christ for Grace; for you see how many times they were
beaten off from the Creature, and yet they fastened again, when their Lamps
failed, which were sparks of their own kindling, or else some common work at
most; then they went to the wise Virgins, not to Christ; when they repulsed
them, sent them away empty, they went to them that sold, they would by no means
come to Jesus Christ, not a word of that; and yet now the Glory of the Kingdom
is to be dispensed, you see n ow they cry Lord, Lord, open to us: if they had
taken this course before, and cried, Lord, Lord, when their Lamps were gone
out, O Lord, now we see our own sparks dye before they reach heaven. O pardon
this our Hypocrisy, and O give us of thine oil, thou art the Olive Tree, pour
out of thy oil into our vessels, as they went to the wise Virgins, and this in
truth of heart, they had had oil, they had been ready, and entered with Christ;
no, but they would not; and see now, when the Gate was shut upon them, now they
cry, Lord, Lord, open to us; they would not come to him for the wedding
Garment, but they would be beholding to him to let them in to the Feast without
one; though heaven would have held them but a little while, if they had entered
in that condition. So the Jews, They would not come to Christ, that they might
have life; that they John 5. 40. 7. 34.
might have the life of Grace, and then the life of Glory; but they would come
to him to have the life of Glory. Ye shall seek Heb. 12. 17.
me, and ye shall not find me, but shall die in your sins. This is Esau's case:
profane Esau, he would not keep his birthright when he had it, nor seek it
again when he had lost it, but the blessing he would have without the
birthright; he could part with the birthright for a mess of pottage, for his
lust rather then extreme hunger, (as some think) but the blessing, he could
seek it with tears.

The grounds of this are such as these; First, Because it is a principle
indelebly written in nature, to will happiness the end in general; (that is to
say) happiness is not that which comes under deliberation and matter of choice
at all, but only the means that tend to that end: no man living can possibly
prevail with himself to be willing to be miserable: it is as natural as for the
fire to fly upward, or the stone to decline downward. A Balaam would die the
death of the rigteous, he would go to heaven when all is done, notwithstanding
his Sorceries and Enchantments against Jacob, and Divinations against Israel. A
man would think such a wretch as he, that would have cursed Israel fain, if God
would have hearkened to him, a deadly enemy he was to them, that he should
scarce have desired to come where they should be; As I have heard of some whose
spleen has been so great against the people of God, that if they came to
heaven, they would never come thither; such are worse then Balaam, yet he would
die the death of the righteous.

Secondly, Because of the woeful ataxie and disorder that is in all our souls,
whereby we are in all things preposterous, in all things that are supernatural;
in things purely natural and civil we do not expect the end without the means,
none but fools and mad men do it. A man would live and have his health, this he
desires, therefore he will eat, you cannot persuade him to starve himself with
hunger; he will take physic, though never so loathsome, never so bitter to him,
and what ever it cost him, skin for skin, and all he has, he will give for his
life; this is the highest end he has in these things; but now in spirituals
there is nothing but confusion, the end we do confusedly aim at, we would have
it; doubtless there is not the veriest unbeliever that hears this, this day,
but would have heaven, and you cannot with all the arguments you can bring,
make him willing to perish in an everlasting separation from God, if he
understand any thing what he says; yet he would have this without the means,
without this union and fellowship with the Lord Jesus, whereby he may be made
meet for it.

3. Because of men's unbelief and unacquaintance with the mystery of salvation,
the mystery of free Grace in Jesus Christ: they do not believe that a man must
come to Christ for Grace, or else they can have no Glory from him; That he is
the way, the truth, Ioh. 14. 6.
and the life; they think he will save them upon any terms; he came to be a
Savior of sinners, and sinners they are, and a Savior he is, and therefore
let Ministers say what they will, they think if they have but time to cry Lord,
Lord, though it be when the Gate is shut, as these foolish Virgins, it will do.
Ah brethren, if the foolish Virgins had been acquainted with this, that they
must have their oil from Christ, or else they should never hold out, nor enter
with him; would they not instead of those trifling, impertinent endeavors,
made some application to him all that while? but they saw it not, it was hid
from their eyes; The Lord will give Grace and Glory, and never will he Psalm.
84. 11.
give Glory sure, if he give not Grace. O for hearts to believe this, it would
be a cure of this disorder.

Fourthly, Because of the enmity that is in our hearts against Grace, nothing
is more contrary: wherevever Grace comes, there is a continual quarrel
between it and sin: the holy Ghost when he comes to dwell in a heart, he
knows he must have no peace there, but continually lust against the flesh,
and endure Gal. 5. 17.
the lustings of the flesh against it self. O brethren then, where a heart is
altogether in sin, what an enemy is it to Grace, and to Christ, as the Author
of Grace? (so says the Apostle) you, while you were enemies in your minds
through Col. 1. 21.
wicked works, has he reconciled: now a man will hardly come to an enemy to
help him, except he be in very great straits indeed: as when men are sinking
into hell, then they will come to Christ for entrance into heaven: for then
their misery is present and imminent, they see there is no avoiding of it: hell
is at their backs, the avengers of blood are now upon them, ready to hurry them
away to destruction: therefore now it is high time for them to cry, Lord, Lord,
open to us: but while they can but keep these things at a distance, put off the
thoughts of heaven and hell, they care not for coming to Christ at all: yet as
great as their enmity is, it may be overlaid by the present apprehensions of
their necessity and danger they are in if they come not to him; and this is
that brings in any soul to Christ for Grace here, while he is dispensing Grace,
until the Lord let the Sinner see his sins in order before him, see the
handwriting upon the wall against him, Mean, Mean, until God write his
condemnation upon his Conscience in bloody Characters, and visible, that he
that runs may read it; he cares not for coming to Christ for Grace, and so for
heaven; if a man neglect all this, yet when God shows him the rivers of
burning brimstone, shows the teeth of the worm which is ready to fasten upon
him, opens a man's ears to hear Satan come jingling with his chain to fetch his
soul, to tear it away whether he will or no: O then, though he has no mind to
go to Christ, now he will go and cry, Lord, Lord open to me.

Why, But you will say, If he be such an enemy to Grace, and to Christ, as
dispensing Grace, is he not much more an enemy to Christ, as glorious, and
receiving sinners to Glory? Yea brethren, I believe for my part, that they are
such enemies to an heavenly work, a glorious state, that if they were admitted
with such hearts as they have, it would be a weary place to them, they cannot
endure the reflection of the sun upon a burnished soul* how will they endure
the face of the Son of righteousness himself? but the sense of their danger,
and looking upon heaven as a place of freedom from the torments of the
condemned, not as upon an holy place, wherein Grace is made glorious, therefore
they desire to enter; alas, what would these foolish Virgins have done there,
if they had entered in this unready condition? heaven would have been too hot to
hold them; but freed they would be from misery, happy they would be, poor
creatures, though they mind not that the happiness of heaven is such, as if
they had not had Grace first to make them meet for it, it would have been no
happiness to them. What is more tedious to them then the Glory of Holiness upon
the Saints, then spiritual communion with God? they cannot bear this. All
delight arises from suittableness between the object and faculty, and all
grief and trouble from the unsuitableness of the object and faculty, and truly
Grace glorified is so much the more unsuitable; but yet I say, they
apprehending that misery is approaching, would go any wihther for shelter.

Fifthly and lastly, Because now they can keep their lusts no longer, therefore
now they would have heaven; as long as the sinner can keep his lust, he will be
for no other Master nor Lord, he cares for no other pleasure; the pleasures of
sin are the fools paradise to the wanton, and so is sport and pastime to the
young gallant, they care not for any thing serious. If men could keep the world
for ever, they would never desire to come to heaven; they could be contented to
have their heaven upon earth; their inward thought is, they shall continue for
ever, they call their houses after their own names, and they think as they
would have it; now Psalm. 49. 11.
when they see they can hold the world no longer, now they would have heaven;
therefore they care not for Grace, so long as they can have their fill of these
delights; if men be Hypocrites, close Hypocrites, have no open profaneness or
lust, yet some secret Dalilah they have that they delight themselves with; but
when the pangs of hell begin to catch hold upon men, when their consciences do
catch of the fire of hell, and this to flame, they see they are going, and
there is no other way with them but one, and being at the brink (as I may say)
the flame catches upon them, as it did those Executioners in Daniel, then, O
for heaven; Lord, Lord, deliver us, save us.

For the Application, This may serve then in the first place to Use. 1.
justify the Lord Jesus: let him be for ever clear when he judges, and
justified when he speaks, though he speaks condemnation and everlasting
separation from himself, to many men at the last day, or at his coming to
Summon; if you call then, and he answer you not, if you cry, Lord, Lord, open
to us, and he give you this answer, I know you not, blame your selves, you
cannot but justify him; why, because you might have had heaven and salvation
in his ways; If you had sought early, you should have found, but you never seek
him, until the Gate be shut against you; as long as you can keep the world, and
your lusts, you will not come unto him, that you might have Pardon, might have
grace, that you might live for ever; now your sins leave you, the world leaves
you, or you must leave the world, they are ready to take away your souls from
you, now you will come and cry, Lord, Lord open to us, is it not just and
righteous if he cast you out?

Secondly, It may serve then to humble us brethren, all of us, before the Lord;
for this is the frame of all our hearts by nature, though the Lord Jesus so
loved sinners, that nothing was too dear for them, even to his very life and
blood, and yet we are all of us so unkind to him again, that we would never
come to him, we would not be beholding to him, through the pride of our hearts,
until we cannot subsist without him, and then we will come, though it be too
late; so that upon the matter Brethren, we do but make Jesus Christ our sinning
stock all the days of our lives, and yet when we can sin no more, we would
serve our own turns upon him merely, we would have entrance into heaven by him,
we desire him not for any loveliness that is in him, or in the Grace which is
revealed by him: Is not this great cause of humbling? As suppose a Prince that
deperit virginem, a poor, ragged, filthy creature, and he even dies for love of
her: so be that she will but come and take him, she shall have all the
privileges of a wife; his honor shall be hers, his crown hers, his beauty
hers: she shall be like him also, be she as uncomely as she may, he will put
off his comeliness upon her: no, she will not hear of coming to him at all,
until at last, she is even perishing, and then comes, and would have his
Glory, but not himself, merely to serve her self upon him. O this is great
unkindness! do you thus requite the Lord, ye foolish people and unwise? And
thus it is with all us, until the Lord mightily change us.

Thirdly, It may serve to convince us of our folly herein: folly is a thing we
cannot endure the imputation of: But what greater folly is it, then brethren,
to dis-joyn the end from the means, specially where the end is so necessary to
be had to happiness, and the means so absolutely necessary to that end? surely
then this is gross folly: he is a fool that would have health and strength, and
yet will not eat, nor drink, nor sleep, nor recreate, will not use the means:
well brethren, you would have heaven every one of you, you would have this
blessed slate after death, we are carried to it with a natural impetus, the end
is necessary, we must enter or perish for ever. 2. This means is as absolutely
necessary to come to Jesus Christ, when the door stands open, while his bowels
and bosom are open and ready to receive us, for when the door is shut, there is
no remedy; we may enter, if we come while the door is open, afterward we
cannot. Now is not he a fool in grain, that will trifle when the door stands
open, and even goes a begging to poor sinners, and yet think to enter when the
door is shut? Ah Brethren, this folly fills every sinners heart: What is the
reason else so few are persuaded, while it is called to day, to come, to seek
him early, that they may find him? You are wise for the world, and men will
speak well of you, if you do well to your selves; but you are fools in Gods
account, in the account of Saints and Angels, they speak not well of you;
witness the Fool in the Gospel, that spent himself for vanity, and neglected
his soul, which that night was to be taken from him. O that the Lord would so
convince us, that we might not dare to linger and trifle away our day of Grace,
lest when we come to cry, the door be shut against us.

4. Has the Lord so far showed us this our folly, as now while the Gate stands
open, to make ready, to get our oil, not to put it off until it be too late? O
bless his name, magnify that Grace of Jesus Christ toward us: when others are
mourning, ye may rejoice; when others howl for sorrow of heart, you may sing
for joy of heart; when others are crying, Lord, Lord, you shall be singing
everlasting Halelu^ahs. Thou would have Grace as well as Glory, thou would
have Christ, and none but Christ, with him all things else shall be given in;
and thou would have him poor soul, thou think it long before thou have
him; why, whence isit that thou art not trifling away thy time, going to them
that sell? whence is this, but from the free mercy of the Lord toward thee?
magnify him, give him the glory of it for ever and ever.

Verse 12. But he answered and said, verily I say unto you, I know you not.
HEre is the sad Catastrophe of all the hopes of the Hypocrite in the Parable,
and that wherewith I shall conclude my thoughts upon this Text; they would not
be beaten off, though the door was shut against them; they come and bounce
against it, with a Lord, Lord, open to us; to you, who are you, that I should
open the Gate now it is shut upon you? upon what acquaintance shall I do this
for you? you are strangers to me verily, I say unto you, I know you not. In
this similitude is held out to us the doom of Hypocrites, and such as are not
found ready for the coming of Christ; Or if you will, rather the reason of the
doom; the door was shut upon them, before they are excluded heaven, there is no
entrance, there is a repulse; and here the reason of it is given, as there in
Mat. 7. Depart from me, says he, which is equivalent, it is as much as the
shutting the door at least, if not more; the same reason is there given for it,
I know you not. So that here seems to be two or three things note-worthy in
these words: I will speak briefly to them, and dismiss all, winding it up in
one application.

First, That many that profess to know Jesus Christ, and to be his people, yet
are not known of him; he knows them not.

Secondly, Such as he does not know, shall not enter; the door is shut against
them; and when they plead to have it opened, they have a denial, which is
presupposed, and (as I may say) included in the exceptive particle but; Lord,
Lord, open to us, But he answered, I know you not; therefore I will not open
the door to you.

Thirdly, Whatever formal Professors may delude themselves with, as if known of
God, then it shall be declared to them, that he knows them not.

For the First, That many that profess Jesus Christ, and to know him, yet are
never known of Christ; That this is so, I think the Text is as clear as the
noonday; as for these foolish Virgins, they did go forth to meet the
Bridegroom, had their Lamps, took pains to trim them when they were out, and
you see they have a Lord, Lord, in their mouths, at the very last, and yet
says our Savior, says the Bridegroom, I know you not; do but add that other
Text, and there will need no more proof; and that is in Mat. 7. Many shall say
unto me at that day, Lord, Lord, open to us; just as here, as if the door was
shut upon them there as well as here; but what is it they plead? O say they, We
have prophesied in thy name, and done many wonderful works, wrought miracles in
the name of Christ; thou have eat and drank in our streets; surely prophesying
and working miracles in the name of Christ, will amount to as much as
profession of him; they must needs have his name called upon them, that could
do such things in his name: and yet mark the return, Depart from me, I never
knew you: never knew you, not before time, nor since the world began did I know
you; but chiefly I never knew you, (that is to say) when your profession was at
the highest, when your Grace was most green upon the housetop, then I knew you
not, therefore now I know you not.

Here I shall only endeavor to open to you what is to be understood by Christ's
knowing of a soul, and so come to the next Note from the words, because I would
hasten to an end.

First then, it is not to be understood, as if the Lord did not understand the
ways of an Hypocrite, and see the close contrivances of his heart, as if he
did not know who they are: and properly to speak of knowledge, it is not the
paint of the sepulcher can hide the rottenness within from his al-seeing eye;
it is not the fair Ier. 17. 9.
leaves that can deceive him, and cover the rottenness of the root from him;
did he not understand Judas from the beginning, and knew he was a white Devil,
a son of perdition, though he followed him as his Savior? well were it for
Hypocrites, if in this sense the Lord did not know them; and surely their
hearts do so conclude with those Atheists in the Psalm, The Lord beholds it
not, and is there knowledge in the most high? but thus Psalm. 73. 11.
he does know them, and that appears plainly by his not knowing of them, as
afterward we shall mention; and that appears by his declaration to them, that
he knows them not; he knows full well to whom he speaks this fearful
sentence, but this is but the first.

Secondly, Yet after the manner of men, (...) yet we must understand it, (...),
he may be said not to know them. I know you not, you are so deformed and
dis-figured, so utterly unlike the men you were when you came out of my hands,
that I know you not. As Jobs friends when they came unto him, his visage being
so marred with the affliction, it is said, they knew him not; which some
understand as a weak affirmative, (that Job 2. 12.
is to say) they scarce knew him; is this Job their ancient friend? Is this
Naomi? they scarce knew her to be the same person that formerly, she was so
altered; paint will exceedingly deform Ruth 1. 19.
them that use it, they say; but sure I am, Hpyocrisie is the greatest
deformity, it is the picture of Satan, who changes himself into an Angel of
light, and therefore after the manner of men, we may look upon this speech of
Christ as thus, I know you not, you have such strange apparel on, you have
such paint, such deformity, so ugly have you made your selves, I know you not.

Thirdly, He is said not to know them, in that he does not approve of them; in
this sense knowing persons and things is often taken, Psalm 1. The Lord knows
the way of the upright, the righteous, he approves of it, though this be not
all in that expression, as by and by you shall see; but this is one thing, He
deligheth in his way, he knows his people, at the last day, as he knows not
Hypocrites, and this is part of it, Well done, good and faithful servant, etc.
he approves of them. And so the Mat. 25. 21.
Jews, that is, One inwardly and circumcised in heart, whose praise Romans 2. 29.
is not of men, but of God; he is approved to God, and approved by God. So the
Apostle Paul, That evil which I do, I allow Romans 7. 15.
not; (...), I know not, (that is to say) I approve not of it. I judge and
condemn my self for it; I would not do it, because I allow not of it: and to
come nearer, even to the same use of the expression, applied to God himself,
They set up Kings, but I Hos. 8. 4.
knew it not, says the Lord, it was not by me, by my advice, I approved not of
it; They would needs have a King, and I yielded 1 King. 11. 13.
to them indeed, but it was in wrath and displeasure; I never knew it, (that is
to say) never approved of it: else he did understand it, and reproved them for
it also at that very time by the Prophet Samuel. And by Jeroboam, though there
was his disposing hand in it, and in a way of providence he gave the ten Tribes
to him, yet he approved not of their revolting; the people had no command from
him, nor did they stay for it, to separate from the house of David.

Fourthly, He is said to know men, when he not only approves of them in their
ways, but loves and favors them; and not to know them, when he does not
love them nor favor them: as we are said to know God, when we love him, and
keep his commandments; so he is said to know us, when he loves us; and so that
may be understood, He that loves God, is known of God; (that is to say) is
loved of him, favored of him: For he 1 Cor. 8. 3.
that loves me, my Father will love him, and I will love him, and manifest my
self to him. In the Hebrew Verbs of knowledge, Ioh. 14. 21.
affection is included: and the ground of this seems to be, because we know
Love breeds familiarity, and familiarity breeds knowledge and acquaintance:
and so on the contrary, where no love, there is estrangedness, and that ends in
a not knowing of a Person; so then, he knows not many that profess, (that is
to say) he loves them not.

Fifthly, This knowing here spoken of, may be also an owning of them for his
own; an acknowledging of them: You only have I known, (says the Lord) of all
the People and Nations of the earth, and Amos 3. 2.
therefore I will not pass by you unpunished; (that is to say) I have owned you
of all the families upon the earth: you have been taken for my family: I have
owned you, and therefore you shall be sure to be visited with the stripes and
rods of men, not to destroy. So says he to Moses, I know thee by name; (that
Exodus 32. 12. and 17.
is to say) I acknowledge thee, and own thee in a near manner indeed; therefore
that place of Amos is no more then that of the Apostle, I chastise every son
whom I receive: this knowing them Heb. 12. 6.
then, may be such an acknowledging of them for his own, they never were his
children, never given of his Father, nor came to him, and therefore he
acknowledges them not as his in so near a relation.

Sixthly, He knows them not by experience, (as I may say) he has had no
experience of them, they never came to him, to touch him, that virtue might go
forth from him to heal them, and pardon them, and therefore he knows them
not, (that is to say) he never had a touch of faith from them, whereby they are
said to know him, for then he should have known them, and have known that
virtue went forth from him to heal them; he had no acquaintance with them, they
never acquainted themselves with him, but their hearts were always estranged and
far from Jesus Christ: though they drew near with their lips, their hearts
never touched one with another; they rested in somewhat else, as gifts and
miracles, and therefore he knows them not by experience of communion with
him, and letting out his healing Mat. 7. 23.
power upon them.

Seventhly, and lastly, He knows them not, (that is to say) he cares not for
them, nor their souls, to defend them, save them: let them do what they will,
be regards them not: As in that first Psalm, The Lord knows the way of the
righteous, but the way of the ungodly shall perish: by the opposite, there it
appears, that Gods knowing the way of the righteous, is to keep it from
perishing, the antecedent including the consequent many times in the Hebrew,
and so the perishing of the way of the ungodly, the Consequent including the
Antecedent, his not knowing of their way, or else it is all on^, Thou have
known my soul in adversity; this is one part of the meaning, thou have had a
care Prove. 12. 10. Ioh. 10, 27.
of me in six and seven troubles, to see that no more were laid on then I could
bear, to keep me that the Spirit that thou have made did not fail etc. so the
righteous man knows the life of his beast (...) he knows it, he is tender
of it, to keep it; and so some understand that, my sheep hear my voice, and I
know them, and they follow me, and I give them eternal life, I will know them
to eternal life; now many professors he knows not, that is to say, he
regards them not what becomes of them, let them sink or or swim, shift for
themselves, take their own course, he regards them not.

Now who these are among professors that the Lord knows not, I believe you
easily understand; they are such as are merely formal, have a Lamp and no Oil,
a form and no power. But so much for this first.

Secondly, The next Note from the words, you may remember was, That such as he
knows not, shall never enter into this Marriage Feast, the door is shut upon
them; and th^s is given as a reason, wherefore our Savior would not open it to
them upon their crying Lord, Lord; but he answered and said, I know you not,
there is no reason you should expect to have the door opened, for I know you
not; and so in that of Matthew, if he know them not, he sends them away from
him, Depart from me, for I know you not.

First, Because many that profess Jesus Christ, yet are very strangers to him,
and he to them, and therefore they shall not have the door opened to them, they
never knew him, nor he never knew them, there was never any acquaintance; now
strangers that we never saw, who uses to admit to a Marriage Feast; they are
the familiars and favorites; if Jesus Christ knew them not, surely they are
strangers, for he knows all his own children, his own sheep, let their
condition be what it will, under never such desertions and cloudings, and
questionings of his love, he knows them: A woman may forget her children, but
God cannot forget his people, if once acquainted with them; he writes their
names before him; yea, upon his very heart they are written, whither nothing
can come to blot them out; now many a professor is a mere stranger to Jesus
Christ, though he throng upon him, yet never touches him, he never had a sight
of Christ, a touch of him, is a stranger to the righteousness of Christ, to the
holiness of Christ, to the joy, and peace, and Kingdom of grace, and therefore
surely he will not admit them, he knows them not it is no place ^or
strangers, but ^or favorites; they must be friends of the Bridegroom, that
must hear his voice, and behold his bea^ty, and rejoice in it for ever, which
every professor, alas is not.

Secondly, Because of the pride of heart, which indeed is the great root of the
former estrangedness of many a professor from Christ, and Christ from them;
what was the reason the Prodigal would feed upon husks rather then go to his
Father? O his stomach was too big to acknowledge his failing to his father, as
long as ever he could hold out; and you see it plainly in the poor woman that
had spent all she had upon the Physician, a stout heart would not down while
she had a penny. And surely you see you see here these foolish Virgins, they
never went to Christ for oil, but up and down where they could beg or buy of
any body, they were too stomachful and slout; so the Apostle, They submitted
not to the righteousness of Christ, as if it were an Romans 10. 2. and 3.
act of submission and self-emptying indeed, as it is to close with the
righteousness of another, to be righteous and stand before the Lord in; this
they would not do, they would have heaven by their own works, or never have it:
so the foolish Virgins would have oil sowewhere short of Christ* or they would
go without, and so they do. Ah, we are proud beggars, proud of rags filthy
rags; and the Lord knows the proud indeed, but it is afar off, he will never
admit them to the nearest comm^nion with himself for ever, therefore he will
not open to them. This is the case of many a professor, who will spin his own
web, and (...)lk by sparks of his own kindling, and not by the light of God,
they will to their Herb to heal them, and not to Christ the Physician of their
souls; and therefore if they be so stout, let them take what follows, he will
not regard them, he knows them not near, as his friends, but afar off.

Thirdly. They are all of them workers of iniquity, and therefore he will not
know them; he approves them not, he cares not for them, he will not admit
them. David that had but a spark of the holiness that is in Jesus Christ, the
holy one of God, Psalm. 101. 4. 119. 115.
and God equal with his Father, he would not know a wicked person, Depart from
me ye workers of iniquity, away with you, I am not company for you, I am a
companion to all that fear God, both small as well as great, though he were a
King; and a vile person he contemned, be he as great as he would, away with him
from me, what communion can light and darkness have? can they dwell together?
surely no: Depart from me, I know you not, ye workers of iniquity; into that
holy place none that defiles can enter: now in this we may understand two
things. (1.) That they do work iniquity, some sin they live in, if not many,
notwithstanding their profession of Christ, and therefore they are workers of
iniquity. (2.) That the very form of godliness and all their show, is but a
working of iniquity.

First then, they are workers of some iniquity or other, and that either, in an
outward gross manner, as gross hypocrites, or else more closely and inwardly,
as close hypocrites, and yet they are workers of iniquity, and the Lord Jesus
will not know them, nor own them. First then, for gross hypocrites such as have
their hands full of blood, full of bribes, their houses are builded by wrong,
and their chambers by unrighteousnes^ and yet they bless themselves in being a
people to God; surely the Lord will not away with this: such are the gross
hypocrites, among us, that will all the week long make a trade of lying in
their shops, in their callings, of swea^ing and forswearing, of drunkenness and
adultery, and come and wipe their mouths with the Harlot, and say, hey have
done no wickedness, they are pure in their own eyes, yet not washed, etc. come
upon these days and Prove. 30. 20.
sit before the Lord as his people, as if they were delivered to do all these
abominations; the drunkard will not believe, nor the swearer, but they are as
good Christians as any, though all have their infirmities, and theirs are no
more; well, th(...)e are lying words you trust unto, they will deceive you; for
says the Lord, Prove. 30. 12.
I will not hear when you make many prayers, your hands are full of blood; God
does not regard the services of such a people; he examineth men's hands, to see
if they be hard with laboring in their iniquities, (...), if so, it is not
your words that are smo^ther then oil, that shall serve your turn, Quid verba
cum sacta videam? to cry Lord, Lord, and yet go and serve, and drudge for the
Devil, as if he were their good Lord; will not the Lord search this out? O
surely he will not know such a person as this.

(2.) It may be it is more secret; there is not an hypocrite but Psalm. 66. 18.
58. 2.
he regards iniquity in his heart, and in heart he works wickedness, if not
with his hands; it may be he may wash his hands with Pilat, but not his heart.
O how do men's mouths water after the pleasures of sin, the stolen waters and
bread eaten in secret; if Prove. 9. 17.
they durst do it for fear of being discovered and ashamed before men, or for a
galled conscience* a secret lust, a secret wound which bleedeth inwardly, is
not so visible, is as deadly as any other; now, I say, be it never so secret;
let Judas cover his Treasury never so close, and Ananias and Saphira their
double dealing, their covetousness, it is to no purpose; burning lips and a
wicked heart, are like a Potsherd covered over with silver Prove. 26. 23.
dross, it makes a glorious show, burning of lips with love, much love showed
with it, but the heart is wicked, and therefore base as a Potsherd, a vessel of
dishonor fitted to destruction, and shall never enter into glory, but be dashed
in pieces.

But Secondly, the very form of godliness, though in it self materially it be
good, yet as they use the matter, to make it a cloak for their sin, a fair skin
over, a belly full of Garbidge and Isa. 1. 13.
filthiness, it is iniquity; it is iniquity says the Lord, even your sol^mn
meetings, Incense is an abomination to me, I am weary to bear them. What was
the matter? why, they did but flatterwith their mouths, their hearts were not
with him, therefore the Lord hated it; this is working iniquity, working out a
form of godliness with much pains, and sticking there; the prayer of the wicked
is sin, it is an abomination, it will amount to no more then to filthy
garments, filthy rags; and in these brethren, the Prove. 28. 9.
Lord will not know us: O no, workers of iniquity shall not dwell with him, Dine
and Sup with him in heaven, the feast of new Wine, he will not open to them;
and what greater iniquity then hypocrisy? Simulata sanctitas, duplex
iniquitas; an hypocrite when he thinks he is at the best, is at the worst,
then his hypocrisy is at the height, and God will not admit any, he knows
them not.

Thirdly. Not our part of the Conclusion: that at that day it shall be declared
openly to hypocrites, that the Lord Jesus knows them not; that is to say,
that he owneth them not, notwithstanding all their seeming delight in his ways,
and their following of him in a profession yet this is the doom they are like
to receive, He knows them not; this is also plain from this Text, and also
from that in Mat. 7. At that day, that is to say, the day of general Judgment,
or the day of death, which is every particular souls. Dooms day they shall say,
Lord, Lord, etc. and then will I say to them, Depart from me, I know you not, I
never knew you.

First then, Why is this so, that at that day many Professors shall have this
doom I know you not, I never knew you; it shall be thus declared from the mouth
of the Lord Jesus himself; it may be taken from the Office of Jesus Christ to
be Judge; God has appointed to judge the world at that day by one, even by
Jesus Christ, and therefore he shall pronounce the Sentence either with his own
mouth, or the ministration of Angels; but rather Acts 17. 31.
me thinks with his own mouth this word shall go forth, which shall be as a
flaming two edged Sword to enter into the bones and bowels of sinners, and
divide them in sunder for ever here sinners are shut up under sin, they have
chains of darkness upon their hearts already, and hypocrites are liable to this
condemnation, and are held with the cords of their sins, and then shall be the
time of the doom, therefore then it shall be declared; a Prisoner fears what
the sentence may be before he comes to the trial; and so hypocrites sometimes
may have some foretaste, some fearfulness may surprise them, but they skin it
over again; but now it shall be declared by the Judge himself, he knows them
not, and therefore they must depart from him.

Secondly, For a confirmation of the words of his servants, and an everlasting
rebuke of their unbelief of his Word by them; for this has been the message of
Christ to formalists in the mouths of all his Messengers, your form of
godliness will not carry you through all conditions, it will fail you sooner or
latter; your fig leaves will not shadow you from the everlasting burnings, the
hope of the hypocrite shall perish and give up the Ghost, God loatheth no sort
of sinners more, though they take themselves to be highly favored, yet they
are deeply abhorred of God; yet alas, there is scarce an hypocrite but has his
shifts to put by an hundred such thrusts as these, by the Sword of the Spirit,
the Word of God, and he has a deceived heart within him, telling him he has
fruit as well as leaves, though it be not fru^t found from him, and he has had
so many testimonies of his love to him, he cannot conclude he is a person
abhorred of God, his hopes are high, he will not believe, not a word fasteneth
upon him, and he is apt to think the Minister too strait when he goes to the
quick, and tells them, if any iniquity be regarded in the heart, the heart is
not right with God, they will not believe, but keep their sin, and doubt not of
their salvation: well now the Lord will dash this presumption of theirs, the
height of unbelief, though they will not see their hypocrisy, and their
forlorn condition, now he will make them see; if the servants word will not
convince them, his shall, and confound them also, therefore he pronounces it
with a Verily I say, etc. that in the sinners own conscience he may be
justified: you see, let Ministers say what they can, be they never such
Bonerges, thundering from heaven upon men, yet they will not be beaten off, but
at the very last come bouncing at the gate of heaven, with a Lord, Lord, open
to us. The Ministers have often enough told them, that when they cry, the Lord
would not hear them, they would but appear before the everlasting burnings to
be consumed; they will not believe, and therefore now the Lord Jesus himself he
speaks, he declares it, and with a full conviction to their consciences; for
he with his Word reaches the soul and conscience, so that now their confidence
must needs be dashed, not a word more has a sinner then to say for himself;
and to confirm the words of his servants, his faithful Messengers, they have
spoken as much as this comes to before, and it has been slighted, they
thought God would be more merciful then those bloody Ministers are, who wound
and spare not; but the Lord will now make them know that whose sins they
retain, clave non errante, by a right application of the threatenings and
terrors of God, not Ioh. 20. 23.
one word of theirs shall fall to the ground, but that they had the mind of
Christ what ever you thought of them; that is another Argument.

Thirdly, For a Declaration and Vindication of his own Wisdom, and Justice, and
Holiness; his Wisdom in that now hypocrites shall see there was nothing could
be hid from his eyes, he knows through and through, even when they made the
most dazzling profession to the eye of the world, that his piercing eye saw
through all this, says the sinner there in that Psalm, and it is the language
of all hypocrites in heart, Tush, the Lord Psalm. 94. 7.
sees not, neither does the God of Jacob regard it? does he look to the
thoughts, to a man's ends, the secrets of his soul? if he carry fair outwardly,
will not this pass the test? yea with men: but thou shall know hypocrite, that
thou have not to do with men, but with God; you may juggle so, as to cast a
mist before men's eyes, but not before his; and though you think you can, yet he
will now manifest it, that you have all of you been a deceived people, who have
thought to deceive him; he will now appear to be a God of wisdom, and one that
searches your hearts, and will recompense into your bosoms the very secrets of
your iniquity. And so his justice and holiness; because an hypocrite has
flourished long, and has had the use of many common gifts, and flourished in
the eyes of men, made a great show, and God has born with much patience;
Justice has been, as I may say, asleep, but now he will repay them into their
own bosoms; and so his holiness, Psalm. 50. 21.
they thought God was such a one as themselves, but he will reprove them, and
set their sins in order before them. Now he will keep silence no longer, that
it may appear how he hates all their hypocrisy that has been fathered upon
him, and men have looked upon them as Saints, yet now his holiness will endure
no longer, but shake them off; they shall now see that such impure hearts he
cannot away with, to dwell with them, though with much patience he did bear
them here, yet that he never knew them here, never owned them, cared for them
here in the very height of their profession.

Fourthly, Because now is the separating time, nothing is hid that shall not be
made manifest, says our Savior in another place, though chaff may go for
wheat, and gilt for Gold, and alchimy for gold, and dross and tin for silver,
now they shall be separated, it is high time now to unmask the hypocrite, he
has long enough deluded himself and others, now therefore he will make it
known, himself will declare it, to put an end to their false imaginations: but
enough for this.

Now to wind up all in a word of Application: In the first place, then it shall
be a terrible word to all Formalists, all gross and Use.
close hypocrites; the Lord search you out this day, and make it a word of
terror, a shaking in your bones, that you may be shaken off your security.
There are two or three things you shall see that are terrible to you herein, It
is your portion, I must deliver it to you. Let not any poor trembling child of
God catch at the dogs portion, no more then the dogs should at the childrens
bread, God would not have such sadned, nor would I speak any thing to the grief
of such as God has wounded. But for Hypocrites and Formalists let me speak it:
1. He knows you. 2. Therefore he does not know you, because he knows you.
And, 3. He will not know you at that day.

First, I say, He knows you; that is to say, he understands you, there are
windows of Crystal into your breasts, all is naked before him with whom you
have to do; it may be you are a little affected with hearing the death of Jesus
Christ, that so innocent a person should be so unworthily, treacherously and
cruelly handled, and now you take your selves to be such as have received the
Spirit of grace and supplication, and mourn over Christ whom you have
crucified; and it is nothing but a natural tenderness, that would be as much
affected or moved with hearing any sad story of another person: Believe it
Brethren, whether you see this deceit or no, the Lord knows it. Your ends are
deep in your actions which seem to be for Christ, and with much self-denial
sometimes, and yet even then in that self-denial, there may be an end for self
at the bottom, the commanding wheel that sets all a work; it may be this is
too deep for any other to discern, or for your selves sometimes, yet the Lord
sees it, he knows all the depth of your heart. You pray, and fast, it may
be, when you are in any distress, but little think it is for carnal end, for
your corn, and wine, and oil; that you howl upon your beds, you little think,
when you pray and seek after God, it is for ends merely that you might spend
these Hos. 7. 14.
things upon your lusts, that you may appear to be some body, be esteemed among
men, be of esteem among the Saints. Well, Brethren, carry it as covertly as you
can, so that your own souls are juggled into a delusion it may be, yet be not
deceived, God is not mocked; men are apt to be deceived, and think that their
secrets of sinning, their bread eaten in secret, their morsels under the tongue
shall never be discovered, but the Lord sees all this, he knows you
thoroughly, he searches the hearts, and tries the reins of the sons of men.

Secondly, because he knows you, therefore he does not know you, he approves
not of you; it may be men do approve of you, Psalm. 106. 4.
your praise may be among the Churches, among the Saints, but yet your praise
may not be of God, he loves you not, savours you not with that favor that he
bears to his people; indeed some love Jesus Christ had to the young man in the
Gospel that was but near to the Kingdom of God, he does not disallow of a form
and profession, it has its use, the leaves of the trees of righteousness they
may be for healing to others; an holy profession, and walking to the appearance
of others, may Ezekiel. 47. 12.
win others to Christ, and yet a man may perish when all is done; and a
profession may serve as a Motive to quicken up themselves to look to the power;
if the power of godliness be not good and necessary, why do men take up a form?
and if it be good, why rest they in a form and neglect it? but if there be no
more, he will not know such a man, he does not know him.

Thirdly, What ever you dream of now, he will pronounce that sentence upon you
at that day, O that dreadful sentence, that he knows you not, he never knew
you. Ah dear friends, if the Lord would but single out any one of us, and tell
us we are the men, what agonies would it put us into? Ah Brethren, this will
make sinners ears tingle to hear this word from the Lord Isa. 33. 14.
Jesus: O let fearfulness surprise the hypocrites; yea I tell you, this will
make your hearts to bleed, and your heart strings crack within you, this will
pierce you through with the sorrows of hell. Ah dear friends, if the voice of
his Messengers, discoursing of righteousness, temperance, and Judgment to
come, be so great as to make a Foelix, a great man, a stout hearted sinner
tremble that was not converted. O what will it be when the Acts 24. 25.
sentence is pronounced against them from the Lord himself? for while you hear
Preachers, though it be terrible when the conscience is opened, yet there is a
Cordial at hand, but when once pronounced by the Lord Jesus, there is no more
remedy; if one word from the Lord Jesus, when the Soldiers came upon him, and
he asked them whom they sought, I am he, says he; this struck them to the
ground; soldiers in such Garrisons in Countries Joh. 18. 6.
kept by the sword they were won by, use to to be men of stoutest spirits, that
would dare sometimes the very Devil himself, and yet one word from Jesus
Christ's mouth struck them to the ground. O Brethren, surely this word of
sentence will speak men not to the ground, but to the lowermost pit: It will
speak them dumb forthwith, that they have nothing to say for themselves; It
will speak them into confusion and amazement, it will speak them into the
flames of hell in a moment: O this roaring of the Lion of the tribe of Judah,
who may abide? If the Law was so terrible in the giving, what will it be in the
execution? You read how the Mountains shook, and Moses himself trembled, but
the sentence of the Law is nothing to the sentence of the Gospel, as this
condemnation of hypocrites will be; it is to men that have Acts 7. 32.
in appearance owned Christ, followed him, done much in his name, and yet he
will profess he never knew them, they pretended acquaintance with him now, but
he will never own them.

You then Brethren, that have only a semblance of holiness, you seem to have
somewhat, and have nothing, then shall be taken from you that which you seemed
to have, then your vizard will be plucked off; you pretend to be friends of
Christ, and of his people, to be his Father, Brethren and Mother, but now will
he profess he knows you not; you that preach in the name of Jesus Christ, and
do not preach for his name, for his glory, but for your own; he will not own
you, he will say to you, he knows you not, you rest in this your form, this
you are ready to plead, and not stay your selves upon him, he will not know
you, O but we do lean upon the Lord: so you say, but mark that of the Prophet,
you lean upon the Lord, and say, the Lord is among M^ca. 3. 11.
us, and yet they build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, the
heads thereof judge for reward; and the Priests teach for hire: that is to say,
their tongues may be hired to say any thing, pass any judgment right or wrong,
and yet lean upon the Lord; say you lean upon the Lord, and yet will be drunk,
swear, lie, cheat, overreach, be filthy and unclean, allow your ^elves in
c(...)mplative wickedness, be sure the Lord will not know such. Psalm. 66. 18.
You that regard any iniquity, never so little, never so secret in your hearts,
believe it, the Lord will not own you, he will not know you, he will not here
own you, much less will he when it comes ^o the judgment. It may be thou
may soar a higher pitch in respect of parts, and gifts, and confidence, and
pretend to live higher then other men, as many men of higher dispensations,
they say now do; but yet as the Eagle, when at the highest pitch, has a
learing eye after her prey below; so have they such a learing eye, a lingering
heart after their iniquity, and their mouths water at it, but for shame. O
surely, Jesus Christ will never own such, fear and tremble at this word, as
many as it concerns. O how will such souls be filled with amazement, when
they made no other reckoning but to come to heaven; if any men in the Country
should be saved, a man would have thought they should have been the men; they
have done much, suffered much, 1 Cor. 13. 2.
wrought wonders, etc. and yet when all comes to all, the heart was never right
with God, and therefore the heart-searching Judge will never own them, never
care for them, become of them what Mat. 7. 22.
will, he will never know their souls.

Secondly, then it may be for a searching word to poor creatures; O be not
deceived, God is not mocked, he knows a Balaam to be a Balaam, though he
profess never so much love to Israel: And O 1 Cor. 6. 9.
if he would give me a house full of gold and silver, I cannot go beyond the
Word of the Lord; And O that my latter end might be as his: Yet the Lord can
see he is but a wretch for all this: therefore Brethren, I beg of you, that it
may be a searching word to us all, Whether ever we have known him, or be known
of him; have you Gal. 6. 7.
ever touched him with the touch of faith, for the pardon of your sins, for the
healing of your corruptions? and have you found healing come from him, yea or
no? have you known him, the power of his death, the power of his life, and
Spirit, yea or no? Gal. 4. 9.
If you have not the Spirit of Christ, you are none of his, whose ever you be,
and he will not own you be sure, Brethren, for his sons, for his friends, to
admit you to the feast, except you be his indeed. Ah dear friends, I doubt many
of us will be found Romans 8. 9.
with the foolish Virgins, following after the creature, resting in somewhat
else beside the Lord Jesus. Do not think your crying Lord, Lord, will do it,
this you may do, and fall short; did not Judas come with his hail Master, and
kiss him, and yet his heart full of treason against him? was this his kindness
to Jesus Christ? and do not many of us kiss him, salute him with a kiss of
love, and homage or obedience in show, and yet in our lives deliver him up to
be scourged by our looseness of carriage, that there is no difference between us
and other men, open the mouths of the wicked, and this constantly, and without
a returning to him, will he own such a soul think you? O how can we be
contented to be uncertain in our conditions, lest when all is done, we should
be disowned, shut out at that day.

Thirdly, Then Brethren, let us all labor and be exhorted to it, to study to
approve our hearts to God, more then to men; a needful lesson to us all, and it
will be our wisdom surely; for alas, what if men know us, and own us, and
favor us as Saints, and precious people, and Jesus Christ will not know our
souls, will this countervail? O Brethren see to it, that your praise be Romans 2.
29.
not of men but of God! O how apt we are to be lifted up and cheared if men
think well of us! and dejected if we suffer in their breasts, if they disown
us, to be cast out of their hearts, would go to our hearts it may be, and we
could not be quiet. Alas, what is this to that fearful sentence, I know you
not: If Christ disown us, what is it if all the Saints should own us? and if he
own us, what should it discourage us, though they none of them own us. O labor
to be more inward Christians, and build your comforts upon the sure mercies of
David in Jesus Christ. No matter what is the rising way in the world, which is
the rising Sun; Look to the mind of Christ, keep a conscience void of offense
toward him, and make this your work, to be found in him when all is done, not
in your gifts, not in your duties, not in your graces, but in Christ. O such a
soul knows the Lord Jesus, and such a soul is known of him, and shall be
known to all eternity.

Fourthly, Here is an encouraging word to poor doubting souls; It may be they
are ready to pass this fearful sentence upon themselves, sooner then many a
wretched hard-hearted hypocrite, to whom it properly belongs; No matter man,
though thy gifts be not so great as another man's, thou can do little, or have
not those sweet refreshings and enlargements which another has; Is thy heart
approved to Jesus Christ, can thou approve thy soul to him, that thou love
him? as Peter, Lord thou know that I love thee; though it may be not so much
as other Saints do, nor so much as the great things he has done for thee call
for; yet thou love him, and would fain love him more; be of good 1 Cor. 8.
3.
(...), for thou art known of him: If any man love God, he is known of God. A
Judas may be an open professor of Christ, and come to him in the day. And a
poor Nicodemus at the first, dare but come in the night it may be, and was a
very shallow Scholar in Christ's School, which is the discouragement of many a
poor soul. And Judas in the mean time a renowned Teacher of others, and yet
behold how the one betrays the Lord Jesus, and the other sticks to him when he
was dead, and professes him openly Joh. 19. 39.
at such a time as that, when there was most discouragement against it. O
therefore, Brethren, though your grace be weak and little at the first, if
there be the root of the matter in thee, if thou can approve thy heart thou
love him, there is nothing in heaven nor in earth thou would have in
comparison of him, though thy infirmities be many, temptations be many, thou
art a poor wearied creature, it may be with thine own heart, be of good
comfort, the Lord Jesus has already owned thee, and he will own thee in that
day. And me thinks, Brethren, as on the one hand when such bold confident
souls, that make no other reckoning but of salvation, but they reckon without
Jesus Christ, when they meet with so sad a disappointment; in stead of an
admittance, they meet with I know you not: O how will their hearts dye within
them! So on the other hand, when a poor, trembling, doubting Thomas, that it
may be knows not what to think of himself nor his condition, he is searching,
and trying, and praying, and fasting, and humbling, and running, and pressing
hard forward, and can get little ground of his corruptions, which much
discourageth him. O he walks tremblingly, lest he should receive this fearful
sentence at the last, that the Lord Jesus knows him not, has never had any
thing to do with him; notwithstanding all his profession, sin is in strength,
corruption prevails, though it is the bitterness of his soul. O when such a
poor doubting creature that happily many times looks for nothing but a fearful
sentence, depart from me, shall have this pronounced, O come thou poor soul, I
know thee, I have known thee from the beginning of the world; though thou have
been doubting of my love, yet I know thee; though thou have been made black
with affliction, and thy visage so marred, as others knew thee not, refuge
failed thee, no man cared for thee, for thy soul, yet I know thee; though thou
have been wounded Psalm. 142. 4.
with many sins, many temptations, and walked under many a discouraged heart,
yet I know thee. O how will this be as everlasting life from eternal death, to
such a soul* So that the soul shall now have now more place for doubting, the
satisfaction shall come with a mandamus, he will speak salvation to the heart,
that it cannot refuse it, the desire accomplished is a tree of life, as hope
deferred is a sickness of heart, but now where a man could Prove. 13. 11. (...)9.
scarce act hope, as it is the case of some poor creatures; O when the Lord
shall against their hope, own them, and that to eternity, it will be
unspeakably sweet, this will fill them with fullness of joy and glory for
evermore.

But so much for this Time and Text.

FINIS.
CHRIST the Sun of Righteousness, has healing in his wings for sinners.
MAL. 4. 2. But unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness
arise with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth and grow up as Calves of
the stall.
MAlachy is the proper name of this Prophet, it signifies an Angel or
Messenger, only with the addition of (') as is usual when common names are made
proper. He is not so called, as if he were an Angel incarnate, as some have
imagined, nor ye^ as if he had his revelation by Angels. But happily the name
might be put on him without (...)foreknowledge of what the Lord would call him
unto* happily (...) Prophetical Spirit it might appear that God would make h(...)
Messenger: But however, such an one ^e was and (...)mporarie with Nehemiah,
because he exhor(...) to the building of the Temple, as Haggai and (...) those
corruptions among the Jews, (...) the last, shows to have been among (...)
over the Jews, as marriage with (...)ng the tithes, Chap. 3. 8. Depravation of
Divine worship, Chap. 1. 13. and 2. 8. And that this is the last of the
Prophets, they themselves acknowledge, therefore he admonishes them that they
should take heed to the Law of Moses, keep that, they might expect no more
Prophets until the great Prophet, the Lord Jesus come (and John his
forerunner). God did in Babylon Psalm. 74. 9.
cause Visions to perish from among them in anger. There is none to tell when
this calamity shall end (said they in the Psalmist) and now again he causes it
to cease from them; that their expectations of the Messiah, that great Prophet,
and of Elias his forerunner might be raised, and that by the want of Prophecy
they might be the more ready* to receive Christ that great Prophet, and to
praise him when he should be revealed; the Law and Prophets Prophecy until
John; Zech. and Elizab. and Simeon, and the Baptist, were so immediately before
him, that they rather showed him, pointed at him come, than prophesied of his
coming.

After he had reproved those corruptions among them (as you hear) he threatens
spiritual Judgments on them: he tells them their expectations would be
frustrated, they looked for the day of the Lord, as if that would heal all
their troubles: No (says the Prophet*) it shall be such a day as you dream not
of: they looked for peace, but behold trouble; for light, but behold darkness;
they looked for a day of shadowing from the displeasure of the Lord, but behold
(says he) the day of the Lord shall burn like an Oven. What day this is, is
very much questioned, some would have it to be the day of the last Judgment
only, and suitably they understand the rising of the Sun of righteousness to be
his last appearing, that (...), illustrious appearing: But this seems not to
be the All, if it be intended here; but this seems not to be a time for
growing up as Calves; now is the time of perfection in glory. Nor yet secondly
do I take it only of the day of their calami^y, when they suffered so much
under the Grecians, Kings of Syria and Egypt, the Seleucidae and Lagidae* (the
two legs of that Image in Dan. as some understand Da^. 2. 33, 41, 42.
it.) though this also might partly be meant: But this day I understand to be
the time of Christ's appearing and manifestation to Israel; which to some would
be a day of grace and rejoicing indeed, to others a day of gloomyness
(according to that in this third Chapter; The Angel of the Covenant shall
suddenly Mal. 3, 2.
come into the Temple, but who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall
stand when he appears? for he is like the Refiners fire, and like Fullers
Soap. And (alas!) the most of them would be found but dross, and stubble, which
must be purged away, they could not abide the fire. So when they rejected the
Lord Jesus, how fearful a day came on them? who could abide it? At the
destruction of Jerusalem 1100000. slain, (beside near 100000. taken captive)
This day burned like an Oven; O! a devouring fire it was: so fearful a thing
its to have a day of grace, a day of Christ come on a people, and yet they
slight it and reject it: Greatest love rejected, turns into greatest
displeasure; flaming love into flaming wrath; heat of affection into a burning
of an oven, a furnace. Hear and tremble (Brethren) at this, we who now have a
day of Christ, and a day of grace, lest we find it in the end such a day as
this, so terrible to us.

But now, lest those mourners in Zion (that did wait for the consolation of
Israel, did fear the name of the Lord, were tender, and did tremble at this his
word) should be discouraged; he opens here a creek to let them in to hide
themselves; provideth a shadow, a skreen to set between them and this consuming
fire, in the words of my Text, But unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of
righteousness (says the Lord) arise with healing in his wings: Ye that tremble
at my word shall not be scorched, nor this smell of the fire pass on you; as it
was with the three children. The day of the Lord shall be a wounding to others,
but it shall be a healing to you: they shall be cast into a burning oven as
stubble or hay, but ye shall go forth and grow up as calves of the stall.

So that the words are nothing else (as I conceive) but a Covenant of grace
tempered into a cordial for poor drooping Spirits, which might now be ready to
faint to hear how terrible a day this day of the Lord would be, which they had
expected, promising themselves so much happiness in it, and their expectations
should not be frustrated, he would not make them ashamed of their hope.

But unto you that fear my name, etc. Here is Christ promised (who is the
Covenant, the substance of it, the mediator, the surety of it) and with him all
things else: Syn^^hdochi understood in these few things here employed and
expressed, as light, and healing, and liberty, and growth, going on from
strength to strength, growing fat, and flourishing, prosperping into a Kingdom,
yea an everlasting Kingdom. The Text then you see (being the sum of the
Covenant of grace) must needs be a bundle of promises made to such as fear the
Lord. I may not stand to open each of them, until I come to speak particularly
to them, lest I hold you too long in the porch, and we not be able to view any
of the inner rooms of the Text, so full of sweetness and comfort.

Therefore first we shall speak to that promise of Christ, unto you that fear
my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and yet
before we speak to the promise it self, something we must say to the notion
under which he is represented in this promise, and that is a Sun of
righteousness; from whence we will observe this Note.

That the Lord Jesus is a Sun of righteousness. Doctr.


There are two things (Brethren) here to be cleared. First, that he is a Sun to
his people. And secondly, a Sun of righteousness, and what is meant by that.

First then, for that he is a Sun; if it be granted that its he who is here
meant, there need not much more to be said to make it good. And that its a
particular promise of Christ-God, manifested in the flesh (surely) none will
question: for who else is it that is that good Physician that can give healing
but he? I am the Lord Exodus 15. 26.
that heals thee; but that will appear better afterward. Let me add for the
present a Scripture or two more to back this with, That Christ is held forth to
us in Scripture, under the Metaphor of a Sun, arise and shine (says the Lord
to his people in their low and afflicted state) he commands Babylon to come
down, Isa. 60. 1.
so he would have his people to lift up their hearts, arise out of the dust
wherein they had wallowed: Why, what is the matter? thy light is come, the
glory of the Lord is risen on thee: and who is this but the Lord Jesus? is it
not he that was given to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, to be the glory of
his people Israel? Luke 2. 32.
the Sun is the glory of the heavens and earth, when it breaks out, it makes a
glorious day, and every thing glorious whose beauty before did not appear, yea
puts glory on things that had none before; its strange to see (Brethren) things
how glorious (even over-dazling the eyes) they appear, when the Sun shines on
them, which have little or no glory at another time. And here in the second
verse, darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: But the
Lord shall arise on thee. Well, its he that is that light, that is that glory
of the Lord. Add but that place in Luke, where he is said to be the dayspring
from on high, visiting us through the tender mercies of our God: its true, the
word there is (...)), which signifies Luke 1. 78.
either the rising of the Sun most ordinarily, or else the place of the Suns
rising, the East; or else some render it, a branch that did arise out of the
root of Jess. But me thinks that is not so agreeable to the scope of the place,
for the next words are, to give light to them that sit in darkness: therefore
we may here note, that the dayspring, or rising of the Sun, is put for the Sun
it self by a Metonymie, and the Sun by a Metaphor put for Christ, he is the
Sun, which rising, makes it day; yea some there are that would have it
understood of the Sun at noonday, of the rising of the Sun to the meridian,
where it shines most gloriously and most hot, according to that in Matthew,
where the Sun rises Mat. 13. 6.
they wither that spring up quickly, and have no root; that is, the Sun arising
to its height, then it scorcheth and withers. And this I will not altogether
reject here, because this seems to be spoken then comparatively, because the
promise is made here to the comfort of such as did then fear the Lord, and may
afterward fear him, which could not be, except the Lord Jesus this Sun of
righteousness had had some influence on them; therefore this may seem to be
meant of his rising to the height of the increase of his glory, when manifested
in the flesh. I mean the glory of light manifested to us, though it were his
own diminution: but happily more of this afterward. Now I will consider it only
absolutely, that he is this Sun. The Lord is a Sun and a shield, Psalm. 84. 11.
and how can he so be, except it be in Christ, as God was in Christ reconciling
the world to himself? So of a consuming fire, he 2 Cor. 5. 19.
becomes a refreshing Sun to his people, in his influences on them.

But wherein is Christ said to be a Sun? We might follow the Metaphor very far,
yet not too far neither. We abhor that dotage of the Manichees, who said
Christ's body went no further then the Sun, but there it was incorporated, on
which account they worship the Sun. But we will a little instance in two or
three particulars, wherein the resemblance holds between Christ and the Sun.

First, the Sun is one, and therefore called Sol from Solus, he only has the
ruling of the day ascribed to him. And so, Brethren, the Lord Christ is one,
though he be two natures, yet he is but one Christ, one person; though he be
God and man truly, yet he is but one Jesus, one Mediator between God and man,
the Lord Jesus Christ, he speaks of him as man, not excluding the Godhead: but
to suit to the weakness of poor unbelieving creatures, 1 Timothy 2. 5.
we may go the more boldly to him, the distance between us now being not so
great, he having taken part of flesh and blood, Heb. 2. 14.
whereof the children, his poor people, are partakers. Its true, many false
Christ's there have been, and some there are now in Mat. 24. 14.
our days; but these, alas, they are but blazing Comets, make a little
streaming light for a while, and fall into a filthy slime at last. There are
also some Parelii (as they call them) images of the Sun made in a cloud, fitly
disposed for such a reflection of his beams. But alas! how soon do these images
and appearances vanish, as soon as by any disturbance the clouds cease to be so
disposed; the Image of a beauty in a glass, in water, is far from the beauty it
self: So do all false Christ's, and false Saviors whoever vanish. He is but one.

Secondly, the Sun is the glory of the heavens. Moon and stars have their
glory, but one star differs from another in glory; but there is none like to
the glory of the Sun. O! the Lord has 1 Cor. 15. 41.
put the excellence of glory on the Lord Jesus; he is the (...), the shining
forth of his Fathers glory: he speaks Heb. 1. 2.
here of Christ as incarnate, as the glory of God did shine in the face of
Moses, so that the people could not behold; so now the glory of the Lord
shines in the face of Jesus Christ (as the 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Apostle has it) so that we cannot behold it, it dazles our eyes steadfastly to
behold this his glory, as it does to behold the Sun in 1 Cor. 1. 14. The wisdom
and power of God.
his glory: Here is the glory of his grace, the glory of his wisdom, of his
mercy, his power, and all in Christ: he is the glory (as it were) of divine
attributes, they all shine forth in him, each with his peculiar glory. The
Temple, the glory of the Lord filled it, so that they could not stand before
him to minister sometimes. So, Brethren, now the Lord has placed his name in
Jesus Christ, he has filled him with his glory: therefore (says the Prophet)
the glory of the Lord is risen on thee: that is, Jesus Isa. 60. 3.
Christ is manifested to thee: was not his glory so great as to confound John,
though a vessel fitted to be filled with those glorious revelations from-him?
He fell at his feet as one dead at the sight Rev. 1. 15, 16, 17.
of him in that vision. How glorious is an Angel, that the very sight of him
was an astonishment to John? what is the Lord of the Angels? If the Moon be so
glorious, what is the Sun?

Thirdly, the Sun is full of light in it self, and filsall things capable of
its light, and yet has never the less; the twinkling Tapers of heaven, they
have each of them their light, some more some less: and the Moon has much
light, and gives much; but what is borrowed light? First, she has it not in
her self, nor in such abundance as the Sun has. So its here, the Saints they
are lights of the Sun (as our Savior says) but alas! like poor Mat. 5. 14.
candles that burn dim, and sometimes through the thickness of the damps of
corruption in our hearts, burn blew, and are ready to go out for the most
part(...) but as the light in the socket, sometimes up and sometimes down, and
every moment a man would think it would go out* the Angels and spirits of just
men made perfect, are like stars shining more gloriously and constantly: But
alas! nothing to the Sun, he sheds the light abroad throughout Heb. 12. 23.
the whole hemisphere at once: Set up many lights at once in a dark night, they
will give light but a little way, and how poor and weak a(...)light, so that
when the Sun shines they appear not at all; and that the Sun should so long
fill the world with his light and have never the less, this is admirable. But
this is but a shadow (Brethren) to the light of Jesus Christ; he is the Jo^. 1.
9.
true light, that is, such a light as that nothing else deserves to be called
a light in comparison of him; as far as the subject is recipient, a glorious
spirit is before a vile body, so far is the light of Christ in its own nature
above the Suns light. And then for fullness there is no comparison, though there
be hardly any thing obvious to ou^ senses (which are to ^et in light to the
understand(...)) that is more glorious, and so is more ^it to set forth the
Lord Jesus his fullness of Light by. Light makes manifest all things; and that
that makes things manifest is the Light: now Ephesians. 5. 13.
the light of the Sun, its true, discovers much, that before it arose appeared
not; but its possible to hide from its light (Brethren) in the depths of the
earth, in the bowels of man, it discovers not any of those, much less the
secrets of hearts, there is no suitableness between such a cause and such an
effect. But the Lord Jesus, he searches all the deep things of men, the very
Marrow Heb. 4. 12.
of their bones (which is the deepest, and has the most coverings upon
coverings) he searches them. So does Christ the ends of men, which are the
most hidden usually in all their designs, they are deep as the Marrow in the
bones, clothed over with flesh, and skin, and bones, pretense upon pretense,
but Christ this Light is so piercing, that there is no hiding any thing from it.

Fourthly, The Sun, his Tabernacle is in heaven; there he made a Tabernacle for
the Sun; there is the seat of the eye of the world, from whence he views all
that is under his Government; Psalm. 19 4.
there is his Palace, and from thence he dispenceth light and influence. So,
Brethren, its with Jesus Christ, he has his Tabernacle in heaven, that is, in
his Church, (for so oftentimes the Church is called) there the Lord places his
Tabernacle; as he says of Israel of old, I will place my Tabernacle among
them, Lev. 26. 11.
and dwell in the midst of them. He walks in the midst of the golden
Candlesticks to behold them, to be nigh them, to dispense of Rev. 1. 13.
his light to them, and of his influence. So does the Sun communicate of his
light to the Moon, and to the Stars in heaven, and to the inhabitants upon
earth. We are not to understand all this of Christ his person merely, but
Christ, as held out in his Ordinances, in his Church, therefore he is said by
the Church to make manifest the mercy and wisdom of God; his Ordinances are the
rays and beams (as afterward we shall speak, when we come to open that part of
the Text.) But his Tabernacle is the Church, thence he shines forth on many
others, as the earth is lightened by the rays from heaven.

Fifthly, From the warming of the Sun; how cold and frozen are those Northern
parts of the world, because remote from the Sun? how cold is the hemisphere
when the Sun is set for a time? ^ow warm when it shines* So the Lord Jesus it
is that is the Author of heat; the Winter is past, the Summer is come, the Cant.
2. 11. 12.
rain is over, the flowers appear on the earth, and the voice of singing of
birds heard: that is, Christ is revealed in the power of his love to poor
sinners; this is that which warmeth the coldest heart when we are frozen in our
affections; and as waters frozen up, cannot run this way nor that way, so we
can do nothing, nor move toward God. Then, Brethren, its a sight of the Sun of
righteousness, the Lord Jesus, a hot gleamfrom him that thaws all, and melts
all, warmeth all again: and therefore in this respect also, he may be compared
to the Sun.

Sixthly, because of influence (which may be, they say, where there is no heat
nor light at least) and therefore Philosophers tell us, that by the influence
of the Sun, the gold is concocted in the bowels of the earth, whither its light
cannot come. And this is that (Brethren) that calls forth the fruits of the
earth, that in the winter for fear of cold were retired, the sap recoiling to
the root, there to be preserved until a season for it: Now the Sun, the heat,
and warmth, and influence thereof calls it forth again; so that the grass, and
fruits, plants and herbs, put forth, bud and blossom (as we see it in the
spring) so the face of the earth is renewed. And so its in this case, the Lord
Jesus Psalm. 104 30.
from heaven shines forth, and conveighing secretly the powerful influences of
his Spirit, and of the Word to poor sinners (though they were as dead and dry
sticks before, as trees that are starven with the frost, and seem dead) then
they put forth again, then they grow green and flourishing, then the heart of a
sinner that was little worth before, becomes a golden Vial full of odours, its
concocted, then the spices flow forth in the garden enclosed.

Seventhly, the Sun dispels the mists and fogs which are unwholsom, would
poison the air; yea, and thick clouds which would muffle up the Sun from us, we
know this by daily experience. So does the Lord Jesus (Brethren) all the mists,
fogs, and clouds of sin, he dispels them for his name sake, he blots out the
transgressions of his people as a cloud. Its the very heat (Brethren) of the
love of Jesus Christ, that consumes, (as Isa. 44. 22.
I may say) melts away those clouds, that they intercept not our communion and
fellowship with him. O! there is not a day, but the streamings of our filthy
hearts would gather into a thick cloud and cover his face from us, were it not
that the warm beams of his love did continually dispell them and scatter them;
we should never enjoy the light of his countenance an hour together, if it were
not for this; and for his names sake he does it. And so the cloud of sorrow,
let the diseases of the people of God be what they will, never so great and
black clouds they are compassed about with; their day is a day of gloominess
and thick darkness, how come these to be dispelled? is it not the Sun of
righteousness breaking forth on poor sinners that does it? one sight of Christ
as reconciled to him puts an end unto all.

Eighthly, the Sun is the cause of the sweet intercourse between the earth and
the clouds, and the clouds and the earth: for its the Sun that exhales the
vapors from the earth, and draws them up into the middle region of the air,
and there with the cold of the air its condensed into a cloud, and hangs until
it be dissolved, and render it self to the earth again to make it fruitful: and
so the dew is in like manner begotten, only is not far lifted up above the
earth, and with the cold of the night is congealed into little drops, and so
sweetly distills. So the Lord Jesus, he draws out the hearts, the affections
of his people in prayers, sweet breathings after himself; and these prayers
come down again sometimes on the same soul, sometimes on another place: they
fall, but abundance of sweetness, and blessing, and mercy is poured out by this
means on poor creatures, whereby they become fruitful.

Ninthly, The Lord Jesus may be compared to the Sun, for that the Sun
Giant-like rejoices to run his race, and who can turn him back? alas! all the
clouds that gather about the Sun, that to our apprehensions might happily seem to
threaten a blotting of it out, a clogging of it, they are all below it. Its
true, prayer once did hold him in his course, and it looks like a word of
command, Sun stand thou still: and so prayer may do much with Jesus Josh. 10.
12.
Christ, but not hinder him in his course, riding on in his triumphant
chariot, conquering and to conquer, enlightening poor dark places and people.
Before we come to the other, we will a little apply this to our selves.

First then (Brethren) if the Lord Jesus be a Sun, then they Use 1.
that have this Sun risen on them, they are children of the day; if the Sun be
up, it must needs be day; and is not the Sun up Brethren, among us? is not the
Lord Jesus gone forth as a Giant to run his race among us? we now have a day of
Grace among us, and how long, or how short it may be, I know not; Brethren, it
seems to be declining in some respects, and the shadows of the evening
growing low; O that we would be persuaded, and stirred up to do the work of our
day, in this our day! our great work, which is to work out our salvation with
Phil. 2. 12.
fear and trembling. I doubt, if the Sun should set, and the night come on you,
wherein no man can work, you should have 2 Cor. 4. 5.
this work yet to do many of you, especially, brethren, you into whose hearts
the Lord Jesus, this Sun of righteousness has shone. O how should you walk as
children of the day, not in surfeiting and drunkenness! I mean not with meat
and fire only, Romans 13. 13.
but with any creature comforts, and delights on this side Christ; away then
with all the works of darkness, all practices which did suit better with the
times of ignorance and blindness and now walk as becomes the light and the
day, that the Sun may not be ashamed to behold you.

Secondly, Such as the Lord Jesus then has not risen on, 2.
they are yet in darkness, children of the night, and walk at uncertainties,
know not whither they go. Alas, many a poor soul thinks he is as sure to go
to heaven, as he is to die, when he is in the very rode to hell; only some go
in the broad trodden path, open profane impudent sinners; some steal thither
behind the hedge; they are going to hell, but in a closure, walk hidden from
others and from themselves. Many night-Birds there are among us, children of
the night indeed, though in one respect many of us may be said to be children
of the day, because Jesus Christ in the dispensation of the Gospel is held
forth unto us, as they are said to be the children of the Kingdom; yet in Gal.
1. 16.
respect of the inward revealing of Christ in the heart, I doubt many of us are
strangers to it; though we fly about in the light, yet we are but Owls and
Bats, darkness agrees better with us; our souls are full of darkness, our
works are nothing else but works of darkness. How sad a consideration is this
Brethren, that in the midst of light we should be children of darkness! (...)
noonday, when the Gospel is at the height, and Christ, the Sun as it were at
the meridian, we should be stumbling and groping as at midnight, not knowing
whither we go.

Then thirdly, As there is this difference of persons where Christ comes, from
them where he comes not, so it is in families 3.
and people. Brethren, what a sad people and family is that where they are all
in Egyptian darkness! Jesus Christ is not risen unto any soul among them, they
know him not experimentally, but they are all in blindness: Alas, none can help
another, Exodus 10. 23.
the Israelites and Egyptians (though they dealed among one another) in one
family there was light, in the other there was nothing but gross darkness that
might be felt. O who would live in such a family! who would not haste out of
such a condition? you would think that a sad conditioned house, that the light
of the Sun and warmth of the Sun never enters into, of all places you would
not live in it: this is is nothing brethren, to the total absence of Christ,
where neither Husband, nor Wife, nor Fellow Servants, nor Children, none of them
have had the Lord Jesus shining into their hearts; Gross darkness shall cover
the earth, (says the Prophet) But on Zion shall the Glory of the Isa. 60. 2.
Lord arise. Look into what families, brethren, you put your selves: no man
would content himself to live in a dungeon continually; that family is worse
where Jesus Christ has never come.

Fourthly, Then take notice how sweet a condition it must 4.
needs be, to have an union and fellowship with Jesus Christ, especially where
that fellowship is constant: truly light is sweet, And it is a pleasant thing
to behold the Sun (says Solomon): Eccles. 11. 7.
but alas, that is nothing to a sight of Christ! poor sinners in a dark
condition, when they become sensible of it, will tell you what its worth to
have a glimpse of Christ, of the light of his countenance: poor creatures that
for half an year together are without the Sun, will tell you how sweet a
condition it is to have the Sun shining on them. Mary Magdalen will tell you,
(when she wanted her Savior, her Lord) with many tears, what a want it is, and
what a joy to have his presence. O what light is there in that soul: what joy,
what peace, what comfort, what warmth, what melting over the Lord Jesus! it is
a little heaven on earth indeed, this enjoyment of the Lord Jesus.

Fifthly, We may hence learn then brethren, whence comes all 5.
our light, and all our warmth, and all our fruitful influences, whereby we
spring forth, and bring forth abundantly, it is from the Lord Jesus. Thy heart
was as very a dungeon as any, full of darkness and bugs, frogs and serpents,
and how came it to be lightened, but that the Sun of God was pleased to shine on
thee, yea into thy heart more then another, and freely with his presence to
scatter those lusts thy soul was full of before. Art thou enabled so much as to
bud, to think a good thought? its from hence, because that the Sun of
righteousness has arisen on thee; thou have received some influence from him:
does it come to a blossom, a good word, holy communication? its from the same
principle: does the fruit knit and grow up into a ripeness, increase into an
holy action, an holy walking with God, whence is it but from the Sun of
righteousness? does the Marigold open? its according to the heat of the Sun
Peter mel^s because Christ looks on him. 6. Gal. 1. 2, 20. Not I, but the Grace
of God in me.
: do our hearts open? are our hearts enlarged? hence it is (Brethren) forget
not the fountain, we are apt to think, the sparks are of our own kindling, etc.

Sixthly, Then (Brethren) we should hence learn to whom, to your all give the
Praise, the Glory of all. Let the Moon and Stars then fall down before this
Sun, as it was in Joseph's dream: they shine but with a borrowed light, and the
borrower is servant to the lender. How do the Birds each morning chant and
chirp, when their little spirits are revived by the Sun rising on them? and
shall our mouths be sealed up, when the Sun of righteousness has visited our
hearts, quickened them, enlightened them? The Stars you know appear not when the
Sun arises in his Glory: O dear friends, so should we when the Name of Christ
comes in competition with our names, not appear, be content to be nothing, to
decrease, so he may increase; Let him have the Glory of all.

Seventhly, Then (Brethren) learn to prize the Lord Jesus, 7. Psalm. 89. 15. I
will walk in the light of his countenance.
set a true esteem on him: should we want the Sun for one month, what a value
should we set on it? it is true worth indeed, brethren, to value things by
their enjoyment, rather then by their (...)ant: now thou have the Sunshine it
may be, many a sweet refreshing warming from the Lord Jesus, O prize it; every
one is looking at and admiring a Comet, but who considers the Sun? who
admireth that? prizeth that? how much ado has the Lord Jesus with us to bring
us to this? he is fain to put us in a dungeon, to make us bear the iniquities
of our youth, to hide his face, to make us walk in darkness, before we will
prize it; what a grief is this to him? is it not a trouble to our selves? and
what a folly is it Brethren, to grieve the Lord Jesus, and grieve our own
souls, when we might save all this? O labor then to do it; beg such a heart of
Jesus Christ.

Eighthly, Then Brethren, shut not the windows against the 8.
shinings of this Sun of righteousness: sometimes the Lord Jesus gets within
a sinner for all his fence and guard, light comes in at some chink, begins
to discover the condition in which he is, shows him the filthy vermin that
are ready to run away with his soul, that the heart swarms withal, that he saw
not before: and yet alas, he makes a shift to clap to the window, to smother
the light with both hands, puts it away, he desires not the presence of it;
this is a sad condition, when men are ignorant, and will be ignorant; when the
Lord Jesus would Jer. 51. 9.
have healed them, and they would not be healed; O how can thou tell, whether
ever thou shall be healed till thou die? O take heed Brethren, of this! it is
the way to bring the blackness of darkness on you, to provoke God to clap the
everlasting chains of darkness on you, wherein you may be reserved to the last
day. Oh it is a sad saying, that, Let him that is ignorant, be ignorant still;
the time may come, when the hour of darkness shall fall on your souls at the
day of death, that you 1. Cor. 14. 38.
would give a world then but for a glimpse of that light you now shut out, and
fence your selves against; when your works of darkness and secret pleasures of
sin (for whose sake you have done it) do fly in your face, buffet you, ready to
tear your throat out, hale you before the judgment seat of Christ, O then for
a sight of Christ, but he is far from you; no, he would have enlightened you,
but you would not; Therefore now the things which belong to Luke 19. 42.
your peace, are hid from your eyes. He might pity Jerusalem, and weep over
her, but alas her condition was past cure; I would the condition of many a poor
soul here were not such; yea Brethren, the people of God themselves, take heed
of sh(...)ing out the light of this Sun of righteousness; for what will become
of the light in the room, when its fullest of light, if the windows be clapped
too? will it not be cut off? will it not become a dungeon? we complain many
times of a dark, and sad, and dead condition: the truth is, Brethren, we have
shut him out, we have thought; Oh now we are full, now we have knowledge and
heat enough; we have been so warmed with the influence of Christ on us, now it
matters not for altogether so strict a walking, now we have gotten the light of
his countenance; this is a secret frowardness of our hearts, and then he is
provoked to withdraw, and alas, we are in darkness again. Therefore take we
heed Brethren, how we hide the face of God in Christ from our selves by such
wantonness under the beams of Grace.

Ninthly, Then Brethren, learn we not to rest in the common 9.
influences of this Sun, the Lord Jesus he shines on the good and bad,
Brethren, but he shines only on the heads of some, but into the hearts of
others (as the Apostle says) the 2 Cor. 4.
passages between the head and the heart are opened, and the light seizes on
the will and affections, as well as the understanding; the Sun may shine on
thee, thou may have much knowledge, and an head full of notion, and yet be
but a weed; for it shines on the weeds as well as on the flowers; on the
dunghill as well as on the garden; the dunghill never savours so bad, as when
the Sun beats most on it. O what steams are there then, enough to poison a
man! Ah Brethren, the shining of Jesus Christ, on some poor sinners, what does
it but raise steams of lust within? men are more vile, more wicked, their guilt
greater, their condemnation surer, their sins more loathsome to God then any
others; therefore stay not here (Brethren) except we find that the light we
receive from Jesus Christ do scatter our lusts, for they will not endure the
light that is saving indeed: except thou find that it change thee indeed, and
transform thy heart into his image from Glory to Glory: if thou find thou art
rather changed from dishonor to dishonor, from one vile affection to 2 Cor.
3. 18.
another, ((...) the Apostle calls them) all the light thou have received, is
nothing. Rom 1. 26.


Tenthly, They are not friends to Christ then Brethren, that 10.
would make more Suns then one; what, is not the Lord of Glory a glo(...)s Sun
enough? is there not a fullness of light in him; sufficient for us all? a
fullness of heat and influence in him for us all, but we must be flattering our
selves and others into a rivalship with Christ? how gross are the Papists in
this point? making the Saints their mediator of satisfaction and intercession
both? I do them no wrong: they are the words of their Missall, praying for
pardon by the merits of their Saints, and praying to them to intercede for
them: yea and to the Virgin to command her son; O horrid! but in them its not
so much, because either they are in Egyptian darkness, and denied the means of
light, or given up to strong delusions to believe a lie; 2 These. 2. 11.
but for us that have the light of the knowledge of Christ in such a rich
manner among us, and yet have a Pope in our bellies, the indignity is much
greater to Jesus Christ: how prone are we to set up our own works, as our
Savior? who can say his heart is clean, and thoroughly purged from this evil? O
that we were but ashamed of it, and were able to say that we do it not in our
hearts; for then its not so deeply chargable on us, (as I doubt) its on many of
us. Therefore take heed of this Brethren, of setting up any spark of our own
kindling (or of his kindling) in us, in defiance to the Lord Jesus, in
opposition against him, or partnership with him in our salvation, in our
comfort, or peace, or joy of faith: if we do, and give him not the whole, we do
much dishonor him, and shall find that we much wrong our own souls. No readier
way (Brethren) to bring an eclipse, then when the Moon will be interposing
between the Sun and the Earth.

Eleventhly, What enemies are they then to Jesus Christ and to 11.
Mankind, that would pluck the Sun out of the Firmament? would we not account
him a desperate enemy that would endeavor it? and are they any better? are
they not much worse, who would pluck away our Christ from us? whether they be
sins, or lusts within, which do indeed rather cloud or eclipse at most. But
there are some who would even pluck him out of his throne that the Father has
set for him in Heaven, in his Church, such as deny the Lord that bought them,
such as will not yield him to be the most high God, equal to the Father; Phil
2. 8.
though Christ counted it no robbery, they count it a robbery for him be equal
with him. Can a creature-Christ be a sufficient Christ to give light, and life,
and healing to poor sinners? will this ever satisfy any tender conscience,
quiet any trouble(...)ul? let it go then for a damnable heresy, and let us
abhor it, and beware of it; for nothing is so gross, but in these times Satan
2 Pet. 2. 1.
finds some vent for it; and bewail it (Brethren) that ever any poor creatures
that expect salvation by Jesus Christ, should attempt such an high indignity
against him? what is it but to kiss him with Judas, and yet to betray him? with
Joab to kiss the Son, and yet to stab him? he that would bring the Sun down to
the light and condition of the Moon, were a wretched man, but this is nothing
to the case in hand.

Twelfthly, Then admire (Brethren) the tender mercy of the Lord that would give
us such a Sun, the Lord Jesus, the Sun of 12.
righteousness! if he had left the world in a Chaos at first, and never
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, never set any Sun in the
Firmament, who could have charged any thing on him? But he knew what a
miserable world it would it be without the Sun, and how little of the beauty,
and excellence, and perfection of his works, and wisdom would appear, if there
were no Sun. But here (Brethren) shining forth more of his ^enderness and
bowels unto poor Sinners in a dark and dead condition, through the tender mercy
of our God, whereby the dayspring from an high has visited us; here are the
soundings of his bowels toward us indeed, when we were forlorn and Luke. 1. 78.
helpless in our selves, to cause this dayspring from on high to visit us. And
truly for us in this Land, how long have we had the Sun of righteousness risen
on us? and that yet it is not set, that he is not altogether eclipsed by the
world of iniquity; that he has stood still (as it were) and not hastened to a
setting; this is unspeakable mercy, admire it, bless the Lord, be filled with
his praises!

Thirteenthly, Brethren, Then let us be exhorted to set our 13.
selves in the warm Sun. I mean, to wait diligently on the Lord Jesus in his
Ordinances, for these are the Orb in which he moves in his Church, the
Heavens, and does, as it were, wheel about the Church in them, as the Sun in
the Orb, to communicate his light, and heat, and influences; and therefore its
observable, that David says, I had rather be a doorkeeper in the Psalm. 84.
house of God, then dwell in the tents of wickedness; why, says he, The Lord
is a Sun, and a Shield, Glory, and a Defense round about them, therefore he
would be a doorkeeper in the house of God; because there, and then, and to
them, he is a Sun in a special manner. O Brethren, have you not experience of
it? where and how come in your warmings on your spirits? is it not in the
Ordinances of Christ? does he not breath there, and feed there with his people?
if a man should be so peevish as that he would not have the Suns influence,
except he did shine in his chamber, did move there, or shine on the earth, or
move there, were he not most justly deprived of them? Here Brethren, here in
the Word preached and heard, in the Seals, and Prayer, and all the Ordinances
of Christ he will be found of his people, and above others in private; be much
in maditation of the sweetness, the riches of his love to poor Sinners, such as
thou art, this is to set our faces Brethren; toward the Sun. O how will this
clear the eyes of an Eagle indeed, one that is gloriously born of heaven,
though Owls are blinded by it? How will this (Brethren) darken the beauty and
glory of all things here? You complain of earthliness, and you are fast glewed
to the world. O beg of God, that he would turn your eyes toward himself, toward
the Lord Jesus; behold this Sun in his strength and glory, and see if this do
not make all things else dull to you, to have no excellence in them, in
comparison of Christ, that you shall cry out, none but Christ, none but Christ.
O Brethren, this would make us sparkle, like Diamonds, lying under the
influence of the Sun: its for want of this that Christians are like Diamonds in
the dirt; this will make us sparkle, as Moses face did shine; this Brethren, is
the way to contract the beams as in a burning glass, and set the heart on fire
with love to Jesus Christ; then our affections will flame, then shall we be a
zealous people of good works; otherwise not.

Fourteenthly, Arise then and shine, thou poor fearing soul, 14.
that lie in the dust, be enlightened, lift up thy eyes thou that languishest,
and thy spirit is ready to faint within thee, thou art even dying, and could
with fears of thy condition: Oh thy light is come! is not the Sun in the
Firmament, though he may be clouded from thee? what though there be much
darkness in thee of ignorance, of discomfort, thou walk in darkness and Isa.
60. 1.
see no light, the Sun may be up, though it appear not? it may be day with
thee (poor soul) and thou a child of light and of the day, though thou
beholdest not the Sun, nor the b^^ms from the Sun; if thou have not the light
of the Sun, the light of his countenance, thou may have the influence of the
Sun notwithstanding, that reaches the parts where the light comes not. And be
not discouraged at the enemies of Christ: what though the clouds of ignorance,
error, profaneness and idolatry gather together, and seem to threaten the Sun?
Alas, how soon can he dispel them, consume them with the brightness of his
glorious appearance? what if the Dogs do bark at the Moon, the Church, or at
Christ, the Sun? will that hinder him in his course? what though the People
when they are scorched with the heat of the Sun (as some Pagans are) do curse
the Sun? can they hinder his course? O no: as a strong man he will run his
race, and who shall hinder it? and those that will not be made fruitful he will
burn up and consume; therefore be not discouraged; and thou that have much
deadness, and coldness, and hardness, be not discouraged, there is influence
enough in Christ, go to him, labor to act faith on him, set thy self under his
influence, wait on him in his Ordinances, and see if it come not into thee, to
warm, to melt, to make fruitful in the work of the Lord.

Now for the second, which is, that Jesus Christ is the Sun of righteousness.
But lest I should dwell too long on the Text, if* I should at large handle
every part, therefore I will rather sum up several things in one Observation,
and its this.

Unto them that fear the Name of the Lord, the Sun of righteousness shall arise
with healing in his wings, or does arise with Doctr.
healing in his wings. Wherein I will labor to unfold several things, and then
come to the Application of all to our selves.

First then, What is meant by them that fear the Lord? here in this place of
the Prophet, I conceive by the coherence of the Text, that hereby are meant
such, as when the Prophet had denounced the fearful threatenings of Judgment,
The day of the Lord to be as a fire; oven, to consume the stubble, etc. they
were afraid, they feared the Lord and his judgments; they were apt to be too
much dismayed at it; but he tells* them, that to them it should be a day of
healing, and liberty, and light, and refreshing to his people. The people of
God may, and ought to be afraid of the judgments of God, when they hang bound
up in a black cloud, but yet in the womb of a threatening; and so Josiah was
afraid, and rent his clothes, and humbled himself, 2 Kings 22. chapter 11. 19.
his heart was tender, and he did tremble at this fearful word, the judgment
threatened against Jerusalem. A stout, stubborn, brawny, hard heart never melts
nor moves, but such as those are afraid; or else if judgment do break out,
and the decree bring forth, the clouds pour out upon Sinners, then they are
afraid. So David was afraid of the judgment of God executed on Psalm. 119. 120.
(...) Chr^n. 21. 30.
Vzzah, and afraid of the Angel of the Lord. Now to such as these, the Lord
promises a Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing; such fear has
torment in it and anguish, and therefore has need of healing; but is this to
be restrained either to their persons, or to their conditions? surely no: the
prophesies are Divine, they are of the nature of the author, with whom 1000
years are but as one day, therefore we are to allow to them a greater latitude,
such as is agreeable to them, they are not fulfilled punctually at once, but
have springing accomplishment, Bacon advancement of Learning. li. 2. p. 121.
and germinant throughout many ages, though the height or fullness of them may
refer them to some age; and of all other prophesies, it is most true of that of
Christ, with respect to the saving virtues of his blood to his people;
therefore for persons we must not confine it to them, no nor for things, to
that sort of fear which seems to be meant by the series of the context; but
this as all other promises of God are applyable to any condition of poor
creatures, to which its suitable. As that of Joshuah, I will, never leave thee,
is applied to want in outward things, and to encourage them to walk without
covetousness. Josh. 1. 5. Heb. 13. 5.
Therefore;

Secondly, Fearing of God, may be meant such as God has begun to work on, has
convinced them of sin, and of wrath by reason of sin; there is a fear wrought
in such an heart, as the poor Jaylour came springing in and trembling; and the
three Acts 16. 29. Acts 2.
thousand in Acts 2. To such as these the Promise may be applyable, That Christ
will arise on them with healing in his wings; though I know not that its to be
taken in any equal latitude with this fear, for there may be such a conviction
and fear, and yet happily never any healing for them.

3. Such as fear the Lord and his Goodness (as the Prophet has i^) Such as
fear his Name, though he himself be in Heaven, Hos. 3* 5
and they cannot see him face to face, as Moses did; they seek not (...)t s^gns
of his presence, though they see him but darkly and through a glass: though
they see him not, being invisible, ^et by his (...) they know him; and the
greatest part of his name is Mercy (as you have it in Exodus) and his name
speaks Exodus 24. 6.
his nature, the Lord, the Lord God, gracious and merciful, long-suffering,
etc. O! such as these, they shall have the Sun of righteousness arise on them;
if they have but little, yet they shall have more: Some they have had, else
they could not be fearing him in such a manner as this is, for this indeed is a
part of the Covenant of grace made good to them already, that he will put his
fear into their hearts; and this here is nothing else but the displaying of the
same Covenant of grace to his people. Alas! many times the people of God that
fear his name, are under cloudings, sometimes in respect of temptation to sin,
they are sore pestered with them: Sometime the prevailing of sin over them, to
the darkning and disquieting of their souls: Sometime they are in darkness and
see no light, and yet fear the name of the Isa. 50. 10.
Lord. Now to such as these the Sun of righteousness will arise with healing in
his wings.

But secondly, what is meant by the Sun of righteousness? That Christ the
Covenant is meant, I told you before; but for a reason of this title, why a
Sun? you have heard at large. But the Sun of righteousness, why so called, is a
further question; and for answer to this, let me speak a few words.

First, One reason may be because of his perfection; there should nothing be
wanting in him, he should have all perfections which were just and fit for such
a Mediator to have; and so some think there is a Hebraism in the words, the Sun
of righteousness; the righteous Sun, the absolutely perfect Sun: and this is a
truth, in this Sun there was no spot, no wrinkle, no darkness, no deficiency of
glory, of light, of heat, of influences, of pains in wheeling about his Church
continually for their supply and refreshing; but this is not all.

Secondly, Because in him the righteousness of God was eminently conspicuous,
therefore he may be called the Sun of righteousness; Some imperfect footsteps
of righteousness there are in the creature, of holiness and conformity to God,
some lineaments of his Image, but very naked, they want their filling up, and
garnishing with colors, and will do while we are in the body: and there are so
many blots, and blurs, and stains, that it scarce appears many times; witness
the choicest examples of the Saints, as (...) Moses, if you look on him at the
water of Meri^ah, you would scarce have thought him so meek a man; and so David
in Psalm. 106. 32. (...) Sam. 19. 29.
the matter of Vriah, and his dealing with Mephibosheth. These were shadows
cast on the beauty of Christ in them, that it was not so conspicuous; the glass
is dimmed, and defiled, and so not so transparent: but now the Lord Jesus is a
pure glass of divine attributes and perfections, and therefore of this
righteousness here spoken of. And secondly, conspicuous in him was the
vindictive righteousness of God; it is true his justice is manifested in
calling sinners to an account, as he did the Angels, the Sodomites, the old
world, and us in our times, his dealings do speak him to Phil. 2. 6.
be a just God: but never any so much as his dealing with Christ, though a Son,
and equal with him in all essential glory; yet if he will be surety for poor
sinners, he must as it were for a time vail his glory with rags of flesh,
because the children partake of the H^b. 2. 14.
same; and though the Son of his incomprehensible love, yet if he will so
appear under the sins of his people, he shall find them like a poisoned
garment, inflamed with wrath, he must drink up the cup to the bottom, though he
were amazed at it, and compassed about with fear, surrounded with fear (as the
Evangelist has it) (...), though it cost him a bloody sweat, put Mat. 14. 34.
him into an agony. A strong potion (Brethren) that casts the Lord of Life and
Glory into such a sweat as this, though it lay him under reproach and shame,
cloud Gods face from him, cost him the very blood of his heart, and all the
joy* of his soul for a time; though he put up strong cries and tears, God will
not be entreated to let the cup pass from him, not spare him at all. O! here
the Justice of God is conspicuous in him. (Brethren) never Mat. 26. 39, 42.
was there such a pattern of righteousness in God as this, that he would not
spare sin, though in his dearest Son of his love. O then! shall sons by
adoption think to make bold with sin, and not smart for it in some measure?
Take heed you watchless, careless walkers before God. O! what shall become of
poor sinners then, that are never the better for all this, whose sins shall be
charged on their own account? Did it amaze the Lord Jesus? With what hearts do
you think (sinners) you shall be able to look an angry God in the face, when
his flaming indignation shall stream forth on your souls to all eternity? O!
think on it sinners, and tremble: but this by the by.

Thirdly, He may be called the Sun of righteousness, as I conceive, as he is
the fulfilling of all the promises that were made of him. The Lord made many
promises, as the seed of the woman Genesis 3. 15.
shall break the serpents-head; and that in Abraham, in his seed all the
Nations of the earth should be blessed; and that a Virgin should conceive and
bear a son, whose name should be Immannuel, God with Isa. 7. 1^.
us; signifying the union of natures in his person.

Now if Christ had not come according to the promise, where had been the truth
of God his righteousness? and therefore says the Apostle, it was to declare
his righteousness for the remission of sins, that are past, through the
forbearance of God; Romans 3. 25, 26.
when all the Fathers had believed in him to come, and to be revealed, they
dyed in faith, not having received the promises, that is, not having seen
Christ come in the flesh for the accomplishment of their redemption, though
afar off they beheld them and embraced them: Abraham saw his day and was glad.
Now what had become of the faith of all these, grounded on the faithfulness of
God who had promised; they without us, says the Apostle, were not made
perfect, though through forbearance Heb. 11. ult.
(as it were) their sins were passed over; yet they would have returned on them
again, if Christ had not come according to the promise; and therefore herein
now Christ may be said to be the Sun of righteousness; but this concerns most
his first appearing in the flesh, though for these ends and purposes, for which
he does arise unto every poor believing soul. Now therefore he is the Sun of
righteousness in this respect also, as well by his arising on any soul that
stands in need of him now, as by arising on them then: for if God should fail
in any of them which he has given to Christ, where were his righteousness?
This is the third.

Fourthly, Another consideration wherefore he may be called the Sun of
righteousness, is this, because he is the meritorious cause of our
justification in the sight of God, therefore he is called, the Lord our
righteousness; he was set forth (says the Apostle) for a propitiation through
faith in his blood, called Ier. 23. 6.
the righteousness of God, as he accepts of the satisfaction of Christ, as
God in Christ paid the price of it, even the blood of God (as he imputes it to
us, or for Christ's sake does not impute our sins on us) Enter not into
Judgment (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 143. 2.
with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no flesh be justified; not by the
works of the Law, but by the blood of Jesus: in this respect he is called a Sun
of righteousness.

Fifthly, in that he does by his influences on the hearts of his people work on
them a similitude, a likeness to himself, to his Father, and so beget an
inherent righteousness, putting inward principles and seeds into their hearts,
from whence flow all manner of holy conversation; in this also he is the Sun of
righteousness: the Apostle is clear in this, he is made of God to us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption; which sanctification 1 Cor. 1. 30.
is sometimes called in Scripture righteousness. So, he has chosen us in him
to the adoption of Sons, that we might be holy and unblamable, that by him we
might be brought to such a Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.
state and condition, by beholding him, by lying in his beams with our faces
toward him, with open face. Now all shadows, 2 Cor. 3. 18. 2 Cor. 5. 2. Made
sin that we might be m^de the righteousness of God in him.
and ceremonies, and vails, (such as in the Legal administration of the
Covenant of grace were on him) being taken away, we are changed into his Image
from glory to glory. In all these respects he may be called the Sun of
righteousness: and thus much for the second thing.

The third then, What is meant by the arising of this Sun of righteousness on
them? if we understand it with respect to the people of God, of those times
that feared his name; then it cannot be understood (Brethren) as if that Christ
had never shined on them: for, how come they then to fear the Lord, if he had
not yet owned them as his people in Covenant? but it must be understood thus,
that they should behold him in a more glorious manner arising; they that should
live to see the day. Many waited for the consolation of Israel, as Zach. and
Simeon, Luke 2. 25.
and many others, who could not have done it if they had had no influence from
Christ on their hearts; therefore we must say, that even among the Jews, yea
and before, many of them had a dawning of light, had some glimmerings of
Christ, he did shine through all the darkness and shadows of the Ceremonies:
Christ was held forth in them all, but only as the beauty of the picturre is in
the shadow. But now we have the very image of the things, (says the Apostle.)
So that this rising on them (Brethren) Heb. 10. 1.
may be as the rising of the Sun to some height, rather then his first
appearing: for I find that in the Gospel of Matthew, so the word (...) is
rendered. When the Sun is risen, it withers: Mat. 13. 6.
that is, when its up and at an height, then it withers.

So now, (though before they had the dawning, I say, some scattering beams
fore-running the glory of the Sun) yet now Joh. 10. 10.
they should have it in greatest glory, for he came that his people might have
light and might have it more abundantly.

But now to us (Brethren) on whom he has shone so long, he may be said to
rise, as he breaks through any clouds of darkness, on us, as the Martyr at the
stake cried out, Son of God shine on me: he meant, that he should show him the
light of his countenance, break in on the heart with more light and warmth,
whereby he might be armed against that tertible death he was to encounter with;
and the Sun in the Firmament broke out in a glorious manner through the thick
clouds, as an Emblem, if not an earnest of the other; and a visible evidence or
testimony to the standers by, that it should be so. So that now I conceive,
when on any poor soul in his first agonies, the throws that he has to bring
forth the child Jesus, his troubles of heart for sin, and thick darkness on him
the Lord Jesus breaks forth on the soul with a glorious discovery of his love,
yea with an hint of his love, its arising on him; and so as the increase of the
glory of his people Israel: the glory of his people Israel is called his
arising on them; so where the Lord does in a more eminent Luke 2. 32..
manner appear to his people, either after desertion in respect of comfort and
peace, or after desertion in respect of holiness, there he may be said to arise
on them. And thus much for the third.

The fourth thing is, what is meant by the wings of this Sun of righteousness?
this is so much the more difficult, by how much the more Metaphors it is
clothed with, one on another: For first, the natural Sun is said to have
wings. And secondly, then this Sun of righteousness being compared to the
natural Sun, is also said to have wings; that we may therefore a little unfold
it, let us first see what are the wings of the Sun, the natural Sun, and for
that we must know it is Metaphorical: the rays, the beams of the Sun are said
to be the wings of the Sun; we read of the wings of the morning, wherewith the
Psalmist Psalm. 139. 9.
would fly away to the ends of the earth; what is that but the dawnings of the
day? the eyelids of the morning, as Job calls Job 3. 9.
it: the first breakings of light, when the Sun peepeth above the Horizon, the
rays and streamings of light scattered before the appearing os the Sun: the
Sun is as it were the eye of heaven, governing and viewing the earth; and the
dawning of the day is as it were the eyelids, opening before the eye do appear
when it awakeneth. So Caryl and Mercer. they are called the wings of the Sun,
(as is conceived) for several reasons.

First, because as wings and feathers compass, clothe and adorn the fowl whose
wings they are; so the rays do clothe, and compass, and adorn the Sun as it
were; how naked would a bird be without his feathers? and how naked would the
Sun be without his rays and beams?

Secondly, because of the swift motion of the Sun, not only in his diurnal
course, as in Psalm 19. He rejoices as a Giant to run his race: but no sooner
is the Sun up, but he does in a manner spread his rays to all the Hemisphere,
as a bird quickly when she rises spreads her wings abroad; and therefore the
Egypitans Hieroglyph. of the Sun, was a fowl spreading long wings every way.

Thirdly, because the wings of a fowl, are those under which she gathers her
young, cherishes them, refreshes, warmeth Mat. 23. 27.
them, that they may grow and increase: So here, the wings of the Sun are those
whereby the creatures in their kind are healed and cherished; as you know how
the body will be benumbed, and languish with the cold of the night: when the
Sun beams come to beat on it again, how does it quicken and revive?

But now for the wings of the Lord Jesus, what are his wings as he is the Sun
of righteousness? whatever answers to this Sunbeams are his wings; and what
are these? In a word then, I take them to be the Word and Spirit especially;
not excluding other Ordinances of Jesus Christ, but these especially; yea
(truly) the Spirit in the Word, and in other Ordinances of Christ, I take to be
these wings here spoken of. The Spirit in the Word, even whereby he comes and
preaches to men, even to them that were asar off from Christ, is said to come
and preach peace; by which also (says the Apostle) that is, by the Spirit, he
went and preached to the Spirits in prison, that now are in prison, but not
^ph. (...). 17.
when he sent to preach to them; the Spirit of Christ in the Word which Noah
preached to them (who was a Preacher of righteousness) the Lord Jesus went and
preached to them: I say, 1 Pet. 3. 19.
these are the wings of our Sun of righteousness; and so they are called happily
for diverse reasons.

First, that these proceeding from him, even as the rays of the Sun, which are
his wings, proceed from the Sun, as the Sun sends forth his beams and
influences in a powerful manner; so Christ sends forth his light and his truth,
the Spirit as a person in the Trinity proceeds from him as from the Father,
but as to his Psalm. 43. 3.
office, to be an enlightening Spirit, a quickening Spirit, a comforting Spirit;
so he proceeds from Christ; I will send you the Comforter Ioh. 15. 26.
from the Father; he poured out of his Spirit on his Apostles and many others,
who were to go forth in his name, and preach the Gospel to the Nations; and the
Word he sends it Rev. 1. 16.
forth, out of his mouth proceeds a two-edged sword, which is his Word.

Secondly, as the beams supply the absence of the Sun, so does the Spirit of
Christ supply his absence; therefore while he was yet present, the Spirit was
not yet given, not poured out in that fullness; but when he was to go, he
comforts his Disciples with this, that if he went, he would send them the
Comforter, another Ioh. 14. 16.
Comforter; himself was one, and he would send them another, and that was his
Spirit, and he should lead them into all truth, bring all things to their
remembrance, and be their Comforter, and help their infirmities, and so supply
the absence of Christ. Yea better then if he himself were with them; as we use
to say, the Sun is come into such an house, when the beams thereof are come in,
which do supply the absence of the Sun, and better it is for us to have the
beams, then the Sun in our houses.

Thirdly, because of the swiftness of the opening of the glory of Christ to the
last ages of the world. O! how swift are the beams of the Sun in a moment
darted from heaven to earth, and overspread the whole Horizon? So the Lord,
his Word being quickened by the Spirit, does run very swiftly (as the Psalmist
Psalm. 147. 15.
has it) in how short a time (as the age of the Apostles) did it overspread
the Horizon, gotten as far as Rome, and how mightily did it prevail, though the
Jews did contradict, and blaspheme, Acts 19. 20.
and endeavor to take off the wheels of his Chariots, yet it went on never the
slower for that, it grew and multiplied; Converts unto the face of the Church
were as thick as the morning dew on the face of the earth, which is generated
by the Psalm. 110. 3.
Sun.

Fourthly, as the beams of the Sun carry light, and heat, and refreshing along
with them to the poor languishing earth, and other creatures, so does the
Spirit and the Word, and the Spirit in the Word carries light with it; thy Word
is a light to my feet; and indeed it is not Christ considered alone, but as he
is held out in the Gospel that is here resembled to the Sun of righteousness,
Romans 10. 18.
as I told you before; their sound is gone forth into all the earth; that is,
of them that preached the Gospel of peace and reconciliation through Christ.
And for heat; O! how does many a poor creature come under an Ordinance with an
heartless mind, cold and dead, and his heart does burn within him, while the
Luke 24. 32.
Lord by his Spirit has communion with him in those Ordinances? and what
refreshings do arise to a poor weary soul, when the Lord creates the fruit of
the lips, peace, peace, certain undoubted peace, he doubleth it for emphasis:
that peace which Isa. 57. 19.
passes understanding: and it shall surely be so, and suddenly too, not long,
he delights not to hold poor souls in anxiety and trouble, only what he sees
needful for their humiliation, fetching them off themselves and sin, and making
Christ sweet to them indeed, that he may be precious to them. Other reasons
might happily be given, why the Spirit, and Word, and Ordinances are compared to
the Sun, which are the wings thereof, but this shall suffice.

The fifth thing, what is meant by healing, and indeed this is large, and as
large as our spiritual maladies are: some say, there is nothing more wholesome
then the Sun; where it comes with its beams, how does it purge the air wherein
we breath, consuming the noysom vapors that arise, and would infect it
quickly, purging the earth from its dregs, or else we should quickly find the
offensiveness of it? So the Lord Jesus by the breaking forth of his Spirit in
the Word of Truth, does heal the air, consume and scatter the venomous errors
of men, wherewith we should quickly be all poisoned, were it not for this, that
be makes manifest their folly to all men, and they proceed no further. He heals
the waters, the waters of the Sanctuary: how often have they been polluted, yea
poisoned by some, and the Lord has healed them again by his Spirit. Again, he
heals the earth of its barrenness; in Winter the earth seems to be
languishing, and all things withered and dead, when the Sun returns how does
it heal it? To its here (Beloved) it is the Word and Spirit that opens the
earth, moistens the earth, sweetly refreshes it, calls forth the fruits
thereof: The fruits of the Spirit they are called, as the fruits of the earth
are called, the precious fruits, put forth by the Sun and by the Moon (which
shines by a derived influence Deuteronomy. 33. 14.
from the Sun:) how precious are the fruits of the Spirit, (Brethren) love,
meekness, joy in the Holy Ghost, humility, self-denial, these are the precious
fruits put forth by the Sun, the Lord Jesus, by his Word and Spirit beating
upon our barren hearts; indeed he makes the barren Wilderness to become a
garden of God. Again, he heals, he reviveth the spirits which languish and
are ready to go out, as the poor Birds that in the Winter are hard put to it,
and some lie you hardly know where, as if they were dead or dying: when the Sun
returns, how does it refresh and revive their little spirits that were left
before? The night brings a heaviness and burden along with it to the body, but
the morning, when the Sun arises, how does it enliven and lighten? Oh! so its
in this case, many a poor soul can say by experience, that when darkness has
been long on them, they have no light, no comfort, no refreshing, no breathing
of the Spirit to their apprehensions in his Ordinances on their hearts. O* how
have hands hanged down, and their knees feeble, and knock one against another
for feebleness, and that which was within them was ready to dye: But now, no
sooner has the Lord Jesus, the Sun of righteousness looked on them, but they
have had their ankle-bones strengthened, the joy of the Lord is their strength,
as Neh. 8. but I intend not here much Neh. 8. 10.
to expatiate, only these two or three things.

First then, the first thing in this healing which is brought under the wings
of the Sun of righteousness, is pardon for our sins; who forgiveth all-thy
iniquities, and heals all-thy diseases: these are exegetical one of another,
or may so be looked on. Sin Psalm. 103. 3.
(Brethren) cuts off a creature from God, and so makes a wound, which now is
healed and made up when they are pardoned; Make the heart of this people fat,
and let their ears be heavy; their eyes closed, lest at any time they should
see with their eyes, or Mat. 13. 15.
hear with their ears, or understand with their hearts, lest they should be
converted, and I should heal them: which Mark reads Mark 4. 12.
thus, lest they should be converted, and their sins be forgiven them. So then
forgiveness and healing are all one; and its one thing surely included, in that
of the Prophet Hosea, I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely;
the justification freely by Hos. 14. 4.
his grace, (as the Apostle calls it.) Poor sinner, thou that ever knew what
sin was, what a wound it was to thy soul; knew that thy pardon is a healing
to thee. So then this arising with healing in his wings, is by his Spirit in
his Word; he conveyeth the blood of Jesus Christ, the merit thereof, makes it
over to the poor soul that believes, to the doing away of all the guilt. So as
a Sun of righteousness, properly he heals: and this is the first.

Secondly, He takes away also the anguish and trouble that did arise from sin
to the soul; as when a wound is healed, you know the anguish and smart is taken
away, though while it is healing, (it may be) when searched and tented, there
will be smart and sore, yet afterward its taken away by degrees: I know some of
you have felt, and happily some at present may feel the grief of your wounds. O!
how they will throb, and beat, and burn, and smart sometimes: broken bones are
nothing to a broken heart, nor the broken flesh any thing to a broken bone: the
Lord heals the broken in heart, he binds up their wounds; I have seen his
ways, and will heal him, says the Lord; he speaks to Psalm. 147. 3.
the condition of a poor disconsolate soul under the wrath of God: He was wrath
and smote him, yea he hid him and was wrath: Isa. 17. 18, 19.
O how this troubles a poor soul! he cannot but have his heart full of
darkness, and terror, and trouble, that has the face of God hidden from him;
well, says the Lord, though he did walk frowardly before me, gave me not my
ends in smiting him, yet I will heal him: and wherein does this healing
consist? Alas* in restoring joy and comfort to him; the poor soul now was
overwhelmed with sorrow, his heart now was ready to sink and fail within him,
and lest it should so do, he will heal him; and how is this but by his Word and
Spirit therein, which is the comforting Spitit, he will create the fruit of the
lips, peace, peace to him. Here is a healing indeed, the healing of broken
hearts, and broken bones; its the work that the Father sent the Lord Jesus for
Luke 4. 18.
into the world, in an especial manner, that he anointed him for, poured out
the Spirit upon him, anointed him with the oil of Isa. 61. 1, 2.
gladness above his fellows, that he might speak in due season, that he might
bind up the broken spirits: Now the Lord Jesus, Brethren, our dear Savior, he
delights to do this will and work of his Father. O! he loves to be doing
with broken hearts: And O that we had some work for the Lord Jesus this day, he
is among us now, to see if there be any heart in this condition, that he may
heal us; its his delight to do it. Well, this is a second, he has his
cordials, as well as his purgatives, his lenitives as well as his corrosives.

Thirdly, he comes with healing under his wings, as to take away the anguish,
so also to purge away the filth of it, to heal the running putrefying sore,
that it may not run, and defile, and pollute all that a man takes in hand: How
much more (says the Apostle) shall the blood of Christ purge our consciences
from dead Heb. 9. 14.
works, that we may serve the living God. With corrosives he eats down the
proud flesh and the dead flesh; he dries up the bloody issues: then the person
was healed when she touched Christ, but the hem of his garment. This is that
which troubles many a heart more then the guilt of their sins; and indeed the
returning and recoyling of sin on them again and again, occasioneth the
questioning of their peace and comfort that they have had. O, how one cries
out of this sin, and another of that sin, and walks heavily and sadly! Well,
the Lord Jesus he will arise with healing under his wings for all these
distempers.

Fourthly and lastly, another healing is the taking away his anger manifested
in outward calamities or diseases in a people or person, I will heal their
backslidings and love them freely, for mine anger is turned away: either to
turn away the affliction, or at least the anger, which is the sting; the
inflammation of any affliction whatsoever, if it be but an itch, a scab, if it
be fired with the anger of God, it shall be enough to consume and destroy: the
Lord challenges it as a privilege, See now, that I, even I am he, and there
is no God with me, I kill and I make alive, I wound and I Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
heal, I wound their comforts, wound their peace, lay them a gasping, a dying;
art thou not he that kelled'st Rah. and wounded the Dragon? So Job, he makes
sore, and binds up, he wounds Job 5. 18.
and his hands make whole. Come say they, let us return to the Lord, for he
has torn and he will heal us, he has smitten and he will bind us up, after
two days will he revive us, and the third day Hos. 6. 1.
we shall live in his sight; Healing upon the returning of poor sinners is a
choice mercy indeed, and all from him, their returning in order to healing, and
the healing unto returning. Behold I will bring it health and cure, I will cure
them, and return to them abundance Jer. 33 56.
of peace, after be had threatened to destroy them in his anger by the
Caldeans; So then it may be (Beloved) that the trouble of spirit thou have had
for sin, God has laid his hand on thy family, on thy person, and all little
enough to bring down the pride of thy heart, and to take away the iniquity of
thy covetousness, and wean thee from the creature. Well, he will return if thou
return to him, he will return, he will heal thee; or at least take away the
anger that inflameth the Visitation (which is a kind of healing; Brethren)
though we are kept under it. But thus much for these particulars touching
healing.

You see then, what it is that is held forth in this Doctrine, That Jesus
Christ will arise unto them that fear his name, with healing under his wings:
that is to say, by his Word, and Spirit, and other Ordinances, conveigh to them
pardon, and cleansing, and peace, and comfort, and freedom from calamities, or
the evil of them; and I hope it is sufficiently proved by the several
particulars; there have been many Scriptures produced to prove it in each
particular; therefore we will not any longer insist on that part, but come to
the Application, which will be diverse.

First, we may take notice (Brethren) hence, what a comprehensive evil sin is,
for if we speak of healing (which is the Use 1.
main thing in this Doctrine) it must needs lead us, being a relative to some
distemper or other, that is, to be healed, whether it be a disease, or whether
it be a wound, or both, for diseases many times are caused by wounds; that its
a disease, a wound might easily be proved in the first place, as by that of the
Prophet, The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint, from the Crown of
the Isa. 1. 5, 6.
head, to the sole of the foot, nothing but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying
sores. O! how loathsome are these sores! do we not read of the plague of the
heart, a hard heart, the stone in the heart; in that place of Ezekiel, where he
speaks of his people Ezekiel. 34. 4.
under the notion of a flock to be fed and guided? the diseased have ye not
strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have you
bound up that which was brokon, diseased and sick. I might here by an
enumeration of particulars, show that every sin almost, according to Scripture
analogy, is a disease; To begin with the head, Brethren, is not blindness a
disease? and is not ignorance a blindness of the mind, whereby we are Ephesians. 4.
18.
alienated from the life of God? (Dear friends) consider it, how many among us,
poor creatures, are groping at noonday? the light that is in them is darkness,
and O how great is that darkness! and is there not also a self-conceipt and
pride, whereby we think Romans 12. 3.
of our selves above what we ought, and from hence it is that we grow more in
the head than in other parts, a dangerous disease; there is much knowledge
among many of us, but little heat, little warmth on the heart, little holy
walking according unto it: Obstructions between the head and the heart, is none
of the least diseases among us. Is there not corruption of Judgment? and is it
not a dangerous disease? if we had never thought so before, our times would
have taught us this, the leprosy in the head, a man of unsound principles is
leprous, and one of the worst kinds also. O, what a vertigo has taken many!
they run round, until they be giddy, and fall, and break themselves. Beloved,
there are strong carnal reasonings in our heads, whereby almost, we will make
any thing good that we would have forward; we shall make it seem reasonable,
that we may, cum rations insanire. Go from the head to the heart, and see, is
there not a stone there? and that is none of the least diseases: is there not a
plague there? O what hardness of heart* and what stubborness, and what
frowardness of heart there is? we might instance 1 King. 8. 38,
in many: (Brethren) are there not eyes full of adultry, like fleams grown over
them, which do blind? are there not 2 Pet. 2. 14.
pearls in the eyes, when the world is dear to us? what is our covetousness
else? and what is envy but a blood-shotten eye, which proceeds from a heart
full of vexing? and is not lust a feavour, yea an ulcer on the liver, or a dart
thrust through it? and what is rotten communication, which men make no more of,
and vain and foolish discoursing, but the rottenness of a grave, but the
rottenness of lungs breathing forth continually? O, how some men's tongues are
set on fire of hell! can utter nothing Jam. 3. 6.
but blasphemies and oaths at every word. But we might be endless if we should
go to particulars. How many of us have a dead palsy, past feeling, commit all
uncleanness with greediness? (says the Apostle). Sinners, you little think
what you are doing, while you are going on in a way of sin: as alas, are not
many of you this day in this condition! you are either contracting or
strengthening the diseases of your souls, making fresh wounds in your
consciences. Ah! how lamentable were his condition that were wounded head and
heart, full of sores putrefying, that the very sight of him, and savor of his
wounds were enough to make all others ubhor him! yea, he is so far from seeking
remedy, he wounds himself more and more, makes them deeper and deeper,
increases his diseases, he cares not how much he inflameth them; this is the
condition of every poor sinner you see: O! what sad creatures are we, that have
so many sicknesses on us, and each of them deadly; and how much more many then
together? and if we feel nothing at all: he that is in the most deadly palsy
or lethargy feels nothing at all, would be let alone, cannot endure to be
stirred, because that makes him sensible of his condition; O! such a man's
condition is very dangerous: and is not this the case of our souls Brethren? O!
what malignity is in sin? the poison, and filthyness, and hurt of all diseases
and wounds are little enough to set it forth by: and how sensible are we of a
wound, of a disease of the body? and how insensible of the diseases of the
soul? Well, in order to a healing, the Lord give us a feeling. But this is but
the first.

But a little further to open the nature of sin on this occasion, which our
Doctrine administers to us; that which is to be healed, you have heard is sin,
and that which needs healing is either a disease or wound (they are
correlatives) that you have heard already; it is therefore compared to many
sorts of diseases, wounds, and putrefying sores, and bruises: But now I will
speak a little (Brethren) to the ill qualities and consequences of sin,
considered as such; which may tend to turn our hearts against it for the time
to come.

First then, there is pain and anguish in most diseases, and in every wound and
bruise, and especially in cankerings, festered sores; this is a proper passion
of a disease, to have pain; and truly, Brethren, so has every sin a pain with
it first or last; it is true, the cup of pleasures goes down merrily with
Sinners, but when its down, it is a cup of trembling to them: do but look on
Gain, when he had sinned in pouring out his Brothers blood, he quenched his
bloody thirst, but kindled a fire in his bowels, Genesis 4. 13. 14.
which did consume him; Oh every one that meets me, will kill me; fear has
torment, (as John says) and see how full of fears a poor sinner is! The wicked
flee, when none pursues; the very stones and beasts being at enmity with them,
they fear they shall be murdered by each of them. And how did Foelix tremble,
when Paul disputed of righteousness, temperance, and Acts 24. 25.
judgment to come; as long as they can keep out the sight of God, as they
think, they are well: But bring a Sinner, and set him, as it were, in the face
of God, let him but look on him as a righteous Judge of all the world, and most
mighty to execute his pleasure on Sinners, and then tell me, whether the
stoutest hearted-sinner do not quail, as usually at the hour of death? for
truly for the most part, men seldom seriously eye their condition before then.
How did the Jaylour spring in trembling, (in the Acts) Ah the Sinners in Sion
are afraid, Fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites; who among us shall dwell
with the Isa. 33. 14.
devouring fire? who shall dwell with everlasting burnings? Alas, the stubble
will not endure before the fire! no more can sinners endure to look on God, as
a consuming fire, it makes the very heart ach, except altogether hardened from
his fear to behold him; because they know themselves guilty, and liable to
those burnings. There is (says the Apostle) a certain fearful looking Heb. 10.
27.
for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries. Can
a poor condemned Prisoner look on the Judge, think on the Tree on which he must
be hanged, on the fire but with fear and trembling? Can Belshazzar read his
sentence on Dan. 5. (...).
the wall, the handwriting, but with terror, his knees knocking one against
another? Ah Brethren, methinks Sinners that are yet in their sins, should not
read a leaf in the Bible, (each leaf concerns him, is (...) doom) but he
should even smite his thighs together, there is so much terror and fear
accompanying sin: Memoria testis, ratio index, timor carnifex, says Bern. As
the Saints have some antipasts of Heaven, a bunch of Grapes before they come to
Cannan, an earnest of that joy unspeakable and full of Glory so doubtless
Sinners they have some hours of darkness coming on them, some wrings and gripes
of a guilty conscience, that sometimes made some of them run to an halter, to a
sword for ease; none knows the hell of a guilty conscience, but such as have
felt it. Oh the wrackings, the distortions of the Soul! The pulling of the very
heart in pieces, and the rending of the very Bowels in pieces, with these
imprisoned passions in the Soul!

But secondly, Even in sinners that repent (Brethren) though the wound be then
healing, there is pain also you know: Now the Lord Jesus comes in mercy to
rouse the soul, to shame it out of its evil courses: and is shame nothing? a
man cannot hold up his head, he is confounded: ye are now ashamed, (says the
Apostle) of the things which ye have done before: Romans 6. 21.
can you look back on your former vain and filthy conversation, and your hearts
not be ashamed, your consciences not be ashamed? there is inward shame and
confusion, though it appear not outwardly. So in that place of Ezekiel, Thou
shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, that thou may remember, and be Ez^k.
16. 61, 63.
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am
pacified toward thee. There will be a godly sorrow which works repentance, and
never was there any repentance without sorrow; there is a pricking of the heart,
and 2 Cor. 7. 10.
pricking in the reins, Acts 2. 37. There is no rest in the flesh by reason of
the sin and broken bones, That the bones which thou Psalm. 51.
have broken, may rejoice. Is it not sin that turns away the face of God? and
what then can arise to the soul but trouble? Thou did hide thy face, and I
was troubled. This is the first thing, there is pain in sin and trouble, it
troubles our hearts, and troubles our houses, as it did Cains; troubles the
City and Country, troubles Israel.

Secondly, In sin (Brethren) or accompanying it, there is weakness and
indisposedness, when its but growing on us, it seizes on the spirits, the
vigor first. So how lazy and listless are we for diverse days bef^^e it do
appear? and much more afterward. Morbus is (...) Galen. Arist. Ethic. lib. 1.
c. ult. cited by Regn. on Hos. page 77.
(...). How wonderfully does sin unbefit us for duty? we even move to it as an
arm or foot out of joint; when a man endeavors to bow it one way, it falls
quite another way* (...) (...). Lust; where they are in prevalency, they are
like to wens in a man's body, which suck up the strength and nourishment; that
which should supply the rest of the members, it turns to its own swelling. So
does pride turn that which should humble us, that which would inflame our
hearts, and melt us, to it self, and so weakens us, keeps our love at an
under, that we cannot so livelily and vigorously serve the Lord. We complain of
our weak hands and feeble knees, our indisposedness to the service of God:
believe it, this is the reason of it, sin unmortified, Heb. 12. 12.
this makes men reprobate to every good work: men of no judgment, Tit. 1. 16.
no dexterity at all to it; When we were without strength, Christ died for the
ungodly, and while we were yet Sinners, Christ dyed Romans 5. 6. and 8.
for us; they are convertible terms, a sick man, a lame man, a wounded man, we
cannot expect they should walk, or work, or run in a race, it utterly unbefits
us for any thing that is good; this is a sad evil that is in sin, as a disease
or wound.

Thirdly, There is filthiness and deformity in sin also: O what a sight it were
to see a poor creature full of running sores from Isa. 1.
head to foot, all running and rotting; what filthiness is here, and and
deformity? So when a poor soul has a lust, a sore running, and never ceasing,
how sad a condition is this? Brethren, how strangely will a fit of sickness
change a person, that the rarest piece of beauty in the world, quickly becomes
a ghastly sight, every part contracting its deformity from the sickness, all
withered and shrivelled, joints loosed, the eye dead and dull, the face thin,
the knees feeble, the hand trembling, and what not; Brethren, if the Lord open
our eyes to behold in the glass of the word, the deformities of sin and
filthiness, as we may see the lothsomness and ugliness of a disease, we should
for ever be haters of it; but I will say no more to this head, That sin is a
disease, a wound.

Use 2. May be then to put us on to be more serious in viewing our selves in
the glass of the Word, the Law of God, that we may see Use.
what creatures we are, and loath our selves; our wounds are so many that we are
all one wound, and all one disease, there is no sound part in us; how pale and
lean do our souls sometimes look with envy at others? how are we swelled with
pride? how great and unweildy are our bellies with this? O how do some of our
bellies cleave to the very dust! we are bowed down, as the woman in the Gospel.
O how lamely do we walk in the ways Luke 13. 11.
of God, halting between two, have a double object, and one foot in the ways
of God, and another in the way of sin; alas, how many wounds have many of us,
that we never searched to this day? if we did but know them, it would pluck
down our feathers, the proudest of us; and for some of us, we have great need
of this admonition, because alas, until we see our selves wounded, see our
deformities, we shall never care for healing, for having his comeliness put
upon us; no, nor can the people of God put a rate upon the mercy, nor the rich,
exceeding rich Grace of God in Christ, whereby they are healed, except they
have before their eyes, the many wounds and running sores they are healed of;
When Paul saw that he was the chief of the Sinners, then he advances the free
Grace of God, that it had abounded, yea 1 Timothy 1. 15.
superabounded; which a soul cannot admire the Lord for, except he see, and
behold how sin has abounded. O then let us be all persuaded to this duty, to
eye our selves more often, more seriously, in the glass of the Law of liberty,
the Law of Christ, and therein see how often, how grievously we offend him; see
what deformities are upon us, that it may be admired how the Lord can love such
as we are, and Sinners that are yet, in sin, that they may be willing to accept
of pardon and deliverance in and through Christ; for truly we are not any of us
willing, until we be reduced to extremity; then the Mariner or Merchant will
cast out his goods, when there is necessity for it, but not before. Therefore
let all of us be persuaded to this duty in the second place.

Thirdly, Let us be instructed in this truth, that healing is not in us. I am
the Lord that heals thee, says God to Israel, and therefore the Lord
promises the Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings, which
were needless, if healing were in our selves; some creatures, if wounded,
healing is in themselves, as some fish are said, if wounded, to heal themselves
with their own slime; a Dog licks himself with his tongue. Brethren, sins are
not such wounds as will heal themselves of their own accord; neither as if a
man have a slight cut it may be, he heedeth it not, it heals of it self;
believe it, the least sin, the least wound thou make in thy conscience, in
thy soul, it will not heal it self, nor will a lust heal it self, and wear away
of its own accord, as some diseases will, though no physic be administered. It
is a deadly disease, it seizes upon the vitals, and then you know it is a
matter of great difficulty and skill to cure it; no nor can a man cure himself:
if he could, to what end did the Lord Jesus undergo all? why he was smitten for
our transgress^^ns, if we could have been healed by any strength of our own?
no, we were without strength, when Christ dyed for us, as the Apostle bath it,
and as to other things, so to this great work; did the Lord do any thing in
vain? much less then would he do the greatest thing that ever be wrought in
vain; alas, who Isa. 61. 1.
can pardon sins but he? who can bind up the broken in spirit, but he who was
sent into the world for this very end? who can pour wine and oil into the
wounds, but the good Samaritan? who can give rest for the anguish of the wounds
but he? we cannot heal our selves; if the very marrow of our bones were
distilled into continual tears, and all our moisture, it would not make a balm
to cure a wound of sin, nor a cordial to support in one swooning fit; there are
many considerations wherefore we cannot do it; and therefore the Lord in pity
and bowels toward us, sent us his Son to be our Physician, because we poor sick
creatures need the Physician, which we should not, if we Isa. 15. 18.
could heal our selves; our wound is incurable, and refuses to be healed by us.

First, alas, We know not our diseases, our distempers; you know a disease is
half cured, if curable, when it is known in the cause; if a Physician mistake
the disease, and mis-applications according to his mistake, quite contrary to
the disease, this is the ruin of the Patient; such Physicians are of no value,
and such should we all be, and are; For we cannot know our sins, nor the plague
of the heart; who knows his errors? if we discover one lust, that it breaks out
in such a manner, that it cannot be hid, yet there is ten for 1 Kings 8. Psalm.
19.
one that we never saw; and how can we then heal them? now the Lord Jesus sees
our hearts through and through, and knows all the malig(...)y and poisonous
humors that lie there, and therefore knows how to purge them out; we know
them not.

Secondly, We have no desire to have them healed at all; we (...)w not what
healing means, being not sensible naturally of our distempers, and sores that
are upon us: no man desires that he knows not. We think we are in health and
strength of soul, in as good a condition as any, need nothing, and yet are
poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked, just like a poor man, Rev. 3. 17.
the strength of his disease works him off his senses, (as we say) he thinkeeh
he is well as ever in his life, when alas he is drawi^g nigh the chambers of
death, his disease is so much the more dangerous. Brethren, sin (...)s our
heads with such fumes of pride and self-confidence, and carnal reasonings, that
we are ready to conclude all is well with us, and I doubt many of us whom this
concerns, will put it away from us upon this very account; We are whole, need
not the Physician, so we have no desire to be healed; the tender of a plaster
by another to a man that thinks Mat. 9. 2.
he has no wounds, it is ridiculous, they are more ready to mock at it, then
receive it; so far are Sinners from providing an healing for themselves,
because they are not sensible of their need of it, they desire it not. Depart
from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, we are well enough without
it; yea more, Job 21. 14.
we have no desire to be healed, because we are in love with our diseases; not
as a man that has an issue, he knows does him good, would not have it stopped;
but we have many bloody issues of sin, and because of the pleasure, and
delight, or pro^t, or humor, or some things, we please our selves with them,
for we are loath to part with them. Augustine himself was loath to be healed so
soon of his lust, not yet Lord, not yet, said his heart, when he prayed for
healing; the disease has seized upon the will it self, so that it is pleased
and taken with the sickness, the ill savor of our wounds, the stench of them
is sweet to us, while we have a stinking nostril, and therefore no marvel if we
can never heal our selves; there is need of this Lord Jesus to come with
healing under his wings.

Thirdly, We do reject healing and the Physician; When he Mat. 23. 27.
would have healed us, we would not be healed; therefore much less can we do it
our selves. I would have purged thee, and thou Ezekiel. 24. 13. Prove. 1. 21.
wast not purged, etc. Brethren, how often has the Lord Jesus called upon us
all, and have we not many of us as often refused? Has he not stretched out his
hands all the day long? all the day of Grace, which has continued long with
us, and we have been a rebellious, a disobedient people, we would none of his
counsel; either it is too mean, as Naaman said when he was bid to go and wash
in Jordan seven times and he should be cleansed, What, are 2 King. 5(...)
not Abana and Phar^ar, Rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of
Israel? so proud dust and ashes, the Lord opens a fountain for sin and
uncleanness, proclaims to every poor sinner, who ever will let him come, let
his disease be what it will, bathe in this Fountain, he shall be healed: what
says the proud sinner, are there not waters of our own, will not our own
repentance do it? we are very backward, through the pride of heart, to receive
even gratis, as that proud Papist said, He would not have heaven gratis; this
Pope is in all our bellies; therefore the Apostle calls it a submission they
would not submit to the righteousness of Romans 10. (...)
God in Jesus Christ; So we look upon the blood of Jesus Christ as an unholy, a
contemptible thing, will not trust wholly to this grace; or else if not too
mean, yet the way that God goes to work with a sinner to heal him, it is too
severe, a bitter potion they must take down: what, must we so much bewail our
selves, must we search and try our ways, rake in our wounds? this we cannot
endure, this will cost us much smart and anguish, as it did David, and Peter,
and Ephraim; poor foolish creatures! we had rather dye of our wounds, then to
have them searched, far from that temper of David we are Search me, and Psalm.
139. 23.
try me; though some of us, I hope, have been so exercised in the work of
searching and mortification, that we can many times say with the Psalmist, Lord
search us, but alas, many of us it is otherwise with, we come not to the light
lest our deeds Ioh. 3. 20.
should be discovered, it would shame us; you know Ahab could not endure to
hear of his sins, he hated M^caiah, 1 King 22.
and that cursed principle is in all our hearts; we would be humored and
daubed, and have the hurt of our souls healed slightly, because we cannot
digest the severity and sharpness of the medicines; we are afraid of the wrings
and gripes, the Prayers, the Fastings it will cost us, and therefore we are
enemies to it.

4. If we were never such friends to it, if we would never so fain be healed,
it is not in our power, it is above the sphere of our activity; if the stripes
had been laid upon us, which were laid upon Christ when he was whipped with
Scorpions; alas, every blow would have cut us in sunder, and given us our
portion in that lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever. You see
brethren, that they fetched blood at every blow of our blessed Savior, who was
equal with his Father, having an infinite Power and Spirit to uphold him; and
yet, O how he ran down with blood, dropping upon the ground! when the world was
to be drowned and overwhelmed, all the veins of the earth were, as I may say,
opened; so now the Lord Jesus, when his Spirit was overwhelmed and amazed, as I
may say and the Lord in a manner Mark 14. 33, 34.
would now swallow him up, My God, why have thou forsaken me? all the voins,
the channels of his body were opened: O how the blows did even almost fetch
away the soul of our Savior! witness that Outcry: what had become of poor man
i^ this had been laid upon him? Beside, who can pardon our sins? is there any
but God that can pardon sins? and is not this a great Psalm. 85.
part of healing? who can speak peace but he? He will speak peace to his
people, he can do it with one word of his mouth; he creates the fruit of the
lips, peace, peace; assuredly he creates it peace: who can subdue a lust? all
the maceration of the body, that the frame of Nature will bear, will not do it;
as it is said of Hierom, though his hair did even stand upright with fasting
and lying upon the ground, yet all would not do to subdue concupilcence; he
should have taken Gods way, and then his help would have come in; no, no, I
will subdue their iniquities, they are too stiff-hearted for any but the Lord
Jesus; none M^c. 7. 18.
could break the heart of sin but he, by being broken himself for our
iniquities; nor can any do it to death, though wounded, and bleeding, and the
heart be broken, but he himself; it is above the creatures power: therefore we
see what poor helpless creature we are there is need of the Sun of
rightcousness to arise with healing; all our influences upon our own hearts
will not heal the least distemper.

The third Use shall be then, to show us the great necessity that we all of us
have of Jesus Christ; The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick,
but the sick need it: now Luke 5. 3.
alas, what is the world but a great Hospital full of diseased creatures? here
lies one sick of the Stone, another of the Palsy, a third of a Dropsy, some
Lunatic, out of their senses, some of the Gangrene of Error, which is
dangerous for in a few hours it creeps to the heart: men slight the
Physician while they are in health, but once sick and wounded, then how welcome
is he! what need had the poor Traveller, that fell among thieves, that left him
wounded and half dead, of the Samaritan, that came and poured in wine and oil;
alas, what had become of him if Luke 10. 30.
God had not so ordered it for him? when a poor Israelite was wounded with the
fiery Serpent, though he might not so much heed the Brazen Serpent before, yet
now he sees his necessity Number. 12.
o^ looking to him, that he might be healed, his neces^^y would promp him to
it* if the poor blind man do but hear of Christ passing, O how sensible he is
of his necessity and cries out to him Jesus thou son of David have mercy upon
me; but here is the misery of it, the diseases and sicknesses of the soul are
stupifying Luke 18 37. Ephe. 4. 19.
they seize upon the vitals and spirits in such a violent manner, that if not
at first yet after a little while they are past feeling. and therefore our
great work is to bring poor creatures to a^sence of their condition, until then
they will not accept of the glad tidings of life and salvation by Jesus Christ;
how ever this argues our necessity of Christ to be so much the greater; thou
feel not that thy hearti stony and hard, and therefore think that when
the sad condition of such a sinner is displayed, it belongs not to thee at all*
alas, thou art so much the harder; tell such stony creatures they have need of
the blood of Jesus Christ to dissolve this Adamant, he being the ^oat slain for
us as well as the Lamb; for the Passover might be either a Exodus 12. 5.
Goat or a Lamb, and the Lord Jesus is our Passover; thou think this
concerns thee not: alas, poor sinner, thou have so much the more need of the
blood of Jesus Christ. How does a tenderhearted Physician pity his patient
that he sees desperately sick, and yet so stupefied as that he will not be
persuaded of his condition; and O that we could look upon you, and speak to you
sinners with such hearts! when we tell you of the plague of the heart, a most
deadly disease; you know when the infection gets to the heart, in that
disease, there is scarce any remedy for it: so it is with sinners: and yet
alas, how hard is it to persuade them of this! they are in as good condition as
any, they have no more plague sore upon them then another: dear friends
remember it, the plague is in all our families, these diseases are in all our
families, and in many of our own souls; and whether we see, it or see it not,
there it is, and our necessity of Christ is so much the greater, by how much
the less sensible we are of it; he Ioh. 9 41.
that says he sees, when he is blind, had the most need of a care of all
others; he had first need of a cure of his e(...)or, his misjudging of his
condition, and then a cure of his disease, what sad moan would Parents make if
they had all their children lying of the sickness, what outcries would there
be as in Egypt when one in a house was dead? and yet alas poor sinners see not
that their children are born leprous, all over leprous, filthy, and yet they
see it not: O brethren, what need there is of Christ to come to all our houses,
for Salvation to come to all our families, to heal and cure our souls, our
children our servants that are all desperately sic of some disease or another!

Fourthly, ^hen such as to this day have never been healed, the Sun of
Righteousness has never arisen with healing in his wings, there is no healing
to be had from under the wings of Christ: know men will be apt, either to play
the Empericks upon themselves, or else to go to some Mountebank or another; but
alas, they are Physicians of no value, healing is not in them, the poor
creature may spend all upon such Physicians, and yet be never the near when he
has done* the poor woman in the Gospel, since her bloody issue continued so
long it argued she Luke 8. 43.
never came to Christ all this while, if she had, she had been healed long ago:
thy sores run as violently as ever, and that continually polluting all thy ways
truly ^his is an argument that christ has not arisen upon thee for when he
arises upon a s^ul, he does it with healing in his wings; brethren. it may be
you have lain at the waters a great while, but you have never been put into
them; you man have lived where Christ has been preached, but it is the Spirit
that is the main thing that carries the healing virtue from the Lord Jesus,
and until he come and breathe in the Ordinances, they are nothing, brethren
what shall I say to you, is it not the condition of the most of us? are not our
lusts as strong and lively as ever they were? are we not as blind wretches
groping at noon day, some of us, as ever we were? are not our hearts as hard as
ever? yea, harder, for the stone increases and grows day by day; are we not
as licentious, as loose, as proud as ever? why should this be, ifyou had any
thing to do with Christ? it is a sign that such a Mat. 9. 21.
sinner has never touched Christ to this day; for no sooner did the woman
touch him, but virtue came from him; the least touch of faith does it: O what a
faithless generation are we then! O how many of us are in this condition! what
a sad thing is it that we should thus throng upon Christ, and so few touch him?
but one poor woman in a whole throng come and steal a touch of Christ, O if she
might but touch him, she should be healed; and so happily now in a Congregation,
there comes in one poor trembling sinner, with his affections stirred, his
desires are up, O if I may but touch him, I shall be well; when for the most
part that is not our error. Now dear friends, what have you been doing all this
while, have you eat and drank in the presence of Christ? have you heard his
Word and Gospel wherein he is lifted up, as the healing Serpent, so many years,
and yet not healed? have you so often received the Lord his Supper, the outward
part of it, and yet are not healed? what, have you been praying, and reading,
and coming to hear, until you have one foot in the grave, and yet not healed?
what have you been doing all this while, that you have never got a sight of
Christ, a touch of him to this day, that you might be healed? Ah, sure you have
spent your time, your money upon the Physicians that cannot heal you, you have
gone to the Disciples in stead of Christ, you have expected healing from the
Ordinances themselves, and expected it happily from us in whom healing is not; as
they looked upon the Apostles, Why look ye upon us, as if we had done Mat 7. 16.
Act. 3. 12.
this by our own power? O no, it is Jesus Christ alone can heal, and therefore
if you are not yet healed, he did never arise upon you to this day: It may be
sinners will be ready to say, what if Jesus Christ has never risen upon us, is
that such a great matter? Indeed I doubt we make a light matter of it; but I
will tell you what a great matter it is, you are yet in your sins, and it is a
very great hazard but you may die in your sins; if he never rise upon thee,
thou shall undoubtedly die in them; and is this nothing? O but you will say,
God is merciful, it is his nature to be merciful, he triumphs in exalting
that perfection, and making it glorious: It is true, brethren, but it is in
Christ, all light and healing is from the Father, but he has filled the Son
now with inlightning and healing influence, so that they who will have it, must
have it from the Son, he has all power committed Matthew. 11. 27.
to him, all the medecines are his now, and the power of applying them is so,
that he heals whom he pleases; therefore dream not of it, you that are wicked
transgressors, that have not your sins healed, that God will be merciful to any
but in Christ; O but we may have our sins healed though it be not yet; It is
true, thou may be healed, and this is somewhat: but consider what a cold
comfort this would be to a man that had the plague seized upon him in a violent
manner why, faith he, it may be healled, and yet alas, be never looks after the
Physician, nor ^^e Physician after him, but grows worse, and worse, and yet
he may be healed: It is true, if the Lord do not cut thee off before, thou
may be healed; or if God swear not in his wrath thou shall never enter into
his rest; or say to thee, thou shall never be healed: O these secret things
belong not to us; the Father has put them in his own power, and we presume
upon our courses of sinning, as if we knew them, were privy to them, and knew
certainly that we should have a day of grace, an hour of mercy; this is
desperate, if thou die in this condition, with all thy running sores upon thee,
from head to foot, no sound part, but loathsome wretches; what, do you think
the Lord Jesus will put such into his bosom? Well consider this for the fourth
Application of the Doctrine: Such as are not healed of their lusts, they have
never had Jesus Christ arising upon them as yet, they never knew Christ to this
day; let our knowledge be what it will, our parts be what it will, our seeming
following Christ be what it will, and thronging upon him never so much, we
never yet touched him, he never yet shined upon our souls; O how many such
poor* Christless souls hear this Word this day!

5. Then, let us labor to raise our spirits in admiration of the riches of
grace in Jesus Christ, given to poor sinners, to provide a healing for us; that
when we had fallen from the height of mercy, or rather grace and goodness, and so
had all to be broken and bruised our selves, broken our b^nes, that he should
provide a healing for us, when we could never think of such a mercy; what were
we more to him then Angels? if he had let us all lie under our broken bones,
under the wounds we had made in our selves, and diseases we had contracted, who
could have had any thing to say against him for it? this the Apostle makes an
argument of his love, and it is doubtless a heightening of it, to consider how
free it is, that their wounds should not be cured, and ours healed, when both
alike curable to him? and considering Heb. 2.
that they might have been much more serviceable to him, then we being
creatures of a more glorious, active nature then we are; yet he took not hold
of the nature of Angels.

But consider we first the infinite disproportion between the Physician and the
Patients: were it not wonderful condescension for a K(...)o come off his
Throne, to buckle himself about the business (...)eal a worm that has been
trodden upon? O it pittieth him to see them bleeding, and therefore he makes
it his business to cure them; brethren, you would think this strange, but this
is the case; yea, this is but a shadow, Jacob is but a worm, and that the Lord
of Lords, the King of Kings should descend from his Throne, from heaven,
disrobe himself, as I may say, put Isa. 44.
on rags, and all to have to do with the wounds and diseases of poor sinful
dust and ashes, worms and no me(...) Brethren, my tongue is not able to express
it; we would thin(...) a great matter, such of us as live in the highest
honor, wear soft raiment, are delicate in all things, to take up a poor
creature in the streets, that is full of sores, cast out to the loathing of his
person, to search the wounds, have to do with those loathsome sores; O what
love were this! it may be we could be content in pity to give money for others
to do it, but to do it with our own hands, there is the trial* and yet this
creature is of our own kind: but what are we to the Lord, or to his Christ? who
would do this for a Dog, for a Viper, a Serpent, a Toad, if wounded, if sick
and diseased? can we conceive what tenderness it must be above what we have; it
may be we would not kill or destroy such a creature, but if otherwise hurt,
would we heal them? O herein is the love of God to poor sinners! high above our
thoughts, as Isa. 55. 8.
heaven is high above the earth: alas, we are more ready to tread upon Serpents
and Dogs, we would cast them out, put them away from us, it is but a dog. Ah,
dear friends, what are we that are strangers from the Covenant of Promise, as
we are all, until he enters into a Covenant with us? we are as dogs, as he
speaks to the Syraphinitian woman, all such unclean creatures; yea, we are a
generation of Vipers, as full of venom of sin as a Toad is full of poison, and
that is our nature as soon as we are born; yet alas, the Lord Jesus would not
have such as we to perish but rather then it should be so, he himself would
become our Physician: O here is rich grace!

Secondly, In that the Lord Jesus like a Son of righteousness indeed, does not
stay until the poor sinner, the patient do send for him, do come to him, but he
is the first in the motion; you know Physicians of eminency and worth, do not
use to go up and down to bespeak their patients, to proclaim it up and down who
has any work for them; no, they are too hi(...) that: if any will have to do
with them, let them find the (...)out, let them wait upon them; Mountebanks
use to do so, they must hang out a bush, else it will not be known that they
profess they can do any thing; pardon the comparison, for our Savior compares
his coming to the coming of a Thief; and if a Mountebank be no better; yet the
comparison is tolerable by that of our Savior himself, I say, he will rather
come to sinners then that they shall misc(...); he came to seek and to save
that which was lost: for alas, the lost creature never will seek him, but
wander, and loses it self more and more, therefore we are compared to wandering
sheep, we all like sheep have gone astray, yea, the very Saints themselves when
once they have been found, yet will Luke 19. 10. Isa. 53. Psalm. 119.
lose themselves again, as David, I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek
thy servant; else we should never find the way to Christ again; dogs and such
kind of creatures, if lost, will find the way home, again, but a sheep will
not; so when we are utterly lost, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is come unto
you. says our Savior; O repent and turn, for the Gospel, and the grace Mat.
3. 12, 28.
of the Gospel is come to you; the Kingdom of heaven goes a begging, as I may
say, comes and knocks at this door, and that door; at this family and that,
to see if they will give entertainment to Jesus Christ, whether they will be
healed, this day is Salvation come to thine house, says the Lord to Zacheus;
it came to him before he came to Christ; though he did indeed Luke 19. 5.
run a little for curiosity sake before Christ, to see his person, yea, our
Savior inviteth himself to him, he invited himself to come to his house; so,
did not the Lord Jesus come to seek Paul, and where did he find him but in
blood, up to the ears, even the blood of the Saints? may we not set to our
seals to the truth of this? That he is found of such as never sought him; Isa.
65. 1.
may we not say truly, that alas, our own souls, and our own families were
poor, dark, ignorant, hard-hearted creatures, that never thought of Jesus
Christ, until he first came and brought healing to us the Son does not stay
until he be called up, but he rises of his own accord upon the world;
Brethren, the Lord Jesus Mat. 23. 4.
this day, though by the mouth of a Babe, and uncircumcised creature in heart
and lips, does invite you, all is ready, and then he calls, this is a part of
the message I have from Christ this day, and it is a sweet one, to invite every
poor wounded Sinner, 2 Cor. 15. 19, 20.
ev(...) poor diseased creature to come to Jesus Christ for healing; and O that
I could bespeak you, as he himself would bespeak you, were he upon earth, with
such a melting heart and sense of your condition. O why will ye die? is the
expostulation Ezekiel. 18. 31.
of the Lord Jesus; why will you die of your wounds, of your plague-sores? here
is balm for you, here is healing for you, if you will but accept of it; O do
not slight it, do not run away from the Physician; Has the Lord Jesus been at
all this pains to procure* a medicine, and shall we cast it away, and slight it?

Thirdly, Here is the riches of the Grace of God toward poor Sinners, that
though we cannot tell our Physician what we ail, yet he knows our diseases,
and from him it is that we are convinced of our condition in this respect;
Physicians are not able to see into the inward parts, into the veins, the
arteries, the liver, the heart, but they judge according to outward symptoms,
or according to the Patients relation of his disease, and how often do they
miscarry and mistake? but here is such a Physician, he so heals, as that he
knows all our diseases, he needs not feel our pulse to see how they beat, he
can tell where there is a poor burdened soul, or a sin-guilty soul, knows
all the guilt, and ta^es notice of it first, and from his own notice of it,
takes occasion to heal it. I have seen his ways, though he was walking Isa. 57.
17, 18.
on in the stubborness of his heart, though he were smitten, he saw not his own
ways, how froward they were, nor his own heart, how hard it was; but says the
Lord, I have seen his ways* and I will heal him; Alas, how long might Paul
have been before he had known his disease, except the Lord Jesus had opened it
to him, come and convinced him of it: and so in the case of David and Peter.

Fourthly, Yet further consider the riches of Grace, Sinners, herein to you,
herein held forth in that, notwithstanding all our unkind dealing with him, yet
he gives not over the work; would not an able Physician take it ill, that his
Patient should go away from him, and run to a cheating Mountebank, and prefer
him before him? were not this enough to lose a Physician? Alas, do we not all
do so? He stretched ont his hands all the day long to a gainsaying and
rebellious people; one runs to one Isa. 65. 2.
thing, another to another; The Prodigal to his husks, rather then to his
Father; and the poor woman to her Physician of no (...)lue, rather then to
Christ; if Sinners can make a shift to lick over their sores with a good
tongue, a smooth tongue, crying peace, peace, where there is no peace; a sad
condition, when Conscience is quieted upon mistaken grounds; if they can quiet
it with a little duty, they are well; if they can skin over their wounds, they
are well enough; they will stick any where, rather then come to Jesus Christ;
and yet for all this, he is ready to heal them. O, how do Persons beside
themselves abuse their Physician? many times fly in their face, and so do
Sinners; now the Lord Jesus comes with his cordials in one hand, his
purgatives in the other hand, ready to purge, to cleanse, to heal us, and we
fly in his face, use him most unkindly; and yet for all this, he is not
overcome, gives us not over, until he has healed us of this, and all the rest
of the distempers of our souls. O how do you think the Lord Jesus can endure to
be kicked in the very bowels, to have his blood trampled under foot by poor
Sinners, that he comes to heal! and yet he does endure it, and for all this
heals them. Is not all this unkindness? what can move him to give us over?
surely many of us are able to say it, that if his bowels had not been
unsearchable, we have so often grieved him, and kicked against him, even since
he had to do with our souls in a way of healing mercy, that we had been undone
for ever. Oh here is unsearchable mercy, we wound him, and grieve him, and yet
he heals us: we slightly esteem of him, of his blood, of his mercy, of his
love, even while he is pouring it out upon us, and he so dearly loves us, that
his blood is not too dear for us, no nor his Spirit, nor his bowels, nor any
thing; O here is rich Grace indeed to poor froward-hearted Sinners!

5. Herein the riches of Grace does appear to poor Sinners, that it is not the
multitude, nor the depth, nor the loathsomness of our wounds, or deadliness of
our diseases, that discourageth him, to make him turn his back upon the work,
and let us alone. O says the Physician, when he comes to such a Patient, he
has the plague, it is seized upon his heart, upon his vitals, it is past my
ski(...), it is but labor in vain, if the spots appear, there is no hope, no
healing; but now the Lord Jesus, he never m^dleth with a Sinner, but he has
the plague in his very heart, not only the sores running upon their tongues,
and upon their hands, but in their very hearts, and all the blood, and spirits
poisoned, and yet he is not discouraged, he takes it in hand: truly some of us,
if we consider how deeply rooted our ^nsts were in our very hearts, it is
matter of admiration, that ever we were healed; and though for the present
there are, it may be, grudgings of the old disease, whereby we are a grief to
him, and a grief to our selves, yet that the plague is cured at the heart, or
curing rather; alas, do you think the Lord Jesus did not know what a weary hand
he should have with us before he began with us? he knew what ulcerations would
be continually breaking out that must be lanced and searched, and yet never
turned his back upon his work upon this account; when the Chyrurgion meets
with a Isa. 1.
poor creature, that is full of wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores, that
have never been opened, nor mollified, but a long time have festered and
rotted; O, says he, I am not able to endure to have to do with such a Patient,
the very stench of his wounds and ^ores is such, I am not able to bear it;
Brethren, this is nothing to sin, the most loathsome running sores are nothing
to the rottenness of sin: O, it is the superfluity of naughtiness, James 1. 19.
it is the very scum of scums, the very excrement of the Devil: now how can we
think that Jesus Christ should endure the stench of our loathsome souls, full of
running sores? and yet he does it, when he comes to heal us, he never yet gave
over any that he undertook to heal, because of the greatness, the multitude,
the loathsomness of his diseases; I know poor misgiving hearts will be ready to
sit down and mourn, as poor creatures without hope, when they consider how many
their sores are, their diseases are. O what loathsome running sores, bloody
issues! and they are loathsome to our selves, that see little or nothing of
them, and that have a stinking nostril, their minds whereby they conceive of
things, are impure themselves, and so cannot apprehend them as so loathsome; but
the Lord Jesus that sees them to the bottom, knows the venom of them, the
loathsomness of them to the full. O sure they are much more to him, sure he
will never have to do with such a rotten soul as mine, says one; such a rotten
heart, such a wretch, so besotted with the world, as I have been, so unclean a
wretch as I have been; this is a mistake, the riches of Grace in Jesus Christ
would never be so made manifest, the exceeding abundance of Grace, if he had
not to do with such sinners as thou art in thine own apprehension; with a Paul,
a Manasses, a Magdalen, with the chief of Sinners; O say not your cases are
desperate, there is no healing for your wounds; nothing makes a Sinners case
desperate, but his own despairing, his final unbelief, his despair of the mercy
of Christ, the faithfulness of Christ in this great undertaking of poor Sinners.

Sixthly, O what tenderness is manifested in the manner of the cure! and it
must needs be so, when bowels themselves are the constitution of the Physician;
where love it self, and compassion it ^elf sets the Physician awork.
Brethren, can you imagine when a Father is a Physician, and has a poor
diseased child, or wounded, cries out for healing; can you imagine with what
an heart he goes about it? if it would do the cure, he could be content to
endure all the lancings, take down all bitter potions; O every groan and
outcry of his Patient goes to his heart, he is so tender; by these affections
the Lord is pleased darkly to shadow out to us his heart toward us; Even as a
Father pittieth his children, so the Lord Jesus pittieth them that fear him;
that Psalm. 103. 13.
are wonnded in any kind, either in their peace, or in their holiness. But this
will appear, if we consider but a few particulars.

First, In that he himself has taken the bitterest part of the physic; O the
wormwood and the gall! they went into his bowels; the Lord Jesus does not
delight to cure by lancings, by searings, and canterizings; no: but he took
down himself the purge that set him upon such a sweat as you know; alas, it
would have drunk up every drop of our blood, and moisture, and marrow, that we
should never have seen through it; this he takes himself, himself is lanced you
know by the Soldiers, and from thence came water and blood, the ingredients of
the healing medicine for poor Sinners for ever, being rightly tempered: like a
tender Mother, if the child be sick, it must be purged; she her self takes the
purge, endures the wrings of it in its working, that the effect may be sucked by
the child who lies at the breast; this is but a resemblance of this rich Grace
in Jesus Christ. Brethren, we see, if men were our Physicians, what they would
prescribe us, their purgations, and pilgrims, whippings, macerating our flesh,
until they bleed and die; but the Lord Jesus does not so; if either the
Physician or the Patient must die in this case, rather then the poor, diseased,
wounded Patient shall die, the Physit(...) himself dies, that we might live,
that his blood might be our cordial, his flesh, our diet, and his blood our
dyet-drink, that continually by little and little might heal us; O what manner
of love is this! Brethren, who would do so? let a Father but examine his heart
and see, could he do so for his child? though a Mother may take down much
bitterness for her child, yet would she be content to open a vein, to bleed to
death, to redeem its life when ready to perish? I know David 2 Samuel 18. 33.
in his passion said, Would God I had dyed for thee; but if Absalom had been
alive, and in cold bood he had been put to it, I question, though his
affections were strong to his Son, but they would have been as strong to
himself; Self is a man's nearest friend; but now the Lord Jesus you see, did it
for his poor sinful people, yea for strangers, for enemies: Brethren, consider
of it, If any of us were Physicians, here is a poor wounded creature lies in
the way, as the poor man in the Gospel, fell among thieves, left wounded and
half-dead, which of us now could find in our hearts to open our own veins, and
be emptied of all our blood and li^e, that such a poor wretch might be
supplied? now this the Lord Jesus does for such Sinners as we are; Brethren, if
there must be pouncing and pricking, he endures it: lancing, he endures it;
contusion, he endures it; For he was wounded for our transgressions, bruised
for our iniquites, the chastisement of our Isa. 53. 5.
peace was upon him, and through his stripes we are healed: his stripes are not
the bodily buffetings, his crown of thorns, and 1 Pet. 2. 24.
such things were nothing in comparison: no, it is the lashing of his spirit,
the wounding of his soul, the travel of his soul, the agonies, wrestlings with
his Fathers displeasure to an agony, when God laid on him so heavily, that he
was ready to faint and sink, and his soul almost fetched at every blow. O dear
Savior, that ever the cure of such sinful dust and ashes should cost thee so
dear, and we so little prize it! But,

2. That which he prescribes to us, though there be some bitterness in it, yet
no more then must needs; it may be a sprinkling from the top of the cup of
trembling, which may put us into a fear and trembling, so much as he sees
needful to imbitter sin to us: it is true, if love were perfect here below,
while graces are imperfect, and our ingenuity perfect; the looking upon a
crucified Christ for us, would be the greatest imbittering of sin to us in the
world; but we are very dull an(...)ow of heart, and therefore a little taste we
must our selves, that we may gather from thence what the Lord Jesus endured for
us: we that never felt what a wounded Spirit meant, and what the clouding of
the face of God from us meant, though we may hear of the sufferings of Christ,
we are not able to be sensible of them, and so not to prize that love as strong
as death; but when a poor creature has had a drop or two of scalding wrath
fall upon his conscience, a lash or two, though gently, upon his spirit, that
makes him roar in the disquietness of his ^oul: O thinks he then, if a drop
or two be so full of terror and amazement, what then was the whole Cup? what
was the dregs? how should I have born that, if my blessed Savior had not taken
it off for me? That which did so parch him who was the Green Tree, that he said
he thirsted, surely would have consumed the dry: If he were as a Bottle dried
in the smoke, it would have consumed us to ashes: If it made Him sweat in such
a manner, it would have altogether dissolved our frame, that we should have
perished for ever: O Isa. 54. 8.
if a little wrath, when God hides his face be such a Hell in many souls, What
a Hell then had Jesus Christ in his soul, when wrath was poured out to the
utmost? for he was not spared a jot. And then to make us out of love with sin,
wherein does lie the very heart of the core and of the cure, surely such are
the bowels of God in Christ, that as he delights not in the death of a
sinner, so neither does he delight in bringing the creature to life, through so
much bitterness and grief, if any other means would so effectually work us out
of love with sin as this; for the Wise God surely would take the most effectual
course; it is all needful, else he would never do it.

Why, but you will say, that hatred of sin is never kindly, except the love to
Jesus Christ be the ground of it? ye that love the Lord hate evil; this takes
the ingenuous spirit off from Omissions and Commissions.

It is true, but yet consider brethren, wherefore do we love Him, but because
he loved us? when his love is revealed and manifested, this warmeth, melts
the heart, indeareth the soul to him; until the Lord Jesus be pleased to open
and unfold his bowels of love to a sinner, he will never love him; now whereby
should we estimate the love of Jesus Christ to poor sinners, but by the
unsearchably rich (...) he paid for them? O the price of every drop of that
blessed blood that run trickling down to the earth, especially if it be
considered by what means it was squeezed out of him, this sets a rate upon
his love; it is not love in word, but in deed and in truth; if nothing else
will be a price to redeem them but his blood, it shall go; he is not dear of it
to the last drop; yea not to part with it by opening a vein, but to have it
extract out of the veins by the pores of his body: O by the unspeakable weight
of wrath upon his Spirit! Now how can we judge of this, except we have had a
little taste of it our selves? when we are put into a little sweat in our own
wrestlings with the displeasure of God, O then we see what our Savior endured
for us: If a man would set the highest estimate upon love among men, this
should be the rate of it; would they willingly have the face of God in Christ
hidden from them for a year or two for the dearest friend they have in the
world? you that have felt what this lashing of your Spirit is, that your breath
was even gone at every blow, and you were ready to perish, and you had fainted
except you had believed some secret undiscerned support. Tell me, would you
redeem the life, yea the souls of your dearest friends that you had in this
world by lying under a wounded Spirit, having a Hell kindled in your souls that
should burn all your days? I cannot tell, I know dear Friends will do much one
for another: O says one, I could lay my hands under their feet to do them
good: O I could redeem their lives with my own, Would God I had died for thee!
and happily because he saw he was in such a sad condition for his soul; but
David, would thou have been content Psalm. 42 7.
to roar all thy days in the disquietness of thy soul, to have his waves and
billows to go over thee, not to wade in the shallows, but to be in the depths,
to be overwhelmed with the displeasure Psalm. 88. 6.
of the Lord, and that for Absalom? if so, it is much, but it is nothing to
this of Christ; therefore this is the truest estimate we can take of his love,
and surely the higher our thoughts are, and deeper of the love of Christ, and
the larger, the greater will be our hatred of sin, our loathing of sin, which
when it is wrought, the cure is wrought; what, shall I play with the knife that
has pierced the heart of my Savior? Shall I harbor that in my bosom that was
the sting of my blessed Savior, the poison whereof-drank up his Spirits?
surely no.

And then Secondly, This will heighten our love to him, and we shall be loath to
grieve him when we love him: O he has endured enough already for me, he ha^h
been wounded, yea so wounded, as to be all over gore for my-sins, and so much,
as to be but all one wound, and shall I grieve him more? I am persuaded that
the experiences of all our hearts that ever tasted of his love, will subscribe
to this, that this is the great reason of our so often grieving of Jesus
Christ, because we have so little impression upon our hearts of his love to us,
and consequently so little love to him; either we never had a strong
impression, or else by degrees it does wear out, and should be renewed by a
serious contemplation of these things which we neglect, and that is the reason;
else we should be very tender and fearful of grieving him after the manner we
do daily.

But then Thirdly, our own smart under the sense of his displeasure will do
something: do you think that the remembrance ^am. 3. ^9.
of the wormwood and gall will not do something, make sinners afraid to meddle
with sin, and all little enough too? so the Father, when the child walks
frowardly, takes him up, I Will make you remember my fingers a good while, says
he; so the Lord deals with his people, but this is nothing to what the Lord
Jesus endured for us; he had the brunt; he broke the waves of the displeasure
of his Father, who is the rock of our salvation; though we that are lifted up
upon that rock, may be under water sometimes by those waves, yet the force of
them is broken upon Jesus Christ, else they would dash us to pieces, having not
co-assistance enough to break them. If ever Peter were solicited to deny Jesus
Christ again, do you think that the remembrance of this, O how dear it cost me,
was not an awe upon him? and so for David; after those doleful complaints from
him, while under the sense of his fathers displeasure; do you think he was not
more afraid of stolen waters, though sweet, and bread eaten in secret, though
pleasant, after God had kept him awhile, shut him up, as I may say, in the
Chambers of death, made him walk there awhile, to make him know what he had
done in sinning away the light of his countenance?

But Thirdly, That which he himself prescribes, even the bitterest of it, it
is no more then he enables the creature to bear; if he do lance our wounds, and
put us to some grief, withal he gives a Cordial that stays us from sinking;
it is true, a right hand cannot be cut off, nor a right foot, a man cannot be
dismembered, but there will be some anguish and trouble; nor a lust mortified,
but it will cost us some heart-aking, but then he quickly stanches the
bleeding, keeps the heart from sinking, fainting, he will not suffer us to be
tried above what we are able, but makes a way to escape; he does not leave us
altogether without his presence 1 Cor. 10. 13.
when we are in the dark, though we see him not; I say, if it were not for
this, I know the lot of Judas and Cain would fall upon every such sinner, nor
will he keep it a jot longer upon us then he will lengthen out our patience.
But what is all this Brethren to what our blessed Savior has taken down for
us? If darkness be so sad to us, who never had but a glimpse of the light of
his countenance, what was it that the Lord Jesus felt then, that had it in that
fullness the creature was capable of, and proportionably greater, by how much
the more iniquity was laid to his charge? So that in a word, it is our blessed
Savior that was wounded, and we healed; all that is done to us is but as a
scratch with a pin to those wounds of his; he felt all those wrings and pangs,
and we have the effects of the working of the Physic; is not this unsearchable
riches of Grace, that we should be healed after such a manner as this!

Seventhly, He does all this most freely, expects no reward, as Physicians
you know do: the poor woman in the Gospel spent all that she had upon the
Physicians, but when she came to Christ, he asked her nothing, only willingness
to accept of deliverance, to believe his power, his willingness to save, and
this is nothing to a reward; yea, and it is he himself that gives the
willingness to be healed; he went up and down throughout the Synagogues and the
villages, healing all their diseases; was it not the freest gift that ever was
given, to give himself, his life, his blood a ransom for poor sinners? alas, he
knew we had nothing to give him, and yet he comes nevertheless freely; for all
he aims at is, that his grace may have the glory, and be made glorious, and
the poorsinner may be saved; and therefore whether they have any thing or
nothing, it is all one; yea, if there be any thing that the creature looks
upon, as his money, the Lord Jesus is so far from taking it as a reward, that
there is nothing hinders him more then this; it is one of the great diseases
indeed of the soul, this holy self, that Jesus Christ comes to heal; poor
sinners are full of sores, wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores, full of
corruption, every one has his bloody issue: now our duties, I^aiah 64.
or holiness, which sinners sometimes so much stand upon, the Apostle thought
them gain once; they are but as the filthy clouts upon our sores, that are ^ull
of the runnings of our sores, as menstruous clothes, defiled with our bloody
issues: we think to plaster our wounds with them, to salve our consciences
with a few duties, but alas they come off like filthy clouts from running
sores, and are these a reward for the Lord Jesus? When a Physician comes to
heal a person of the Plague, O says he, I will reward you, you shall not take
all this pains with me for nothing; you shall have the rags that come off my
sores, for your pains: Is not the Physician much beholding to him think you? So
it is here, we have nothing but such rags to give the Lord Jesus, and alas they
must be washed clean in his blood; our services healed as well as our souls,
before they be worth any thing: therefore I say, he himself freely prepares
the Lances to open the wounds, convinces the poor creature of his condition;
he himself takes the pains to open the vein, to empty the creature of himself,
to cure him of that Plethory: He it is tempereth the Physic, is at the charge
of it; O the richest Cordials in the world! tempered of his own blood and
water, by his own Spirit, to support the poor creature when ready to faint: he
sits over his people, even as a tender Father over a weak wounded child,
and with what a heart you may imagine; he provideth Messengers of his own to be
with them, to minister to them, to watch over them, and himself is always at
hand. Ah dear Friends, that ever the Lord Jesus should set so high esteem upon
poor sinners, when we were in such a loathsome condition, as that he would dwell
in flesh, and take part of flesh and blood, that so he might have somewhat to
make a restorative of, a healing medicine of, that we might not perish; one
drop, every drop of his most precious blood, with respect to the value which
the Godhead put upon it, is more then if a world of pearl could be decocted
into a cordial; and yet he spared it not: that he should visit sinners with
this salvation, with his corrosives, his cordials, with his healing virtue, and
power, and his heart, so ready to put it forth from time to time; this is
unsearchable riches of grace, to do all this freely. Yea,

Eighthly and lastly, it will appear in this, that the Lord Jesus brings his
heart full, and his hands full of reward with him to a poor sinner, so that he
will be but healed; you see foolish children when they have fallen and wounded
themselves, they must be hired to let the Father or the Chyrurgion heal it, put
a plaster upon it; but cries out as undone, had rather do any thing then be
healed; but alas, who would do it to a stranger? it may be thou see a poor
leprous creature lie languishing at thy gates, and thou can heal him, but he
is not willing; either he is in love with his disease, or distrusts your good
will, or faithfulness, or something, but he is not willing to be healed: now
where is there a heart so full of tenderness as to be willing to offer him a
reward? I will give thee thus much, or thus much, if thou will but let me heal
thee, for I pity thy condition: Brethren, a King and his subjects fall out,
they rebel against the King in the war, the subject is wounded even to the
death, except there be more then ordinary care taken of him; now the King, his
heart relents, he comes to him in the prison, and does not upbraid him with
his unkindness, nor pride, nor stubbornness, but entreats him he will give
him leave to heal him, that he will but suffer his wounds to be searched, to be
healed, to be closed, so that he may not perish, he will pardon all that he
has done amiss, begs of him to accept of him, he will make him the second man
in the Kingdom, he shall be near to him, if he will but suffer himself to be
healed: Is not this rich mercy indeed, is there any such Paragon to be found?
Surely no: but lo, this is in Jesus Christ, and more, for he not only promises
a reward upon our healing, but makes the poor creature willing also, willing
to part with his lusts; and to speak the truth, I take this to be the greatest
part of our healing, when a poor sinner that was in love with sin before, loved
his lusts as much as his life; O his merry companions were as dear to him as
his very eye, or his right hand, he could no more part with one then the other,
and so his gain of unrighteousness. Now when the Lord by proposing of objects,
which have a great force, but that is not all, but by a sweet and yet powerful
bowing of the heart, makes the poor creature willing to be healed; so that now
he cries out with Augustine, How long Lord, how long? this man is in a great
measure healed, and this is the work, and yet he rewards for this, promises
a Crown, gives grace, and glory, glory with himself, fellowship with him, to
lie in his bosom to all eternity. O here is unsearchable riches of grace!
Brethren, I have only, if so much, brought you to the vein where these riches
lie. O that you would dig a little by serious contemplating upon it. You will
find more then I am able to speak.

Sixthly, Another Use shall be this, to warn us that we do not upon this score,
because that Jesus Christ will arise with healing under his wings upon poor
sinners; therefore to make bold with sin; it is no great matter, the healing
virtue of Christ will be so much the more magnified. O how desperate is this!
would you not think that man were out of his wits, that upon presumption upon
the skill, and tenderness of the Physician, should without any care how, or
where, wound himself, and gash himself, he has a Physician that will heal him;
you that dare be so bold to sin, that grace may abound, and make work for Jesus
Christ, know this, this day, you know not what the grace of Christ means,
Romans 6. 1.
that make such a use of it: how did this stir the Apostles spirit? God forbid:
he does, as I may say, recoil; as a man startled at some horrid sight. O the
Lord forbid you should suck such poison out of so sweet a flower! This
concerns two sorts of persons; First, such as yet never knew what this
healing virtue of Christ is, only by the hearing of the ear, they hear the Lord
Jesus is able to heal the most desperate wounds, and that he is willing, and
therefore they make bold to continue in sin, they may go on to inflame the
reckoning a little higher yet, it is all one with Christ to pardon millions as
mites, to swallow up mountains as mole(...) it is true, if thou respect his
power; but how do thou know that he will do it for thee, sinner? or what hope
have thou, or can thou have while it is thus with thoe? Its true, if sinners
do not sin away the day of grace, he is willing; but did ever Jesus Christ tell
thee that thou should be healed particularly, though thou go on rebelling
against him, wound upon wound upon thy poor soul? Surely no, be not deceived
sinners, these are the insinuations of the wicked one, this is such Gospel as
the Devil preaches, when he preaches Christ as an Angel of light, but in the
close, you will find the Law instead of the Gospel; such presumption and
security usually ends in despair, the time may come, that you that make so
little a matter of it, may cry out and roar, O your wounds, you refused to be
healed; what if the Lord then say to you, your iniquities shall never be
healed, you shall dye in your sins; what will become of your presumption then?

Secondly, it concerns the people of God, that have had it may be some
experience of this healing virtue of Jesus Christ, that have a long time been
groaning under the loathsomness and anguish of their wounds, and now at the
last are healed through abundant grace. O take heed of returning to folly any
more; will you make bold with sin, that have known what it cost our blessed
Savior, and what it cost your selves? what it cost him, when as he would
himself purge our iniquities; he took the Physic, and thou enjoy^st the cure;
but is it no more to us. Brethren? the heaviness of his soul to the death; must
he bleed to death, that we might not bleed to death, that our bloody issues
might be stopped? did it cost him an eclipse of the light of the countenance of
his Father, and will thou make so light a matter of it? walk so watchlesly as
we do, to go on to grieve him, as we do some of us? O it is the want of keeping
that fresh upon our hearts, what the cure of it cost, that is the great cause
of our so often relapsing. And so we forget what it cost our selves; it is
strange that the burnt child does not dread the fire: do thou not remember
when the Lord came to search thy wounds, what it cost thee when he went to the
bottom of them? O do thou not remember the stench of them, when he came to
pluck off the hard crust grown upon them, and let thee see and be sensible of
the filthiness in them? is this forgotten, that thou make no more of sin? O
do thou not remember the time when thou wast even weary of thy self, a
burden to thy self, thou could not rest many a weary day and night, it cost
thee many an aching heart, and yet now so soon art making wounds again, making
work again for Christ? Surely this is very ill requital of all that riches of
grace. Or what, can we heal the breaches we make upon our peace by our
recidivations when we please? It is true, if a man had his panacea in his
pocket, that whatever disease he fell into, whatever wound he should make upon
himself, he could cure it again when he pleased, it were somewhat like, there
were some color; but have you the treasuries of grace in your own keeping?
have you? or has any man a pardon in a box, as the poor deceived Papists are
grievously mocked? Surely no; Alas, we can make wounds, but we cannot heal
them, we can make a shift to break our faces and bones, but we cannot heal them
again, it is in his hand; and will it be for our comfort then, to grieve him by
such careless walking? what if he resolve to grieve thee, and give thee enough
of thy backslidings? Will it not be bitterness in the latter end? though he
may heal it, it may cost thee many a throb and much smart for this wantonness;
Brethren, take Prove. 14. 14.
heed of this: O sickness is chargeable, it may cost thee mourning all thy
days.

Seventhly, Then let it be for Exhortation to us all, that we get under the
influence of this Sun of righteousness. Sinners, we have all of us need of the
Physician, for there is never a whole soul among us, though to our own
apprehension some of us think it is well with us, yet it is not, we are full of
wounds, the whole head is sick, the whole heart is faint, the Lord Jesus has
Isa. 1.
sent me to tell you where you-may have healing, and to persuade you to come to
him; but alas, I am a child and cannot speak. Where is there healing to be had
you will say? you know that as well as you can be told; why then, how comes it
to pass that you come not to Jesus Christ, he has set open the Storehouse,
the Treasuries of pardoning-mercy, and healing-mercy, inviteth all that will to
come, and yet you come not? Surely, either you do not believe this report, or
else you do not believe your need of Jesus Christ. O consider what has been
said to that part, and the Lord help you to believe, and persuade you to come
to him, for indeed it is he that must draw, and make poor sinners willing to
come, or else they will never come to him, only he does draw; one way is by
proposing the object, by holding out a crucified Christ for them. And therefore
let me a little propose something to you to persuade you to come to Jesus
Christ.

1. Your need of Christ you have seen; for we are all wounded, yea even to the
death, bitten with fiery Serpents, the venom whereof inflames our souls, and
therefore a Physician we must have or else dye: Now there is no healing in any
other, but through his stripes; if you know of any other Savior that can
deliver, can heal you, take him; follow after him; but I must tell you, when
you have spent all, you must be fain to come to Jesus Christ for healing; and
is it not better to come before you have spent all upon other Physicians that
cannot cure when all is done? O that sinners could but believe this! I tell you
truth, Brethren, a Plaster of any thing else; made of our own sorrow, or
tears, or righteousness, or good works, or whatsoever, it is so far from being
a healing, that it will venom the wound more, and makes yet further work for
Jesus Christ, if rested in as a cure. I say, you may make a shift to stop the
Orifice of the wound with a balm of your own procuring, but all the while the
sore eats into the soul so much the deeper, wrankles within. O now the Lord
Jesus, he begins at the bottom, and so heals it up; say not then, Are not
Abana and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of Israel?
when we must go and 2 King. 5. 12.
wash in Jordan if we be healed.

2. Consider this, the longer you conceal your wounds and hold off, the worse
will it go with you; for either the Lord will let you go on and never heal you,
but let you languish away in these ways of sin you please your selves so much
in; or else if he do, the longer the wound is wrankling the worse it will be,
the harder it will go when it comes to be searched; when David had turned his
back upon Christ for so long in the matter of Vriah, it cost him somewhat, it
made him roar when the Physic came to work, the Lord withdrawing from him
happily as long. O that while you are called to day, sinners, now while healing
is tendered, you would accept of it! the Lord make you willing.

3. Do but consider, what thronging there was to Christ for healing of their
bodily distempers, they brought them from all Luke 6. 19.
parts to him, such as could not come themselves; and would there not be the
like now if he were upon earth? O how would poor Creeples set the best foot
forward to come to him, and such as had diseased creatures, Lame, Blind,
Palsy? etc. O how would they take themselves bound to bring them to Christ for
healing? and what, is the body more then the soul, Brethren? You would think
you were undone if you were lamed, and could not stand upon your legs; why this
is nothing to have a heart and a heart. Such a man is lame, one leg shorter
then another, or walks with one foot in an higher way, and the other in a
lower, and so halts, and is this nothing? O, what would a tender mother give
now, if she had all her children and self under the plague at once, or lying of
the stone or gout at once, one cries, and another cries, never pain like
theirs. What would a mother give now for such a Physician, and how ready would
she be to carry them to him? what is this to the plague of the heart, and the
stone in the heart? and yet no outcries at all, nor care at all, nay the Lord
Jesus comes himself, is first in the thing, visits with his salvation, moves,
entreats to accept of pardon, of healing, and yet you will not; what shall I
say more, Brethren?

4. Consider, that the Lord Jesus is most freely willing to heal poor sinners;
do you think if the Lord Jesus had not been in good earnest, and hearty in the
work of salvation of poor sinners, he would have prepared such costly cordials,
made up of his own spirits and his own blood, that so no disease might be so
deadly, but the sovereignty of the Medicine should be as lively? Surely no; did
he ever refuse any that came to him for healing in the Gospel, for healing of
the body, but rather while they came for healing of their bodies, he did ex
superabundanti gratia, heal their souls; they came to ask crumbs of him, as the
poor woman, and he gives them the childrens bread, his flesh and his blood to
eat and to drink, to be food and Physic to heal and nourish them; you have
heard at large, that none that come unto him he will in any wise cast out.

Therefore, Brethren, let me beg of you to labor with the Lord, and with your
own hearts, and never give it over until he has brought you, and set you
directly under the beams of this Sun of righteousness: for the more direct they
are, the more power they have, you know the reason: beams of the Sun in winter
will not heal the earth of its barrenness and frozenness, but its bound up: and
so some may have some glancing influence from Christ, some kind of tastes, and
yet notwithstanding not amount to an healing, though to an escaping of the
pollutions of the world, outward acts, yet it is not healed to the bottom;
there are some lusts indeed, that are like sullen weeds, that will not live
except it be in the shade and darkness, as in wells, and pits, and the like,
where the Sun comes not; and therefore, wherever the light of the Gospel
comes, these are presently done away. Some things are so gross, as if there be
but a glimmering of light discovered, they fly away, will not endure it; but
there are some secret lusts lie so close to the heart, have cast out their
roots so there, and are so fastened in the spirit, that except the Lord Jesus
do shine in his strength into such a soul, they will never up, they will never
wither nor dye, nor the soul be healed; but thus much for the Exhortation.

Lastly, I shall speak a word of refreshing to such as tremble at this Word,
and every Word of God; are indeed sensible of their condition by reason of sin,
and many sad complaints they make; I may imagine, but the Lord hears the moan
that every poor sinner makes over his wounds, and over his diseases, before
the Lord; as you shall have a poor creature that feels he is wounded, the heavy
groans he fetches, one cries out of the broken arm, another of a wounded
head, a third of the stone, a fourth of the plague: O how it throbs and smarts,
when the Lord opens sinners eyes to see what they have done, which they never
saw before, thus it is with them: Why now poor sinner, is this thy case, do
thou see and know thy wound? know this day, there is healing for thee, cast not
away thy hope; for so poor creatures are ready to say, is there any healing for
me? there was never wound sure so deep as mine. O never was there disease so
loathsome, so full of pain as mine! yea, here is a promise, the Sun of
righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings upon them that fear him;
and now thou beginnest to be afraid of him: though before thou knew him,
thou made nothing of rebelling against him, yet now thou do: as they say,
bring a man that is guilty of another murder before him, he will bleed
afresh. So the Lord Jesus, when a poor sinner, guilty of his blood, suppose the
worst, and this is that which wounds thee now, why his blood will issue afresh
to heal poor sinners; what is it that thou art troubled with, is it in thine
eyes, is the eyes of thy understanding darkened? he will heal this: how ready
was he when the blind men cried to his that they might receive their sight? you
know he healed them. What, would thou have thy memory healed of its
slipperiness and treachery? he will heal that, he has done it for many a one
in a strange manner. What is it? thy thoughts it may be are wandering and vain,
he will heal that; what is it? thy love it may be is full of dissimulation, is
not out of a pure heart, and not ^ervent as it should, he will heal that; and
for thy will, of its pronness to sin, this sin, that sin, thy own iniquity, he
will heal that: and so for the Irascible part, he will heal thee of those
fears, and troubles, and inordinate passions, vanities, lusts, and vain desires.

O but says one, my disease is a Relapse, I have found strength against such
or such a lust, but I have fallen back again! Be it so, he will heal their
backslidings: though it be true, if any sins be Ho^. 14. 4.
talents, these are they. Yea, he will forgive an hundred talents as well as
thirty pence; backsliding is a kind of compound of all sins; so much the
sadder it is, by how much there is a slighting and undervaluing the blood of
Jesus Christ, wherewith we have been purged and cleansed; but is this thy
trouble (as this Novatianism is in every poor troubled conscience) to question,
Whether ever God will pardon or heal, if they fall after repentance? though I
must tell you, usually it costs them more smart; yet the Lord will heal even
such as these; what, was not David's sin a backsliding, and Peter's a
backsliding? the most fearful sin; and the most remarkable sins pardoned and
healed, were backslidings, only thou must be content to endure something for
the healing of those fearful wounds thou have made in upon thy soul, for there
is no wound cured in a moment, nor without any anguish; and all that he lays
upon thee is nothing, the smart is nothing, though the plaster lie long upon
thee before it be healed, to draw the sore to a head, to break it, to draw it,
to heal it, there* will be some time, but he will heal thee poor sinner; if he
have made thee weary of this sin, desirous of healing indeed.

And for you that are crying out of broken bones, it may be there are some
whose condition this is, that do fear the Lord, and obey the voice of his
servants; it is the greatest fear of thy soul to Psalm. 5^.
displease the Lord, to grieve him, happy soul with whom it is thus; but thou
art over-cast, thou art clouded, thou see no light, thy bones are broken, thy
spirit is wounded, O who can bear a wounded spirit? Be of good cheer man,
remember this, has he not promised it, that he will arise upon them that fear
the Prove. 18. 14.
Lord with healing in his wings? he will heal those broken bones, and the flesh
wherein there is no soundness by reason of thy sins, he will heal it, and he is
doing of it, though thou art not sensible of it; he pittyeth thee, and knows
how to pity thee, for himself was ecclipsed, though the Son of righteousness,
that he might know how to pity them that suffer in the like kind for the time
to come; he knows thy frame, what thou can bear, and he will not let thee
sink O thou of little faith^ though he may fright thee, as he did his
Disciples, the cloud will be over again, only thou must wait for him; he
knows what it is to be without the light of his Fathers countenance as well
as thou, and he knows what thou can bear; therefore be not discouraged man:
and beside, thou have his promise for it, only look to it, that thou fear him,
that thou put not forth thy hand to iniquity, that thou say not with that
wicked King, Why should I wait for the Lord any longer? he that shall come,
will come, in the best season. When the mercy will be most sweet and
seasonable, himself may have most glory by it, and thy soul most refreshing.

O but says another, I am not healed I doubt then, for alas, I find, though
happily I break not out as before, to uncleanness actually; yet I have eyes full
of adultery still, I find the dispositions, and inclinations, and yieldings of
my heart strong to mine own iniquity still, some to one and some to another.
^or answer to this: Is this thy burden, thy grief that it is so? do thou
loath thy ^elf for it? do thou hate it? would thou fain have it rooted up?
thou art healed in the greatest part, there is the core fetched up from the
bottom, though the wound be not altogether healed up, it is the work of longer
time then happily God has been dealing with thy soul; but be of good cheer man,
lay thy self under the Sun of righteousness, labor to improve the Covenant of
grace, wherein he shines most gloriously; he has promised he will circumcise
thine heart, and thou shall be able to love the Lord with all thine heart, and
that he will subdue all iniquity Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
for thee; and see if he be not as good as his word in his own time, which is
the best time.

We have already endeavored to open the main promise in this bundle, and apply
it, with what advantage the Lord and your own hearts can tell; you have heard
at large that Jesus Christ is a Sun of righteousness, and that he will ari^e
with healing in his wings upon them that fear him. So that there is Christ
promised, light, and heat, and healing, reviving and quickening promised, and
through him. And now we are come to speak to the liberty which is promised with
Christ, which is none of the least considerable Appendices of our justification
through his blood, and though you have not long since heard somewhat upon this
subject, however, if you hear but the same things, the Spirit of the Lord may
breath where and when it pleases, we may meet with him sometimes in hearing
the same things, that at another time he has not been found in.

-- And ye shall go forth: This is principally, as I told you, spoken to the
Jew; to the Jew first, but also to the Gentile; as all the Gospel promises,
they were first preached to the children of the Kingdom, when the Gentiles were
strangers from Ephesians. 2. 13. 2 Cor. 1. 20.
the Covenant of promises; but now the Lord has made them nigh in the blood of
his Son that were afar off; in Christ all the promises are Yea and Amen to
them, as well as to the Jews; I told you at the first, that we are not to
confine promises made to times and persons, except by unavoidable nece^sity,
where the matter promised is such, and the promise such as can agree to no
other time or person; no persons or peoples condition can become like to theirs
to whom the promise is made, or are not capable of the thing promised, as the
promise of the Messiah to come of David; and that in Abraham's seed all the
Nations of the earth should be blessed, etc. therefore this is a promise
concerning all the people of God, as their conditions become alike, yea all
that fear the Lord in any of these senses we have already spoken to.

By going forth here, some understand, a going forth of this life, or a going
out of the grave, which is a prison indeed to some, though not properly so to
the Saints, but a place of repose until the appearing of Jesus Christ; So Alap.
citing Tert. and Jer. the reason is, because they took that which is spoken of
the day of the Lord in the foregoing verse, of the day of Judgment, That day
which should burn as an Oven; but I do rather conceive that it is not meant of
the day of the last Judgment, but the day of the fearful desolations of
Jerusalem, out of which yet the Lord did deliver and save his own people; and
the rather I conceive so, because of the growing up like Calves of the Stall,
promised afterward: now if that be the day, there is no room then to grow any
higher, to spread any further, but as the tree is cut down so it lies; there is
then in the words a promise of an enlargement from under restraint, wherewith
their spirits were bound up, as I may say, and were imprisoned, and this we
shall see (I hope) is very great; only take here the note of observation from
the words.

The Lord Jesus rising upon a soul, brings enlargement to that soul Doctrine.
or people, ye shall go forth. For the prosecution of this I shall propose this
Method. First, give you the (...), the quod, that it is so, Secondly, the quid,
what this enlargement is which comes* along with Jesus Christ to a Believer.
Thirdly, the quare why it is so: And Fourthly, the Use of the Point.

First then for proof of this, peruse a Text or two in that Evangelical
Prophet, who does very eminently hold out Jesus Christ, I the Lord have called
thee in righteousness: there is the Call of Christ: And I will hold thee by
thine hand, or, hold thine hand: there is the support of Christ in that great
work: and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant to the people; for a
light of the Gentiles: He is indeed the Spirits of the Covenant; the marrow of
the Gospel; the very Spirits of all the promises is Christ; the speech is
^igurative. Well, but what is he to do? To open the blind eyes; to bring out
the prisoners from the prison, Isa. 42. 7.
and them that sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse. Mind you therefore,
the Lord Jesus was willing, as I may say, to be imprisoned in our body, if I
may so say; or if not, in other respects he was in prison, that he might set
his people free, bring them out of the prison: even as Paul when he might,
would not go free, except they came and fetched them out of prison. So here,
sinners would never go out, except the Lord Jesus came and fetched them out. A
Prince for Rebellion casts his Subjects into prison, in the dungeon, there they
lie, and would lie and rot there, their stomach is so great, they will not ask
for deliverance; nay, if they would, they cannot set themselves free; the
Prince comes with his own hands, knocks off the bolts, breaks the bars and
gates, and bids them follow him: so the Lord Jesus does for sinners. So again,
in that place of John, If the Son make you Ioh. (...). 32.
free, ye shall be free indeed: there is much liberty and freedom, and you will
not hear of your being in bondage; but says our Savior, to set at Liberty is
not the work of every one: it is the Son that only can make you free; and if he
make you free, you shall be free indeed. The Lord Jesus you know came into the
world, not only to work out salvation for his people, but to preach the
salvation he did work out: not only to shed his blood, but to preach remission
of sins through his blood, as the Apostle has it, How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2. 3.
Which at the first began to be spoken to us by the Lord, and afterward by
those that heard him: so that he himself preached salvation; he himself did
work it out, for no other name is given under heaven: now he preaches this as
a main part, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to
preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me to bind up the broken
hearted; He was anointed, there is his Office; and because anointed as a
Prophet to preach it, therefore the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, poured out
without measure, he was gifted and fitted for it; which though some understand
of Isaiah, as well as of Christ, yet of Isaiah but as the type: Well then, to
proclaim Isa. 61. 1.
liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound.
Now surely if this be the substance of his preaching, where he comes and
reveals himself inwardly to a soul, in a soul, gives himself to a soul,
there must needs be a going forth out of the prison, out of the bondage,
wherein the poor soul was held: so we have it in that place, says the Lord
again, even as in chap. 42. so chap. 49. of Isaiah, I will preserve thee, and
give thee for a Covenant of the people, etc. That thou may say to the Isa.
49. 8. and 9.
prisoners go forth, to them that stand in darkness, show your selves: and it
is no more with God but dictum ac factum, his words are operative words; mark
you, they shall Go forth when the Sun of righteousness arises upon them; his
Commission is his work, for to say to the Prisoners, Go forth; if he bid
Lazarus come forth, he comes forth; he calls the things that are not, as if
they were; commands light out of darkness, and so commands Deliverance and
Liberty for his poor people that are bound: I hope none will say this is all
Old Testament proof; for this is Gospel as clear as the Sun, and to take away
all ground of a cavil, read but Luke, and you shall find this is the very Text
our Savior preaches upon to the Jews; tells them, that day this Text was
fulfilled, that is to say, that he was the anointed of the Lord; the Spirit of
the Lord was upon him, because he was appointed to preach the Gospel to the
poor, to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight Luke 4. 18. and 21.
to the blind, and to set at liberty them that are bruised; but I may not wast
any more time, it is but burning day light to hold a candle to the Sun: It is
written with a Sunbeam, except you shut your eyes you must needs see it.

The second thing, Is the quod, what this enlargement, or freedom is that is
here promised? and truly this is a large question, and wherein most of our work
will lie: each of us in the general acknowledge a slavery, a bondage we are
under, from which the Lord Jesus does speak to his people to go forth, yea
brings them forth; but we have not a distinct understanding of it: and alas, I
am the meanest of them, who make it their work to preserve knowledge; yet as I
have received, I shall endeavor somewhat this-way to open the nature of this
liberty.

That we may the more clearly proceed, we must distinguish of freedom or
liberty into Civil and Spiritual; Civil, is a freedom of ma^s person from
servitude of men, so that he shall no more be under ^he yoke; and thus the Jews
misunderstood our Savior when he spoke of freedom; If the Son do make you
free, you shall be free indeed: why said they, We are the seed of Abraham, Ioh.
8. 33.
we are freeborn, and we never were in bondage to any man; they meant sure
they were never particularly sold for servants to any, else bred in bondage to
any to be their servants, not meaning their public state, but private, else
they much did forget themselves; for they had often been in captivity and
bondage, as in Egypt and Babylon, and at present under the Romans; but this is
not the liberty we chiefly aim at, nor may we extend it to this bondage, any
further then it is a curse: now we know the Apostle tells us, that if a man be
called, being a servant, care not for it, for such an one is the Lord his
Freeman, neither bond ^or free: is there any difference? they are all one in
Christ; therefore our Savior did not come to break all yokes off the neck of
Servants, or to deliver all such relations; no, but it is meant here surely of
a spiritual Liberty, a freedom of the soul from its thraldom; nay himself
comes to be a servant; did he not rather sanctify such a condition and
relation then abolish it?

Secondly, Then taking it for spiritual Liberty, that is to say, a freedom from
Spiritual evils, the subjection whereunto is a bondage to the poor creature; we
must know yet further, that we may take it either in a larger, or in a more
restrained sense; in a more restrained, only for that liberty and freedom which
the Saints have ever had through the Lord Jesus, since the Covenant of Grace
was preached to them, and they closed with it; for we must know that ever
before Christ came in the flesh, Believers believed in him to come; they had a
liberty through him as to the main parts of it, and necessarily to salvation,
though happily not in that degree that now ordinarily Believers indeed have that
freedom: but there were some yoaks upon them then, which now we are delivered
from, they are broken from off the necks of the Saints; yea, and such as were
pinching yoaks indeed, but yet less considerable by far, then those from which
they were delivered and set free; so that now we see there is a larger liberty,
and more glorious, which the sons of God have; which will better appear when we
come to speak to the parts of it, only this I thought good to premi^e, lost any
should think that liberty began only when Christ was revealed in the flesh; for
it was the smallest part that then was added, though, I say, the other liberty
from the sore condemning, destroying bondage of the soul they had before, happily
is now heightened to believers; and so much by way of premise.

For the opening of this spiritual Liberty, we shall consider, 1. Its Subject.
2. Its Causes. 3. Its Parts, extensive and intensive, if we may so speak, that
is to say, the degrees of it.

First then for the subject of this Liberty, they are all Christians that are
so indeed; therefore it is called Christian Liberty, not only from Christ the
Author, but from the Subjects, they are Christians, Believers, both Jews and
Gentiles, Bond or Free, Male or Female: Jerusalem, says the Apostle, which is
above, is Gal. 4. 24.
free, which is the Mother of us all; all such then as receive the Gospel, as
the poor are said to do, all those upon whom the Sun of righteousness does
arise, they are set free, they do go forth: for the partial subject of this
liberty, that will better appear when we come to speak of the parts of this
liberty; some are for the freeing the mind, some the will, some the
conscience, some the whole man, but of this afterward.

Secondly, Then for the causes of this liberty which is here promised, we shall
speak to some of them.

First then, The principal efficient cause is, the Father, Son, and Spirit; the
work of the Trinity ad extra, are individed: the Father it is that calls us to
liberty; Ye are called to liberty, (says the Apostle) use it not as a cloak to
the flesh. I marvel Gal. 5. 13. c. 1. 6.
(says the Apostle) that you are so soon removed from him who has called you
into the Grace of Christ unto another Gospel. The Apostle means the calling
to liberty, which he calls the Grace of Christ; and that Doctrine of the false
teachers that would subject them again to the Law and Ceremonies, and to that
bondage, subvert their liberty, he calls it another Gospel. And for the Son, we
have it: If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed; and stand fast in
the liberty wherewith Christ has made you Ioh. 8. 36.
free: false Brethren came to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ
Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage. And for Gal 5. 1. c. 2. 4.
the Spirit, it is as clear: The Law of the Spirit of life in Jesus Christ has
made me free from the Law of Sin and Death: the Romans 8. 2.
mighty, powerful working of the Spirit, is called the Law of the Spirit, as
the powerful operation of Sin, is called the Law of Sin; and so in that place,
where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty: and so the Spirit of
Adoption it is, that succedeth the Spirit 2 Cor. 3. 17. Romans 8. 15.
of Bondage, and sets us free from that Bondage.

Secondly, The impulsive cause is merely his (...), his good pleasure, yea, his
tender mercy, his bowels: So it is in the Original, The bowels of our God,
whereby the dayspring from on high has visited us: there is the arising of
the Sun of rightousness upon Luke 1. 74.
us, and the effect of it you have before: That we being delivered from the
hands of all our enemies, might serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness, etc. It is not misery is the motive only, else he would do it
for all as well as some, for we are all of us in the same bondage naturally,
one as well as another.

Thirdly, The meritorious cause is the blood of Jesus Christ, no less then the
blood of the Kings son is the price of the liberty of poor Slaves in bondage:
this must needs be tender mercy indeed, rich love indeed: so says the Apostle,
That through death he might destroy him that has the power of death, that is,
the Devil: Heb. 2. 14.
no less then a Kings ransom is paid for the liberty of every poor creature
that is made free, and therefore he took upon him flesh and blood; because the
children were partakers of the same, that he might die for them, and to deliver
them that for fear of death were in bondage all their lifetime, of which more
afterward; we are now speaking to the meritorious cause the price of his
precious mercy, even the blood of Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, The means of conferring or conveiging this liberty to poor Sinners,
is the Gospel of liberty, the Covenant of Grace held out in the Gospel is the
means; and this is plain in many places; As in that of Isaiah, The Spirit of
the Lord is upon me; Isa. 61. 1.
therefore he has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek, to bind up
the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives: if Isa. 42. 7.
ever any preaching was the Gospel, Christ's preaching was, and the Covenant,
who himself was given to be the Covenant to the people: sure he would preach
nothing but that, or in subordination to that, as he does preach the Law too,
as would easily appear: but we may not digress: and so in tha^ other place of
Luke, Luke 4. 18.
where either that or some of the forecited places in Isaiah are quoted: Ye
shall know the truth, (says our Savior) and the Ioh. 8. 32.
truth shall make you free: by truth there, I take it is not meant
indefinitely, any truth whatever, no, nor a scriptural truth, but the Gospel of
truth, which is called the truth: Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ: it is
such a truth, so pure and precious: For his word is like Silver tried and
purified seven times: (that is Psalm. 12. 6, 7.
to say) his Promise, therefore he concludes, That the Lord will keep them, he
will preserve them for ever: and so precious, so confirmed by miracles, that
all other truth scarce deserves the name of truth in comparison of it: either
it is not so pure, but has some dross, or else not so precious. O they are
precious Promises indeed! as the soul knows right-well, when he comes to
stand in need of a Promise, and the sweetness of it he sucks out, and it
lets down the sweetness of it upon the soul; but take a parallel Scripture
to show that Gospel is called the truth: The Apostle speaks plainly, For the
hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof you heard before in the word
of the truth of the Gospel: and again to the Ephesians, In whom also ye
trusted, Col. 1. 5. ver. 13.
after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation, in whom
also after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise. So that
this is the truth then, the knowledge whereof shall make us free; where the
Spirit of Christ is, there is liberty; that is clear, as you heard before; Now
how is the Spirit given but by the Gospel? Received ye the Spirit by the works
of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? which is that hearing of Faith Gal. 3.
2.
by the Word of Truth; the foregoing Verse, even that which held forth a
crucified Christ to them, hearing of Faith, not the rumor of Faith, but
hearing is such an hearing, as whereby a man believes; and Faith by a
Metonymie, is put for the Word of Faith, as the Gospel is called sometimes,
because Faith thereby is begotten; now by this the Spirit is received, and
therefore liberty comes; and therefore the Gospel is called the ministration 2
Cor. 3. 8.
of the Spirit, in that place of the Apostle, because therewith the Spirit is
given and ministered to poor creatures; whereas the Law works Bondage and Wrath,
Therefore Jerusalem is free, which is above; (that is to say) the Church
builded upon the Romans 4. 15.
Covenant of Grace is free, is the Mother of us all, but enough of this; The
Gospel is the outward instrumental cause.

Fifthly, the inward instrumental cause or Con. as some will have Gal. 3. 2.
it, which I shall not now dispute; that is faith, whereby we close with this
Covenant; it is the Word of Faith and hearing of Faith, (that is to say) of the
Gospel, so as to work Faith, whereby the Spirit is given which brings liberty
to the soul. Alas, many hear the Gospel of liberty which we preach, and few do
receive it, few believe it; for it appears by woeful experience, we are yet in
bondage, we have never gone forth to this day, many of us, though we have had
as much preaching of the Gospel as any other; Jerusalem that now is, (as the
Apostle calls it) was in bondage Gal. 4. 25.
then, though they had the Gospel preached among them a great while, they
believed not; except the Spirit therein be conveyed, the Gospel is but a dead
letter as well as the Law, and a deadly letter also: and so much for the causes
of this liberty or freedom which comes by Jesus Christ.

The third thing under this head, is the parts of this liberty or freedom,
which we shall consider two ways. First, Extensively, in their latitude^ And
secondly, Intensively, in the degrees of each of these parts in its latitude.
But that we may the better understand it, we must know that liberty is a
relative, and respects some bondage, some imprisoning or shutting up, from
which this liberty is a deliverance, ye shall go forth: and therefore to set
off the luster of this glorious liberty, it may not be amiss to run a parallel
between them. That there is such a bondage under which every poor creature
without Christ, is held, we shall at present presuppose, though afterward happily
I shall come to prove it: I would not here too far digress before we come to
speak of the parts of the bondage, to which the parts of liberty will be
opposite and correspondent. I shall say in a few words, something to the Author
of this Bondage and Tenure of it, and but a word or two.

For the Author of this bondage under which poor creatures are without Christ
altogether; and in part also many times when they are under Christ, and under
Grace.

First, Some part of it is to be ascribed to the Lord, so far forth as it is
merely vindictive, or an inflicting of a just penalty upon Sinners for sin, so
far we may ascribe it to God, as will more plainly appear in the following
Considerations. The Law Gal. 4. 24.
which genders to Bondage, it is his Law, and holy, and just and good, though
it gender to Bondage: nor will it follow, because we are delivered form it,
therefore it was an evil in it self, but only per accidens, by reason of our
corruption, and so the Spirit of Bondage which in some is vindictive, when he
binds and hampers a Sinner with the cords of his sin, happily never intending
that he shall see through those terrors to his comfort; this is from him, and
justly; or else if it be in order to a settlement, to a peace, to an Adoption,
a Sonship through Christ, as preparative to the receiving of Christ, this is
from him; and so several other parts of it are from him under this
Consideration.

Secondly, But so far forth as any part of it is sinful, there it is from
Satan, and from our own evil hearts: for darkness cannot come from the light,
nor can any thing unclean come from that which is altogether pure, no more then
a clean thing can proceed from an unclean, as the bondage under sin, which more
at large afterward we shall discuss.

Secondly, For the tenure: for being in bondage, we are in bondage to some
person properly; to some thing improperly, and by a kind of Prosopopeia we are
said to be in such a bondage; now there is some Tenure (as I may say) wherein
they do hold us in bondage, there are three or four tenures (if I may so call
them) whereby we are thus held under Bondage, until Jesus Christ come to set us
free. First, A Sale* Secondly, By Birth. Thirdly, By Captivity or Conquest.
Fourthly, By Tyranny and resignation of themselves up to such a vassallage: but
a word or two to each of them.

First then, There is a Bondage by Captivity, when People are taken Captives;
this is so common, there is none can be ignorant of it. What are the Turks
Gally-slaves but the prey of their piracies? all is fish that comes to the
net; so it is in this case; This is one Part of the Tenure, we are taken
captive by Satan even at his pleasure; Of whom a man is overcome, of the 2 Pet.
2. 16*
same is he brought in bondage; this is the military Law, the Prisoners were
ever the Conquerours slaves; we have seen it but too evidently with our own
eyes, we have born witness to it in our days, wherein there has been so much
leading into captivity, and so much complaining in our Land; So Satan he Psalm.
144. 14.
has overcome us in our first Parents, we were overcome, and ever since he
holds fast his hold he had of us; and though he let Sinners enjoy a little
chain sometimes, so that they are ready to think they are at liberty, yet alas
he takes them alive at his pleasure; 2 Timothy 2. 26.
you see a beast of prey sometimes so sportful as to play with the prey, and,
let it go a little, it runs, and thinks it is free; but alas all this while
it is under the command of the beast of prey; as Pharaoh would let Israel go,
so they would not go far, he fetches them in when he pleases.

Secondly, There is also a Bondage by Sale, as you know Joseph was sold into
Egypt for a servant; and nothing more ordinary then selling and buying of
servants; he is bought with thy money, says God to Abraham, Genesis 17. 12. and
13. (distinguishing of servants) he must needs be circumcised, whereby it
appears, they had a more absolute power over them, then they had over other
Servants bought of any stranger, which is not of thy seed; thy bondmen and thy
bond-maids shall be of the Heathen, not of thy brethren, Of them shall ye buy
bondmen and bond-maids, Levit. 25. 44. These were to be even as a Possession
to them, ver. 25. and their power was so absolute over them, that though they
smote them with the hand or a rod, so Exodus 21. 21.
that they died, if they continued a day or two before, they must not be
punished for it, for they were their money, which was somewhat an hard bondage
to them; truly brethren, thus it is, We are sold under sin, (as the Apostle
says) speaking of himself, who Romans 7. 14.
was not altogether freed from this bondage, he was sold under sin, being
carnal, (that is to say) in part, as in that first of the Corin^hians, They are
called carnal, that were as Babes in Christ; so far as sin prevailed, so far
the bondage did appear, he was sold in the first transgression. Now there is
another selling whereby a man does sell himself to commit wickedness, as you
know Ahab did. Paul did not now sell himself, but was under the former sale,
and in such a bondage he could by no means altogether 2 King. 21. 20.
free himself from; he could not shake off his chains and weights that did hang
upon him by reason of this bondage; but now Sinners, they sell themselves. Such
as Ahab, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? says he to Elijah: I have found
thee, because thou have sold thy self to work wickedness in the sight of the
Lord; and so the Israelites are said to sell themselves to do evil in the sight
of the Lord, making their Sons and Daughters pass through fire, etc. Now by
this Sale, the Sinner passes himself over into the power of him that buyeth
him, yet more and more fully. Quod venditur, transit in potestate ementis: The
Devil knew the meanest of his, the price he pays, a little pleasure of sin, a
little profit; he cares not how often there be a bargain between him and the
soul of a Sinner; a man that for a little pelf will venture and hazard his
soul, he shall have it, or else it shall cost the Devil a fall; I speak not of
Witches selling themselves to Satan, for the accomplishment of some lust, to
satisfy some discontent, but of every lew and wicked Sinner; he little knows
what he does, that goes on in a course of Sin; every new transgression and
satisfaction to the flesh is a new price, (as I may say) laid down in your
hands for your souls to become slaves to the Devil. O how many times has he
bought many of us! and have we sold our selves to do evil in the sight of the
Lord? the ambitious man for the satisfaction of his lust, sels himself to
commit wickedness; as the covetous you see in Ahab, to have his desire, would
not stick to murder, to suborn witnesses to swear falsely; the ambitious person
would not care to swim through a Sea of blood to the Throne, they are slaves to
the worst of Tyrants, a lust; it would make a man tremble to read the fearful
things that are done upon this account, specially by the Ottomans, the great
Turk, who rivits himself in the Imperial Throne, with the bones of his
murdered brethren, as one expresses it. O how dear a rate do men give, who
sell their precious souls for a spurt of pleasure, for the pleasures of sin for
a season, they are not always in season neither; or a little profit of sin, a
little unjust gain, they pay not twenty, nor an hundred years purchase, but if
the Lord do not intervene with the purchase of the blood of Jesus Christ, they
pay eternity for it, and when they have so sold their souls to commit
wickedness, what can they give, or what would they give in exchange for their
souls again? a world full of honors, and pleasures, and Mat. 16. 26.
profits then, alas, would be nothing to part with, if they might but have them
redeemed, when it is too late; this is another way whereby sinners come into
bondage.

Thirdly, By brith also there is a bondage; as you know the children of them
who were taken captives were captives, they were sold themselves, that were
sold, and with them their children, therefore such servants as the Israelites
bought with money, Genesis 14. 14.
how many so ever they did beget in their families, they were all servants and
bondmen; so Abraham had so many servants trained, born in his own house, 318.
I had servants born in mine house, says Solomon. The Israelites indeed, if
they did sell themselves through poverty, or became servants, they did continue
Eccl. 2. 7.
until the year of jubilee, but must not be ruled over with rigor, as they
might rule over strangers, nor must be kept as bondmen for ever; but the
strangers they might buy of them, and leave them as a possession for ever to
their children, that is to say, both them and their children; they might buy,
and so sell them again, and leave them to their children, and therefore all
born in such a condition were bond-servants; so we find in that place when our
Savior told them they should be free indeed, if the Son made Lev. 25. 46.
them free; why said they, We are Abraham's seed, and never were in bondage by
birth; we are free, not as the seed of the Canaanites, Ioh. 8. 33.
who were bondmen, and they never were in bondage to any, they were not sold
as servants; poor blind creatures could see no Ephesians. 2. 12.
further then a civil bondage or liberty. Now truly Brethren, thus we are all
of us bondmen and women by birth, being all strangers from the Commonwealth
of Israel, and Covenant of promises (as the Apostle speaks) they are the
children of the promise only, that are free. We are all the children of wrath
by nature, not a mothers child of us freeborn; if any by nature should have
been freeborn, surely the seed of Abrah^m according to the flesh; but our
Savior tells them their liberty was but imaginary; if the Son did make them
free, they should be free indeed; this is the third.

Fourthly, by tenure and usurpation there is a bondage also; as we see it in
the case of Israel in Egypt, they were bondmen in Egypt, and they made them
serve a hard bondage, it is called Exodus 1. 13.
the house of bondage; they made them serve with rigor, so says the text, in
all manner of service; the design of the King being to weary them out by
degrees, and yet to advantage himself by their service, while they were
wearying out, this was their wise dealing with them, lest they should be too
hard for them; and truly of this nature is the bondage wherein the people of
God themselves are in part, though the Devil have no title to them, the price
being paid for them to the justice of the Father, yet he as a tyrannical
^aylor, loath to let them go, and therefore he loads them with chains, lays
heavy temptations upon them, and sin rages to lose its servant, and therefore
tyrannizeth, and the Law in the members carries captive to the Law of sin, and
this is one great grief to the poor child of God, that though sin do not reign
in their mortal bodies, yet it tyrannizeth over them, and with a strong hand
many times holds them down, so as that they are not able to stir hand nor foot:
but more of this afterward.

Now for the parts of this bondage, with which the parts of that liberty or
freedom we are to speak of will run parallel: We shall devide this bondage into
these two general parts, it is either to sin, or else to the black
concomitants, which are very many; we shall particularize some of them, and
thereby our liberty will the more plainly appear.

First then for sin, it is clear we are in bondage to sin, either totally or in
part, all of us by nature altogether in bondage, for we are sold under sin; and
though it be true, that sin is only a privation of good, and disposition to
evil, and so properly cannot be said to rule over us, yet by a prosopopeia we
are said to be in bondage to it, therefore we are said to be sold under sin;
sold Romans 7. 14.
under it, and therefore in Scripture it is, that sin is called an old man,
corrupt according to deceitful lusts, and this old man it is Ephesians. 4. 22.
that has the poor sinner under his power, and rules him with subtilty. O
they are deceitful lusts, ^he counsels of sin, the fetches, and tricks, and
devices, depths and methods of a sinful heart, who knows Brethren? he
carries it so slily, that many think themselves 2 Pet. 2. 29.
at liberty, as freemen as any the world has, yea so free, as to promise to
others liberty, and yet themselves in the mean time are the servants of sin;
and not only so, but the^^ are Laws of sin which carry a strength with them,
and the poor creature under them must obey them; and these Laws are nothing
else but the wills of the flesh, as the Apostle calls them, an arbitray Ephesians. 2.
3.
government here begins and takes it rise. Hoc volo, sic jubeo, etc. says
the imperious person. If a sinner begin to question what reason there is in
such an act, he is prompted to sin, blows out the candle; hoc volo, etc. let
my will be a reason, I will have it so. So many lusts, so many wills, and is it
Romans 6. 17.
not a bondage to be under these? Ye were, says the Apostle, the servants of
sin, but now ye have obeyed from the heart the form of Doctrine delivered unto
you; and so in several other places: whosoever commits sin, says our
Savior, is the servant of sin. Ioh. 8. 34.
You talk of being Abraham's seed, and never being in bondage, this is nothing
to my purpose, I speak of a bondage to sin, and he that commits it is the
servant of it; he that works it industriously, is a drudge to his lusts, as
alas, how many of us are? and he that curiously works it is an Artist. O with
what art can some Romans 13. 14.
mon lie, and cheat, and cozen, and play the hypocrites! these are the servants
of sin. O when one fulfills the lusts of the flesh, and of the mind, makes
provision for the flesh to satisfy the lusts thereof! This man is a servant of
sin: the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, the pride of life, the love
of profits, the love of pleasures, and the love of pride, when men give
themselves up to satisfy these, study their lusts, how to fulfill them, this
is a bondage under sin with a witness.

Now blessed be the Lord, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
delivered us, as many as believe, from this bondage, so the Apostle breaks out
pathetically, Thanks be Romans 6. 17, 18.
to God that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart the
form of Doctrine delivered unto you; now says he; being made free from sin, ye
became the servants of righteousness; and this is set forth by our death to
sin; ye are dead, says the Apostle to the Col. and your life is hid with
Christ in God; now death Col. 3. 3. Job 3. 19.
puts an end to all bondage (...) as Job speaking of it, the small and great
are there in the grave, and the servant is free from his Master. A woman, says
the Apostle (speaking of sin, of the Law with respect to sin, as afterward we
shall speak somewhat) she is bound to her husband as long as he lives, but if
he be dead, then she is free. So it is in this case, death breaks all the iron
yoaks and brazen gates, therefore says the Apostle, he that is dead is freed
from Romans 6. 7.
sin; not as the vulgar and some read, is justified, as if our justification
and sanctification were confounded; for here the Apostle is speaking of our
Sanctification, or the death of sin, crucifying the old man, of being buried
with Christ in body, and so dead to sin; now says he, he that is dead, is free
from sin; the Con. is comprehended in the Antecedent, he is freed actually from
sin, Sin shall not have dominion over you, says the Apostle, no iniquity shall
have dominion over you. Thus believers are freed from sin, Romans 6. 14.
whereas before we were under a cruel bondage; you that have experience of this
liberty, what it is to be freed from your former lusts which you served,
foolish and hurtful lusts; the Lord teach you to prize it. 1 Timothy 6. 9.


But secondly, now for the Con. of this bondage to sin, there are many and very
dreadful, which every poor sinner is under, which are also as parts of this
bondage.

First then, hence it is that we are in bondage unto Satan, that we are under
his power, that we are in bondage by nature to him, as the Jailer, it is clear,
the Spirit that now rules in the Ephesians. 2. 2.
hearts of the children of disobedience: he rules there, sets up his throne
there; and service to such a Master cannot be a freedom, but a bondage, a cruel
one. A Master that delights now naturally in nothing but mischief; though it be
but to swine, yet he 2 Timothy 2. 26.
would do mischief, much more then to poor sinners; and therefore he is said to
lead captive poor creatures at his pleasure, to take them alive; and indeed, it
is the Devil that binds the pinching yoke upon us, his loins are laid upon the
back of a poor sinner, and his being the Tyrant, does help the former
prosopopeia, whereby bondage is ascribed to for, Zech. 1. 15. the heathen
helped forward; etc. Not as if sin would not work and keep the creature in
subjection, or were a dead Law of it self, and must have a Prince, a King to
put it into act; no, no, if there were no Devil to aggravate our bondage, we
should find the rage of lust very great, and their commands very peremptory,
but yet however he is not idle, he stirs up, and endeavors to enrage our
lusts more and more; the Devil stirred up David to number the people: Why alas,
David had that pride and fleshly confidence in him that was ready enough to
provoke him to it, but the Devil helped it forward, his concurrence with sin
makes it the more powerful; as the Spirit of the Lord acting our graces, so
does the Devil also, though with some difference, act our corruption: was it
not the Devil that filled Ananias and Saphira Acts 5.
their hearts? he had filled them as his throne, and so had laid the commands
of sin, of their lust, of their carnal fears, that they were overborn by them:
and so he entered into Judas after the Luke 22. 3.
sop: he came to our Savior, and he found nothing in him, and yet he would vex
him with his temptations notwithstanding: but alas for us, he can come within
us, he has matter enough to work upon, and he can come within us to the very
fancy, and there secretly work: now the Saints, they are delivered from this
Con. which is a part of the bondage also; he rules no more in them, for they
are not the children of disobedience; our Savior saw when the Gospel went
forth to be preached, Satan falling like lightening from heaven, he came down
with a witness, Luke 10. 18.
was dethroned, cast out: the strong man armed holds all in quiet possession,
that is to say, Satan holds the heart of poor sinners quietly, while he has
his armor, their ignorance, and this carnal reasonings, and corrupt
affections, and stubborn wills, while Luk 11. 21, 22.
these are his, he is safe enough; but now let the Lord Jesus come and take
away the armor, change the heart of a poor creature, and then alas, he is
spoiled of all; therefore he is said to spoil principalities and powers, and to
make an open show of them. So that he has led captive; taking captivity
actively or passively: Col. 2. 15.
actively, he has led him that did lead his people captive, now Ephesians. 4. 8.
captive himself: or else passively, those were led captive by Satan; now the
Lord Jesus has captivated them to himself, brought them under his own
dominion. Satan cannot now any more challenge them as his own, nor rule over
them as his slaves, and this is another piece of this liberty, to go forth of
the paw of this Lion, the jaws of this rouring Lion, that goes about seeking
whom he may devour.

Secondly, another part of this bondage is the guilt of sin, which is an
obnoxiousness to the wrath and displeasure of God, Joh 3. 18, 36.
whether the creature ^eeth it, or sees it not, he is under condemnation, his
guilt is the Obligation which binds him over to answer it at the great day of
Jesus Christ, as you see offenders are bound over to answer it at the Assizes
or Sessions; this is guilts work in respect of the soul; now we look upon a
guilty person that is bound over as a prisoner, if he go under bayl he is under
a bondage by reason of this guilt. So it is here, the Law of God Gal. 3. 23.
is that which shuts up a sinner, as it is in that place of the Apostle; so
that we are, as I may say, in prison; and a man under guilt, whether he sleep,
or whether he wake, he is a guilty person and under bondage; specially, if it
proceed so far as to a condemnation, as it is in this case, every unbeliever is
condemned already in the Court of Scripture; for God does manage in this
liberty concernments of our souls by a Law, by a Law he acquitteth or
condemns, and so unbelievers are under this bondage also; from this now every
child of God is set free, there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, their guilt is done away, Romans 8. 1.
their surety has satisfied justice, has paid the debt, laid down the price,
and therefore all being cleared, the poor creature is set free from that part
of his bondage. Is not this an unspeakable freedom to have all the guilt of our
sins that ever we commtited taken away? but this is but the second.

Thirdly, another Con(...) is this, the darkness which from sin arises, and
is, as I may say, chains upon the soul, and no small part of this bondage;
Dungeons you know are usually dark places, and therefore darkness is put for
the prison, sometimes, as a Synonyma, to bring out the prisoners out of prison,
in that place of Isaiah, and them that sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse;
and so again, that thou may say to the prisoners, go Isa. 40. 7.
forth; and to them that are in darkness, show your selves: The darkness you
know imprisoned them in Egypt, no man stirred out of his place, none went forth
nor came in by reason of the darkness; and so the night imprisoneth men,
shuts up their works and employments, night comes when no man can work,
which is the night of darkness, by removing the Gospel; or else the night of
death: Now when the Sun of righteousness arises upon a soul, he shall go forth
of this darkness or prison.

Here it will be enquired what is meant by this darkness, which is a part of
this bondage. First, by darkness, I mean a state of ignorance; gross darkness
covers the earth, says the Prophet; ye were sometimes darkness, but now are
ye light in the Lord; that is to say, so dark as that nothing but the abstract
would Ephesians. 5. 8.
suffice to set forth their condition. Now truly, ignorance may well be looked
upon as a bondage, for it is the very beginning, the principal of all our
bondage, and therefore when the Lord speaks of delivering a poor sinner from
the power of sin, he says, who has delivered us from the power of darkness,
and translated us Col. 1. 13.
into the Kingdom of his dear Son: mind you, from the power of darkness,
darkness is the power of Satan, he is the Prince of the power of darkness, as
some render that place: were it not that sinners are blind-folded, do you think
they would be led by Ephesians 2. 2.
Satan into so many horrid things? O if they had known, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory; Father forgive them, they know not what they do.
Alas, the Panther hides his head when he allureth the beasts, the sweetness of
his smell, or beauty of his Luke 23. 34.
skin, only the Drag is said to fly from him, Isid. li. 12. 2. See Mead upon
Revel. p. 2. p. 52. Alas, they see not the head, which is ready to affright
them and devour them; and not only is it the ground of this bondage, but of all
the rest; how comes it to pass that poor souls are plunged into such desperate
gulfs of despairing, and such breaking bondage in that kind, but because they
are held in ignorance, they do not come to know the Father and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent, he keeps them in ignorance of the John 17.
promises, the sweet and precious promises of Jesus Christ. O dear friends, it
is impossible, were it not for our ignorance of that love of God in Jesus
Christ, and that riches, exceeding riches of grace that is in him, and his
thoughts that are above our thoughts, that there should be so many cloudings,
such fearful plunges as many poor souls are put unto, yea many times even after
they are once delivered from them; why now I say, when the Lord Jesus comes,
arises upon a soul as the Sun of righteousness, he dispels this ignorance,
discovers sin in its own colors, and indeed worse it cannot be set forth in;
therefore the Apostle says, that sin might appear to be sin; and then he opens
the treasuries Romans 7. 13.
of the Promises of the Covenant of Grace, to let a poor sinner see there is
enough for him there: though his sins be great, yet mercy is transcendantly
greater: if he have mountains to be covered, the Lord has a sea to swallow
them up; if multitudes of sin, there is multitude of mercies: there is love,
which will cover a multitude; and so by discovering himself thus, and our
selves to our selves, he by degrees sets the creature at Liberty from those
fearful apprehensions of God, and from that delight in sin, which formerly he
had taken; so that now no longer will he serve it. But a little more* plainly,
take a Scripture or two for it, in that of Isaiah, To proclaim liberty to the
captives, the opening of the prison to them that are bound; the opening of
Isal. 61. 1.
the prison, some read it so, and so do our Translators, though it is
acknowledged by the learned among us, that the latter is no where else used in
this sense for the prison, nor for the prey, as some others use it; and
therefore some do take the word to be but one, and render it om^im^do
apertionem, so that the doubling of the Letters here are Emphatical, and by way
of (...), though then Manaph here remains as a difficulty, for words so
doubled use not to be so joined together: so that some would have it here
nothing else, but a very large opening of their eyes, and say that it is used
most properly, if not constantly, of the opening of the eyes: and surely this
is the way of Gods delivering his Captives, and agreeable to the text here; the
Sun arising in the morning opens the eyes, sets the senses at liberty from
Isal. 42. 7.
that prison of darkness they were in in the night; and elsewhere it is
manifest in that of Luke 4. 18. To preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind: and again the Psalmist, The Lord loses the
Prisoners, he opens the eyes of the Psalm. 146. 8.
blind; therefore Paul was sent to open the eyes of the blind, and turn them
from the power of Satan to God, and from darkness Act. 26. 8.
to light; for we must know that this bondage is of the soul, the faculties
thereof, and chiefly the will: Now the Lord when he comes to deliver us,
deals with us as with men; and therefore, first opens the eyes of the mind,
and draws us with the cords of a man, with arguments over-powring our reason,
and then, with the cords of love, sweetly thereby inclining our hearts, and
bowing our wills, and then the poor creature comeeth forth out of this bondage;
before we see we are in prison, or see the loathsomness of it, the darkness of
it, we are in love with it, and will not go forth.

But Secondly, This darkness comprehends another, and that is Error, or
rather this arises from the other, and therefore we shall speak to it apart,
Ye err, not knowing the Scripture, nor the Matthew. 22. 1^.
power of God; he says not, ye err, not knowing immediate Revelations, but not
knowing the Scripture; for there the light is in the Lanthorn, if we will
behold it; now this error, of what kind it will be, it is a snare of the Devil,
and therefore it is a bondage. The Apostle there speaks of Heretical Doctrine,
held by such as do perversely oppose themselves against the Ministers of Jesus
Christ, who hold out the truth as it is in Jesus. He shows how Timothy is to
carry himself to them, in meekness, instructing them that oppose themselves; if
God peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledgement of the
truth; Repentance is a turning from sin to God, and to the contrary 2 Timothy 2.
2(...)
Grace or Virtue, and that is the acknowledgement of the truth; therefore their
sin was some corruption of the truth, and that they may recover themselves out
of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will, out of the
snare of the devil; a sad snare it is: if the devil can but get so far within a
man as to dazzle his eyes, to blind them, he may lead them whither he will; if
he can but corrupt their judgment, especially in fundamentals or practicals,
then they are his own, they are fast enough, he carries them captive, takes
them alive even at his pleasure. Now our liberty from this part of bondage also
is by the arising of Ioh. 16. 13. Ioh. 1. 2, 20.
the Sun of righteousness upon us; the Spirit makes us free, as he is a spirit
leading his people into the truth; not only the notion, but the practice of it
also; and we have an anointing, whereby we know all things, says the Apostle,
speaking of Antichrist: it is needle^s for me to speak to you of him, you have
an anointing will teach you to avoid th^se his errors: O happy is that soul,
that has such a Guide! such a Leader to lead him forth out of prison; even as
the Angel went before Peter, else between sleep and Acts 12. 18.
wake, hope and fear, he might happily have mist his way. So the Lord Jesus
comes and gives his Spirit, and bids the soul go forth: alas, whether should
they go? they know not the way, Ioh. 14. 6.
as Thomas said; why says he, ^ollow me, I will lead you, as he in his word
has therein revealed himself, and makes it out by his Spirit to his people.

Fifthly, There is another part of bondage, under a slavish obedience, that is
to say, such an obedience to the Law of God, as nothing but a slavish fear is
the principle of it; and truly, this puts on men to do many things; they know
it is written, Cursed is Gal. 3. 10.
he that continues not in every thing that is written in the book of the Law
to do it: Now this sticks with the poor soul, God requires me to love him with
all my heart, with all my soul, with all my strength; and if I do not, I am
cursed; therefore now he buckles a little to it, as far as such terrors will
carry him; but alas, he is not able to do it; like a slave that does his task,
while his Master stands over him with a rod; or because he is sure to be
beaten, if he do it not; not out of any love to the Master, nor to his service
at all, what a grievous bondage is this? Let but any Apprentice, that has a
hard Master, whom he serves merely out of fear, as the Egyptians did their
task, because if they did them not, they must be beaten: and this makes the
yoke very heavy and uneasy, also it pincheth exceedingly. Now when the Lord
Jesus comes to a soul, he breaks this yoke, the Law Gal. 4. 24. and 3. 13.
genders to bondage; the curse of it has the very seeds of bondage in it: Now
I say when the Lord Jesus comes, arises upon a soul, lets him see that he
has undertaken for him, not only the curse of the Law, being made a curse, but
has set his love upon him, has paid all the debt, will take him to be his
son, no more as a servant; O now when the soul begins to be sensible his
condition is changed, that he is a Son, and now has not a cruel hard Master to
serve, but a Father that will pity and spare where he falls short of his
duty, let him do his best; this does much facilitate the work, makes the yoke
easy, and the burden Mat. 11. 28.
light, his Commandments are no more so grievous to the soul, as they were
before: Now the Law of Christ is a perfect Law of Liberty to him; before it was
a Law gendring bondage; for alas, before it was only preached to the ear, and
that under the Iam. 1. 25.
penalty of such a curse, now it is written in the heart; now there is an echo
in the soul resounding, Thy will Lord will I do, Isal. 40.
when he speaks any thing; as the Law of love was upon the heart of Christ, in
the work of our Redemption; now his Law is in our hearts, and therefore we
delight to do his will in some measure, I delight in the Law of God after the
inward man, as the Romans 7. 22.
Apostle says; as a Servant it may be for a while under his Master hardly
used, yet afterward he changes his manner of dealing with him, offers him
great immunities, it may be, to be of a Servant, Son in Law to the King: O now
the Servant will be bored, he will now become a willing servant, and not be
dragged to obedience by terrors and fears any more, but willingly yields up
his members weapons of righteousness to holiness: now the Psalm. 40. 6. Exodus
21. 5. and 6. Romans 6. 19. Psalm 110. Romans 6. 17.
service is hearty and free; his people shall be a willing people in the day of
his power: O says the Apostle, Ye were the servants of sin, but now thanks be
to God, ye have from the heart obeyed the form of doctrine delivered to you:
from the heart, that is to say, out of love, it cannot else well be from the
heart; for whom we dread with a slavish fear, we hate, and while the soul looks
upon God, as such a Judge, as a cruel Master, and his Law a cruel, bloody Law,
nothing but blood and ruin to them that come not up unto it, there is a hatred
of God, it is impossible to love him, or his service; and then the service such
a man does, it is not from the heart; a man may serve sin, and yet do some
service to God out of a slavish fear, as most unbelievers do; therefore they
pray, and therefore they read, and therefore they do many things, and yet serve
sin; but they never obey from the heart, until this work be done, the Law of
love be written in their souls: now you shall go forth, you shall obey no more
out of fear, but out of love: this is a Fifth.

Sixthly, From the terrors and fears before a man's conversion, which usually
seize upon the creature, in order to it; for truly, before the Lord has to do
with our hearts, we are so dead asleep with the opium of sin, that there must
be somewhat to rouse us, to awaken us; usually there is a spirit of bondage,
which works fear and dread, and terror in the soul, that is to say, when the
Spirit of Christ, breathing in the Commandment, makes sin appear to be sin,
exceeding sinful, and opens some of the terrors which sin does breed in it,
witnesses to the poor creature, that he is in a state of condemnation, that
there is no way but one with Romans 8. 15.
him: O now the soul begins to be amazed, and startled, and knows not what
to do! this runs him to the heart: he had many afflictions and troubles in the
flesh before, never any came so near as this; and no marvel, because the
Spirit* of Jesus Christ has wounded him at the very heart. Brethren, the Law
of God is, as I may say, an Habeas Corpus, or rather Animam, apprehends, or
claps up a soul, as I may say, puts him in prison; and therefore the Apostle
uses that expression; mind you, the Scripture has concluded all under sin
(...) has shut us up together, all concluded under one prison* in one dungeon,
that Gal. 3. 23.
the promise, which is of Faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to them that
believe; but before Faith came, we were kept under the Law: I pray you mind
it, we were kept as in a Garrison, as the Learned interpret it, (...); and
again, (...), being shut up together unto the Faith, which should afterward be
revealed: it is just as it is with a Prince, he proclaims Pardon to all his
Rebellious Subjects, but withal he sends out his Messengers, his
Pursuivants, to apprehend, throw in prison, keep under Bolts and Shakles as
many of them as he can apprehend; this is not contrary to his mercy, nor
proclamation of Pardon, but in order to it, subordinate to it, that so his
Pardon, offered might be accepted, they might sue for it: So it is here, the
Law does thus shut up a soul, as I may say; as when there is an Highway open
for a man to walk in, but he will go another way, there it is hedged up; at
last he is so hedged in, he cannot tell which way in the world to get out
again: O then! if he could but find the open way, he would go in it: So it is
in this case, the Lord makes this terror and this bondage a means to their
enlargement. Ah blessed Prison! that is only to make poor creatures willing to
be at liberty; well, now this the Lord Jesus when he comes and reveals
himself to a soul, he brings him out of these labyrinths of fears and terrors;
lets the poor creature see, that himself is the way, and the only way; he
has undertaken the work for his people, only if they will believe, though they
have no strength in them to do any thing, nor to extricate themselves from the
difficulties they find themselves in, by reason they cannot fulfill the Law; yet
he is the mighty one upon whom help is laid, and withal lets them understand
how his bowels do yern over them, and how his heart is open, ready to enlarge
them; and so persuades them to close with him; and then they go forth when
faith comes; so Christ is the end of the Law, and the ^aw a Schoolmaster to
bring us to Christ: But that is but the Sixth.

Seventhly, Another part of this bondage, is those after-claps of fears and
terrors, that after Christ has been revealed to, and in a soul, may befall
the creature; alas, you find it so, they may be clapped up afterward in the pit
of noise, the horrible pit, and be in the deeps, and in darkness; and like
Jeremiahs dungeon, Psalm. 40. 2.
sink in the mire, where there is no standing, they feel no bottom of their
misery, their fears are overwhelming; or like Jonahs Psalm. 88. 6.
Whales belly, they are in the belly of hell, and all the waves and billows of
God go over them: O this is sore bondage! however it be true, that the Spirit
of God is never any more a spirit of bondage to them, to witness to them they
are children of wrath Romans 8. 16.
afterward, yet he does not say but they may have bondage again; and all fear
has torment, and is bondage to the Spirit, it does fetter it, and shut up and
contract the spirits exceedingly. Now I say, the darkness of a man's own heart,
which does naturally gender, fear, and Satan to help, and the frowns of Gods
displeasure for the present, though he do not witness any more that a man is a
child of eternal wrath and displeasure, these may bring the poor creature into
sad perplexities; Well, yet the Spirit of the Lord Jesus when he comes, brings
also liberty with him from this bondage; David will tell you so; and Heman will
tell you so: do but consider what conditions they were in? how came they to be
delivered? O lift up the light of thy countena nce upon me; Psalm. 4. 15.
Son of God arise upon me, shine upon my soul, and then I shall be healed. O
restore to me the joy of thy salvation, make me* to hear joy and gladness, etc.
Well, the Promise does extend even to this bondage also, and to this may we
refer the next: I will speak of it distinctly.

Eighthly, There is another Bondage, and that is the fears of death and
judgment, whereby many a poor creature is kept in Bondage all the days of
their lives; (as the Apostle says in that to the Hebrews) to which I will
speak a few words; He came; (says the Text) and took part of flesh and blood,
that through death be might destroy him that has the power of death (that is
to Heb. 2. 14.
say, the Devil) and deliver them that through fear of death were all their
lifetime subject to Bondage. Brethren, death it self is a terrible thing, the
Simplex could say, but hardly could he tell the reason of it; for them that
have no fear of God before their eyes, but have put out the eye of reason, and
live like Beasts, giving up themselves to commit wickedness with greediness,
though while they can keep off the apprehensions of death, they may go on
merrily, but when that seizes upon them, it marrs their mirth, it makes a
change in their faces, and they are not: now truly death is not so terrible in
it self considered, but that the stoutness of a man's spirit, specially where
there is no other consideration of it, he may overcome it, and live above the
fears of it, as the Heathens some of them did; but now a man that knows
indeed what death is, not only a dissolution of the union between the soul and
body, taking down this mouldring Tabernacle, but a Serpent with a sting it is,
where 1 Cor. 1. 15. 5, 6.
sin and guilt lies upon the soul; it is the beginning of sorrows, the arrest
of the soul to judgment to come, to receive its doom for all its bloody evils
he has been guilty of. The wordling is not willing to give up his soul, O he
knows, he can never answer for his wasting of his spirits, and spending his
time to lay up treasure here, and in the mean time neglecting his soul and
Jesus Christ, and tenders of Grace; he knows this well enough, and therefore
he will not yield up his Spirit, they shall take it from him, as it is in the
Parable; This night shall thy soul be taken from thee: and so for any other
sin; and now I say this makes death Luke 12. 20.
terrible, and by reason of these fears of death, men that have any sight or
sense of their condition, they are in Bondage all their lives long, yea, even
the people of God themselves are in some measure under this bondage; and
according to the measure of the discovery of Christ to them, and the power of
faith in them, is this fear, and this bondage broken, and the Lord Jesus came
for this end, to deliver them: alas, before his coming the Saints may be
specially meant here, who had indeed the knowledge of Christ to be crucified
for Sinners, and beheld him crucified, though darkly in the sacrifices, etc.
and in the promise from the foundation of the world, but yet notwithstanding
they had not that confidence usually, but there was more room for doubtings and
fears, because they died still without the accomplishing of that promise; now
though such as had an extraordinary measure of faith and a prophetical spirit,
might see this clearly, and so it might raise them much what above this
bondage, yet ordinarily I believe it was not so, that they had such clear
conviction of the freeness of grace, and the abundance and riches of it in
Jesus Christ, and therefore it did not so f^lly quiet their Spirits in respect
of fears of death and judgment, they did not so clearly see the sting plucked
out; therefore the Apostle says, those Sacrifices, though they did hold out
Christ, could not make the Heb. 10. 1. and 14.
comers thereunto perfect, and therefore they were often repeated; But now the
Lord Jesus he has by once offering, for ever perfected, completed their
salvation, and therefore you shall find, that the Apostle and others do so
triumph over death, and the grave, and sin, as we hardly find any before the
coming of 1 Cor. 15. 56.
Christ; and it must needs be so, because now the Spirit, which is the liberty
of the Saints was poured out in a greater measure, and therefore we may
understand this of a general state of the Saints before the coming of Christ;
the arising of this Sun of righteousness indeed, has shone into the very
chambers of death themselves, to let us see tha^ there is not that real terror
in it, that otherwise, except himself had gone through it, and broken the bars
of it, and plucked out the sting, and sanctified it as a passage to our Glory as
well as to his own, we should still have been in as great bondage as they were
in this respect, and therefore Simeon says, Lord, now let thou thy servant
depart in peace according to thy word: now he had embraced the Lord Luke 2. 29.
Christ not only in his bodily arms, but had a clearer discovery also of him to
his soul doubtless: and the sense may help faith also.

But then secondly, According to the measure of the faith of his people is the
degree of their liberty from this bondage; alas, it is terrible to many of us,
yea, such as do believe; but their faith is weak, and the persuasions of sense
are strong, and hold down the soul many times, but the Lord Jesus came to
deliver his people also from this bondage, and according to the degrees of his
manifesting himselfto the soul, will the soul go forth from these fears: and
though Aristotle died doubtful whither he should go, and yet cried out, Ens
entium, and causa causarum miserere mei; Yet the Apostle, and those that
attained that pitch, to know that when our tabernacles are dissolved, we have
an house eternal in the heavens: to know, the sting of death, and victory of
the grave is swallowed up by Jesus 2 Cor. 5. 1.
Christ, it left its sting in his side; to know that when we are dissolved, we
shall be with Christ; and know how much better that will be to the soul, that
is well studied in these things, and grown strong in the faith that is in
Jesus, he will desire to be dissolved and to be with Jesus; O here is a going
forth now, a liberty and freedom indeed, by the arising of the Sun of Phil. 1.
23.
Righteousness upon us.

Ninthly, A freedom or liberty from the Govenant of works; What says the Law?
Do this and live: continue in every thing that is written; now when the soul
comes to see how spirittual the Law is, and how earnal he is, and sold under
sin, that it binds not only the thoughts, but the desires of the heart, that
there must not be so much as a vain thought pass through his soul, but if there
do, this Covenant knows no mercy; alas, this keeps the poor creature under
much bondage, and trouble, and doubting concerning his condition; now we must
know that this is not a bondage of Gods putting upon us, (though he gave us the
Law) but of our own making; the Lord gave the Law with Evangelical purposes, it
was added because of transgression; it was added, that the Covenant of Grace,
that it might convince poor creatures of their condition by s^n, and not to be
their Savior, or a Covenant of life to them; When the Commandment came, sin
revived, and I died: (says the Apostle) Gal 3. 19.
that is the work of it indeed; but now we would needs make it to be a Covenant
of works, and look upon it so: and therefore do what we did in obedience to
this Law as for life, expecting to be saved by our own works: and so the
Hebrews, the Jews to whom that Law was first given: we see, how they would not
submit, they would not stoop to have this yoke taken off from them, they would
not submit to the righteousness of Ged, but would have a righteousness of their
own; they had two strings to their bow, and as long as either of them would
hold, they would not Ioh. 8. 32. Romans 10. 1, 2.
yield to be righteous by the righteousness of God in Christ: the one was their
freedom by Birth, They were the seed of Abraham, and not the seed of the
Bondwoman, and therefore what need they care for this liberty: the other was
their own works, they made account their own penny was good silver enough,
though the Lord knows it was but reprobate silver, they went about to
establish their own righteousness, they would be justified by a Covenant of
works. And so there were some that came, and endeavored to turn aside the
Galathians to another Gospel, by teaching them they should again put their
necks under this yoke, not only of Ceremonies, though that be one thing to the
Jews, if not to the Gentiles, that never were under it; but it is the Law, the
Moral Law, as a Covenant of Works, else to what end does he mention the curse
therein: And if ye be justified by the Law, Christ shall not profit you, you
are fallen from the Doctrine of Grace. Well now, the Lord Jesus, when he is
revealed to a soul, delivers him from this: though I must tell you, it is an
harder matter to get clearly off it, then many do imagine; and even the people
of God themselves shall find, that too often they are turned aside to the
bondwoman from the free, from the Covenant of Grace to a Covenant of Works.
Again, from the Law as provoking, for that is the Bondage chiefly the Apostle
speaks of: Romans 7. But the more clearly and fully the Grace which is in Christ,
is revealed to us, with the greater power he arises upon us, the more fully
are we set free from it. Here we might discuss the question, how far we are
delivered from the Law, and how far by Jesus Christ? I will rather reserve that
to another place, and proceed to conclude this part.

Tenthly, There is a kind of bondage the people of God are under, even that
weakness, and straitness, and deadness of heart toward God: you know that
sickness does weaken a man exceedingly, in so much that he can scarce go upon
his legs, he is a prisoner a great while under that weakness, from all action
to purpose; let but a poor prisoner be under hardship a while in the prison,
and how feeble will he be, and scarce worth the ground he goes upon? a while
longer he is a prisoner under that weakness, so it is here; therefore says the
Psalmist, Then Psalm. 119. 32.
will I run the ways of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart. Now
the Lord Jesus when he comes in with pardon, speaking peace, smiling upon the
soul, filling the heart with joy unspeakable, this joy of the Lord is the
strength of the soul, he goes forth, even as a man to his labor in the
morning when the Sun arises, that drousiness, heaviness, deadness under which
he was a prisoner before, being now removed.

Eleventhly, There is a liberty and freedom also from outward afflictions, for
these are also an appendix of the Law, a part of the execution of it; and
therefore the Lord does set his people free from the fear of these, before they
come, which is a kind of bondage upon them. Secondly, From the presence of them
when they are come. Or Thirdly, From the evil of them, the pinching, and
wringing, and galling of the yoke.

First, In respect of the fear of them, They shall go forth: he speaks here
plainly to the believing Jews, they were afraid of the judgments of God in the
threatening while they did but hang over their heads, and they were in a kind of
prison, or bondage by reason of this fear; Well says the Lord, Fear not, you
shall go forth, the Sun of righteousness shall arise upon you. Job was afraid
of his sorrows: take and compare Job the nonesuch in the East, a most eminent
Saint, and Paul in the New Testament: and the Job 9, 28.
one you find; he is afraid of his sorrows, Paul he glories in his
tribulations, you never hear him complaining of his sufferings, no nor feared
them, he knew that bonds and imprisonments did abide him in every City, but he
cared not for any of these things, he Acts 20. 23.
had a richer discovrey of the Grace of God in Christ, then Job had, and
clearer it is like; and therefore this set him free in a great measure from
them: and indeed his soul that knows the things that are freely given him in
Christ, knows now that he is his Father, and what ever shall befall him, it
shall turn to his good, what need he much to fear.

Secondly, They shall go out from the presence of them, this the Lord does many
times for his people what though the day of the Lord burn like an oven, and
burn up the chaff and stubble, and devour them root and branch, I will be an
hiding place to you, says the Lord, You that fear my name indeed, and tremble
at my word: O the Sun of righteousness shall arise upon you, and by virtue of
his death ye shall be delivered as the Jews were in Egypt, By the sprinkling of
the blood of the Passover upon the Posts of the Doors, which did represent and
typifie the blood of Jesus Christ: Exodus 1^. 13.
and in that place of Z^ch. Mark you, says the Lord, concerning his peoples
Deliverance out of Babylon, a type of spiritual deliverance Zech. 9. 11.
and freedom of his people: as for thee also by the blood of the Covenant, I
have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the Pit wherein there is no water; this is
done by virtue of the Covenant of Grace, whereby this freedom and going forth
is made out to Believers, therefore you may observe, when the Lord comes to
deliver Israel out of Egypt, he ushers it in thus. I remember my Covenant: the
Exodus 6. 5.
difference between the deliverances of Israel and other people are, the one is
a Covenant mercy, the other a common mercy merely. Well now says the Lord, ye
shall go forth of the burning, even as the children in the Furnace, it burned,
but they escaped, the Lord Jesus was with them, so shall ye go forth; and the
Lord did provide a little Zoar for his people in the destruction of Jerusalem,
many of them escaped to Pella as the story goes, a little Town beyond Jordan;
and so the Lord does seal the 144000. before he brings those bloody calamities
upon the earth, Rev. 7.
the persecuting world, and those in the ninth of Ezekiel, O who would not be
in Covenant with God! they shall go forth.

Or thirdly, They shall be freed from the destroying evil, the hardening evil
of affliction, which is a bondage, and a sore one too, being bound in
affliction and iron; and so Job in the 13. chapter Psalm. 107. 10.
ver. 27. God writes bitter things against him, and puts his feet in the
stocks, and all his affliction together is called Jobs captivity; he was, as I
may say, resigned up to the pleasure of Satan for a while, who led him from one
affliction to another, but the Lord brought him out, and brought him off
without the evil, the Devil expected that he should curse him and dye, curse
him to his Job 1. 11.
face: now I say, the Lord makes his people go forth, brings them through; and
not only so, but without any of the hurt seizing upon them. Sinners are the
harder for being in the fire, but they are melted, as very a stone as Pharaoh
was, he began to burn in the fire, and be hot, and a man would have thought his
heart had given, but it was a stone still; but his people came out melted,
refined with this Epiphonema to all their afflictions. O it was good for me, I
could not have been without it, much of my dross Psalm. 119. 71.
is gone by it; and thus the Lord makes his people go forth; ^e shall go forth.

Twelfthly, There is one more, and that is the yoke of Ceremonies and
traditions of men, I will put them both together; the Ceremonies were a yoke
you know, circumcision was a hard service, to draw blood of their children at
eight days old, their journeys to their feasts at Jerusalem, their offerings
and oblations, they were very chargeable, insomuch that they grew weary of
them, and snuffed at them, etc. And for the Traditions of men, they are a
grievous burden where their Doctrines are taught and received; Mal. 1. 13.
the Apostle comprehends both-under that word, the rudiments of the world,
whereunto he would not have them be brought in Col. 2. 8, 20.
bondage again, the difference of meats and drinks, etc. the Lord Jesus has
let us loose from those observations, and therefore it is a desperate doctrine,
a doctrine of Devils, or at least of them that speak lies in hypocrisy, to
forbid to marry, and commanding 1 Timothy 4. 2, 3.
to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving; and blessed be his name, that by the rising of the Sun of
righteousness among us, he has brought us out from this bondage generally: and
if he would be pleased to shine among the poor ignorant Papists, that they
might but come to the knowledge of his will, doubtless this would be quickly
shakt off with them also, but you have the parts of this liberty.

For the degrees of it, we must know this, that it is not in the same degree to
every believer, you have already heard, how that before Christ's coming it was
not in such power as since; Ye shall go forth, has been accomplished in many
respects since the appearing of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the more
faith and the clearer sight we have of Jesus Christ, with the greater power,
and splendour, and glory he shines upon us, the more of the riches of his grace
we come to apprehend, the more fully and perfectly to rest upon that grace, the
more shall we find that all these bondages shall be broken we have been
speaking to; but thus much for the two things, which is, what this liberty is.

Which are the arguments for the further confirmation of the 3.
Doctrine, Where the Lord Jesus arises upon a soul, there is liberty and
enlargement.

First, from the very nature of that gift of grace, the arising of the Sun of
righteousness upon them, what is this but the giving of himself unto a soul,
revealing himself in the soul, as the Gal. 1. 16.
Apostle speaks, it pleased the Father to reveal his son in me, by which means
that darkness and terror is taken away in great measure; Christ is all in all:
the bondage you heard before, it is Col. 3. 11.
either sin, or the sad effects of sin; the revelation of Christ answerably, is
either for holiness, or else by joy and comfort, wherein he meets with both
the other, the guilt, the bondage he takes away, to that end himself was made
sin, that knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; it is the power of
Satan, him he overcame; yet the power of sin that is broken also, sin shall not
have dominion over you, etc. If it be terrors, fears, whatsoever, our blessed
Savior where he makes himself manifest to a soul; is enough to take away all,
but this you have in effect had before, therefore no more of it here; he adopts
us all, Joh. 8. 36. (...), was used in some Cities in Greece, as Grot. notes:

Secondly, another Argument shall be this, that they might serve him, therefore
they shall go forth; while a man is under bondage he is at the command of such
as he is in bondage unto, and therefore cannot serve another Master whatsoever;
this specially respects that part of the bondage which concerns sin and
Satan: when Satan had filled Ananias heart, could he obey Acts 5. 1 King. 21.
the will of Christ? No, no more could Ahab that had sold himself to commit
wickedness; it is impossible for a man to be a slave of sin, and a servant of
Christ at the same time. I speak not what a man may do for an act or two, but a
man that does work sin, Ioh. 8.
labor it, hammer it in his brain, forge it there, art it and pollish it, and
with great dexterity, for such a man to serve Christ, ye cannot serve God and
Mammon, says our Savior, mentioning one lust, they are contrary one to
another; When a man does Mat. 6. 24.
wickedness with both hands earnestly, there is never a hand left for Christ's
service; that is complete service indeed, when it is from the heart, as seems
by that opposition, thanks be to God, Mic. 7. 3. Romans 6. 17.
that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart the form
of Doctrine. So that the heart is the main thing, if that be gone after sin, we
cannot serve the Lord Jesus heartily; and then for the carcass, the lip, the
eye, the tongue, he matters it not; therefore first, the Marriage-yoak must be
broken between the soul and sin, before they can be married to another, even to
the Lord Christ to serve him, ye are become dead to the Law, that, ye might be
married to another; when ye were the servants of sin, ye Romans 7. 4.
were free from righteousness; mind you, if under the command of sin, you are
free from righteousness, it has no commanding Chap. 6. 20.
power over you at all; and if a man be under the commanding power of Christ*
there sin has not the command of him, we must be dead to sin, and so free from
sin, as the Apostle says, he Romans 6. 7.
that is dead, is free from sin, or else we cannot be alive to God to serve
him. Brethren, I know that every man would be thought a servant of Christ, and
we look upon him as the offscouring of the world, and not worthy to live among
men, that would not serve the Lord; poor creatures, while we are under the
command of sin it cannot be, when a man yields his members instruments Romans
6. 19.
of unrighteousness to unholiness, and yet pretends to be a servant of Christ.
What is this but a mockery? but be not deceived, God is not mocked: would you
not take this to be a mockery, if one come and tells you, O Sir, I will be your
servant if you will give me this or that reward, but you must give me leave to
do all the service I can to your enemy, you shall have the name of my service,
but your enemy shall have the reality of it: is not this a mockery?

Thirdly, That their services may be more cheerful, therefore he sets them
free from their bondage, and this respects that part of bondage which
concerns the Concomitants, even sorrow, and fears, and terrors, and the
like; the Lord does not love to have his people follow him whining, he loves a
cheerful giver and a cheerful doer of his will, it is much for his honor that
his servants should lift up their heads; for what would we say to see a poor
servant go discouraged, and as if scarce worth the earth he goes upon, amazed
with fears, with sorrows; sure such a servant has a hard Master, that he has
so Psalm. 40. 2.
little joy of his life, therefore the Lord Jesus makes his people go forth
out of the horrible pit, sets them free from all their fears, and terrors,
that they may with a cheerful and a large heart serve him; here is love indeed,
that the Lord does so sweeten his yoke and his service, as that his people
shall delight in it, therefore says he, that we might serve him without fear
in Luke 1. 74.
holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives.

Fourthly, that their services to him may be more strong then otherwise they
would, a man under bonds brought down with bard bondage, cannot do the service
which another man can, but the* joy of the Lord is the strength of his people,
as in that of Neh. 8. 10. therefore he does enlarge their hearts, that they may
run the ways of his commandments, takes off the fetters for this very end; a
poor child of God under terrors and fears, or under the prevailing of a lust,
have, as I may say, their hands manacled, they cannot fight, their feet are
fettered, they cannot walk, much less run.

Fifthly, Yet one more, and that is, lest a poor soul held under bondage too
long, should put forth his hands to sin, this respects specially the bondage of
sorrows and fears which are ready to swallow up many a poor creature many
times, my spirit is overwhelmed Psalm. 77. 3.
within me, says the Psalmist (...) like case; the Lord will speak peace
(says the Psalmist) unto his people, that they may not Psalm. 85. 8.
return to folly any more; for if the Lord should lay his hand upon them,
continually pressing them, they could not always hold out, but if they can find
no pleasure in God nor in his ways, they would be inclinable to return to
their pleasures of sin, as in that Psalm, let not the rod of the wicked always
rest upon the lot of the Psalm. 125. 3.
righteous, lest they put forth, etc. as you see the Psalmists heels were
almost thrown up, and himself upon his back, his faith upon its back in this
very respect. O says he, if it be thus, I must be plunged every morning, always
in the net, under the yoke of affliction, Psalm. 73. 2, 13, 14.
in affliction and iron continually, surely I have cleansed my self in vain;
and these rods are the rods of God of a lesser nature, those with which the
spirit is lashed are most sore, and therefore the soul might be in danger to
depart to iniquity, to return to sin again; how soon did Israel resolve of
making them a Captain to return again? N^h. 9. 17: If the Prodigal return in
such distress to his Father, and he should keep him hungring and languishing,
when Luke 16.
he has not so much as husks to eat; surely this were the way to put him upon
it to return again to riotous courses: the peace of God keeps them with God,
etc.

Sixthly, Again, because the spirit would fail which he has made, if he did
not in due season break the yoke, set them at liberty; as a tender Father will
not lose his child for want of Isa. 57. 16. (...)
the rod, no more will the Father of spirits for want of ^^shing our spirits;
yet on the other hand, a tenderhearted Father will much less lose him by
over-doing of it; as he will not spare him, indulge him to death, so neither
will he whip him to death, hang ^rons and fetters upon him until they eat into
his soul and consume him. O no, when the Father sees the spirit of the child
to fall, and he begins to swoon under his rod, under the yoke of fear, which
has torment, be it what it will be, then he lets the rod fall out of his
hand, falls a kissing of the child to revive him again; we must preserve the
spirits, and maintain nature in Physic, and if purgations have wrought the
patient off his strength, there must be a restoring with Cordials, 1 Cor. 10.
13. he will not suffer them to be tempted above what they are able, etc. he
will not suffer his people to perish, and sink, and go away in prison and
bondage, and therefore he causes them to go forth, and does arise upon them to
that end.

For the Application of the point, there are several uses to be made of it.

First then, take notice from hence what a grievous bondage the service of sin
is, this is the principal part of the bondage, and all the rest are but the
product of sin; sin is pregnant, it has the seeds of all those terrors, fears,
sorrows, slavishness, deadness, straitness, and all the rest in its womb, but
it self is the chief, and therefore we are said to be sold under sin, and sin
is said to have dominion over us; so many lusts, Brethren, in strength, so many
Romans 7. 14.
pairs of fetters there are about our legs, and how then is it likely that a
sinner should run the ways of Gods Commandments! but I hope by what has been
said already, it will be granted, that a condition of sin is a condition of
bondage; only a little to aggravate this consideration to you, and all little
enough, I doubt, to startle sinners who are in this condition.

First consider, it is the basest, most sordid thing that can be; you know a
servile condition is mean and base in comparison of liberty and freedom, take
it at the best; but to serve the basest of men, who would not abhor this? what
spirit would stoop to be a drudge to a Master, to rake Channels and cleanse
Jakes, who would not abhor this? Brethren, this is nothing to sin, to the
slavery of sin: as it was the greatest honor in the world to be a servant, a
son of God; Moses the servant of the Lord, David my servant: As you know
servants do much bear themselves up upon the honor of their Masters. So it is
the basest servitude in the world to be in bondage to a lust, for a man to sell
himself into the hands of sin and Satan, for a moments pleasure of sin, this is
base: It is brutish for a man to subject his understanding and will to the
passions of his lust, dishonorable base passions; Romans 1. 26.
for beasts are led by their appetites.

Secondly, As it is base drudgery, so secondly the poor sinner has so many
lusts and so contrary to serve and satisfy, that he must needs be distracted
between them; one commands him this way, and the other commands him that way;
as now for a man to serve his pride and covetousness, or his luxury and
covetousness, these are contrary, and distract, and distort the mind, and hurry
him hither and thither, he can enjoy no peace in his own spirit at all; you
shall see a man that will spend at no aim when he is in company, and none
seems to set less by the world then he at such a time; but afterward, when he
recollects himself, then he must run, and drudge, and hurry himself and all his
family, and drive faster then they are able to bear, and all to make up that
which he has consumed upon his lusts, is not this a miserable bondage to be
under such contrary lusts?

Thirdly, Yea consider that these lusts are most insatiable, in drinking up a
man's time, and spirits, and strength, and will never Luk 16.
leave a man while he has any thing to lay out upon them more. So you know the
Prodigal spent all that ever he had upon his lusts, all his patrimony, his
time, and strength, and spirits, and all; and so the wanton does upon his
Dalilah, and thou mourn at the last, says the wise man, when thy life and thy
body is consumed, and Prove. 5. 11.
say, how have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof? except it
have all the precious workings of the soul, it is not satisfied, it must have
all the thoughts, be in them all, though God be in none of them, all that
precious water must drive this mill; as for covetousness, now how is the soul
under the power of that lust, as I may say, hanged up like a meteor in the air,
as the Evangelist has it, (...), be not hanged up as meteors in the Luke 12.
2^.
^ir, as I may say, between heaven and earth; and be not careful, ^aith our
Savior, be not divided, distracted in your cares. O that they shall eat, and
what they shall drink, how they shall accomplish this and that design, what a
drudge is any man that is under the power of this lust, he does nothing but
root in the world? in other servitude, if that a servant were maimed or
dismembered, lost an eye, yea or but a tooth, they must be let go Exodus 21. 26.
for their eye-sake, or for the tooth-sake, but here sin does nothing but wound
the soul, breaks a man, consumes him soul and body, and yet will not let him
go; sin does put a man's eyes out, that so it may have the more full complete
command over the poor creature, and stops the ears, and strikes out the teeth,
and distasteth the palate, so that any thing of God has no more relish then a
chip to a soul, makes the poor creature lame for any lust harbored in the
soul, makes a man go with an uneven pace, and halt, he cannot go uprightly,
and so it weakens the hands and makes feeble knees, and indeed like a woolf in
the flesh, or a greedy wen, devours all the strength, and yet will by no means
let the poor sinner go free.

Fourthly, It is a growing bondage, the longer a man continues in it, the
faster he is held with the snares and bonds of his sins; in the transgression
of an evil man there is a snare, says Solomon, Prove. 29. 6.
and every act of sinning does fasten the snare so much the more upon the soul
with bands of iron and brass, yea of adamant; the longer they are in this dark
and filthy dungeon, the deeper they sink into the mire and clay, where there is
no standing, the heart grows more hard through the deceitfuluess of sin. O
the cup of delights is a bewitching cup, and the more a man drinks of it, the
more he may; every drop of oil you cast upon the flame, makes it the harder to
be quenched, every act of sinning does strengthen the habit, as in all other
cases, and dispose a man so much the more strongly, incline him to the same sin
again, and so there is so much the more ado to get the heart off from these
lusts; there is many a poor sinner among us, I believe, can speak by experience
what a miserable bondage it is, and what a growing bondage it is, the further a
man goes in it, he goes still further into the prison, binds the yoke upon
his neck so much the harder and closer, insomuch that a gray-headed-sinner you
shall seldom see recovered out of the snare of the Devil, though sometimes we
may: This the fourth.

Fifthly, it is so durable a bondage, that it abides in part, even where a soul
is brought under the command of another principle, it does continue in a great
part in many a gracious heart, as in this place of the Apostle, I am carnal and
sold under sin; he says Romans 7. 14.
not he was, but he is carnal; that is to say, in part, as those in that first
to the Corinthians, are you not carnal? that is to say, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 4.
has not the flesh a great sway with you, when you are so divided and full of
strife and emulation, and one for Paul, and another for Apollo? etc. and
therefore the Apostle did walk heavily under the sense of the chains which were
upon him, not altogether shakt off. O wretched man, who shall deliver me? I am
Romans 7. 24.
carried captive by a Law in my members to the Law of sin. O strange, that in
the Apostle, so sanctified, so mortified a creature, yet the Law in his members
should have such a strength as this is, to carry him captive; though the spirit
do lust against the flesh, yet the flesh does lust against the spirit, so that
they cannot Gal. 5. 17.
do the things they would; they are under bondage in part, though notunder the
reign of sin; yet it usurpeth, and tyranizeth, and lays its commands upon a
poor believing soul, as if he were altogether his own; sin will not let go its
hold altogether, but if it lose the Citadel, the Tower, the chief Fort, the
Will, yet it will lurk in some of the outworks still; if it lose the heart, it
will hold by the heel still, and hang about us, that we cannot walk at liberty
in the ways of his Commandments.

Sixthly, The reward to the service and bondage of sin, what is it but bondage
upon bondage? you have heard how many sad Concomitants there are of this
bondage of sin, does it not subject to the curse, to the wrath of God? it is
not only an unprofitable service, what fruit had ye then in those things
whereof ye are now ashamed? that is to say, what good had ye by them, ye are
now ashamed of them: that is the reward, as you see in the case of Adam, it
laid him open and naked before the Lord, both without covering for the shame,
and without defense against his displeasure, now he wanted somewhat in stead of
his innocence to skreen him from the everlasting burnings, or the presence of
God, who Phil. 3. 19:
is a consuming fire, yea the wages of these things is death, whose end is
destruction, says the Apostle, whose glory is in their shame, whose God is
their belly, who mind earthly things; a man will hardly believe this, that the
savouring of earthly things is so dangerous a service, being so pleasing as it
is to men; alas, you little think what you do, you have heard some of you, how
many evils do attend it, you little know what wounds you get, a wound and
dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away; this is
nothing to the wound of the conscience. O what pains sinners are at to store up
gunpowder at last to blow up their comforts and their souls and all; would you
not think it a sad servitude where a master should delight in nothing but the
cruel wounding and goring of a man's self, this is nothing indeed to the service
of sin, you will one day find sinners, the truth of this, whether you will
believe it now or no, that sin is big with terrors, and fears, and amazement,
that sin does nothing but wound the soul, the conscience, though you feel it
not for the present; many and Prove. 5. 11. Prove. 23. 29.
many that have been as senseless as many of us are, that yet at last mourned
and said, O how is my flesh and my body consumed! O what a wretch was I to
serve sin, to lay out my self for sin, that now has nothing but woe and
misery, nothing but racks and woundings to reward me with! O what a reward is
it Brethren, to pass fro m the chains of your sins here, to those everlasting
chains of darkness!

Se venthly and lastly, it is inextricable, as to our selves, we cannot open
the prison doors, nor loosen our fetters, the cords of our sins wherewith we
are held, and bound over, as I may say, to Judgment. O I know the poor
creature, specially when his eyes are open to see what a condition he is in,
will be making many an attempt, sometimes to break prison, sometimes to loose
his bonds, but it will not be; O what resolutions and vows you shall have many
a sinner make, specially after a passion in their spirits, when their eyes are
a little open; O they will never return to their folly any more, and it is the
next thing they do. O the bands of our own making are too slender to pull a
poor creature out of the mire and clay, they all break even as a thread of Tow
when it comes to the fire, and there the poor soul sticks; no, nor is it the
prayers nor tears of our own that can do it, for you shall see, and happily some
of us know it by experience, though it be wonderful to see a man pray and sin,
and weep and sin, mourn and sin, go on in the same course of sinning a long
time, some of our souls I believe know this, we pray and are not willing to be
delivered, as Aug. did, and so mourn upon the sight of the grievousness of a
sin, but it prevails not to for sake it. O no, if any of all this would have
done it, what need the Lord Jesus then be anointed for that work, to preach
deliverance to the captives, and the opening of the prison doors to them that
are bound: surely the Lord would do no nothing in vain: but so much for this
Application.

Then it may teach us the vanity of all conceit of liberty or Use 2.
freedom, or going forth before the Lord Jesus come and shine upon a man's soul,
then they shall go forth, not before; what is the reason that the most of men
can satisfy themselves with their condition as they do, but they have some
conceit they are at liberty; were sinners persuaded that they are under the
dominion of sin and Satan, etc. could they eat, or drink, or sleep? what a
fearful thing would we think it, if the Devil had but power over our bodies, to
carry them whither he pleased, to shatter and shake them at his pleasure? but
what is this to the having power over the soul, over the will, the affections,
the mind, by keeping them in blindness? and yet sinners do not believe they are
in such a bondage, but think they are free, nor do I think there is any one
thing does keep more poor creatures in bondage then this, they think they are
free; but let us see a little the vanity of such conceits.

First, Some are so gross, as to think they are born free, when as you heard
before, We are born the children of wrath, we are Ephesians. 2. 3.
all born in the house of bondage, in the Prison House; and therefore, we as
well as our Parents are under bondage. Can a slave bring forth any other then a
slave? If many of us look to the Isa. 51. 1.
Rock whence we are hewn, as the Prophet speaks, we shall find that our very
Parents were the servants of sin, and it may be lived and died so; and what
then? were they the slaves to Satan, and can we be Christ his Freemen by
Birth? It cannot be surely. It is very strange, that men that know their
Parents to be loose, wicked, profane, earthly, carnal crearu^es, that yet
should bear up themselves with this privilege, they are born free, they are
Christians by birth, such men little know what goes to make a Christian; can
the bondwoman bring forth children that are free?

Secondly, Others have a fairer pretense for it then this, they think they are
free by birth, because they had faithful believing parents, we have Abraham to
our Father, and we being his seed, John 8.
how can we be in bondage? I must confefs, Brethren, this is something to me,
for as Satan has servants born in his house, in his Eccl. 2. 7.
kingdom, so the Lord Jesus has in his; if bondmen were born bondmen, and
servants were born in the house, then God has servants also born to him, and
his servants are free in that sense, that they are his servants, and therefore
it is remarkable in that of Leviticus, they must let their servants go free,
and their children Levit. 25. 41, 42.
also, for they are my servants says the Lord, whom I brought out of Egypt;
which was a Type of our spiritual bondage: mind you, the Lord calls them his
servants, his children, as well as others; only note here two or three things
for the clearing of it.

First, that this is by grace and not by nature; for by nature and natural
generation, no man can beget, nor woman bring forth any child that is free; no,
though they themselves through the riches of grace are made free, yet their
children by nature are the children of wrath as well as others; yea, though
they belong to the Election of grace, and be saved whether they die in infancy,
or come to the acknowledgment of the truth, and believe, as the Apostle did;
yet by nature they are the children of wrath, a sad condition our poor children
are in by nature, if parents did but well lay it to heart; but what then does
this hinder, but that by grace they may be free, though by nature they are
bound? as the Apostle himself by nature was a child of wrath, under the curse
of the Law; that is to say, and in bondage, but by grace he was free; and why
might not the Lord by grace make him free sooner if he pleased, as well as
later? is it not all one with him, can he not make children free as well as men
if he please? are not men purely receptives in the first grace, and are not
children as passive and receptive as any?

But secondly, there is a freedom invisible and saving, and a freedom visible,
and both by grace; the freedom invisible, when a soul is actually set at
liberty from the power of sin and the bondage of his corruptions; or else
visible, when there is ground for our judging they are so freed; now many are
visibly free, that are not invisibly free at all: so there is many an
hypocritical professor, that carries it so like a freeman of Christ, that it
would puzzle the most discernable spirit to discover that he is under the
bondage of sin or Satan, and yet he is so invisibly happily, but visibly he is
free, that is to say, appears to be so: appears to be in Covenant with God, for
that is the freedom; therefore wherever Christ is spoken of, as to preach
liberty, it is said still, he is given as a Covenant to the people; so many
appear to be in Covenant, and so visibly are such, that invisibly are not* and
so the children of such holy parents, who are in Covenant with God, are visibly
free, though invisibly they may be in bondage, that is to say, they are in
visibly in Covenant with God, that is to say, we have ground to judge
charitably and hopefully of them, that they are in Covenant with God, and if
they so die, that they are ^aved by virtue of that Covenant there; which for my
own part, I know no other revealed way of salvation, and therefore if we deny
them this, we must either say there is no grounded hope of their salvation, and
I would be loath to be such a durus pater infan^um, to deny all visibility of
salvation to them: Or else we must say, the Lord has left nothing upon record,
whereby we might have any comfort concerning little ones that die in that
condition; which what an impeachment it were to the wisdom and grace of God in
Christ, I wish men would impartially consider. And if they will say they may be
saved, can it be without the invisible grace? have they not corrupt natures,
and the seeds of all sin in them? and can any unclean thing enter into heaven?
and therefore sure they must be freed from sin: and will we grant them the
invisible grace, that they come under that which is narrower, and shall we deny
them that which is larger? would you think that man himself, that should yield
that a man may be in the Kings Bedchamber, but he may not be in the Palace;
or a man be in this house, and yet not in the City, which is much more large
and comprehensive?

But thirdly, I conceive that this visible freedom of theirs is to be limited
with the time, until they come to discover the contrary; as an hypocritical
professor, to us he is visibly a Saint, and free, until his leaf do fade and
fall, and that be taken from him which he seems to have, as it is in that of
the Evangelist; now the child is upon his Fathers root, the Lord owning them
with their parents in the same covenant of grace; yet if afterward, when they
come to understanding; and by the rule of Christ they are to own the covenant
themselves actually; if they do disown it, they shall be cast out as well as
Ismael was, and therefore it is I suppose, that our Savior reproves the Jews
when they stood now at age, and should have minded what themselves had done,
now standing upon their own, and not upon their Fathers root, they should have
owned the Covenant themselves, and believed, that so they might have been free
indeed invisibly; but though they never wrought the works of Abraham, to
believe in Christ to come, and now in Christ come, they should have believed;
but wrought the works of the Devil: yet they bound themselves up with this,
that they were the children of Abraham, they were so indeed; and this in their
infancy was ground for a believing hopefully of them, specially if their
Parents were Believers; but now the Lord required themselves, I say, to own the
Covenant, and walk worthy of it, else that would not stand them instead; it is
just as if a man that makes a profession of Christ gloriously for a while, and
in the judgment of all that behold him he is a gracious man, but yet he falls
off, draws back to perdition, the latter end of such a man is worse then his
beginning, yet he bears up himself, O I am a Christian, I have professed Heb.
10. 2.
Christ as well as you, and yet at present is thus stubborn and rebellious; do
you think this would satisfy any man's spirit Mat. 12. 45.
concerning him, is not here as much vanity of hope concerning his condition,
as in the other case?

O but some will say, what a Doctrine is this? can a man be free in any sense,
and yet come into bondage again, and perish afterward? are not the gifts and
calling of God without repentance? therefore that children should be free by
virtue of this Romans 11. 19.
Covenant, and yet afterward become the servants of sin and Satan, and be so
desperately wicked and profane, this seems derogatory to grace, and that any
that have been in Covenant of God and free, should now be bound with
everlasting chains of darkness? It is no derogation from the truth, nor from
the grace that came by Jesus Christ that it should be so; for mind you, it is
one thing to be free in the account of God, and another thing to be free in the
account of the Church and people of God; God judges not as we judge, visibly
we judge, and he judges that which is invisible: now it is true, one that has
been truly inwardly delivered from the bondage of sin, and so gone out of
prison, he can never be reduced to such a condition, cannot perish; and so that
man that is, or ever was invisibly in Covenant with God, can never come to that
place of darkness; but such as only visibly and in appearance did own the
Covenant, or were in Covenant, may miscarry; how many glorious professors that
made a great show for a time, and sprang up as fast, and flourished as much as
any, that yet now are the fuel for those everlasting flames? what could men
judge of them, but that they were in Covenant with God, and so freemen and
delivered from the Mat. 13. 6. They had not root, though they had blade enough.
Mat. 8. 12.
prison, from the bondage, yet alas were in the hold of sin to that day? and
why may it not be so, and allowed in this case, as well as in that? may not the
children of the Kingdom be cast out into outer darkness? I could wish that were
well considered, the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer
darkness; we will allow professors a communion and fellowship with us as
freemen, as men in Covenant with God, whose profession so oftentimes prove
rotten and unsound, and think this profession is a sufficient ground to declare
to us they are in Covenant with Christ, and yet we will not allow Believers
children to be in Covenant with God, because afterward they come to walk
contrary to this Covenant: Nor do we think the declaration of God, that he does
own them as his, as his children, his servants, as holy to himself, to be as
sufficient to make it out they are in Covenant with God: For my own part, I see
not the pretended difference, but if there be any advantage in the visibility
of being in Covenant with God, I take it upon this hand, for I do and shall
make more of a word of God, where the Lord has said it, that they are his in a
way of grace, though it prove to be but visibly, not invisibly, then I shall
make of any man's profession in the world, which can amount to no more then a
visibility, or at least I shall make as much of it.

Well but then, suppose thou were a child of Abraham, of believing parents, and
so were free and in Covenant with God visibly; yet alas, this will not now
stand thee in stead to salvation, no more then a profession of a temporary
faith will do an hypocrite; thou workest the works of the Devil, art a very
drudge to Satan, and the world, and thy own hearts lusts, and yet will hang thy
hopes of salvation upon a being born free, we are Abraham's seed; if any seed
of Believers since the Covenant, should have been saved and freed, inwardly and
savingly, Joh. 8. 44.
by being the seed of such parents, when themselves came actually to renounce
it in works, to deny the Covenant in works, they might have it by Abraham; but
yet you see our Savior tells them, the Son must make them free, before they
could be free; therefore this is a vain conceit, the Lord persuade poor sinners
against it.

Secondly, some there are, that because they feel nothing of such a bondage as
has been spoken of, therefore they conclude there is no such thing upon them,
they do not feel any such thing as fetters and ginns upon them, they never were
under any such slavishness of obedience, under any such terrors, nor under the
command of their lusts, they think they are Masters of themselves, and can
command their passions and appetites as well as any others, and therefore sure
they are free. This is a deceit also. The more undiscerned the bondage is, the
more sure it is; it was the slateliness of some Princes, they would not be seen
by their subjects, nor make their persons too common, they should feel the
weight of their loins, but not see them, to keep up an esteem among them; if
they had made themselves too common happily, and too cheap, it might have
weakened their authority: So it is in this case, sin and Satan will not be seen
happily in the business, they know if it should appear to a sinner he is in
bondage to them, it were a dangerous step to dethrone him, and divest him of
his commanding power over a poor sinner; for who, if he did see himself
thralled to so base and bloody an enemy as Satan is, would endure it long? and
therefore he keeps them in darkness, from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan to Acts 26. 18.
God; therefore it is the first work of grace to open the eyes, as in the case
of Paul, who art thou Lord? he knew not, nor did he know his persecution was a
sin; he was so far from it, as that he thought verily he ought to do many
things against that way: Acts 26. 9.
And truly so it is with many a poor soul, they think they are as far from
bondage in sin; as he that is furthest, whereas they are altogether in bondage:
A man in error, if of a lesser or greater moment, he is in the snare of the
Devil, and yet he thinks himself free, specially before admonition; else
fundamentals are written so clearly, that after the first and second
admonition, if Tit. 3. 11.
administered with such clearness and tenderness as it ought. Dear friends, I
doubt there are some of us, that it never came into our hearts seriously to
consider, scarce to suspect that we were in bondage; do not your hearts bear
witness to this truth? believe it, such are in the greatest bondage of all
others ordinarily. I know it is true, that even from the childhood, under
gracious education, which the Lord has promised a blessing to, as one of his
Ordinances, with it may be instilled so insensibly, as that a man may scarce
ever know how it came to pass; but yet that he is free, he may know, as the
blind man said; but I speak of sinners, that it is too apparent; alas, if they
did, or could but search, and try, and ponder their ways, that they are in the
gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity, and yet think highly of themselves,
as Magus did, that they are some body: O this is a grievous deceit.

Thirdly, There are some, that because they part with some sin, they think they
are free; it may be they were before drunkards or blasphemers, now they are
reformed, and not guilty in this kind, therefore they think they are free, they
have gone forth; when alas they are held in the cords of another lust; it may
be run from one extreme to another, reel from one pit to another, and truly one
chain upon the soul will hold it fast enough; one foot in the snare holds it as
well as if the whole body were restrained; if Satan have but one cord about us,
2 Timothy 2. 16.
he takes us alive at his pleasure; Because that they pass one Gate in the
Prison, they think they are presently out, no: Brethren, there are iron Gates
and Bars yet to be opened, there are more lusts yet to be shaked off, before
you can look upon your selves as free; Sampson must have his Dalilah; Herod,
his Herodias, though he did many things.

Fourthly, Some think they are free, because it may be they forbear the outward
acts of rebellion: so be they can keep themselves 1 Timothy 3. 2.
unblamable and unreprovable of the world, (...), they heed not what is within.
Brethren, what is it the better to have the hand and the foot out of the snare,
and the heart be entangled? a man may through fear, slavish fear of God, or
else fear of men, fear of shame, or the like, forbear to act, and yet the heart
love and like the sin well enough. The Dog is not offended with his vomit,
though he bring it up, he likes it well enough, it is only some pain at the
stomach which he cannot brook. So you may pluck away the iron from the
Loadstone, but it has a lingering after it still; and so Phaltiel when his
Wife was taken 2 Samuel 3. 16.
from him, he parted with her indeed, because he durst not otherwise choose, for
the dipleasure of the King would wax hot against him; he might lose his
liberty, if not his life, if he had refused; but says the Text, He went
mourning after her, he did it with an unwilling heart. So may a man part with
sin, the practice of it, but yet his heart cleaves to it still; he may cast it
away when the coal is fired, but yet he could be content if the fire were out,
to put it into his bosom again; Brethren, Is it thus with us? we dare not let
down sin happily, swallow it, for fear it prove bitterin the belly: but yet we
will roll it under the tongue as a sweet morsel; surely this is not to go
forth, to be set free from this bondage, therefore do not mistake your selves:
it may be thou do not gripe and oppress in bargain, dealing hardly or
overreach, but thy teeth water at it, thou could digest it well enough thou
durst, thou dislikest it not, because it is sin, and displeasing to the Lord,
thou art not yet free.

Fifthly, Some think they are free, because loose Libertines promise them
liberty, when themselves are the servants of sin; Truly Brethren, if ever hell
were broke loose, now is the time: 2 Pet. 2. 19.
the Devil never enjoyed more chain then now, specially as an Angel of light:
it is come to that pass now adays, that men think they are never free, until
they have broken the bands of Christ, and cast away his cords from them, until
they have broken Psalm 2. Mat. 11. 28.
the yoke of Christ from off their necks: sons of Belial, that will not endure
to he yoked, though never so easy; O these Ordinances, and Duties, and
Services, they are a bondage, they are poor and beggarly rudiments, to which
they will not any more be in bondage: they will not any more be Priest-rid den,
as they call it: and as for Sabbaths, and Prayers, and Hearing, and Reading,
and Meditating, these are poor empty things, and a burden it is to bear them,
they are weary, and snuff at it, as in Malachy. It Mal. 1. 13.
is true, they are empty to them that have not communion with Christ in them:
Else as David says in the like case, The soul may there be filled with marrow
and fatness. But now mind what says the Apostle, When themselves are the
servants of sin; I do observe it, and it is worth the noting, in the example of
such as would not have their necks under the yoke of Christ, his Ordinances,
but live above them; have the yoke upon them, usually they are persons under
the command of their lusts; and are these likely persons to teach men the way
to liberty? surely no.

Sixthly, Some think they are freed and delivered, if they do but attain that
knowledge which the Apostle speaks of, in the use of indifferent things; they
scruple not any thing, as clean or unclean, in (...) Cor. 8. 7.
meats, or clothes, or days, make no difference at all, and hereupon they make
account they are free, whereas this may stand with a bondage unto sin
notwithstanding; O how may such men in the very use of this part of their
liberty enslave themselves to sin, to their lusts? it is but a pretense many
times, their liberty is; they will use the creatures liberally, and without
scruplicity and nicety, will nor suffer their consciences to be coy or tickle
in such small things wherein they have a liber^y, whereas the very truth is,
they have no command of their Lusts nor Appetites, and then liberty* is the
cloak of it; they are so impotent they cannot forbear meat or drinks; or such
and such rich apparel, as is a question, whether it become them or no; they are
brought under the power of these things, and yet liberty is the pretense:
Surely brethren this is not to be free neither: so much for this second Use,
whereby we may perceive, how many of us, that, it may be, think we were ^ree,
are yet in bondage to this day; these mis-conceits of freedom set us not free:
a Prisoner dreams his chains are fallen off, and he walks up and down at
liberty; but when he awakes, alas, his bonds are upon him still.

Seventhly, No nor yet is every one that does endeavor to fulfill the Law of
God, yet set free: there is many a diligent soul, very industrious and
laborious, it may be, and as they think, for heaven, that would put the most of
us to shame in this point: and yet all this while alas they are working in
their fetters, in their bonds, yea they do twist and work bonds, they are held
in the cords of their own services, stick there and never go further, these are
not free neither: it is not Moses any more then Abraham, that can make free; it
must be the Son must do it; yea, truly, for my own part, I take it, that these
poor souls that are under the Law as a Covenant of life, are in the most
dangerous condition: for alas, they are in love with their bondage, and so much
the more, because they take it for freedom: A man is in love with his Fetters,
because they are gold, he makes account they will buy his freedom, when he
pleases: when any offers to take them away, what, would you have me to part
with my gold? O no: And so many a poor creature is in love with a Sepulcher
full of rottenness, and dead men's bones, because: it is painted and garnished:
how hard a matter is it to persuade many a Justitiary among us, that he is in
such a bondage, and stands in need of this great power of Christ to make them
free? etc. Well then, do we move as heartless Christians do? like Watches, with
outward motion? come duties from us, like fire from a Flint? alas do we what we
do by constraint, or of a willing mind.? are we a free people? is love our
constraint? as the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. etc.

3. Use. Shall be then to take notice what an incomparable Use 3.
benefit the Gospel is, that brings such glad tidings unto poor souls in
bondage, in prison: Brethren, do but imagine how welcome tidings it would be to
a company of poor Gally slaves, to tell them, your Prince has laid down your
ransom for you, and has sent to proclaim Liberty to you, if you will go forth:
O how their hearts would leap within them for joy, they could hardly believe it
at first, but would be like them that dreamed there in the Psalms; but when
they come to themselves, surely they would rejoice more in it, then if they had
found great spoils; you have heard it is the Gospel preached, whereby this
Liberty is held out, yea and conveyed; for the truth shall make you free: Ioh.
8. 3^.
and now to a man that is in love with the prison, and not willing to come out,
the tenderings of Liberty is not so much; but he that is weary of the nastiness
of the Prison, of the weight of his chains; he whose spirit is overwhelmed with
the pre-apprehensions of his condemnation, and, it may be, never expected to
come out of his prison, except to be led to Sentence, or to the Execution: now
for Liberty to be proclaimed to such, and freely too: O what a benefit is here?
Brethren, if it were not for this Gospel of glorious Liberty, what were the
world but a prison, a dungeon full of poor miserable Caitiffs, shut up under
sin to the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, at Gal. 3. 13.
the great Day: it were better for us to die as soon as we are born, were it not
for this Gospel: What miserable comforts were our Riches, our Honors, our
Friends, and Relations, were it not for this Gospel? A man in prison, liable to
condemnation, under Bolts and Shakels, tell him of wearing soft raiment, or
Royal dainties, faring deliciously every day: alas, it goes not down with him,
he is a prisoner in bondage, nothing can be pleasing to him, it deadens his
heart, his relish to all things else; liberty would be a sweet welcome message
to him: Brethren, this is the tidings of the Gospel.

4. Use. See here and admire the riches of this Grace of the Use 4.
Gospel in Jesus Christ, that he should proclaim Liberty to the Captives,
notwithstanding their wilfulness in throwing themselves into these chains,
their willingness to continue in them, and unwillingness to go forth, to go out
of them; notwithstanding their being worn out, as I may say, and spent in this
bondage, so that they can very little be serviceable to him. For the first of
the aggravations of the bondage, which tends to heighten the freedom and
deliverance from it, that we wilfully plunged our selves into it: if a man be
taken captive by the Turk against his will, we pity him much; but if he
wilfully throw himself upon them, this takes away much of the compassion; yet
this is our case: did not Adam sell us in the first transgression, in which
respect we are all to this day sold under sin? yea more then so: alas, what
Romans 7. 14.
sinner is there almost that lives to any years, but he sells himself with
profane Esau? sells his soul, and his hope of heaven, and all for a Mess of
pottage, for a little moments satisfaction to his lusts: Nay, do we not all
subscribe to that act of selling us under sin, when we so willingly embrace our
chains? In so much that some do even wear their chains as their ornaments,
glorying in their shame, that is to say, making their boast of their
wickedness. And that yet notwithstanding, when no eye pitied poor sinners in
this condition, they themselves were so far from pitying themselves, that they
were pleased with the prison: all men in the like condition with themselves,
cannot pity them; the Saints alas, want bowels to such as willingly are in
bondage: that yet the Lord, who is most slighted in all this, should pity and
make a way for their deliverance; this is unspeakable, rich grace! that the
Lord should, as I may say, study a course to make them willing to come forth;
to which end all the sad and fearful Characters of this bondage in Scripture
are; to which end is the Law given, that sin might appear to be sin, and
exceeding sinful, and the bondage very great, that they might thereby see
themselves shut up: to this end, all those sweet invitations, and powerful
expostulations with poor sinners in the Gospel; O why will ye die? why will ye
perish and rot in prison, since there is a ransom found for you? the Lord takes
no pleasure in your death; and why will ye delight in your own death? O Ez^k.
18. 31.
what powerful Rhetoric are these loving entreaties, expostulations, the
yearnings of his bowels over them? his tears over Jerusalem, when they would
not be gathered under his wings? Luke 19. 42.
and all this to make the poor sinner willing; and when all will not do, that
he should even put forth a power upon their wills and hearts, inclining them to
it by a sweet, and yet strong, though not compulsory influence of his Spirit
upon them, this is admirable! what tenderness was there toward Lot, that when
he lingered Genesis 19.
and delayed, the Angel took him by the hand, and brought him without the City,
and bid him haste for his life: truly there is not a soul delivered from this
bondage, but there is as much exercise of the patience, and bowels of Christ
toward them, to make them willing; yea to take them by the hand, when they
linger and make excuses: as those in the Gospel; I will follow thee, but let me
go and bid farewell to my friends: I must not come off abruptly from my old
Companions in sin, but take leave of them handsomely: I must go bury my father,
says another; but the Lord Jesus takes by the hand, plucks us out, as I may
say, by head and ears, before we will come out.

Again, consider how we have worn out our selves in the bondage and slavery of
sin, and with these fetters upon our souls, or else spent so, that now he may
even say, we our selves may say of our days, there is no pleasure in them: so
Luke 4. 18. to set at liberty them that are bruised, Dimittere confract^s in
remissionem, (...) which words are not in Isaiah 61. neither Hebrew, Greek, nor
Latin, but they are added (...) by Luke, as some conceive: ^atabl. and others,
read them v^lneratos, persons wounded, shattered, worn out with the hard
bondage and service they were put to; bondage is a weary thing at the best; but
when a man is such a slave, as that he must like a Gally Slave, work like a
horse in the service of sin: O what pains sinners do take with both hands!
earnestly they come to iniquity, and so exhaust their spirits, the best milk
and marrow in the bones, so that they are as dry sticks, that are good for
nothing; and yet that the Lord Jesus should to such proclaim liberty, bring
them forth, that are able to do him no service in a manner; so the thief upon
the Cross: and so the Jew that Andreas is said to convert, hanging upon the
Cross: and so many a gray headed sinner, that Fullers Lives page 38 8.
never ceased serving sin, yet now, etc. Truly, if the Lord Christ should set
us free, with a respect to any service we should do him afterward, I doubt none
would ever be set free: for Brethren, what can we add to him? if thou be
righteous, it profits him Psalm. 16. 4.
not at all; he is a God infinitely perfect in himself, our goodness extends
not to him; all the best of Lebanon, and the wood Job 35. 8.
are not enough for a burnt offering, so great a God he is; and yet though he
be not advantaged by our service when we are set at Liberty, but what
commandments he gives us to observe, and gives us hearts, inclines our
hearts thereunto, they are for our own welfare, as in that of Deuteronomy. The
Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath, for his good, his
advantage; Deuteronomy. 6. 24. Mar. 2. 27.
and so is all the services: or if it were, yet alas (I say) how are we broken
many times with the bondage of sin, so that we are fit for nothing, the
understanding and affections so weakened and wasted, and besotted with sin, that
afterward we can do little for him, because of that sad effect sin has left
upon our souls, and yet he delivers us: this the fourth.

Use 5. Then it shall it be for Exhortation and invitation this day to every
poor sinner, that is in bondage, that they would Use 5.
close with this promise, that they would go forth: O Sinners! that you would
but accept of Deliverance and Liberty, that now the Lord Jesus, after so dear a
purchase of it, does tender to you; you see he is willing, he came on purpose
into the world, to preach and proclaim liberty to the Captives: Now art not
thou a Captive? and have thou no mind to be set free? And for some Motives to
stir us up a little, at least to a consideration of our condition, and what we
do all this while.

First, Consider this is the acceptable year of the Lord, as in that of Isaiah:
O it begins with the preaching of the Gospel; indeed the acceptable year,
mind you, acceptable to Jesus Christ: It pleases him wondrous well, if
sinners be willing to come out of prison, to be set at liberty: there is many a
poor soul that thinks with himself, I am willing; if the Lord Jesus be
willing that I shall go forth: O it is the acceptable year of the Lord, there
is nothing more pleasing to him, then to see the ransom he has laid down for
you sinners take effect, and bring out many out of bondage; the Apostle
applies it to the times of the Gospel; There is joy in heaven, etc. The Father
of the Prodigal, 2 Cor. 6. 2.
how willing was he? and then it is the acceptable year to sinners too: O how
did men that were in bondage long for the Jubilee, and breath and pant after
it, especially if their bondage were hard? that set them all free. Dear
Friends, Consider, this is the great Jubilee, proclaimed solemnly with the
Silver Trumpets of the Gospel, that every poor creature, that will, may go
forth out of prison; yea, that if now they go forth, the Lord Jesus is Lev. 25.
9, 10.
willing we should; but if we shall trifle away this year of the Lord, which we
know not how long it may last to us: either the Gospel may be taken away from
us, or else we from the Gospel; or else the things which concern our peace in
the Gospel be hid Luke 19. 42.
from our eyes, that we shall never see them: O that sinners would but consider
this, these seasons the Father has kept in his Acts 1. 7.
own power, that sinners might be afraid to trifle away one Sabbath, When
liberty was proclaimed from Babylon, some would stay there, etc.
wherein this grace is offered, for fear that it never be offered more to us:
If the Servant did neglect to take the opportunity of the Jubilee, he must be
in bondage, he and his, until another Jubilee, and so he himself was like to
perish in that service.

There were only three things that did hinder their going free in that
acceptable year: 1. Either they were strangers, and of the cursed Canaanites,
who were doomed to bondage; now there was Lev. 25. 45, 46.
no going forth for them: Or else 2. The Matters would not let them go free: Or
else 3. They themselves had no mind to go free, and so bound themselves for
ever to their Masters.

First, I say, The Strangers: alas, the Jubilee was not proclaimed to them; and
therefore, though they might he willing to go free, yet they could not, they
were as good never think of it, it concerns them not; and the Masters knowing
this would never let them go free; surely, this is not our case, though the
Ephesians. 2. 13.
time was, when we were sinners of the Gentiles, and afar off, and the year of
Jubilee was not proclaimed to us; yea, the Lord Jesus forbid his disciples, to
go into the way of the Gentiles: If Mat. 10. 5.
this were our case, then there were some excuse for our continuing in bondage;
and thus it is with many a poor people under the Sun this day; the Lord Christ
has never said to them that sit in darkness, go forth, else happily, Tire and
Zidon would have done it sooner then Coraz and Bethsaida.

Secondly then, the unwillingness of him to whom we are in bondage, to let us
go free: it is true, sin is unwilling to let the sinner go; alas, how shall
lust be satisfied and served then? And so is Satan, as long as ever he can, he
will hold his hold; but does not the Lord threaten the hard hearted Jews, since
they would Jer. 34. 15, 16, 17.
not let his people go out of bondage, that he would proclaim a Liberty to
them, to the sword, and to the famine, and to the pestilence? Pharaoh was very
loath to let Israel go as long as he had a being, therefore he was destroyed:
And so sin and Satan, they will not let the sinner go; O how a man's lusts do
cling about him then, when he should go free! what, will ye forsake me now,
have I not brought you in so much content, so many sweet hours you have had of
repose in my lap, so much gain and advantage, have you not lived by me, and
will you now leave me? these will stratle the soul; and then for Satan, either
he multiplyeth his baits, makes the best of every thing in the way of sin that
now begins to be laid open, to find colors and glosses to put upon them, or
else he rages and tells the soul, thou go free! do thou think that now thou
have served sin so long, Jesus Christ will accept of thee? and indeed, all that
his wit or power can do, he bestirreth himself, now he sees his kingdom going
down, and his yoke breaking; I, but remember this, that the Lord will break him
to pieces, tread him under-feet if he refuse to let you go, the Lord will pluck
you out of his hands, destroy his power.

Thirdly, Our own unwillingness, for if the servant said, he loved his Master,
and his Masters service, and he would not go free, then the Jubilee served him
in no stead, he must have his ear Exodus 21. 6. (...)
bored to the door-post by the Magistrate, and so be his servant for ever;
either this might be as a punishment of his contempt of liberty, now he might
have liberty, which is rather to be chosen, as the Apostle says: and the Lord
out of a tender respect to them, as his people, that he has bought out of
bondage, would not have them kept in bondage by their Brethren; Now if he would
not go free, but loved his Master so well; that he preferred his service before
freedom, he should have this torment and public shame, to be bored through the
ear: And I tell you Brethren, it will not be the piercing of the ear that shall
be the recompense of your refusing of this liberty, but the piercing of your
hearts, as with a sword, when you come to see what your bondage will bring you
unto; or else secondly, That now they must never go out of their Masters doors
without his leave, the servitude must be stricter then ever it was; and so
truly I do believe, Brethren, that now, where the acceptable year of the Lord
is preached to sinners, they have liberty offered, and they will not accept of
it; that now they are more fully under the command of Sat^n and sin, then they
were before. Thirdly, that hereby might be signified the willingness of their
service for the time to come, that they had, as I may say, their ears opened
now to what ever their Master should command them; and so in that Psalm;
Sacrifice and offering thou would not; but mine ear have thou bored or
dug, so the words may be read, that is to Psalm. 40 6.
say, thou have made me willingly obedient to thee to the death, and that
obedience is better then sacrifice; and truly this is the saddest of all the
rest, when men shall give up themselves with a fuller will to serve Sin and
Satan then ever they did before, in stea^ of going forth; O let us fear and
tremble before the Lord, lest while liberty is proclaimed, we in stead of going
forth, be bored in the ear, and become Satan's servants for ever, never go forth
from our bondage.

Again, Consider yet further, that the day if liberty is proclaimed; it is the
day of the vengeance of our God also, as the Prophet has it; as if he had
said, if it be not a day of liberty, and of going forth to you, it will be a
day of vengeance to Isa. 61. 11.
you as well as to the enemies of Christ; for what desperate love is this, to
sin against Christ? that when he has been at so much pains and cost to
purchase a liberty for us, and we refuse and reject it, will not part with our
chains, will rather rot in prison then come forth, what can be expected but
wrath to the utmost to come upon such a soul? O surely the Gospel will be the
savor of death to death to such a soul, a savor of bondage to bondage and
everlast^ng chains of darkness will be their bonds for ever: Brethren, think of
this before the prison doors be shut and barred, before you be sealed up unto
this destruction.

Lastly, Consider how sweet and precious Liberty is, even civel libetty, how
sweet a thing it is; else men would never expend so much treasure and blood as
we have done for it: Ah, this is nothing to a freedom from sin, and from other
bondages which arise upon sin unto the soul: Ask but any poor creature that is
newly come out of the dungeon, out of the horrible pit, where there was no
standing; will they not tell you that liberty is Psalm. 40. 2.
sweet? it is not to be expressed: If Paul had not been free, he had had many a
lash by those cruel tyrants. If the soul be not Acts 22. 19.
free, it is liable to perish, to be whipped* to death, to eternal death with
Scorpions; ask but any of the people of God, who have been wearied and almost
worried with their lusts; O the iron entered into their soul, they did sit in
darkness, in the dungeon many a sad day and hour, and at last Out of the depths
they have called to the Lord, he has set them free: O what an Heaven upon
Earth they found it when they have been delivered in any measure from this
bondage! what would they take to be in the same condition again, specially
under the command of their lusts? not all the world; brethren, the Lord
persuade your hearts now, now while it is to be had, before you be called for
out of prison to the judgment, that you may go forth and enjoy this glorious
liberty.

O but you would say, Alas, what should we do in this case? we are convinced;
it may be some poor soul man say of himself, that this is a miserable bondage
we are in, even by sin and the consequents of it, and we would fain be set
free, but we know not which way to go about it; we are in a maze, a wilderness,
a labyrinth, a du^geon: we grope, and grope, and cannot find the way out: O
what shall we do? it may be this may be the case of some of our souls; I will
tell you what you shall do.

First Deny your own policy, and wisdom, know, they will not set you free;
Judas had much knowledge, and yet he hanged himself; you will rather by depth
of reasonings plunge your selves deeper; the Gospel is foolishness to them
through the pride in their carnal knowledge.

Secondly, Labor to know the Gospel in its tenor, and to close with it, to
believe it, you shall know the truth, and the truth Ioh. 17. 13.
shall make you free; truth truly known will set a soul free; this truth is the
truth of the Gospel, for Grace and Truth come by Jesus Christ: and it is
observable that they are both put together; Sanctify them with thy Truth,
says our Savior, thy Word is Truth.

There are three things here considerable.

First, That there must be a through acquaintance with the bondage that we are
under, and the better condition of service; how much the service of Christ is
to be preferred before that of Satan; for the truth is, while a man knows no
better, he will be content to serve the worse; there is never a sinner under
the dominion of sin, but thinks he is the freest man; and the people of God
that are bound up in their Spirits to such a strict way of walking with God, he
thinks they are the men in bondage; but alas, it is because he understands
not his own condition: nor is it a slight hint of such a thing that will
usually prevail to a freedom from all sin, therefore you must labor to study
what this bondage is, see what thou art exposed to by reason of it, and see
what a prfect freedom the service of Christ is. O what great Psalm. 19.
reward there is in the very keeping of his Commandments; joy is such an
inseparable attendant upon obedience, that some measure of it follows every
good action, as the very heathens themselves acknowledged; much more then, when
the Lord Jesus is the Master, and his service the work.

Secondly, Thou must be acquainted with the commands of Christ; his precepts
are pure, and they have an influence upon the heart that believes them, to
bring him out of that bondage, to set him free: I do believe nothing more
keeps many a soul in bondage; he knows not what the will of Christ is in
such or such a particular, else he would do it. Be acquainted with Christ the
sum of the Gospel, you shall know the truth; that is to say, what he has
done to set poor creatures free became a servant obedient to the death, was in
bondage, in prison, in the horrible pit, how he was put to it to overcome, etc.

Thirdly and principally, thou must be acquainted with the promises of the
Gospel that are made to this end; it is their excellency to help forward our
freedom; this part of the truth well known, so known as to be closed with, will
make every poor creature free, ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall
make you free; and so this in the text, the Sun of righteousness shall arise
Romans 6. 14.
upon you with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth: and so many other
places, sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are M^ca. 7. 17.
not under the Law, but under Grace: It is the very tenure of the Covenant, and
of the promises in Scripture, that he will deliver his people, save them from
all their uncleanness, and subdue all iniquities for them, yea though they
work iniquity with both hands, Verse. 3. Either we know not these things, or
else we make not use of them, we act not faith upon them; the Lord does love to
have his people use the importunity of faith, for nothing is so importunate as
faith, nor offers, as I may say, such violence to heaven as that does. O
Brethren, the Lord help our unbelief, and forgive our neglect of our faith in
this point; if thou can act it but weakly, yet put forth some act of faith,
hang upon these promises, tell the Lord he has caused thee to hope upon this
his Word, else thou could not hope, and thou do hope in this Word, else
thy heart would altogether sink within thee; and will he now make thee ashamed
of his hope, has his promise ever failed a poor creature, and will it now fail
thee?

But beside this, do thou find thy heart moved, made willing indeed to part
with sin? Art thou in good earnest in this business? O yes, says the poor
soul, I would rather then my life be set at liberty, for what good will my life
do me, if I must continually serve sin, and grieve such bowels of love toward
me in Jesus Christ? have you searched, do you know your hearts in this point?
it may be thou have not that heed of trusting thy heart further then thou see
it, it will deceive thee then; but if thou have searched it; and begged of God
to search it, and thou* do not find but he has through infinite riches of
grace made thee willing to come out if thou could tell how: I tell you
Brethren, if this be so, the chains are fallen off from your hands, and the
bolts from your legs, your freedom is in a great part accomplished, only thou
can not find the way out of the prison. O then follow Christ, follow his
Spirit, when he moves thy heart at any time to search and try, makes thee
tender, puts thee into a frame to bewail the evils of thy heart, take the hint
up and be doing, follow him and he will bring thee through one iron-gate, and
through another, and thou shall find thy self at the last set free, and know
thy liberty, and the things freely given thee of God.

O beg the Spirit, for he is the cause of liberty, it depends upon him as light
upon the Sun, and the Spring upon the Fountain; he applies what Christ has
done for us, knowing the deep things of God, he reveals them, he only
convinces and answers objections, etc.

The sixth Use of the point shall be several admonitions or exhortations to
them that are set free from this bondage; thou have Use 6.
had the Sun of righteousness shine upon thee, and art gone forth from sin,
from that bondage, those fears, terrors, darkness and distractions which sin
brings upon poor creatures, thou rememberest the time when thou could do
nothing but sin against the Lord and grieve him continually, thou could not
cease to sin, thou wast under the command of sin, and now through grace,
exceeding rich grace, the gates of the prison are open, the Lord has plucked
thy feet, thy affections out of the snare; What does the Lord thy God require
of thee? this should be the next enquiry of the soul, me thinks, after so
signal mercies.

First, surely he expects thou should give him the glory of all, praise
him, and exalt him alone: alas, what are the calves of our lips, they cost us
nothing, the poorest have this, and the richest have no more in effect but
this, if thou be able to do little for Christ, yet thou may praise him, thou
may admire his rich grace, make his name glorious? Truly Brethren, I believe
some of us are able to say by experience, that our unthankfulness for the
freedom we have had, has been an occasion of our being clapped up, for all the
design of God in Christ, in redemption of poor creatures, is to make his mercy
and grace glorious, as he did his power in the creation and wisdom; Now how is
it made glorious among us, but by our acknowledgment of it, our lifting up the
Lord Jesus not only with our hearts but our tongues; art thou brought back
again into darkness, and into the prison after some refreshing? Consider, wast
thou thankful for what thou had? we are all sick of the leapers disease in
the Gospel, ten were (...). (...). 17.
cleansed, but where are the nine? I doubt scarce one in ten of us do praise
him according to what he has done for our souls, and those that do* yet scarce
for one act of his loving kindness in ten, in bringing of-us forth; it may be
he delivers us ten times from a dead heart, before we once give him the
glory. O this Popish principle of pride that is in us; is that which seals: up
our hearts and stops our mouths from praises, but opens it in complaints, in
discontents, when we want such a mercy. O if our f^eece be dry when others are
wet; we are ready to question, why does the Lord deal so with me rather then
with another, why have I not as much enlargement of heart as another, as great
gifts, freedom of speech, and utterance, as great grace in any kind? Why am I
not set above these wretched carnal delights as well as others of his people?
as if, God should do any thing for us out of respect to us, we had deserved any
thing at his hands; whereas we may rather expostulate with our selves, O why is
it not worse with me then it is? why am I in no sorer* bondage then I am? where
I am once overthrown, it is mercy I have not an hundred times been over-thrown
with-my lusts. So on the other hand, it stops our mouths for returning unto the
Lord for what he has done for us; we may many of us thank our selves for much
of the bondage that is upon us, that we so much complain of. O if every time
the Lord sets our frozen spirits a melting, every time he sets our
straightned hearts at large, we instead of lifting up our selves, we could and
did but admire that grace, magnify him, loath our selves, would he not much
more delight to enlarge us? O therefore look to this.

Secondly, Then look to it that ye stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ
has made you free; I speak not so much here Gal. 5. 1.
to the yoke of Ceremonies which the Lord has taken away altogether, but I
speak specially to our freedom from the dominion of our sins, the freedom from
the Law as a Covenant of life, and from outward pressures and bondages; you
know our fears were great when we saw this cloud of blood but hanging over our
heads, and many of the precious ones of God, I know, when I was little and
scarce able to take notice of such things, yet I have been an eye and
ear-witness of the sad complaints made before the Lord of it. Now has God
delivered us from this, stand we fast in this liberty.

But first then, for that of sin and our lusts, has the Lord broken the yoke
of them, set thee free when thou did groan under it? O take heed of returning
to folly any more; has he spoken Psalm. ^5. 8.
peace to thy troubled soul, loosed the cords of thy sins wherewith thou wast
held, and will thou be tampering with sin again? This was the madness and
perverseness of Israel, they would make them a Captain and return to Egypt
again, to the house of bondage, when they had been but a little tried in the
Wilderness; but we have no such discouragement upon us as to put us upon such
resolutions, but merely the unfaithfulness of our own hearts, and
unsteadfastness of our own spirits: the Apostle speaks of some, who having
escaped the pollutions of the world, they did return with the dog to the vomit,
with the swine to the mire; the condition of 2 Pet. 2. 22.
such a soul is worse then ever it was, he brings seven other spirits worse
then himself, and the latter end of that man is worse then his Mat. 12. 45.
beginning. O when the Devil can but fasten upon such a poor creature again,
that once has gotten out of the prison, like a cruel Jailer now he will lay
more fetters upon him, now he shall be even overwhelmed with temptations, now
his feet, his head, and his heart and all shall be put in the stocks, have
their bolts and chains upon them. Sinners, you never make work for Christ, but
you make work for your selves, lay a grievous foundation for much bitterness to
your own spirits; a little care, a little watchfulness here, may prevent
heartbreaking afterward, which we do necessitate (as I may say) Jesus Christ
to by our backslidings; to this end therefore fly sin, as Moses fled from the
face of his Serpent; fly youthful lusts, make have away, the Devil and sin
will pursue hard, and cast this golden apple in our way, this and that
occasion; O take heed of them. So the Apostle, fly 2 ^im. 2. 22. 1 Cor. 6. 18.
fornication, and fly Idolatry, etc.

Secondly, Take heed of returning to that Covenant of works, or Covenant of
life, which was a yoke of our own making; if our blessed Savior has been
pleased to break it, set us free, shall we ret^rn to that bondage again? I
doubt this is a great cause of much sorrow and heavy walking before the Lord of
many a poor creature: O he cannot do this, and he cannot do that, and therefore
he doubts all is not well with him, whether he have any thing to do with
Christ? It is true, if he had made our doing, our perfect obedience the
condition of his Covenant, it had been somewhat, but he has not, but faith in
him; take from him for all ends and purposes, not only for pardon, but for
strength, for food, for victory over our sin. Now we go off this, and therefore
we move so heavily and cannot stir, but are like a door off its hinges, a
Chariot off its wheels, bring much bondage and trouble upon our selves, and
much of our time and pains is spent in poring upon this, and getting healing
again for this, which might be spent in glorifying him. Psalm. 51. 12.


Therefore beg of God to this end, that he would establish you with his
Princely Royal Spirit, where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; the
Son makes us free by his Spirit; and therefore David makes that prayer, as
being sensible of this. O beg 2 Cor. 3. 17.
this Spirit for establishment, the Lord will be entreated, he puts arguments
into our mouths, and gives us the greatest encouragements to beg the Spirit,
of any other mercy that I know of, as being the greatest mercy, and the
principal of all Gospel Grace, and therefore being so great a gift, poor
sinners might be afraid to ask, but says he, you are Fathers whose affections
are Luke 11. 13.
finite and mixed, you are not pure love, yea you are evil, and yet will give
good gifts to your children, much more will God give the Spirit; this the
Apostle is earnest with the Lord for, that he would stablish and strengthen his
people to every good Word 2 These. 2. 16.
and Work, for grace is but a creature, and so is weak, cannot consist of it
self without him, therefore be earnest here.

Thirdly, Since we are delivered from outward pressures, the yoke that did gall
the necks of the people of God as before; has the Lord set us above our
enemies, has he before our eyes brought our Egyptians down in the red Sea of
blood, and shall we return thither again? I speak not of the same bondage, I
hope the Lord will keep his people from that, but I speak of a worse, to be
delivered from a tyranny of man, to return to a tyranny and dominion of sin;
it is sad, the heathens could say, Servitus gravissima est sibi ipsi servire,
it is the heaviest yoke for Seneca.
a man to be yoaked with his own ends and interests, to seek himself, serve
himself, specially his sinful self, to make provision for his lusts. It was a
sad character of Rome that Angustine gives her, Victrix gentium captiva
vitiorum. What are we the better for being delivered from that bondage? if such
as were humble then, and low, and meek, and self-denying, now are high, and
fierce, and self-seeking, proud and wanton, and luxurious, their whoreing,
hawking, and hounding, and spending their time in such sports which should have
been laid out in public service, was looked upon as a great evil, God caused
their houses and lands to spue them out. I wish we be not beginning to come
under that worse yoke, now we are delivered from that of oppression; was it not
better for Israel to work in the Iron-furnace, in the brickkill, then to be
enslaved to their lusts in the wilderness, and there to perish? and was not
Babylon better for them, then to be at liberty, and yet to become slaves to
their lusts, to their Idols? Brethren, I pray you let us look well about us
every one; it is true, the day of the Lord, it has burned like an oven among
us, and many have been as stubble fully dried put into it; the briars and
brambles that did scratch and tear the people of God, they are consumed, God
has gone through them and consumed Is^. 17. 4.
them; and are we any thing the better, are we not worse? If we now melt away
with the sweetness of our liberty, grow luxurious and wanton, wanton in
opinions, that men know not well what they would be, but any thing, so it be
new and the thriving way: and wanton in apparel; are there not as many slaves
to pride, to vanity, to self, as there were then to the lusts of other men? I
beseech you, which is the worse, to be at the mercy of another man's lusts,
which can but reach the body and effect our sorrow for a time; or the mercy of
our own merciless lusts, which will work our woe and ruin? O therefore look to
this then, if set at liberty, sly sin; as he said to Lot, fly for thy life,
etc. sly fornication 1 Cor. 6.
and youthful lusts, etc. said the Apostle.

The third part of the Exhortation then shall be, to take heed 1 Pet. 2. 16.
how we abuse this our liberty, as says the Apostle, not using our liberty as
a cloak of malitiousness; happily alluding to the manner of persons. The Apostles
scope in that place leads us to one part Gal 5. 13.
of the sense of this abusing of our liberty, and that is to think they are so
free now, that they need not have their necks under the yoke of men at all, for
that goes before, exhorting them to submit themselves to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake; to be subject to the higher powers and subordinate
powers, is very consistent with this spiritual freedom* was there ever any so
free as our Savior, who is the Son that makes us free? and yet Luke 2. 51.
did not he submit? submit to his parents, was subject to them, and subject to
the powers under which he lived, because his Kingdom was not of this world; and
would it suite with the head, and will it not suite with the members? But I
hope I need not speak much to this. But there is much more wherein we may abuse
our liberty as children, by a carrying it frowardly and rebelliously against
their parents, upon pretense of liberty: and servants that are under the yoke,
it may be think they may do much in this case, more then they have warrant to
do, because they are free, it may be, and their Masters happily in bondage under
sin, therefore shall they despise them? No, but count them worthy of all 1 Timothy
6. 1.
honor, serving them in singleness of heart, as unto Christ; not for
by-respects and ends, for fear of their displeasure, but for Christ's sake to do
it: this is freedom indeed.

But to speak a little more generally, many men think when once they have
gotten their necks out of the yoke, from under that bondage, and those fears
that they have been under, they think now they are at liberty, they are past
all the worst, when they have gotten a little peace, and therefore though
before they walked mournfully before God, and were diligent in following hard
after him, now they slack their pace, grow remiss, they have their
consolations, the loaves they would have, and now they may take their ease. O
this is a horrible abuse of this liberty, for therefore the Lord speaks peace,
that we might not return to folly; Psalm. 85. 8.
and we quite cross, because he has spoken peace to us, therefore give up our
selves to folly; is not this to walk contrary to him? and will he not walk
contrary to you? is not this to make our liberty a cloak, an occasion to the
flesh, a handle for the flesh to Gal. 5. 13.
take hold of, and so to bring you into bondage again, and so make more work
for Christ to set you at liberty again? Brethren, can we make our liberty a
cloak to the flesh, and do you think the Lord will not pluck that cloak over
our ears, and show us our nakedness again, and make us know how we come by it
again, before we have it? and therefore take heed of this, I beseech you, lest
your liberty degenerate into licentiousness; Maxima liberate minima licentia,
said that Ancient.

But yet more particularly, take heed of abusing of your liberty in the use of
things lawful in themselves and indifferent; it is a sign of a heart that has
little fear of offending God, that dare walk just at the very brink, upon the
very line of destruction, between sin and lawful liberty, if it can be
assigned* You find the Apostle of another Spirit, rather then offend his weak
Brother, 1 Cor. 8. 13.
he would never eat meat while he lived: why how would he live? rather upon
herbs, and fruits, and such things, then to eat flesh as long as he lived too.
I tell you Brethren, in our days, though there is much discourse of liberty,
there is little true use of it, when a man will offend all the people of God,
and his Brethren, rather then he will part with an excrement; and a woman
rather then sorbear her spotting, and painting, and bedlam nakedness. If the
things be lawful in themselves, which I think they are not; or a man will
rather grieve all the people of God then cross his humor, this is sad.

Again, Brethren, one man may have a greater liberty then another in this case,
and another greater then he in another case; as for instance now, Abraham might
look upon Sodom when it was flaming, but Lot might not, because there he had
his desirable things, lest it should draw back his heart from the journey now
commanded him; and so if a man do but observe when temptations and lusts meet
together; where his corruption lies, what is the scum of his heart, and what
does use to fire his lusts, there he may not give himself such a liberty as
another may, whose temptation lies in another thing: as if a man's temptation
lie to excess in eating, in drinking, it is not lawsul for such a man now to
look upon the wine when red, etc. to come in the danger of such a temptation;
and so if a man have eyes full of adultery Prove. 23. 31. 2 Pet. 2. 14
that cannot cease to sin, he may not behold an object that another may, whose
temptation lies not there.

In a word, look to it Brethren, that we serve one another in love, this is
opposed to using our liberty as a Cloak to the flesh, to bear one another
burdens; Brethren, we are not at liberty one from another, we may not say with
Cain, Am I my Brothers Gal. 5. 13.
keeper? we ought not to despise the infirmities of the weak, because they see
not as we see, and therefore are grieved and offended at many things that we
make nothing of; here we ought to bear their infirmities, to cover them, to
labor to inform them, Romans 15. 1.
and forbear them, not despise them; become all things to them that we may
lawfully, as the Apostle became all things, but a sinner, 2 Cor. 9. 19, 22.
to gain them; this is serving one another in love, and the labor of love
either to God or men is a free service indeed; we are rather ready to serve our
selves one of another, for ought I perceive, generally it is so, then serve one
another in love. Brethren, I doubt there is little love for Christ sake, though
there may be some for our own, and then all the liberty we talk of, it is but
bondage; the Law of love is a Law of liberty indeed, but enough of this.

Fourthly, Then look to it, that we being free from sin, we become the servants
of righteousness; that is to say, that you give Romans 6. 22.
up your selves, yield your selves unto God, unto Christ, as instruments for
the holy Spirit to play upon, as instruments, tools, weapons of righteousness
for the Lord to make use of, even as he pleases, this is the end of all that
liberty held out in the Covenant of grace, that we being delivered from the
hands of all our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness Luke 1. 74.
all the days of our lives: Now has the Lord then set thee free, brought thee
out of the horrible pit, broken off the shakles, knocked them off, set open the
prison? what can we do less then this? spend our selves now in his service. O
if men would but consider, how much of their strength and spirits sin has had,
while we were under that bondage: Me thinks it should put us on so much the
more earnestly, specially considering how our service adds nothing to him, it
is for our own good, as you heard before, and it is all he expects for
delivering of us. What poor Gally-slave would not most willingly yield to a
Nobleman to be his servant, where his service is honorable, and pleasant, and
delightful, so be he would redeem him? why this is the very case.

Beside, if we consider the fruit here, and the reward hereafter; the Apostle
puts both together, and I will not put them asunder, the first fruits, and the
harvest, they have their fruit unto holiness; the more we serve the Lord
Christ, the more easy, pleasant and delightful will his service be, the more
our souls will shine with the beauty of holiness; as the bondage grows by
continuance, so does the freedom by this service. I dare say, the more
acquaintance any poor heart has with a diligent, close, humble, upright
walking with God, the more pleasant the ways of God are to him; yea, and the
more holy that man grows, it must needs be so, because he has more communion
with the Fountain of holiness, even God in Jesus Christ, and the Spirit also:
would you be holy, Brethren? would you be more and more freed from the
remainders of bondage which are upon you? Believe it, the only way is to lay
out your selves more in the service of Christ; the Spirit of Christ will
delight to be where he is entertained; where his motions are received, every
hint is taken, and followed, and improved, and the more that spirit then dwells
in the heart, which is his contrary principle lusting against the flesh, the
more the flesh must needs go down in a soul. But the end is that will make up
all. O the reward will be according to our works; when a man is rich toward
God, has been faithful in a little, faithful in a great deal, has laid up a
good foundation against the time to come, O how shall such shine in glory! Me
thinks our eyes should be a little forward, the eye of faith, as well as
altogether backward to Christ, and what he has done for us, to what he has
prepared for us, and therefore he himself proposes himself as a pattern to us
in this very respect, looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our faith,
having laid aside Romans 12. 2.
every weight, being set free from this bondage, then run, looking to Jesus the
Author of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despised the shame; endured the clouding of his Fathers face from him,
that was the weight that made him hang the head; it is the proposing of the end
that sweetens the means, health that is aimed at, how it sugars many a bitter
potion, a man will endure any thing in such a case: Well, though we may have
much ado with our froward and backsliding hearts, and be many times wearied
with them; yet give not over, but run, and work, and so work, as men set at
liberty, not in chains, cheerfully and strongly upon all the former
considerations, and this will be a right use of our liberty indeed.

Fifthly, Then be not brought under bondage unto men, that is to say, to have
our consciences inslaved, either through the fear of men, or favor of men;
surely, if the Spirit of Christ be in us, as it is, if we be his, it will free
and make us go forth from this bondage: You have seen it in all experiences,
when they threatened the Apostles, commanded them they should not Acts 4 19.
preach in that name; the Spirit that was in them did break all those bonds,
though it taught them (...)ot to rebel, to be tumultuous; for it is pure and
then peaceable, the wisdom that is from this Spirit, yet it taught them not to
regard it; whether it be fit to obey God or man judge ye? they rejoiced the
more, that they were accounted worthy to suffer for Christ; this wind that
blows where it lists, it bears down all opposition, there is no resisting
of that Spirit that speaks and acts in them. See the Martyrs, how it did
triumph over their adversaries, they overcame their cruelty by the invincible
patience, and yielding their bodies to a torment, rather then their consciences
to the cruel commands of sinners, which tend to their wounding. Was there ever
such a slave as Canaan a servant of servants shall he be; when another man, a
great person, is a servant to sin, and thou Gen 9. 25.
for advantage or fear art a slave to him; is not this to be a servant of
servants? to have this curse upon thy soul in the highest degree, to be a slave
to a slave, is the deepest slavery that can be imagined: Therefore take heed
lest such a bondage creep upon us at unawares, for our hearts are deceitful;
take heed of sinful compliances with the prevailing evils of the times for
advantage, this is to be a slave to men and to humors, and not to be freemen
to Jesus Christ.

But if you would stand fast in this liberty in all these respects, then truly
we must see to it, that we do not grieve the holy Spirit of Jesus Christ; for
this is the principle of our liberty, where the Spirit of Christ is, there is
liberty; and according to the proportion of his presence with, and working in
any heart, is the liberty and freedom of that soul; he first works liberty,
knocks off the bolts of the soul, pulls out of the horrible pit, he only
answers our doubts, satisfies the soul that is in bondage, by witnessing love
to the soul, by applying the blood of Jesus Christ to the soul, this the Spirit
does, and he only establishes the soul in this liberty, establish me with thy
free Spirit; indeed, somewhat else may loosen a man, as to the outward practice
from sin, but the Spirit only can loosen the heart from sin, and only can
dissolve the sodering of corrupt affections, whereby our hearts and their
sinful objects are sodered and glued together, and then the heart is broken
from sin, as well as for sin, nor can any thing else keep up the soul in the
enjoyment of that liberty by this Spirit; and therefore if we would keep up and
maintain our spiritual liberty, we must be sure to keep in with the Spirit; if
we grieve him, he will grieve us, and leave us to fight with our own strength,
and fall under sin, and so come to bondage again in part, to the grief and
wounding of our spirits; some of us alas it may be, thought once we had been
free, but have been brought into bondage again, and held under the power of
sin, in terrors: we are ready to wonder when the lusts we thought had been
dead and buried, do rise up again, captive us to them; but wonder not at it,
for how often is this holy Spirit grieved by us, which is the principle of our
liberty? if we consider this well, it will put an end to our admiration; if we
would keep our liberty, not return to bondage, grieve not the Spirit.

First, he is grieved when he is neglected and slighted, his motions to put us
on to such a duty, we shift and shuffle, and make one excuse or another, and
will not do it; either to set upon a duty we never performed, or to do it in
another manner then we have done at another time, this grieveth him; as for
instance, he puts us on to reprove our Brother for a sin, not to suffer sin to
lie upon him, and we smother it, we think it more offends another then us, or
else it is an unthankful office, it is the way to lose a friend, to be
accounted a busie-body, we see that men for the most part cannot bear a
reproof, but they will snarl at least, if they do not turn and rent us, and
bear us upon their backs. And therefore we neglect our duty, and so for any
other; now alas, how often are we guilty in this kind?

Secondly, Take heed of all impurity, uncleanness, for he is a pure holy Spirit
and will lie clean, he cannot endure a nasty place; this will grieve him, if it
be pollution of the flesh, or pollution of the spirit, if harbored in the
heart it will grieve the Spirit; and then as a man grieved, he departs, that
is his grieving indeed; properly he is not grieved, God is not subject to any
passion, or fears, or sorrows, etc. because all things are always present with
him, he sees what we would be, before he had to do with us at all, but then,
when we do actually thus pollute our selves, he takes occasion to depart, to
leave us to those evils, and to fill us with our own backslidings.

Thirdly, Take heed of sinning against conviction, against light, this is
dangerous indeed, you may come to be shut up in darkness for this, to be bound
in affliction and iron, to endure sad things upon your spirits; for if the
Spirit of Christ who convinces you this or that is a sin, be so far slighted
as you heed it not, what if he then forbear? and is it not righteous he should
forbear to shine upon your graces, that you should see any thing that is ought
in you? So that you shall walk in darkness and see no light: will not this be a
paying of you home in your own coin? David could not be ignorant what his sin
was before he committed it, and yet you see, he ventured upon it, and what it
cost him.

Fourthly, Take heed of deliberate sinning, when a man has time of
consideration of his sin, to argue the case pro and con, as we use to say, and
does revolve with himself, O this is sinful, if I do it I rebel against God, I
do what in me lies to undo my self; O but says lust, man it shall be
satisfied; God is merciful, there is time enough to repent, or it will easily
be healed afterward. Now upon such deliberations as this, if a man will sin,
there is much of the will in it, and so much the more wicked, and therefore now
the spirit must needs be grieved; what can such a poor creature expect but to
be brought under bondage? as you see it in David, his plotting and contriving
the death of Vriah; these sins in cold blood, when a man is not under the
sudden violent heat of a temptation, and yet will sin, O this grieves him much;
if a pot be on the fire and the scum rise, we throw it out, we expect it would
rise; but if no fire be under, and yet a scum arise, O this is so loathsome, it
is not to be endured.

Fifthly, Take heed of Ranker and Malice, of grudgings of heart one against
another, as the Apostle says, grudge not one against another; prejudices,
heart-burnings, grudgings upon injuries, real, or conceived and imagined: O
this grieveth the Spirit, who is a Spirit of pure love, and will have them that
look to enjoy him, to be a people of love, to cover much, bear and forbear, and
forgive in love, for love will cover a multitude of offenses.

Sixthly, Take heed then of pride, of being lifted up, for the Spirit of Christ
is a Spirit of humility: O he loves to dwell in the lowly spirit: if we be
lifted up we rob him of his honor, to arrogate that to our selves which he
has been working for us, to think we are something of our own, of our selves:
he will let us know, to our sorrow, that we have nothing in our hearts but
darkness, and bondage, and sin, and that all was from him.

Seventhly, Take heed of unthankfulness for what he has done for us: when the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus shall be at all this pains with us, contest with the
quarrellings and disputings of our own hearts, against our own peace and
comfort, and answer all our objections, and still our complaints, and seal up
love upon our hearts, remove our trembling and fears, dispell our darkness,
cleanse our loathsome hearts in a great measure of those lusts that did so much
prevail against us, and we shall forget this now, and not return to him the
praise, but either to grow into carnal security, and when we have rest from
that which galled us, with the nine leapers, go our ways, never mind whence we
received it, or else so much pore upon the remainder of our sins, as not to
exalt that grace whereby we are in so great a part delivered? O this grieveth
him, and therefore he may justly let us step back again, or let loose upon us
again those lusts, that we were delivered from their strength, and never prized
the mercy; that we learn to admire that grace; much more might be added, but
this shall suffice.

The next use of the point shall be for satisfaction to some doubts, since we
are delivered and set free from the Law, as you have heard from that; It may be
thought, First, that the Law was an evil, that it is such a privilege of the
Saints to be delivered from it. Secondly, It may be doubted how far we are set
free from it, and therefore I will speak a little to each of them; for the
first.

First, the Apostle meets with it, or rather prevents it, for seeing that
carnal reason would be so ingenuous as to find out that cavil among others,
against the Doctrine of faith, and of freedom from the bondage under the Law,
as the strength of sin specially; What shall I say then, says the Apostle, is
the Law sin? that Rom 7. 12.
we are said to be delivered from it, and that sin has its strength from it?
and so deliverance from sin is a deliverance from the Law, as the strength of
it. Or, is the Law death, since sin by this means does work death? No, says
the Apostle, the Law is holy, just and good, the Law gives no occasion to sin;
but sin takes occasion, sin will not endure to be contradicted, it sucks poison
out of that holy and good Law of God; meeting with opposition, it swells and
rages, so that indeed it is sin that is the evil, the Law is holy and good. O
but the Law it works wrath, and works death, and can this then be good? and how
can it be such a mercy to be delivered from it? is it a favor to be put into
golden fetters? supposing the Law to be good and holy, yet since it is, as we
may say, ginns, and fetters, and bolts, though of gold, to hold the poor soul
in, to keep him in and up as in a prison, is this so good then? To this I
answer, It is true, by the Law is the knowledge of sin, I had not known lust,
except the Law had said thou shall not covet; whether in the last command, or
in each command, now I will not dispute; but the first motions, thoughts,
risings and bubblings of corruption, I had not known them to be sin, but that
the Law has said, thou shall not covet: Why, but was that then that was good
made death to me? says the Apostle: You must know the Apostle speaks here of a
death, which is the receiving, as I may say, the sentence of condemnation in
his own spirit by conviction, for this is all his knowledge of sin, that sin by
the commandment might appear to be exceeding sinful; this is the dying there
mentioned, sin revived and I dyed; which is in order to liberty, to make the
poor creature see his necessity of Jesus Christ, that so he might make out
after him, to make a pardon welcome, therefore he casts poor sinners into fet
ters under this Law: So that if you look upon it in this subserviency to the
Gospel, though the creature may be put to much grief by it, yet it is good;
when pardon is proclaimed, that a Prince should cast those rebels into prison,
to make them willing of a pardon; the Gospel is a savor of death to death you
know, and yet it is a sweet savor in them that perish, and them that are
saved; the Gospel is never the worse for that: and if the Law prove fetters to
a poor sinner; to keep him under bondage for ever, and bind him over to
everlasting Judgment, this is through his own wickedness, that he will not
accept of deliverance in the Gospel where it is preached: the Law is never the
less good and holy.

But the second is the main thing, how far we are said to be freed from the Law
of God, and how we are not freed from it?

First, we are delivered from it as a Covenant of righteousness, do this and
live; that is to say, be thou exactly conformable to this Law for ever; (...),
want of suitableness to this Law is a sin, and every sin, the wages of it is
death; if thou break it but in one, thou art guilty of all. Alas, Brethren, the
Law was weak through our flesh, and could not justify, it could discover sin,
as a glass, but not purge it; it could work wrath, work it out, but it could
not pacify, therefore the Lord Jesus came and took upon him that name, the
Lord our righteousness, and he is now, says Romans 10. 4. Gal. 3. 25.
the Apostle, the end of the Law for righteousness: It was a Schoolmaster to
whip us, to fright us, out of our selves to Jesus Christ; therefore every soul
in Christ now is delivered from the Law as a Covenant of life, that is clear;
but this was mentioned before.

Secondly, Now from the rigorous exacting of obedience; for according to the
Law, nothing is obedience, except perfect; if a man miscarry in one thing he is
guilty of all, there must be a doing of every thing written, yea in the
fullest, most spiritual sense of it; yea a continuance in every thing to the
end, or else it is not obedience; but now the Lord accepts of the desires of
the upright heart, he hears the prayer of such as desire to fear his name:
the will now goes for the deed, where the poor soul striveth to do and is not
able; Dear friends, how sad a condition were we in many times if the Lord did
so rigorously exact our obedience? how often do we come to pray, and can say
nothing in his presence, can scarce sigh or groan? and in hearing and speaking
his Word, though we do stir up our selves to watch: O how often do vain
thoughts run away with our hearts? now if we were under this exacting of the
Law, what would become of us? what had become of Paul when he did the things he
hated, the things he would not, etc. if he had been under the rigor of the
Law? If there be first a willing mind, that imprimis Brethren, does legitimate
all the following Items, though never so weak; now the Law is in the hand of
Christ, as a Father who pittieth and spares us; alas, what had become of the
best of us else long Mal. 3. 17.
since? thus we are delivered.

Thirdly, From the curse of it, Gal. 3. 18. our Savior being made a curse for
us, so that the curse of it does not lie upon us to sink us, that is to say,
the weight of the wrath or displeasure of God; Nor yet as a compulsion to
obedience to this Law; as slaves and very wretched sinners may do much for the
fear and dread of this curse of God, but this the Lord delivered his people
from, he makes them a willing people, he now shows them greater reason
against sin then ever they saw, now opens to them the grave, they see the
rottenness of it, which they saw not before, now he opens his treasures of rich
grace in Christ, and so by mediation of the understanding works upon the will,
sweetly inclining it to God, though there be a moral swasion by apposition of
object, as a Lamb is led by a green bush up and down; yet this is not all,
there goes more to the taking away the stone in the heart, and giving a heart
of flesh, which does most what lie in the making the will flexible and pliable,
not so much in sorrow, and tears, and meltings, which does many times accompany
it, and sometimes not at all, or very little: Pharaohs heart was hardened, for
he obeyed not, he was stiff and stubborn, and therefore said to be a stone: Now
I say, a moral swasion will not reach to this, a man may use much oratory to a
stone, and yet it remains a stone still; a Preacher may hold forth sin to be
sin, and exceeding sinful, and hold forth Christ crucified by them and for them
before their eyes, and yet alas, all will not do, they remain stones still: No,
no, an enclining of the heart; he turns the hearts of men whithersoever he
will, as he did the heart of Esau to Jacob upon his prayer, there was more then
a swasion; Genesis 32.
and as he did the thief upon the Cross in the midst of his torments and
agonies of death, then to think upon a Christ, then to have his heart toward
him, that never regarded him in his lifetime, and in the midst of a people
reviling him, as you know, and upon the Cross suffering and dying, and yet then
to be wrought upon, argues a wonderful divine power put forth upon the will.
Well then, when the will is overcome, we are made free to the service of Jesus
Christ; now we can delight in the Romans 7. 32.
Law of God after the inward man; it was a weariness to a sinner to hear the
Word, specially if it came near to him, he could not endure to be grated upon;
and a weariness to pray; now he delights in these things: So far we are
delivered from the curse, as the great inforcement of Obedience.

Fourthly, From the provoking power of the Law, as you have often heard; now
that Law that was the occasion of the rebelling of lust, is hid in the heart,
that we might not sin against Psalm. 119. 22.
him; this is a great change indeed in a child of God from the former
condition, when before, God would put his yoke upon our souls, we writhed and
plucked away our neck, would not endure it; now it pleases us to be under it,
it is sweet and easy to us now, it is a provocation to obedience, that before
was a provocation unto sin.

But now on the other hand, we are not set free from the Law, as a Law, a rule
of holy walking, of new obedience; our Savior did not by fulfilling the Law
destroy it, but accomplish it; because we were not able of our selves to do it,
he under went the rigor of it, and took away all the condemnation of it, that
it might be an easy yoke to us; and wherefore have we a Law written in our
hearts, which is but a counterpane, as I may say, a disposition to do the
revealed will of God, except we have this revealed will of his to be a rule to
walk by? has the Lord Jesus then Mat. 5. 17.
lightened the yoke, sweetened it, given us his example, chalked out our way
thereby as a pattern to us, and given us strength also to do it, and shall we
refuse this holy Law, as a rule to walk by? it is true, it is not now in the
hand of Moses, as a Schoolmaster, to lash, to terrify, to bring us to Christ,
when once we are in him; but now it is a rule in the hand of Christ, in the
hand of a tutor, that with all gentleness does lead us by his Spirit into all
truth; that is to say, not the knowledge, but the practice, that is, to be led
into the truth: man may know much, and yet be far from being led into it, know
nothing as he ought to know; now it is a rule in the hand of a Father, before
it was a Lion terribly roaring upon us, hell, and wrath, and ruin, and so it
is still to every unbelieving creature, who are under it, as to the
satisfaction of divine Justice by suffering, that is to say, under the curse,
though as a Covenant of life none is under it since Adam, for I conceive it was
not given for that end; but under it, as to satisfaction of divine justice they
are: now I say it is terrible to such, but when the Lion is killed by our
Sampson, there is sweetness in it, out of the eater came meat: the very Law of
God that is terrible, condemning, affrighting a poor guilty sinner; it is the
delight of a David: indeed not a page of the Book of God, but is, as I may say,
a handwriting against every wicked wretch, wherein he may read his doom; and
not a page wherein there is not something that ministers consolation to a
Believer: for to see the terrors of the Law, which is a wounding, death,
overwhelming a sinner; is a raising of his Spirit to consider what he is
delivered from; well then, now it is a Law of liberty, Jam. 1. 25. his commands
are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. but yet we are under those commands still. So
the Apostle was not without the Law, but under the Law to Christ; we make it
not void by faith, but establish it: But thus much shall Romans 3. 31.
serve to be spoken to this.

The last Use shall be a word of comfort to poor creatures that are yet under
this bondage. Something of encouragement I may give to sinners that yet are
rebelling against the Lord Jesus, though if you continue so doing, there is no
hope for you; yet know this, that the Lord Jesus has laid down a ransom
sufficient for all, and publishes this liberty to all; he sets open the
prison doors, and if then you will not go free, thank your selves: but of this
before. I doubt such sinners as these will be snatching at the comfort which
belongs not to them. Therefore mind it Brethren, you that please your selves in
sin, are given up to the ways of your own hearts, while you are such, it is
not my work to comfort you at all; catch not at it, it concerns you not; but
I speak to poor sinners that are sensible of their condition, that are
striving, struggling, groaning under the bondage, the yoke of sin, or the
concomitants thereof, which you have heard spoken to so at large. Alas, may one
say, I doubt all is not well with me, if where Jesus Christ comes into a soul,
reveals himself in a soul, he brings liberty with him to that soul, then I am
a poor creature without Christ to this day, for alas, I am in grievous bondage;
O there is bondage of ^ears, and bondage of sin; It is true, I do something
says one, but I doubt it is nothing but a slavish obedience out of fear; for
this we must know, Brethren, that though it be true there is a fear which is
merely slavish, when a sinner looks upon god as a severe terrible Judge, his
Law a cruel bloody Law, while he sees no mixture of mercy and love, and yet
with Foelix, trembles; or as they at the deliverance of the Law, when God
revealed himself in so terrible a manner, trembled, could not endure the sight;
now a man under the curse of the Law, he endeavors to do what he does upon
this ground, because of terrors; but a child of God he has a principle of
love, it is mercy, it is love, it is tenderness in Jesus that sets him a
going; terrors indeed do amaze, and astonish, and fright him out of himself;
but it is love in Jesus Christ that sets his soul a work to do his will; yet
so Brethren, as that you must know there is not all fear banished out of the
soul; but that we may the better understand it, let us consider (...) a little
distinctly.

First, there is to be a reverent fear of the Majesty of god in all his people;
let us serve him with reverence and godly fear, says Heb. 12. ult.
the Apostle, for our God is, etc. a great God, and greatly to be feared: what
an awe there is upon a poor peasants spirit when he appears before a mighty
Prince? so here, and I doubt we have most of us cause rather to complain, that
there is not so much of this holy awe upon us as there ought to be, O serve the
Lord Psalm. 2. 11. Exodus 20. 20.
with fear, and rejoice with trembling: fear not, says Moses, for God is come
to prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces: Fear not: that is to
say, be not dismayed, astonished, God is come now to give a rule of obedience,
that you may serve him with reverence, holy fear and trembling.

Secondly, There ought to be a fear of offending God, as Hos. 3. 5.
a Son his Father, though he were sure never to be scourged for it; or because
he is his Father, and carries so much love toward him, so tender of him, and
good toward him, therefore he would not offend him.

Thirdly, There ought to be a fear of the judgments of God upon others; David
was afraid of his judgments, when the Angel of the Lord was there; he durst
not go up to worship before the tabernacle in Gibb^^n, because of the Angel of
the Lord, I am afraid of thy judgments, etc. 1 Chro. 21. 30.


Fourthly, We may fear chastizements, the thing I feared is come upon me, says
Job; since we know we do so often offend him and grieve him, we may expect and
fear it; yea it is hardness and security for us not to fear.

Fifthly, A man, a child of God may have a fear of everlasting damnation, which
serves to rouse him up when he is growing secure, when ^e has drowned his
evidences, blotted them; and it is necessary it should be so, for why else does
the Holy Ghost, even in the Gospel, inculcate this upon the Disciples, fear not
him Mat. 10. 28.
that can kill the body, but fear him that kills soul and body: And so, if ye
live after the flesh ye shall dye, but if by the Spirit ye mortify Romans 8. 13.
the deeds of the flesh ye shall live: these threatenings surely would not have
been written to Believers, except they were to make some use of them, to be as
an awe upon their spirits to keep them from sinning, to be a quickening to their
souls.

Now on the other hand it is true; that there ought not to be in us such a
fear, as to distract us; to drive us from, to weaken our Spirits, to disable us
from duty, to cloud and drown all our delight in his ways, to blot out our
apprehensions of his loveliness, and compassion, and bowels, so as to beget
hard thoughts in our hearts of God, which will produce hatred of him; such a
fear ought not to be in us, and though there may be a spice of it sometimes,
even in the best, when they are not themselves, yet this is not the prevailing
principle in the soul, but an holy fear of offending him, which arises from a
mixture of love toward him, and holy reverence and awe of him, and of his
Majesty and Greatness; and truly Brethren, this is no enemy to spiritual
liberty; But I must not dwell so long, upon things.

But secondly, the main thing that I know most troubles a gracious heart, is,
that he finds himself so much under the power of sin; O I find not this
freedom, this liberty you speak of, I am a wretch then under the power of my
corruptions: O the sad complaints to Christians, to men continually, from some
poor disconsolate souls! and to speak a little for their consolation if the
Lord breath in it.

First, Brethren, you must know this, that as sin has had a time of settling
and rooting, there will be a time of unsettling it; thou art of yesterday, it
may be, and do thou think to be so free the first day, as they that have many
years been wresting, and fighting, and praying, and fasting, and mourning, and
believing down their lusts? This is a great mistake: it is infinite mercy that
thou have thy hands let loose, and thy feet out of the mire and clay, and that
thou art set upon a Rock, that thou have now a standing and liberty to fight,
thou must not expect a liberty from fighting and conflicting with sin while
thou art in the flesh; mind you the Apostles two or three verses of the same
Epistle to the Romans, he says, the Law of the Spirit of life, the powerful
working of the Spirit of life, has set him free from the Romans 8. (...).
Law of sin and death: and yet a few verses before, O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of sin and death? thou groanest under the
burden, whereby it appears thou art delivered in a great part; thou art
willing to be freed, and when the will is disintangled, the man is free in a
great part.

Secondly, Brethren, know this for your comfort, that your labor is not in
vain; striving against sin, fighting with it, you are sure to overcome, though
sin lie hard upon you, you shall overcome it. First, the Lord he is able to
break all the bonds: if he will deliver Peter out of prison, what shall hinder?
his chains shall fall from his hands, the Iron-gates shall open of their own
accord before him, nothing shall be able to hold them; It was somewhat hard for
Israel to believe that they should be delivered out of Egypt, and somewhat a
strange Message of Moses at Exodus 3. 14.
the first; even as one should be sent to the great Turk to tell him, the God
of the Christians commands him to let them go; but God tells him and them, that
he is that he is; I am has sent me, the great God, who is being it self, and
from himself, he is what he is, he is able to destroy the Egyptians; do thou
believe this, that he can subdue thine iniquities, thy strong, impetuous,
violent lusts? Secondly, then he will do it, he heard Israel groaning under
bondage, and came down to deliver them, he remembered Exodus 2. 24.
his Covenant; it was his faithfulness, Brethren, that brought him out, the
self-same day the Lord delivered them; and the Lord will keep time to a day
with thee that groanest under this bondage, if thou were but humbled, if it had
done its work upon thee; for that and such like ends he would not suffer sin to
prevail upon thee any longer, for he lets not lusts loose upon a soul to
woorry it, but to humble it, make it out of love with sin, to drive it to
himself, to make it for ever cleave closer to him; now there is promise upon
promise for this, you shall know the truth, and the Joh. 8. 32.
truth shall make you free; he speaks this to his Disciples, who did already
know it in part; know himself, the truth, the way, and the life; and the truth
in opposition to shadows, grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, and it shall
make you free; how many promises are there? as in the text, therefore surely he
will do it: Now what an encouragement it is to fight, when we are sure to
overcome; yea, to endure hardship in this conflict.

But thirdly, consider it is the very office of Jesus Christ; the work which he
received of his Father is to destroy the works of the Devil, to destroy strong
holds, to lead captivity captive; Luke 11. 21, 22.
therefore he came into the world: if it had not been for such poor creatures
as are under bondage, there had been no need of Christ, he came to give himself
a ransom for many* and to preach deliverance to them, and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound, you have heard already, and therefore he was
anointed of his Father, and received the Spirit, that he might set open the
prison doors: Now poor burdened souls, if any such, whose body ofsin and death
presses them down sore, and they walk heavily, go^ to him, spread your
condition before him, put him in mind wherefore he came into the world, to set
open the prison, to loose the prisoners; and thou have an infirmity, and happily
been bound with it many years, beseech him to exercise his Office toward thy
poor soul; the Lord loves to hear his people earnest and importunate, to plead
it thus with him; but if thou can not, yet be sure he will do the work which
his Father has given him to do; and what is that, but to set at liberty such
prisoners as thou art, that groan under the burden and bondage of their lusts?

Fourthly, Consider how pitiful a heart he bears to his people laboring under
corruption; when we are weak, it may be, sometimes the spirits of a poor
creature are spent in labor in other services, and he thinks he should be as
lively then as at another time, but it is not likly so to be, and therefore
when natural vigor decaies in old age, though there may be as much
uprightness, there cannot be so much vigor appearing in service always; Now men
are apt to have sad thoughts of themselves upon this account, and so in other
cases when wearied out; our Savior is tender and pitiful, he takes notice of
every groan under it, when thou can not help thy self but art foiled, and he
pittyeth and spares. O says he, to his Disciples, could ye not watch with me
one hour? and at such a time as that was, when our Savior Mat (...)1.
had most need of their watching which him? alas they were asleep: Well says
he, I consider your weakness, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak: The
Lord is ready to make the best of our conditions, and therefore be not
altogether discouraged, though thou have a weary hand with thy self, with thy
own base heart.

Fifthly, But some will say, O but they are grievous workings of sin that are
in my heart, whether they rise from within or from without, my heart closes
with them, and they are very horrid, and I know not what to think concerning
it: But I say, was Paul buffeted, and can thou think to escape? truly
Brethren, I take it, the Devil befools himself much in putting a soul upon
horrid sins, because that is the way to settle the soul so much the more fully,
when the bit is bigger then will down; when Egypt dealt more hardly with the
Israelits then before, it made them cry out, and then the Lord heard; so it may
be, a soul was not so fully delivered from a sin, but he does stick, as I may
say, in the skirts of it, but now this makes him cry out, more willing, more
earnest to be delivered.

Sixthly, Take heed lest anguish of spirit so far prevail, as that thy soul
refuse to be comforted, as the Psalmist says; and the Israelites could not
believe by reason of anguish of heart, when God had sent them a Savior to
deliver them; it may be it Exodus 6. 9.
is so with thee.

Seventhly, There will come a time when thou shall be altogether free, thou
shall never see the Egyptians more, which now pursue thee and trouble thee, me
thinks that the thoughts of this should refresh us, and make us desirous and
willing to depart, Well then, whatever thy condition be in respect of the
world, it may be afflicted, it may be friendless, it may be in other kinds, Oh
me thinks one thought of this, that thou art free from guilt, and have a free
access to the Throne of grace, might exceedingly support thy spirit. But thus
much for this use of the point also. -- And grow up as Calves of the stall.

We are now come to the last promise in the bundle, and it is not the least
considerable: That bondage under guilt, under sin, in its prevailing, could not
but be a hinderance of growth, therefore if we lay so much weight upon the
order of the words, something seems to be held forth of that nature, that
this growth is a Concomitant of that liberty and enlargement promised before;
but I will not hang too much upon that, though it be an undoubted truth; yet
whether it may be argued strongly enough from the order of words, I will not
urge.

Ye shall grow, or increase, or be multiplied, as some render it; and the same
word is read for spreading themselves, the horsemen H^b. 1. 8.
shall spread themselves, or they shall be multiplied, as others: Sometimes it
is taken for springing up, Genesis 2. 9. Job 31. 40. Our translation is very
suitable; some read it exilire, to spring, and leap, and wantonize, as Calves
use to do when loosed from the stall; But I rather much adhere to our
translation, and the meaning is, ye shall increase, and grow, and come on, you
shall not stand at a stay, and be always at a pass, but grow. But what this
growth is, of what it is meant, will be the Question; whether of a temporal or
spiritual growth, a taking root in the world, and growing up and flourishing,
which is spoken of the wicked, and sometimes the word is thus used for
increasing, though thy beginning were small, said Bildad to Job, yet thy latter
end should greatly Job 8. 7.
increase; that is to say, his habitation should be made prosperous at the
last, if thou were innocent in his sight. So Solomon, it is said of him, that
he was great and increased more then all that went before Eccles. 2. 9.
him: And so Rovanellus takes it here for an increase of glory, dignity, riches
and prosperity; and so in that place of Jerem, when the Prophet first
concluding, however it were, yet God was righteous and good to his people, yet
he would plead with him concerning his judgments, Wherefore does the way o^
the wicked prosper? Ier. 12. 1 2.
Wherefore are all they happy that deal treacherously? thou have planted them,
yea they have taken root, they grow, yea they bring forth fruit; though this be
another Metaphor of a tree, the other of a sensitive creature. In the day shall
thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning thou shall make thy seed to
flourish, Isa. 17. 11.
but the harvest shall be a heap in the day of grief, and of desperate sorrow:
There it is taken for all manner of outward prosperity; but indeed me thinks
this, though it may not be excluded, yet should not be the main thing here
intended; for alas, though it be a great mercy to a people to be richly laden
with benefits, blessed with the abundance of all things, so as that they may
wax fat: yet if this be abused and they kick against God as Jesurun Deuteronomy. 32.
15.
did, there is little comfort in it in comparison. It is true, it does not
necessarily follow, because here is the sum of the Covenant of grace,
therefore earthly promises are to be excluded, for they are a part of the
Covenant also, so far as good for us, and all included in that, I will be thy
God. Godliness has the promise now as well as then, of the things of this
life, as well as of 1 Timothy 4. 8.
that which is to come; yet I shall rather speak to the other, the growth in
spirituals; that is to say, the daily renewing of the inward man, the increase
of their sanctification, and holiness, and grace; this I take here to be meant,
and specially meant, and therefore thus we shall understand it; the promise is
amplified by a comparison, grow ye shall as Calves of the stall; the word for
stall signifies an enclosure, a coop, any place made for to fat Cattle, or
other creatures in; and we know that usually such do grow exceedingly, else
there is a great deal of cost bestowed upon them in vain, and therefore our
translators read that in the Proverbs, better is a dinner of herbs where love
is, then a stalled Prove. 15. 17.
Ox and hatred therewith.

There may be three things happily couched in the comparison.

First, that they shall grow in quantity as calves; calves shoot up and forth
very much when they are in the stalls, do grow much more then if at random they
run up and down; none grow so much as they: and therefore this is used to set
forth the greatness of the growth.

Secondly, in fatness and sweetness, they grow very much, a stalled-Oxe is
fatted very fat, which is much sweeter and better then another; so they grow
not only in quantity but quality, as we shall see hereafter.

Thirdly, the speediness of the growth happily is in this comparison, they grow
faster then other creatures of the like kind when they are put into the stall,
and therefore they are said to grow as the Lilly, not only in beauty, which was
greater then Solomon himself in all his glory had, but in speediness, for they
say, this flower grows much and discernably in one night; and Hos. 14. 5.
Mat. 6. 29. John 2.
though it be true, sudden growths are the more suspicious, yet God can, and
sometimes does work them, even with truth, as in the Miracle, he quickly turned
water into wine; which he does every year, though in greater time, by the
operation of the Sun.

In a word then, the Holy Ghost uses this simile to them, being rude and weak
of understanding, that they might the better understand it, and have the
greater assurance of it, that it should be so, therefore he propounds it so
cross, says Calvin.

But this as well as the other we must look upon as a Concomitant, yea an
effect of the appearing of the Sun of righteousness to us, his arising upon the
soul, that is the grand promise; all things else are promised and given for him
and with him to us, and this among the rest, the going forth out of the prison
was one, and this growing is another of the genuine and sweet effects of the
rising of the Sun of righteousness upon them that fear him; so that take it in
this connection, and then the note is this.

That soul or people that are under the influences of Christ, of the Sun of
righteousness, are in a growing condition, they shall grow; ^octr.
there is not a soul that has union and fellowship with the Lord Jesus, but he
shall grow; ye shall grow up as, etc.

For the proof of the point we need not so much, there is a notable place there
in the Psalmist, they that are planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish
in the Courts of our God, the righteous Psalm. 92. 12.
shall flourish like a Palm Tree, and grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. Here you
have growth promised, and flourishing, and to whom it is promised, and whence
it comes, and the comparisons whereby it is set forth, in these two verses
growth is promised, they that are planted they shall grow and flourish; a tree
flourishes not except it grow after it is planted; when it is planted, alas it
is little and ^^ender, happily but a ^eed, then it grows up. 2. The persons to
whom promised, they are such as are planted in the house of the Lord, that is
to say, the Temple, which was a Type of Christ, and the Church of Christ, so
that they must be in him, as afterward we shall speak; they shall flourish in
the Courts of Gods house, by Communion with him in his Ordinances. 3. The
comparison, as a Palm Tree, which the Naturalists say, though cut Pli^. lib. 13.
down to the ground, yet springs up again, grows up again. If a tree be out
down, is there any hope it should grow up again, in that Job 14. 7.
of Job? Yet this tree will grow again: if the Church, to take it o^f the whole
body, for so we may as well as of single persons, if they be cut down to the
very ground, so wasted as that there is scarce any visible, as in Eliah's
days, he thought he was alone, the Church then seemed to be all withered or
grown over with nettles and brambles, to have no plants of righteousness in it,
but yet then it shall grow again, and when persecution rages and cuts it down
to the very ground, yet he makes it grow again; or of particular persons,
though they be brought to such exigencies sometimes, as to say, their hope is
perished from the Lord, and Lam. 3. 18.
their faith seems to be extinguished with the violence of temptation, yet
they shall grow again and increase. But the Palm Tree it grows upward against
the weight that oppresses it, it will not be kept down, but grows through
all persecution, affliction, yea sins and falls, as afterward we shall have
occasion to mention a little more fully. And like Cedars, grow tall and strong,
and abide, as the Cedar is not subject to rottenness, nor decy with age. But
for further proof, take that in the Psalmist, who passing through the valley of
Bacah, make it a well, etc. they go Psalm. 84. 7.
from strength to strength, from army to army, or from strength to strength,
passing through a solitary valley abounding with Mulberry-trees, which they say
grow in dry and barren places, and so there is much difficulty in the passage
for drought and other necessities, yet they dig up fountains, they make it a
Well, a Cistern, they search the Scriptures, fetch up somewhat of consolation
from thence; and notwithstanding all the difficulties, yet they go from
strength to strength, walk toward Sion; all this was typical. And so the
Apostle, whom beholding as in a glass, we are changed into his image from glory
to glory; every degree of 2 Cor. 3. 18.
grace has its glory, but we are changed from glory to glory, from a spark
into a coal, from a coal glowing, to a flame. What else is the meaning of those
Parables of the Mustard Seed, it is the Mat. 43. 31, 32, 33.
least of seeds, or less then others, then many others, the Cypressfeed is so
small as can scarce be discerned, and yet a great tree grows of it; but this
is small, and yet a great tree arises from it, Tremel. writes strange things
of the Mus^ard-feed-tree in those Countries; this, it is true, is meant of the
Kingdom of God without us, the administration of the Kingdom, the Word of God,
how it grows; but that is not all, the Kingdom of God within us, within the
Saints, where it comes with power; does also spread it self more and more, as
Leven also hid in the midst of the meal, by degrees spreads it self further
and further. So then you see the (...), that it is so, that persons under the
influence of Christ the Sun of righteousness, that have communion and
fellowship with him, they grow in grace. And so, the path of the just is as the
Pro^. 4. 18.
shining light that shines more and more to the perfect day; or, as the
morning light, as some read it, that you know grows from one degree to
another, until the per^ect day.

The next thing will be then to open the nature of this Spiritual growth, that
we may understand what we speak of, and then we shall a little further confirm
it, and apply it.

And the opening of it I shall deliver in several propositions as distinctly as
I can; for the right understanding of the meaning of it: note in the first
place, that growth is a motion or mutation from a less to a greater quantity;
as you see a babe, though it be a man in a smaller letter, and have part for
part, yet they are small, and grow to a greater bigness; the child grew in
stature, says the text, and in favor with God as well as with men. And Luke
2. 52.
so a plant or a seed is little at first, but it grows to a tree, to a blade,
and the s^al^ to the ear, and the full corn in the ear, here is a motion from a
less to a greater quantity: So a Calf of the stall must needs also shoot forth.
Now for grace, you know it is either Relative or Inherent, and accordingly we
must understand the Mat. 6. 27.
growth; Relative grace, as that of remission of sins, and justification in the
sight of God, and adoption to be sons and daughter, this, if looked upon as the
act of God, it will be hard to say, that it is intended or remitted, that there
is a growth or motion from a lesser to a greater quantity, for remission of
sins being the act of God, we cannot say that one man's sins are more pardoned
then another, that believes as well as he. So we cannot say, that one
believer is more a Son then another, they are all the children of the most
high; though a child grow in stature, yet his relation grows not, he is a Son
the first day he was born, as well as when he is at the perfect stature, this
is plain; though every Son be not a Joseph or a Benjamin, yet he is a Son as
well as any; which by the way ministers much refreshing to a poor weak soul,
that eyeth his stature and growth. O he is so weak, such a babe, a child in
comparison of some of the people of God, which are strong in faith, and can
give glory to God, when they are doubting and scrupling every step they go, yet
I say, though this be a burden, yet the main whereupon the comfort of a poor
creature hangs, is alike to all, there is no growth; there the weakest, poor,
sickly, froward-hearted child, is a chi^d as well as he that is strongest,
healthiest, most serviceable; and though faith be weak, yet the relation of one
is alike, the purchase, the price paid, the ransom is alike to all that
believe, though it be but in some more weakly.

Only here mistake not neither, though this relative grace grow not, as of
justification or adoption, yet the knowledge of this grace arising from the
reflection of the soul upon its self, and the shining of the Spirit upon the
works of grace he has wrought in the soul, this is capable of a growth, it may
be that a man may be a child of God, and yet not know it; alas, how long are
our children children, and we look upon them so, and hearts and bowels yearn
and tender them, and yet they know not that they are children; we need go no
further then common experience for this: do we not see many a precious soul
that lies at the feet of Jesus Christ for mercy, whose souls are sick of love
for him, who prize him above all? O they are willing with all their souls to
close with him for all ends and purposes, if he be but willing Phil. 3. 8.
to close with them; they think they are not children, nor that they do not
believe, when they do believe; for this very willingness of Christ in
sincerity, is believing, and therefore they think they are not children, when
they are dear in Gods ^ight: what think you of him that walks in darkness and
sees no light? do Isa. 50. 10.
you think he can see his relation to God in Christ without that light? Surely
no.

Again, another he has some probability which begets an opinion in him
concerning his condition, and that he has received this special grace from the
Lord, and been partaker of this love, to become a Son of God: others they rise
higher then 1 John 3. 1.
this, and have a strong confidence, and some a full assurance, and know that
they are the Sons of God, that their persons are justified, Romans 8. 34. Cant.
2. 6. John 20. 28. 1 Cor. 2. 8.
they can triumph with the Apostle, who shall lay any thing to their charge?
can say, my beloved is mine and I am his: and my Lord and my God, with Thomas;
they know the things freely given them of God, even by the Spirit of Christ:
yea the same person, Brethren, may grow from such a doubting of his condition,
to such a probability, such a persuasion, such an assurance of his condition,
this therefore admits of a growth, but not the relative grace it self, but
only our sense, feeling or knowledge of it: and so much for that.

Secondly, There is a grace inherent, which is indeed as the root; and the acts
and issues of it are, as I may say, the fruit; but this grace within we shall
speak to as most nearly concerning this purpose; the fruits I have spoken to,
you know, at large upon another Scripture, and I would not in this discourse
interfere with what I then delivered; or if we speak any thing to the fruits
that grow upon these internal inherent graces of the Spirit, as likely enough
we shall, yet we shall not consider them as fruits rising from such a root, but
as growing fruits, being bettered, improved according to the growing of the
principles from whence they flow.

But for the grace inherent, by that I mean all those habits or gracious
dispositions of the heart godly, as that of faith, and that of love, and
humility, and sincerity, and spirituality, and self-denial; these things and
all the rest in the habit or disposition of the soul is the subject of this
consideration; and these Brethren, you know they are but qualities, though
divine qualities, and therefore though growth or augmentation, according to
terms of Art or Logic be not properly ascribed to them, yet according to
Rhetoric, it is proper enough to speak it of any thing under a Simile, that it
grows, if it any way increase, as if a quality: Now the light, for instance,
or heat in the fire, or Sun, that is intended or waxes more clear and more
hot, this may be called a growing-light, or growing-heat, because that as in
things that properly grow, there is an addition of one quantity to another,
whereby it increases; so here, there is an addition of one degree of the
quality to what was before, whereby it is more intense then it was before;
therefore when we speak of grace growing, the speech is figurative, taken
either from plants or sensitive creatures, that all their beginnings are small,
but afterward grow up to their pitch.

Secondly, A thing is said to grow properly, you know, when the increase is
made, not by opposition as they call it, but by an inward receiving, that is to
say, it is a nutrition, as the means; it was a custom to cast every one a
stone, and make a great heap, Ioshuah 7. 26. 2 Samuel 18. 17.
as upon Achan and Absalom: Why at first it was little, but every stone makes
some increase of the heap, and yet it grows not properly; so a snow-ball, it
is greater with rolling, but this is not properly growth nor augmentation; but
it is when there is somewhat inwardly received, which by interchanges in man,
at last is turned into his substance, and makes an increase of it, as a man
does his food, and a r^o^ does the juice of the earth, which is concocted and
becomes nourishment to the branches, whereby they grow and increase; this is
properly growth.

Now to apply this proposition to the case in hand, when we speak of growing in
grace, either we say the grace it self grows, or else persons do in this or
that grace. If the former, then this does not so suitably hold, for the grace,
the habit of faith, of love, cannot properly be said to receive inwardly this
or that nourishment, but as qualities, have added to them such or such degrees,
and so increase. But if we say, that a soul does grow or increase in this or
that grace, then it will hold somewhat more exactly, which is also a
metonymical speech, a met onymie of the subject for the adjunct, to say the
person grows, when indeed it is but the habit of grace which is increased,
the person continues the same. I say, then it holds somewhat more near,
though happily the Simile will not yet run upon all four neither; nor is it to be
expected, the poor believing soul then receives nourishment inwardly, that is
to say, that which is nourishment to his faith, to his love, whereby he grows
therein; some deeper knowledge of the riches, the exceeding riches of the grace
of God, the riches of the Covenant of promises, whereby his faith is increased;
and so somewhat more of the height, and depth, and breadth, and length of the
love of God in Christ toward him he knows, which much heighteneth his love
to Christ again. Now remember this is not by any thing external; external
additions to a thing may make it appear the greater, but not really the
greater; as a man's clothes make him seem bigger then he is, yet he is the same
in them and out of them, no bigger at all; there is very great difference
between a weight hanged upon a Clock, the more weight, the more the motion is
hastened; and a child that went but timerously and weakly, the Spirit of life
within him prevailing, that he can run faster, and so grows in stature and
agility, there is much difference; and so there is much difference between an
hypocrites growing in appearance, in duties, in services, in zeal, which
appears to us, for we can but judge the root by the fruit; therefore we think
they are grown there, but all this while are mistaken, for it is not the root
of the matter within, it is some external weight, and that is hanged upon their
affections; some by-respect or another to their credit, their profit, their
Kingdom, as Jehu, that sets them a working so fast more then before; there
is great difference between such an one and a child of God, such as David,
whose heart was perfect, who from the inward revelations of Christ in them,
discoveries of his love, teachings of his Spirit, and quicknings, they grow up
more and more, there is much difference I say. But this is the second, I am
afraid I shall be too tedious herein, yet I hope this will not be unuseful to
make things as plain as I can, as we go, that we may understand what we speak
of.

Thirdly, The thing that grows remains the same, though increased, the body
that grows it is the same body still, though much increased; as a child and a
man, he is the same person when a babe and when a man, only he is much
increased by a continual nourishment: So it is here, a man's grace is the same,
the same habit of faith and of love, but grows much stronger, as in the case
of Thomas and the rest of the Disciples you see it; it is the same that was a
tender plant, and now is become a strong Oak or Cedar, only now it is more
rooted then before, and grown up and spread it self; though a child of God have
many shakings with contrary winds, temptations and false Doctrines, and
sometimes his knowledge may be corrupted, and sometimes his faith may be
shaken, yet I believe he is never plucked up by the root, and then planted
again; when once he has received that grace, and obtained that mercy, to be
faithful, to believe, and have the graces of the Spirit implanted in the soul,
these are never destroyed altogether; once alive to God, and that life never
fails, because the principle, the fountain of it, that feeds it, never fails;
the seed of God abides, as the Apostle says. It is true, there may be
sickness, and weakness, and wounds, and distempers that may 1 John 3. 9. and 2.
14.
hinder the growth of a child, but yet he lives and grows afterward again,
yea more then he did before happily, and this is the case; and though David and
Peter broke their bones, though they be sore shaken, yet they are not plucked up
by the roots, as trees dead and so planted again, nor does any grace of Gods
planting wither away altogether, like Jonah's gourd: the reason that is given
for the withering away of some of the corn that Math. 13. 21.
was green, is because it had not root. This the third.

Fourthly, Another consideration to make out further the nature of this growth,
is this, there must first be a life before there be a growth, either
vegetative, or sensitive, or rational; you know if there be no life in the
tree, if it have not a root alive to maintain it, it grows not at all, stands
at the same stay for proportion, and grows dry indeed, and rotten, and fit
for burning, and so there must be life in a man before he grows, when he is
dead all growth cease, there is nothing but dissolution upon dissolution
then; and so it is in this case, there must be a root, a planting into Christ,
a grafting into him by his ingrafted word; before we can grow up in him, we
must be one with Christ, for Math. 13. 21.
you know that which had no root withered; it may make a show for a time and
flourish, even as the grass upon the house top, but it withers before it
grows up. Paul may plant, and Apollo Psalm. 129. 6.
may water, but it is he the Lord that gives the increase, he that ministereth
seed to the sowers, both ministers bread for your food, and multiplies 2 Cor.
3. 6. 2 Cor. 9. 10.
your seed sown, and increases the fruits of your righteousness: Now this he
does in and through Christ, for he is the only pipe through which grace is
conveyed to us, as things here are to be noted, to make this out fully.

First, that all the nourishment is from Christ, as the breastmilk is from the
mother that brought it forth; so it is with us in Isa. 53. 11.
respect of Christ, he traveled, his soul traveled with us, he was big with
us, and O what sharp travel he had, such as never was, nor can be the like
again, and he supplies the nourishment, the Word and the Spirit he promises
shall never depart out of his peoples mouths; and this is that the Evangelist
has, of his fullness we Isa. 59. 21. John 1. 16.
receive grace for grace; the sincere milk of the Word is his, he prepares the
sweet cup of consolation in the promises; so many precious promises, so many
breasts a child of God has to suck continually, there he has prepared
nourishment for our faith, and so in our trials and experiences, there is
nourishment for our faith, and for our humility, and for our love, and all this
is from him.

Secondly, But then beside this, there is a forming power, a power of
concoction, digestion and assimilation, to turn these nourishments into the
very substance, for so the Apostle, Some preach Christ of envy, says he,
supposing to add affliction to my bonds; the Devil and his Angels of light
preach Christ, but with no good intent, not to gain credit but dishonor to the
Gospel at the long run; we see it by too woeful experience; well says the
Apostle, I know this shall turn to my salvation, through Phil. 1. 19.
your prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ; if a man take never
so much down, if he have not a power to digest it, and turn it into substance,
succum and sanguinem, he shall never grow by it: alas, do we not see many live
under the Word, the sincere milk of the Word, and seem to draw as hard at the
breast as any, hanging upon the Ministers lips, that should preserve knowledge,
and yet grow not, come not on? there wants this digesting faculty, the Spirit
of Christ to mix the word with faith; Mal. 2. 7. Heb. 4. 2.
then when it is so mixed and concocted it grows indeed, the Word grows,
then the poor Believer grows, his faith grows: And so the Apostle in that
to the Corinthians; who beholding as in a glass, there is the nourishment, the
Ordinances, the 2 Cor. 3. 18.
beholding Christ in them, but the power of concocting these, turning them to
strength, is the Spirit, we are changed into his image from glory to glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord; as there John 1. 14.
is not similitudinis, but identitatis, the glory as of the only begotten Son
of God, full of grace and truth; there is the truth in general, that it is from
Christ, and more specially that this power is his; in that one place to the
Ephesians, from whom the whole body fitly Ephesians. 4. 6.
joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplyeth, according
to the effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the
body; he speaks of the growth of the Church in general, but there is par ratio
for the growth of each member, for it is one part of the growing of the whole,
that the members grow in stature as well as in number; and so in that place to
the Colossians, Let not man beguile you of your reward: as a Judge* of the race
of masteries prescribes, it is an exorbitant course to ^un out of the way, and
then promise you the reward for it; this will be but a beguiling of you in a
voluntary humility, and worship of Angels, etc. and is worshipping of Saints any
better then this voluntary humility and yet some there are that beguile poor
creatures of their reward, promising them, if they run in this course they
shall have it, not holding the head; me thinks an ingenuous Papist reading
this, should begin to suspect their way, since to worship Angels, and such
voluntary humility as God never commanded, as not to approach to Christ without
a mediation of Saints, which he never commanded, is voluntary humility, and so
this is not to hold the head Christ Jesus, from which, from the head, all the
body by joints and bands have nourishment ministered and knit together,
increases with the increases of God; it is the increase of God, because he is
the Author Col. 2. 19.
of it, or else because of the greatness of the increase and its excellency,
for so the name of God is often used in the old Scriptures, and their phrases
the Apostles do often keep in the New. You see the nourishment is ministered
from the head, as the sap is from the root of the tree, and it is his effectual
working whereby it is turned to an increase of our faith and love; and
therefore that soul that is not really and truly in the Lord Jesus, though he
may for a time flourish, yet he will wither; he may be green, and yet be but a
weed, and they grow fast, but they are not upon a right root, they spring not
from such a seed, and therefore at their perfection they will be but wild Oats
it may be, or Tares, which for a great while are so like to Wheat, as some of
the Ancients speak, that it is not to be discerned from it until it come into
the ear; and so many an hypocrite may have as broad a leaf, as green a blade,
in externals: not be behind any for enlargements, and parts, and notions of the
knowledge of Christ; and yet alas, though he had more and more degrees, this is
not a spiritual growth, this is not from the head, from the root, the Lord
Jesus, as a root of saving life. I deny not but he gives those gifts and
parts, but it is not as head of the invisible Church, who alone shall be saved;
though as head of the visible Church there may be a communication of some
fatness and sweetness of the Olive to them; that is to say, the Ordinances and
privileges of the Church, which an hypocrite may enjoy, and yet be cut off
when Romans 11. 17.
all is done, and thereby he may make some progress of knowledge, and a
formality, but yet this is no true spiritual growth; this should make us look
well about us, and see if our water do arise from this fountain, it will spread
it self until it come to a river, grow broader and broader.

Fifthly, As it is from him, and therefore we must be in him before we can grow
with this spiritual growth; so this growth in grace is a growing up into him;
and good reason, if of him and by him be all things, that to him should be all
things also; if Rivers be from the Sea, they return to the Sea again; there may
be Romans 11. 32.
two things in this one expression of growing up into Christ who is the head.

First, that we grow up into a nearer fellowship and communion with him who is
the head; and this is most sure, whether the growth of the members where it is,
the faster do draw more and more yet from the head and other parts where the
nourishment is prepared, I shall not meddle with, but this I am sure of, the
more grace any soul receives, the more yet he may, it is in order to further
fellowship and communion with the Lord Jesus; which is indeed an argument
whereby the grace of Christ is as highly advanced as by any other whatsoever,
that he should therefore increase the strength of his poor weak children, that
they may draw more strongly from him, and their hearts more enlarged to receive
more abundantly from his fullness; as a strong child will draw harder and harder
still, the arms of the trees as they grow stronger and stronger, so they suck
more juice from the root still to feed them and carry them on* Now I say, this
is sweet to the soul, and it may be a character also of our growth; if we do
grow in grace indeed, we shall grow up into him, we shall find a greater
drawing of our hearts after him still, and suck more strongly from him: This
the first.

Secondly, another thing comprehended under this growing up into Christ may be
this, that all our growth is to his honor, it ends in him, who alone is
exalted by it, it is the honor of the head when the members grow and become by
the communication of the animal spirits, more vigorous and active, and fit for
the discharge of their several works, this is the glory of the head; this may
be understood two ways. First, it is the end of the thing it self, finis
operis, the thing does much advance him, when others behold such a fullness of
strength and power flowing forth from Jesus Christ upon the members; to see the
members of a body languid, and weak, and withered, it is not for the honor of
the head, specially if generally so, though there may be also particular
causes, as obstructions, and the like, but these are not so visible. What an
honor is it to Christ to see a poor soul th(...) now is as weak as water, like
the poor man in the Gospel, Lord help my unbelief, that ere long through the
supply of grace from Christ, is able to say, My Lord and my God; to see a poor
soul lie languishing under a lust, and not be able to stir, and yet ere long
able to triumph over it; to see a poor soul that ere while was cleaving to the
ground and to the dust, could not get up the heart, and now after a while upon
Eagles wings running without weariness, and walking without faintness, is not
this to the honor of Christ? But secondly, It must be so intended by us, else
our growth is not right in the end, our end in desires of, and Gods end in
working; we must look to the end, Brethren, we desire strength against this and
that corruption, to wax more valiant in this fight, to conquer, to triumph over
them; we would have such a measure of knowledge, such a measure of faith, but
what is our end; is Christ the end in all this? is it that we may more advance
him? Ah that soul that indeed grows into Christ, Brethren, grows downward
into the root, can be content to be any thing, to be nothing that his blessed
Savior may be advanced; so it was with John: Ah so with David, if the Lord
will lay me aside, and I 2 Samuel 5. 16, 17.
must not build him a Temple, but my son must do it, it is the Lord, why should
I not submit? So if Moses must not bring them into Canaan, he is contented. O
he would not have Joshua in another case envy for his sake, he wished all the
Lords people were Prophets, God would have the greater glory: when the Lord
of^ered to make of him a greater people, O what then will thou do to Numb. 11.
29. Exodus 32. 12.
thy great name, the enemies will say then, that thou broughtest them out to
destroy them; he had rather die, and perish, and be nothing, then God should be
dishonored. O dear friends, let this be considered, if we grow, we grow up
into him; I say, it may serve for a piece of trial; though delivered in this
place, I would have my whole discourse as applicatory as may be.

Sixthly, In a true growth we must know, there is an uniformity, as you know
one member grows in the body as well as another if it be a true growth; where
some of the members receive no nourishment, but all the growth is found in the
root, this is a disease, and not the effect of the principle of life within
them; as you see it in the Rickets, a disease now ordinarily known by that
name; but this uniformity is twofold.

First, in respect of the Church.

And secondly, of each particular member thereof, in regard of the graces of
the Spirit which are growing in them.

First then, for the Church of Christ, there is an uniform growth there, that
is to say, the Lord Jesus does not communicate his sap, and vigor, and virtue
so to one, as to spend it on him, and leave another without, but every wild
Olive grafted into the Olive, either visible or invsible Church; the visible
there is meant in that place of the Apostle, in whom the whole body being, Ephesians
2. 21.
etc. they receive accordingly, either the common influences of the Spirit with
the Ordinances, whereby they grow up in that which we call common grace, and
one as well as another; there is none sure but thriveth more or less.

Secondly, for the invisible, there is none so grafted but he grows, he is
one Spirit with the Lord, and therefore sure must needs grow that has a
continual supply of the Spirit, as the Apostle in that forecited place; the
Lord Jesus in his invisible body, has no withered arm nor legs, whatever there
be in the visible, whatever dead and dry sticks may cleave to the visible
Olive, there is none so cleaves to the invisible; it is impossible a soul
should hold the head, and hold inward communion and fellowship with him, and
yet not to grow; but this is but for the Church, which thus uniformly grows,
one member as well as another.

Now secondly, for particular members, they also grow, and that uniformly also;
grow not in one grace only, or in this grace, or that grace, nor in another,
no, but they grow uniformly; that a man should be all faith and no love it is
impossible, or all love and no knowledge it cannot be, there must be an
uniformity in growth, if right; that were more like a wen and its growth, then
growth of the body; you would not esteem that a growth, that a man should grow
all in the eye, and it should become as big as the body almost, so that he
could see wonderfully, but in the mean time the rest of the parts are as small
as when they were born; grow in one grace, and grow in every grace, grow in
sincerity, and grow in humility, grow in faith, and grow in love, and grow in
all. A timpany, a growth of one member more then all the rest is monstrous, and
so it would be in grace: Now though through defect or super fluity in natural
causes, there may be a monstrosity in a birth or growth, yet it cannot be in
respect of Christ, who does alike extend his influence to the growth and
increase of one as well as another grace which he has begotten in the soul; so
that if a man find he thinks he grows in faith, and thinks he grows in
love, and yet grow not in zeal for the glory of God, grows not in tenderness
of heart and plyableness to his will, this is not a right growth: Alas, how
many of us then do not grow in grace indeed?

Seventhly, Though there be an uniformity in growth, yet we must not so
understand it, that every member grows in the same measure with another, and
yet may grow also in its due proportion; and so also in respect of graces,
there may be somewhat of truth in it: but to speak the more distinctly:

First, consider the members of the Church of Christ, and our selves, if we be
such indeed; though all the members of the Church of Christ do grow, yet they
do not grow all alike in the same measure; the Apostle says, according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part; so that you see each part has
Ephesians. 4. 16.
a measure, every member has not the same relation, the same office in the
body, and so does not require the same measure of strength, or the same
quantity or greatness. Yea if it have a greater quantity then is meet, it is a
burden and an hindrance, as if the joint of a finger should grow as much as
the joint of a man's knee, would it not be monstrous? and yet both joints grow,
but each according to its proportion, so that they grow all ^que, but not
^qualite^* one as well as another, but not one as much as another, uniformiter,
and yet difformiter, if every finger were as big as an arm, what an hand would
there be, holding no proportion to the body, though the rest grow, this
over-groweth its proportion. It is true, every child of God is not a David nor
a Paul, nor is every one called to those great undertakings that they were; the
more eminent places in the body of Christ we have, the more we must look to it
that we grow: If a man be a Magistrate or a Minister, I tell you Brethren, it
is not enough that they be as other men in grace; and yet alas then, what
disproportion do some of us make in the body of Jesus Christ, that stand in
that relation to the body; and yet O how do other members over-grow us?
Brethren, they are not to be blamed for their growing so fast, but we for our
growing no fa(...)er, nor any more proportionable to our relations; for a
Magistrate to have no more courage nor zeal then another man, that is not
called so to put it forth, is unsuitable, and so for wisdom and knowledge; and
so for Ministers, are we as arms in the body, and have scarce the strength of a
little finger? O how can we work for Christ, do the works of our conditions? if
you see some eminent, as blessed be his name there are eminent, and have their
measure of growth to their condition, you should be followers of them, follow
after as hard as you can; therefore Ministers should be ensamples to the flock,
in faith, in puriry, in holiness, 1 Timothy 4. 12. an example to believe in word,
in conversation, in faith, in purity, etc. But alas, Brethren, may we not
rather some of us take examples therein, how weak is our faith? yet I say,
where there are such of eminency, and thou can not reach them, yet be not
discouraged because thou can not get so much light as the eye has, be not
discouraged, it is required there more then in another; nor so much strength as
an arm, a leg, when thou art it may be but as a little finger, only there may
be a proportion; yea I will tell you Brethren, pity us, pray for us*
Magistrates and Ministers, for I do verily believe there are none fall so much
short of our proportion of growth in grace according to our relations as we do:
But this is but the first.

And then secondly; for the graces in every believer; now the measure of every
grace its growth, as I think, is much more hard to determine, whether all
graces do grow according to the proportion of the growth of any one of them;
that is to say, whether love to God, and zeal to his glory, do grow according
to the measure of every man's faith, and so patience according to the measure of
his faith; indeed I am at a stand here; if that one habit of grace did beget
another, faith did beget love, it would be the more clear, because then
according to the strength of the causes, the effect would be; a strong cause, a
strong effect, the habits of grace in us being not voluntary agents; but I take
it for granted that the efficient cause of all grace, one as well as Phil. 1.
19.
another, is the same Spirit of the Father and the Son; it is the supply of the
Spirit, as the Apostle calls it, whereby we grow in any grace; now the Spirit
of God being a most free agent, is not tied up by a necessity of nature to work
alike upon the same heart, to the increase of every grace; though he do work to
the growth of every grace, yet whether he does equally work to the increase of
them all. So that what proportion of grace a Believer has in one grace, he
has the same proportion of strength in another, is doubtful; specially since
the Lord, who works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure,
knows what trials he has for every one of us, some in one kind, some in
another, some greater trials for their faith, and some for their self-denial,
and some for their love, may accordingly work; but this is not so much
material, if we can find we grow in every grace of the Spirit, whether we do
grow alike in the measure of love, as in the measure of faith, or zeal, or
spiritualness; as it will be very hard to judge, considering how hard it is to
judge of the strength of our habits by their acts, which may accidentally be
inter(...)itted and interrupted, and considering whatever knowledge we have at
the best, of the faculties of our souls and their workings, and so of the
habits of grace in them. So I take it, (...) is not so much considerable if we
could come to know it, only if we be sure we grow in all, and that we grow
according to the measure proportionable to our condition or relation to the
body: this the seventh.

Eighthly and (...)stly, that I shall speak to the opening the nature of this
growth in grace; growth here has no determined (...) until death, until we
come actually to the spirits of just men made perfect; in nature there is a
determinate time for growth in quantity, which is properly growth about thirty
years; the causes of it, I leave Schoolmen to dispute, it is not so proper for
us in this place; in nature there is in this life, yea happily when life is half
run up, the maximum quod sic, as they call it, but not in grace: No, while we
have breath, we must be growing, the hoary head must be found in the way of
righteousness, going forward still; the path of the just must be as the growing
light, Prove. 16. 3.
shining more and more to the perfect day; this we pray for, that his will may
be done by us on earth, as the Angels do, with that perfect Ephesians. 4. 13.
plyableness, forwardness, cheerfulness that they do it; this we must press
after, to come as near it as we can, even the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, to a perfect man, which perfection I take not only for a
perfection of parts, as in some other places, where many are said to walk
before the Lord with a perfect heart; as a seed is a perfect seed though no
tree, and a child, a babe, is a perfect child, though not at man's stature,
perfect; yet this I so take in this place, therefore remember this, Brethren,
while we are here we are growing, if our growth be right; there may be some
accidental hindrances, of which afterward, which for a time may hinder, but
yet we shall afterward grow and never cease: sit still, set up a Herules power,
and with a ne plus ultra, there is no such thing in grace, Brethren, until it
be swallowed up in glory; and therefore the desires of the Saints that have
tasted indeed of this grace of God, they are still kept above what they have
received; do but observe it, and you shall find it so. O they would have more
still, they are not strong enough to resist temptations, they would have more
softness and easiness of spirit toward God, to echo to every hint of his will,
thy face Lord will I seek: and this much tends to their growth, even as the
appetite after meat and nourishment, does to the growth of the body. O how
strong is it in children when they are growing! but of that afterward: happily,
you see then there is no time limited, no, never until you awake will you be
satisfied with his likeness; remember this Brethren, I doubt many of us forget
our selves Psalm. 17. 15.
here, and think we may loyter and grow lazy when we are come to such a pitch;
believe it, if your growth be right, it will be continual, you will go on
still, and in old age be fat and flourishing, as the Psalmist speaks; thus it
ought to be, and thus God has promised it shall be and if it be not, it is for
our want of believing, closing with it, improving of it for the growth of our
Psalm. 92. 14.
graces: but so much for the opening of the nature of this growth.

For the Arguments, I will not trouble you with many, only something I shall
speak that way; and the First shall be this, Because of Christ the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, who works Heb. 12. 2. Phil. 2. 12.
in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure; his works are perfect,
he goes through-stitch with his works, he does not bring his people into the
Wilderness and leave them there, but unto Canaan; you see, if he create a
world, his work is perfect, he leaves none of his works without the last hand
and file to polish them; therefore when he looks upon them himself, he says,
they are very good: we may be apt to have over-waining conceits of our own
works, and therefore the Orator gives a prudent advice, to lay aside our
writings for several years, until the strength of our affection to that which
is our own be wrought out, and it may then appear as a strange thing to us,
that so we may the more impartially judge; but this is a rule suited to the
weakness of poor passionate bemisted creatures, but for the Lord, he is not
subject to any such thing as passions, all things being alike present to him
from eternity, and therefore cannot be taken with any newness of excellency in
any thing, therefore what he says is good, is very good; and was it not a
perfection of his living creatures that they should grow and multiply, grow in
number, and then the young substance in stature to perfection; and will he,
think you, be more wanting to the new creature, will he leave it until it have
all its due perfections, until every privation be filled up with a perfection?
Surely no; must there be nothing wanting of perfection where he would make his
power and his wisdom glorious? and will there be any thing wanting, think you,
when he comes to make his grace glorious, as he does in the work of
Redemption? Surely no; no, no, Brethren, whatever God does, he does it like a
God, if he ruin, he ruins to the utmost, so as no creature can, even soul and
body, and that for ever; and if he save, he saves to the uttermost, from all
imperfection and weakness in his people; if God be as the dew to Israel, he
shall, he must needs grow as the Lilly; this is Heb. 7. 25. Hos. 14. 5.
such a dew so sweetly distilling upon our souls; O the gentle soft rain upon
the mown grass, makes it to spring again, grow again; so a soul, though cut
down, as I may say, very low, sometimes with a sharp temptation, yet a
refreshing from the presence of God, O how it makes him spring up again; grace
we use to say is of a growing nature, and therefore, though like a grain of
Mustard Seed, yet it grows, or as the seeds of the Cypress-trees, which they
say are so small, as they are hardly discernable, Mat. 13, 15.
and yet they grow to a great tree; and so in that place, thy talent or pound
has gained ten pounds; we our selves do not Plut. l. 11. c. 2. cited by Trapp
upon Mat. 14.
gain it, though we traffic with it, yet it is ascribed to the grace it self:
no, Brethren, nor can his grace in us increase it self, for though it be a
divine quality, yet it is a creature, though the new creature, and therefore
weak, and cannot support it self, much less increase it self; it would quickly
languish, and faint, and die, were it not for a continual influence from the
Lord Christ to supply it; were it not for this supply of the Spirit, would the
members grow think you, could they extend themselves from one dimension to
another, if it were not for the nourishment they receive? no more can his grace
grow without a continual supply; as the light, you know how in a moment it
vanishes, if it be but cut from the influence of the Sun; there is a glorious
morning without clouds arises upon us, the whole hemisphere is full of light;
if the Sun should now set, would that light grow think you to the perfect day?
Surely no; it would be night presently; now we have a swelling stream, it fills
the Channel, and over flows its banks, to the enriching of the ground about
it, but cut it off from the Fountain, or from the Sea, and what will become of
it? so that the growth, the continuance of the stream is from the fountain; so
it is in this case, though a man's gifts and grace rise never so high, and
overflow at his lips, at his actions, to make others also fruitful and to
grow, yet if there be not a continual supply from the Fountain, would it
subsist, would it not languish? therefore this is the comfort, that he is an
Author of it, I the Lord, have thou not heard, have thou not known, Isa. 40.
28, 29.
that I the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth faint not, neither am
weary, and therefore though you faint and languish, yet I faint not, says the
Lord, I will renew your strength therefore, and ye shall run and not be weary,
though now you cannot lift up your heads; therefore this is the first reason:
It must needs be perfect, every good and every perfect gift comes from the
Father of lights, if any be more perfect then another, sure they are the gifts
of his grace, but this is but the first.

The second Reason may be an auxiliary to the first, The Lord will perfect the
work of grace he begins, and therefore there is such an increase, as the
Apostle calls it, the increase of God: Col. 2. 19. Col. 1. 11. Ephesians. 4. 13.
now why is this? because he has appointed a measure of a fullness of stature
to be attained by us, before we be made meet for the inheritance of the Saints
in light; a child, while a child, is scarce able to manage an inheritance, he
knows not what it means; and so for a weak Christian; and therefore mark
you what our Savior says, ye must be converted and become as little children,
else you cannot enter into the Kingdom of God; he saw some Mat. 18. 3.
pride, and swelling, and ambition of their spirits; well, faith our Savior,
this must be fetched out of you one way or other, either by love, or by the
rod, or both, before you will be fit to enter into glory. O how heavenly and
sweet do the Saints generally grow before the Lord takes them? Brethren, if so
glorious a building as the temple of God be intended, will every rough stone, a
rough-hewn-Christian be fit to lay in that building? O no, surely those knotty
pieces shall be plained, and smoothed, and pollished before they be laid in
that glorious Temple in heaven: remember it, I say, Brethren, there is a
meetness for heaven, and though happily many of us care not for it, we would not
be too meet for it, lest we be taken to it before we be willing to part with
the world; never fear that, while thou have such a heart, it is well if thou be
not so far from it that thou never come thither, thou need not fear coming
thither too soon. But there are two causes which seem to call for a word here
to open them.

First, what will you say then to persons, that it may be no sooner are
converted but they dye; what time have they to grow in grace, and to come to
this meetness of the inheritance of the Saints? Remember what was said before,
that growth is not always in all of the same pace: What if God will create one
Adam in perfect stature the first day, and the rest grow to it by degrees, why
may it not be so? what if some grow as the L^^lies, Hos. 1^. 5.
shoot up quickly, much in a night, and others are longer about it; if all must
grow and come to this fittness before he take them; and so if the Lord be a
whole year turning water into wine in his ordinary way of providence, which is
wonderful, and at another time, though not so often, do it in a moment; who
shall say to him, what do thou? this is as perfect wine, as fit to be drunk,
as rich and full of spirits as the other; so the thief upon the Cross, he made
a large progess in a short time; for I tell you, to believe in the Lord Jesus
and confess him, and at such a time as that was, was no small power of grace,
when himself was under the agonies of death, and Christ under disgrace and the
shame of the Cross, and crucifying and dying, yea under the displeasure of his
Father, crying out, My God my God why have thou forsaken Luke 23. 40, 41.
me? when he was forsaken of his Father in a sort, and forsaken of all men, ye^
and of his own Disciples also, none of them then durst openly ^cknowledge him,
and crucifying, at that time Peter had denied him, they all fled from him
before, though some of them stood and looked on, yet if they had been put to it
at that time, it is a question what they would have done; therefore our Savior
in tenderness toward them, would have them be let go, Ioh. 18. 8.
as you have it, when himself was taken; now at such a time as this, when
heaven and earth, looked black upon our blessed Savior, to own him, to despise
the shame of the Cross at the first dash, and to reprove his fellow that was
crucified with him, it was a great measure of faith: I Will tell you Brethren, it
is like he that wrought that in him, had wrought a like measure of love, when
he told him, he should this day be with him in Paradise: what such a wretch as
I, that all my life time have lived so wickedly, and now am dying under my
guilt; and in one day, at the last moment to be translated into a glorious
Kingdom? O this could not but surely much enlarge his heart in love to the Lord
Jesus, and that is the perfection of the Law: and so we see some Christians
that grow more in a month, in a year or two, then many do in many years; some
are foolish children that stick long in the place of breaking forth, some make
haste, and run much in Hos. 13. 13.
a little time, and therefore this hinders not but all should grow to their
measure appointed of God, before they come to heaven.

And for the children of Believers; how can they come to this pitch, you will
say, how can they grow ^o such a height of growth? for answer,

First, It is worth the noting, that even they who deny them the privileges of
the Covenant of grace, which are visible and outward in the Church of God, yet
dare not profess, whatever they think to the contrary, but that they are saved,
or may be saved, and profess tender thoughts of them; they are not such duri
patres infantum, as to exclude them out of the Kingdom; it was the Disciples
fault you know, and so it may be good men's now, to hinder them from coming to
Christ; they thought they were but troublesome guests to him, they were capable
of little, and therefore forbad them, but they got a rebuke for their labor;
what, says our Savior, is it not clear enough, even from the old Scripture,
for there were no other then written; and they had means to know that they did
belong to Christ and Luke 18. 15, 16, 17.
the Kingdom, else he would not have reproved them, Do you not know to such
belongs the Kingdom of God? you might have known and ought to have known, and
therefore you deserve a rebuke for it; and so it may be good men's faults now a
days, but yet they dare not exclude them from the Kingdom of glory.

Secondly, It is to be noted, that no unclean thing shall ever enter into that
place; Children by nature are the children of wrath, poor leprous polluted
creatures, and therefore if there be not a pardoning grace and cleansing mercy
for them, how can they enter into glory? and because we cannot apprehend how it
should be conveyed, shall we therefore deny it? are we not all of us pure
receptives in the first grace, and are not infants as Psalm. 17.
purely receptives as we? Yea, are they not more purely receptives then we? for
though it is true, they have the same seeds of rebellion, the same spawn, the
same venomous poisonous nature with our selves, miserable sinful offspring, of
miserable sinful parents; yet according to their own principles, they cannot
put it forth into such actual rebellion as we; and do not the acts increase and
strengthen the habits, and the stronger the habits are, the stronger the
opposition is against Christ, and therefore they are more purely receptive then
we are: and therefore,

Thirdly, What hinders but they in as short a time as the thief upon the Cross,
may be brought to as high a degree of grace as he, though in an unspeakable
manner? Was it not more then ordinary that John leaped within the womb at the
voice of the mother of the Lord? it was more then ordinary, else the mother
Luke 1. 41.
would not have wondered at it, though a miracle it were; truly, Brethren,
every work of grace is a miracle, and the greater miracle it is, to work upon a
desperate, profane, hard-hearted sinner, that has all his lifetime been
working wickedness with both hands earnestly; to make such an one in one day
fit for heaven and glory, as the thief upon the Cross, where there is greater
opposition, is not this a greater miracle then the other? Beside, let it be
considered I beseech you, what our Savior says, he that receives not the
Kingdom like as a little Luke 18. 17.
child, cannot enter into it. It may be some will say, this is nothing, he
compares his Disciples to Doves and Sheep, etc. and so he does to a little
child, this proves nothing: But let it be considered and weighed; and then I
leave it to the judgment of impartial persons; he says not only, you must be
like children, and like Doves for innocence; he says not, you must be like
children for humility, and want of envy, for love; no, but ye cannot enter
except ye receive the Kingdom as a little child: the comparison lies in the
receiving the Kingdom, as well as in the qualities; so that except little
children did receive the Kingdom, how can the Disciples be compared to them in
receiving the Kingdom? how can they be, as I may say, made the very standard in
receiving the Kingdom of God? we must receive it as little children receive it;
you never find such a like speech of Doves or Sheep, that we must receive the
Kingdom as Doves or as Sheep, because they are not capable to receive the
Kingdom, it was never appointed nor prepared for them: Now if little children
be made, as I may say, the pattern for humility, self-denial, which I tell you,
Brethren, goes far in Christianity. O which is the first step? humility, the
second humility, the third humility, it reaches to the top of the Ladder; and
not only so, but the very pattern in receiving the Kingdom of God. Surely then,
such children as we allow, as we must allow some, else the comparison were not
true nor rightly framed, they must be allowed to be as holy as any others;
truly Brethren, me thinks if we consider how much innocence there is in these
little ones, which is not in us, O how we have rebelled all our days, which
they never have done; played the hypocrites before the Lord, which they never
have done; dealt falsely in his Covenant, which they never have done; have such
strong lusts in act and vigor, and strong habits of sin, pride, and envy, and
hatred to oppose the workings of grace in us, which they have none of; me
thinks it might easily be yielded unto, that former supposition, that many of
them are saved (and who dare deny it) that they have grace, and a great
measure, so as to be made the standard of receiving the Kingdom; therefore they
may quickly come to a great height: but thus much for this reason, I am carried
further then I had any thought, when I first minded it as an Argument.

Thirdly, Another reason may be, because the greater our growth is, the more
honor he has from us, and the more services, and we the more comfort; this
does much what concern the growth of such as are of years of understanding, for
to such I speak; I give it therefore as a reason, only of the growth of persons
of understanding, though some part of it may reach others.

First then, hereby God has the more service: Alas, what service has a Father
or Mother from a little child when it hangs upon the breast? many a weary hand
she has with it in its frowardness, but no help at all, but when grown up it
will do something; Heb. 12. 12.
so while a poor Believer is weak and feeble, feeble knees and weak hands, alas
can scarce stand upon their legs, every little wind of temptation or doctrine
is ready to blow him over, and Ephesians. 4. 14.
stagger him, he stands scrupling and trembling at every step, and doubting, he
cannot set a foot before another, but the Father is fain to take him by the
hand and teach him to go, as he did Ephraim; this is the great time of Gods
taking pains (like a Hos. 11. (...).
tenderhearted mother) with his children, and truly if his bowels were not as
a mothers bowels, yea much more infinitely, he would never endure to handle us
so tenderly in all our weakness and loathsomness; now when we are grown up into
Christ, are strong in his might and power, then we are able to do him some
service, and he expects it of us, though the Lord knows we often requite
him as Ifrael did after all his tenderness, he nourishes and brings up
children, feeding us with the bread of heaven, Manna is our daily bread, the
Lord Jesus, he makes out somethng of him to us continually, whereby we grow,
and presses the promises by his own Spirit, that they may give down their milk
and sweetness to us, and when all is done, we rebel against him, even to the
breaking of his heart, as he speaks after Ezekiel. 6. 9
the manner of men; but this costs the people of God dear, whoever they be,
though it be true the Lord has no need of our service, we profit not him at
all, he can work deliverance for his people and Church, if there were never a
Hester to pray nor mediate to the King, some other way he will do it; yet he
ordinarily uses the service of his people; and alas, that our reward may be
the more abundant, our Crowns of grace may be the more weighty, so that there
is not a step from the very Cradle to the Crown of glory, but all is grace, and
growing, until it be swallowed up of that fullness.

Secondly, He is honored indeed so much the more, Brethren, by our growth,
fortes oreantur fortibus: O when his people come to that strength, to bear the
Cross of Jesus Christ, to deny themselves, to hate their lives for his sake,
which the Disciples at all times were not ripe for; how does this honor the
Lord Jesus? O what Spirit is that whereby they are acted, that even their
enemies themselves have been confounded with the consideration of it, and so
when they are strong in faith, giving glory to God; a man weak in faith, a
child, a babe that staggers at every difficulty, is questioning upon every
occasion whether God be with them, as Israel, because they had no water; O,
said they, Romans 4. 20. Exodus 17. 7.
is, God among us? because there was no water; now this is not to his honor,
to have children live in a family together, eat and drink of the best, and yet
to be always children, weaklings, as I may say, consumpsit, this is a dishonor
to their Father and Mother; so it is in this case, what is more choice,
Brethren, then the bread from heaven, this wine and milk which is to be had in
Jesus Christ, which Believers live upon; and yet if they be weaklings, how does
it dishonor Jesus Christ? his flesh is John 6. 55.
meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed: but if we come not on with it, it
will be hard to persuade men so; but where they see us go from strength to
strength, that we can do singular things Isa. 55. 7.
for Christ, in prosperity, in affliction, which others cannot do: O they will
be ready to say, surely that which these men feed Mat. 5. 47.
upon is rare and excellent diet indeed: Now, Brethren, alas, this glory is
nothing to God, it is only that he may be acknowledged among men in the way of
his grace, which adds nothing to him, but to poor creatures it does, yet it
is all he requires, and he is jealous of it indeed: Now for infants, truly
Brethren, though they act little among men, specially while properly infants,
that cannot speak for him, thence they have their names Infants; there may be
little appearance, yet the very consideration of this, that the Lord should
infuse grace, yea such rich grace, as you heard, into them, me thinks should
take us up sometimes with more admiration then we are taken up with it; for I
say, no man dare deny but that they may have grace, and some of them have
grace, and all of them that die in infancy for ought we know, have: Now how
admirable is it? but God has made it visible in some extraordinary cases, as
in John; is it stupendous that the like babe should leap in the womb for joy
at the hearing of the report of Jesus, more then the most of Believers likely
would have done upon a bare report? Beside, how many instances of little
children wrought upon, even as soon as they can speak, I say, that can make it
appear in an admirable manner, and to call God Father at very tender years, yea
know him to be their God, and they his, and that they shall have a Kingdom
prepared for them; me thinks these things are enough to convince us; there is
no such necessity of years, Brethren. And then, is it not the more admirable,
is not Christ more to be admired? Again, it is much for the comfort of his
people, and truly this the Lord has much in his eye, next to his own glory,
which indeed is much magnified by the comfortable walking of his people; the
more then a man grows up in the knowledge of the things freely given of God
by the Spirit of Christ, the more comfortably he 1 Cor. 2. 12.
walks, such are an ornament to their profession, an encouragement and
invitation of others to enter upon the same ways, when they see the faces of
the Saints that shine, to be anointed with the oil of gladness, and the Kingdom
of God in them, to Psalm. 45. 7.
consist in righteousness, and joy, and peace, this encourages others, that
otherwise would be disheartened: Now I say, the Lord is very tender of his
peoples comfort; do but observe it, and you shall find, Brethren, the blood and
Spirit of the Lord Jesus to run through all the veins of the Scripture, and all
for the consolation of the Saints; these things I write to you, that your Romans
14. 7. 1 John 1. 4.
joy might be full, and that through consolation of the Scripture we might have
hope; else why are there so many promises so often repeated again and again?
how many promises of remission of sins set forth in various expressions every
way, to affect and meet with every man's condition, but that his design is the
comfort of his people? and wherefore are the examples of the Saints proposed to
us; their falls, their restoring again, but for our comfort and hope? surely
this is the design, Brethren; and therefore surely, he will carry on his people
in the knowledge and understanding of them, the closing with them, else the
work is done but imperfectly; for what though the righteousness of God be
revealed in the Gospel from faith to faith, except there be an eye Romans 1. 17.
Ephesians. 1. 18.
opened? and as the light grows clearer, so the eye grows stronger and
clearer to behold it: it will be little matter of comfort to the people of God;
what is a man the better as to comfort, to have rich means, and knows nothing
of it at all? and then to grow in grace, in all the graces of the Spirit,
Brethren, this does wonderfully help to the comfort of the Saints: What is the
complaint of the most of men? O they cannot l^ft up their heads, they cannot
carry a cheerful heart; why? O they think they are hypocrites, they are not
right with God, or they are in unbelief, they cannot believe in Jesus Christ,
they cannot do this or that, or they cannot see that there is any thing right
in them: Why Brethren, it will not satisfy a tender heart, except he see and
discover somewhat in himself of Gods working; now when it is, small as a
Mustard Seed, as a Cypress-seed, it is scarce discernable, but as it grows
from strength to strength, at last he comes to see it, when sincerity of heart
does more ordinarily and strongly prevail against the sly and subtle
insinuations of sin upon the heart. O then the soul can see that his heart is
right with God; and so for faith, when it is strong and acts strongly upon the
Lord Jesus, the soul does even feel that it does believe, and so an end is
brought to all those sad complaints; let men of corrupt minds say what they
will, Brethren, the appearances of grace in the soul, is a notable evidence of
our being clothed with the righteousness of Christ, when we walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit; for a man to pretend to have no condemnation upon
him, and yet walk after the flesh, loosly and vainly, wickedly, Romans 8. 1, 13.
and yet never doubt nor question his condition; I say, that man is in a
desperate security, a lethargy, it is very great odds but he perishes in it;
the Apostle says, such shall die; and they say, they shall live; but they will
one day know, whether Gods Word or theirs shall stand* Well then, this much
furthers their comfort, and this is one of the Lords great designs for our
good, that we should walk comfortably, and therefore he brings o^ that his
work; that spark in a great deal of green wood, that smothers, and smokes, and
puts out our eyes almost with weeping at it, he blows it up by his Spirit
more and more, and brings judgment to victory, victory over our corruptions
through the strength of the Spirit, and so victory over our doubtings, fears
and discomforts. O what riches of grace is Mat. 12. 20.
here! but thus much for the Arguments of the point.

For the Application then; First, this will speak the sad condition of two
sorts of persons, and those are,

First; Such as make a profession of Jesus Christ, and yet grow not, are at a
stand; we do innovere but not promovere, like a horse in a mill, go round, and
are at night where they were in the morning; they go round in a formal compass
of duty, but alas, grow not by it at all; look upon many professors, and
consider what they have been, and shall you not find they had as much life
seven years ago as they have now, they are grown in faith nothing, their faith
is still as a grain of Mustard Seed, if they have any at all indeed, as they
may, its true, and yet not grow for a time; the Apostle speaks of silly women,
that are always learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth; and 2 Timothy 3. 7.
there are silly men among us that are always learning and yet are not come to
the knowledge of the truth: Some indeed I pity much, there is a natural defect
in their understandings, by mediation whereof all this growth is perfected, and
it is so great in some, that they will hardly ever be able to apprehend much of
the wisdom of God in a mystery, it is well if they understand the main thing,
without which there is no life; but these are not the persons I speak of, but
such among us have wit and parts enough, can understand, and manage, and
improve any thing else they take in hand, and yet in the matters of their
souls, they take up their rest like tired Jades that will go no further: the
Apostle reproves the Hebrews for it sharply, that when for the time they might
have been teachers of others, yet we had need Heb. 5. 12.
to be taught our selves the first principles of the Doctrine of Christianity:
truly Brethren, me thinks you that have long known Jesus Christ, and have gray
hairs upon your heads, and are found in the way of righteousness, when you see
young striplings out-grow you, and apprehend much of the mysteries of Christ
which you do not, this should be a shame to you: it is a Prove. 16. 31.
strange sottishness and security that seizes upon men, in respect of their
souls: they would think shame that a young man of little or no experience
should know them, to manage their trade better then themselves, that are of so
long standing and experience, but here they are content to be out-stript, and
content themselves with any thing; that your grace should be so small, as I may
say, in the seed still, so small as a seed, and scarce discernable to this day;
O what a sad thing is this! now your salvation is nearer then when you
believed, and you are as far from being meet for it, as when you believed. O
how unfit are we for death, though we have one foot in the grave already some
of us, and we do not heed this? Surely, if this be a truth, that those who are
planted in Christ do grow, and thou can not find thou growest; what can
thou conclude, but one of these two things?

First, that either thou have all this while deceived thy self, and thought
thou had the root of the matter within thee, and had it not, for if thou
had, thou would have grown: The Kingdom of God will not be always as a grain
of Mustard Seed, and that which is in thee happily appears to be no more; and is
not this a sad condition, Brethren? is it not high time for you to look about
you, when you are grown to such years, and never have been planted into Jesus
Christ, never made one with him to this day? I say, a man that finds he
grows not at all, he is where he was so many years ago, has cause to fear
this; and me thinks this should startle us, a company of lazy professors, that
never matter whether they improve or no.

Or else secondly, which is bad enough, that thou have some sad disease upon
thee, that hinders thy growth: surely somewhat is the matter, Brethren, it is
not right with you; if you have a child stand at a stay for two or three-years,
while it should grow, you see it is a living child, but it grows not; O
surely it has some disease or another, some obstructions hindering the course
between the head, and heart, and the members, and you fear such a child will
not live. O that you would but apply this to your souls! sure you have some
desperate disease upon you, some obstruction or another; it may be the world is
gotten between you and the root, and the head, which is Christ, and so the
communication is hindered, you grow not up into him, draw nothing nearer to him
at all; does it never enter into your hearts to consider this, Brethren, are
you not afraid of perishing in such a condition? I am sure your condition is
sad, that a growing sensible Christian would not be in your case for a world;
and are you not sensible of it? it is so much the worse. O how will you answer
it, Brethren, considering how much influence you have had from on high, the
Ordinances, the fat things of his house in abundance, the sincere milk of the
word you have had in this place for a long time, more then most places have had
it, and yet your souls have prospered no more under it; you have had five
Talents, and yet it may be many that have had but two, but one, have out-stript
some of you; where you have had five Sermons, five opportunities of grace, many
a poor soul would have been glad of one, and yet such it may be stronger in
faith, more in humility, more spiritual minded then we are; can you answer this
at the great day? But thus much for this first.

Secondly, It shows us the sad condition of such, as instead of growing in
grace, alas they grow worse and worse; as the Apostle says, evil men and
seducers grow worse; and indeed, we 2 Timothy 3. 13.
must know this, Brethren, we do grow either better or worse, as happily
afterward we shall have occasion to speak to at large; either the house of
David grows stronger, or the house of Saul; either the flesh or the spirit
prevails in the hearts of the people of God; there are two sorts of persons
whose condition is under this consideration.

First, Such as have professed the name of Jesus Christ, and yet alas, though
they were green for a while, now their leaf is fallen, their light is gone out,
they are fallen from their place of standing among the Saints in appearance;
never was there an age more fruitful in such barrenness then this is; alas,
like a Fir Tree shaken with the wind, they lose their fruit, yea, are turned up
by the roots, and now are become as a dry stick, fit for nothing but to burn,
the latter end of such men is worse then their beginning, Mat. 12. 45. Jude 12.
they are trees twice dead; not only dead by nature, but have lost their
profession, which was a visible life, whereby they did appear to men to be
alive; and is there any hope of such a tree living again? truly, Brethren, very
little; I have oberved it, and I wish I could look upon it with a more
trembling heart, that such men as these grow worse, fall off and decline, they
are the saddest, hard-hearted, desperate, profane wretches afterward; or the
most besotted worldlings, and seldom are they recovered. I know not whether I
may speak to any such at this time, I hope the best things of you; if there be
any such, let me tell thee, thou art in a more dangerous condition then those
that never knew God to this day.

Secondly, Such as never yet had appearance of being planted into Jesus Christ,
and so no growth in them, but are yet in their Isa. 55. 11.
naturals; know this day, you are growing worse and worse, the Gospel does not
return in vain, you are worse every day then other, every Sermon then other;
the Gospel is a savor of death to death to you; as there is nothing does
condemn sinners like to John 3. 19.
the Gospel rejected, so nothing does harden sinners more then the Gospel, and
those precious promises which men give the hearing to, day by day, but alas
that is all. Isaiah, the most Evangelical Prophet, he comes with a make you
the ears of this Isa. 6. 10.
people heavy, that hearing they might hear and not perceive. If the Son be not
kissed when he is offered to sinners, but they turn their Psalm 2.
backs upon him, he will be angry; if the more worthy person be suitor, and be
denied and slighted, and the heel lift up against him, will not this provoke
him think you? surely it will: therefore God does usually give up such to a
reprobate mind, yea even for Romans 1. 28.
despising the light of nature, much more the Gospel, and gives them up to
hardness of heart; you shall ordinarily see where the Gospel comes at the
first among a people, it works more mightily then afterward; at first, though
men are profane, yet they have not had the Sunshine to harden the Clay into a
Brick; the Word of God, this Gospel and means of growth, it is as fire, the
coals of love, and either they do melt, or else burn sinners into stones and
bricks, and sear their consciences that they are even past feeling, hence it is
we have so many desperately wicked persons among us. O how sad a condition is
this Brethren, to be growing worse and worse under the greatest mercy and love
that the Lord manifests to any! Sinners, in good earnest, do you think it is
the way to heaven to grow worse, and worse, or the way to the Chambers of
death? Thou know thy self to be a more desperate profane wretch then
formerly, making no conscience of that which heretofore thy soul it may be has
trembled at, now it goes down without regret, or else if not in open
profaneness, if thou meltest away in secret wickedness, that no eye takes
notice of, and art worse and worse, what will the end of these things be? the
Saints that grow, they grow up into the likeness, and image, and glory of
Christ, they grow up into him; and thou growest up into the likeness of the
Devil, up int(...)im; What will become of you? O that sinners would but lay
these things to heart: if heretofore thou wast overtaken with a sin, it may be
it was some trouble to thee; now thou will work the works of the Devil, thy
will is engaged, and so much the more heinous the sin is; what can you expect,
Brethren? O that God would open sinners eyes, that they might but see whether
they are going, what they are doing, and they could but consider what
bitterness this will be in the latter end, to grow worse and worse.

The next Use shall be then, Brethren, to take an account of Use 3.
our selves, whether we grow or go backward yea or no; this is not the work of
every day, Brethren, for it will hardly be discernable, if we daily should put
our selves to the trial, we should do nothing else, it would eat up that time,
and those endeavors to grow, which ought to be laid out upon it, that so it
may afterward appear; a man that should spend every day in casting up his whole
Books, to see how he grows in his estate, would h^nder himself of those
endeavors to thrive that must be used, else he cannot thrive; besides, this
growth is not the work of a day usually, though sometimes it may be so; but of
months, or a year, or so; if a man should sit by his tree, or set his eye upon
his child to behold his motion or growth, he would lose his labor, it is
better seen afterward, as in another place afterward shall be spoken; besides,
if we should daily judge of our growth and try it, alas what inconstant
judgments should we make of our condition; for some days we are up, and some
days down; it may be some days under the power of a temptation, and other
days set at liberty from them; sometimes the Merchant makes a losing bargain,
sometimes a winning; sometimes his cash comes in, and sometimes he is all in
disbursments; therefore he must not, he cannot judge of his estate, whether he
prosper or thrive by this or that day, but after a while he should look to it,
cast up his Books, see how it stands. Brethren, it is impossible to persuade
a Merchant, except he be Bankrupt, and knows it is so, and therefore has no
mind to look upon his misery, else I say, you cannot persuade a Merchant but he
will take his set times for perusing his Books, casting up his accounts, and
not let it run too long neither, for fear of the worst, and if any should
advise him to the contrary, he would take him to be his enemy, suspect him for
one that would undo him; and yet alas, how easy are we to believe Satan and
the world, when they shuffle us off from this work of casting up the accounts
of our souls? I think we may all of us, or the most of us, plead guilty here;
have we our times, Brethren, we set apart for this work of self-searching and
trial? not an hour in a month, or many months; when we come to the Lords
Supper, an hour in a quarter, or a day in a year, yea, do you ever perform this
duty at all? truly, it is an ill sign when we are so backward to search; the
Lord persuade you to the duty: you heard before how sad a thing it is to be at
a stand, not to grow; and beside, how can thou be thankful if thou take not
notice of it? he loses his glory, and that will neither be for our advantage
nor comfort.

And here I hope it may not be beside the Text, to speak of growth, under that
other ordinary Simile, of growing like trees or plants; in Scripture, nothing
more ordinary, then that where Believers are compared to trees of
righteousness, and branches in Christ the Vine; and what is included in this
comparison here, as to the growth in quantity, increase in quality, and
goodness and swiftness of it, I hope I shall meet with in the other.

First then, look whether you grow more into the root, you 2 King. 19. 30.
grow downward, for if a tree grow not in the root proportionably, you know it
will be top-heavy, and every blast is ready to over-turn it; that soul grows
to purpose, that grows then in the root more; now what is this root but the
Covenant of Mat. 3. 10.
grace, as you have heard? when God would cut a people down by the root, he
would dis-covenant them; now the Lord Jesus is the main of the Covenant, and
therefore called the Covenant he and his Spirit are the great promises of the
Covenant; Christ 1 Cor. 1. 30.
as he is tendered for righteousness, for holiness, for redemption, and all.
Now there are three graces specially which respect the root Jesus Christ,
whereby we may be said to grow in the root, and therefore let us labor to
search and try our selves by them.

The first is Faith, Brethren, whereby indeed we are planted into him, and as
that grows, so we are said to grow in the root; time was when our faith was but
as a grain of Mustard Seed, but now has it deeper rooting, faster hold of
Christ; do we now embrace him more closely then we did? time has been it may
be, when we have understood little of the Covenant of grace, and so
consequently could give but an assent to what we understood of it, and an
answerable consent; but do thou now understand it more, to give a firmer
assent to the truth of the thing? wherein the Lord has promised to give his
Son, and with him remission Isa. 43. 25. Ier. 31. 34.
of sins, that he will remember them no more, and blot out their iniquities;
thou assentest to this truth now more then thou did before. O the bloodiness
of thy guilt was that which dismayed thee, the horridness, the filthyness, the
multitude, the aggravations of thy sins; now thou see and consentest to the
truth of it, that God will swallow up all, they shall be (though scarlet) as
white as snow; though the time was, the sight of thy sins did as much amaze
thee, as the sight of the Egyptians did the Israelites, O thou know not what
to do; now thou can look upon them as swallowed up in the red Sea of the
blood of Jesus Christ. O a Sea of mercy, a red Sea of precious redeeming blood!
what will it not swallow up? do thou find it? O observe, Brethren, how you
grow in your assent to it; and so for mortification, subduing iniquities,
because thou have been pressed and pestered with thy lusts, thou have been ready
to ^ay, all men are liars, in thy haste: O notwithstanding this Covenant of
grace, I find my corruptions strong and lively: but now thou do not upon this
account question the Covenant, but assentest to it, and Mica. 7.
closest with it, consent as well as assent, and so waitest upon God for the
fulfilling of it until his time; he that believes, makes not haste; though he
make it not to grow, yet this is all thy salvation, here thou hangest thy
hopes, and off this thou will not be beaten, though heretofore thou have found,
alas, thou could hardly fasten upon it at all, do you find this? Bretheen,
see in what degrees: if we grow not here, we grow not at all to any purpose.

Secondly, And that which is indeed included in the former, is that of
self-denial; if any man will be my Disciple, he must deny ^lat. 16. 24.
himself and take up his Cross; Deny himself; all that is desirable in himself,
all that he looked upon as conducible to salvation, whether his works, or gifts,
or duties, his privileges, or whatever; It is true, we had a root of our own
in Adam, but that worm of sin has smitten the root, and it is withered, and it
is but rottenness, and therefore there is no growth to be expected from it but
what will be rotten: Now Christ alone in the Covenant of grace is the root, and
the more we grow off our own root, the more we grow into him, as the root: Now
consider this, Brethren, it may be the time has been thou have builded much of
thy hopes and comforts upon what thou have had in thy self. O if thou could
but do this, and that thou could be quiet and take comfort in thy condition:
now, though thou do more or do less, whatever thou art enabled to do through
him, do thou find that thou can bless him for it, and yet go out of all,
and be as though we had never done any thing, counting all but as menstruous
clothes, and yet not the less, but the more encouraged, that our own
righteousness is not the bottom, because then it could not be sure, but we have
such a root as never withers, even Jesus Christ. Alas, how far short are we in
this? though we have seen it many times, when we would be standing upon our own
bottom, that we cannot stand upon a thing that stands not under us, but
sinketh, only upon the Rock Jesus Christ, yet we have not learned this many of
us I doubt: this hinders our growth much; as if a vessel be indeed afloat, yet
so shallow, keeps so near the side of the shore, as that it ever and anon
strikes upon the ground, it can make no considerable progress, and is in danger
of smiting beside: so it is in this case; well, consider then, this has been
our case, we could not launch out into the deep, perfectly trust to that grace
revealed in Christ, we must have one foot upon the ground, we must feel
something of our own under us, or else we could not be quiet; is it thus with
thee now? that thou ar^ more come off this, thou can now though thou see
nothing in thy self, yea when there is most appearing in thee, yet wave all,
come clearly off it, and alone cast thy self upon the waters, commit thy self
to the deep, where no bottom is to be felt; this is growing in the root indeed.

Thirdly, In humility; this is another which indeed does follow upon the other,
and must needs do so, for nothing emptyeth more then faith, nothing lays the
soul lower, and indeed this is the prospering grace of the soul; that soul that
is lifted up, as the Prophet says, is not right within him: Learn of me, says
our Hab 2. 4. Mat. 11. 29.
Savior, for I am meek and lowly: O when the soul is thus low, then it is
hungry, and thirsty, and poor in Spirit; and then it sucks from the Lord Jesus,
then a taste of his love is sweet to the soul, then the Spirit being ready to
yield to God in every thing, to do all his will, God is ready to yield to the
soul in every thing that he requires agreeable to his will; how do we grow in
humility, Brethren? examine this, it is the first, and second, and third, and
every step of Jacobs Ladder; do thou find, that whereas thou wast wont to
overlook and undervalue in comparison of thy self; now rather thou think in
good earnest, that every one fearing God is better then thy self, because of
the vileness of thine own heart, thou see; before thou could not bear a
reproof, but if thou did not turn and all to rent him that reproved thee,
though with never so much mildness, yet thou would snarl, and quarrel, and be
ready to cast as much as that came to, into his own teeth that reproved thee;
now if thou be reproved, thou have nothing to say, but fear thy heart, it
may be too true of thee, now it is welcome, thou love them that reprove thee
so much the more; Brethren, it may be heretofore you would be apt to complain
of your selves, and of your own vileness, and make sad moan, and yet if another
speak but an ill word of you, yea, if they speak no more of you then you
deserve, you could not bear it; now if they speak ill of you, art thou ready to
lay thy hand upon thy mouth, sure the Lord has bid them speak evil, and there
is cause enough for it, and they 2 Samuel 16. 10.
cannot say worse of me then I am. O here is a growth in humility; before thou
were ready to envy every one that had more gifts, or more grace, more of the
hearts of Gods people then thy self; now thou art ready to say with Moses,
enviest thou for my sake? thou can sweetly submit to his disposal of thee:
the Numb. 11. 29. Exodus 32. 1.
least thou have is more then thou deservest. O this is that which obtains much
of the Lord, when thy heart is in such a frame, it is fit to receive; so Jacob,
he was less then the least of his mercies, it was an argument wherewith he
pleaded with the Lord; thou art content to be any thing, though in never so
mean a degree of service to him, so be he will be but thy Father and own thee;
if thou may not be with him in the transfiguration upon the mount, if thou
may be but a Disciple, if thou may not get within the cloud with Moses, nor
be a Benjamin; yet if Mat. 17.
thou may be a Son and a Subject, though no Favorite, this is that thou art
contented with. O here is a growth! Brethren, search and try, are we come to
this pitch, or how far are we gone herein? is it better with us then it has
been in this respect?

But then secondly, we must try whether we grow upward yea or no, as well as
downward; and this I shall consider according to the chief faculties of the
soul, the mind and the will, and speak somewhat to each of them.

And first for the mind, the understanding. 1. Do you find, Brethren, that you
grow and increase in the knowledge of his will, that the darkness that is upon
your hearts naturally, does vanish by any degrees? do you find the vail does
wear thinner that was upon your hearts, that you begin to behold the Lord Jesus
with a more open face then before? time was when you were babes in
understanding; are you new men and women, or are you past the state of babes?
Alas, I doubt if the treasuries of our hearts were laid open, we should find
them very empty of this heavenly knowledge, how few can bring out of their
treasuries both new and old? This will appear in these two things Eph^ 4. 14.
specially.

First, if you be apt to be tossed up and down with every wind of Doctrine, and
are not-stablished in the present truth, but your minds are floating, and
hovering, and ready to settle upon any thing that is presented to you, though
contrary to what you have received, it is a sign that you are but children in
understanding; how easy is it to deceive children, to put upon them Counters
instead of Gold, to make them part with the one for the other? and how easy is
it to lead captive silly-women, as the Apostle 2* Tim. 3 6.
calls them that are ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth; a weak eye that cannot discern between Heb. 5. 14.
things that differ, has not his senses exercised to discern: it is very easy
to put one thing upon them for another; truly Brethren, these times have the
name for times of great light, and greater knowledge then there was before, and
I do believe that knowledge shall increase by going too and fro; but yet for
all that, men's eyes are very weak, they cannot discern between light and
darkness, but put darkness for light; for what is the ground of all error, is
it not the ignorance of the Scripture and the power of God? and was there ever
any times more fruitful in error then these are? Alas Brethren, what strangers
are many of us to the very principles of Religion, if examined, in them that
pretend to such high discoveries and revelations of Christ in our times, such
have need of milk, and not of strong meat; the wisdom of God in a mystery is a
riddle to them; the Heb. 12. 5.
Apostle spoke it to them that were perfect, that is to say, grown men and
women, in opposition to babes: Well then, look to it, if you find your selves
easy to be shaken, to turn with every wind of Doctrine like a weathercock, it
argues you are but children, but babes; you may persuade a child to any thing,
to be of twenty minds in an hour, because alas, he has no sound well-grounded
knowledge of any thing, you may persuade him to part with his meat, his drink,
for a toy, or by some pretended loathsomness in it that is not, and so it is
with poor, weak, ignorant souls; how do we see many cheated out of Ordinances,
out of duties, out of close walkings with God, as things of no moment, by the
cunning craftiness of them who lie in wait to deceive. It is a sad thing to see
persons that should be of greater knowledge then ordinary, that in things so
much controverted, as they are now a days, can in a few days time be so tossed
with a wind of Doctrine, as to take up a strange, a contrary practice; this
easiness to forgo our principles, argues we are childish and weak.

Secondly, Are we grown in understanding? you will find it by this; thou will
not be so ready, so easy to take offense as heretofore thou have been: alas,
before men are acquainted with the ways of God at all, you see they are
offended at every thing they see; the Jews were offended with the meanness of
Jesus Christ, his descent, that he was the Carpenters Son, he was not like to
be the Messiah; alas, it was the weakness of their understanding, they did not
consider those Scriptures, where it is said there should be no beauty in him
that we should desire him; and that Mat. 13. 15.
he should come meek and lowly, riding upon an Ass: and so they were offended
at his Doctrine, when he told them, they must eat his flesh, and drink his
blood, they could not conceive of it; and many of his Disciples went backward
and walked with Zech. 9. 9. John 6. 66.
him no more. And so sinners, O they stumble at every thing in the people of
God, when they consider them, and pry into them, and find they miss it, and
fall in their duties, they are prejudiced strongly against the ways of God
upon this score; alas it is ignorance, they know not that they have a corrupt
principle within, whereby they are laid open to sin, when lust and temptation
meets, except the Lord do wonderfully keep them; they expect they should be
as the Angels in heaven, altogether spotless and pure, even while they are upon
the earth, and therefore they are offended. And so a weak child of God, that is
newly come on to grace; alas, every little thing in the way they stumble at,
for this offending is nothing else but stumbling upon a thing, so as to hurt
themselves by it, either by being drawn to sin thereby, being encouraged to sin
thereby, or else by being grieved at it without cause; you know a child cannot
get over that which a man makes nothing of, but he stumbleth and falls: so
the Apostle, where he discusseth of the use of indifferent things, says he,
All 1 Cor. 8. 7.
men have not this knowledge, that an Idol is nothing, and therefore if some
weak ones, see a Brother that is strong eat of that which was offered to an
Idol, which he knows to be lawful for him to do, he is offended at it: this
argues weakness: now have we found it so, that we have been apt to take offense
at any thing, at every thing in others almost? and now we can bear; it argues
we see more clearly the grounds of such actions; but thus much for this.

Secondly, Another part of this growth upward, I place in the will, which is
indeed the main, the commanding faculty of the soul, and indeed wherein the
main of faith does lie, and of other graces, as of tender-heartedness, and the
like: do thou find then that heretofore thy will was more unsettled and
wavering, being as I may say, halting between two, thou wast not able to come
up so fully, to such a resolution for God and for Christ, as to trample all
under-foot for them; thou would have them, but either had some reservation,
in such a case thou would be saved; now thy resolution breaks through all
whatsoever, this is growth indeed.

A man of a weak resolution for Christ, alas if a temptation come, to deny him
the allurements of the world, he forsakes him with Demas, and imbraceth the
present world, or the frowns of the world, he draws ba^k to perdition; or
else is foiled with 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Peter, or at least much abated in his zeal, grows to a more indifferency
Heb. 10. Col. 6. 12. Gal. 2. 12.
of Spirit, would join Christ and Moses together with the temporizing Jews, to
keep themselves from being persecuted; and as Peter himself afterward, alas his
resolution was not yet so strong as afterward for fear of the Jews, he did
forbear to walk with the Gentiles as before he had done, and so was an offense
to them. Ah dear friends, it may be some of us can tell the time when for fear
of men we have sadly miscarried, is it better with us now? have we now more
courage? have we for fear of shame come to Christ with Nicodemus by night? and
now are we not Ioh. 7. 50.
ashamed of Christ nor of his Gospel? As the Apostle, he was not ashamed of it,
though it were persecuted, and though his meanness of speech were despised, his
preaching in a suitable manner to the subject, which is a great part of a
Preachers duty, he was not ashamed: Well then, now consider, does the Lord give
thee such boldness, such courage, such resolution of heart, as to hold fast the
Word of his patience, the suffering-truth? it may be we may be tried in this
point; if we be not grown we shall miscarry as heretofore we have done. Alas
Brethren, a little touch with a finger, a little blast will blow a c(...)d over
and over, but if we be grown, we shall find greater resolutions against sin, to
avoid the occasions of it; do you find, Brethren, O the yielding frame of your
hearts to sin, to weakness, every day it is weaker then heretofore, and done
away, that now you can peremptorily deny a lust, deny a temptation? O you may
not do this and sin against God! then we are grown in the will indeed: and the
more strong we grow in these resolutions, the more we grow in this respect; but
if we cannot cease to sin, Brethren, we are where we were; it may be we may be
sometimes affected a little with our sins upon a flash or pang, but have no
power nor 2 Pet. 2. 14.
strength to resist our wills, our wills are as weak as water to any thing that
is good, and against sin; we grow not, Brethren.

Again, as thus downward and upward, so see how we grow in fruitfulness; we
have spoken at large to that subject, that we must bring forth fruits, or else
we cannot escape the Axe; now I speak of the measure of the growth therein; a
young tree of the first year, cannot be expected to bear so much, as when
better grown; no more a young Christian: here I would only mind you of two
things.

First, that we bring forth more fruit, that is, that we do more for God then
we have done, and for his people, and for our own souls; it may be thou have
heretofore, but now and then prayed to God, do thou now do it more often? it
may be three times a day with Daniel and David: It may be heretofore thou
gave but little to the relief of the poor Saints and others in distress; do
thou now give more and more, proportionable to thy estate, as the Lord has
blessed thee? for that is the proportion which 1 Cor. 16. 4.
the Apostle makes; and so where heretofore thou did speak but now and then
a savory word, now do thou grow in that? is thy communication much more
seasoned and savoury? is it all savoury, tending to minister grace to the
hearers? heretofore thou had it may be scarce a thought of God in a day; now
he is the object of the workings of thy soul, the thoughts of him are pleasant
to thee, this is an high condition, it argues thou have grown, thou art in a
growing condtition; but this is not all, Brethren.

Secondly, Is that more fruit you bring forth, better then it was before? is it
more mellow then formerly? or if thou bring forth no more in number, is it more
in weight? for God takes not our services by number but by weight; and it is a
sottishness of the poor blind Papists, to think that God is pleased with their
much speaking, with pattering over so many Avy Mary's and Pater Nosters, or
principles of the Doctrine of Christ. I wish our practices be not too like
theirs; It may be heretofore thou could not enlarge thy self in prayer, and
now thou can; and thou think thou art much grown, it may be in bulk, but
not in goodness; are thy prayers now more, the breathings of the Spirit of
Christ within thee, and less of thine own Spirit? O how much strange fire
mingled with our sacrifices, and strange incense, strange zeal, even our own
passions, instead of a zeal for God! Now Brethren, is our zeal and fire more
pure, coming down from heaven, even from the Spirit of Jesus Christ, warming
our hearts? Look to this, do we find that we grow more spiritual in duties, in
prayer, do we act our faith more strongly, wrestle with God in spirit more then
in words? children are apt to be taken with bables and pictures, and flowers in
the corn, and we with sweet and quaint expressions; but now have we learned to
worship him more in spirit and in truth; to know that the great work of our
duties lie in the frame of our hearts toward God, in prayer, in preaching, in
hearing of the Word? It is childishness, Brethren, for one never to be well, or
to place so much in it to be always upon the lap and dandled; do we find that
now we would rather be made serviceable to him, and do it with more pure
hearts, more pure ends, not for our selves, but for his glory, we ask not
gifts, parts, Iam. 4. 3.
grace, to spend it upon our lusts as heretofore; not ^or our own peace, that
we might take our ends, but that we might be fitter instruments in his hands
for his glory, not for our own praise and honor among men. O look to this, I
tell you there is nothing sticks closer to us then this; now does this
sowrness, crabbidness of our fruits wear away by degrees; is it better with us
in these respects then before? this is a sign of growth indeed.

I will add but one more, and that shall be this; Do thou ^ind that thou
growest by the opposition thou meetest with in the work of grace, either from
without or from within, or any way whatsoever?

First, I say, from opposition without, grace will grow and gather strength,
and this either from men or from the Lood; from men, when they oppose the way
of God wherein we walk, we must look to it that we grow so much the stronger,
for that is the nature of grace, Brethren; as when Paul preached the faith
which once he had destroyed, and the people were amazed, says the Acts 9. 22.
Text, and they spoke of him as a changling, is not this he that wasted them
that called upon his name in Jerusalem? but Saul waxed so much the stronger,
and confounded the Jews that dwelled at Damaseus, proving that this was the
Christ. As the fire, they say, is hotter by antiperistasis, in coldest weather;
the Palm Trees they grow like as you heard in the proof, that raises it self
up under a weight of opposition. Well, look to this Brethren, I do not Psalm. 9
(...)
mean an Ish(...)elitish spirit, that is against every one, and every man's hand
against it; and that a man should out of a cross, crooked disposition, do any
thing, or vex and gall persons that oppose them; but grace will then be stirred
up as the fire by the wind, that blows it this way and that way, it is in
vain to blow it out, to offer it, for it increases the flame; there is no
resisting that Spirit, whereby the Saints a(...)ted; look to it, is it thus
with us, or do we find that opposition from men does cool us, discourage us,
dishearten us, so that we dare not own the Lord Jesus and his truth and way?
Truly, it is to be feared it is not right with us.

Secondly, From the Lord, there is some opposition sometimes, he wrestleth with
us; Jacobs wrestling with God implies some Exodus 32.
opposition of God, as I may say, he wrestled with him, let me go, says he,
this stirs him up so much the more earnestly to lay hold upon him, when the
Lord would take his leave of him; and you see the poor man in the Gospel, when
he was rebuked for crying after Jesus Christ, he cried so much the more
earnestly; and Mat. 20. 31.
so our Savior when he was in that great agony, or striving under the
displeasure of his Father, says the Text, he prayed so much the more
earnestly. So the Lord does sometimes hang back Luke 22. 44.
or hide his face, that he might draw out more and more his peoples hearts
toward him, as a Fisher draws away his bait to make the fish follow it the
more eagerly. Well, consider this now, do we thus grow, even by opposition? if
the Lord say to us we are dogs, not fit for childrens bread, can we conclude
the worst against our selves, and yet gather upon him for the crumbs at the
least?

But then there is opposition from our selves, from within, and that is from
the rebelling of our lusts, they rise and swell, and many times over-bear us,
we are foiled; do we grow by this? this may seem somewhat strange, that the
acting of sin should tend to the increasing of grace, for that we must know,
that it is not proper; for every act of sin properly does strengthen the habits
of sin, and the stronger sin is in the soul, the weaker grace is like to be; as
the more the water cools, the less heat there is remaining in it; but it is by
accident, as water cast upon a coalfire, at present it seems to put it out,
but afterward it burns so much the hotter and fiercer. So grace takes occasion
hereby to stir up it self so much the more, to set it self so much the more in
opposition to it; it makes a child of God so much the more humble, so much the
more watchful and full of prayer, if it be right with them, and neither sin nor
Satan gets by this at all. So if Peter be tossed in that sieve of vanity, that
temptation, and fall; O how it humbles him; and how afterward it fetches him
off his own bottom! how valiant he grew for Jesus Christ? And Hezekiah his
pride in the business of the King of Babylon, how it tended to humble him so
much the more; do we find it thus? does sin increase our grace, increase even
by our falls? do we get ground of them yea or no? if not, it is not well with
us. And thus much shall serve for the trial.

The next Use then will be for Exhortation to us all. If we find that we have
none of this, we grow not at all, we are a company of poor formal professors,
we are at a stand for proficiency, we know not what it means; I should advise
all such, Brethren, to look to their standing, their being in Christ; it may be
you have been deceived all this while, and except you be in him, except the Sun
of righteousness be risen upon you, it is in vain to put you on to grow, as to
the event, though not as to the discharge of our duty. A rotten root will not
carry the branches on to any increase, they may be at a stand a while, but they
will wither and rot, and perish as well as the root; look to your foundation,
Brethren, me thinks I should not need to press this upon you, you know for the
notion as well as it can be told you, that except you be in him, you can bring
forth no fruit, much less can you increase in fruitfulness. If you do not shut
your eyes, Brethren, and wink with them, as they in the Gospel did, they
stopped their eyes lest they should Isa. 6. 10. Mat. 13. 15.
see with them; the Sun of righteousness is ready to arise upon you, are you
willing to have it so? would you have him to arise upon you? would you be made
one with him? would you be found in him as the root, the head from whence
righteousness and holiness proceeds? deceive not your selves, Brethren,
Christ offers himself to you all, every one that will may come and take him for
his head, for his root, and so grow up in him; if thou were willing, then what
is the reason thou art not in him? well, surely then thou art not willing,
(whatever thou pretendest) he would gather thee under his wings, as a Hen the
Chickens, where they grow apace from the heat they are cherished with; but ye
would not, ye would not; look to this in the first place.

Secondly, you that are alive through grace, and have this union with Christ,
and yet it may be find you grow little, or happily can scarce see that you have
grown; now will you be exhorted in the name of Jesus Christ, in the Apostles
words, Grow in 2 Pet. 3. 18.
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; Labor to improve, to
come on, to be fat and flourishing, content not your selves to be babes in
Christ, no nor young men, but grow up to be Fathers. The prosecution of this
Use, the general Exhortation, I shall first lay you down some particulars,
wherein among others specially we are to labor to grow, because happily if we
rest in generals, each hearer has not his skill to bring it to particulars.
Secondly, the motives to enforce it. And thirdly, some general helps to growth,
and then come to some other Exhortations.

First then for the first, wherein specially we are to look to our growth; and
first in knowledge: we must ^ook to it that we grow in the first place; as the
Apostle has it in that forecited place, Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ: 2 Pet. 3. 18.
Knowledge is not here put by way of contradistinct. from grace, as if it were
no grace, but as being that special grace which does so much promote and
further the growth of all grace: beside, the Papists tell us, ignorance is the
mother of devotion, and that faith is better defined by ignorance then by
knowledge, but the Holy Ghost calls faith knowledge, by his knowldege shall my
righteous servant justify many, that is faith sure; and this is life eternal,
to know thee the only true God; now do but observe it; they boast themselves
Isa. 53. John 17. 3.
so much of Peter, and how little they own him in this point; for says he,
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord* Jesus Christ, the knowledge of
a crucified Christ: Now says the Papists, this is the way to error and
schism, and ignorance is the mother of devotion; just as the Jews made their
boast of Moses, and our Savior confuteth them by Moses whom they so much
boasted of, there is one who accuses you, even Moses, in John 5. 45.
whom you trust, for if ye had believed Moses, ye had believed me, for he wrote
of me. So there will be one that will accuse them in this point of knowledge,
even Peter, in whom they trust. So the Apostle, that ye may grow up in him,
speaking the truth in love; the Ephesians. 4. 15.
speaking the truth in love, is the way to grow up in Christ; and so the
receiving the truth, and the receiving of it in love; a well-qualified
knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified; and therefore the Apostle desired
to know nothing among them but this, if they knew Christ and him crucified,
this knowledge would 1 Cor. 2. 2.
produce whatever else is requisite for them, not by its own power, but the
Spirit of grace carrying it on. And so the Apostle to the Colossians,
increasing in knowledge, or the acknowledgment of God, and strengthened with
all might according to his glorious power, to all Col. 1. 10, 11.
patience and long-suffering with joy. So the wise man himself tells us, a wise
man is strong, yea a man of understanding increases Prove. 24. 5.
strength: Why, but you will say, may there not be much knowledge and yet
little grace, and therefore is this too necessary to grow in knowledge? I
answer, It is true, there may be much knowledge where there is little grace, as
in many an hypocrite; 1 Cor. 8. 7.
and many know much, but they know nothing as they ought to know it; but yet
however there cannot be grace without knowledge, a compe(...)t considerable
knowledge of Jesus Christ and him crucified; Fuel may be where there is no
fire, but the fire will not burn nor continue if there be no fuel; knowledge,
is as I may say, the very oil, the very fuel wherein the flame of the Spirit
lives in the soul, do but observe it, grace and truth came by Jesus Christ,
grace and truth, therefore grace abounds John 1. 17.
now in the time of the Gospel; he came that they might live, and live more
abundantly, because he came to reveal the truth in a more clear, full manner
then before; when the vail is taken away, says the Apostle, that was upon the
face, then beholding Christ 2 Cor. 3. 18.
with open face, we are changed into his image from glory to glory: and truly
there is all the reason that can be for it, for whereby grace is begotten, by
the same means it must needs be preserved and increased: Now it is by the
knowledge of the truth that we are begotten to God, therefore the Spirit is
promised to be sent forth to convince the world of sin, and of righteousness,
and John 16.
of judgment. And so says the Apostle James, he has begotten us again of his
own will by his word of truth, and therefore by this means grace is kept alive,
by our keeping this knowledge; and increased by the increasing of this
knowledge; Sanctify them John 8. 32.
with thy truth, thy word is truth, says our Savior, concerning his
Disciples; ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free; he
speaks here of a further progress, for they were his Disciples already, only he
promises them further freedom and liberty from sin, and this through the
knowledge of the truth; how do men that are not right escape the pollutions of
the world, but through the knowledge of the truth? as it is in that place, the
2 Pet. 2. 20.
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: and how come they to wallow in
their vomit again, to return to wallow in the mire, but by imprisoning and
smothering the truth? the principles they have received put out the light, and
then they may do what they please: the truth is, Brethren, all grace is
conveyed through the understanding of men and women, because the Lord works
upon us as reasonable creatures, and therefore proposes things to the
understanding, that it may Judge of them, assent to the truth of them, and
judge the goodness of them, and then propound them to the will to receive them,
to close with them, they Psalm. 9. 10.
that know thy name will trust in thee; the great reason wherefore poor sinners
are strangers from the life of God is because of their ignorance, as the
Apostle says, therefore the heathen call not upon Ephesians. 4. 18.
God, because they know him not; and therefore so many of us call Psalm. 79. 6.
not upon him as we ought, because we know him not; either we neglect it, or
else do it in a slight slubbering manne(...)t is because we know not God, what
a God he is, searching the hearts, great and glorious, and jealous: what is the
reason that poor creatures trust not more perfectly to the grace that is
revealed, but because the eyes of their understandings are no more opened to
behold the unsearchable riches of the grace which is in Jesus Christ, which is
able to swallow up all their mountainous sins, wash out their spots, though
never so deep; pay their debts, though never Ephesians. 1. 18.
so deeply charged: if poor sinners did but know this, they would trust more
perfectly; what is the reason we are so familiar with sin, and make no more of
it? it is because we know little or nothing of it in comparison: Ah poor
creatures, those that crucified Luke 22. 34.
Christ knew not what they did, else they would not have done it; and poor
sinners now that stand it out in this their day, and slight the offers of
grace, alas you know not what you do, else you would not do it; therefore if
you would grow in any grace, all graces, in faith, in love, in any thing else,
you must labor to grow in knowledge. O Brethren, if we had but a clear
understanding of the dimensions of the love of God, the freeness and fullness of
it, that he should set his love upon such vile, filthy, polluted wretches, such
as had no comeliness, but loathsomness upon us, and to bring us so near to
himself, to be one with him, to be one Spirit, and live and reign for ever with
him as Children, as a Spouse: if the soul did but know this, O how would it
love (...) Lord Jesus again! would men be proud, if they knew this as they
ought to know it? O no: therefore look that you grow in this: there were never
more ways and means to come to the knowledge of Christ, and him cr^cified,
then now, if we be not wanting to our selves shamefully: we cannot conclude
ignorance of these things: this is the way to grow. A man of understanding
increases knowledge: learn Prove. 1. 5.
of any body.

Secondly, Labor to grow in faith; the Disciples were sensible of this defect,
therefore they prayed, that he would increase their faith; Faith has a
wonderful influence upon the soul in respect of all the Graces of the Spirit;
Be it unto thee even as thou will: Luke 17. 5.
Mat. 15. 28. sa^^h our Savior to the Woman of Canaan; if we were but strong
in Faith, if women would have their Wills, this is the way; and if men would
have their Wills, this is the way, to labor to be strong in Faith; Faith is
that whereby the union and communion with Christ is maintained; it is that
whereby the soul cleaves to him, and therefore according to the strength or
weakness of that Will, the growth in other respects be also; a strong Faith
draws strongly from him: all the nourishment is from him, and the suppl^es of
the Spirit whereby it is digested, is from him; Now a strong Faith draws
these from the Lord Jesus more abundantly to the soul then a weak Faith: this
is that whereby we suck the milk out of the breasts of consolation, the
Promises; we feed upon Christ, Eat his flesh, which is meat indeed, and drink
his blood, which is drink indeed, no nourishment like to it; we do by Faith
partake Ioh. 6. 15.
of the fatness of the Olive, and therefore accordingly grow in other Graces;
One says of it, that it is Faith that virtually is all Graces, because Faith
fetches in the supplies of Christ to enable to all whatsoever; therefore it is
that we are patient in tribulation, because we believe; and impatiency, it
proceeds from the want of Faith; he that believes, makes not haste; hence
it is that we turn aside from following the Lord, that there is so much
unevenness in our walking; we cannot walk uprightly with God, because of the
weakness of Faith; if a man did believe God to be all-sufficient, to have all
fullness of good in him, and a full defense from evil, to be a Son and a shield,
would men for a little credit, a little honor to avoid a little trouble in the
flesh, turn aside from followin(...)he Lord? surely they would not. How often
does our Savior rebuke his Disciples for the littleness of their Faith? they
had Faith, but it was very little; How long shall I be with you? how long shall
I suffer you? says he in one place, where they could not cast out the Devil:
And will not God take care of you much more then of Sparrows? O ye of little
Faith! had they so much of his presence with them, teaching them, and yet were
but of little faith? Faith may grow objectively, when more is revealed.
Our Savior was displeased with it, he knew they could never do much to honor
him while their Faith was weak: as now in the Gospel, and more difficult cases,
as Number. 11. etc.

But may he not much rather take us up for this: the Spirit was not poured out
as now he is, and we have more then the bodily presence, even the Spirit of
Christ, and great encouragement to beg that Spirit, whereby we should
exceedingly grow in this Grace; may he not say to us, O ye of little Faith, why
do ye doubt? why do you walk so pensively, and hang the head, to the dishonor
of my Grace? may he not say, O ye of little Faith, why do you perplex your
selves, and rack your selves with cares of the World, what ye shall eat and
drink, and how ye shall be prvoided for? does not your heavenly Father take
care of you? O ye of little Faith, why do ye in every perplexity and trouble,
as men at a loss, run to this creature, and that creature, and not to the Lord
wherein your help does lie? O ye of little Faith, why do you, when means fail,
then cast away your hope, as if there were no help in God? as if because the
streams were dried up, therefore the fountain must needs be dry also; therefore
Brethren, labor to grow in this Grace: if ever you would do any eminent
service for Christ, or honor him, set the crown on him in any condition,
labor to be strong in Faith.

Thirdly, In that Grace of Love, labor to grow therein. First to the Lord
himself, to Jesus Christ: It may be thou do love him, and according to the
measure of Faith and Knowledge of him, the soul will love him usually, but we
must labor to love him much more; love, we take it kindly if it be from the
meanest person, and so does the Lord Jesus. O love the Lord ye Psalm. 31. 32.
his Saints, you cannot love him too much; do you always err in his love: the
more you love him, the more you may, for Prove. 5. 19.
there is no end of his perfections, his love, his mercy, his bowels toward
you, there is no searching of them, you may go yet deeper and deeper, and find
a ground for the increase of your love still; you love Relations, Husband,
Wife, Children, and more for relation, then for any excellency in them: many
times fond we are: O that we could be so fond of Jesus Christ! how sick of love
was Rachel, yea sick to the death for children? and so is many a fond mother; O
we cannot live without Genesis 30. 1.
them: Ah how few are thus sick of love to Jesus Christ! well, lobour to love
him, and to this end.

First, Labor to present the Lord and Jesus Christas most lovely to thee;
while thou entertainest hard thoughts of Jesus Christ, thou can not love him;
if thou think thus with thy self, I would fain have him, but he is not
willing to have me; if thou look upon him as rigorous and cruel, and one that
delights in your blood, it is impossible that you should love him: O no, labor
to present him to your selves, as one whose bowels are continually yearning
over poor souls, poor sinners, one full of compassions, full of mercy and
tenderness: he desires not the Cant. 5. 16.
death of a sinner; the Lord Jesus Brethren, is altogether lovely; it is true
for his holiness, his purity, as well as his grace and mercy: but this is that
which most moves to love, at least while we are under weakness, it is an high
pitch to love him for the beauty of Holiness that is in him. Think often then
seriously upon it, what dear thoughts the Lord Jesus had to poor sinners; that
rather then they should perish, he would interpose between them and the
everlasting burnings, though be were sorely scorched for it; O will not this
draw love! look upon him with his precious blood trickling down, and one drop
overtaking another; O what haste did love make! O how lavish was his love! he
would not spare any pains, any travel of soul, that sinners might live; and can
you but love him then? O what an heart must that creature have, that can look
upon the Lord Jesus wrestling with strongest wrath of his Father, so that he
needed the Ministry of Angels at that time, and yet not love him? try, see
whether such considerations as these will not heighten your love to him? we
complain of want of love; Brethren, we cannot love a thing we know not, or that
we consider not: see then if you do not find still some new beauty in him, for
which you should love him yet the more.

Secondly, Let it be much upon your hearts, how much he has forgiven thee.
Alas says the poor soul, if I knew that, that my sins were forgiven, I should
love him indeed abundantly: It may be thou have not a full persuasion of it;
but have thou not a good hope through Grace? and such a lively hope, as sets
a working out the scum, the pollution of thy heart more and more? Is not this
cause of great love to him? why, he has not left thee to sink in despair, and
perish: O how Luke 7. 47.
much did that sinner love him! because he had forgiven her much, therefore she
loved much. Dear friends, could this be, think you, without her heart dwelt
upon this consideration? it was fresh upon her spirit: O the more she
considered it, the more apparent were the riches of Grace toward her: O so
many Devils cast out of me! would the Lord Jesus have such precious thoughts
toward such a wretch as I? what, an Harlot, a filthy, unclean wretch, and would
he think upon me? and pitch his love upon me? and pass by many others that had
it may be but one devil, and make love to me that had seven? O she could not
hold; her bowels within her were ready to break; she must love him, she must
hang upon him, even upon his feet; she must wash him with her tears, and wipe
them with the hairs of her head; though before as harlots use to do, she had
been much in tricking and trimming her head, yet now they shall be dishrifled,
and now they shall be a Towel to wipe the feet of Jesus Christ: O here is love!
kiss his feet, if she may not kiss his lips, and blessed soul that had such an
heart given her! Now Brethren, consider this, have not some of us had seven
devils, have there not been seven abominations in our hearts? O it may be, we
have been 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
fornicators, adulterers, filthy unclean wretches, as vile wretches as ever
breathed; now consider this often, is it so indeed? has the Lord looked upon
such as we have been, pitched his love upon the vilest of us, and to make us so
nigh to himself, and shall we not love him? O where are such workings of love
toward the Lord Jesus, as that poor woman manifested! our hearts are dead and
dry: So the Apostle Paul, His love of Christ constrained him; O he was the
chief of Sinners, and the Lord did 1 Timothy 1. 13, 15.
so eminently save him, and call him out of darkness, when he was in the very
height of his wickedness, that then mercy should ^eet with him! that then a
pardon should descend from heaven, when he was fighting and rebelling against
heaven! and he should be conquered by the love of Christ, whose heart was full
of blood against him! O this lying upon his spirit, did indear his soul to
Jesus Christ. Ah dear Friends, I beseech you consider this; some of us sure,
that hear this, this day, our hearts do tell us, we have been the chief of
sinners, never viler then we: and has the Lord met with us? not as an enemy,
but poured out upon us such a stream of love, as we could no longer withstand
it? and yet do we not love him accordingly? O labor to grow in love to Jesus
Christ!

Thirdly, Mind the particular experiences thou have had of his love and
tenderness to thee. So the Psalmist, I love the Lord, Psalm. 1 16. 1.
because he has heard my voice; when he was in distress, then he cried to the
Lord, and he heard him, therefore he would love him; how many deliverances has
the Lord wrought particularly for us? specially he has kept us from sinning
such a time, and such a time, so that thou did not go on to the wounding of
thy conscience, the dishonor of his name, and will thou not therefore love
him? O dear friends, how often has he shaken the rod over thee, and yet has
spared, and can thou not love him? yea, though a child thinks the rod cannot
stand with love, yet when he comes to lay away childish thoughts, and to
understand as a man, he loves his father so much the more, that he has
chastened him, and not suffered him to take the way of his own heart; so should
it be in this case. But consider, how many sweet experiences have thou had of
his love? which it may be many a poor creature would have given a world for one
of them; many a kiss of his lips: thou scarce ever appearest before him, but
thou have a smile from him, some refreshing, some melting; does not this indear
thy heart? consider these things; there is many a poor child of God, that
scarce ever finds such sensible refreshings, and yet hang upon him, and
loves him; and O it is pure love indeed, when we hang upon him, though he
frown upon us, though he seem to shake us off, not to heed us nor regard us;
yet our souls it may be are sick of love for him, we must follow him still. But
thou that have such fore-draughts of his love sometimes, yea many times, O the
remembrance of these me thinks should much increase love to him. Now this is of
very great moment, for it will make us more abundant in the work of the Lord,
and with much more ease it will come off: Paul labored 2 Cor. 5.
more abundantly then they all, and it was nothing to him, O he loved much; and
so it will be with us if we could get our hearts to it. What was it think you,
that carried our Savior so cheerfully through all his travels, and griefs, and
slightings of men? O it was his love, nothing is hard to love, therefore labor
to be like-minded, to grow in love to the Lord Jesus.

But secondly, To grow in love one toward another, this is matter of rejoicing
to the saithful overseers of the Church of 2. These. 1. 3.
Christ, we are bound to thank God always for you Brethren, as it is meet,
because that your faith grows exceedingly, and the charity, or love of every
one of you all toward each other abounds. So again, as touching brotherly
love, you have no need that I write unto you, for ye are taught of God to love
one another, and ye do the same thing to all the Brethren which are in all
Ma^edonia, but we beseech you Brethren to abound more and more; you have it in
that place of the Apostle to the Corinthians, that to be full of contention 2.
Cor. 3.
and dividing zeal, is a sign, not of growth, but childishness. I am of Paul,
and I am of Apollo, and I am of Cephas, and I am of Christ; are you not carnal?
that is to say, I could not write to you as spiritual, as grown men, but as
carnal, as unto babes in Christ, such in whom the flesh did much prevail;
surely Brethren, the way of love is the edifying-way, and therefore the body is
said to edify it self in love; knowledge puffs up, and from that Ephesians. 4. 16.
pride comes contention, as the wise man speaks; but love edifies. O how would
the Church grow, and the Saints grow, if all the heat, and zeal, and pains
which is laid out in maintaining breaches, factions, separations one from
another, did all run in one stream to build up one another in our most holy
faith, to make that our business? It is sweet when the members have that care
one of another, that out of a pure spirit of love to consider 1. Cor. 12. 25.
one another, to provoke to love and to good works: Now if there be rents and
schisms in the body, there will not be that ^are one of another, and therefore
no marvel if the Apostle note such, nigro carbone, mark them that caused
divisions contrary to the Doctrine Romans 16. 17.
that you have received, and avoid them, set a cross upon their doors, have no
fellowship with them. You know in the body, if there be a breach, a
dismembering of the body, or some members out of joint, or fearful wounds,
there is a grief of the spirit, and the growth is hindered: So it is in this
case, when the Churches walked together with singleness of heart, then were
they multiplied, Act. 2. ^6, 47. Ephesians. 4. 30, 31.
then they prospered and increased indeed; the Holy Ghost is grieved with
bitterness, and wrath, and anger: when the Sea was divided for Israel to pass
through, it was weakened, but when the waters were united again, they are said
to return to their strength; so when the waters run in one Channel, which is
love, O how strong is the Church of Christ! it grows mightily then, then the
Egyptians, the enemies of Israel are drowned in it; but so many fractions, so
many streams, it being divided into each of them, is easily passable by the
enemies: the Lord give a Spirit of love. O if there were but more love in
Ministers to people, how would they do more then they do? or at least, in
another manner then they do. And so in people, if they would be more earnest
for their Ministers then they are; therefore if we would grow indeed, labor to
grow in love to all the Saints, wherever indeed the image of Christ is, and to
love them with a pure heart, unfeignedly, as the Apostle says.

Fourthly, To grow in humility, to grow downward, to be willing to decrease, so
the Lord Jesus may increase. Ah Brethren, if we John 3. 30.
were put to it, it may be we should find it very hard to be laid aside (as I
may say) as David was to the building of the Temple, because he was such a man
of blood; or as Moses was for his unbelief at the waters of strife. O the daily
working this upon our hearts, what we were, and what we are, through grace in
Jesus Christ; what infinite riches of grace is manifested to the vilest of
sinners; this will make us lie low before him; but enough of this before.

Fifthly, In mercy, in bowels and compassions to persons in necessity and
distress; O be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful, take him for
o^^ pattern, and there will be continual room for Luke 6. 36.
growth and increase. So the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians, that as they
abounded in other graces, so they would labor to abound 2 Cor. 8. 7.
in this also. Ah where are bowels, Brethren, toward one another souls? with
what tenderness did the Apostle stand over the souls of those poor people,
warning them day and night with tears? And our Savior over Jerusalem; now I
tell you again weeping, says the Apostle. O that God would give such a heart
to us, and such a heart to his people! indeed there is little tenderness and
bowels one toward another, little pitying one another while under temptation;
we can rather raise our hearts one against another, stomach one another,
entertain prejudice one Gal. 6. 1.
against another upon this account; but a spirit of meekness, and love, and
tenderness, in restoring, setting one another in joint, if we be fallen, is not
found among us, or very little: O labor to grow here, and then to abound in
works of mercy, to give, and give much, liberally, and do it with a tender
heart, an upright heart, out of obedience to God, not for ostentation.

But fifthly, Labor to grow in softness of heart, to see the stone wasting day
by day. I do not mean by softness of heart, only an aptness to melt into tears,
for many an one may have a soft heart, that cannot weep at all, though most
dispositions are apt to it: and where it is, it is a sweet expression of the
heart toward Christ oftentimes; though I must tell you, there may be much of
this, and yet much hardness of heart; many tears shed, and it may be upon the
consideration of sin, and yet the heart hard to this day; the softness of the
heart, Brethren, lies most what in the plyableness and yielding of the spirit
to God, when we are ready to do all the will of God; as David, I have found
David my Acts 13. 22.
servant, one that will do all my will; that is ready to say, speak Lord for
thy servant hears, Lord what would thou have me to do? Now alas, there is
many a wretched heart, that it may be under a passion, weeping at the
apprehension of sin, and yet go away and return to it again and again; the
heart is not pliable, but stubborn: wherein did lie the hardness of Pharaohs
heart? it lay in this, that he would not harken to the Lord, nor let Israel go,
though he had had so many judgments, and so many deliverances, yet all would
not soften his heart; no, the iron sinews in his stiff neck, they remained such
still, though sometimes he seemed to relent, yet alas, no sooner the hand was
off, but the heart was more hard then before, he strouted it out, and would not
yield to let Israel go. So when the Lord heapeth mercy upon mercy to melt out
the s^one in the heart, to make it like wax to the fire, to the mould, to be
put into a fashion, and it may be sometimes it draws a few tears from the
eyes, but the heart is never the more pliable to God. And so he comes with rod
upon rod, blow after blow, and yet does it gently, and all to foften and make
the poor creature more pliable to him; it affects a little sometimes, but is
not the heart as stubborn, as unteachable, as far from yielding to God in all
things as before? O this is the softness; as a piece of joyners work, it is all
glued together, one part to another. Now then it is dissolved and broken, when
the glue, the soder is melted, and one piece falls from another; so it is here,
our hearts and their sinful objects are glued together by carnal affections;
now then the heart is said to be broken to a softness, when these affections
are dissolved, when our hearts and our objects of sin fall asunder each from
the other; labor to grow herein, Brethren.

Sixthly, To be more spiritual in holy duties, more inward in our Communion
with God; you have heard this spoken to in the trial. O labor then to grow in
spiritualness, in prayer, to pray with more faith, with more fervency, with
more purity of heart, not to ask any thing to spend it upon our lusts. In
meditation to keep closer to it without distraction, and so to read, to hear,
to do all these duties in a better manner: but enough of this already.

Seventhly, In your holy walking with God, and with your selves; as the Apostle
says, we be seech you Brethren, by the Lord Jesus, that as you have received
of us how ye ought to walk and please 1 These. 4. 1.
God, so you abound more and more; when a man walks with God alvvay, sets
the Lord as before his face, as the Psalmist speaks, then he will be able to
walk pleasingly to him, when by faith he sees him that is invisible, that is
to say, God to be present with him, and knovveth him, to ponder his ways; O
how eareful shall we be then of our thoughts, as well as of our words and
actions! and this we do by faith, believing his presence with us, and his
all-seeing eye to be upon us still, upon our hearts, and all their workings;
according to the prevailing of these persuasions, and the constancy of them
upon our spirits, will our ways be ordered: such a man will not dare to
harbor vain thoughts in his heart, though they will rudely rush in, as a
ruffian may rudely offer violence to a chaste Matron, she will not endure it;
so it is here, O no, I dare not: as Joseph you see; and then vvalking with our
selves by more and more restection upon our selves, upon our actions, our
ways: the very truth is, the want of this is the great cause we grow so
little, or if we do, that we can take so little comfort in it; herein lies the
excellency and glory of a man above a beast, that he can recoyl upon his own
actions, therefore labor to improve this. O be more in it, reproving your
selves when you find you have done amiss, whip those vain thoughts which pass
through your souls, and give them their Pass; exhort your selves, stir up your
selves, comfort and cheer your selves in your God, which you cannot do, except
you be much in this part of an holy walking, even reflecting upon your selves
and your own state.

Eighthly and lastly, that I shall speak to, shall be this, To labor to grow
more and more in that assurance of your relative grace; your adoption, the
growth and other grace, its true is a great help unto it, but labor to improve
it to that end: how cheerfully might many a poor soul walk, if they did but
know the things which are freely given them of God? O beg the Spirit to be a
witnessing, a sealing-spirit to you more and more. And do the Romans 8. H^b. 6.
11.
same diligence, says the Apostle, to the full assurance of hope unto the end;
we do content our selves with a hope-well, which we ought not to do; we should
strive to this of Thomas, John 20. 28. Can. 2. 16.
My Lord, my God; my beloved is mine and I am his; can thou say so upon good
grounds? thou may be a justified and a sanctified person, which is done by
the direct act of faith, which is acted upon the Word of Promise, and Christ in
that Promise, which the poor soul does close with, taking Christ for better for
worse; but now this is by the reflect act of faith, and is grounded upon
experience of our own condition ordinarily. I see, I feel, that I do believe,
that I have chosen the Lord Jesus for my portion, and therefore he is mine and
I am his; I have many sealings of his love to me, many kisses of his lips, it
is given to me to believe, to be upright with him, I can approve my soul to him
as Peter, Lord thou know all things, thou know that I love thee; John 21.
17.
thus the soul by laying up those experiences that it has of God and laying
them together, does from all come (through grace) to be able to conclude, that
the Lord Jesus is his, to a full assurance of hope and faith; and what an
heaven upon earth is this? Well, labor after it, though your conditions may be
safe without it, yet not so comfortable to your selves, nor so honorable to
him, nor so profitable likely to others, all which considerations, if well
weighed and improved, I presume are motives enough to it.

You have the first thing in this general Exhortation, and that is, wherein we
are to labor, to grow and increase. Now for the Motives in a few particulars;
and truly the first shall be that in the very Text, we must labor for it,
because he has promised it; therefore we must pray for it, and use all other
means, for prayer is one, as afterward we shall speak; God had promised he
would bring Israel into Canaan, but they must fight for it first, to dispossess
the Canaanites: and so he promises health and strength to his people as choice
mercies, but they must eat, and drink, and use Physic as often as occasion
serves; and it is an encouragement so to do, because God has promised us
those things so far as good for us, therefore use the means; he promises
fruitfulness to the earth; what, shall the plough-man therefore cast the plough
in the hedge and never strike stroke? it is true, if God bid them stand still,
and only see the salvation of God, it is somewhat, else they must work, and
serve providence in the use of means; so here it is promised, O, says the
Apostle, work out your salvation with fear and trembling, for it is Phil. 2. 12.
he that works: Labor to be more spiritual in prayer, to grow therein, for
it is his Spirit that bears the heavier end of the burden, he helps our
infirmities; let this be an encouragement Romans 8. 26.
to stir up our souls to it, because it is promised; think not Brethren, it is
enough to sit still, and wait when this will fall into your mouths, or that an
idle complaining will do it; no, no, you must be up and doing, and laboring to
use the means, and the more, because he has promised.

Secondly, Every man would grow and come on in other things, therefore we
should much more labor to grow in the best things; you would your selves, and
have your children come on and thrive in body, you think their meat is not well
bestowed, (as we use to say) if they should not prosper at all, but should
devour, like Pharaohs lean kine, and be never the fatter; you would grow in
your names, and in your estates, and every man would be adding bag to bag,
house to house, land to land, and here they never think they are come to a full
growth. O that the Lord would but make you half so dilgent in taking half the
pains to grow in grace, as they do that grow in the world, how should we
prosper? It is observable, that the Apostle says of Gaius that good man, he
wishes he may prosper, 3 John 2.
even as his soul prospers; it seems the good man, his inward man was
renewed, though happily his estate or his body might wax old and decay, yet his
soul prospered, and he makes that a pattern of the prosperity of his outward
man; may we not say on the other hand, O that your souls did prosper, even as
your bodies prosper? You are fat and flourishing, and feed your selves Jude 12.
without fear, much pampering of the flesh, but the poor soul, O how lean, and
thin, and consumpsit it is? what fat purses, and lean souls? Brethren, whatever
you profess while it is thus, I must tell you there is much preposterousness in
your endeavors, that all this ado should be made for a lump of clay, and the
soul, the precious soul, the price of the blood of Jesus Christ neglected; men
can rise at midnight, and with end^ to follow their business, set it forward,
if need so require, and other occasions, etc. O if we could be persuaded to use
but the like diligence for the soul upon the like occasion.

Thirdly, Consider, if you grow not, you decline; either you increase or
decrease, either you ebb or flow, wax or wain, for it is like a man that rows
against the stream, if he go not forward, he is carried backward. So it is
here, we have a stream of lusts to row against, and if we go not forward, be
sure we go backward, and therefore if you observe it, the Apostle does threaten
the Hebrews upon this account (because they went not forward) Heb. 6. 4.
with Apostasy, they were in danger of falling away quite from God that go not
forward, therefore consider this seriously, and surely it will put us on to
look to our growth; there is not an Ordinance wherein we appear before the
Lord, but either we soften or harden, we get something or lose something by it,
it returns not in vain, not the Word, nor any other appointment of his.

Fourthly, Another shall be this, we cannot else withstand enemies, bear
crosses; alas, a child is overborn by a touch, he cannot withstand a potent
enemy, therefore we must labor to be strong men, whom resist, says the
Apostle, steadfast in the faith; 1 Pet. 5. 9.
there is no stedfastness but by faith, nor any resisting but by this
stedfastness; if we give ground, the Devil will pursue the victory, if we turn
our backs upon him; now we cannot keep our ground except there be some
strength. Its true, every child of God is born with his armor on him, as is
fabled of the race of those Giants; so the Saints have their breast plate of
faith to keep the heart, and the shield to preserve the body, but as they grow
in strength, so are they able to weild their shield, yea it grows stronger
and more able to bear off a blow. Alas, our Savior saw his Disciples were not
able to bear a temptation at that time, John 18. 8. therefore, let them go,
says he, to them that sought for him, if ye seek me; let these go; as yet they
were not grown to that stedfastness; but now, what if the Lord should for holy
ends give Satan liberty to sift thee to the very bran, and thy faith be weak? O
what sad work will there be then in thy soul? therefore our Savior prayed,
that Peter's faith should not fail him; but yet you see how near it was, and
what it cost him; and so except we be grown in wisdom and understanding, we
shall be ignorant of his devices; and he will take us alive at his pleasure,
because we know not where he will have us, nor what his methods of deceiving
are, that there we might watch. And so for crosses, it is not a child can bear
the cross, specially if great; some little affliction they may bear, as you see
our Savior did train up his Disciples to it by degrees: at first only they
threatened them, and charged them not to preach Acts 4. u^^.
in that name of Jesus Christ; then afterward, when by that experience of the
power of God with them, they were somewhat grown, then they were scourged and
imprisoned, and as strength grew, so afflictions grew: we are not able to
suffer much for Christ: while our faith is weak, our love is small, our
patience inconsiderable, therefore we must labor to grow in every grace of the
Spirit.

Fifthly, Because the stronger our graces are, the more discernable they will
be; this was hinted before in the arguments of the point, and this will put an
end to many sad complaints that a child of God makes concerning himself, when
his grace becomes more visible, not only to others, but to himself, by reason
of the greatness of it, and the Spirit of God shining upon it to discover it. O
how comfortable may such an one walk!

Sixthly, Consider the end of all the Ministry and Ordinances God has given,
it is for our growth, as in that place, therefore he gave some Apostles, some
Evangelists, same Pastors, for the edifying Ephesians. 4. 12.
of the body of Christ; now, has the Lord been at all this pains, rising up
early, and sending messengers upon messengers, one after another, and pouring
out the gifts of the Spirit, to befit them for that work, and all to build us
up, and yet we are children and dwarfs? What a shame is this to us, and what a
grief is this to God? and is not this the way to make him repent of the good he
has done unto us, and to withdraw them?

Seventhly, A very hypocrite, Brethren, may grow in some things, and therefore
we had need look to it, to go beyond them in our growth; an hypocrite may grow
in parts and gifts, may learn to pray and preach most plausibly; may make long
prayers, with those hypocrites, though they grow not inwardly at all, therefore
take heed of sticking here: or because thou growest more civilly, escapest the
pollutions of the world, and yet alas, art the same in disposition, a swine in
nature; yea, there may be a growing in assent to the truth, such a says as the
Devils have, which makes them tremble, and some kind of affection too, as
Herod had; but by how much we see there is danger of being deceived, by so much
the more narrowly we had need to look to it, that we grow there, where there is
no deceit; grow in the spiritualness of service and duty, in that of
self-denial, humility, and saving-faith, and love.

Eighthly, Wicked men grow worse and worse, and why should not we grow better
and better? Shall Satan's Kingdom so increase and grow strong, and shall not the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ grow stronger also? how much the more need had we to
stir up our selves in this respect, considering how many grow worse and worse?

Ninthly, The stronger we grow in the habits of grace, the more easy will our
acting of grace be to us; we come off so hard with a duty, as with prayer, or
the like; what is the reason? but because we are so weak in the Grace of
prayer, so unacquainted with it: O how a man delights to do the things which he
is befitted for, and habituated to! O how quickly are some men's spirits up in
duty, like tinder to the fire of the Spirit; or like the spirits of wine or
oil, quickly fired: therefore God would have the fat offered up, it would
quickly take fire; and when our services come off with delight and
cheerfulness, then the Lord is pleased with it; so you see, They rejoiced they
were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of Christ; Acts 5. 41.
and yet a little before, were so weak, that they all forsook him; what a
difference is here? and so they rejoiced that God had given them such a willing
heart to lay out themselves upon the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29.
to build an House to the Name of God; when a man's love and mercy is weak, what
he gives, it comes hardly from him, like drops of blood (as we say) but
afterward he can freely, willingly empty his purse for Christ's sake; this is
one way Brethren, to make the Commands of God not so grievous to us, as they
seem to be, until we be thus grown.

Again, We must grow to our pitch, before we can enter into the kingdom: Mat.
18. 3, etc. Therefore upon all these considerations, let us be exhorted to make
it our business to improve, to grow, to wax stronger and stronger day by day;
But thus much for the Motives.

For Helps, that will be the next enquiry what we should do to grow in Grace;
since it is so necessary a work lying upon us all? And I might speak
distinctly, First, To the Grace which is inherent in us, wherein our holiness
consists; and Secondly, That wherein our comfort consists, even the
knowledge of our relative state to God; But the main thing is that holiness,
those several Graces of the Spirit, each whereof shining with its own luster,
and yet by the symmetry and conjunction with the rest, make up the perfect
beauty of Holiness.

First then in general, If thou would grow indeed, and art in good earnest in
this matter, thou must exercise Grace, if thou would grow; what a rich
treasury is that of the Mind, above that of a man's Che^t? the more he uses of
the one, the more he has; the more he uses of the other, the less he has.
How did the Talent increase but with the using? that is signified, by putting
them out to the Changers; and so the Talent or Luke 19.
Pound gained five Talents, or ten; therefore it is observed by so me, that the
Scripture in commanding or requiring any Grace of us, does directly and
immediately command the Acts and the Habits obliquely, as the Fountain to the
Stream: So Baxter says. The way to get away our indisposedness to Prayer,
says Luther, is to pray it away: exercise that Grace according to the ability
given, and thou shall find it grow: it is much to be preferred before an idle
complaining, a diligent soul that is up and doing; thou find thy Faith is
weak, it may be thou can scarce call it any thing, but unbelief: labor to
act it, put it forth often: the nature of it lies in the souls sincere
willingness to take Jesus Christ, to have him for a Savior and Lord, to save
from iniquites, as well as from the condemnation of sin now, though weakly put
forth, the acts of willing Jesus Christ, as he has offered himself, and thou
shall find it will grow: often be rolling thy self and thy burden, poor
burdened soul upon the Lord Jesus: cast thy self upon him, and thou shall find
as much rest in it for the present, so also an increase of faith, and a feeling
also, that thou do believe after a time. And so for other things: alas, is
there a day that goes over our heads, but there is use for Faith? it is the
very life of a Christian: The life I now live, I live by the Faith of the Gal.
2. 20.
Son of God; and therefore as much need of the exercise of it daily, as of any
vital acts whatsoever; and you shall find, you have occasions for it, either
some temptations from your own hearts, some corruptions stirring and
disquieting your peace, or some scourgings from without, some buffetings of
Satan, some deadness and security growing upon you daily: O there is daily need
of acting Faith, as there is to eat and drink; therefore Israel, their Manna
was their daily food; and if they were daily stung, they must daily look up to
the Serpent; and Exodus 16.
which of us is not? though you have a Lamp lighted; Brethren, There was enery
morning daily a triming of the Lamps of the Exodus 30. 7.
Sanctuary, and pouring oil into them afresh: you know, they will not continue,
but go out in obscure darkness, except there be a feeding of them with oil;
this we may do, and this we ought to do; and indeed, a man that exercises not
his Grace, is, as if he had none; neither has the strength, nor the comfort of
his Grace; for Habits are for Acts, and then Acts strengthen the Habits again.
The Learned Aristotle said, A wise man differed nothing from a fool, if he
exercised not his wisdom; and says the Wiseman, Even a fool, when he holds his
peace, is counted wise; the Act is that chiefly commanded, and that chiefly
rewarded of God; the exercising of Grace, and that whereby it grows, which is
the main thing here I mind: Has not every day its evil sufficient to it? now
if faith ^e not Mat. 6. 34.
upon the wing, what a condition is that soul in? therefore exercise it: use
legs, and have legs And so for love; put it forth, exercise it toward the Lord
Jesus daily, and toward his people, that is the way to grow. Brethren, how do
benumbed limbs that have no feeling nor strength, gather strength, but by
rubbing, and chasing, and exercising of them? though a man's legs be so
benumbed, falling for a step or two, he can scarce set them to the ground, yet
use them a little, and they will come to themselves again: If Merchants money
lie still, it is a dead thing, it increases not; but they must turn it up and
down, and return it, use it, and exercise their trade with it, and it grows.
And truly I am persuaded, it is the great reason we are many of us so weak as
we are, we lie complaining and making sad moan before the Lord of our weakness,
and yet are careless in the exercise of the Grace wherein we pretend we would
grow: The desire of the slothful kills him; for his hands refuse to labor;
Prove. 12. 25.
we may mourn our selves away off our legs, and spend our days in lamentable
complainings, and shall never be the better, except we put forth into act, what
we have already received; if we be not faithful in trading with a little, will
he give us more? action and motion increase heat: if you see a poor creature
lie starving, ready to perish for want of fire, his legs are stiff, cannot
hardly move them, is that the way to help him? no, up to the fire, up, and
exercise your limbs, rub them, chafe them, if you would get heat and agility
into them.

Secondly, See to it, that we exercise one as well as another: for there is
such a sweet harmony and dependency of the Graces one upon another, that they
do one strengthen another; the acts of our Graces, do, (as I may say)
cooperate, and sweetly conspire to the promoting one of another, (that is to
say) of the acts, and these acts then strengthen the habits. As for instance,
you see in an Arch, one stone strengthens another, take away one of them, and
all the rest are ready to fall upon your head; and therefore the Apostle
exhorts so earnestly, That they should add to Faith, Temperance, etc. not as if
they could add 2 Pet 1. 5. to 12.
one habit to another, for they are infused together, but the acts are to be
added one to another; For if ye do these things, (says the Apostle) then ye
shall not be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ:
yea, you shall never fall: yea, you shall have an abundant entrance into the
everlasting kingdom; The strength of a building, you know, lies not in the
strength of one piece, but in the due compacting of it, and joining part to his
part; if there be never so strong beams, if the other parts be weak, the
rafters, the wall-plates, or such considerable pieces, and not well joined
together, the building is weak, and will easily fall: therefore if you would be
strong, and grow indeed, look that we exercise all the Graces of the Spirit we
have already received; not only Faith, nor only Love, nor only Humility, nor
only Self-denial, but all: labor to act them all: and Temperance, and
Heavenly-mindedness, etc. and you shall find, that as each Grace does grow by
the exercising of it self, so by the exercising of them all; they will have a
mutual influence each upon the other, to strengthen one another: the act of
Faith will strengthen the acting of love, and that will strengthen faith again,
and so for the rest.

Thirdly, If you would grow in Grace, You must be much in prayer: for a man of
much Prayer, is a man of much Grace, and therefore the Prophet puts them both
together: He will pour out the Spirit of Grace and Supplication. Zec^. 12 10.
And so the Apostle Jude, But you Beloved, building up your selves in your most
holy Faith, praying in the Holy Jude 20.
Ghost: and there is the like reason for building up our selves in any other
Grace: praying by the Spirit of God, is the way you see, to grow in Grace:
there is very great reason that Prayer should be a great means of increasing
Grace. First, Because in Prayer, there is the greatest exercising of Grace, of
all Grace usually, of any other service we do to God: there our repentance is
exercised, for you always find the Saints in drawing nigh to God: David, and
Ezra, and others, that still they begin with bewailing their iniquities,
expressing their sorrow for them: because no man was to appear before. God, but
with pure hands, and pure feet; and therefore since we 1 Timothy 2. 8.
gather soil continually, there is need of acknowledging our iniquities, and
then he is faithful and just to forgive them; there James 4. 8.
is the exercise of Faith, if any where, else that is it whereby we wrestle
with God in Prayer; Prayer is indeed a wrestling with God, as Jacob, it was his
faith whereby he overcame, and got the blessing; a man must pray in Faith, else
it is nothing worth at all; God accepts no service, but where there is Faith
mixed; there is Love exercised toward God, and to his people; we go to him, it
is an acting of our desire toward him, our delight in his presence, and love to
his Saints, when we can James 5. 16.
pray feelingly for them: And so Humility: O says Abraham, Genesis 18. 32.
Who am I, dust and ashes? And Jacob, I am less then the least of thy mercies;
In a word, all the Graces are set awork in prayer, that is a working prayer
indeed; our thankfulness and all our supplications in all things are to be made
known, etc. Every Phil. 4. 6.
wheel is set a going in the soul, if it be (...) an effectual prayer; and
therefore by the exercises of the Graces they are increased; do you think that
by acting Faith upon the Promises, pleading them? (as Jacob did) Thou said
thou would Gen 32. 12. and v. 9.
do me good, etc. and so in many other places: Remember thy Word to thy
Servant, whereupon thou have caused me to hope: (says the Psalmist) That this
does not increase Faith, and so the acting of Love: increase it therefore.
Luther, a man of much Prayer, was a man of much Grace, of much Courage, and
Zeal, and Faith, and Diligence in the Service of God. And that famous Servant
of God, Mr. Bolton, It is said of him, that six times a day he prayed: and so
others: observe it when you will, where you see a growing Christian indeed,
follow him to his Closet, you shall find that man a man of much prayer; So
David, and Daniel, etc.

But Secondly, There is another reason for it: Because Prayer does carry the
soul to a nearer communion with God: O it is the gaining acquaintance with God;
acquaint thy self with God, that thou may have peace with him, and thou shall
Job 22. 21.
have prosperity: and therefore when Job discovered such weakness in his
impatiency, says that friend of his, Surely thou restrainect prayer from the
Almighty; if thou did maintain communion with God, it would not be thus with
thee. Now whither Luke 13. 5.
should we go with empty vessels, but to the fountain? whither should poor,
weak, wounded, lame, feeble creatures go, but to him that has all power to
heal and strengthen them? God has treasures of grace, it is true, and he is
not streighthearted, he gives liberally; but the treasury is locked, and prayer
Iam. 5. 5.
is the key, and faith the hand that turns it; we must to the treasury, if we
would be rich in grace, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom; which of us
would be poor, if we had a warrant to go to the Treasury, to fetch what we
please? O what pains would there be, the Treasurer should have employment
enough: if God would but persuade us it is so in this case, we should visit him
more, the great Treasurer of heaven, the Lord Jesus, in whom all treasures of
wisdom and knowledge are hid; yea, and of faith and all grace, for of his
fullness we receive grace for grace. O how Col. 2. 3.
would we ply him, give him no rest, he would have much more of our company,
but that we have slight persuasions of these things, and make use of prayer as
a duty and a task many of us, and not a singular means of improving our graces:
Brethren, were we but as much in Communion with God as David, we might have the
strength of David; it is but ask and have, knock and it shall be opened; the
Spirit which works all this, will not be Luke 11. 9.
denied, if you ask, and ask not amiss, as you heard lately. God Iam. 4. 3.
will expend willingly his treasures of grace upon us, and pour out the fullness
of his Spirit upon us, but he will be enquired of for these things.

Well then, if we would grow in grace, we must be much in prayer; I do believe
some of us can speak it but too experimentally, that when we have found
corruptions prevail, and our selves foiled and brought under, this has been
the reason, we have restrained prayer from the Almighty; either we have
neglected this duty, or else we have been slight and slubbering, shuffled it,
if not out of doors, yet to the very door; and generally observe it, we can
more easily find time for any thing then for prayer, every other business has
its hours to attend upon, but if any thing be neglected, it must be prayer, or
else posted over. Whereas, alas, it would no more hinder our business then our
meal-times do, which must be had: and I know, Brethren, that some of us are
able to say it, that we have seen when the prospering presence of the Lord has
been with us, we have come on more, and done more in a short time, then at
another time, in many times as long a time; and yet so wretched hearts we have,
that we content our selves with any thing in this duty, if we appear before the
Lord, we think it is enough; we do not strive unto prayer, and watch unto
prayer, and labor by blowing the green wood, that will hardly kindle, to get
it on a flame, before we go out of his presence. O Jacob would not let him go
without a blessing: Brethren, in what a sad manner do we many Exodus 32.
times rise off our knees, with our hearts further off from God then we came:
is this to obtain a blessing? no, no; we must take pains in this work, if we
would grow: the Lord persuade our hearts.

Alas, you will say, you have prayed, and prayed, and yet for ought you can
perceive, you grow not: To this I might answer many things.

First, Do thou find that hereby thou never gettest thy heart in a better
frame? art thou never wrought up to some sweet frame of heart in respect of
faith, and love, and humility? Why here is an improving, this is the main thing
in prayer; when we can find our hearts wrought up to such a frame, it is the
very growth it self in a great part, therefore thou art mistaken.

Secondly, If thou do not find it may be sometimes such warnings, and
notwithstanding all the pains, thon have sometimes been blowing at the coal,
until thy arm ache with holding the bellows; and thy heart aches, and yet thou
can not get thy faith and thy affections into a frame, but thou art as dead
and dull as before. Now in such a case observe it, do thou not gain thus much
by it, to have viler, lower thoughts of thy self, to see the necessity of an
High Priest the more feelingly; this humbles, Exodus 28. 38.
this emptyeth of self more, and is not this a growth in grace? Yea, and no
small improvement.

But thirdly, If thou be put to wait for an answer, know, it is the excellency
of faith to wait upon him, to hold out as the woman of Canaan. And Jacob
wrestled all night with God. So Daniel, Mat. 15. Genesis 32. Dan. 10. 12.
his answer comes not as soon as he began to pray, but he must wait a while,
he must go through with his duty, and afterward the answer comes; if the Lord
give thee a heart to wait upon him, to hang upon him, not to give him over;
Brethren, you are growing, and you are not aware of it, it is no easy matter
to wait upon God. Alas, a poor sinner in a mood sometimes, and in a flash under
a stirring Sermon, O he will go and pray, and if an answer come not presently,
there is an end, it dies; but a child of God, he waits upon God, he will
have no nay, if he will not answer at one time, he will to it again and again;
as Paul sought God thrice for the removing the Thorn, before 2 Cor. 12. 7.
he had an answer. And so Elias, seven times his servant was sent, and brought
an answer of nothing appearing, and at last 1 King. 18. 42.
but a little cloud; and his prayer was fervent too, as appears by the story.

Fourthly, You must grow upon God, knock harder; if he come not at the first,
cry louder, cry out so much the more; importunity will overcome him at the
last; yea if by the delay of Luke 11.
an answer, as thou think, thou be kept praying, and more and more
fervently; there is nothing, Brethren, wherein we more grow then in prayer it
self, where the Lord exercises us with such occasions, as put us on to stir up
all our strength to wrestle with him. Well, the Lord persuade our hearts to a
diligence in this duty, for we are as averse from it as from any. O how our
hearts do hang back? and if the Lord persuade us not, and by the invincible
bonds of the Spirit, bind us close to it, we shall see by woeful experience, how
quickly our slippery hearts will either shift themselves out of it, or else
into a formality in the service.

Fifthly, Observe your answers also; take heed of being always complaining, as
if we had received nothing, or were nothing grown, whereby God loses the glory
of what he has done for us already, this is not the way to procure more, this
is the way indeed to grieve Gods Spirit, which is the Spirit of prayer; and
then if he be grieved, we shall find a woeful declining in prayer, and then our
growth will go on but very slowly. I beseech you pardon me for standing so much
upon this point, to press it upon you, I know many of you cannot but see the
necessity of it; and truly observe it, since these times of outward prosperity
of the people of God, mind it in your own cases, lookers on may easily observe
it, and since our hands have been so full of the world, if there be not a
declining; and indeed I think (If I am mistaken, I should be glad to be
mistaken) that this is the main thing wherein we are hurt, we are so upon
hurries, and so thronged, our hearts, and heads, and hands so full of the
world, that we cannot have those times and seasons to work our hearts up in
this duty; it is sad when our hearts have most need of pains-taking with them,
as in such cases they have, that we should find least time to do it in: What
can become of this think you?

Fourthly, Another help to this growth in grace will be this; Conscientiously
and diligently to use the Ordinances, all of them, as well as that of prayer; I
speak to that particular, because it is of so general concernment, running
along with all the rest, for sanctification of them to us. You heard before,
that knowledge is the great means whereby our grace does grow; it is conveyed
through the understanding, the consent of the will to close with Christ, it is
greater or lesser according to the apprehensions which the mind has of Christ,
of his goodness, his loveliness, the necessity of him, etc. therefore, grace
and truth came by Jesus Christ, and whom beholding as in a glass, we are
changed into his John 1. 17. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
image; this glass, what is it but the Ordinances of God? O, how fat do men
grow that fare deliciously every day? is there not great difference between
feeding upon husks when the kernel is gone, and feeding upon the finest of the
wheat? how quickly will the weakest man grow strong, feeding upon the one; and
the strongest weak, when he feeds upon the other? Alas, when it came to that,
the Prodigal was almost beaten off his legs: Why the Ordinances of God, they
are a feast, a feast of Isa. 25. 6.
fat things, marrow and wines upon the less well-refined; in this mountain
shall the Lord of hosts make to all people a feast of fat things, a feast of
wines on the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees
well-refined; What are these but the Ordinances of God? these are the green
pastures and still waters, with Psalm. 23.
these he promises to satiate the soul of the Priest with fatness, and my
people shall be satisfied with my goodness, says the Lord: And my soul shall
be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy Ier. 31. 14.
house, there it is; and in the 63. Psalm, the Psalmist longs after Psalm. 36. 8.
the enjoyment of God in his Ordinances, in his Sanctuary, O, says he, my soul
shall be satisfied with marrow and fatness: Psalm. 63. 5.
What can be said more, Brethren? Is not this the way to grow fat, to increase?
and did not God give therefore Pastors and Teachers to dispense the Ordinances
for the edifying of the body? in that place to the Ephesians. Well, but all
this will not do, except we make use of these Ordinances; mind you, they are
the fat things of the house of God, we must have them in the stall, in the
coop, in the fold, in the house of God, that is to say, the Church of God, if
we would flourish indeed; as the Psalmist speaks, they that are planted in the
house of the Lord, shall flourish Psalm. 92. 12.
in the Courts of our God; and therefore the Spouse in the Canticles was so
earnest, Show me where thou feedest thy flocks, where Cant. 1. 7.
thou make them rest at noon: Alas, many poor Believers may be to seek where
the Lord Jesus feeds his flocks, specially in these days, wherein there are
so many pretenses to the way of Christianity, which is but one; but at least,
me thinks this will follow from those Scriptures, that the house of the Lord,
the Courts of his Psalm. 92. 12.
house is the Church of God; therefore we should inquire where the flocks are
fed, that we may walk with them and among them, it is the way where the Lord
Jesus is found then ordinarily; and indeed I do desire to pity such as yet
cannot see this; but this is not all.

Secondly, There is the use and improvement of the Ordinances, which is much
more necessary then the other; desire the sincere milk of the Word: milk, for
sweetness and nourishing; and 1. Pet. 2. 2.
sincere, without mixture of error or humane wisdom: Alas, Brethren, if we
come not to it with desires, get our affections up when we come to it, and look
not to it that we digest it when we have heard it, we are not likely to grow by
it: Alas, alas, no marvel we are so lean in our souls some of us, as if God bad
in heavy displeasure sent the curse upon us: what is the matter? we come to
hear the Word, but with what affections? come reeking out of the World into it,
with our heads, and hearts full of it: the stomach is full already, there is no
room for the Word to take place in our hearts: and we are much for hearing, but
digest but little. Ah Brethren, this meditation upon what we hear, we are all
of us short in: that is the man that grows indeed, as in the first Psalm, he
shall flourish that meditates day and night: For my own part, I am persuaded,
that upon a Sabbath Day, it is not so much how much we hear, to spend our whole
time in it, that there is no time left for chewing upon it, for working it upon
the heart by meditation: No plough-man would do so, think he never plougheth
and sows enough, and never makes use of the harrowing. Alas, much of it is
stolen away, he has little increase; we go ^ow out of the presence of God, and
into the world again over head and ears, without any care to work the Word upon
our souls; how can you expect to prosper in your souls? you may have fat
purses, but you are like to have but lean souls, you digest not your meat; a
Physician will tell you it is not how much you eat, but how much you digest,
that tends to health and growth. And so for the other Ordinances of the Supper,
there is meat indeed, and drink indeed; but do we look to it to improve that
Ordinance for strengtheuing of faith, to John 6. 55.
get our graces up, our appetites up, our faith, our love upon the wing when we
come, to act faith and love in the Ordinance, to draw from the Lord Jesus, to
drink and drink abundantly? Alas, wisdom has killed her beasts, and mixed her
wine, and furnished Prove. 9.
her table among us; and we come indeed, but without wedding-garments many
times, and without appetites, and so we are cast Mat. 22. 11.
out, and instead of receiving Christ, more and more of him, we are more
hardened, Satan enters into some poor souls. Ah, no marvel then if they grow
not in grace. If we had not the fat things of the house of God, Brethren, it
were something, but the Lord has not denied them to us, his table is richly
furnished; the dainties are the same, though the Maidens that are sent forth
now to call you are weak and unworthy, that should not derogate from the esteem
of the feast; now what can we say for our selves? if we will play with our
meat, if we will not fall on when we come to it, if we matter not for digesting
it, where Brethren, will the guilt lie? O be humbled for that we have neglected
this salvation so much as we have done, though it may be we have not mist an
opportunity, yet that we make no better use of them then we have done, that is
the first step to a reformation of it: Do you think this were a pleasing
carriage of a child, when he is poor, and lean, and ill-favored, his Father
provideth a rich banquet, royal dainties for him, sets them before him,
entreats him to fall on, he complains of his weakness and faintness, and yet
will not eat; this is frovvardness, it is not pleasing to God, who has so
richly provided for us; to hear his people complaining alvvay of their
weakness in faith, and weakness in love, and all graces of the Spirit; and
though he has provided such dainties for them in his Ordinances, as never eye
savv, nor any tasted, but a Believer, and they might be fat and flourishing, if
they were not vvretchedly vvanting to themselves; they complain, and complain,
but never mind it; to eat, to feed, to improve the Ordinances for this their
growth: I have spoken the more largely here, because I know, Brethren, I
know it is our own vvretched neglect of our selves in this case, that is the
great cause of our want of growth.

Fifthly, Another help shall be this, labor to get the distempers of your
souls healed, that hinder your growth: it is impossible while a man has a
Woolf in his flesh, or a greedy wen that sucks all the nourishment from the
body, that he should grow: Alas, every one of us can best tell where our
diseases are. Some have obstructions betvveen the head and the heart, the
passages are not opened, and so they grow indeed in the head, but the heart is
poor, and dry, and withered, all notion, and no affection; how little
affection have we the most of us? nothing answerable to what we apprehend
of the riches of grace in Jesus Christ, all is not well with us, Brethren.
Alas, how many of us have surfeited of the world and the comforts thereon?
and so our appetites are lost to these dainties and fat things of the house of
God, whereby we should grow up like Calves of the stall. O for Christ's sake,
and as you love your souls, take heed of the world and love of it. Ah, we
little know how close it sticks to us, and how indiscernably it insinuates
it self upon us? It may be we consume all upon our lusts, make all we have
received but a stepping-stone to raise our proud spirits upon; how apt we are
to be admiring our selves? this was well done, and that was well done by us:
instead of admiring rich grace to such poor dust and ashes as we are; this
dammeth up the fountain, Brethren, this provokes God to withdraw his Spirit,
and presence, and alas, what can we do then? then we see what we are. Well,
if we would grow, we must begin at the right end, we must labor to get these
lusts that do prevail, down; if a child have such a disease as the Rickets, or
some other disease upon it, you may give it all the nursing, and tending, and
feeding that can be, it will never grow uniformly, but all runs into the head.
It is in vain to complain of the want of growth, the way is to go to the
Physician, get some prescription for the healing of the disease; and so we must
look to it, Brethren, if any object come between the Lord Jesus and your
hearts, and so interrupt the sweet and saving influences of Christ from you,
you cannot grow; you see that shrubs in the Wilderness, that never see where
good comes, or plant a Tree or Plant in such a dark place where the Sun never
comes, but is kept off by this or that hinderance, it will not grow; and so
under trees that shade the Sun, and keep the rain from the seed, most herbs
will not grow; and so it is in this case; therefore look to this Brethren, in
the name of Jesus Christ, as ever you hope to recover your selves, and to grow
indeed.

Sixthly, Labor to make special use of the promises of God, that particularly
concern this matter; I know this is reducible to that former head of
exercising-grace, and particularly the grace of faith, because this is a
special object whereupon the act is to be exercised; but for orders sake, we
shall put it distinctly by it self in this place; is this the grievance of thy
soul indeed, that thou growest not? Why here is a rich Treasury in the
promises, which if it were drawn out, cannot but much further our growth.

First then, search out these promises, they are many, I cannot give you them
all, a taste I will, to help the weak; What a sweet promise is that in the
first Psalm? look upon it as such, they shall be like the tree planted by the
rivers of water; Brethren, nothing ordinarily kills trees more then drought, I
think, and thus to have moisture with heat, they must needs grow and flourish;
therefore in that place of Job, a tree, though cut down, yet through the scent
of water it will sprout again: Now there is a sweet promise to that end; and
so, they that are planted in the house of the Lord, they shall flourish; this
in the Text, they shall go forth, (it is Psalm. 92. 12.
a promise) they shall grow up as Calves of the stall. And that in Hos. 14. 5.
God will be as the dew unto Israel, and he shall grow up as the Lilly, and
spread his roots as Lebanon; grow in rootedness, and grow quickly, and grow in
beauty and sweetness, the smell shall be as Lebanon; here the growth is set
forth under that metaphor of a tree, or plant; the dew, you know, upon the mown
grass, makes it spring again, else it would wither; and the corn for a time as
dead under the clod, yet the dew makes it grow up; or as the corn that seemed
to wither away, the dew refreshes it, and makes it revive indeed. I will not
burden your memories, take but one more, and that is in the Prophet Isaiah, to
them that have no might he increases strength, and he gives power to them
Isa. 40. 29.
that faint; to them that have no mights, the original is very emphatical, the
plural with the Hebrews, as some note, when it is affirmative, sets forth
the abundancy, the eminency or excellency of any quaility or virtue, as wisdoms
for wisdom, in many places in the Proverbs; that is to say, the most excellent
wisdom or abundance. So in the negative, it often signifies the great want in
an eminent degree of such or such a qualification, as here, such as have no
strength; that is to say, very little, none at all, such as faint and languish,
then you know strength is very little. So again, they are a people of no
understandings, in the plural Isa. 27. 11.
number; and again, there is no safety, or salvation, or deliverance wrought in
the earth: there is no deliverance at all: the meaning is not, there are not
many deliverances, but there is not any at all; and so here, such as have no
mights it is in the Original, and we read such as have no might. Alas they have
no strength, to those he will increase might. Now I say, gather together such
promises as these.

Secondly, Not only so, but dwell upon them in your thoughts; it may be at the
first or second sight of them, there will be little arising to the soul from
them, but you must dwell upon them, as the Be does, that will not off the
flower until she has gotten some sweetness from it; So do you, make these
promises the object of your meditation: can you have any thing sweeter to
meditate upon then a promise in such a condition as this is? Sure David, when
he meditated upon the Word of God, and his meditations were sweet to him, were
not only the commands but the promises: these indeed are the honey-suckles to
dwell upon; these Psalm. 104. 34.
you shall find much refreshing in: break the bones if you would have the
marrow in them. You will not be able at first to find the depth of these
promises, to apprehend the fullness of them, except you dwell upon them, and
then you can never further improve them to your comfort.

Thirdly, More then this, you must ^ay your mouths to them; these are the
breasts of consolations; if the child will have any thing, he must draw, and
draw hard sometimes, and the mother is fain to help in some cases to press it
down too, and all little enough; the child is pleased and taken to see the
breast, but this will not feed nor nourish; no more will our beholding the
promises, except we suck, and suck strongly; and the Spirit of Jesus Christ is
ready, Brethren, to press those breasts, to make them give down their milk,
their sweetness and fatness to us, specially in prayer before the Lord; take
the promises that concern this condition of yours, tell him he has been
pleased to make such gracious promises; he was free, and might have been so
still if he had pleased, but now he has engaged himself to give strength to
them that have no might; and Lord, here is a poor soul that has no might, no
strength; I am in a poor, lean, faint, languishing condition, will thou not
make good thy Word to thy poor creature? thou have caused me to hope upon this
Word, thou have put the breast into my mouth, or at least thou have showed it
thy poor creature, and will thou not make it give down its sweetness to me? O
make good thy Word to thy poor creature. Lord I am in a declining condition, I
am even withering, and lose of my greenness, growing yellow, or that which thou
have done for me lies under the clods; thou have promised to be as the dew unto
Israel, will thou not make good thy Word unto me? and so thou have planted me
in thy house, and promised I shall grow and flourish, etc. Press the Lord thus
with his Word, O he loves to have his bond sued in the Court of heaven. I dare
undertake that such a soul that is thus stirred up to act faith upon the
promises of God, that soul is in a growing condition. Brethren, these are the
wells in the valley of Baacha, the wells of salvation, you must draw from them,
and then you grow from strength to strength.

Seventhly another; I shall name but this: The greatness of the object
whereupon your hearts are to dwell much, and that is God himself, for there is
nothing does greaten the mind more then the greatness of the Object, whereupon
it is conversant; you see it by experience in all things, what low minds, what
poor and weak apprehensions they have that are exercised upon low objects,
never rise higher; what heightens the mind of a Prince, but the thoughts of a
Kingdom? What difference is there between the mind of the meanest Mechanic and
the deepest Politician? Such difference must there needs be between the heart
of a man that is poring always upon low things, and God is very little dwelt
upon. It is said of Moses, that is the ground Exodus 2. 11. Heb. 11.
of it, he waxed great, says the Text, not only in body, but in mind and
Spirit; he waxed strong in Spirit, was a man of a great mind; his eye was upon
him that is invisible, the great God Jehovah Elohim, who gives being to his
promises, keeps Covenant with his people, and is Mighty, Almighty, can do
what he will do in heaven and earth, and all deep places: This made him so
great: therefore he was above the fears of the Kings wrath, he cared not for
it; Before indeed he was afraid and fled, he then had not had so much converse
with God, and contemplation of him, and knowledge of him, as afterward he had.
Well then, you say your faith is weak, you know not how to get it strengthened,
lift up your thoughts to this great object, do but peruse his name a little now
and then, yea often, the Lord, the Lord God, gracious and merciful, etc. See if
there be not an abundance there to swallow up all thy doubts and fears; O thou
art a miserable Exodus 34. 7.
creature! it is true, but he is a merciful God, and thy misery is but the
misery of a creature, and his mercy is the mercy of a Creator, a God; and what
are thy thoughts of thy misery, when thou have aggravated it to the height as
much as can be? they are but finite thoughts, and his thoughts of pardon and
mercy, they are the thoughts of a God, infinitely above thy thoughts, either of
misery or mercy; if his thoughts of mercy and pardon were not more then ours,
we were in a sad condition, for then they would never answer his thoughts of
our misery, which are infinitely above ours of our own misery. Alas, but I am
the most vile unworthy wretch in the world, O you know not what I am; alas, is
it for such an one as I to believe? Suppose so; he is gracious: O it is most
free, infinitely free what he gives, he looks for nothing at thy hands, only
acceptance. O but sure I have wearied out his patience, he has waited upon me
so long; he is long suffering. O but I have such an abundance of sin, my heart
is so full: there is an abundance of goodness, abundantly pardon in him, yea
and truth also, etc. Alas, but I shall never hold out, nor keep my heart with
him, I shall quickly back-slide: But he it is that keeps mercy for thousands;
O if our hearts were but much in meditation of God, his name, the Lord our
righteousness; and this name, his works, the great things that he has done,
how would it raise our spirits to believe, and how would it increase our love
to him, and our fear of him? There is mercy with thee, that thou may be
feared; we should Psalm. 30. 4.
find a very great influence upon all our Graces, to increase them, even from
the greatness, the fullness, the riches of this Object: O his Almighty Arm!
whereby he laid the foundations of the heavens and earth, and hanged the earth
upon nothing; and what then, though thou be nothing, he can lay a foundation of
eternal comfort, and an heavenly Kingdom, as well as the earth upon nothing;
and bestow his riches of Grace, as well as his power and wisdom upon nothing:
therefore labor much to improve this great Object. O it will take the heart
much off these poor little nothing vanities of the world, it will make us
contented with our portion, it will arm us against all the fears of men and
lights of the world; what will it not do, if the Lord be pleased but to breath
upon our endeavors, in fixing our hearts upon this so high an Object?

Eighthly, Another is, to use the Society of growing Christians; there is much
in the communion of Saints, which presupposes an union, makes increase of the
Body, to the edifying of it Ephesians. 4. 16.
self in love; as the Fellowship of the Graces of the Spirit, and their
cooperation or working together, does help to strengthen the whole; so the
Fellowship of the Saints tends very much to building up. So the Church, When
they continued together daily with one accord, (...), with one consent, with
Acts 2. 46.
one heart, then the Lord added to the Church daily, such as should be saved;
and not only so, but hereby the hands of the people of God are strengthened,
and their spirits quickened: the fire grows to a flame, when many brands are
laid together; if there be but one live coal, and many dead ones, lay them
together, and there will be an increase of the heat; he that will walk alone,
and apart from the communion of Saints, I do believe, shall quickly know by his
own spirit, what the want of them is; but now there are some that are move
growing and grown then others are: alas, how many are under diseases, the
world, or somewhat as bad, that they are at a stand, proced not, or rather
decline? there is little to be got by the fellowship of such: no, no, the
people that we find are so full, they are over flowing continually, their lips
feed many, they are bringing out of the good treasury of their hearts, things
both new and old; they are still telling what the Lord has done for their Mat.
2. 35.
souls, or still they are stirring up others; you shall receive something
still, if your own hearts be not out of frame to receive: O how the example of
a lively, sensible, diligent, close-walking Christian will provoke us? (as the
Apostle says) Your charity has 2. Cor. 9. 2.
provoked many: it will put us upon it, to follow harder after God, To do the
same diligence with them, to the full assurance of hope to the end; wherefore
else are the experiences and examples of the Saints in Scripture written? what
David found, and Jacob found by experience of God in prayer, wrestling with
him; and what their fallings cost them both; but that they being dead, might
yet speak to us, and with us, and we might converse with their living examples,
though themselves be dead: even as faithful Abel being dead, yet speaks; and
why should there Heb. 11. 4.
not be such a Fellowship of Saints to communicate what they have found of God?
I do believe, Brethren, some of us may with thankful hearts bless the Lord,
that ever we saw the faces of some of his people, that we have by their
examples, and by their words been much quickened, much stirred up, much
provoked; therefore if we would grow, converse with such; if thou be weak in
faith, find out some of the people of God whom he has made eminent, strong in
Faith, converse with them; and if they be not very communicative, as some are
more reserved, whereby they are not so profitable to others, draw it out from
them, dive into their experiences, how they came to that measure of Faith,
wherein they can so glorify God, and walk so cheerfully before him. And so for
Humility and Tenderness: where thou find any eminent in these, make an
improvement of them, join thy self to them in a more special manner; labor to
get somewhat from them, this is a special help to growth in Grace. And for
knowledge of your relative State, lay together your experiences you have had of
God; beg his Spirit to shine upon them, else you will see nothing but by his
light; but a word or two more to this afterward. Thus much for the General
Exhortation.

I have a double Exhortation, which is more particular: and then a word of
Comfort, and so shut up all. For the particular Exhortation.

First then, Be sure that we grow according to our measure; For every part has
a measure according to the effectual working, Ephesians. 4. 16.
in the measure of every part. I doubt many of us that should be as the eye to
the body, have much less light in us then other parts of the body; and such as
should be as the arm and hands to work, alas, are like little fingers for
growth, come on poorly: How should Magistrates grow, and Ministers grow, and
such as bear an Office in the body of Christ? they should be much more grown,
their Faith should be much more strong then other men's, because they have
greater works lying upon them then Ioh. 15. 5.
other men; and who is their sufficiency, but Jesus Christ? and how is he
strong to any of us, but according to the measure of Faith? If Paul had not had
a strong Faith, he had never done the works of his condition with such
unwearied pains; no, nor Moses, nor Joshua; Faith it works by Love: a weak
Faith can do little, and is not this the reason that some of us in these
employments, Gal. 5. 6.
alas, act so poorly for Christ? our faith is weak, and so our knowledge is
weak: few Apolloes mighty in the Scriptures, able to convince gainsayers,
therefore the Apostle exhorts young Timothy to give attendence, do his
diligence in reading as well as in Exhortation; give thy self wholly to these
things, that thy profiting may appear to all men. As Jerome, I think, 1 Timothy 4.
15.
said he did, discere and docere, as he learned a lesson, so he taught it to
them; there is a double score then, upon which Ministers are to labor to grow.
First, upon their own account, because they have greater works to do, and
greater temptations usually to grapple with, then others have; for the Devil is
most malicious against the Light-bearers, such as have the Torch in the hand to
give light to others, Even the light of the knowledge 2 Cor. 4. 6.
of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus: He knows they are laboring to
pull down his Kingdom, and do you think he 2 Cor. 7. 5.
will not labor to pull them down, their souls down? O how his finger itches
to be winnowing them, as he did the Disciples! Luke 23. 31.
he desires it, he begs it; as he did to molest Job, that Pillar of Religion in
those parts, so he would buffet and exercise the poor Ministers of Jesus
Christ: I know not what others have, but I am sure some have their hands full,
and their hearts full. O what need then to be men grown, and strong in Faith,
to resist steadfast, of knowledge in his depths and devices! But this 1 Pet 5. 9.
is not all: Secondly, Because the growth of others does much depend-upon our
growth: are they not as the bones to the body? when they grow no more, the body
grows no more: They are called Pillars in the house of God; and what
proportion the pillars Gal. 2. 9.
bear to the house, the bones bear to the body. No marvel, If Teachers be such
as know not what they say, and whereof they affirm; (as the Apostle says) That
their hearers also be like those silly women, always learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth. O what need then had young Timothies to
(...) Tim. 1. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 6.
be stir themselves wholly to these things, because alas, else they will be able
to say nothing either for substance or manner, that may be for the edification
of the body. It is true, there are no new revelations now: the Scriptures are
able to make the man of God perfect to every good work: but how short do we
fall in our understanding of them? it is matter of sadness, and would be more
if our hearts were more sensible to consider, that for ought we know many are
dwarfs, because we are so our selves; Brethren, help us for your own sakes.

But there are others also that should be exhorted to look to their growth,
that it be proportionable to the means of Grace you have, and do enjoy,
according to your time of standing in the Church of Christ; how long have thou
been planted in the house of the Lord? many years: you should be Fathers in
Israel, and Mothers in Israel, as Deborah was; and is it so with you? Brethren,
It is very sad to consider, that some among us that have hoary heads, found in
the ways of righteousness, and have so long been in that way, and yet are so
heavy, and so dull, and so ignorant, and so little Faith and
Heavenly-mindedness, that there are many Christians that are but of yesterday,
outstrip them in many things; is not this a shame? therefore labor to answer
your mercies, your experiences, your light and means you have enjoyed by your
growth, for this is expected; assure your selves, there is not a Talent but
shall be accounted for; and if you perish not, yet you are not like to have a
full reward, you will suffer loss: for a Calf of the Stall to grow no fatter
then another, that has not such feeding, it will not be born: to be like
Pharoahs lean kine, devouring all before us, and yet be never the fatter, but
as poor, and lean, as if we had never lived under a lively searching Ministry,
as you of this place for the most part have done; assure your selves, Brethren,
your guilt is very great; to be watered every moment, and yet be as dry, and
hard, as if you had never seen when good had come.

Thirdly, Another particular Exhortation shall be to help one another;
Brethren, were we not wanting one to another in this respect, we should be a
people much more strong in the Grace which is in Jesus Christ. But alas, you
will say, is this in our power to help one another to grow? all the supply
comes from Jesus Christ the Head; It is true, it does so principally, Phil. 1.
19. Joh. 1. 16. 2 Cor. 3. 18. But he communicates by the mediation of
instruments, there is a supply of every part, by that which every part
supplyeth, (says the Apostle) as you see the Ephesians. 4. 16.
spirits conveyed from the head to the lowest parts, it is by mediation of
the other parts between the head and the foot; before it comes thither, it
passes through some others. I know the Lord Jesus is not bound up to any
instruments, he can teach by his own Spirit, yea, and always does, sometimes
without means, sometimes breathing in the means, and this is most ordinary; and
therefore something we must look to it, that we supply every one of us; you
have heard it is the end of all Christian Society to build up one another, and
it is the end wherefore the Lord intrusteth us with such Talents, to lay them
out for the good of others, whereby our own Talents grow in the using, and we
are instruments in the hand of God, to improve others; has the Lord then:
revealed himself to thee? thou wast in an horrible pit, where there was no
standing; thou sunkest yet lower and lower: has the Lord set thy feet upon the
Rock? what then, will thou keep this always to thy self, when called to speak of
it? mind you, Christ and David, Psalm. 40. 3.
they speak of it, what God had done; And many shall hear, and fear, and shall
trust in God: it encourages them* wherefore does Paul so often speak what he
had been, and he had obtained mercy? O that others that should come after,
might believe, and never be discouraged by their sins, though never so great.
And so the Psalmist, Again, my soul shall make her boast in God, the humble
shall hear thereof, and be glad; this Psalm. 34. (...).
poor man cried to the Lord, and he heard him. No sooner did Andrew find the
Messiah, but he tells Simon: O we have found the Messiah. And so Philip says to
Nathaniel: and the Ioh. 1. 44, 45.
woman of Samaria, she no sooner had the knowledge of Christ, O she was full,
she was big, until she was delivered: O come, and see the man that told me all
that ever I did: is not this the Christ? Ioh 4. 24.
I would (says the Apostle) that your hearts might be knit together Col. 2. 1,
2.
in love, and comforted, etc. that to this end you should know what conflict I
had for every one of you; wherefore are we delivered out of temptation, but to
set up way-marks? O take heed how you come there, warn others that they come
not near such a temptation: when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren:
and therefore comforted, that we might Luke 22. 32.
comfort others; and therefore endued with knowledge, that we might feed many.
Now truly Brethren, as the Apostle says of the solemn meeting, so I may say of
the occasional meetings together; it is not for the better many times, but for
the worse; and how a sad a thing is this? when Saints shall meet together, to
have so sweet an opportunity of stirring up one another to love, to good works,
that either we shall spend the time in Ephesians. 5. 4.
foolish talking, and jesting, and looseness, and looseness of Spirit: I tell
you, Brethren, observe it, you little know what hurt you do your own souls by
this lightness, nor what hurt you do to others: do you never reflect in the
evening, what you have been doing, what company you have been in, what you have
done, what you have gotten? methinks it should make our* hearts ache, to
consider this day, through the lightness and frothiness of my Spirit, I have
not only sinned my self, but drawn others to it: this is not to grow, nor to
help, but hinder one another. Or else we are discoursing of the world, of this
and that bargain; or else raking into the infirmities of others, and pleasing
our selves with that, specially of those: that are not altogether of our minds,
whereby our spirits are imbittered, not to stir up one another to bowels and
compassions to them. How many such opportunities does the Lord put into our
hands, and we have no heart to them? shall I beg of you, and of the Lord this
day, that there might be a laboring either to do, or receive some good: O
think every moment ill spent in the Fellowship of the people of God, that is
not thus improved; and indeed if our hearts and mouths be not set a work thus,
they will be working upon somewhat which is worse, to the grieving and wounding
of our spirits, and grieving Gods Spirit: Thus much for this Exhortation also.

The last Use then, shall be a word of comfort to every poor believing soul,
that it may be, from what has been said, may be discouraged. If it be thus,
that such as upon whom the Lord Jesus is arisen, they are in such a growing
condition, then what shall I think of my self? alas, I am weak, am very feeble,
am at a stand, etc. For answer, I shall say a few things.

First, There are several states and statures in Christ, there are babes in
Christ, and such as have need of milk, and not strong meat; as the Apostle
says, ye have need of milk: I could not 1 Ioh. 2. 13, 14.
speak to you as to spiritual, but as to carnal, as to babes in Christ; that is
to say, such in whom the flesh was very strong and prevailing; 1 Cor. 3.
So the Apostle John writes to all the Saints under three states, some were
babes, some young men, in their strength and vigor, some old men, Fathers of
grown experience in the ways of Christ; Fathers in Israel, and Mothers in
Israel; some are but just entered into the School of Christ, some are of a
middle form, some of the highest, some are but gotten within the door of the
house of God, and happy it is for them that are but once within, for then they
shall go further and further: Others are gone further, into the inner Chambers,
and are acquainted with the Lord Jesus in the most inward manner; What then,
will thou conclude, that because thou art not a man the first day, or
presently, therefore thou art no child of grace? No, suppose thou art but a
child, and weak, and every temptation over-turns thee, draws thee aside, yet
remember thou art a child: though thou be not a strong deeply rooted Cedar, yet
thou art planted it may be lately: though yet for the time we might be men
spiritual, perfect, as the Apostle says, to bear the wisdom of God in a
mystery, and yet are babes; it is matter of humiliation, but not of despair.

Secondly, Another is this, that the people of God, though they are in a
growing condition, yet it is not so to be understood, as that every moment they
grow, they have their declining fits; trees and plants, you know, have their
Winters, and children have their sicknesses and fits, when they are at a stand,
though afterward happily they shoot out so much the more for it; and so many
times the people of God do, they are under a distemper for a while, and
decline, and a man would think they were even withering and dying, but it
reviveth again; many times grace in the hearts of the children of God, through
corruption, are like the light of a candle ready to go out, even in the socket,
but yet afterward they are stirred up, they trim up their Lamps, shine more
clearly and sweetly then before: I say, do not conclude therefore thou art no
child of God, because it is not altogether with thee as it has been: thou have
found thy heart much more large toward God, much more tender, etc. Brethren, we
may lose our first love, and grow cold and dead, yea and it is possible Rev. 2.
4.
for a child of God to dye under such a condition, and yet not miscarry in the
main, though it is not so comfortable for him, nor so honorable for God;
therefore take heed of concluding your state by what you feel at present; it
may be some temptation has prevailed, some distemper is upon thee, therefore
thou must heal that, get that removed, and thou shall see thou will grow.

Thirdly, Even then thou may be growing in the root, for there must be a time
for that, Brethren: when we are least in our selves, and see we are nothing,
can do nothing, specially being sensible of it: O how this humbles us! we are
no losers by this, our roots cannot be too much spread, nor the foundation too
much strengthened; this drives us the more to Christ, makes us the more
seriously inquisitive after our state, to be sure to look to our grounding and
establishing upon him, and this will fit us for further growth.

Fourthly, In the next place know this, that even then, when there is nothing
appearing, thou think thou art nothing, have nothing, all seems to be
withered, no fruit appears, even then the Lord sees the root in the ground:
though we see it not, he takes notice of it, and is pleased with it; though
Jobs friends think he was a withered branch, cut off from Communion with God,
yet he had the root of the matter within him: come into a garden in the summer,
how pleasant and how glorious it is furnished with all variety of plants and
flowers; in the winter there is nothing appears, they are under ground; but
now the Gardener, he knows what roots he has there, though they appear not,
and he can tell you what plants he shall have springing up in the spring, and
he is choice and tender of the places where they grow, as if they did appear
and put forth; the Lord knows, if there be but the root of the matter in
thee, if never so small, if right, he knows it, and he knows the thoughts
afar off, long before we think them, he knows our works afar off, I know
Abraham, he will command his house after him, to keep Psalm. 39. 2. Genesis 18. 19.
my Commandments; the Lord knows what sinners would be if they lived, and
therefore many times cuts them off; and he knows what his people would be and
will be, though for the present under a temptation, under a cloud, and seem to
be all withered and dried up. Is this nothing? Brethren, he knows what root,
what seed he has sown in the heart, and that it will put forth; Say not then,
surely thou art not regarded of God, because thou do not appear to thy self
to grow at every moment.

Fifthly, Alas, but you will say, if I did come on thus and thus, as such an
one does, it were something like. I answer, it is good to follow the pattern of
fruitful and growing-Christians; but what if God will not give thee that
measure that he gives another? What if thou be but as a little finger in the
body, and such an one is as an arm? can thou expect then to grow as much as
such an one? is not he wise, and knows best what measure is good for us?
Secondly, For that thy desires are yet higher then thy growth, it is good for
thee, desire growth as much as thou will; and I could wish your desires were
more earnest, for then your endeavors would be more answerable then they are;
but if thy desires be in good earnest, and thou make it thy work to grow and
come on, and yet can not reach thy desires; should this discourage? No; thou
should be encouraged, and bless the Lord that thy desires are kept up after
more and more; that you say not sufficit, for this is the way appointed of God
for growth, that still the desires of his people should be uppermost; and for
my own part, I think there is not a better sign of a growing, then an eager
stomach, except it be a disease, which can hardly be in spirituals, though a
man may desire also to hear more then he digests. See, the Church was following
Christ, and yet says she, Draw me, I will run; We go after thee, but we Cant.
1. 4.
would run.

Sixthly, Growth is not sensible, is not visible until afterward; that degree
which is in the motion is not perceived until afterward: you see trees, and
plants, and children, they have grown, but if you sit by them, set your eyes
upon them to see them grow, and cannot discern it, and should complain, alas,
they grow not; would you not bewray much weakness? So it is in this case: A
Merchant, it is true, casts up his daily accounts, what comes in, what goes
out, but he does take the state of his condition but now and then: So should
we, though daily we examine our selves, how we gain or lose, such a day, in all
passages; yet to examine the state of our growth in the general every day, is
to little purpose, as I told you before; the Kingdom of God comes not with
observation; both the Kingdom of God in Psalm. 110. Hos. 14. Mar. 4. 27.
the administration of it grows insensibly, as the falling of the dew from
the womb of the morning; thou have the dew of thy youth, and God will be as the
dew to Israel. So the seed sown, is said to grow while he that sowed it
sleeps, he knows not how; it is vain to observe it while it is growing, but
afterward it will appear.

Seventhly, Though it may be thou grow not in affections so much as thou
think, thou may grow notwithstanding in the understanding, and in the
will, in the main part of the soul; for the passions indeed, they are the
lowest part, and yet we are apt to place most in them. O if we can be but so
and so affected (...) a rapture of joy, a melting into tears, it may be with
many of us, is more then a sweet yielding Spirit to the will of Jesus Christ;
this is a great mistake. It may be heretofore, when the matter was new to thee,
thou wast more affected with it passionately then now thou art; as you see new
things do affect our nature most, which, as some well observe, is the reason
wherefore children are taken and affected with every thing at the first,
because every thing is new to them, which men are not, except with things which
are so to them. Beside, as the blood grows colder in old age, and the spirits
are not so agile, there cannot be expected that vigor of affection in old
persons, and weak, and sick persons, as in young* persons, this is the case.
Besides, these passions they are wonderful unconstant, and there is no
judgment by them at all, they do so strangely ebb and flow; some men's natures
are more passionate, apt to grieve, to be affected with every little thing, and
there a little matter will set their passions afloat; others are more
stock-like, it is much that moves their affection: Now a little thing will not
move them. But suppose that thou do not grow in these so much, how is thy
understanding? do thou grow there, abound in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ? before thou wast empty, knew very little; now thou have a Treasury
of knowledge, and thou go on herein: do we grow in our judgments, Brethren?
do thou not value Christ and grace at a higher rate then before, counting all
things dross in comparison of him? do thou not cleave to the Lord with more
full and strong purpose of heart then before? this is growth indeed to the
purpose.

Eighthly, If thou grow not in bigness, do thou grow in sweetness? this is
growth Brethren. At first, Christians run up 1 Cor. 8. 2*
to a great height, a pace they grow in knowledge, but afterward they grow in
the sanctifiedness of that knowledge: Alas, when they know much, they know
little as they ought: Now thou come to know it as thou ought, so as to
humble thee, so as to endear thee to Christ more: Now thou art more peaceable,
more apt to forgive, less censorious, have not so much of that dividing spirit
that formerly thou had: do thou grow, I say, in sweetness therefore, if
thou grow so? so much in heat? this is the fatness and the sweetness of the
growth, and there is great comfort in this.

Ninthly, In the last place, as David said of the Covenant of God, and his
family, though he make it not to grow, yet says he, this is all my hope, and
all my salvation; yet he trusted in him. 2 Samuel 23. 5.
It is God that makes it to grow (Brethren) and he is free, and rich in his
influences; and what if he make it not to grow for a time? what then? will thou
question all his work in thee? No, no, but rather labor to believe it away:
Here are many promises, trust in him, though he make it not to grow; hang upon
him still for this growth, and if he still make it not to grow, yet still make
this thy salvation, his Covenant: if he see not such a measure fit for thee, be
humbled for what thou find to be the obstruction, but cast not away thy
confidence, though he make it not to grow: and thus much for this.

FINIS.
Christ his Willingness to accept Humbled Sinners.
John 6. 37. -- and he that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.
IN this Chapter, after the Miracle of the five hundred men fed with five
loaves and two fishes, ver. 9, 10, etc. which was no small Miracle indeed, and
argued devine power, to multiply so small a quantity into a sufficiency for so
many hungry bellies; and here, if ever was made good that, that man lives not
by bread alone, but by the Word of God; and so it is, when he has never so
much; much more where he has but little and inconsiderable, has but Pulse
instead of dainty fare, a cruse of oil, a little meal; I say, after this
Miracle, our Savior had won so far upon their affections, if not their
understandings, though very carnal; they concluded this was that Prophet which
they expected, ver. 14. that is to say, a special Prophet, beside John the
Baptist, or Elias, as they thought he should come again, be born again,
misunderstanding that place in Mal. 4. and beside, Christ the Messiah, they
expected another Prophet before him, as the Ancients, Chrysostom. Theoph. Cyril
and Beza also conceive; and seems very plain in that place of John, why do
thou Baptize if thou neither be Elias, nor that Prophet, nor yet the Christ?
Ich. 1. 21, 25.
where he is distinguished from Christ, and yet me thinks here they were
carried further in their apprehensions of Christ, then to take him for such a
Prophet, for says the Text, Our Savior Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
seeing that they would come and take him by violence to make him Acts 3. 23.
King, he withdrew himself into a Mount, ver. 15. therefore it should seem they
had some kind of flash that he was the Messiah, according to their carnal
conceit of the Messiah, that he should be a temporal King, and come in pomp,
they would needs now make him King. Well, our Savior now going to his
Disciples upon the Sea, and when he came into the ship, it was forthwith
ashore; O how sweetly and swiftly does any work of Christ or for Christ go on
when he himself is with us; the multitude they follow him, their bellies all
this while were their instructers, their gods and their guides; ye follow me
because of the loaves, says our Savior; and therefore he takes this occasion
to stir them up, to seek for that food that perishes not; they were sensible
of the hunger of their bellies, and were taken with his power to make such
provision for the body, even where there was nothing in comparison. O, but
their poor souls were in a starving condition! and they were not sensible of
this; and therefore our Savior endeavors to raise their apprehensions
somewhat higher, spending much of the Chapter afterward, in setting forth
himself, the true, the spiritual Shewbread, or bread of faces, if they had but
stomachs and appetites suitable to the necessities of their poor perishing
souls. But alas, they had not aseeing eye, nor a hearing ear, nor a believing
heart; when they heard of 1 Cor. 2. 9.
bread, of which, if they did eat, they should never hunger; Lord give us this
bread, said they, but they knew not well what they said; for alas, this bread
was tendered to them, but they had no mind to it; as the fountain of water was
near to Hagar, but she saw Genesis 21. 15.
it not; so the bread of life was now offering himself to them, but they knew
it not, and therefore our Savior reproves them, you also, says he, have seen
me, and yet believe not; this bread is spiritual, I am the bread, but
spiritually understood, for it is the Spirit that quickens, but the flesh
profits nothing, (says he) even to his own Disciples, who were already
stumbled at this Sermon of his, concerning eating his flesh and drinking his
blood; but (says our Savior) ye believe not; that is to say, ye will not take
of this bread, eat of it, receive and apply the benefit of my death, and
resurrection, and ascension, and intercession, and all I understand by this
bread in a spiritual sense, whereby the soul is nourished to eternal life, and
this was a sad symptom unto them, that they were not belonging to Gods purpose
of grace, they had little ground to conclude it as yet; for our Savior says,
all that the Father has given me shall come; as yet ye believe not, ye have
not come to me with hungry souls, though you have followed me with hungry
bellies for the loaves; but if you belong to the election, if you be of those
the Father has given to me from eternity, you shall come, and him that comes
unto me, I will in no wise, etc.

And him that comes unto me; the copulative and, speaks as great a latitude of
the subjects spoken of, as you have in the former part of the verse, All that
the Father has given shall come; So the Greeks use the Neuter-gender, to
express universality, though they speak of persons, all that are given shall
come, and he that comes being given of his Father; for indeed, there are none
else that do come to the Son, but such; ye believe not, says he, but all that
the Father has given shall come; if you be not of that number, ye may never
come to me: and then, whosoever comes unto me, I will in no wise east him out.

Our Savior, in these words, has given us to understand what welcome, what
entertainment we shall be sure to have with him, if we come to him; he will not
cast out any such soul. So that at once he has stopped the mouths, or prevented
and cut off the occasion of many doubtings, whereby Satan and a man's own heart
are very busy to block up our way to Christ, that we should not come. O; I
know not what success I shall have if I go to him, I may happily be refused; and
it is as good sit still, as rise and fall (we use to say) thus we are apt to be
answering our selves, before we come to Jesus Christ. Now our Savior, to cut
off all such excuses as these, and to embolden us, and encourage us, has made
this free, this general, this positive declaration of his willingness to
receive us if we come to him, he will not in any wise cast out any soul.

The words will not need any division, and therefore we shall, before we speak
any further to them, make the observation, which is this;

The Lord Jesus will not cast out any poor soul that comes to him; there is no
more change of them, then what necessity requires: he speaking of himself,
uses the first person; we speaking of him must use the third; and this
variation is nothing.

This note I shall endeavor to explain, prove, confirm and apply to us all.

First then, for the opening of the Doctrine; First, what is meant by coming
unto Jesus Christ. And secondly, what is meant by casting out; which he
promises he will not do, if any man come unto him.

For the first then, what it is to come to Jesus Christ, not to speak of that
which is necessarily presupposed, that we are all of us by nature far off from
Jesus Christ, and strangers from Ephesians. 2. 13.
the life of God and Covenant of promises, enemies to God and to Christ, and to
our own salvation; we are miserable, and are content to be so, would be so; but
that I shall leave building upon it as a thing granted by all, that it is so
with us by nature, Psalm. 148. 14.
every mothers child; yea, however we may seem to be near, and have an outward
nearness, as the Jews were said to be his Mat. 1^. 28.
people, near the Kingdom of God: So it may be with us at the present; that is
to say, the Lord opens heaven, and lets down the white sheet of the Gospel to
us, wherein we have all varieties of heaven in our Lord Jesus; and the voice
is, arise and eat, come and eat, and drink and live; but alas, our hearts are
so far from it, that we turn our backs upon it; and thus its with every one of
us, until the Lord proceeds further with us: therefore in the

First place, Brethren, to come to Jesus Christ in the order of nature, does
immediately presuppose a hearing and learning of God: in time happily they may
agree: and this I speak of, because I neither my self would give you an effect,
without showing you the dependence upon its cause, lest some might fasten it
upon a false root, a false cause, and so put a fallacy upon themselves; this
you have plainly in the 45. ver. of this Chapter, Whosoever therefore has
heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me; where, note the difference of
the tense or time in the Text, whosoever has heard and learned does come, and
therefore he comes, because he has heard and learned; this is Gods teaching
and man's learning; they shall be all taught of God: all! who? all that are in
the womb of Gods purpose, all that he will bring in to Jesus Christ, as he has
given to Jesus Christ: Not simply all men, for we see by daily experiences
contrary, how many dye and never hear of Christ: how many that hear of him,
that never learn any thing at all, and so do not come to Jesus Christ: yea, how
many that seem to come to Jesus Christ, and make a profession, and yet depart
from him, are left to their own hearts to depart (which is a kind of casting
out) as those Disciples afterward, many of them went backward, being offended
at our Saviors speech, concerning eating his flesh, and drinking his blood,
and never walked with him any more; therefore by the way note it, a man may be
a Disciple that never learned, was never taught of God; for all that are thus
taught of God, and learn, they do come to Jesus Christ; and they that so come
to Christ, he says, he will never cast them out, Isa. 54. 13. Ier. 31. 33.
as we shall see more afterward. Well, but this hearing and learning of the
Father, is as much as being taught of God, which in order goes before the
conversion of a sinner, or his coming to Christ, whatever it be in time; and if
this Scripture would prove the needlesness of Ordinances now to grown
Believers, it would prove it as well to new Converts, for these are taught of
God as well as grown Believers, or else they could never come to Christ; and if
they be not necessary, neither for the one nor for the other, to what end did
the most wise Governor of the world and of the Church appoint them for?
nothing? but that by the by. I say, this is as much as being taught of God, as
the Evangelist shows in the 45. verse, bringing that Prophecy, they shall be
all taught of God; and making this inference from it, whosoever therefore
hears and learneth of the Father comes unto me: Again, this being taught of
God, it is nothing else but the drawing of the Father, as you have it in the
44. verse, no man comes unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw
him; it is written in the Prophets, they shall be all taught of God; therefore
I conceive that this hearing and learning may be understood thus.

First, By hearing, I understand the usual means of salvation, and working of
Faith, and that is the Word of Christ, the Gospel of Salvation. How can they
believe in him of whom they Romans 10. 14.
have not heard? (says the Apostle) And Faith comes by hearing, and therefore
it is called the word of Faith, and therein the righteousness of God is
revealed from Faith to Faith thereby: wherein? even in the Gospel preached, of
which the Apostle was not ashamed: by the preaching thereof poor Romans 1. 17.
creatures were brought to believe in the Lord Jesus: and so the righteousness
of Christ was revealed therein to them, and conveyed to them by Faith. I know
not what course the Lord holds with the Heathen, to whom the Gospel is not
preached by men like themselves, nor has the Lord given us a positive account
of his dealing with them, and therefore I meddle not with it; but this is the
ordinary way of Gods working of Faith in them who come to be capable of hearing
the Word, and understanding of it; therefore usually, if God intend to bring
Ioh 12. 32. The brazen Serpent lifted up. Number. 21. 6.
on such a soul, or such a soul, he will bring them under the Word, either to
dwell under it, or the Word accidentally to be among them. It is observable,
that in Paul's conversion, only he himself heard the voice of him that talked
with him, not the men that were with him, because God intended this vision for
Paul, and not for them; they are said in another place, to hear a voice, but
not the voice of God, but the voice of Paul, and wondered to hear him speak,
and heard no body speaking to Acts 9. 7. and chap. 22. 9.
him: hearing then of God, is hearing him speak in his Word, for it is he that
speaks therein.

Secondly, By the hearing may also be understood yet further, some whisperings
and motions, and secret workings of his Spirit, which many a man has many
times in hearing of the Word; the Spirit passes by, and breaths in the Word
upon one soul, and upon another, putting on the soul to fasten upon such a a
truth, or such a truth, as sweet and precious; inwardly speaking to their
understandings, that they are sure the men concerned in such a threatening, in
such a promise; and this is a Genesis 6. 3.
part of Gods striving by his Spirit with rebellious sinners that do not
believe nor obey. Now this is a more inward hearing then the former; some sit
under the same Sermon, and the Sword of the Spirit makes no more entrance upon
them, then upon a brazen wall; and it must be a sharp sword indeed, that must
divide an heart of stone: many a blow is laid at a sturdy Oak, an old grown
sinner, before his heart begins so much as to shake: and this is the second.

Thirdly, Then for the learning, which is the main thing, which goes before
the coming to Jesus Christ; this I take to to be when the Lord not only by his
Messengers makes his word plain before us, lays it to our Consciences, as the
Ax to the root of the Tree, but when he opens our understandings, plucks open
our eyes to behold the light, teaches us indeed; he teaches a poor soul in
special these two or three things.

1. That he is lost, a son of perdition for ought he knows: many a poor
Creature in the Ship, like Jonas, though ready to sink; he was asleep, if the
Ship had sunk, it had been all one to him; they come and awake him up, thou
sleeper, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
do thou not see thou art sinking, thou art dying, thou art perishing? so the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus takes a poor, sleepy, dead sinner by the
understanding, tells him, thou art the man condemned, wrath abides upon thee
particularly; what do thou mean? will thou have the flames of hell about thy
ears, before thou will stir a foot? what, will thou bring the blood of Jesus
upon thy head? thus the Spirit comes, and shakes a poor soul out of his sleep
in sin, he never dreamed what his condition was before; this is the Spirits
convincing a man of sin, sets his sins in order before him, sets a man
upon the search into his condition, then represents all his sins in their
bloody guilt and condemning nature: every one of them with Ioh. 16. 10.
a mouth like hell, ready to swallow him up: this is a part of the cords of a
man's convictions.

2. It teaches him yet further, now no longer to lie securely in that
condition: if he continue here, he must perish: therefore now he begins to
look about him: O what shall I do? to whom shall I turn my self? is there no
hope of pardon, no mercy for me? O what shall we do (said they in Acts 2.) to
Acts 2. 27.
be saved? if the Ship be sinking, now it is time to look about for a Plank, a
Mast, something to lay hold upon, something to stop the leak; if now Brethren,
grenades be cast into the soul, and be broken, and tearing all to pieces, the
very flames of hell have caught hold upon such a poor creature, there is no
delay; now the Spirit of the Lord working with a man's natural principle for
self-preservation, puts him on to enquire for somewhat to quench it; now he
begins to cry out, fire, fire, in his soul; O he cannot hold it!

3. It teaches yet further, and the poor soul learneth this also effectually,
that there is no help for him in the creature, neither in himself, nor in any
other; if he take the quintescence of all his works, which we usually before
have a high esteem of, and temper them together, alas, they will not make a
balsom for this wound; now all the Spirits in all the Creatures in the world,
if they could be extracted, I mean the comforts that might arise from the
enjoyment of them, would not keep the poor languishing soul from fainting and
dying, waters of the fullest cup, let them overflow never so much; if a man
have rivers of pleasures in the enjoyment of creature comforts, honors,
relations, parts, learning, gifts, whatsoever they be, alas, the poor creature
is now taught, they will not quench this spark that is gotten into the
conscience; I mean, they will not allay the trouble of his spirit, will not
heal the wounds of his spirit, so that now he knows not what to do; the Heart,
they say, if smitten with an arrow, goes to her herb to cause the arrow to
fall out; and other creatures being poisoned, stung, sick, distempered, run to
their cure by a natural instinct; but now, when God has shot this arrow into a
poor soul, it wounds too deep, sticks too fast for the teeth of any creature to
pluck it out, or for the virtue of any creature; yea they are so far from
healing, that rather the consideration of them, are as oil to the flame, to vex
and wound so much the more: well, this is much to be taught; he that learneth
this effectually, and not in the notion only, goes far; there are many
convinced of their wounds, their bleeding, dying condition, but they imagine
there is help to be had in something else: they run to a duty of their own, as
if a day of fasting would make amends for all, run to this or that, unfaithful
Shepherds that will daub and heal them deceitfully, get it skinned over a
little, and so the world will do it, building, and planting, and marrying, and
drinking, and pastimes, these may skin over the wound, but it heals not; and
miserable is the condition of poor creatures, so deluded; but now they that are
taught of God, and learn, they learn this effectually and practically, that
there is nothing in the creature that can do it.

Fourthly, They learn this also, that though all the world be Now the ^^rds of
Love.
but as a cloud without rain, when the soul is a fire, a Well without water, a
broken Cistern that leaks out all, a Torrent, a Brook that is dried up, when
the soul is parched and burnt up with the scorching heat of the displeasure of
God. O when the Lord sets a soul in his sight, and looks upon him as a
consuming fire, with his eyes as a flaming fire, ready with a Iaa. 25. 4.
sight of him to devour him, and he cannot get out of his sight. O now the
world, all their comforts will not skreen them from his eyes: but what will?
only the Lord Jesus, he can be a cooling shadow, to shadow us from this
scorching heat, and this the Spirit Hos. 14. 8.
of the Lord persuades the soul; we all of us will talk of it, O Jesus Christ
is our help and hope, and look for salvation in no other, but in him; it is
grown now so cus^omary a thing among us, that it is in every man's mouth; but to
how few has the Lord spoken this to our hearts that thus it is?

Fifthly, Again, another thing that we are taught of God, before we come to
Jesus Christ, is this: that he is willing to let out of his ointments to heal:
he is willing to expend that precious balm of Gilead upon us, else the soul
will never come to him: it is that that keeps off many a soul a long time;
the Spirit of the Lord persuades the poor soul, that though he has Hos. 14. 4.
been an enemy to Jesus Christ, and grieved him, and torn his wounds, and rent
his flesh with horrid oaths and blasphemies, trampled his blood under foot,
have been never so horrid a transgressor, yet he persuades him that the Lord
Jesus is willing to receive sinners without exception, if they come to him.
Suppose there was a Physician, whose skill were so great, and his store of
Medicines so inexhaustible, and sovereign, and his heart so large, as that he
proclaims to all, that whosoever is wounded, though never so desperately;
whosoever is sick unto the death, one of the Stone, another of the Gout,
another of the plague, I will cure you all; O then, if poor creatures did
believe this, were persuaded of it, they would come, and not before; O says
one, mine is a plague sore, and it is past cure; mine is an hereditary disease,
says another, and so far gone, I cannot be cured; they come not, and perish; O
mine is such a disease; it will cost more pains and charge then I think he will
be willing to be at to cure, and therefore he comes not to him, and so
perishes; just so it is in this case, except the Lord do secretly insinuate it
into the soul, how willingly the Lord Jesus writ it upon his Spirit, and that
the Lord Jesus is willing to receive, to heal, to save the soul that will not
come to him; but thus much for these things, which in the order of nature go
before a coming to Christ; now for the acts wherein it formally consist.

First then, when the heart is thus made sensible of what is in himself working
to death, and what is not in himself, nor in any other creature to save, then I
say, there is from the teaching of the heart, how able and willing the Lord
Jesus is, there arises a desire in the soul after the Jesus Christ; not as if
this did flow or were produced by the former apprehensions of a man's own
necessities of Christ, and of the fullness in him, as a fountain, and the
openness of the fountain, which is sealed to none that come; for alas, one
grace, though never so habitual and deeply rooted, cannot produce another, no
not faith it self produce love, but the Spirit which works faith, works love in
our hearts also; much less then, can a conviction be the cause of a conviction,
or a turning unto the Lord Jesus; but it is the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, when
he has so opened the eyes of an Hagar to see the fountain opened that was near
her before, but she saw it not; and let us see that our bottle is dried up, and
all other hopes in the creature perished, then I say, the Spirit inclines the
Will to come to Jesus Christ; then he works sweetly, though strongly, an
inclination, a desire after him. It is not in these things as in nature, an
ordinary providence concurring with the actings of the creature, according to
their necessities. When Hagar saw the fountain, she needs no further persuasion
to go unto it, her necessity was a cord strong enough to draw her, yea a
weight, a spring to carry her swiftly to it; but alas, when we see the bottles
dried, see that the creatures say, it is not in us to be had: and see there is
a fountain opened, yet such is the waywardness of our hearts, yea such the
enmity in our hearts against the Lord Jesus, though the streams of his love
toward us were as strong as death, that we will not yet come to him, we had
rather sit down, as you see some sullen creatures taken from their damms, will
rather perish then receive food at the hand of man, such an indisposition and
aversness to man there is; and so it is in this case, except the Lord Jesus
come in by another act of his Spirit, and bow the will, and make us desirous of
himself; O then, when this act of power is put forth, the soul begins to
long, to desire after Jesus Christ, O that I had him, O that I might but have a
sight Psalm. 110. 3. Luke 19. 4. Psalm. 119. 20. Cant. 2. 5. Psalm. 42. 2.
of him; then there is getting upon the tree by a low Zacheus, then there is an
ascending in this Ordinance and that Ordinance, and everywhere the desire of
the soul is for Jesus Christ; this is a coming, for the affections are to the
soul as the feet to the body, that which carries the soul in and out in all,
to this object, or from that object; O then when shall I come and appear before
him!

Secondly, In this coming to Christ is included a passing all other stands and
rests on this side Jesus Christ; many a poor soul comes near to Christ, and to
the Kingdom of God, and yet falls short of him; as an arrow not drawn up to the
head, falls short of the mark, and there it sticks where it fastens, goes no
further: So here, some upon their convictions, the discovery of their
conditions, run to this Ordinance, to that; to this duty, to that; as things
that of themselves, as performances, should give rest to them: and alas, they
are but bottles themselves, if Christ be not in them, and there found to a
soul, and sought by a soul, they are dry and sapless; when many a rich man in
hearing a Sermon, has a qualm comes over his heart, and he begins to be a
little sick of sin, which the Word has lanced, and it strikes to the heart;
what does he do? alas, he chears himself with this, Surely if I were such a
sinner, God would not regard me, God would never have blessed me as he has
done, therefore this is but a foolish melancholy fit: The drunkard and the
wanton can eat, and drink, and sing, and dance down twenty such pills as these;
though they troubled them a little at the first, they make a shift to claw it
off; The civil good-natured man, though he see and know himself to be a sinner,
yet he is none of the worst, he does much good in the place where he is; yea,
he prays, and hears, and keeps Sabbaths, and thinks this shall make
amends for all, and so walks in the sparks of his own kindling; but alas, the
end of these things will not be rest, for they shall lie down in sorrow, and
shall Isa. 50. 1.
have it from the hand of God too; and then, who can resist it when lifted up,
or heal his blow when it is given? I tell you, Brethren, I doubt this is the
grand imposture of most of our hearts, for it can hardly be, but we must
sometime or another be convinced our condition by nature is very sad and
forlorn, and men are not men, if they be not carried forth to seek some
course-for their escaping; and how few alas, reach the Lord Jesus? therefore we
mnst needs stick somewhere short of him. Ah, the Lord grant that none of us,
who think upon more probable grounds then others, and others think so of us
too, that we are such as come to Jesus Christ; that we sit not down in any
thing on this side him, for if we do we perish: Therefore I say, the soul that
comes to Jesus Christ, goes out of all; alas, if he have never so much of the
world, profits, pleasures at will, he is as rich as another, Phil. 3. 13.
and has as much content in relations suitable to his hearts as another, and
it may be as much in praying, fasting, hearing, using of the Ordinances, as
another; and yet all this is nothing to him, satisfies him not, he cannot take
up with it, they are but husks, they will not satisfy, however they may fill.

Thirdly, There is a coming unto Jesus Christ, it is not a going toward him,
but a coming to him; this is builded much what upon the willingness of Jesus
Christ to receive them; this desire after him, happily more fitly may be annexed
to the power of Christ to save to the utmost. O when the soul knows this,
Heb. 7. 25.
O then that I had him, that I were in him; but now when the soul comes to
understand, is persuaded he is willing to receive all that come: Well then, the
Spirit quickening, persuading; the soul resolves, I will venture upon him, I will
go and cast my self upon him, and bear my self upon him, hang all my weight
upon him; and this also he is taught of God, this is impressed upon his Spirit,
by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, this is the drawing nigh, yea not nigh to him,
but coming unto him; this is the touch of faith, if it be never so secret, a
touch of faith that others take no notice Mat. 14. 36.
of; yea, that a poor soul through the fears and troubles that are upon him,
and earnestness of Spirit to have all quieted and cleansed, and done away
forthwith, thinks he does not, he has not touched the Lord Jesus, yet he may
have touched him, and be come unto him, if he be carried out in his affections
indeed and in truth beyond all; count all as nothing, as dung and Phil. 3. 8, 9.
dross; as an hungry man would prefer a piece of bread before much riches, he
cannot eat nor drink gold nor silver; and so it is here, and he is resolved
upon it, that he will lie at the pool of Bethesda, John 5. 3. Psalm. 123. 2.
his eyes shall be up, and are up to him, he will hang on him, not let him go,
except he shake him off^ into hell; O this is a soul indeed that comes to
Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, He comes to him with words too, at least heart-words, if not words
of confession (I will wrap up Hos. 14. 1.
these things as fast as I can, I doubt I stay too long in the first part)
words of confession, and words of petition; of confession, so the poor
Prodigal, I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy
to be called thy Son. O I have Lok. 15. 19.
sinned from the womb, conceived in sin, born in iniquity, I have sinned before
thee, not regarding thy all-seeing eye, desperately, against light, against
knowledge, against mercy, against the blood of the Lord Jesus, against all that
grace whereby thou have waited upon me to be gracious, O I am no more worthby
to Luke 18. 13.
be called thy sun: O I am not worthy to lift up mine eye toward heaven, says
the poor Publican, I am not worthy to come near to the Temple, to come among
the company of the people of God; but stands afar off, and there acknowledges
his vileness. Ah, so it is with many a poor soul, he deserves not to be owned
by the Lord, nor by any of his; if he fall upon me as a millstone, to grind me
to power, he does me no wrong.

Secondly, With words of petition to him, that he would have mercy upon us,
that he would pardon, and heal, and give himself to us indeed, that he would be
our God; a soul that is thoroughly sensible of his want of Christ, cries our
after him; not with a still listless desire, but the heart makes a noise unto
the Lord, O give me Christ or else I dye; Lord Jesus save Genesis 13. 1. Luk 8. 24.
my poor soul, else I perish; O sin is ready to swallow me up; O the grave and
hell are ready to shut their mouths upon me, save me or else I perish, as they
to Christ; the waves and billows of thy displeasure are the shaking and
breaking of many poor souls. O what moan many times will a poor soul that wants
the Lord Jesus make to him, lead me to the rock that is higher then I: O how he
sucks the promises, and every argument he can fetch out of them, he comes with
it, and lays it before the Lord, yea every letter of his name, the Lord, the
Lord God, gracious and merciful, etc. he pleads to the Exodus 34. Psalm. 35. 11.
Lord, O thy name is great to the ends of the earth, therefore pardon me; O
mine iniquity is great, therefore pardon; thy faithfulness, thy mercy, thy
promise, thy dear Son, the highest pledge of thy love, that came to save
sinners, the price is paid, the greatest part is done already; all that a poor
soul can find, he will then make use of before the Lord: and indeed, these are
the sweet breathings of faith, these are the near approaches of the soul to
Christ, this is to lay hold upon him, though the soul feel little comfort for
the present, yet this is a coming to Christ: So the Prodigal, O make me but as
one of thine hired servants.

Fifthly and lastly, it is a closing with Jesus Christ, as he is offered, not
by the halves, Christ is not divided, as the Apostle says, his righteousness
from his holiness, nor his holiness from his righteousness; therefore says the
Apostle, as you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him: O here
many are Col. 2. 6.
deceived, they would have Christ, but they will not be his; what a strange
unreasonable thing is this, they would have the benefit of having him to be
their Father, and be heirs, but they will not be subject as children; they
would have all the immunities, Psalm. 7. 23. Can. 2. 16.
and privileges, peace, and prosperity of soul under him as a King, but they
will not submit themselves to him as King and Lord; they would have him for an
husband, and yet will not obey. O this is not a coming to Jesus Christ, this is
to serve our selves upon him; but the Lord Jesus will search this out, keep it
as close as we can from others, that they may think well of us, yea from our
selves also, through the juglings of our hearts, we cannot keep it from him, he
knows where there is a soul that takes the Lord Jesus without any reserve and
equivocation; Aug. Is non modo durus, was no good sign of his condition at that
time, though afterward it was otherwise, for we find he acknowledges it, and
bewails it; the Lord grant that the doom of Ananias and Saphira reach not to
many of our souls, for pretending to give up the whole to Jesus Christ, and yet
reserve part to our selves; yea, pretend to come to Jesus Christ, and yet
divide him. Well, you see Brethren, what this coming to Jesus Christ is; it is
not then every one that says, Lord, Lord, nor cries out, the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, that come to Christ; it is not the having a few
faint wishings and wouldings, which like the untimely birth of a woman, like a
babble, perish and never appear more, that is a coming to Christ; it is not your
sucking sweetness from your own duties, performances, Ordinances, privileges,
any thing short of Christ that is coming to him. Dear Lord Jesus, how many of
us loyter, and take up our rest short of thee? It is not a bare acknowledgement
of our being sinners in the general, and a Lord have mercy from the mouth,
without any sense of our condition upon our hearts, that is a coming to Jesus
Christ. It is not a desire to be pardoned alone, for then none of us should
miscarry; and O that it were so if the Lord see it good: But it is the earnest
breathings of a poor, broken, lost soul, the moan of a poor wounded creature,
the pantings of a poor languishing heart after Jesus Christ, a making him alone
our stay, a resigning our selves to him, that is the coming to him here spoken
of, and such a soul he will not cast out. Pardon me, I know I am too slow for
the acute, and I wish I be not as much too swift for many of us that are dull
of understanding, slow of heart to understand and believe these things; the
condition of people now a days, I take it, does call upon us to speak oftener
and more fully to beat it upon poor creatures, the nature of this coming to
Jesus Christ, then any other thing; as I find still in all the preachings of
the Apostles, they did endeavor to make good that truth most necessarily, that
Jesus was the Christ, because that was most opposed in those days; so now this
being granted by all, and already, that we are sinners, the main work lies
herein, to undeceive poor creatures, who think all is well enough with them;
and therefore I am the more large in this part, and indeed much more large then
I thought to be.

The second thing then is, what is meant by this not casting out, wherein lies
the marrow, and fatness, and sweetness of this Scripture; and indeed I think
the whole Book of God does not afford a more refreshing word, a more
establishing word to a poor weak creature then this is: O then let us see what
it is!

First, he will not cast him out, he will not cast him out of his heart, that
is the first: not out of his love, for we must know this all of us, this day,
which may be a comfort to many a doubting, trembling, misgiving-heart, that if
the Lord Jesus have done this in us and for us, has given us thus to come to
him in truth: for degrees of the things formerly spoken of, I intend not them
as to make up the nature of our duty, it may be in a weaker and a stronger
measure; but if in truth it can be found, that so we come, know for thine
everlasting comf(...)t, as base thoughts as thou have of thy self, and of thy
vileness, and of thy unworthiness, thy dear Savior has precious thoughts of
thee, thou art written in his heart, thou wast in his heart, when he wrought
this work in thee and for thee; yea, long before this: for the truth is, were
not he first as well as last in the work, the Alpha as well as the Omega, in
that work of salvation, we should never come to him, nor should we abide with
him. O thy Law is in my heart, says he, in Psalm. 44. 8. thy command, I delight
to do thy will; and what was that? that all that the Father has given to him,
he should redeem, and deliver, and save; and therefore if it be thus with us,
we were in his heart before; as it was said of that Queen when she dyed, That
if her heart were opened, they should find Calice there. Ah, Brethren, surely
the names of the choice of God, which now appears and breaks out by this that
is given to us to come to Jesus Christ, all that the Father has given, shall
come to me; I say, our names were then upon his heart, and now are upon his
heart; as the Priest did bear the names of Israel before the Lord, and
therefore the Lord will not cast out such a poor soul out of his heart, out of
his love; O my loving kindness I will never take from thee; however he may
chastise, however he may Psalm. 89. 33.
withold comfort for a time, yet believe it, O that every poor weak creature
might this day have it given from on high to believe, that the Lord will not
cast them out of his heart; this is thy greatest fear, poor soul, lest thou
should lose him, lest Hos^a 1.
he should disown thee, and say, I will not have mercy on thee: Alas, it is as
impossible, as white to be black, or black white: has he once owned thee, and
made manifest his love, in drawing thee, bringing thee to come to him, and will
he now change his mind? It is true, if he were as man he might repent, but the
Lord is not as man: O what comfort is here, what encouragement is this!

Secondly, He will not cast them out of his Church; that is, his Kingdom, his
Family, his School, his Vineyard, he will not cast them out; for if there be
this coming to Jesus Christ, there is faith; and by that faith; as we are made
one with Jesus Christ, so also with all his members; so says the Apostle, we
are members Ephesians. 4. 25. Heb. 12. 13.
one of another; ye are come, says the Apostle, to Mount-Sion, and to the
assembly of the firstborn; that is to say, you are gathered into the flock of
Christ, and out of this ye shall not be cast; it may come to pass, that through
the ignorance of men they may be cast out of the visible Church or Churches of
Christ, and have little fellowship and communion with them, and it cannot but
be a burden to a gracious spirit; and oh that the Lord would so clear up his
mind, that we might not thus by mis-apprehension be a burden each to other; but
here is the comfort, if we thus come to Jesus, we are of the invisible Church,
and he that knows the heart, knows his own image there, his own
handwriting there, every spark of his own kindling there, and cannot be
deceived, and therefore there is no fear, he will not cast away out of this
Church the assembly of the firstborn, not out of this his family; will a
Parent cast out his child that he has begotten in his own image, because of
some deformity it may be, and imperfection that it does not resemble the father
in, or because of its weakness in those parts which it has? even grace for
grace we have from the Lord Jesus, though weak and imperfect; and will he cast
out? surely no.

Thirdly, He will not cast out; that is to say, he will not send away empty,
cast them out of his presence when they come to him; neither at our first
coming, no nor our after-coming unto him: Not at our first coming; where is the
soul that can say, that he did thus come to Jesus Christ and was refused, was
sent away? it may be thou came full, full of thy self, not with such an empty
hand to take him; it may be thou came with a false heart, and then well might
he cast thee cut, for he knows how the heart stands toward him: it may be
thou wast troubled only with the smart of sin, and not the filthiness, the
putrefaction of the wound and loathsome nature of it, and would have Christ
only to have served thy turn, and then would have turned thy back upon him:
alas, he knows this, and therefore he resists the proud, a man of a
Pharisaical spirit, Jam. 4. 6.
a man of a Laodicean temper, that is rich and needs nothing, Rev. 3. 17.
comes to Christ for a complement; thou come to him whole, not sick, nor
wounded; if thou did, and with such a heart as we have said, I cannot believe
that the Lord Jesus would have cast thee out, no more then I can believe that
be can lie who is truth it self. O who would not venture upon this Jesus
Christ* be his condition never so sad, he will not refuse if we come to him: we
perish for our not coming.

Secondly, Even in our after-comings to him, he will not cast out; tell me,
when did thou ever come before the Lord, with a heart sensible of thy want of
him, with a renewing of the acts of self-denial, being nothing in thy self,
that thou we^test away empty? did ever any hungering soul come to* this
Ordinance, where we have the most royal dainties that ever it self affords in
some degree, even the flesh and blood of the Lord Jesus, the strong wines of
consolation, and did thou go away empty? surely no; he that comes full,
goes away empty; Luke 1. 53.
but he that comes empty, goes away filled with some refreshing: Happily thou
may be put to it to wait a little while for it, but have it thou shall: If
either the Lord Jesus wanted a fullness of mercy, there were not room enough in
his heart for us all, it were something; or if he wanted propensity and bowels,
it were something; if he were not a merciful, pitiful High Priest, H^b. 2. 17.
or if he did not know our meanings by our very looks, or if he did not know
our hearts where they are upright, it were something indeed, there were some
ground to be discouraged; but who can suppose any of these? O that we could
more strongly close with these; with what confidence should we then come to
him? and how full a recompense of reward should we find, even in the first
fruits here, ^f there were no more?

Fourthly, He will not cast them out of heaven; for every child of God, as I
may say, has one foot in heaven already, as Mat. 6. 26.
an unbeliever has one foot in hell already; where our hope is, there our
hearts are* O that I could ^ay they are there, they Heb. 6. ^9.
should be there, there is our Anchor, in heaven, there the Lord Jesus is, our
head is, who has taken possession for us, and went to prepare a place for us;
and therefore the works of grace in the soul are called, things that have
salvation, he will not cast them out; no, by no means: two negatives do deny
more ve^emently: some shall be cast out at the last day, yea, the Kingdoms
children, Members of the Church, and such as have lived under the Ordinances,
as the Jews did strangers; others, any that hear, and believe, and obey the
Lord Jesus, shall be received in. Now Brethren, our hearts are so vain, we can
scarce settle upon it, to think of the woeful condition that will be, to be cast
out from the Lord Jesus; but no man that comes to Christ shall be cast out. O
then, it is not greatness shall enter in, nor riches, nor beauty, nor learning,
nor gifts, nor any of all these, but merely the coming unto Jesus Christ; he
will never cast out such a soul.

You have seen already, what* it is to come to Jesus Christ, in many
particulars, and what is necessarily presupposed, and such he will not cast
out, no, in no wise or sort whatsoever; but alas, the difficulty is to persuade
poor creatures of this, that are upon the turning pin; many can say, Lord, if
thou will, Mat. 8. 2.
thou can make me clean; but the willingness of Christ to accept of poor
sinners, is that we many times doubt very much of; and it is not the tongue of
men nor Angels that can persuade a man to this; and well it is for us that it
is so, for then the Faith of poor creatures would consist in the wisdom of men,
and not in the power of God only: let me lay before your hearts, 1 Cor. 2. 5.
and my own, a few considerations from Scripture, which, if the Lord be pleased
to breath in them, may be a support to Faith in this.

First then, The Lord Jesus has promised, that if any man come to him, he will
in no wise cast them out; And shall men that are liars, yet count it their
honor to make good their Rev. 3. 17.
word; and do you think Jesus Christ his honor is not as dear to him, as the
honor of men is to them? is he not the Amen, the faithful and true Witness?
all that he says is Yea, and Amen in him; is it not his own nature to be true
and faithful? is he equal, or equals with his Father? (as some critically Phil.
2. 6.
note) that is to say, in all his perfections essential: and is he not equal
with him in truth? (says the Apostle) God who cannot T^t. 1. 2.
lie, has promised; would he not cease to be God, to be the highest
perfection, and rule of all perfections, if there were Ioh. 8. 44.
any obliquity in him? is not Satan a liar, and the father of it, and shall we
father a lie then upon God? what a Mediator were Jesus Christ, and how should
the Promises of God in him, be Yea, and Amen, if he could falsify his own word
to his people? Well then, surely if Jesus Christ has promised it, as you 2
Cor. 1. 20.
see he has, will he not be as good as his word? did he eve^ break with any
poor soul, though never so unworthy? which is the great plea of poor creatures:
did he ever cast out any? has he not been as good as his word? And is he not
the same Heb. 13. 8.
yesterday, to day, and for ever? But thus much for the first: it leads to the
second.

Secondly, If that Jesus Christ should cast out any poor creature, he would
plainly be argued to be changable: for I showed you before, that none that came
to him, but they were in his heart before the world was, and his delight was
with the sons of Prove. 8. 31.
men: and is he now so changed, as when they do come, he will* cast them out?
did he before the world, (as I may say) please himself with the thoughts of it,
that he should be a Savior to his people, to save them from their sins, and
from wrath to come, and when they come to him, to the fountain opened for sin
and for uncleanness, he should refuse them? would not this be more then a
shadow of turning, if his heart, that once was so toward them, should now be
turned so against them, as to disown them when they follow after him? O surely
Iam. 1. 17.
this cannot be!

Thirdly, If so, It would be rather a slighting of his Fathers gift; for he
has given them to Jesus Christ even before the world was; in which respect,
They are said to be chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world: all
that the Father has given to Ephesians. 1. 4, 5.
me, shall come; and as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed; Acts
13. 48.
and therefore, now when a poor soul comes with his mouth in the dust, with a
rope about his neck, with a word of confession, petition, with sighs and
groans, with mournings over Christ, and mournings after Christ, and he shall
now shut up his mercy from him, cast him out, turn his back upon him, would not
this be an high undervaluing of the gift of the Father, and slighting of it?
you know that gifts are not given from one friend to another, but as tokens of
respect and love, and so he gave a number of poor creatures to his Son for him
to redeem and purchase to himself, and if he should slight them now, his
Fathers love would be much undervalued.

Fourthly, It would be failing in his trust: for the Lord Jesus Psalm. 89. 19.
is the great undertaker for his poor people, and help was laid upon this
mighty one, mighty to save to the utmost; for this end I say, he undertook the
ransoming and redeeming of a people to himself, and to his Father, and his
Father committed the charge of it to him; He came not to do his own Will, but
the Will of him that sent him; (as he says in that place) I delight Ioh. 6.
38, 39. Psalm. 40. 7.
to do thy Will; the Will of his Father: and what was that Will? That is, That
none that come to Jesus Christ should miscarry: This is the Fathers Will that
has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but
raise it up at the last day, (that is to say) as Mediator, as by the influence
of an Head unto the Members; so to raise them up, is here meant: Well, Of, all
that he has given me, either in his purpose of Grace, or actually in their
Calling, which is an evidence of the secret purpose of God, I should lose none:
now none can come to Jesus Christ, except he be given to Christ of the Father;
that is clear, by comparing the words of the Text with the former: Ye will not
come to me, or ye have seen me, and yet believe not: but though you believe
not, All that the Father has given me, shall come, shall believe in me: well,
As many as were ordained, believed, came to Jesus Christ: as we have expounded
Acts 13. 48.
this coming the last time. Now I say, if Jesus Christ should not take up every
poor soul that comes, he would not discharge his trust, do the Will of his
Father which he has undertaken; and then what a Savior should we make of him?

Fifthly, Then the Lord Jesus should slight and undervalue his own blood: he
only knew what a value his Godhead put upon it, and therefore accordingly, he
only can bear a proportionable esteem of his blood; did he not shed his
precious blood, That whosoever believes, might not perish, but have
everlasting life? or whosoever comes to him, might not perish? for believing,
if it be not convertible with coming to Christ, yet it is doubtless
comprehended in it, as a main part of it. And what then, when a poor sinner
laden with iniquity, whose burden is too heavy for him to bear, comes to
Christ, groaning and panting for ease and refreshing, rowls himself upon him,
hangs all his weight upon him, lies at his feet in his weariness of spirit
under it, if he now cast out this poor creature, would not this be an
undervaluing of his blood, and the price of our redemption? would it not appear
that he was lavish of his blood? Brethren, is the Lord Jesus so angry with
sinners for trampling Heb. 10. 29.
his blood under their feet, and for neglecting so great salvation, Heb. 2. 3.
as he has wrought out for them, (as you have not long since heard) and will
he (think you) be guilty of slighting his own most precious blood? O surely no:
And would it not be a neglecting of the salvation, to improve the price he has
laid down, if he should exclude any poor sinner that comes to him, though he
have not been what he might be? surely if ever our blessed Savior would have
balked it, it would have been when he was to lay down the price, his life, his
blood* for sinners, when Mark 14. 33.
he was amazed at the apprehension of his Fathers displeasure, when that cup of
trembling and astonishment was to be put into his hand, to be drunk off to the
very dregs; but yet he willingly undertook this, took it off to the bottom,
that nothing might remain of the dregs to his people; which potion put him into
a bloody sweat, filled him with horror, and even astonished him; but has he
done all this, and is it possible he should now slight it, by casting out any
poor soul purchased with so dear a rate, that now comes to him? O surely it
cannot be.

Sixthly, Because this would be to undo what the Father has done; For it is
the Fathers work to draw a poor soul, to teach them, (as you have heard) before
they can come to Jesus Christ, No man can come to me, except the Father which
has sent me Ioh. 6. 44.
draw him; you could not have a desire toward the Lord Jesus, not a breathing
after the waterbrooks, the Fountain of life, which is in Jesus Christ, but
that the Father has breathed it into thee; now the Lord Jesus, if he should
cast out a poor soul that comes with such breathings after him, would quench
the Spirit, would put out the light of Israel, should destroy the works of his
Father, instead of destroying the works of the devil; 1 Ioh. 3. 8.
therefore surely it cannot be, that he should cast out any poor soul that
comes to him, that his Father has drawn with the cords of a man, and with the
cords of love: Is it the work of a Savior to cut the cords, whereby poor
creatures are drawn to him, and not rather of a murderer, a soul-destroyer? and
can we have such hard thoughts of Christ our dearest Savior? O far be it from
us! this cannot be.

Seventhly, He would hereby bring upon himself the imputation of delusion, and
mocking of poor sinners, not only because of his Promise, and offers of Grace,
but in two respects among others; for I will not dwell too long upon these
things.

First, Because of the many invitations that he has made to poor creatures to
come to him. O mind, how he proclaims it to every one that thirsts: Come,
come, buy wine and milk Isa. 55. 1.
without money or moneys worth; you that have no worthiness, nor any money to
buy an acccptation, come to the Waters, and what then? when they come to the
Fountain, to the Waters, will the Lord Jesus shut them out, cast them away? is
there any such imposture in him? Come to me all that are weary Mat. 11. 28.
and heavy-laden, and I will give you rest: what then? is a poor soul persuaded
of his burden, and where rest is to be had, and comes to Jesus Christ, ready
to sink at his foot, and faint away under his burden, and will he there suffer
him to perish, and turn away his face from him? I beseech you, (says the
Apostle) as if God did beseech you by us, to be reconciled to God, ye rebels,
for so we are all (...), ye run-aways, what 2 Cor 5. 20. Ezekiel. 18. 31.
do you mean? why will ye perish? Why will ye dye (says he) O house of Israel?
why now if a rebel turn, and his heart relent, and he would fain close with
this Prince of Peace, that would fain be at peace with him, do you think he
will turn his back upon him Surely no: he might have done it to the thief upon
the Cross, that truly repented and believed, as to any, if he would; but if he
should do so, then sinners had something to answer indeed, that there is reason
wherefore we should not come to thee; who would come to be mocked, to be
deceived, tantalized, Zach 13. 1.
to have the fountain opened, and stand open for any to come that will come,
and when we are willing, then to roll a stone upon it, is not this deceiving?
the Jews indeed took Christ to be a deceiver, and therefore they came not to
him; I wish we be not many of us Jews in heart, though we be Christians in
name, our conversation witnesses to our faces; for why else do not sinners
come to Jesus Christ, except they look upon all these invitations of Christ as
delusions; but take heed, that as they perished, so we also perish not in the
same gainsaying.

Secondly, He would be convicted of imposture, if he should reject any poor
soul that comes to him, because it is he also that draws them as well as the
Father, else they could not come. So he says, When I am lifted up, I will draw
all men unto me; that is to say, all that the Father has given me, I will draw
John 12. 32. Mat. 24. 28.
to me; and so he does objective, as the carcass draws the Eagles together,
as the willow branch draws the Lambs after it, as a fair lovely object
draws the eye, sweet melody draws the ear; and effective also, for what the
Father does; he does also, for he and the Father are one. Now does the Lord
Jesus draw and persuade men, send forth his Spirit, which is his arm unbared
and stretched out, to lay hold upon the hearts of sinners, to draw them, to
make them willing to accept of deliverance Ioh. 16. 10. Isa. 53. 1.
and salvation in him, from the filthiness and power, as well as from the guilt
of sin, and when they come, will he shut them out? were not this horrible
deceit? O, surely Jesus Christ cannot so deceive poor creatures, these are most
unworthy thoughts of him!

Eighthly and lastly, It is inconsistent with his bowels and tenderness, which
naturally he has to poor sinners, specially such as the Father has given unto
him; could the Father shut out the Prodigal Son when he returned to him? his
bowels would not bear it, he ran and met him, etc. Joseph made it a little
strange at the first to his Brethren, and spoke a little roughly to Luke 15.
18. Genesis 42. 17.
them, but mind you, he could not hold, he was fain to go into a place to weep,
egerere dolorem, to empty his affection into tears for them, to see those
Brethren of his that had done him so much wrong, dealt so hardly with him; O
when he heard them confess what they had done, and their consciences smit them
for it, then doubtless his bowels were rolled together within him; and for a
while, I say, he made a shift to cover it, and put some of them into prison,
but all this while his bowels were moved; and was he not a type of Jesus Christ
in this? happily, as I may say, in other respects I shall not determine it, but
when a poor sinner comes to Jesus Christ, that has sold him for a lust, dealt
hardly with him, crucified him, and now he is convinced of it, he mourns for
it, and mourns over him; did Joseph's bowels yearn, and do not the Lord Jesus
his bowels? is the love of women to be compared to the love of Jesus Christ? O
surely no; he may seem for a while to turn his back upon a poor creature, but
all this while the fire of love is burning within, and will burst out into a
flame; all this while what workings there are in the heart of Jesus Christ
toward a poor sinner; as a Father, that for a time to humble his child, will
make it strange to him; O how full is his heart, how much ado has he to hold,
as Joseph to his Brethren! O it is the rejoicing of Jesus Christ, when poor
sinners do come to him to see his seed, to see his blood that was sowed, and
his Semen Ecclesiae to come up, it is his rejoicing; and will any Husband man
in the world, that sows precious seed, when it puts forth, beat it down again,
nip off the buds, the tops of it? it cannot be: he is grieved when poor
creatures will not be persuaded to come, through hardness of heart, and
unbelief, and waywardness: we will not come to the fountain, but sit down, it
may be, some of us with Hagar, weeping over our empty bottles, and making sad
moan and complaints for want of Genesis 21. 15.
righteousness, because of sin, and yet come not to him; this is a grief to
him, as it was among the Jews: O did he ever in the days of his flesh refuse
any poor creature that came to him, either for healing of soul or body, which
is the lesser; yea, when they came some of them for the healing of the body,
did he not heal the soul? and all out of the abundant riches of his love to
poor creatures. O surely then, now he is in heaven, at the right hand of the
Father, being no less tender of his poor people, if any come now, he will in no
wise cast them out. Well, the Lord write these arguments upon our hearts: it
may be some of us may have occasion, or have at present need of them to
persuade us of this truth.

We now come to the Application.

Use 1. And first, in the first Use, It may serve for a lamentation, to lament
the backwardness of our hearts to come to Jesus Christ, for if our hearts were
not backward to come to him, what need all this ado to make poor creatures
willing to come to Jesus Christ? O, what is the reason! what a strange enmity
is in our hearts against the Lord Jesus, that we run away from him instead of
coming; yea, though he follow with a Pardon in his hand, purchased with his
blood; O I am Jesus who dyed for you, turn unto me, my heart is toward you,
Psalm. 40. 5.
turn unto me, I delight not in your death, turn unto me; O why will ye die?
and yet poor creatures will not be persuaded to come to Jesus Christ: O what is
it? what is it Brethren, that can keep us off thus from Jesus Christ? in our
unwillingness to close with him, to come unto him, have not many of us many
times clearly been convinced that our condition has been slark naught? that we
stand guilty before God, and he will by no means clear the guilty: and
convinced that in Jesus Christ there is a doing away of this guilt, a bloting
out of the hand-writings that are against us, and contrary to us; if we will
but come to him? No, we are like sullen creatures, will rather perish then come
to Jesus Christ. I do not believe but many of us are convinced, and what shift
can we make to smother our convictions? I know not: but it appears we come not
to Jesus Christ: As long as the Prodigal could have husks to fill his belly
Luke 15. 16. Mark 5. 26.
with, he would not come home to his Father; as long as ever the poor woman in
the Gospel had any thing to spend upon the Physicians, she came not to Jesus
Christ; as long as ever poor sinners can make a shift to daub over the breaches
that sometimes the Word makes upon their consciences, they will not come: O
the fault lies in the Will, Brethren: Ye will not come unto me, ^ohn 5. 40.
Mat. 23. 37.
says our Savior, that ye might have life; how often would I have gathered
you as a Hen does her Chickens, and ye would not? they would rather perish then
be healed by such an hand, even the hand of Jesus Christ. O the deadly enmity
that is in every one of us by nature! What, we are not willing to part with
sins, and therefore we come not to Jesus Christ: we are not willing to be
healed, will thou be made whole? we are profane, and we would be so still;
proud, and would be so still; unclean, John 5. 6. Col. 2. 11.
and would be so still: We know, if we come to him, put on Christ, we must put
off the lusts of our former conversation. O wretched love to sin, that
prefers it before the Lord Jesus, before the salvation of our poor souls!
What, are we loath through the pride of our hearts to take the shame of our
iniquities? Happily something of this nature kept off the Prodigal: Is it not
more shame to do sin, then to acknowledge it when it is done? what is it,
Brethren? how strange a thing is it, that men should take such pains to hew out
broken Cisterns to themselves that will hold no water? dig deep into the world
to find some rest there; exhaust their strength in duties, in Ier. 2. 13.
prayers, and tears, as many Self-saviors do, specially the Papists; and I
wish there be none among us, rather then they will come to Jesus Christ to
accept of that righteousness, that pardon, which shall cost us nothing but
acceptance: O the pride of our hearts; O the enmity of our hearts, against the
Lord Jesus; and is there such an heart in every one of us, Brethren? Yea, even
in the best, until he overcome us with his loving kindness; and is not this a
thing worthy to be bewailed? Yea, if it were possible with tears of blood;
being such an aversion from the blood of Jesus Christ, and the dearest love of
our Savior to poor creatures. Or what is it, Brethren? is it the more love we
find from Jesus Christ, are our hearts the more averse from him? if he did
profess himself an enemy to us, to destroy and slay us, if we came near him, to
scatter us with the streams of flaming indignation, issuing from his throne and
presence, we could do no more then run away from him, as many of us now do. O
that we could lay it to heart!

The second Use shall be, to show us the grievous nature of the sin of
unbelief, and happily this may make poor creatures afraid of straining courtesy
with Christ, and afraid to come to him because of their vileness, etc. to
complement with him.

First, Consider but the unreasonableness of the sin of unbelief above other
sins indeed; though all sin be unreasonable, other sins they have some pretense
of profit, or pleasure, but this has nothing but woe and misery attending it,
condemnation. 2 These. 3. 2.
But that I shall not insist upon, for there is hardly any thing but Satan and
a man's carnal reason will put a specious pretense upon it.

Therefore consider this unreasonableness; First, in respect of our selves,
that being plunged into such a depth of distraction and misery of sin, and
guilt, and wrath, that when we are sinking and drowning, we will not so much as
put out the hand to lay hold upon a twig, upon something held out to us; is not
this unreasonable, and unnatural? it raceth out the principle of
self-preservation that is in every man by nature; so that I will be bold to
say, the greatest reason in the world improved to keep off a poor soul from
Jesus Christ, is unreasonable; it is the depravation of our carnal reason: had
it not been unreasonable if Hagar, having a fountain opened her before her
eyes, and she languishing for thirst, and must perish without it, and yet would
sit still, is not this unreasonable?

Again, If we look upon the Lord Jesus, who seeks to us, beseeches us to
accept of him, of mercy, of pardon in his blood, the Creator comes down to the
creature, poor worms who have our being by his Word, and might be dissolved
with his Word, and yet we stand it out, and will not accept of him, who would
bestow himself and his infinite all sufficiency upon us, and we will not; is
not this unreasonable? that a Prince should seek to a worthless rebel to be
reconciled, and he will not hear of it: If he had any need of us, and upon that
account would have poor sinners to come to him, to make a supply of his wants,
it were something; but all the want; the indigency is on our part, and
therefore unbelief is the more unreasonable thing: O how might we here break
out and say, hear ye heavens, and give ear O earth, for the Lord Jesus, the
Lord of both, heir of all things, the offended Majesty seeks to poor rebelling
worms to be reconciled, but they will not hear of it, they come not in, they
close not with him.

Secondly, As the unreasonableness of the thing, so also we may take notice of
the injuriousness of this sin of unbelief; I would a little insist upon this
sin, the more, because that though I find many a poor heart seems to be weary
of sin, and afraid of sinning against God in other kinds, yet sees not in the
mean time how exceedingly he sins against him by his unbelief, not closing with
Christ, and coming to him; therefore see in the second place, the injuriousness
of this sin of unbelief, how injurious it is to Jesus Christ, Brethren? for if
the truth were known, what is the reason wherefore we need so much ado, why we
come not in to him? We either think he cannot save us; our sins are so great; O
says one, there was never such a wretch as I, though he have accepted of great
sinners, such as Paul, and Manasses, and Magdalen, yet there was never such a
wretch as I; O surely, my wounds are such, there is no healing for them: What
is this, but to make Jesus Christ weak, and a Physician of no value? Is there
any sin higher then the imbrewing their hands in the blood of Jesus Christ
himself? and suppose thou be such an one, and this is that thou cryest out of,
thou have come so often to the Lords Supper with a common heart, which is to be
guilty of his blood, accessory to his death: and cannot his blood cleanse, even
from the guilt of them that shed it? were not many of the Jews sensible os
this? how dishonorable is Acts 2. 32.
this to Jesus Christ, when we will be measuring of him by our selves? we are
apt to think of pardon, and mercy, as far as a man's, a creatures bowels and
thoughts will reach: mind, there is an end, not minding that he is God as well
as man; this is an high wrong unto our Savior: O, he will not, says the poor
soul, if he can, yet he will not, sure, receive such an one as I; O I am so
laden and so loathsome a wretch; what should he do with such an one as I? What,
is it possible thou should remember how many promises, how many invitations,
how many expostulations he has made; what entreaties to poor creatures to be
reconciled to him, and yet call in question his willingness! why, what do you
make of Jesus Christ? O, how does unbelief, in effect, dethrone Jesus Christ,
disgracing the Throne of his Glory, robs him of his mercy, of his power, his
love, his bowels, of that which he most glories in; and is not this injurious
then to thy dear Savior? Would not you think it a wrong to you, from one of
your children, that had offended you as highly as you can imagine? suppose he
had sought your life, as Absalom did David's, and now the Father seeks, thou
suest to thy son; O how many promises thou heapest up, one upon another,
backest them with oaths, wooest him, intreatest him to be reconciled, to accept
of a pardon: No, he believes you not, notwithstanding all you can do or say,
that you are real in the thing; is not this injurious? does he not wrong
exceedingly in this, as well as in the former; and is not this the very case?

Thirdly, See how much unkindness there is in this sin of unbelief, as it is
directly against the love, the bowels of Jesus Christ, which sound toward poor
creatures in the Gospel, in every entreaty, to be reconciled to him: Brethren,
what could the Lord Jesus do more for us, then he did? was not his life dear to
him, even to the death sor poor sinners, that there might be a pardon for us?
and do we thus requite him, even to slight it, never to mind it? or if we do
sometimes a little, yet to stand out and not to close with him: What unkindness
was it in the Jews? it is so recorded of them, he came to his own, and his own
received him not; that is to say, his own flesh and blood; and so John 1. 11.
he is ours as well as others; but he came of them according to the flesh in a
nearer manner, and sent to them in the first place, they received him not: But
to come to Us poor Gentiles, outcasts, Ephesians. 2 13.
that were strangers, afar off, with a desire to make us near in his blood,
near to his Father and to himself, is this love nothing to be thus slighted?
for how few among us do believe in the Lord Jesus, notwithstanding all this?
nothing breaks the heart of a creature more then unkindness: and surely
Brethren, me thinks the thoughts of this, if our hearts were not stony, should
be a breaking of our hearts, that we have hitherto, so many of us, dealt so
unkindly with Christ as we have done.

But fourthly, see the dangerousness of this sin of unbelief, that we may be
set a trembling by reason of this sin, as well as any other, and be weary of
this, as well as any other.

1. Other sins have but their own particular guilt, each of them particularly
binding over a poor soul to wrath, and entayling the curse of the Law upon a
poor sinner; so every sin does, every oath, every lie, every unclean thought,
wanton look, adultery, fornication of the body, the heart or eye; but unbelief
is that which binds the guilt of all other sins upon the soul, besides its own
proper guilt, which is not the least, as you have heard before: I say, it binds
all upon the soul; if Paul had not believed, all the guilt of his persecution
had yet lain upon his head. O, says our Savior, if ye believe not, ye shall
dye in your sins; not only in your unbelief, but in all your sins, so that this
unbelief, it is the very edge, as I may say, of all other guilt whatsoever, and
therefore how dangerous a sin it is, judge ye; you are terrified and affrighted
with your grievous abominations, rebellions, filthiness of your ways, you
never think of it happily, but your heart sinketh within you: why know this, this
day, that unbelief is that which keeps all this upon the soul: if that thou
would but aceept of deliverance in Jesus Christ, take him, close with him,
come to him, he would not cast you out, he would not turn you away without a
pardon: but the reason of your burdens upon you, is because of unbelief.

Secondly, It is dangerous, because above other sins, it brings a man's blood
upon his own head; that is a sad word (me thinks) that of the Apostle, I take
God to witness, that I am pure from Acts 20. 26.
the blood of all men; if you perish, your blood will be upon your head: that
is to say, you are guilty of your own death, your own murder, your own
damnation, and everlasting separation from God; much more may our blessed
Savior say, I am free from the blood of you all, sinners, I have dyed for you,
made an All-sufficient satisfaction to the Justice of my Father, for all sins,
laid down a price, enough to ransom you, and yet you would none of me, you
cared not for it; I have made this known to you, else you had had some excuse,
some cloak, but you have no cloak for your sins, for your unbelief; If I had
not wooed you, entreated you to be reconciled by my Messengers, then it had
been something to ext^nuate at least; but alas, he has done all this, and
more, Brethren, infinitely, then I am able to speak, for poor sinners, and yet
they will not close with him; why then, Jesus Christ is clear from your blood,
he has done what he undertook to do of his Father, spared not himself to the
least drop of wrath, and of his own blood, and yet we will not come to him. O
this must needs bring poor sinners blood upon their own heads.

Thirdly, This unbelief brings the blood of Jesus Christ upon our heads, for if
after all this that he has done and said to persuade us to make us willing to
close with him, we stand it out, are we not guilty of his blood, as well as of
our own? If an unworthy receiving of the Lords Supper bring a man under 1 Cor.
11. 29.
this guilt, will not an unbelieving heart, in hearing of this Gospel, bring a
man under the same guilt? for is it not the same Jesus that is held forth
broken for sinners? and the same blood shed for sinners, that is held forth in
the Lords Supper to the eye, and in the Gospel Preached to the ear? even so
plain as if it were before their faces, as the Apostle says to the Galathians;
O, me thinks this should make us afraid of resting any longer in this condition
of unbelief, and make us look about us; the Jews, as hard-hearted as they were,
could not endure: their consciences pricked them I believe, and did fly in
their faces, and therefore would not endure the Apostles to Preach Christ: say
Acts 5. 28.
they, ye would bring upon us the blood of this man. O me thinks this stirs the
stoutest sinners among us; I delight not to bring to you, Brethren, such sad
things as these are, nor to bring the blood of Jesus upon your heads, but let
us take heed we do it not our selves, for we shall find that this will be the
dregs of the cup of wrath, if we will not be reclaimed, that ever we have so
much under-valued the Lord Jesus, as to cast his love behind us by our unbelief.

The third Use shall be then of Exhortation to every poor soul to come to Jesus
Christ; for you that are yet in your hardened Use 3.
condition, never made sensible of your need of Christ, I have the less hopes
to prevail with you, for this Doctrine is foolishness to such; it is
foolishness to speak much of the sovereignty of a medicine, the readiness of a
Physician to heal, to a man that feels not that he is wounded; and such is the
Doctrine of Christ and of faith to many a poor soul; but there are some poor
souls that happily are convinced of their lost condition by nature, and see that
all the water in the bottle is spent, and yet Genesis 21. 15.
cannot see the fountain near them and opened, happily for grief, for weeping,
they are overcharged with sorrow, and yet come not to Jesus Christ. O that the
Lord Jesus, who has received the tongue of the Learned for this end, to speak
a word in due season, Isalah 50. 4.
would speak by the mouth of his poor unworthy Messenger to such hearts! What
is the reason that thou will not come to Jesus Christ? art thou resolved to sit
languishing over an empty bottle and perish, when there is refreshing to be had
in Jesus Christ? O no, says the poor soul, I would not sit still and perish if
there be healing and mercy to be had; why, do thou Heb. 7. 25.
not believe that he is able to save to the utmost? where sin has most
abounded, there Grace can superabound; yea, it is the glory of his Grace so to
do. If I thought there were any 1 Timothy 1. 14.
stuck at this, I would spend a few words upon it, but consider those
Scriptures forementioned; but the main thing is, whether Jesus Christ will
accept of such a wretch as I have been, says one: O you know not the vileness
of my heart, the horrid pollutions of my ways, else you would have harder
thoughts of me, therefore thou art ready to conclude that he will not look at
thee sure. Let me here propound a few Considerations to thee.

First, Consider how injurious it is to Grace, to measure it by our thoughts;
limit not the holy one of Israel; it is the Glory Isa. 55. 8.
of God, The Lord, the Lord God, gracious and merciful, and that whereby he
infinitely transcendeth all other gods and men; Who is like unto thee?
pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin; and can thou comprehend the Glory
of God in thy poor narrow thoughts? thou it may be think, O if any man had
so offended me, I could not have born it, I could never have been reconciled to
him again; but if thou can not, it may be another can; it is much that the
Lord enables his people to love, to pray for, to be ready to embrace those that
in the most bloody manner seek their lives, if they come and close with Christ,
as the Disciples did Paul; and doubtless Stephen would have hugged them in his
bosom, if any of them had then had their hearts changed; and what then can, and
will the Lord Jesus do, when such as have been guilty of his blood, trampled it
under feet, turned their backs upon him, crucified him, when they come to him?
So in Acts 2. Thou think, if thou were but such a sinner, if thou had not
sinned against such love and mercy, he would have pardoned, he would have
accepted; when thy thoughts are at an end and lost, then is infinite Grace
beginning to be Glorious.

Secondly, Consider this, that he has left thee altogether without excuse; he
has cut off all pretenses that sinners might make for their keeping off from
Christ, both here and in other places. O says one, He has waited so long upon
me, stretched out his hands all the day long to me; While I have been Isa. 30.
18. Romans 10. ult. Rev. 3. 20.
rebelling, the Lord Jesus has been entreating me to be reconciled; he has
stood so long at the door knocking, that now sure he is gone; he will not come
to my soul, nor take my soul into fellowship with himself. I am an old sinner,
as long as ever I could arm my heart, and boy up my self with any thing, carnal
reasonings, moral services, vain delights, and creature comforts, I would never
come to him: what though the Lord Jesus is ready to receive when ever thou come
to him? Had not the poor Woman in the Gospel spent all upon the Physicians,
before she Mar. 5. 26.
came to Christ? if she could have had balm any where else, she would never
have gone to Gilead for it, nor for that Physician, and does he cast her out
notwithstanding? surely no: He gives liberally, and upbraideth not: he hits
her not in the James 1. 5.
teeth with her unworthiness to come to him, but when she comes, he heals
her distemper. Was not this the Prodigals case? would he ever have gone to his
Father, if he could have gotten husks, or any thing? and what, does his father
upbraid him with it? what, thou be received now, that have stood out as long as
ever thou could? it is necessity, and not love that has driven thee home,
therefore take thy course, I have no bread for thee; O this would have broken
the heart quite, and for ever discouraged him for coming; no, he meets him by
the way notwithstanding, and how ready he is to receive him, and embrace him,
that Parable sets forth. O but says another, I am so poor, miserable, have
nothing at all in me but sin and misery: suppose so, thou have the more need of
Jesus Christ, and he is most ready to reveal himself to them that need him
most, yea thou art the more fit to come to Christ; for while thou have any
thing to subsist upon, thou will not come off thy self clearly and fully as
thou ought; besides, remember this, that the Lord Jesus is able to bestow
his riches upon nothing, as he did at the first make a world of nothing: so in
the new Creation in the soul, he can, he will bestow the riches of his Grace
upon nothing; it is like thou have as much as the Prodigal had in his
returning; O but he cannot but abhor me, my sins are not slight scars, and
races, but deep wounds, and festering wounds, running sores, bloody issues,
loathsome in his sight: did the woman with the bloody issue in the Gospel find a
repulse, because of the loathsomness of her distemper? or the Lepers, because
of theirs? or Lazarus, because of his? surely no: therein is the great
commendation of his love to poor sinners, that though in their blood, yet he
loves them, yet he receives them. In one word for all, to stop the mouths of
these clamours, the Lord Jesus has said it, and will he not be as good as his
word? he has said, That if any man come to him, he will in no wise cast him
out, be his distemper what it will, be his uuworthiness what it will, he will
in no wise cast him out: therefore never make that an obstruction, but rather
an argument to put thee on to go to Christ, because thy want of him is so
great, more then is found in others.

Thirdly, Consider that these hard thoughts of Jesus Christ, before thou have
tried, and had experience of a repulse from him, are but a prejudice against
the Lord Jesus; how glad is the enemy of our peace, if any way he can keep poor
souls off from Christ; will you judge a man to be so hard-hearted, and unkind
to you, before you have tried him? and shall we judge so of Jesus Christ? O
this is to add sin to sin, and much worsens our condition daily.

Fourthly, Consider this poor soul, and add to thy own experience, the
experience of all the Saints; ask of them, and they will tell thee, O never was
there viler wretches then they themselves were! they had as vile and base
thoughts of themselves as thou, and were as much discouraged as thou art; and
yet when they came to Jesus Christ, they did obtain mercy, they found Grace in
his sight, the Scepter was held out to them. Ask of Paul, who though dead, yet
speaks, and he will tell thee, thou never wast such a wretch as he, imbrewing
his hands in the blood of the Saints, a persecutor, blasphemer, injurious. Ask
but Magdalen, and she will tell thee, that she had seven Devils for one happily
that thou have. And so will Peter and David: O thou never had thy hand in
blood, in adultery, in denying the Lord Jesus, these found mercy; And is not
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for Heb. 13. 8.
ever?

Fifthly, Thou can have no good evidence, that thou art one given of the
Father to Christ, before the world began, until thou come to Jesus Christ:
All that the Father has given me, shall Ioh. 6. 37.
come. What then, shall sinners abuse this doctrine, to set light by it, cast
off all care of their condition, because if they be given of the Father, they
shall come? no: But sadly consider this, if thou be not yet come to Jesus
Christ, thou art not as yet declared to be one that is given to Christ; and if
not given to the Son, thou art a son of perdition; and woe is thee that thou
wast ever born; and as yet thou art not come to Christ, and how know thou,
thou shall ever have an opportunity, or an heart to believe, or come to him?
Faith is not at your command, nor Christ at your command for poor sinners; O
consider this ye that forget God, and forget your own welfare; As many as were
ordained to eternal life, believed; the rest were Acts 13 48.
hardened.

Sixthly, A rational Motive shall be this; In other distractions a possibility
of relief will make poor Creatures put themselves upon extreme hazards, when it
is not possible they should escape without such a hazard running; how much more
then in the business of our souls, should we be willing to run an hazard, if
there were any, where there is probability, yea, certainty of speeding if we
come. So the Lepers, you know their argument, If we stay here, we must perish;
if we go, we may escape. So Esther, she knew if she went not into the King at 2
Kings 7.
that time, her neck was upon the block, as well as the rest, and if she did go
in, she might happily speed and prosper, and therefore she ventures hard; if the
Scepter had not been held out to her, it had cost her, her life there; but the
body did lie at the stake, as being starved for want, or else designed to
destruction by enemies; but here soul and body lie at the stake, and are
E(...)her 14. 16.
in danger of perishing for ever; there was only a possibility of escaping,
here is a certainty of escaping: he will not in any wise cast him out. O how
cheerfully would Esther have run to the King, if there had been such a Law,
that when ever the Queen comes, the Scepter should be held out to her; so it
is here: there they ran a very desperate hazard, but here is no hazard run,
here is a sure word of promise for it, That heaven and earth shall pass away,
before a tittle of it shall pass away: whoever comes to Christ, he will in no
wise cast him out.

Seventhly, It is a grief to the Lord Jesus, that we should be thus wayward,
that we will not be persuaded of his good will toward us, if we come to him;
that we should have such unworthy thoughts of Jesus Christ, that he should make
no more of his Word of promise, his death his blood, then to slight all,
falsify all, when poor sinners come to him according to his invitation; he was
grieved (says the Text) because of the unbelief and hardness of Mar. 3. 5.
Mat. 23. 37.
their hearts; It is said of the Jews, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. he wept
over it, when nothing would do to persuade them to close with him; thou art
grieved, and Christ is grieved by this frowardness of thine; Suppose the Father
of the prodigal son in the Gospel had invited him to come to him, promised him
all the inheritance, to put him in his bosom, confirm his love to him; no,
says he, I have misspent all, I have undone my self, fed upon husks as long as
I could get them, and now I am ready to perish not being able to procure them:
here I will sit and dye, I cannot believe that thou will accept of me, that
thou can ever love me, or receive me more: would not this grieve the father
think you? I know poor mourning soul thou would not grieve the Lord Jesus; I
tell thee, if thou would not, thou must come to him, accept of his kindness
and love, believe his faithfulness, and truth, and so thy soul shall be
established.

Use 4. The fourth Use shall be then to exalt the riches of the Grace of Jesus
Christ to poor sinners; we might altus repetere, Use 4.
and speak something to the purchasing of us at so dear a rate as his precious
blood; corruptible things, as Silver and Gold are not worthy to be named the
same day with the blood of Jesus Christ. Alas, there had been no possibility
for us to come to him, except there had been the (...) paid, and then to invite
us to come to him, and not only so, but to draw us with the cords of a man, and
the cords of love, that we should hear and learn of the Father, be all taught
of God, which is the drawing of his Father, without which we cannot come, which
Verse 44, 45. Hos. 11. 4.
what it is, you have heard already formerly; Brethren, this is abundance of
Grace, yea, more he has promised, and does, and will perform; whoever comes
to him, he will in no wise cast him out. If the Lord Jesus had limited himself
to such or such a sort of sinners, that he would receive all that should not
continue so many years in sin, or s^all not rise to such an height in sin, yet
it had been much Grace to receive any, but he excludes none; if any man come
to Christ he will in no wise cast him out. Are there not many souls in the
presence of God, that can set to their seals that this is a truth in Jesus? if
he would have cast out any, what would become of thee and me, who are the chief
of sinners? if he would have 1 Cor. 6. 10.
cast out such as have been drunkards, covetous, unclean, effeminate, what had
become of them in 1 Cor. 6? Such were some of you: and what would have become
of some of us, if he would have cast out all that have been bloody persecutors,
what would have become of Paul? Ah poor soul! bethink thy self in what filth
and blood thou did wallow, before he put off his own comeliness upon thee? and
then think, if the Lord Jesus had limited his receiving of sinners, that come
to such or such a measure, what then had become of thee? O what abounding Grace
is in the Lord Jesus toward poor sinners! let us exalt it, meditate much of
it, labor to heighten it in thy thoughts; there will be no thoughts more
sweet, or profitable, more melting of that stone in thy heart, we so sadly
complain of, more indearing and engaging of the heart to the Lord Jesus, then
these are.

Use 5. Use 5. Then surely there is no falling away from Christ, from
justifying, sanctifying Grace once received; for what Use 5.
else is this coming to Christ, but coming for righteousness, for pardon, for
he is the Lord our Righteousness; the Father 1 Cor. 1 30.
has found a Ransom now in his Son, and this the poor sinner makes after in
Christ; and for holiness also, for he is made of God, Sanctification, as well
as Righteousness and Holiness to the poor soul that comes to him; now he will
never cast him out that comes to him, he will in no wise cast him out: If he
had said, I will not cast him out, except he sin to this or that degree after
my receiving him, it had been somewhat; but I will not cast him out, no, in no
wise will I do it. O blessed bosom, which will never shut out the poor soul
that is once gotten in to it! and if the Lord Jesus cast us not out when we
come, what can? It may be, some will say that we our selves may do it, Christ
will not do it; I, but the sinner himself may ^all off, though he have been
received of Christ, put in his bosom, warmed with his love; it is true, if a
sinner were his own keeper, it were somewhat like; if it were left to the
liberty of our wills, whether we would abide in Christ, yea or no, we should
quickly be lost again; but it is not, the Lord Jesus does not only not cast us
out, except we cast our selves out, but he holds us in his hand, and the Father
holds us in his hand, and they are stronger then all: None shall be able to
pluck them out of Ioh. 10. 28, 19.
his hand: he lays hold upon the heart, puts his fear there; yea, and that
Peace of God also places he, as a pregnable garrison there, that they shall
never depart from him; except the Lord Ier. 32. 40.
could deny his Covenant, for my part, I see not how any soul that in truth is
come on to Christ, can finally apostatize, though from some common grace they
may withdraw, which is true Grace, though not of this kind which is saving. But
what then, does the Lord Jesus hold us to himself whether we will or no? No
Brethren, But he makes us willing in the day Psalm. 110.
of his power; so that we shall not any more be willing to leave him, to depart
from him; nor is it an infringement of our liberty at all to be determined to
one party either of the contradiction of contrariety, as they use to
distinguish them, for God himself is determined to one part, he cannot will any
thing that is evil as evil; nor the Angels in heaven established and confirmed;
and yet their liberty sure is much greater then ours; well then, the Lord Jesus
he will never cast them out, therefore they shall persevere when once they are
in him in Covenant; God has put that principle into them, that they shall
never depart themselves, he will not let loose any lust, any temptation upon
them that shall ruin them, that were in effect, in a moral sense, a casting of
them out; in no wise whatsoever will he do it.

Use 6. Sixthly, Yet here let me put in a double Caution: First, Let Use 6.
sinners, impenitent sinners that yet stand it out, protract the time of their
coming to Jesus Christ: as Aug. O modo Domine, take a warning word this day,
that is, do not so abuse this sweet and precious truth, as to encourage
themselves thereby in an evil way: tush, says the drunkard, the unclean
person, to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant: it is time
enough to repent, Jesus Christ is so tender and so merciful to poor sinners,
that when ever we come to him, he will not cast us out; and though we do
treasure up many bags, and fill up the measure of sin fuller then others, he
has made no Rom 2.
limitation; if we come to him, he will not cast us out: what a lamentable
condition is that man in, whose stomach turns an honeycomb into poison to him!
here is the most precious cordial, the very Spirits of the Gospel in this our
Doctrine, and see how sinners do turn it into a deadly potion to their souls!
what Spiders are we, that can suck venom out of the sweetest flowers? but
suppose this be true, that when ever thou come to Jesus Christ, thou shall be
received, and not cast out in any wise; is there any truth in the Hypothesis
that lies hid, which is either this, that thou have power to come of thy self
at any time, thy will at command, if it be proper to say so of that which is
the commanding faculty in the soul; or else this, that God will draw thee
hereafter, and give thee a will to come to Jesus Christ, when thou have lived a
while longer in the pleasures of sin: Ah poor soul, thou little know the
deceitfulness of sin, and of thy own heart; what is the reason that thou art
not now willing to receive the Lord Jesus Christ? is it not because thou art
held so fast in the embraces of thy darling lusts? O that sin that kills with
its embraces, poisons with its kisses! and tell me, is that the way to get
looser from thy lusts, and so more ready to come to Jesus Christ, to go on in
sin, to satisfy and fulfill the lusts of the flesh? surely no: thou know
not the deceitfulness of sin, whereby the heart is more hardened H^b 3. 13.
every act, then before; It may please him out of the abundant riches of his
Grace to draw such a presumptuous sinner to Christ, but it is to be admired, me
thinks thou should rather tremble when thou think, I now put off my coming
to Christ until a more convenient opportunity, and what if this never come?
what if my soul be taken from me this night, now the Arrows of God are
scattered among our dwellings? and what if I never have a heart, nor some time
to come and repent, but go on still and grow more and more hard and desperate,
and sinning, and so perish? O that sinners would consider this that forget God,
that they abuse not this Grace of Jesus Christ: When did Jesus Christ tell thee
how long he would wait upon thee to be gracious? does he not say, to day Heb.
3. 7, 8.
if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; you may possibly outlive
your day of grace, and Christ is waiting upon you, and striving with you, and
then it had been better for you, you had never been born.

Secondly, Another caution shall be to them that have come to Jesus Christ, and
are found in him, that they take heed they abuse not this grace to wantonness.
If we shall not in any wise Jude 4.
be cast out of Christ, what need so much ado? O what viperous natures have we,
that are ready to turn all to poison! this principle is in every heart among
us, therefore watch over it: The Doctrine is Christ's, a truth in Jesus, and
therefore in its own nature has no tendency to such a froward walking before
God, there is nothing in its own nature does more tend to kill sin then grace,
the abundance of grace in Jesus Christ: and truly, if grace and love will not
do it, nothing will do it; nothing runs the old man to the heart so home, as
this unsearchable love of God in Christ, that if we come to him, he will in no
wise cast us out. It is a wretched, graceless conclusion, to say no more of it,
to continue in sin that grace might abound; the Apostle was well taught in Romans
12. 1.
Christ's School, and both by Revelation from Christ, and personal experience in
his own case; he knew the power of the love of God in Christ, the exceeding
abundance of his grace, and how does he argue from mercy to duty? So our
Savior himself, who best knows the end of his grace, of which he is the
Author and Finisher, come to me, etc. and I will give you rest: Mat. 11.
And what then? may they sit still and take their ease, never trouble
themselves more concerning their souls, never care how to walk in well-pleasing
to Christ? No, the next words are, take my yoke upon you, for it is easy, and
it is light: It is no great matter he expects of us, in comparison of what he
might expect, and in respect of the recompense of reward; a Belial is a Monster
in the Church of Christ, a man without yoke, like a wild-Ass, snuffing up the
wind, and doing according to his own hearts lust. I will be bold to say, let
men pretend to what they will, that man that has drunk deepest of the love of
God in Christ, and is most firmly rooted in him, and this free grace of God in
him, brings forth fruit in the greatest abundance of any other whatsoever,
therefore take heed of this abuse of the grace of Christ.

Use 7. Seventhly, Then let the people of God make this the comfort, the stay
of their hearts, that to which they have recourse in all their doubts and
fears, the Lord Jesus will never cast them out; labor to set a high price upon
this promise, it is worthy to be written in every heart of a Believer in golden
letters; we are too often too apt to turn aside to our broken Cisterns for
refreshings when troubles seize upon us; but alas, how do they by their
emptiness quickly cause the heart to fall off from them? as a Be comes to a
flower, abides not, because it quickly emptyeth, it sucks out all the
sweetness, and then to another; and truly, such are all things in the world,
when we go to drink at them, to refresh our weary spirits: but here you may
drink, and drink abundantly, these are waters that never fail; never any were
occasioned to fall off from Christ because of emptiness in him, nor yet because
of satiety, as the Horseleach when gorged full: No, no, Christ's breasts are
full of milk, full of grace, abundant consolation do they minister; thou shall
never need to fear that hunger or thirst shall force thee away from Christ.

Nor yet secondly, will these comforts ever forsake thee, ever cast thee out;
relations come together, and much delight they take each in other; and many a
man is much taken up with the embraces of this well-favoured harlot, the world;
what between the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and pride of life;
but alas, Brethren, besides the killing of the embraces, the sinner must leave
them, or they will leave him; and what then? O but once get into the arms of
the Lord Jesus, and those embraces cure instead of killing, and thou shall
never be cast out more. O me thinks, Brethren, one rolling of this sweet morsel
under the tongue, were enough to sweeten any condition in the world; happy soul
that has the enjoyment of the Lord Jesus, and the sense of it.

Thirdly, Yea more, if he have not cast thee out at the first coming, much less
afterward in thy after-comings to him for more of his fullness of grace, he will
not cast thee out, not send thee away empty; if he would have ever thrown thee
off, it would have been at the first, while thou wast a stranger to him; yet
when thou came to him in a weary, burdened condition, he had respect to thy
condition, had pity on thee, gave thee rest, admitted thee with all thy sin,
and guilt, and took it away; will he not much more have now bowels toward
thee? can he cast thee out now for thy defects and deformities? O surely no.
Brethren, you that have Fathers and Mothers hearts to your children, tell me,
you that have a poor child, though by his own untowardness he falls, wounds
himself, bleedeth, faints, deformeth himself, comes to his father, O father
pity, father help, father heal, I have what in me lies undone my self; though
he be angry at his miscarriage, yet the bowels work toward him, he does not
upon this account cast him out: And it is worth noting, when our Savior was
offended with his Disciples for their little faith in the storm, they came and
awaked him, saying, Lord save us, we perish; his tenderness was such, before he
rebuked them for their unbelief, he rebuked the Sea Man. 4. 39, 40.
and the wind. O Brethren, surely, surely the Lord Jesus his tenderness toward
his people, is a feast of fat things, here are the wines on the lees to revive
and refresh the poor drooping spirits; lose not the comfort of your condition
for want of meditating upon it.

Object. But some will say, If this be so, it is sad with me, for I have
thought I came to Jesus Christ, and have found comfort and refreshing, and rest
in him, and yet alas, now he has cast me off; and therefore surely I was never
truly in him, for none that come to him does he in any wise cast off.

For answer to this, I conceive it is but a mistake, such qualms as these seize
upon the people of God sometimes, when we 2 Cor. 5. 7.
will needs live by sight and not by faith: And sometimes the Lord may please
to hide his face from his own people, and then no marvel if they be troubled;
in a little wrath I hid my face, Psalm. 30. 7.
etc. Sometimes our lusts come and steal away our Savior, bereaveth us of his
presence, at least the sensibleness of it; and then we know not where they have
laid our Savior, is our sad complaint; then we mourn, as children, thinking
themselves forsaken, if the Mother be but stepped aside happily on purpose upon
some necessary occasion. So David, I said I am cast out of thy sight. So Jonas,
What, has the Lord shut up his tender mercies, has he taken his leave of me,
and will he be gone for ever? Iona. 2. 4.
all this while the Mother is behind the Curtain, takes notice of every sigh,
sees every tear fall from the child, minds every expression of longing and
breaking desires after her, and so does the Lord; this is not a forsaking, a
casting out, but a fitting the poor soul for the receiving more of his love
afterward. Why art thou then so disquieted, poor soul, and droopest, as if
there were no more hope nor help for thee in Christ, because he has a little
turned his face away from thee? O happy soul, that can not bear his absence,
that followest so hard after him, that mournest after him, it is a sign he has
left some sweetness upon the heart to draw thee after him, he has not cast
thee off; but by this means would work thee more (...)5, 6.
out of love with that sin that has made the separation, that so he might
abide with thee for ever.

2. Object. Alas but I know not whether I have ever yet come to Jesus Christ; I
am persuaded that such as come to him aright, he will never cast them out; but
my scru^le yet sticks, I am afraid of deceiving my self, and thinking I come to
him when I come not, for I have thus long come and followed after Christ, and
never yet got a smile from him to this day; therefore he seems to shake me
off, and cast me out.

Let me speak a few things to this.

First, That though he hold thee off a while, and seem not to own thee, in
respect of the comforts his presence, yet in the mean time he does stay and
support thee, there is his strengthening presence, else thou were never able to
endure to hold out mourning after him.

Secondly, When thy heart is so drawn out after Jesus Christ, that thou can
not live, nor be satisfied without thou mournest, pinest, languishest after
him, this is a coming, a true coming to Jesus Christ; when thou have all things
else that heart can wish, it may be thou have relations, estate, name as good
as others, yet thou can not be satisfied, all is nothing without interest in
him; thou runnest from Ordinance to Ordinance, from one Congregation to
another, from reading to prayer, yet find no satisfaction in all: I will say
to that soul, Thou have an evidence, and a clear one too, he has indeed
received thee, or thou were never able thus to breath after him; and though he
may hold thee off for a while, yet he will not shut thee out.

Thirdly, Has the Lord made thee willing indeed to have him, to receive him as
King and Savior, to be purified by him, subdued to him, as well as saved by
him? Alas, I know not whether I am or no: if not, what then means all thy
stuffing thy bed with groans? What mean those Rivers of tears shed over him?
what means thy following so hard after him? What, is it possible that any man
should make such heavy moan, as some poor souls do for Jesus Christ, and yet
not be willing to have him? If thou would not have him, me thinks thou
would rather run away from him, then run after him: what ascending is there
up into this tree and that tree, as the Lord Jesus passes by in an Ordinance,
to get a sight of him, and yet the poor soul will not be persuaded that he
would have, fain have the Lord Jesus; when one sight of him would be so
refreshing to them: O go away rejoicing and triumphing in the Lord Jesus, that
ever he has looked upon thee, to make thee willing in the day of his power,
for surely thou art a willing soul who art so affected toward him; and this
willing, Brethren, John 1. 12.
surely is the very receiving of Jesus Christ, it is the closing with him, thus
taking with one hand Christ for pardon, and giving up a man's self to him with
the other hand, which is the thing thy soul groans for; now if Christ Jesus be
so willing to receive poor sinners, and thou be so willing to receive him, what
can interpose to hinder or break the match? surely nothing.

Fourthly, Thou must be content to wait a while happily, before thou have the
comfort of thy coming to Christ; before, I say, thou shall suck the sweetness
that flows from him to thy soul, for thou have broken thy bones with sin,
which brought wrath upon thy soul, as David complains; O there was no rest in
his bones, and they must have a time to knit again. A man will rather lie upon
his bed a Prisoner a few days, then be a Cripple all the days of his life;
therefore they say a Horse leg is incurable if broke, he will not endure to be
bound, to lie quiet.

Submit to the Chyrurgians hand and skill, the Lord Jesus will do it, it is
doing; but alas, such broken bones heal but slowly through many humors; by
reason of the abundance of sin in the soul may be it will be the longer, but
wait; Remember the pains that Elijahs servant took to go up and down that steep
hill Carmel with wearyness seven times, and brought news of nothing at all,
until at last, he sees a little cloud which filled the heavens: So it may be
with thee, and it will recompense all; at last there will be abundance of rain
to refresh thy weary parched soul.

Fifthly, Be frequent in acting of faith, putting forth the acts of thy
willingness to receive the Lord Jesus, if he be willing to receive thee, for
hereby the habit of faith will grow stronger, the little grain of Mustard Seed
thou shall see take strong rooting and spread it self, and then the acts will
be stronger, and those will yet again strengthen the habit, and by this means
the grace will appear more visible: So that at the last thou shall even feel in
thy very soul, that thou do believe, if thou often 1 John 5. 10.
put forth this act of recumbency upon him, casting thy self upon the Lord
Jesus, into his arms, at his feet; and see if thou find it not, that at last
thou have not this witness in thy self, that thou do believe in the Lord
Jesus. And then happy soul, thou may take the comfort of that condition;
Thou shall never be cast out.

FINIS.
The first Table contains the General and Particular Heads (as they follow in
their order) in the preceding Subject, Circumspect Walking, A Christians Wisdom.
THe Text opened, Page 55. out of which this first doctrine is raised. That it
is a duty Christians are strictly charged with to walk circumspectly, ibid. But
first there is enquired, what it is to walk circumspectly, Here you have first
the Matter of a Christians conversation expressed by walking, which includes
all a man's actions. 1. Spiritual. 2. Civil. 3. Natural. 55, 56 This Latiude
appears, 1. In that walking is a motion. 1. From other Principles. 2. By other
Rules then the men of the world walk by, ibid. 2. There is a Terminus a quo,
from whence they walk, and that is from sin. ibid. 3. A Terminus ad quem, and
that is to God in Christ. 57 4. This Motion is a progressive motion. 5. It is a
constant Motion,
6. It it a pleasant
ibid. Secondly, Here you have the manner of this walking Circumspectly, (...).
Now to this exact walking, 1. There must go a Rule, 57 2. Knowledge to
understand, and wisdom rightly to apply the rule. 58 3. Keeping close to the
rule. 1. In not following a multitude as most do. 59 2. In not following the
Examples of the Saints further then they follow Christ. 60 4. There must be a
mending not only the external part, but the inside and the Spirit of the rule.
61 5. Carrying an even course toward heaven. ibid. 6. Making it a man's work to
walk exactly with, 1. A watchful eye. 2. A trembling heart.
The second thing in the words of the Text, That it is a duty so strictly
charged upon the Saints, proved 63 The Reasons of the third thing in the words
of the Text. Why this duty is charged upon the Saints, (viz.) to walk
circumspectly. 1. Because they are the children of the light. ibid. 2. Because
their steps are more eyed then other men's. 64 1. In regard of God himself. 2.
In regard of men. 1. Many men watch for their Halting. 2. Some men are
scandalized by their uneven walking. Either good or evil Men. 65 3. Because all
have erring hearts, and naturally love to wander. ibid. 4. Because there are
many bypath whereinto they may step awry. 66. The first Use shows, that among
the much profession of Christ there is little power. ibid. The second use
reproves, 1. The People of God that come short of this exact Walking. 2. Those
that instead of following God fully, have their hearts divided. 67 1. Some that
content themselves only with the shows of religion. 2. Some that are all for
morality and honesty of conversation. 68 3. Some that neither fear God, nor
reverence Man. ibid. Thirdly, Those are reproved that make exact walking the
object of their scorn. The third Use is for Exhortation, to buckle to this duty
of exact walking. 69 From whence follows the Motives, As 1. The way wherein to
walk, is all overspread with snares. 70 1. To tempt into sin. 2. To Tempt for
sin. ibid.
2. The necessity of it unto the end. 71 3. The difficulty of it. 72 4. The
love of many waxes cold. ibid. 5. God has much honor by it. 73 6 Others may
be drawn to a liking of it. ibid. The Directions herein how to walk exactly,
are. 1. Laboring to get an heart sensible of wanderings. 74 2. Setting the
heart always as in Gods presence. ibid. 3. Letting the Word of God dwell richly
in the heart. 75 1. In all wisdom. 2. In all understanding.
4. Applying the rule to a man's ways. ibid. 5. Enquiring of God in every
serious undertaking. 77 6. Looking to Humility. ibid. 7. Taking heed of
squint-eyed ends. ibid. 8. Taking heed of halting between two. 78 9.
Fore-casting what temptations to meet with in the ways of God. ibid. 10.
Laboring to Arm with a strong persuasion of Gods Al-sufficiency. ibid. Now
then Plead not against the difficulty of this circumspect walking 79 For first,
by how much the more difficult, by so much the more exexcellent it is. ibid. 2.
There is nothing so hard, but diligence will overcome, if the soul be in
Christ. For, 1. Then it has a fullness of strength. 80 2. It has in Christ all
the Promises. ibid. The second Doctrine, That it is a proof of Christian Wisdom
to walk circumspectly, Proved. ibid. 1. From Places of Scripture. 81 It is
further confirmed, 1. In that it is wisdom to propound a right end. ibid. 2. To
provide and make use of the right means. ibid. 3. To take the nearest and
easiest way. 83 4. To suit and shape a man's course according to the exigence of
his condition. 84 5. To do it in its season or time. 85 6. To go through s^itch
with the work. ibid. 7. To take a Course for the fullest enjoyment of the last
end. 86 8. To make sure the title of inheritance. 87 The Application serves, 1.
To wipe off that slandering imputation of (...), The false accuser of the
Brethren, etc. Casts upon Religion. 89 2. To retort folly upon the wisdom of
the world. 90 1. In Pitching upon a wrong end, ibid. Considering, 1. That all
these things here will not run parallel with the souls to eternity. 91 2. That
these things while they are kept here do not satisfy the soul ibid. 2. In
miscarrying in the right means. 92 1. In being wise to do evil. 2. In being
satisfied with the bare name of Christianity. 3. In being wise in their own
conceits. Now then, Let the sons of true wisdom justify her by a
circumspectual walking. 93 1. Laboring to cease from their own wisdom. 94 2.
Begging the Spirit of wisdom more earnestly. 95 And it will be found that he
will guide them by his Counsel; And afterward receive them to Glory.
The first Alphabetical Table, containing the principal heads, and matter in
the foregoing Treatise of The Parable of the ten Virgins.
A
ADmissions into Christ's fellowship and communion, they who are stricter herein
then Christ would have them, are to be blamed, page 93 Affections in man are
dull, 22 Afflict his people, Christ is not forward so to do, 86 Afflictions are
said to be a cry, 201 Allegory, what is it, 2 Angels, what are they called, 192
Angry, sometimes Christ is with his people, yet not properly, 81 Antichrist,
that we are delivered from him, we should bless the Lord for it, 308
Archangels voice, the forerunner of Christ's general coming to Judgment, is
understood to be a cry, 200 Awake, the time of it, 188 Awake, that the people
of God have been kept so in a time of need, is double and treble mercy, 195
Awakened, to be by God, should sweeten his severest dealings toward us, 205
Aims, our own, they must be as high as heaven, 253
B
Beginners, young, are to look that they be able so to run, as to obtain, 382
To Believe things, men are exceeding slow, 21 Believers profession may decline,
240 Believers profession growing low, it is their duty to renew it, 256
Breaches, take heed of making them, 98 Bride, who this is, 35 Bridegroom,
Christ stands in that relation to his people, 33 Bridegroom, Christ Jesus is
he, if you consider, 1. His Birth. 2. His Beauty. 3. His Riches. 4. His Honor.
5. His Power. 6. His lovely disposition, from
p. 38 to 40 Bridegroom and Bride, the causes that concur to the making up
their relation between them, 41 Bridegrooms coming is to be desired, 81
C
Change in us to true wisdom must be great, 118 Christ and the Church are
related. See Bridegroom. Christ Redeems his people, and woes them, from p. 41.
to p. 44 Christ has satisfied all that can be demanded, 49 Christ makes the
soul give up it self to him, 1. Considerately. 2. In truth sincerely.
53 Christ lays his people in his bosom, 63 Christ owns many before they own
him, 97 Choice, what is it, 74 Choose not the prosperity that is expected to
accompany Christ, 74 Nor his graces, but himself first, 75 Church visible has
two sorts in it, 9 Church visible compared to ten Virgins, ibid. and p. 10
Church visible is made up of visible Saints, 87 Church and the world, they are
too blame that make no difference between them, 92 Church visible has in it
some good, and some bad, 94 Church, what she should do when Members become
scandalous, 99 Closing, not with Christ, the danger, 69 Closing, with Christ;
the Motives to persuade, 70 Coming of Christ, that he does delay, it is proved
by Scripture, 120 Coming, what is meant, 121 Coming, in what sense Christ is
said to delay it, p. 122. and in what sense not to delay it, 124 Coming of
Christ, such as abuse and mock at it, reproved, and a word to mind them, from
130, to 137 Coming of Christ, something noted thereupon, 198 Coming of Christ
ordinarily is at midnight, 208 Communion in this life is twofold, 353
Conditions, two there are that usually wither men's professions, 245 Conscience
has yet some stirring, 158 Cry goes before Christ's coming, what this is put
for, 6 Cry, what is it taken for, 197 Cry, what is noted by it, 199 And what it
is, ibid. Cry, its relative consideration, and wherefore there is such before
Christ's coming, 201, 202 Cry of such before the coming of Christ, what use to
be made thereof, 206. and the danger if it be not done, ibid.
D
Day of the Lord must be waited for by the Saints, 137 Day of the Lord, how
sinners must wait for it, 139 Day of Christ coming is like to be nearest, when
least expected, 214 Day, what is concerned by it, 279 Declinings may be in the
people of God, even near their end, 243 Declinings in Gods people, should teach
us many things, 246 Delay, See Coming. Deliverance, whence does it come, 156
Discouragements of the world are to be armed against, 251, 252 Dividing, upon
every occasion take heed of it, 98 To Do what a man knows he is slow, 23 Door
of heaven will be shut against all such as are not ready to enter in with
Christ, 363 Door is twofold, ibid. Door, that it is not shut against us, what
have we to bless the Lord for, 371 Dullness, we are to be humbled for it, 26
E
Entrance, abundant into glory, as a preparation unto it, what is required, 328
Espousals, the manner of it between Christ and his people, 46 Espousals of
Christ, The difference between this, and those espousals between men and women,
86
F
Faithful, the soul must be unto Christ, 8 Fall away from grace is to be
reproved, 254 Favorites of heaven, that we are made so, let us admire it, 351
Feast, what is it taken for, 339 Feast, may be looked upon two ways 340 Feast,
in it the Communion of the Saints shall be heightened in heaven, p. 343. and it
must needs be so, 345 Feast, how Christ brings the Saints in unto it, 347
Feast, into it, none else can bring but Christ, 348 Feast, to it sinners are
invited, 353 With two cautions, ib d. Feast, the sinners that say they have it
already, answered, 355 Feast, to come to it, lays a necessity upon you, 357
Feast, as many as are admitted to the beginning of it, labor to prepare for it
in heaven, 358 Feast, to those that enter in with Christ to it, comfort, 360
Fellowships. See Admissions. Folly of formal professors, wherein it appears,
111 Folly, as many as are guilty of it reproved, 290 Folly, wherein it does
consist, 299 See Wisdom. Formality, if no more does fail a man, 263 Formalists,
to all them a terrible word, 402
G
God for his own glory comes in a time unknown, 210 God the Father gives his
people to his Son, and gives his Son to them, 41 God and the world are of two
minds, 114 Gods goodness to his people is to be taken notice of in awakening
them, 204 Gospel, its preaching to all the world understood to be a cry, 199
Gospel, if men refuse and reject it, no wonder if they be shut out of heaven,
369 Grace distinguished, 99 Grace, its largeness to sinners, 97 Grace, its act
Saints may loose, but not its habit, 172 Grace, its throne, what need there is
to ply it, 194 Grace is not to be abused, 255 Grace, if once in the heart, it
is never lost, ibid. Grace, for it, what shall be rendered to the Lord, 256
Grace, its getting being put off till the last day, is very great folly, 286
Grace, the going to the creature for it, is a note of great folly, 298 Grace,
they that go to the Saints for it, are like to be denied, 302 Grace, there are
none that have any surplusage of it, or more then will serve their turn, 309
Grace, to as many as think they have enough of it, a reproving word, 311 Grace,
to such as think they have but little, a word of Comfort, 313 Grace, its day,
such as do trifle away, the time will come, when pity shall arise from none,
315 Graces must be had, gotten and kept in a lively frame, 218 Graces, how they
must be acted, 219 Grow, how to do it, 249
H
Heart of man is unconstant, 23 Heart must not be trusted in the highest frame,
194 Heaven, men may come very near it, and yet be shut out, 379 Heaven, what
will become of them who never set foot toward it, 380 Heaven, in it the Saints
Communion will be heightened, 343 Holiness real what is it, 366 Honored,
wherein Father and Son are, 69 Hypocrisy deep may lie in the hearts of men, 95
Hypocrites, Christ coming to judge at midnight is like an evil snare, 212
Hypocrites when Christ comes upon them unawares, it will be a Terror, 215
Hypocrites may go very far toward heaven and Salvation, from 122 to 231
Hypoctites, how many men know whether they be such or no, 234 Hypocrites never
have respect to all Gods Commandments, 236 Hypocrites profession will not carry
them through all conditions, 262 Hypocrites lean upon two Pillars that will
fail them, 266 Hypocrites may long lie hid from themselves, 268 Hypocrites
ordinarily are not diligent, or laborious in searching within, 272
I
James King, what once he said, 173 Jealousy, what is it, 68 Jeroms
resolution, 297 Jerusalem had her day of grace, 279 Jesus is to be magnified,
we to be humbled and convinced of folly, from 389 to 391 Infants of Believers
are external Saints, 94 Justice satisfied, See Christ. Justice and Mercy, upon
what account they are to be magnified, 322
K
Kingdom of heaven what is it taken for, 87 Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a
Feast, 339 Know, such as Christ does not, shall never enter into his
Marriage Feast, 396 Know them not, Christ will declare this at the day of
Judgment unto Hypocrites, 399 Knowledge of God in Christ, what is to be said of
those that have none 231 Knowing of a soul by Christ, what is (...) understood,
393 Known of Jesus Christ, many never are that profess him, and profess to know
him, 392
L
Lamps, what is meant by it, 11 103 Lamps of the wise Virgins, though they burn
low, yet are they not put out 244 Lamps must be trimmed every day, 254 Lamps,
what is it to trim them, 257 Lamps, their Motives to stir us up to trim them,
258 Lamps our own, what we should do to trim them, 260 Law requires absolute
obedience, 69 Long-sufferance of God, what they treasure up that despise it,
134 Look unto two things, 383 Love transcendent of Jesus Christ, 54 Love of
Christ to us should ever keep us low, 59 Love of Christ, the souls objections
against it, answered, 78
M
Magistrates who are the keepers of the Lords vineyard have slept, 155 Man, in
him Christ sees nothing desirable, 47 Man, in him a double principle, 146 Man
or Men, though they will not come to Christ for Grace, yet will they come to
him for Glory, 385 Marriage, what is meant by it, 338 Marriages used to be made
with feasting, 53 Measures that are false, take heed of being deceived by them,
251 Members of Christ's visible Church, to be one of them, is a great
privilege, 98 Members unregenerated in a visible Church is a sad condition, 99
Memory in man is a leaking vessel, 21 Metaphor, what is it, 2 Midnight, what is
meant by it, 208 See coming of Christ. Ministers plea for putting the People in
remembrance, 24 Ministers wisdom in pressing truths, 25 Ministers, what they
do, 44 Ministers duty, 67 Ministers have slept, 156
N
Novelties, take heed of affecting them, 28 Number our days, labor so to do,
117 Ordinances of Christ must neither be neglected, nor slighted, 253
Ordinances, many that think they can get grace from them, reproved, 300
Ornaments, look unto them, and get them ready, 81 Oil, what is meant by it, 14,
104 Oil, there is need to cha^e it in our hearts, 32 Oil, Motives to have it in
our Vessels, 115 Oil of grace, how to know we have it, 118 Oil in your vessels,
must surely be had in readiness, 217 Oil, they that go to the Saints for it,
are like to have a denial, 302
P
Papists reproved for taking upon them to sell grace, 306 Papists are like to
foolish Virgins, 299 Parable, what is it, 1 People of God have slept, 156
People of God, that make profession of Jesus Christ, an exhortation to them,
232 People of God have considerations to stir them up to cut off all delays,
293 People of God that are guided by the Spirit, it is a comfort to them, 318
Perfection in this life there is not, 192 Plots and- Purposes, how it comes to
pass that many are taken away in the midst of them, 213 Prayer, we are to be
much in it, 253 Profession without the enjoyment of the Spirit is but folly,
104 Professions, all are full of folls, 115 Professors formal, what such are to
know, 265 Professors formal, a startling word to them, 280 Professors real, to
them a word of Exhortation, 282 Professors trifling, a warning word to them,
316. Their doleful condition, 371. See Saints. Formalists. Promises, from them
conclude that Christ will not put away any soul, 84 Prophecyings, they that
despise them, what to remember, 24 Put away from Christ, the souls objections
answered, 85
R
Readiness, labor to maintain it, 337 Reaidness, what is meant by it, 326
Ready, such as are when Christ comes, do enter with him into glory, 325 Ready
a child of God may be before he desire it, and desire it before he be ready,
329, 330 Ready soul is in a blessed condition, 332 Ready are we, put this
question, 333 Ready to enter, what need there is to look to it, 372 With
Directions what to do, 373 374 Refuges, how hard it is to beat a man off from
them, 319 Refuges, what they should teach those that are brought off from them,
321 Rejoice in Christ, the soul must, 79 See willing. Resurrection of the dead,
a Saint falls short of this, though he have never so much grace here, 311
S
Saints seeming and real, in what respect called, and compared to Virgins, 10
Saints real and formal, the things that do distinguish them, 14 Saints
privileges, 60 Saints ought to communicate their experiences each to other,
305 Saints may have a good esteem of hypocrites, 229 Saint-ship, what is
requisite to it, 89 Similitude is the mother of mistakes, 271 Sins greatness,
wherein it lies, 151 Sin, how to know whether the conflict of it be right or
no, 238 Sinners hearts are full of self-confidence and presumption, 383 Sleep,
what kind is it, 145 Noted by two degrees, ibid. Sleep, the causes of it, 147
Sleep of Formalists and Saints do differ, 1^7 Sleep, considerations to stir us
up out of it, 163 Sleep, they that are in it will find no ease, 169 Sleep that
we are kept from it, considerations to heighten our praises, 177 Sleep, we are
apt to be, when most need to be awake, 187 Sleep, what it argues, 192 Sleep is
matter of deep humiliation, ibid. Sleeping, the sad effects of it is matter of
mourning, 155 Sleeping, cautions against it, 171 Sleepy, the end why God leaves
his people in such a frame, 153 Slumbering and sleeping, what is meant by it,
12, 145 Slumbering and sleeping, the time considerable, 143 Slumbering and
sleeping, incident to the best of Saints, 144 Slumbering and sleeping, argues
an hour of need to watch in, 196 Sorrow for sin, how to know whether it be
right or no, 235 Souls dejected, have arguments set before them to close with
Christ, 58 Soul of man has two things in it considerable, 106 Souls evil or
loss, 112 Souls doubting, to them a word of encouragement, 407 Spirit of Christ
is the greatest woer, 44 Spirit of grace, there is need to keep in with him,
195 Spirit must not be grieved when we have his presence, 254 Spirits profane,
reproved, 135
T
Teachers false, and their ways are to be taken heed of. 250 Teachers of God
have a pattern set before them, 24 Temptation has an hour. See Awaking.
Things, the same inculcated upon Believers, bespeaks somewhat more to be
learned, 28 Time is to be made good use of, both by Saints and Sinners, 139 140
Time unknown, what is it put for, 208 Truth, for the abusing of it, a word for
conviction, 130 Truths divine, have cautions against the nauseating of them, 27
V
Vessel, what is meant by it, 15 Virgins, why so called, 10 Virgins foolish,
their request to the wise Virgins, 262, 286 Virgins wise, their answer to the
foolish Virgins, 301, 314. See Lamps. Understanding in man is very dull, 20
Union between Christ and his people, so sure that it cannot be shaken, 87
Vnreadiness, what is meant by it, 365 Unready, two or three persons likely will
be found, 367 Unregenerate estate. See Members.
W
Watch, what is the end of such men as do, or do not, 18 Watch, the reason
wherefore, 211 Watch, to it men are persuaded, 216 Willing to close, They whom
Christ has made so, should labor to make it sure, 75 Wisdom, wherein it lies,
105 Wisdom, for the completing of it has three things, 106 Wisdom of a
pretended and real Saint, compared, 108 Wisdom of a Saint and a fool, wherein
it appears, 113 Withdrawing between Christ and us, their difference, 87 World.
See Church. Workers of iniquity, what is understood by that, 398
Y
Yield up themselves to Christ. To such a word of comfort, 86

The second Alphabetical Table, containing the principal heads, and matter in
the foregoing Treatise of Christ the Sun of Righteousness has healing in his
wings.
A
ACquaintance we gain with God by prayer, 625 Afflictions outward, from them
there is freedom, 505 From 1. The fear of them. 2. The presence of them. 3. The
evil of them, from, 506, to 507

Arise, when Christ does upon a soul, he brings enlargement to it, 479, 508
Arising of the Sun of righteousness on them, what is meant by it, 434
B
Bondage, the Authors of it, 486 Bondage there is, 1. By Captivity, 487 2. By
sale, ibid. 3. By birth, 489 4. By tenure and usurpation, 490
Bondage to sin, its consequences, 492 Bondage, the guilt of sin is a part of
it, 494 Bondage, sinners that are in it, exhorted to close with the promise of
going forth, 529 Bondage, what God requires of them that are set free from it,
536 Bondage unto men, be not brought under, 544 See Sin.
C
Ceremonies of men, from these there is freedom, 508 Children are made free by
grace, not by natural generation, 518 Children may be free in the account of
the Church, and yet be the servants of sin, 520 Children of Believers can grow,
581 Christ is to be valued by us, 423 Christ, of him there is great necessity,
452 Christ is the only pipe through which grace is conveyed, 568 Come to
Christ, considerations so to do, 473 Communion of Saints, in it much growth to
be gotten, 637 Converted ones, though suddenly dying, yet can grow in grace,
579 Covenant of works, from this there is freedom, 504
D
Day of the Lord, what is meant by it, 412 Darkness is a part of bondage, 494
Darkness, what is meant by it, 495 Denial of self, as that grows, so we grow,
594 Duties holy, labor to be more spiritual in them, 615
E
End, look unto it, 571 Enemies they are, who would pluck away Christ from us,
426 Enemies cannot be withstood, unless there be growing, 619 Error, all the
ground of it, 597 Experiences particular, of love, and tenderness of mind, 611
F
Faculties of the soul, see whether we grow in them, 595 Faith, as it grows, so
do we grow, 593 Faith, in this grace labor to grow, 607 Faith, what is it,
ibid. And wherein the nature of it lies, 622 Family, where they are all in
Egyptian darkness is a sad one, 422 Fear, all is not banished out of the soul,
553 Fear is a part of bondage, 499 Fear distractive, fear ought not to be in
us, 554 Feared the Lord. See Them. Fellowship with Jesus Christ is sweet, 422
Free-set, many think they are by Jesus Christ, and yet deceived, 517 Free-going
in the acceptable year, three things did hinder, 530 Free-set, that we might
be, what is to be done, 533 Freedom there is, 1. Invisible. Both by grace, 518
2. Visible.
Fruitfulness, what growth is there in this, 600
G
God himself, is to be much dwelled upon, 635 Going forth, what is meant by it,
478 Gospel is an incomparable benefit, 526 Grace, the riches of it to poor
sinners, 457 Graee is either, 1. Relative, 562 Or 2. Inherent, 564 Grace will
grow by the opposition it meets withal, either from 1. Without, 601. Or 2.
Within, 602 Grace relative, labor to grow more and more in the assurance of
it, 616 Graces three, which respect the root Jesus Christ, 593 Grow as Calves
of the Stall, the comparison wherein it stands, 559 Grow, when is any thing
said so properly, 565 Grow up in Christ, before this be, there must be
implantation into him, 567 Grow in Grace they do, though no sooner converted,
but they die, 579 See Children. Grow, if you do not, conclude one of two
things, 558 Grow, many do worse and worse, 589 Grow, how to know it, 591 Grow,
the Motives to it, 617 The Helps to it, 621 Grow we must, according to our
measure, 638. And herein help each other, 641 Grow, many may though they
perceive it not, 627 Growing up into Christ, what is there in the expression,
570 Growing, to such as think they are not, Comfort, 643 Growth spiritual, the
nature of it, 562, and the Arguments to prove it, 577 Growth, the greater it
is, the more honor and service God has, 583 Growth compared to Trees or
Plants, 592 Growth is placed, 1. In the Uuderstanding. 596 2. In the Will. 598
Growth, wherein to look to it, 604
H
Head, the Glory of it, wherein it lies, 571 Heal, if we could our selves, yet
our wound is incurable, 449 Healing, what is meant by it, 438 Healing, what it
brings, 440 Healing is not in us, 448 Healing concerns two sorts of Persons,
470 Heart-softness, in this labor to grow, 614, etc. wherein it lies, ibid.
Humility, as it grows, so do we grow, 595 Humility, in this Grace labor to
grow, 613 Hypocrites may grow in some things, 620
I
Enlargement promised to a soul, what is it, 481
K
Knowledge, In this Grace labor to grow, 604
L
Liberty spiritual, 1. Its subject, 482 2. Its causes, 483 3. Its parts, 485 4.
Its degrees, 508
Light our, from whence comes it, 422 Love to Christ, works the soul to a
kindly hatred of sin, 465 Love to Jesus Christ, herein labor to grow, 608. And
that for several ends, 609 Love toward one another; herein labor to grow, 612
M
Malachy, what it signifies, 411 Members grow not alike in the same measure,
573 Mercy, in this Grace labor to grow, 613 Ministry all, for what end, 620
Ministers are to labor to grow, 639
O
Obedience slavish is a bondage, 498 Ordinances, wait diligently on the Lord in
them, 427 Ordinances being used conscientiously and diligently tend to growth,
629
P
People under the influences of the Sun of Righteousness are in a growing
condition, 560 Planted in Christ, such as never were, grow worse and worse, 590
Prayer is a great means to increase Grace, 624 Prayer, what is it, 625
Professed the Name of Christ, many have, and yet are fallen, 589 Profession of
Christ, such as make and grow not, are in a sad condition, 587
S
Saints Communion is to build up each other, 637 Sin is a comprehensive evil,
442 Sin has ill qualities and consequences, 444 Sin is the first general part
of bondage, 490 Sin the guilt of it, is a part of bondage, 494 Sin is a
grievous bondage, 512 Sin though it lie hard upon any soul, yet shall it be
overcome, 555 S^ns yoke, to such as are struggling under it, comfort, ibid.
Soul-distempers hinder growth, 632 Spirit, how he is grieved, 545. And
therefore cautions not to grieve him, 546 Spirit properly is not grieved, ibid.
Sun, Christ is to his people, 414 Sun, wherein does the resemblance between
Christ and it hold, 416 Sun, they that have it risen upon them, are the
children of the day, 421 Sun of Righteousness, against its shinings shut not
the windows, 424 Sun, that God would give such, is cause of admiration, 427 Sun
of Righteousness, why is Christ so called, 431
T
Them that feared the Lord, what is meant by that, 429 Things best, in them
labor to grow, 617 Truth will set a man free, 533
V
Understanding; in this let us try our growth, 596
W
Walking holy with God, herein labor to grow, 615 Wings of the Sun of
Righteousness, what is meant by that, 435 Wings of the Sun of Righteousness,
what are they, 436 Wings, why so called, 437 Word of God, to such as tremble at
it, comfort, 475 Wounded, them that are so, Christ pittyeth, 463

The last Table, containing the general and particular Heads, as they follow in
their order, in the foregoing Subject, Christ his Willingness to accept humbled
Sinners.
THe Text opened, 651 Out of which this Point of Doctrine issues, That the Lord
Jesus will not cast out any poor soul that comes to him, 652 Here is observed,
First, That coming unto Christ presupposes, 1. Hearing. 2. Learning.
ibid. By Hearing is understood, 1. The usual means of Salvation, 654 2. Some
whisperings, motions, and secret workings of the Spirit, ibid. By Learning is
understood, first the opening of the understanding, 655 and thus a poor soul is
taught, 1. That he is lost in himself, 2. That he must not lie securely in this
condition, ibid. 3. That there is no help in the Creature, 656 4. That nothing
can skreen him from the wrath of God, but Jesus Christ, 657 5. That Christ is
willing to let out of his ointments to heal, ibid. Now for the Acts wherein it
formally consists, are, 1. In a desire of the soul after Christ, 658 2. In
passing all other stands and rests on this side Christ, 659 3. In coming to
him, 660 4. In coming with heart-words, 661 1. Words of Confession. 2. Words of
Petition. ibid.
5. In closing with Christ, 662 The Second thing in the Doctrine, What is meant
by not casting out, 663 1. Not out of his heart, 664 2. Not out of his Church,
ibid. 3. Not sending away empty, either at the first or after-coming, 665, 666
4. Not out of heaven, ibid. The Doctrine proved, 1. From the promise of Christ,
66, 71 If otherwise, Then 2. from Christ's being argued unchangeable, 668 3.
From Christ's slighting of his Fathers gift, ibid. 4. From Christ's failing in
his trust, 669 5. From Christ's undervaluing of his blood, ibid. 6. From undoing
what the Father had done, 670 7. From Christ's bringing upon himself the
imputation of delusion, 671 1. Because of the many invitations made hy him to
poor creatures, ibid. 2. Because of his being contradicted of imposture, 672 3.
Because inconsistent with Christ's bowels and tenderness, ibid. The first Use is
to lament the backwardness of our hearts in coming to Christ, 673 The second
Use shows the grievous nature of the sin of unbelief; By considering, 1. The
unreasonableness of this sin, 675 1. In respect of our selves, 675 2. In
respect of Christ, 676
2. The injuriousness of this sin, ibid. 3. The unkindness of this sin, 678 4.
The danger of this sin, ibid. 1. Binding the guilt of all other sins upon the
soul, ibid. 2. Bringing blood upon a man's own head, 679 3. Bringing the blood
of Christ upon a man's head, ibid.
The third Use serves for Exhortation to every poor soul to come to Christ, 680
From whence, several considerations against the many hard thoughts of coming to
Jesus Christ. As, 1. How injurious it is to grace, 681 2. Christ leaves the
soul altogether without excuse, ibid. 3. How prejudicial to Jesus Christ, 683
4. The experiences of all the Saints, ibid. 5. The soul can have no evidence of
being given to Christ, until it come, ibid. 6. How willing to run at hazard,
seeing there is so much certainty of speeding, 684 7. Its a grief to Christ
that the soul will not be persuaded of his good will, ibid. The fourth Use
exalts the riches of the grace of Christ to poor sinners, 685 The fifth Use
declares that there is no falling away from Christ, either from Justifying, or
Sanctifying grace once received, 686 The sixth Use puts in a double caution, 1.
That impenitent sinners encourage not themselves in an evil way, upon the
account of Christ's tenderness and mercy to poor sinners, 687 2. That they that
are in Christ, take heed they abuse not this grace to wantonness, 689
The seventh Use serves for a comfort to Gods people in all their fears and
doubts, that Christ will never cast them out, 690 The first Objection. That the
soul thought it came to Christ, etc. but says he is cast off, and therefore
concludes it was never truly in Christ, is answered, 691 The second Objection,
that the soul knows not whether ever yet it came to Christ, and therefore is
cast off, is answered, 692 1. Though Christ seems not for a time to own the
soul, yet he does support it, 693 2. When the heart is unsatisfiedly drawn
after Jesus Christ, ibid. 3. When the soul is willing to receive him as King
and Savior, ibid. 4. When the soul is content to wait a while, 694 5. When the
soul is frequent in acting of faith, to receive Christ, ibid.

FINIS.

