A True RELATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS FROM YORK and BEVERLEY.

Showing The great power and strength there raised against the Parliament and
Hull, under the command of the Lord of Carnarvon, the Lord Rich, Colonel
Fielding, Colonel Lunsford, Capt. Butler, etc.

Also The bounty of the Clergy, and of the Gentry in Yorkshire, tending to
the increasing and managing of these unhappie Proceedings.

Likewise some Rehearfall of Bishop Williams his Sermon before the King, July
24. And of the great hurt that the great Recusant, Mr. Beckwith has received
by Sir John Hotham.

Sent in a Letter from Beverley, to a Citizen of good worth in London.

Aug. 3. London. printed for John Johnson 1642.

NEVVES FROM YORK AND BEVERLEY.
Cosen: My kind love, etc.
ACcording to your desire and my promise, I shall acquaint youwith such News
as has happened with us since last I writ to you.

Then in brief thus.

On Friday last, Sir John Goodrick Knight and Baronet, which was one of the
Yorkshire Knights, that subscribed to give the King 250 horse, brought in his
horse and men, being 36 in number, very bravely accoutred. Sir Francis Worthy,
and the rest, have engaged themselves to bring in theirs on Friday next. This
day a Troop of Horse, under the command of Captain Butler, marched from hence
^owards New Castle (as it is reported) to guard the Town; and this day likewise
two Regiments of Foot, of the Trained Bands of Yorkshire, show under the
command of Colonel Lunsford, the other under the command of Colonel Fieldiug,
marched toward Hull. Doctor Bastwick, and three other Captains, are taken
prisoners by Mr. Hastings and his Confederates, and they are expected to be
brought to York. The late Bishop of Lincoln, now Archbishop of York, last
Sunday preached at the great Church in York, his Text was the words of our
Savior in Luke, Unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharifies, ye shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. How a man
of his faction might apply that Text, I leave to you, or any reasonable man to
imagine.

Yet among other passages of his Sermon, he took occasion to speak of Jonas
who being in the Ship, was cause of the storm in the Sea, neither could it be
allayed till he was thrown into the Sea, whereupon he said that he was not
so uncharitable to the disturbers of the peace of Israel. Those that have
raised this storm of descention in the land to be thrown into the Sea, but he
wished with all his heart they were thrown beyond the Sea, and besides he
thought his wishes met with many of their desires, for he thought most of them
had a mind to be beyond Sea. The King is returned from the Southern parts to
Beverley.

It is reported by those who went with him, that has he gained the affections
of the people where he has lately been: those that have seen him since his
return, report him very merry, for they say he wants no money, and on my own
knowledge I never here the Soldiers complain for want of pay*

Here come in daily men, money and provision, and Arms from all parts of this
Kingdom to the King: the drums strike up all the day long here for Volunteers
upon the promise of large pay. Here is with us a Dutchman who works in casting
Mortar pieces, and making Fireworkes, a very experienced man he is, and does
rare exploits, here is come from Cambridge 10000 l to the King in money and
plate. Besides, all the Lords that are here, are there in favor with the King,
many others (whom I mean) you may suspect. For any thing I can yet hear, there
is nothing but a preparation for a Civil War. Beckstith the great Recusant
was this last week, by a Bullet shot from the town of Hull, (he lyinst againg
the Town with the Cavaliers) shot through the arm.

Here is to be a muster of all the Kings forces, Horse and foot to morrow, and
at night the Dutchman is to show some fireworks before the King, I might belly
you as many do I know, yet take this on my word, the King is very strong here,
(God grant all prove well) the Lord of Canarvan in the Princes absence,
commands the Troop, which I must needs confess is a brave one, which consists
most of Gentlemen: and besides the service they do themselves. They among
them, have set forth a Troop of Horse, which is under the command of my Lord
Rich. What the event of these things will be, time must produce. My Lord of
Lincoln feasts the Cavaliers nobly, they are much engaged to his Honor, and
he has as brave a spirit in this exploit as the best of them. Hull is very
strongly besieged, and forces do daily thither resort, yet Sir John Hotham
behaves himself bravely, and we are all indebted to him, ye Freeholders here
are led away with the Gentry of this Country, who stand stiff for the King:
Sir Michael Warton Knight, has lent the King 20000 l, and other Yorkshire
Gentlemen do profer much.

This is all for the present* Farewell. H M.

FINIS.

