THE CHIEF EVENTS OF The Monarchy of SPAIN, In the year 1639.

Written By the Marquess Virgilio Maluezzi, one of his Majesty's Council of
War.

Translated out of the Italian Copy by ROBERT GENTILIS Gent.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Humphrey Moseley, at the sign of the Princes
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1647.

To the right Honorable EDWARD, Earl of Dorset, Lord Buckhurst, Knight of the
most Honorable Order of the Garter, Lord Chamberberlaine of his Majesty's
Household, and one of his Honorable Privy Council.
SIR,
I Have presumed to present this Translation to your Lordships view, and send
it into the world under your Patronage. And though my self be not worthy so
great a Patron, yet the Author Count Virgilio Maluezzi his Works generally are
of such esteem, that a Noble and honorable Pen in this Kingdom has
vouchsafed to English some part of them. And this particular History is so
inter-woven with several grave politic Discourses, learned and pithy Speeches
upon sundry occasions, that I question not but your Lordship may find somewhat
in it worthy your reading at vacant hours. This, and your ever known love to
learning, showed by your daily favors continually flowing upon Scholars, has
encouraged me to prefix your honored Name to these my endeavors: in which
though I come far short of Maluezzi's incomparable style, or the honorable
Translators facunditie, I shall most humbly beseech your honor to cast a
gracious aspect upon it, which may encourage me to attempt higher things, if
so great a one shall deigne to accept of this so small present. So praying God
ever to bless you, and all your honorable family, I humbly rest,

Your Honors most devoted and humble servant, Robert Gentilis.

To the Reader,
REader, I confess, I use my uttermost skill to not write a History with a
plain narration and that I employ the uttermost of mine understanding to set
it out, it seeming to me to be the duty of him who is to leave unfolded to
posterity the noble remembrance of the renowned deeds and admirable actions of
the greatest King in the world. The Tuscane aires the Ruggierie and Romancies,
and other touches, Songs and Daunces, are played in the streets, and Market
places, and also in the Royal Palace. The Merchant, the Citizen* the
Gentleman, and the King, also go clothed in Silk; but those which are played
in the Royal Palace, are played leisurely with learned counterpoints touched
with Foreign daintinesses, stopps, quavers, accents, and spirits. This place
on most noted days clotheth the Kings person, in a habit woven with gold and
gemmes, embroidered and garnished; and so great is the art and workmanship,
that the least thing that is heard in the one is the Basso, and that is seen
in the other is Silk. If Royal things are so different from City ones, who
shall blame my History only for the manner of it? Surely if the subject is
good, I have given it state, and embroidered it; if bad, I have put it out of
tune, and bundled it up. If Histories be written to give instruction
instructing or teaching is not to take off the course and bring to an end, a
thing needful to be done both for those which read them curiously, and for
them who study them attentively, either to change vain desires, or give
satisfaction to those as are well regulated. So that he is questionless
praiseworthy, who takes a man out of the ordinary way, which is long and
broad, and conducteth him through one that is not dark but short, full of
strangeness, sentences, expressions, which sometimes teach, and sometimes
delight* and which at sometimes mingled together do both teach and delight.

If I have done so I have fulfilled my desire, and peradventure my duty; But
because it would be pride in me to affirm I had done it, it shall be a
sufficient excuse for me, I have a desire to do it, that if I be not praised,
I may at least be suffered.

The Italian Printer to the Reader.
THe Author is resolved to print this Book in his own natural tongue, in
Regard of some considerable errors, with change of the sense, which passed in
the Spanish Impression at Madrid through the Printers carelessness, which
happened whilst he was absent from that Court.

The chief Events in the Spanish Monarchy.
AFflicted Europe weeps (for many ages) from time to time at her ruins,
either because God does most chastise the carelessness of those whom he loves
best, and so it is good will; or because he most punishes the faults of them
who are most bound unto him, and so it seems revenge: he either tries as
merciful or scourges as wrathful. Sometimes she sees her Inhabitants bloody
themselves in civil wars, and oftentimes she sees her land overflowne with
barbarous Nations. Our bitterness calls simplicity Barbarism and him
barbarous, who is not tedious of other men's affairs; who is content with his
own, as long as it is able to maintain him; who to offer violence, will first
have it offered to himself; who goes against a man through a desire of
preserving himself, and not through greediness of growing great; who slays
another to preserve his own life, who invadeth Countries to get a dwelling
place; valorous without cunning; hardy without deceit* as if Nature were worse
then Art, and he best who much knows, when much knowledge serves him to do
the greater hurt.

War was once more terrible to Nations when it was moved against them to
dwell in the Country, then when the aim was domination; The one; was against
all, the other against one in losing, the one obliged to change a master, the
other to leave being one. Now adays also the worst would be our leader, if our
lamentable times with a most evil comparison did not justify it. The
Countries were more fortunate, the men less evil. The necessity of living
pricked men forward and not the greediness of commanding, nor the hatred of
him that commanded. The land changed its Inhabitants, it did not lose them, men
did not destroy the houses where they meant to dwell* they did not make the
land barren which was to nourish them, they peopled it, and did not lay it
waste, and it did renew it, more then ruin it; Then was Europe a prey, but to
men, now it is a prey to the Sword, Fire, Famine, and Pestilence; war taking
the dominion away from one, and not gaining it to the other, if so be command
is meant over men, and not over buried carcasses which are turned to dust; over
fruitful and abounding plains, and not a desert, burnd, unmanured, and barren
Country.

In these turbulent motions* and deplorable, times came in the year one
thousand six hundred thirty nine, the fire of dissentions burning more then
ever, and like Mount Aetna, showing no sign of going out, as if it also had
its Scillaes and Charibdies, which devouring the wealths of Kings and Nations,
did feed upon blood and treasure.

Germany was destroyed, full of civil wars. The French overcome, but not
weakened, nor mortified, thought upon revenge. Great Britain as last in the
world, was rather then forgotten, reserved for the last beams which made an
influence of war over Europe, and now feeling the damages of it, sought for
a remedy. The state of the Austriacall Monarchy was various; Flanders
victorious, but not secure; Spain triumphant and threatened; The affairs in
Burgundy dangerous, in Brasill doubtfu^l, in Germany adverse; Weymar possessed
of Brisack, the Swede of Bohemia, the Turkish armies ready to move, the Hans
towns wavering, the Switzers irresolute; The Fleet set upon by the Hollanders,
and though not overcome, yet hindered and stayed. In vain did the Catholic
King desire peace, withstood by the Rebels obstinacy, the enemies greediness,
and agreement of their Officers. These not being able to be governed but by
the violence of motion, and the other not satisfying, some their rage, some
their envy, but with conquests of new Cities and Kingdoms* did already make
easy things seem difficult with strange pretenses, and difficult things easy
with new tributes, levies, and Engines.

In the mean time the body of Christendom, infirm, languishing, and hurt in
its most solid parts consumed like an Ectick, either finding no Physician, or
wanting a remedy. It seemed because of the sharpness of the season to rest,
and accumulate matters to kindle a new paroxisme. The motion did not cease,
passing from the body to the head, from the heart to the mind, which partly
disquieted, partly necessitated, studied a^l means to trouble the bodies, and
stir up arms.

In France the Officers discoursed of making new conquests in Flanders of
making sure the affairs of Germany, of troubling Spain by Sea and by Land*
little reflecting upon the business of Italy, where they weighed not the loss
of small places, and thought time long in conquering great ones. That in the
mean time the Spanish Army would decrease, and theirs increase. That they
wou^d go to relieve p^aces, and force their enemies either to give over what
they had undertaken with shame, or fight with danger. That they should gain in
Flanders, and in Burgundy, and what sinister accident soever should happen
they esteemed not the loss of a place in Italy considerable (beyond which they
imagined those powers could not reach) they having so many there, so that they
thought it impossible to be counterpoised, much more to be overcome.

In Spain were very different thoughts, they looked upon the affairs of
Italy, as their chief scope. That it was good to go with great strength
where the reward was great, the opposition small. The dates which they set in
Piemont would be sufficient to bring forth olive trees. That to be the most
sensible part of Europe. Thither to be called by men, and invited by fortune,
and if the one did show themselves favorable, and the other should prove
prosperous, the King of France his conquests would be counterpoised and he
would be called into that Province where he most feared, and be diverted from
that where he had most hopes.

They were not careless of the defense of their other States: the provisions
for Flanders were great both of men and money: Four Millions and a half of
silver; Seven thousand Foot at the Groine ready for to go; an Army of Germans
under the command of Count Picolomini, all old Soldiers, and new Levies in the
Country. Holsatia and Burgundia were to be releived with an Army under the
Command of Don Francesco di Melo. In Spain, Cantabria was made sure with
fourteen thousand Horse and Foot who asisted it. And for a supply of the
Forces in the County of R^nciglione there were great Levies appointed to be
made in that Province. A Tertia of Walloones which was coming out of Flanders,
the Italian Infantrie which the galleys of Spain, Scicilie, Naples and Genoa
were to bring over in the Spring. Now for to keep the Mediterranean Sea, and
the Ocean, there should be, the Navies which should come from Carthagena and
Cadiz, that which was at the Groine, and the Ships of the Fleet which was
expected out of the Indies. And to secure themselves totally from the
threatenings of mighty Fleets which were preparing in Britanie, the Coast of
Spain was all furnished, with Men* Ammunition, and Provision. Providing for
Land affairs as if they wanted defense by Sea; And thinking upon the Fleet at
Sea as if they could not defend themselves by Land*

A victory obtained against the Hollander at Sea gave a beginning to this
years conquests, an enemy of a long time, and yet domestical; almost at home,
and therefore continual.

Some Dunkirk Ships were to go to the Groine to take in some Spanish
Infanterie, they went to Mardick to join with the rest having fought with the
emie, who strong with a Fleet of seaventeene sail all of strength, came to
besiege them at the mouth of the haven. The General Michael d'Orno, though
unequal in strength, yet superior in courage, being not able to endure the
rebels insolence, with a prosperous wind came forth of Mardick and set upon
them three times. The first time though for a little space they fought
generously, yet the Hollander made some show of giving back* the second he gave
back the third he fled and getting into their own harbors left a most
glorious victory to his Majesty's forces which joyfully, being but eight ships
strong furrowed the waves to gather the fruits, many promising them the
dominion of the Ocean yielded by the Hollander shut up and weakened.

But who is the Master of the Ocean? It is not overcome, though in it one
overcommeth, yea he often is conquered by the Sea, who has conquered man. He
that was overcome fled and the Sea is overcome by flying it. He that
overcommeth fights, and who fights with the Sea loses by it*

There arose the most horridest tempest that was in the memory of th'eldest
men, it scattered the ships and tore them, so that with much toil, and almost
by miracle they came into harbor, some at Ostend, and some at Dunkirk, without
rudders, sails, or masts, more like relics of a shipwreck then ships fled
from the injury of the waves.

I could note to make you bend the eyebrowes the strangeness of it; there
being but very few hours betwixt the rejoicing with triumph and the bewayling
of losses* if I would therein follow the tracks of a wise man who for an
admirable particularitie of the Sea cried out, that in the self same place
ships were one day playing and sporting and cast away the next. As if the Land
did not produce such effects, which are not thought of nor observed, because
they are more frequent. Who sees not that in the selfsame bed, where man
takes his best rest, and where he enjoys sometime amorous, sometime
Matrimonial delights, be a so lets forth his last and vital spirits and
breathings with pain and horror amidst tormenting sorrows?

The Marquess of Fuentes care did get the ships mended, and shipping two
thousand Walloons in them for the [ Groigne, caused them to set sail.

The Enemy was returned powerful within sight of the Harbor, out of which his
Majesty's ships came, but not with happy success, for some run aground, and
other for want of wind could not get out; there were but five that fought.
Michael d'Orno set upon the Holland Admiral with such fierceness, that he had
almost sunk her, she shunned the boarding, and presently fled with the rest
of the ships, and in the flight met with two of the Kings ships. The Sea grew
calm, the Captain and the Admiral run on ground, so that the enemy was
left with the two ships, playing upon them with their Ordnance, but would not
adventure to board them. So here were two great victories, which the Kings
Forces, obtained against the Rebels, the one was counterpoised by too much wind
and the other almost changed for want of wind.

The Captain got off, and all the rest of the ships but the Admiral; the
enemies battered retired to their own Ports for relief, and the Kings ships to
Mardick and Dunkirke, and from thence after they were mended they went away
with their Walloons, and arrived safely into Spain, where the Cardinal
Infanta writ in what distress Burgundy was, Weymer being come into it* and
having taken Pontaglier* and Joigri, by means whereof he cut off that Province
from all relief of Arms and provisions from the Switzers.

His Majesty sent money, and order to the Marquess of Leganes, that he should
assist them with men.

In the mean time Prince Thomas was extraordinarily importunate at Court, to
get leave to go and assist the business of Italy. That his Country did burn,
that the Government was swayed by a passionate woman, an unable Prince, and
Officers won, bought, hindered, and forced by the French. That the laws gave
him and the Cardinal the tuition. That he could not justify to the world his
stay in Flanders to look upon the flames. He promised his Majesty fruitful
actions, and that he likewise promised to himself from his Majesty, justice
and love, if he should have recourse to his Clemency, and great assistance,
if there were need of power. That he had many intelligences, and that he was
called thither, by his friends, malcontents, convenience, obligation, and hope.

Every one did not applaud this going into Italy, many believing it could do
no good, did prognosticate great damage might ensue thereupon. The
malcontents within, showed every thing to be easy for them as went out,
because they should trouble the State; and these made every thing seem easy
to the King* wherein they might assist him, promising themselves more then they
could perform, and promising more then they knew they could perform. Force of
Arms, nor intelligence of Princes could not gain so many places to his
Majesty, as the Duchess despair might give unto the King of France. True it
is, that her reason of State is not that she should deliver them into the hand
of the French, and that now in case the affection of Sister should persuade her
to it, the love of a Mother would dissuade her from it: But if she should
imagine that they must be lost, she would sooner fall into the arms of a
Brother, then under the feet of her Kinsmen. Convenience is the reason of
State, and they are all counterpoised while a state remains, but it being
lost, revenge takes the place of conveniencie, and rage the place of reason;
The future is not discoursed upon, only the present is hated, neither do they
consider which is the best, when all are bad. The sick man, whilst he hopes to
obtain health patiently endures thirst, hunger, iron, and fire, but if he once
falls into despair, he abhorres the Physician, and hates the remedies worse
then the disease. The powers of the Spaniard until that time to have seemed to
the Duchess to be against the French* her state to serve for a field to
wrath, and not for a reward to victories. If she see the Princes of Savoy with
those forces she will think them to be against her. And whereas before in case
of loss, the King of Spaines more moderate mind, did promise her restitution;
the title of Kinsman might deceive her, and the just title of the King of
France; and of both these things did assure her the emulation which was between
them, and the agreement between the Princes of Europe. And she might now doubt
that in this third, the contraries might agree, the emulation might be
appeased, the Subjects satisfied, and the world contented; there being not
wanting lawful, specious, apparent, and hidden titles and pretenses.
Intelligences do work better a far off by their power, then near by their
person; thoughts which men have cannot be seen; but the eyes do show where a
man means to hit. That Prince Thomas in Flanders did thrive and gain as
present, in Italic as absent, changing of country he might breed turmoile on
the one part and do hurt in the other, if not in both. Ostentation to be the
greatest enemy that this enterprise could have, enough will be done, if they
can persuade that little can be done. The Duchess will not desperately cast
her self into the hands of the French, and they will not go with great powers,
where they imagine not to gain great rewards, or hinder great conquests.
Scarce shall Prince Thomas appear, but the one, and the other grown jealous
and suspicious, will stir up every stone, and use the uttermost endeavor,
they will change all governors both in holds and armies, and fill every thing
with French; whereby the one side assured of the treachery, and the other not
forbearing to attempt it, cunning being in vain employed, the time will be
lost of helping ones self with force. Nature has thought craft to be hurtful
to valor, and only helpful to cowardlinesse, granting it to the weakest kind
of beasts, and denying it to the most valorous. They are both hindered when
they are together, diminishing when they are mixed, and being good for nothing
when they are diminished. That it was not known of what degree Prince Thomas
his person should be in the army; it was not convenient he should be superior
to the Marquis of Leganes, and to have him inferior would be dissonant.
Howsoever he would breed disturbance, in War, in Peace, in overcomming, and
(peradventure more) when he had overcome.

But wise men, and those who understood his Majesty's mind aright, discoursed
the contrary. That it had always bin helpful to the conquering of countries,
to have in the armies persons of their blood who ruled. This means which had
served many to cover injustice and to deceive people, would now serve to show
the truth, and to undeceive those which went astray. That nothing could hinder
his Majesty's good intention more, then the not being known, and that nothing
could make it more known then the presence of those who were interested.
Should he fear the Duchess should despair? let her do what she will, when
she has done what she could do she will peradventure not be more desperate
(and that questionless) when she is assaulted. Her mind cannot be gained, it
must be forced, she will give unto the French, whatsoever the Spaniards do not
take. That the King ought to procure that she might be won to her self,
taking away her estate, that she may not lose it, with an intent (as a
guardian) to restore it to her again when her Frenzy is over-past, and that
she has recovered her health. In the mean time that it is necessary to
hinder her from casting it into the hands of the French, and bind these to
leave that by force, which they had through covetousness usurped, or to
restore it through envy. The presence of those Princes to be necessary, they
had not yet gathered so many intelligences, as they would gather. Let
Potentates and strange Commonwealths Armies once hear them, and they will know
that the King of Spain goes to protect, and not to gain. Let the Subjects
see their faces, and they will believe they come to govern them, and not to
fight with them. All will follow them, partly confessing themselves obliged
for received favors, and partly knowing themselves freed from the oath which
was given them, honor and conveniencie not hindering them, and fear and
interest pricking them on. That those people hate the French, and distrust the
Spaniards, and so being unresolved between distrust and hatred, they shall
scarce see the Princes, but without exact examination of the business, they
will without any further consideration cast themselves into their arms. He who
is in a straight between two contraries, fears hurt from each, and as soon
as he sees a third, without further advise, he runs precipitously to him.
The hatred will be increased toward a woman's government, and contempt of a
childs. Distasters will be imputed, some to the ignorance, and some to the
evil will of them that rule. They will desire to change their Lord, and at
last they will change him.

They confessed that intelligences which are had in States, promise more then
they can do, counting of that which others shall do, and that others are
deceived in the doing, making account of that which has been promised them.
He that means to undertake an enterprise and sets intelligences foremost in an
account, shall find himself deceived. These ought to follow hopes, not to
frame them, doing service enough, when other things are disposed, as if they
served for nothing. Great forces confirm those who are well affected, and
gain those who stand doubtful; Small forces lose every one, even those whose
understandings were before persuaded; That his Majesty did confide in the
greatness of Armies, as in a substance, in that of intelligences as in an
accident. Who comes into a State with these two, runs like a torrent, and the
further he goes, the more he increases. That Prince Thomas his valor, and
experience in his own Country (if no other circumstances did concur)
promised victories. That the Marquess of Leganes gentleness of mind, (who
without losing the Supreme power, could yield the supreme honor) would secure
all disturbances in the progress; And the good intention of the King and
Princes, after they had gone forward. The King not weighing whether it were
profitable or hurtful that Prince Thomas should go into Italy, only willing
to satisfy the desire he seemed to have of it, granted him leave: and he came
thither just at that time that the Marquisse of Leganes incited by many Letters
of Count Duke, resolved to take the field.

He knew that to overcome the Frenches valor, it would be very advantageous
to conquer their nature. He already for two years time had happily found by
experience, what a great help celeritie was in Matiall affairs: and that
greater swiftness was able to counterpoise greater force. The nature of the
heavens shows it, wherein the weakest are made the swiftest, because the
inferior shall not be hindered by the mightier. The Moon whose influence has
not virtue to equal Saturnes, shows her effects more cleete, and if she does
not produce them greater, she reiterateth them more often, supplying the
weakness of her beam, with the swiftness of her motion. The French is
brought into streights by being prevented: either he believes not himself to
be come time enough to opperate, and so gives himself over, or he moves out of
time, and so loses himself. The Spaniard is not so: his nature is slow, and
when that slownesse imprints a quality which seems to be hurtful, not failing
in what is necessary, he brings into consequence the others which follow it, in
such manner equalled with the first, that they make it profitable, or at least
they do correct it. Who so is overcome in his peculiar quality, ruins with
the consequent; Not by reason of the first which he has lost, but of the rest
which he has not changed.

The Marquess of Leganes sent D. Martino d' Arragon, with a part of the Army
to the passes; And he with the rest came to Novara; Thither came Prince
Thomas, they discoursed of the surprisall of Civasco, and it was resolved in
Vercelli to attempt it. The Prince with two thou and Horse did attempt it; and
having had good success, he being strengthened with two thousand foot which
the Marquess sent him, set upon Jurea, assaulted it, got within the Walls and
won it, Veglia yielded to him, and becoming Lord of both their Territories,
he became Master of the vale of Osta.

Don Martino of Aragon thinking that to gain Cencio, it was first necessary
for him to take Saliceto a small Castle, sent D. Jews of Lincastro, thither,
he raised a Battery against it with two Demi-Cannon. D. Martino went to view
the place, and a Musket Shot hitting him in the forehead, slew him. A Soldier
of extraordinary valor, who had with his hand justified what he was; He was
loving to his inferiors, affable to his equals, and reverent to his betters.
Great in place, experience, hope and merit. Worthy to live to perform greater
matters, or to die upon a greater service. But there was nothing to be found
fault with in him, if so unhappy a death had not given cause to accuse fortune.

The loss of D. Martino, might have occasioned some competition amongst the
chief Officers, which uses to end in tumults, But D. Lewis Ponze of Leon
giving no time to discourses, came to remedy it with his persuasions, and
chiefly by his example; For calling them altogether, he showed them, that he
was one of his Majesty's Council of war, the eldest field Marshall, and of
the tertia of Lombardie; he said that by reason of these qualities, and of
some circumstances, by right the government belonged to him, which he did
voluntarily lay down, sacrificing his own interest to the good of the King
his Master, who when he receives damage by a competition, every he who is in
the right does deserve punishment: there being no private respect that can
parallel a public damage. That advices came of the enemies approaching; That
the command might be better deserved by fighting then by competition. If they
did not agree, there would be no fighting no commanding, and all would be lost.
That the Governor of Milan showed, which way he inclined when he sent D.
Antonio Sotello to seize on the works; The not yiedling to this would be a
thwarting of the Marquess his desires, and to hinder rather then to accept of
the command, which if it were laid down, ought rather to be refused with
wisdom, then be afterward forcibly left with shame.

They all approved of this discourse, content to be commanded by D. Antonio
Sotello. The King in his Letter acknowledged himself to be well served by D.
Lewis his discreet proceeding, not only for the present act (which occasioned a
Victory, and the like being not observed in times past had occasioned great
losses) but chiefly in respect of the document which so rare an example would
leave unto posterity: and admitted of no exception, because that besides the
having right on his fide, he wanted not great valor, and the like experience,
besides the Nobility of his famous house.

This action so new, and so unusual in the Kings Armies deceived the Cardinal
of Vallette, and the Marquess of Villa, who went with all their forces to
relieve Saliceto, thinking to find the Soldiers without a Commander, or with
many confused ones. They found them commanded by D. Antonio Sotello, with so
much union, order, and valor, that coming to battle, they were routed and
put to flight, with the death and imprisonment of the boldest. A great part of
the Victory, ought to be acknowledged from D. Jews Ponze di Leon and his
Regiment, who after he had modestly yielded to his friends, fought valiantly
against his enemies showing himself more fit to govern then ambitious of
governing.

So was that strong place wonn, which would have troubled any other Army that
had not been Spanish, for the space of a whole year, and was a place of great
importance, one part of it standing upon the entrance of Piemont, and the other
to secure Final.

This piece of Army was returning to join with the Marquess under the conduct
of Don John di Garrai, and coming near to Verrua in an evening, he took the
out-workes; At the dawning of the day he assaulted it five ways; won it, Set
upon the Castle, and it yielded to him.

He was revenged of the wounds which he had received in that place when he
served the Duke of Feria, and if he did in some way disgrace his Masters act
taking that in four hours, which his Master could not take in three months;
yet did he do much credit to his advice, the Dukes Counsel being them to
assault it, not to besiege it: Then he joined with the Marquess of Leganes,
who laid Siege to Crescentino, and though it had a dike full of water, deep,
and well fortified, and kept by a Garrison of thirteen hundred French, yet in
eight days he won it.

It will not peradventure be distastefull if I here set down what reason moved
the King of Spain at first to invade the Duke of Savoy his Dominions, for the
sting of revenge, reason of State, nor rigor of justice are not sufficient
motives for his mild piety, to bring him on to endammage other men, if he were
not otherwise violently moved thereunto.

Marquess Forni Amadeo, Duke of Savoy his Ambassador was in Madrid, who in
the name of the Duke his Master, promised all friendship, and forbearance of
hosti^ity, when the Duke at the selfsame instant joining with France, entered
into the State of Milan; when (for fear of breeding jealousy) it lay in a
manner disarmed: with an Ecclesiastical person over the Politic government,
and an old man over the Military; So that from one skirmish to another, it
came to that pass, that if they would not yield without any more stirring,
they must be forced to adventure it upon a battle at Tornevento, with so much
disadvantage, that nothing (necessity excepted) could have freed it from the
judgment of a most rash act.

Being as it were by miracle escaped out of these streights, Duke Amadeo died.
And what rational man then would have said* that it was not then just for the
King of Spain to overthrow his Dominions, who had deceived him with public
faith? and joining with his enemies, had assaulted the State of Milan, and
brought it in jeopardy of losing. What Politician would not have judged it
necessary, not to leave an example so pernicious to all Monarchies, viz. that
they might be set upon by inferior Princes, and those Princes receive no
other damage thereby, but the not obtaining of the issue-of their desires? And
what humane heart of flesh would have blamed the King for running upon a
revenge necessary in Policy, and lawful in Justice; Yet his Majesty
courteous, not vindicative: magnanimous, not Politic, pious with Justice, and
not just with rigor, propounded Peace to the Duchess if she would forbear
to assist the French, taking upon him to make an agreement between her and the
Princes her Allies; what could he do more to have this Vine produce Grapes?
yet it brought forth nothing but wild ones. What could he do less, then come
in with fire and Sword, to show what gentleness provoked with ingratitude, and
mercy slighted by obstinacy can, and is able to do? Yet he has not done
it; he burned only to fatten the soil, and destroy the weeds; He cut down to
engraft Plants, to cause them bring forth fruits in stead of thorns; He
overcame the Mother, that she might not ruin her Son; He moved war to
establish peace and seized on dominions to restore them.

The French were already come into low Germany, with two mighty Armies, the one
under the command of Migliari, to go upon the Country of Artois, the other led
by Fucchieres to enter upon the land of Luxenburg. The designs were to renew
the name and recover the Kingdom of the ancient Austrasia. Surely a great
thought, and befitting a high mind that were not most Christian. The
provocatives were the remembrance of Charles the great, and the greatness of
the house of Austria, the end to renew the first, and ruin the last.

The first things wherein Princes are in their younger years instructed, are
(...) great acts of their Predecessors; They hear them rehearsed with delight,
whilst they are not able to act them (infirmity of humane nature, which not to
remain without glory, having none of their own, appropriate other men's to
themselves, and takes from the fortune of Birth, that which springs only from
the worth of the person.) But if their spirit grows up with their age, those
relations which once seemed to please, do now torment, to praise, reprove, and
tormenting and reproving enflameth them, first to be imitators of their
Ancestors, and to follow their steps; then to emulate and outgoe them, which
ever tieth them either to live idle in despair, or troublesome to disquiet the
world: And if by chance to the memory of those who are past, be added an
emulation of some that are present, finding greater in their own and other
families by reading and practice experience. And if equalling the first
consists in overcomming the last, What provocations will these be to fight
with them? Surely very sharp ones. And what shall be the ends of fighting with
them, certainly peace and quietness, not of the world, but their own, for not
being able to attain unto those ends, but by overcomming the world, they set
that at variance, and conquer it not, but disquiet, and ruin it.

Happy is the King of Spain (and by his means the Christian world) who has
no emulators, who being greater then he, do disquiet him, and has no memories
of any Ancestors, but such as tie him rather to keep what he has, then to
gain more. His quiet is not moved, but he appeaseth motions, he shuns war, and
loves peace: never takes up Arms, but to cause them to be laid down.

The Cardinal Infanta gave order to Piccolomini to go set upon Fucchieres,
and bid him battle. The Marquess of Fuenes to oppose Migliare his
proceedings, who after the burning of certain Castles and Towns, had laid
siege to Edino. And the Count of Fera was to watch the Hollander, who was
drawing near to the Island of Bommell. Things seemed here to be well ordered,
but a sudden accident had like to have disturbed them. Banier had routed, six
thousand of The Imperial Foot, the Emperor desired so many men of Piccolomini
to supply that want. It was judged in Flandars, that to send those men, would
but little help the Empire, and occasion the total ruin of that Province.

That the French was to be more looked after then the Swede. That Banier would
not effect that which the King of Sweden could not do, the King of France
might do it. Nothing is more easy then to know his intent, and there is no
Prince or Commonwealth in Germany, but if he knew it, would take up arms to
hinder it. All of them might hinder it, if they would determine so, and they
would all know it, if they would reflect upon it.

The first thing the King of France desires, is to make himself Emperor, and
it will be the last he will attain to; His Ancestors began with the taking
of Metz, Tul, and Verdun he has followed these with the taking in of Alsacia
and Lorraine. Being Lord of Teonville, he will now take Luxemburge, Burgundy
will totally fall, the Palatinate will not be able to defend it self, he
will become Master of the Land of Trever, and all the old Austrasia, he will
subdue th'Ecclesiafticall Electors, the Kings of Spain will lose Flanders,
Caesar the Empire, and the Commonwealths of Germany their Liberties, and the
Princes their States.

The Father of this Emperor found himself in the extremest streights having
nothing left him but Vienna (and that besieged) whilst he was not as yet
Emperor. The King of Spain relieved him with reputation, Armies and
Treasures, which he could not have done, had he not been Lord of Flanders; He
became victorious, subdued his enemies, recovered his Dominions, made himself
Emperor, and his Son King of the Romans.

It is a great Error for a little evil not to shut the door against greater
ones, which will suddenly happen, and then be remediless; and a great loss
of reputation, for a small loss to forsake the interests of Germany, Italy,
Westphalia and Flanders.

The emperor and the King of Spain their Dominions are separate, to enjoy
every one his own, in time of peace, but they are not divided upon occasion of
defense in time of War; Where dangers are common, it is not good to make the
interests particular. A man ought not to take more care of his own state then
of another, if his greatest interest lies in the others.

If the case require it th'Infanta would go in person to defend him; And would
leave (as has been done at other times) the King his Masters Dominions to
assist him, but the occasion does not now require it.

If Piccolomini his Forces should go away (which in a manner bridle the bounds
of Westphalia and the Rhine) the Princes who are friends, and if they faulter
not, do at least fear) losing courage, would accept the enemies proffers,
which they would not do, let the pretenses be never so specious, if they were
not put to despair.

It would be forty days before these Forces could come to the place where
there was need of them; in the mean time there might either be no need of
them, or greater would be required, which might then be sent him, seven
thousand Foot being daily looked for out of Spain, there being new levies in
the Country, and daily hopes of routing the enemy.

The Forces might be defeated by the way, and the French might set upon
Piccolominie being weakened; and overcome him, or with a few Horse set upon
this relief, and rout it, so that it would arrive too late and defeated or
being overthrown, would not come thither at all.

These reasons shown by the Cardinal to Piccolomini, persuaded him to stay
till further order, and being likewise represented to the Emperor, he was
contented to desist and press it no further.

The King of France his Fleet consisting of forty great men of war, and more
terrible by reason of thirty fire ships, which sailed along with it, set sail
being commanded by th'Archbishop of Bourdeaux, who thus encompassed with fire
and Sword (as Tasso describes Lucifer withstanding heaven) carried Vulcan in
Neptunes lap, to fire rather then fight.

He came within sight of the Groine. There commanded on the shore, the
Marquess of Valpraiso, who endowed with Spanish valor had also some French
fantasticalnesse in him; The shipping was under the command of Don Loze di
Ozes, a valiant Soldier, and most expert Mariner, most happy in all his
enterprises whenever he struggled with the Sea, or fought with his enemy, if
so be the fire was not his enemy, or the Sea became not a Hell. Th'Archbishop
endeavored to draw near the Haven, he was put back with loss. He tried to
burn the shipping, and he was opposed by floating timber which shut off the
entrance of the Haven.

These things passed by Sea, and by Land were greater dangers threatened by the
preparation of Arms, and provision which was made at Narbona: the report went
the Prince of Conde was to invade the County of Raciglione with a powerful
Army.

This Monarchy was ordained to have wars, either for him, or by him; And he
always to retire, either into Spain, being persecuted by the French, or into
France, being pursued by the Spaniard, by a retreat receiving courtesies, and
with another repaying them.

Wise men imagined the Enemies intent to be rather to amaze with reports, then
to set upon with Arms, to threaten rather then assault, to divert rather then
conquer. The diversion possible to be obtained by setting up three or four
Colors at home, without displaying them in the field, Listing men, without
stirring them. Conquests to be almost impossible, disgraces easy, and the
damages certain. No account to be made of Salsas, and though it should chance
to be lost. Perpignane not to be feared though it should be assaulted, being
strong of it self, backed by a Province abundant in provision, rich in coin,
and numerous in hardy and valiant men. That the King of Spain would be the
hardlier turned. by reason he was tied to defend himself being assaulted by
great Forces, and had strength enough to do it, and because of the effect which
the love of their King, and the hatred they have to the French, might work in
the hearts of the Catalonians. That his Majesty had with the Havens, the
Dominion of the Sea, his Galleys might hinder any one else from becoming
master of it. This gate being closed, it would be impossible for the French to
maintain a potent Army, seeing he was to bring Ammunition and provision on
his back, so far for it. The fire to be kindled in Italy. Piemont in
eminent danger to be lost, and the Kings Sister with it. That it was good to
draw the Spaniards thither, where the reward was great, and whither they could
not come but by Sea, where the Climate is different, and where once routed it
was hard for them to be recruited. That Nature had parted these two Nations
with th'Appenines, the Spaniards Foot to be more valiant, and the French more
numerous in Cavallerie; The one to be forced to come into the Mountains to
move war, where they can make no use of that wherein they most abound, and
the others to descend into the plain, where that was needful, which they most
wanted. To so many motives of reason, and natural cares, was added the ancient
experience, and especially the modern of Fonterable, where the last year they
lost so many men, and so much reputation.

But now in these days experience is followed, only wherein it is favorable;
if adverse, it must be overcome, and though its authority be not denied, yet
it must be interpreted; The cause is attributed to chances, which always
accompany every great enterprise, and the cross of chances imputed to the
Commanders, changing of which in stead of taking away th'inconveniences, they
alter the Generals, in stead of amending the evil, they multiplied and
increase it.

One runs not twice into an error, when in the same there is both shame and
loss, for the danger of loss will not suffer them to adventure the shame.
Enterprises obtain not their effects, either because they are projected, or
badly executed, the error is sometimes in the one, sometimes in the other: but
the fault is always laid on him who can least help it.

It is common to all men to err, but proper only to brave men to confess
their error; He that has often dealt infallibly, if he receive blame for being
once deceived, receives no shame by confessing that he was deceived, It is no
abasement of spirit, nor loss of reputation; It is a confidence in ones own
credit, which is not feared to be lost in one only action. He that confesses
an error, binds himself to the cancelling of it by some great attempt,
whereas he that denies it, seems to be subject to commit a greater. And it is
strange that an ignorant man will never confess one, when the wise man
affirms, that the just man commits seven in a day.

The French Army (numerous being of twenty thousand Foot, commanded in chief
by the Prince of Conde, a Lord of a great blood, and secondarily by the Duke of
Luin, a Soldier of great valor) was by the most Christian Kings Officers sent
into the County of Ronciglione, as though they would overcome the bounds of
nature, the valor of the Spaniards, and alter the Generals fortune; Fortune
smiled, but did not favor; Valor overcome by multitude, appealed to time:
Nature was betrayed, and not overcome.

The Governor of the Castle of Oppoli, a small place, a passage of those
Mountains of a craggie situation, inaccessible by Ordinance, and almost
impenetrable to man, suffered himself to be surprised by a Fanatic terror.
The cries of the French threats entered into his ears, the number of the men
presented it self before his eyes, and in stead of viewing them with emissive
rays, which he might have done a far off from the foot of the hill, he
received the impression of them in the eyes of his imagination, he figured them
to himself, as if they were before him, and was disturbed, and before he
could come to himself again, he lost his courage, his discourse and himself:
for yiedling up the Castle to the French, he and his Lieutenant were put to
death at Perpignane, punishing him, and by his punishment giving others example.

The Count of Santa Colomba governed the Province of Catalonia in those days
to the King and peoples great satisfaction, a Gentleman of great hopes, though
but of small experience. The defect of this quality suffered him not then to
be an eminent Soldier, the plenty of other promised he would be one. He was
noble, apt, prudent, calm, and valiant. In a peaceable government, you could
have desired no more: And in war he so behaved himself, that it seemed that
did him no hurt, which he was defective in; For providing discoursing, and
doing every thing exceeding well, none could judge he needed that which he
only wanted.

He did not find himself to have strength enough to resist the enemy in the
field; The men he looked for to recruit that Army were not yet come; greater
conveniencie, therefore was to be exppected, it being reasonable to doubt in
things not to be questioned at that time.

The Marquess of Leganes business would not permit to have six thousand Foot
taken from the Army which were allotted for that place, seeing he had lost many
men in the Conquest, and employed many to secure the conquered places. The
Galleys of Naples and Sicily, thinking their orders for coming into Spain had
a connection with those six thousand Foots coming, stayed for new orders,
whereby they retarded the arrival of the Tertia of Modona of the Levies made
within the Territories of Lucca, and of the old Gally soldiers. The
Catalaines, either because they did not imagine the enemy would at that time
set upon those parts, or because they were too much tied to the Letter
(construing their privileges too straightly and rigorously) had not made any
fitting preparation. To all these accidents there concurred at last (to the
great wrong of wisdom, which opposed is the ruin of wise men) some French
Officers had intercepted certain Letters sent by the Marquess of Leganes,
importing that the Prince of Conde with his Forces in Linguadoc was to march
toward Italy. It was easily believed, for if it was not, it ought to have been
so; and though it did not persuade to desist from being careful, yet it
dissuaded from using compulsion.

Spain was encompassed with enemies, a mighty Fleet at the Groine, a great
Army in the County of Ronciglione, threatened in the Mediterranean by the Ships
and Galleys of Marseilles, in Cantabria by the Forces which were gathering
together in Bayona, and yet the people (a thing worthy of note) which last
year were affrighted with one Siege, in a place of no great danger, were no
more moved at the rumor of so many forces, then if there were none. Whether it
were because the French, who have no power to overcome, but at the first shock
could affright them but at the first; Or that the people being assaulted, where
they thought they could not be endammaged, believed their own judgment to be
deceived, and not the enemies. And not finding what reason moved him, because
they could not find it, they judged it to be great, and finding it once vain
and weak, giving over unreasonable fear, they fell into a foolish securenesse.

Novelty deceives the judgment, either because it goes before the discourse,
or because it disturbeth it. In a moment it strikes to the understanding, and
forces it presently to frame a confused and indistinct conception: and with
deceit increases those passions, which ignorance would abate. Every thing in
the world is vain, when it is once known. There is no delight can please the
mind nor fear can terrify it; Habit diminishes our passions, not through any
power it has from custom, but through the want we have of the true objects;
Novelty increases them, not because it is unusual, but because it is unknown.

But whether the Spaniards or the French-mens nature caused these various
motions; Sometimes ignorance, sometimes undeceiving, sometimes the novelty,
sometimes the habit, Certain it is that above all other things, that wrought
in it (which the eyes of all Spain saw the year before) the Kings great
wisdom, wise fantasy, and sure direction; The certain judgment, eminent
understanding, quick execution, and uncessant labor of the Count Duke, whence
arose the confidence which increases the courage, and persuades obedience;
which if it be not deceived in the object, assists the Victories, and being
deceived, it hops for them. And if it be not sufficient to make one overcome,
it suffices at least to make him fearlesse.

The Marquess of Villa Franca, went to command the Spanish Galleys which were
in Barcellona, Gianattino d'Oria arived thither with them of Genoa, Frigets
were sent to hasten away them of Sicily and Naples. It was ordered that the
remnant of the Count Dukes regiment should march, and with it six thousand of
the choicest foot in. Cantabria. That Perpignane should be fully ammunitioned,
and that the forces should lie under shelter of it; That the Marquess of
Torracusa and Arena should go thither; That only five hundred horse should
stay for the defense of Cantabria, and the rest should march to Perpignane;
That money, munition and victuals should be provided. That the Levies in
Arragon, and Valencia should be hastened; that these should be persuaded to
defend their Country, and all should remember the bond wherein they were tied
to their Liege Lord.

The King of France his Fleet lay at the Groine, and vexed the coast of Spain.
The Hollanders lay in the Channel, and hindered the sending of men appointed
for Flanders; And because it was necessary to defend the one, and relieve the
other, the Count Duke called the Junta of the Counsels of State and War,
without which he has done nothing, and in which he has done every thing. If
he spoke first, the voting ended in him; He left way for nothing but for
applause; If last from him it took beginning, mending errors, or by him it got
perfection, bettering what was defective.

To desire to be the only adviser of a King, makes not an Officer great, it
makes him odious, and exposes him to danger, and oftentimes is a sign of a
rash mind, which arrogates too much to it self; sometimes of a suspicious and
mistrustfull beart, and many times also of a weak breast, which shunneth the
test, fearing to divide the Kings favor, and lose it, if he prove inferior.

There was scarce ever any great Officer, but that desired to do every thing
himself, and doing it, has not been ruined. But if the wisest men could not
keep themselves from this itching desire surely there must be some great
conveniencie in it; And if so many have been wracked thereby, there must lie
hidden in it some great danger. Two great qualities which the Count Duke has,
make these so intricate points even, namely his moderation and valor, doing
every thing by the advice of counsel, and in counsel prevailing above all;
whereby he enjoys the conveniencie, of avoiding hatred, and converting it
into admiration.

I desire not to be alone believed in what I say of this great Officer. Let
the Original consultations of both the great Counsels of state and war
together be looked upon, and you shall find (which is a thing worthy of wonder)
that the vote coming last to the Count Duke, upon some particular
considerations of his, many Consultations have bin altered, all confessing that
they had erred.

The means was canvassed in the Junta how to remedy the present
inconveniences; It was voted by all that the Coast should be defended by land,
and that the relief should be conveyed into Flanders, (if the French Army did
not hinder it) by sailing about Scotland, with a long compass, exposed to many
misfortunes, and by a parcel of Sea, naturally threatening shipwracks.

But the Count Duke, in whose understanding lies joined the whole frame of the
Monarchy, whose breast is capable of two worlds, considering what vessels
were in Cantabria in four towns, namely, in the Groine, Lisbon, Cadiz,
Alicant, and Cartagena, some Merchants Vessels which were come out of the
Indies, together with those as were every day expected with the Fleet, made it
appear that his Majesty had a Fleet sufficient to fight with the French, carry
relief into Flanders, and also to pass into the Mediterranean Seas, and for a
need, fight with the Turk, and relieve the Venetians.

His Majesty and the whole Iunta agreed with the Count Duke his opinion, who
sent Orders, and provided for necessaries, that these Fleets might as soon as
possibly they could, be ready to set sail.

From hence let it be gathered, how great the forces of the Spanish Monarchy
are, and which most to be regarded. When these did not so much as come in
sight nor thought worthy consideration, though they were greater then some, as
other great Potentates would make their last refuge and ground their highest
thoughts, and liveliest hopes upon.

Piccolomini was marching toward Luxemburg, to fight with Fucchieres, but
could not reach him so soon, but that he was first entrenched and besieging of
Teonvill. He set upon him, disordered two of his quarters, made him break up,
relieved the place, passed over the Mose: fought with him squadron after
squadron, where for a time the enemy fought valiantly, then gave way, and at the
last fled.

The French have swift and subtle spirits, easy to be moved, and being moved,
easy to be dissolved, and because swift and moveable, they run presently where
they find occasion, and united in the selfsame time and place, they make the
subject at the first greater then man and because they are tender and subtle,
and apt to consume in the end being weakened, destroyed, and dissolved, they
forsake him, and leave him a dead carcass. Such like effects are seen every
day in a candle before it goes out, and in a sick man before he dies. The
candle because it shall not ruin at the first; by framing a great light, is
hindered by the tenacity on grossnesse of the matter, which at the latter end
being softened and rarefied, moveable, and light, runs without delay to foment
the flame, and increase it; it does it; but for a little time, because there is
but little matter left. In a sick man the spirits being subtilized by diet, not
overburthened, nor hindered by the body already brought low, consumed and
wasted; finding themselves at liberty and loos, fiercely set upon the diseas;
and being more active then ever they were, at first they overcome, but being
tender, they consume in overcomming, and being consumed, not finding where to
refresh themselves, having none to second them, if they overcome not in an
instant, they die. The slaughter was great, because the foot were all slain or
taken. The victory was the more famous by the chief Commanders being taken.
This Noble man a Politician, and a soldier of greater experience in
State-businesse then in wars, was advised more by politic, then Military
art, did rather follow the time, then manage his forces; and lost, seeking to
prevent loss. He knew by the example of former Captains, that there was no
mean; that he must either conquer, or lose himself, amongst his friends with
shame, or amongst his enemies with glory. For in France, where the
unwillingnesse of losing, was not admitted for a sufficient reason of not
having overcome, there remained no proof of a man's not being able to overcome,
but only by losing.

Piccolomini stayed not to enjoy the victory, he thought to increase it by
trying Mouzzone, and if he had attempted it presently, he had surely taken it,
but want of provisions hindered him.

Man proposes an end unto himself, and for that end he prepares his means;
if upon a new occasion he change his end, if he provide not new means, he
loses himself, and while he does provide them, he loses his opportunity. He
that goes about one enterprise, ordinarily cannot perform two, and he that
will undertake two, seldom performs any. Some have not followed victories,
because they could not, and so have lost their credit; and some, when they
ought not, having gone on to follow them have quite lost them. When one party
is in possibility of being overcome, the other is not always fitting to set
upon him.

The staying of his Majesty's Officers, gave the Marshall of Castillon time to
come and relieve it, causing the forces which Piccolomini had sent thither to
retreat, whilst he marched on speedily with the Cavalrie (sent for by the
Cardinal Infanta) to relieve Edino, brought to the last gasp.

The Cardinal of Richelien, the most Christian Kings great Officer, had
brought his Lord to the Frontiers of Artois, very near to Edino, were it a
purpose to give the King the honor of it as Joah did, or upon necessity to
encourage the Army, that it might not disband. Confidence of overcomming, or
provision to overcome, had so much the more engaged him, because that having
counterpoised the loss with the gain, the following of the enterprise, with
the deserting of it; he found it was more reproachful to retreat half flying,
then glorious to enter into a small place when it was won. Joabs success
then had some conveniencie in it, now adays it is become a mere curiosity.
David was a great Commander, it might be thought of him, that by his brain he
had taken the place, though he was far off, whereas it would not be thought
so of other men, though they were near. But if this were imprudencie, (which I
will not affirm) over carelessness transformed it into wise dome. For the
Garrison wanting powder, being well assaulted, better defended, wanting
Ammunition, it was lost, not being not able to subsist eight days, which had
been enough to have made this year, the gloriousest year that the Monarchy of
Spain had ever seen. The Cardinal Infanta could not relieve it for want of
Horse, the Governor for want of Powder, and Piccolomini for want of time.

He came to the Army, and was there received with applause; He was born of
Ancestors famous both in Peace and War; renowned sometimes by the Keys, and
sometimes by the Sword; he served his natural Lord at Court, in his childhood;
Being yet but young, be went to the German wars, and in his first beginnings
showed himself worthy of the chief degrees; He arrived thereunto by the
lesser; for whereas they use to stay for a time, that years may increase
valor, they were feign to stay a time, that his age might increase, because
that which was proportionable to his merit, might not be disproportionable to
his years; so that leaving it to be questioned whether fortune or valor were
greater in him, I will only affirm that he has been longer valorous then
fortunate; Generous, magnanimous, fearlesse, liberal, and ordained for
victories, he made them spring in the midst of losses, and conquered where
he did not overcome. So fortunate, that valor seemed to superabound in him,
and that he had no need of it. So valorous, that it seemed fortune was
superfluous to him, and that he even forced her. This enemy to merit, when she
cannot beat it down by abandoning it, will follow it, to make it seem less:
and weakens glories, by dividing that which is not to be divided and requiring
share in that wherein she has not wrought. In his first age he was valiant
without any defect of wisdom, in his second wise without any diminution of
valor. Happy in all occasion, victorious at all times, so that nothing hinders
him from being compared with the greatest Commanders of our time, but this
only, that he was never overcome. His Majesty's forces overrunne Piemont
without any resistance. Prince Thomas propounded to the Marquess of Leganes,
to go before Turin with the Army, not to try the strength of it by force,
but only to show himself, and encourage those friends which he had within it.
But all were not of that mind.

Some said that there was no reason to go thither, but only upon hope of
intelligences, which hope was easily perceived, when there was no other, and
once perceived, was easily crossed. That the Citizen was nothing worth, where
the Soldier was armed and forewarned. That darkness and suddenness did
favor turbulent designs, light and time would dissipate them. That what might
be would for that time be made impossible, by showing ones self; And the
surprizall for ever, by making ones self known. That the course of Fortune
ought not to be stayed, nor reputation endangered, time lost, and given to the
enemy.

Notwithstanding all these reasons the Marquess knowing that it was good to
try any thing which could not be hurtful, and dealing with careless men;
that might prove easy which seemed most difficult; and to avoid the censure of
Critics, which always think well of that which has not been tried, he did
not oppose Prince Thomas his desires, and disposed the businesses in that kind,
that he would be sure to lose no reputation by beginning any trench; nor any
time by staying there but few days, and not to give over his conquests by
sending Trotti to Pontestura.

Being come within sight of Turin, the Enemy opposed him with Horse and Foot,
our men routed them, slew many, and took some prisoners, and some few that
fled they pursued to the very Purcullisses of the City. The Duchess sent the
Popes Nuntio, to negotiate an agreement between her and her Kinsmen; Her
Propositions now when she lost all were as high, as if she were a Conqueror;
She seemed to give, rather then take laws. Her demands were great and once
granted could not be recalled; And all she promised, was as nothing and that
revocable when she pleased.

The Treaty broke off, th'intelligences failed, and the Marquess went away,
and because Trotti having taken the town of Pontestura, found much refistance
in the Castle, he resolved to divide his Army into two parts. Prince Thomas
with the one part went to Villanova, and took it by storm; with the other,
the Marquess marched toward Pontestura; He overthrew the enemies relief,
took the Castle, went to Moncaluo, and having taken that place, he lay down
before Asti with his whole Army. The Piemontesses, terrified by the Kings
forces, brought the Keys of the City to the Princes, and the Spaniards valor
overcame the obstinacy of them that kept the Fort.

The Marquess his desires aimed at the taking in of Trino, a place of it self
being of importance, and besides it cut off relief from Casal, and safeguarded
the State of Milan. He had sent his Cavalrie thither, (whilst he lay before
Asti) to hinder the enemy from sending in any forces. They took much
Ammunition which would have gone in, and cut off almost a whole relief of five
hundred chosen French, whom the Marquess of Villanova sought to bring in
there. Trino is held to be almost impregnable, fortied without and within, a
bogge near it not to be meddled with, deep water in the Motes, a strong
Garrison, and well victualled. Notwithstanding the Marquess besieged it, made
a Trench, and withal his approaches as near as he thought fitting for
raising of Batteries, and resolved to give a general assault, hoping thereby
to gain some of the outworks. He gave the assault, took all the outworks, the
City, and the Castle, which having no time to receive the Sonldiers that fled
thither being unprovided, and amazed, yielded within few hours; It was
impossible to hinder the Army (victorious and heated) from pillaging, slaying
and burning.

Who shall deny valor to break forth? it grows with the heat of victory, and
snatching the reins out of judgments hands, it guides a man, and more then
that it carries him? Whereby being heated, he goes where he thought not, and
being in cold blood, he finds himself where now he could not go, because
he went not, but was carried thither.

It would be needful here to set forth the Marquess o^ Leganes his glories,
who has filled Flanders, Germany, and Italy with his acts and victories;
mortified France, and made Spain glorious. But what greater testimony can I
give him of it, but to make it known that a Letter of the Kings spoke his
deserts; A Monarchs Pen was requisite therein, that authority might cause it
to be believed; The whole world unanimously with one hand setting down those
glories, which conformity causes it to spread abroad with one tongue.

The affairs in the County of Ronciglione went on with various fortune, the
enemy had taken the Castle of Oppoli, and having put a Garrison into it, had
laid siege to Salsas.

This place lies almost in a Semicircle at the foot of the Pirenean
Mountains; high hills, small hillocks, and standing waters are the theater of
it. On the South it looks toward Catalonia, on the North are the Apennines,
the Sea is on the East, and on the West a Poole which falls from the Pireneans,
almost to the Walls; The Country may be called barren, the air subtle, by
reason of the Mountains which overtop it, and soggie, because of the water
which is so near it, which mixture rather hurts it then mends it. The Place if
you consider the situation is not very sufficient to defend the Country; if the
Fortifications, not to defend it self; The Motes are full of water, the Walls
massy, high, and countermined, by the form it is altogether exposed to the
enemies injury, by the matter partly defensible. The hardness of the stone
will not suffer any breach to be made in it, the smallness of the Flanckers
will not hinder the approaches. It was strong enough in those days, when the
art used in assaulting tied men to no greater defense. The last who put it in a
posture of defense, found it so situate, that it was necessary, either to
fortify or slight it; He fortified it, because it was, not because it should
be there.

The Governor valorous, but not of experience equal to it, resolved to lose
himself before he would yield the place, more faithful then wary, thinking
only upon the not yiedling of it, failed in the means of keeping it; He
defended not the counterscarff, he came not out of the walls, he fortified not
himself in the Mores, he did not sufficiently meet the Mines, nor he did not
disturb them in their Works. Every time the enemy came with force upon him, he
beat him back, but he did not hinder him when he used art, whereby after forty
days resistance Salsas was lost by carelessness, and after so many more of
siege it was won by surprise. For the enemy having in vain attempted with four
Batteries to beat down the wall, coming to it with the mattock had very good
success by reason of a Mine, which springing, made a hole in stead of a breach,
by which (though little) there went in a great many French before the besieged
espied it, or at least had time to hinder them. Wherefore running too it too
late, and to no purpose, some of the valiantest died there. The Governor being
lame of the Gout, was not present at the action, and yielded upon Composition,
with those soldiers which he had left. Many think they have performed their
duties, if they do not yield up a Hold, as if yiedling them, or having them
taken were not the same thing. It is better for a Captain to want valor, then
experience, the Soldier sometimes helps the one, and adds confusion to the
other. There is nothing worse then ignorance accompanied with valor, the heart
goes against th'understanding, the one will do, and the other knows not what
to do, so that one does, and knows not what he does.

War requires art and valor, and all enterprises, do not require these two
qualities in an equal proportion, sometimes there is most need of the one,
sometimes of the other; but because this distinction is seldom made, and less
known, though many times one overcome with one alone, it is judged he has
done it with both. So men deceived sometimes by th'understanding, and mosttimes
by the heart, do give the command of all enterprises to such as are not good
for all.

To few men has nature given both great valor, and great understanding,
whether because they require a contrary temperature, which is impossible to be
given them, or an even counterpoise which cannot be joined to them. Sometimes
the great heat of the heart, overheateth the brain, and sometimes the
coldness of the brain, does cool the heart too much. And though in Armies
there be seen more valorous then understanding men Commanders, it is not
because these be less necessary, but because they are not so easily found; It
is hard in wars to become famous without valor, and men attaining to command
if they be not famed; Understanding attaines not to it for want of heart, and
the heart because it has no understanding loses it, after it has attained
unto it.

Th'Archbishop of Bordeaux, seeing his attempts vain at the Groine, despairing
of force, and his art being bound up by our men with chains of timber, set
ashore two thousand men at Ferol. His Majesty's forces (though not great)
caused them to retreat rather confusedly then in order. He returned to the
Groine, then putting to Sea, he sailed out of sight, leaving every one
suspicious and doubtful.

In the Junta of State and war th'opinions were different. Some believed the
enemies thoughts were deep and impenetrable. Some said their ends were to take
the Groine, some that it was to hinder the relief of Flanders, some to ransack
the Fleet, some to pass into Italy, some to join with the Holland Fleet in
the Channel, some to burn our ships in their harbors, and some that it was
to set upon Cantabria. Amongst so many, and so various opinions, there was one
who began to speak thus;

SIR, Though man may well be deceived in seeking, to divine or imagine what the
ends and intents of mighty ones are, and the imagining to have found them may
be hurtful, yet it is necessary to discourse thereof, not to affirm what
they will do, but to hinder them from doing it. And as it is true that great
Princes ends cannot be understood, so it is likewise certain that the ends of
great affairs may be found out, for the greatness it self discovers them.

It is the opinion of some, that this great Fleet was raised for inscrutable
ends. I forsake the opinion, or fear not the ends, especially in Spain, where
we need not doubt of any traitors that will yield up Holds, or raise tumults in
Kingdoms, and much less in this Junta, full of so excellent men, that it
cannot be doubted that they should in discoursing, omit any thing which may be
possible. And if the enemies end be any of those that is discoursed of, it is
not impenetrable, if it be known, it will be avoided, if not known, it will
not be feared.

But because it is more easy to deny then to affirm; in affirmations, for
the most part, arguments of likelihood being used, and in negations, certain
demonstrations, it will be the easiest way to show the intent of raising this
Fleet, by making known for what intent it was not raised; for oftentimes where
the truth of an opinion cannot make it self known by it self, one may attain
to the doing of it by the falsehood of other opinions. And that which cannot
come to effect by proving, may be gained by disproving.

It was not raised to the end to ransack the Indian Fleet which they ought
suppose to have been already come into Spain, nor to hinder the relief for
the Low Countries, which they might imagine already arrived into Flanders, nor
to fire the Navy which they believed was gone. All these things being ordered
to be done, some months before it came out of the harbors of France, and all
(save only the Fleet) staid upon such accidents, as the French could neither
see nor imagine. The Forces, which the enemy has sent to Luxemburg, and into
the County of Artois, have caused some to think, that the intent was to land
them in Flanders, an open and rich Country, abounding in fodder and victuals.
And this opinion might be confirmed by the instances the Hollanders made to the
King of England, when he came to Cadis, that he should forsake the hopes of the
barren sands of Spain, and land his men in those fruitful Provinces. But the
King of France has too many Forces in the Low Countries, and is too near, and
too mighty to have the Hollanders suffer him to set footing there, much less
to invite him to it.

This opinion is controlled (as likewise another, viz. that they should imagine
to find some part of Spain unprovided, to land their Forces there, and to take
it) by an advertisement or animadversion, which is this; Fleets do manifest
which way their enterprises tend by their forces. If their greatest strength
consists in shipping, their intents are for the Sea, if in the strength of men,
train of Attillerie provision of horses, they intend land service. But this
Fleet being powerful in vessels of great burden, without any horses, or
carriages for Ordnance; weak in men, which are new raised, of a base
condition, and violently shipped, gives no cause to fear any conquests by
Land; And much less can we be persuaded that it is intended for Italy, by
reason of the place where they were built, namely the Ocean Sea; the greatness
of the ships dangerous for the Mediterranean, and the prosperous wind they have
had to go thither, and went not.

The enemies thought may (in mine opinion) be to draw us, with the fear and
report of the Army, to furnish all the sea coasts of Spain with men; and they
to assault with the Navy of Marseilles the Counti^ of Ronciglione, encouraging
the Army which is there, and has already taken Salsas to besiege Perpignane,
and with the Fleet in the Ocean and the forces which are raising about Bayona,
by Sea and Land to invade Cantabria, lay siege to St. Sebastian, first disperse
our forces into diverse parts, and then force them to come strongly into
several places, thinking it impossible for us to defend a vast Country, and
with two mighty Armies to relieve two invaded Provinces.

There is an erroneous opinion spread amongst the chief Officers of France,
that the Spaniard has no men, and amongst the common sort of Spaniards
another, that the French have no money. A Monarch that has great store of money,
may find men enough. And a King that has great store of men, if obedience be
not wanting, never wants money. I am confirmed in this opinion by seeing that
this Fleet has already layen a month sailing to and fro before the Groine
without attempting any thing; It works toward its end, without doing any
thing.

I believe it would willingly set upon the Fleet, burn our shipping and gladly
hinder the relief of Flanders, and much rather discomfit it and that if it
found a Port of importance neglected, it would set upon it, as things casually
and occasionally laid before them, which fall in their way, and sometimes come
to be easilier effected, then those which were at first conceived; Like unto
the difference there is between a child at first conceived, and one that is
bringing forth, the one coming forth into the light alive, and the other
sometimes vanishing away, wasting in its beginning, or when it is reduced to an
embrio.

I promise not my self, that I have penetrated into the intent of the French,
neither do I care. When the enemy will perform an enterprise, and set upon
that can perform no other, it conduces much to a defense, if one can
penetrate into it; but when he thinks to do one thing and may do many, the
best defense is ignorance. Notice causes man to secure that part which is
threatened and suffer the rest to be neglected. And that being safeguarded,
causes the enemy to alter his mind, and the other neglected, helps him to
attain to that upon which his altered mind is fixed.

He that has not power to defend himself in all parts, does necessarily lose
himself for want of strength. He thath has sufficient, loses himself
sometimes through carelessenesse, and sometimes through too much providence.
The knowiedge of the assailing enemies intention is an ease when it is good to
know it, and a difficulty when the notice of it is hurtful. For where he can
do but only one thing, it is likely secured, and where he may do diverse,
the understanding knows not how to resolve upon one, and it would make the
other easy if it were resolved upon.

The Count Duke has with admirable wisdom secured the difficulties of
provisionall things. The chief Ports are sufficiently surnished. Cantabria is
set in posture of defense to hinder the enemy if he should affaile it.
Catalonia ready to thrust him out when he is come in. Don Anthonio Ochendo,
ready in the streights to secure the Fleet. The Marquis of Villa Franca with
the Galleys to oppose the ships of Marseilles. Every thing provided for and
armed.

But our discourses and the enemies designs were carried away with the wind,
which rising tempestuous, and lasting three days (a thing unusual at that
time of the year) brought the Fleet in danger of over setting or sinking. The
lesser Ships perished in the Ocean, in the fury of the tempest. The biggest of
them in a calm Sea, when they were going into harbor. As if it did presege
danger of shipwreck to great ones in tranquillity of peace, entering into
harbor, or in the harbor it self, by some revolution of State, after the
little ones were perished in the turbulencies of War.

The enemy being become Master of the field by taking of Salsas took all
places which lay open and ordinarily follow the fortune of the most powerful,
He never skirmished nor fought, with our cavallery, but we carried away the
best of it, showing that the Spanish horse are no way inferior to the French,
if we had them. The long peace this Province has enjoyed the wars at Sea
where there is no use of horses, foreign wars, sometimes in the Indies
where we could not convey them, sometimes in Flanders where foot did the
greatest execution sometimes in Italy, or Germany where we found Auxiliarie
ones, made us first to neglect the use of them, then grow careless in bringing
them up.

But it is either the convenience or fate of the greatest Monarchies, to have
their chief strength and prop to consist in the foot; the Romans in their
Legions, the Macedonians in their Phalanges, making up their Cavallerie,
always with strangers, friends, or Auxiliaries.

Many yield to opinion, when they have neglected art, and after they have
yielded for a time, going to try whether the conceit be true or no, they are
overcome, and yield again, confessing themselves inferior in valor, when
they are only inferior in practice. Through this deceit the Spaniards would
have tried and yielded a thousand times, if wars had not happened in Spain
it self, where necessity has forced, and time undeceived them.

His Majesty's Army had not as yet any convenient number it did enough doing
nothing, seeing it hindered the enemy from much doing. But the Soldier partly
valorous, and partly inexperienced, some for shame, and some through interest,
de^^red to come in sight of the French, and fight with them and he desired it
most who had never seen the enemy, nor knew not what fighting was.

The Commanders for a while did stay their heat, rather then allay it. Being
persuaded, that as in a sick man, so in a Soldier, one ought to hope, where he
hops, and fear, where he fears (a rule which is false, in that hope, which
often deceiving, causes good to be looked for where there is evil, and only
true in the fear which though deceived may bring forth evil, even where it
does not find it) they went with a small Army. partly of new and partly of not
disciplined men, to see the enemy, and saw his advantage so great, that they
retreated without doing any thing. The King and his Council had presently a
lively feeling of this disorder: what encouragement the enemies might gain,
and our men lose. And because the Army confisted of people of that country,
commanded by the Count of Santa Colomba and of hired men, haste was made to
send them a valorous and expert Chieftaine, who with general applause was Don
Philip Spinola Marquis of Balbases.

This man was son to Marquis Ambrose Spinola, the renownedst General of our
age, and one of the greatest that histories mention. He follows his Fathers
stepps in martial affairs to revive the glories of them and he fills them
up so, what with valor, what with wisdom, that it shall serve to say for the
praise of them both; of the one that he was borne of such a father, and of the
other that he begot such a son.

The Count Duke gave him his first imbossement in the best way as such a
Subject could do, who being one of the greatest Generals is defective in no
quality. Which this one thing would make envy it self confess. Namely that his
engagement of being present in all Armies by direction, hindered not his genius
from being personally present in one. His not fighting in any, may hinder him
from being styled a great Soldier, but his commanding there will admit to the
title of a great General.

He that knows (as the Count Duke does) both his Kings, and the enemies
forces; The art of fighting, the place where they fight, and has (like him)
had experience or so many wars, framed so many Armies, withstood so many
disasters, given advice in so many enterprises, and with his counsel disposed
and obtained so many Victories, may wed govern Armies, and stay at home;
command them, and be absent. The swiftness of Posts makes that which is far
off to be near, the strength of the understanding soreseeth what is to come
and though he cannot affirm what an enemy will do before he does it, it is
sufficient if he knows what he should do. The good is only one, but the
evil manifold: The first is to be known by great wisdom, and the other is
no great matter whether it be known or no. To instruct a General of an Army,
it is enough to teach him ways to defend himself from the enemy and how to
offend, when he does well for if otherwise his own error will instruct him by
erring.

The Cardinal of Valletta was already strong in Italy, and did hourly look
for the Duke of Longeville to come with those Troops which were destined to
the harms of But gundie. The Dutch effe openly professed she would receive
them in Monmiglian, Susa, and Carmagnuola.

The Marquis of Leganes lay under Santia, which being taken, Casal was quite
blocked up; and though it was a very strong Castle, it had victuals but for
eight days: Prince Thomas was of opinion to go into Piemont with the Army, to
win those places before the coming in of the French. Urging that the Countries
were willing to receive them, and invited them thither. That they once lost
their opportunity of besieging Trino, through the desire of streightning Casal.
That the Frenches stay, before they came into Piemont, and the Spaniards
quickness in winning of that place, had caused the opportunity to be rather
deferred then lost.

That if now they would retard upon the same pretense, and stay till Santia was
taken, the occasion would be lost. That remedies should not be sought for the
feet, where the disease proceeded from the head. That Santia might be held in
play with small forces.

That being in sight of the enemy in Piemont, he could not relieve Monferras;
the Duke of Longevill might be hindered from joining with the other forces:
those Holds would be taken, and so they would remain masters of the field, and
of the passes of Savoy to Burgundy, and Flanders: that the French would be
confined in Pinarole, without victual to maintain themselves, or Country to
resist, whereby they would be forced to come into these parts with great
strength to defend themselves, and so forsake the hopes of flanders and
Burgundy give over molesting of Spain, and laying down their vast
imaginations be brought to a good peace.

That giving them time to get into those Holds, was the dividing of Piemont,
and bringing perpetual war into it, more dangerous for him that is nearest
with his state, and furthest off with his forces. That the enemy might there
with small forces defend himself, and put Flanders in danger; or come with
much strength and endanger the state of Milan.

If the Duchess did not admit them into Turin, it would be impossible for
them to relieve Casal; and if she did admit them, it would be difficult; they
would be opposed by evil passes, deep rivers, and dangerous places of abode.

That for a small relief it would be sufficient if any neighbor Garrison
were increased with fifteen hundred Foot; and as for a great one it could no
way be compassed: fighting would become necessary, and then one might consider
whether it were better to give battle in the entrance of Piemont, with so many
retiring places at their backs, to go into upon occasion of loss, and so many
before them to conquer, in case they overcome; or to give it upon the very
Frontier of the State of Millan far from any place to conquer and near to
lose all.

That his Majesty's Commanders had stumbled at Casal (as at a fatal stone)
with much danger to the Monarchy; Once thinking to surprise it by intelligence;
and another to take it by force, and this would be the third in going about to
block it up from relief.

The Marquess of Leganes being scanted of men by diseases which had killed
many, by overthrowes which he had given, still with some blood any by places
which he had taken, and was bound to put garrisons into, thought he could not
without danger go far from what he had gotten, and expose himself with
small tired forces to fight with a multitude of fresh soldiers: which either
occasion, or necessity might easily have enforced him to. That the Kings chief
interest consisted in defending the State of Millan that Santia being taken
Casal remained quite cut of^ from all re^iefe. That staying in those parts, he
could make all he had gotten sure unless it were Civasco the endangering of
which could not counterpoise so many conveniences. That no hopes invited them
into Piemont, but only intelligences: which he had so often found vain, that
to confide in them would be a folly, and much more to put themselves into
irrecoverable hazard if they should fail. That it was no great matter whether
the French did get into those holds or no; they could do no more in them, then
out of them. They would engage a number of men in them, would vex the
Inhabitants, and make them their enemies who before were their friends.

The taking of Santia was made difficult to the Marquis. The hold of it self
being strong, the ground without unfit for batteries, wanting wood to make
sconces, and being without water. He resolved to besiege it at large. But the
enemies forces recruited came marching toward Asti to relieve them. The
Marquis encamped himself in such sort that he could hinder their designs and
yet not go from the place, insomuch that the enemy lying on the other side of
Dora, within seven miles of the place, victuals failing the besieged, they
yielded themselves. The Cardinal of Valetta, and Marquis Villa, despairing of
doing any good in those parts, went to besiege Civasco. Prince Thomas and the
Marquis drew near it with their Army* but finding the enemy already fortified,
and without comparison surpassing in number, they did not endeavor to relieve
it, and so the place was lost.

In the mean time Conio a strong hold, and of great consequence for the
gaining of Nizza* and Villa, Franca, declared it self to hold with the Princes,
The French set upon it, and were forced with great loss to retreat. The
Cardinal of Valletta came thither with all his Army to besiedge it. The
Cardinal of Savoy (respecting it as his own creature) with more resolution
then care, threw himself into it to defend it. Prince Thomas nor the Marquis
of Leganes had not consented to his engagement. But seeing the danger, they
sought for a remedy.

They marched toward Turin with their Army, not with any certainty, but only
with a kind of hope to divert the enemy from his former enterprise, and call
him thither. And to make it sure, the Prince with the Marquis his advice
resolved to attempt it. Which he did, and advancing forward one night with two
thousand horse, and a thousand foot, he hung a pettarre upon the gate, set
scaling ladders to the walls, and (though with resistance and blood) he won
the City, where (a thing which seldom comes to pass) the prisoners were
more in number, then they who took them. The duchess recovered the
Cittadell, but so closely pursued, that for want of time she was forced to
leave even her very jewels behind her.

In this action were most taken notice of, the Marquis of Carcena Don Martino
of Mexica, and D. Francisco Tuttavilla, who bravely relieving one another,
revived the almost extinguished hopes, and perfected the design which was
almost desperate.

And this is the effect which the Cardinal of Savoy his phantasticallnesse
brought forth, who bringing his brother and his friend into a straight,
occasioned the taking of Turin.

As births come not forth of a woman with child without great pain, so the
understanding cannot bring forth without great labor. The expulsive virtue
works not unless it be provoked and best, when most; valor increases, and
falls, according to wrath and interest; and the understanding through
affliction. There is none naturally careful or valiant man, but may be
careless and fearful* in respect of him who is made careful by danger, and
valorous through despair.

The King of France his Fleet rather patched up then repaired covering its
nakedness, with the spoils of English, German, and Holland ships which lay in
the harbors of Brittanie, set sail again, and coming in sight of the
Province of four Cities, after some tacking about, came into Laredo, an open
place, without any forts to relieve it, or soldiers to defend it, he took the
town, sacked it, wasted the country about, and robbing, ruining, and burning
went abord again. With the news of Laredo there arrived into France the the
news of the surprise of Turin by Prince Thomas.

Paris and the whole Kingdom murmured* that so many millions should be laid
out upon such a powerful Fleet, to no other end or profit but to sack a poor
place, which had been a small matter for a poor sea rover to have done. Upon a
mighty Army to take a Castle which brought more loss then gain with it,
causing a great Army to be kept there, wasting many men, and much money. That
with these costly vanities, the interest of Italy was abandoned, friends, and
the Royal blood exposed to dangers, frauds, accidents and fortune. They
accused the Officers of vanity, that they made difficult the surest
enterprises where something might be gotten, wasting time, and the blood and
substance of subjects, in those things which made but a fair show, and a great
deal of noise. Persuaded sometimes by passion, sometimes by emulation, rather
to kindle coals, then conquer states.

To those who defended them by saying, that the powerfullest way to destroy the
Monarchy was to set upon it in Spain; for keeping the War there, and
diverting it from other places, the rest of the dominions were cut off from
relief, where there was continual need of men and money; They answered that
to defend Italy by invading Spain, Flanders and Burgundy, was to make one
plant grow by sowing of another; that it was wasting of Gold in Alchimie; and
like thinking to make Gold of Mercury, and brass, and give over digging it
out of the mines.

That it was not to be thought a small matter to divert the Marquis of Leganes
fortune in its fierce beginning, and that it was impossible to do it with a
Fleet in the Ocean that fired three or four straw ricks, or with a powerful
Armies taking a small Castle in the County of Rouciglione, and that they could
much less make Piemont secure with only diverting the enemies forces, and not
defending it.

That diversion required, an opportune time, great forces, and prosperous
fortune. That the Romans did not make use of it with Aniball in the torrent of
his victories, but after his first violence was past, and when (though his
course were not staid) his fury was assuaged. That they opposed him strongly in
one place to call him to another; that they forsook not the defense of Italy,
when they invaded Africa. and did not only divert him with Armies, but tied him
to it with victories.

But whosoever shall at this time attentively consider the state of France, the
houses full of blood, the neighboring Islands full of exiled men, the Kingdom
of tributes, the public privileges cancelled private men's goods taken away,
Subjects discontented, Heretics multiplied under the name of overcome, the
Province destroyed under pretense of reforming, every thing by nature turned
upside down, and by violence kept quiet, may know that the endeavors which
are used to maintain the Swede in Germany with store of money, to assault
Spain, Flanders, and Germany with powerful Armies, are prudent and
necessary, that the evil may not penetrate into the inward parts of a body
full of very evil humors. And that the glory of being an invader, losses
dissembled, conquests multiplied, and increased, may so fill the ears of the
Parents that they may not hear the grievous groans of their sacrificed
children resounding in their air.

Order was given the Count of Santa Columba, that he should not undertake any
new enterprise before th'arrivall of the Marquess of Balbases, who stayed so
long, that before him came the Marquess of Torracusa, the rest of the Count
Dukes Regiment, the old tertiaes of Cantabria the horse and foot disembarqued
out of the Neapolitan and Sicilian Galleys, so that at his coming he found the
Army numerous and valiant, desirous of enterprises, and able to perform great
ones; But because the enemy prevailed in number of Cavalrie, and many recruits
were by him daily expected, it was considered of in the Junta of State and
war, whether it were good to go find him out and fight with him. And there
was but one who was of opinion that we should not give battle.

That we ought not to fight with the enemy, when we were too weak, and that if
we were too strong we could not. He would retreat into France, where the
pursuit of him would be impossible through want of victuals, fotherage, and
train of Artillery. And that we were then to fight with them in their own
Country where their rear was secured, their provisions certain, and their
Cavalrie advantageous.

When the enemy is not afraid, if it be a shame to fear, yet it is wisdom to
doubt, and this Monarchy ought not to be exposed to a doubtful fortune, which
adverse may make us unhappy, and prosperous can add no felicity to us.

Princes take Citizen-like advise, when they adventure their estates upon a
point of reputation, which consists not in the loss of a Castle in the midst
of wars, but in the ending of them with great Conquests, or an honorable
Peace.

Finally it would do small good to overthrow the French Army in Autumn, and
to regaine Salsas much less, but to lose a battle, might be a great
prejudice.

And if we should win it, the enemy by virtue of their numerous Cavallerie
might retire with little loss with the remainder of their Army by
the assistance of the Sea, it being now October, and having so populous a
Country might by the Spring be recruited. Ours would diminish in the fight, and
more afterward. Those of the Province thinking the enterprise to be at an
end, and that they had done enough to maintain their reputations, being raw in
the profession, weary of the field, and troubled by the waters which were
naturally near upon coming would hinder the besieging of Salsas, or the
gaining of it, if it were besieged.

To know what his Majesty's victorious Army would do in Catalonia, let it be
considered what they did in Cantabria. If any thing had remained to do after
the Battle, there was nothing left to do it withal'. Armies raised in Spain,
(as if they were raised but for one end) last but for one enterprise.

The profit attained by the winning of Salsas, would not counterpoise the
damage that might follow a disaster, which God forbid. This Army being
overthrown, which for want of Horse (if conquered) would be quite destroyed;
How could it be recruited in a Country scarce both of horse and men, at such a
time as the proud conquering enemy, emboldened, would prepare to assault
Cantabria by land, and having a mighty Fleet at Sea, would engage us, either to
secure this vast circumference of Spain, or oppose them with a greater Fleet
beside, that which is needful to convoy the Plate Fleet, defend Brasil, and
guard the Streights.

Where should men be levied, if there were fighting in so many places,
especially if we imagined we were to fight where there is now no fighting,
being bound to defend all this Province, besides Italy, Germany, Burgundy,
Flanders, and the Indies?

That the enemy had an advantage above us, viz. that he could bear many
losses. He was this year overthrown at Theonville, and routed with great
slaughter, and at the same time he took another Hold, and within few days
came into the field again with a new Army. The last year at the Siege of
Fountainarabie he lost a Battle, and he is now returned more powerful both
by Sea and Land, giving us cause of fear one way, and another way besieging
Holds, and winning them.

If the French do not take Perpignane* they have done nothing* nor we, if we
take not Narbona. They will not take Perpignane with keeping Salsas, nor we
Narbona by routing of them.

The best revenge one can take* is to take none. The greatest conquest is to be
content with loss. If a man cannot always conquer* when he loses, a small
loss, it seems to be a great victory, and many times it is a preparation to
it.

It is easier to go on in prosperous fortune, then to stop in a disaster. The
one does not please the mind with so powerful a charm, as the other with a
sharp goad wounds it. He that stops in good success, oftentimes loses it, he
that does it in a disaster, oftentimes changes it.

Two small things ruin a fool a little: victory, and a small loss; in the
one he grows careless, in the other he is provoked. Being careless, he
loses that which he had not gotten, and provoked, he adventures that which
he had not lost.

That Battles ought to be given in France by any other way but this, getting
into the heart of it, and driving it to defend it self. There is a difference
between fighting with one who defends himself, and with one that offends.
The first being overcome, has lost the means of defending himself, and the
other may defend himself with that which he has not lost.

The Romans at the same time as they avoided fighting with the Carthaginians in
Italy, sent Scipio to fight with them in Africa.

He that overcommeth in France, Italy and Germany, shall be the umpire of the
world.

That it was not fitting to leave it to a Generals will, to fight; or not: if
they be not much inferior, they will fight. They see those who last year
dissuaded it, have lost their credit. They find this counsel inclining to it,
and they will adventure to put that reputation in question by fighting, which
they would be sure to lose by retiring.

The Count of Lauta Columba would have fought before it was time; Marquess
Spinola does judge it to be time now. One is moved by one reason, the other by
another, and both (if they be left to their own mind) will fight.

This Army, which is the most flourishing that has been seen in this Monarchy
since the memory of man; either may be lost in battle, or wasted in a siege,
and either lost or wasted, there will not such another be gotten together in a
hundred years, for it is a hundred years since any such was seen.

They should keep it till such time as they might better secure themselves from
losses, and profit themselves more by victories. They should imagine Perpignane
was the Frontire. They should lodge their Army, maintain it, increase it. The
Spring would show where it might best be employed: and the Galleys would
convey it where need should require.

Contrary to this another began to say; SIR, There is amongst Counselors a
maxim more wily then honest, profitable for themselves, but most pernicious
to Princes, viz. not to give any dangerous counsels, but to let Princes take
them of themselves. The intent is to avoid danger, and hatred, which is done by
exposing their Lord to hatred, and abandoning him to danger.

It is a mistake of a shallow brain, rather then deep wisdom to dissuade
battles when there is no greater reason then the danger of trying it. That
which is lost cannot be recovered nor that defended which is assaulted, but by
endangering what remains.

The preservative power in man* which sweetly governs the body, when it is in
health, if once set upon by sickness goes not about to sooth it up, it uses
violence, assaults it, and adventures to overcome it, putting it to the fortune
of a Duel, either to live or die.

If your Ancestors had not adventured themselves in battles, they had not
conquered, if your Majesty does not adventure, he will lose. No Monarchy did
ever subsist long, if it did not sometimes adventure.

Saying, that the enemy ought to be gotten out of Spain by diverting not by
battle is a vanity. Either he would not be turned away, and we shall then
remain weaker, or if he be diverted, we should but only change our danger.
Consider nature, which employing its forces to divert humors raw, before she
has overcome them, if being violented they yield unto her, it lames, and
kills, not heales; if they contumaciously resist, having weakened her strength
by seeking to divert them, it remains unable to overcome them: she then
obtaines her end, when she first concocts, and then diverts them. That is a
wise diversion which is made not with an intent to begin Victories, but to
perfect them when they are begun.

The fortune of the French is sudden like their temperature: it rises and sets
in the same field, and as it is hard to overcome it when it grows, so it is
secure when it declines. When occasion is come, he that through weakness
loses it, or through ignorance does not know it, never sees it again. He
that passes by ripe fruit, and does not gather it, when he comes again, either
it is gone, or grown rotten; whether it be that nature is an enemy to
simplicity and ignorance, or that th'impersection of worldly perfection comes
late, stays but a while, and falls suddenly. Fortune comes to every one at
some time; most are put off because they knew her not, not because they had her
not, and all may become happy, if they knew how to go about it. When the
Romans determined to give battle no more in their own Country, they had given
it there four times already; It was not wisdom but faintness, not because
they had gotten more brain, but because they had lost their hearts in so many
battles with such unfortunate success. That which disheartened them, ought to
encourage us, who have once given bastell and won it, and have overcom, as
often as we have sought.

If the Romans had gotten the better in the first battle, Hannibal must have
dyed there, or gone back discomfited. And it would now have run in Politicians
pens that we ought to fight with the enemy presently, and not give him time
to take footing in the country* nor assault it, to dishearten the men, and
destroy the land: If fortune should prove adverse we might with the remainders
keep the country, and with these entire parts at the back of them renew the
Army, and try our fortunes again, if it should prove prosperous we might undo
the enemy. One victory would suffice to become conquerors, and by one overthrow
we should not be overcome. But because the Romans were overcome, the Council
is blamed, whereas the execution of it should, having lost rather through want
of valor and discipline, then of wisdom.

It is much that Scipio a young man his advice, who was more rash for his own
glory then for the profit of the common wealth, great in estimation not for
what he was but for what he came to be, applauded only by the people, not by
the Senate, suffered rather then allowed of when they could neither diswade nor
hinder him, should now bind men in all ages to follow him, being favored by
fortune* which only did approve of him, condemned by Fabius Maximus his
reasons, by the authority of a whole Senate, and much more by the experience of
his Father and Uncle who in the self same enterprise with little glory lost
part of their Army and their lives.

Many opinions are defended (by the respect is borne to gray hairs, and many
are borne up to the reverence due to the Majestic memory of antiquity. It is
more harsh to bring ones mind to think they are false, then to find they are
so: and yet it is a manner of deifying antiquity to believe their sayings,
without examining them.

When Scipio went into Afric it had peradventure bin better to have changed
Captain then Country. With that power, that Army, and that his valor, he
might more securely have conquered in Italy. And if he lost in one place he
might also have lost in another. Neither could he have recovered himself,
being so far from the Romans assistance, nor peradventure they, having sent
him away so far from them. He overcame, it is true, but who will deny that he
might have bin overcome? if he had fought in Italy he had made sure the
victory; because he overcame in Africa he increased the commonwealth, if he
had lost, he had ruined it. The conquest had bin vain in one part, to have
remedied the loss in the other. In Italy the commonwealth had gone to ruin,
in Africa Scipio had become King.

Then if all that the Romans had, consisted in the end, success, and fortune,
of the forces of Italy, why did they weaken, and abandon it?

In our times the Duke of Bavaria joined with the Spanish forces, might have
taken the Palatinat, and yet he went to seek the Palsgrave, where he had his
Army, not his dwelling, Knowing that if he lost in Bohemia it was in vain to
Conquer in the Palatinat.

Let what has bin in times past, be as it will, either well discoursed
according to reason or favored by fortune. This Monarchy, now the biggest that
ever was, must not make use of others examples, she of it self, ought to be an
example to it self.

One ought not leave the doing of a good thing, to do a better; when both may
be done, especially when they do not hinder, much more when they further one
another. In our case conquering the enemy in Ronciglione does assist, and not
disturb the going to Paris.

Let us then Sir try to overthrow the French here, to profit our selves by the
victory, to call him to defense, to offend him elfe where, and over come him
every where. It was not Scipio his Army in Africa that overcame the
Carthaginians, but those forces which they had consumed in Italy. So it may
befall the French to lose themselves at home, by going to much abroad.

Let us fight with this enemy in France in Italy, in Flanders, by Sea, by
Land, wheresoever we find him, seeing we Conquer him wheresoever we fight with
him. The dangers which seem to threaten are not such as at first they seem to
be. There was seldom a battle lost but that some part of the Army has bin
saved: The remainders, though never so small, will serve to hinder the enemy
from further proceedings, the gold and men of Spain, to repair it on all
sides: the Officers valor sufficient to do it, and the season, will afford
time for it.

They are deceived that hold Spain to be a desert place. There be disinhabited
and barren places, but there are likewise many populous, and fruitful. And it
is so large, that not counting the first, measuring only the last, it would be
found bigger then the fruitfullest Country of Europe.

Deductions and consequences from times past to the present are dangerous,
their examples are not available. The knowledge of events, if nere at hand are
decitfull, if far off false. Fighting now is diverse from what it was, there
are other men, another age, and (I will say it) another world.

The Iunta agreed that battle should be given, Marquis Spinola who advanced
to seek out the French Army. Overtaken by night when he drew nere it. he never
laid hand to spade made no trench, defense or fortification* but set his Army
open in battai^e array. The enemy retired toward his own Country, drew nere
to Salsas, under the safeguard of that place, at the recovering of which the
minds of the greatest part of the Spanish Commanders seemed to aim.

Marquis Spinola was perplexed. He had many important difficulties before his
eyes. The time of year far spent, the Country cold, the Climat unhealthfull;
the long drought which had bin, threatened, great store of rain, small
provision of food, none of Fother, the ground bare to make hutts for his Army,
stony to entrench it, no stuff to make any shelter, no Pioners, nor Gunners,
nor Founders, few instruments to work with, miners fewer, the former unfitted,
the latter inexpert. The place fortified without and lined within, Ordnance,
Ammunition and Men, more then abundant. The enemy encamped about it, to hinder
it from being besieged and it ready to receive him if he were assalted. Forced
to fight before he could besiege, and expose himself to a dangerous battle,
for to begin an incertaine enterprise: a loss would put him in great danger,
and one Victory not sufficient to make a conquest.

The water, the sword, and want would undo the Army. The Soldiers would
forsake their Colors, being wounded sick, and wearied. They must be relieved
with men out of Cantabria, the Ships and the Galleys with old and new Levies;
To forsake their enterprises, would make the relief of Italy impossible,
weaken the defense of other Provinces, and growing obstinate about a small
Castle, would make all provisions for the future field difficult.

And if the enemy should refuse to fight, and go back with his Army entire,
rest it, increase it, and having an eye upon ours, when he saw it diminished
and wearied, should set upon it powerful and fresh; it would be a shame to
retreat dangerous to meet him, and more to stay for him. The ordinary manner
of intrenching would be hard, the extraordioary impossible. The quarters of
necessity must be so distant, that they should not in an instant relieve one
another every very thing would be weak and disunited; so that the enemy might
in a dark night give alarm in diverse places, set upon one quarter strongly,
and take it, so we might lose them all without fighting, but only with the
hands of a few, and peradventure the weakest. If we should go to meet him, we
must either forsake and slight our trenches, and the labor of many days would
be lost, which (the time of year considered) would not be made good again in
many weeks. Or we must leave men to guard them, and that would weaken the
Army, tying it to fight with notable disadvantage.

The Marquis desired nothing more then to give battle, and nothing assured him
of victory more, then to give it quickly.

In this perplexity was Spinola, when by the advice of the Count of Saenta
Columba, and other head Officers, it was resolved to send all the Horse, and
four thousand Foot to view the place, and the enemy.

These forces were commanded by the Maquis of Torrecusa, Field-Marshall
General, and with him the Marquis of Arena. Being arrived, they found the
French quartered behind the Fort Torrecusa determined to try them with horse
and foot; he caused John de Arza the field Marshall to advance with a flying
squadron, he gave the charge of the foot skirmish to the Marquis of Mortara. It
began with such valor of our Horse and Foot, that gaining ground, they
presently forced the enemy terrified and lost, to forsake their stand, and
retire under command of Musket shot of Salsas, with great-losse of men, and
greater of reputation, leaving their quarters and tents in the hands of the
conquering Spaniards. The relief of the Ordnance and Musket shot from the
Castle would not have saved them, if night, and a confused retreat, and orderly
flight with much silence had not conveyed them further off.

This fight had engaged the Kings Generals to advance with the whole Army, and
though they arrived before day thinking to fight with the enemy at the dawning
yet they found him already retreated. They determined to seiz upon a Fort
royal, and Redout which was upon the hill; wherein they had prosperous
success.

Death stayed the course of many, yet abated no man's courage, where it hit not
it terrified not, stirring up wrath in the rest, in stead of compassion as it
ordinarily does where valor is above fear.

They put the enemy to flight, they entered the Fort and Redout and having got
these, with the same valor they gained the rest of the out-workes.

Then the whole Army charged the place with more courage then discipline, For
the officers endeavored to have them stay, and shelter themselves there. But
the soldiers in that rage refusing it could not be stayed by fear nor wounds.
For though their Flanks were discovered, and lay open to bullets, fire, and
stones; many drunk with valor, run to the very Gate to hang on a Petard,
and others into the Dike to assault the Wall, not discerning possibility from
impossibility, esteeming every thing easy for the courageous, and nothing shut
up from a valiant man. In this fight, all the Field Marshalls and particular
men behaved themselves valiantly, especially the Count Duke his Regiment, which
being all of old soldiers, and reformadoes, Commanded by the Marquis of
Mortara, and Don John di Arza, made it self to be known for the chief
squadron of the Army.

In the enemies flight, or retreat, the French his Letters happened in the
Spaniards hands; There were some of the Cardinal of Richlieues which spoke
somewhat modestly. Some from a Secretary of State, which were more arrogant
viz. that they expected in Paris to hear that the King of France his Army was
penetrated into the very bowels of Spain, made the Provinces desolate, and
taken the Royal Palace of Madrid. The Duke of Luin his conceits gave more
scandal then any thing else. For he being esteemed a valiant and wise
Captain, it was strange to hear, that when our men had set upon his
Cavallerie, (which was diverse times) and had always made it retire or run
away he should write That our men having presumed, to set upon a few of their
Horse, with many men, some eight or ten of their Gentlemen coming in, had
caused ours to run away, as if he would make Ariosto be believed, and turn him
from a Poet to a Chronicler, making that a history, which was once but a fable.

Nothing manifested the deceit more plainly then his last Letter, when he lay
with all his men under the shelter of the Fortifications of Salsas he certainly
promised that the King of Spain his Army would not dare to look them in the
face, nor come within Canon short of them, And yet within few hours he saw a
parcel of it set upon him in his quarters, drive him out, rout him, and put
him to flight.

Whilst they writ with so much contempt of the Spaniards valor, the Letters
of his Majesty's Officers in the Army spoke very honorably of the French, made
their forces great, and (though truth had showed them to be faint-hearted) gave
an honorable report of them.

This which seems in one part to be folly, in the other weakness, if it be
not art which foresees the want, is nature that provides for it. Where courage
is wanting, it is good to take away the understanding, and where one cannot
encourage to deceive. It is needless to show a valiant man, to have him fight,
the securenesse of the business* if he but knows what he should do. He takes
his virtue from him, that conceales the danger to him. He deserves the name of
valiant, who knowing the danger by discourse, meets it with reason.

The French manner produces this effect, that he being deceived, sets fiercely
upon his enemy, thinking he will run away. But if he finds him stiff, he
oftentimes loses his courage, and recovers his brain; and whereas his first
motion was of an inconsiderate violence, his last comes to be an abject mind,
The Spaniards valiant in their onset, pursue their enemies rashly, for having
imagined a resistance; overcomming it, they think to find none greater.
Therefore the French scarce being set upon, fled, and the Spaniards being
Conquerours, run against the Wall, thinking the very stones would yield to
that steel, which trenches and men had yielded to.

Amidst these prosperous, pleasing, and happy successes, the Army put to
flight, the Fortifications won and the enemy retired into the Hold dejected:
the difficulties of the siege seemed to the Marquess to be increased by the
death of so many valiant Commanders and Soldiers rather then decreased, yet
he resolved to besiege it. Whether it was because the victory did likewise
inflame him, which suffered him not to consider of every thing or whether
fortune called him, which must many times be followed blindfold, or whether the
Armies valor persuaded him to it? or whether most of all likelihood bound him
thereto, not knowing how to justify himself, if he did not besiege it, to
avoid the blame of great, and small; ignorant and wise, when every Commander
and Soldier gave it up for taken.

Counsel is hard against likelihood: It requires a great understanding,
penetrating into the truth: a strong resolution against murmuring, a heart not
void of interest, and not caring for his own credit, things rare and necessary
in a subject, and either are not to be found, or are not available. Likelihood
does almost always deceive, whether it be a punishment for Princes against
flattery, or the reward of wise men, for the welfare of liberty. If their
advices were believed, it would prevent the seeing of effects, the only way to
undeceive a man.

So happy and prosperous a beginning encouraged, and persuaded the Officers and
Soldiers; it is half the work if we believe wise men the whole, if
Astrologicall foolishness, which judging the event by the constellation in
which the action began, will believe this to be favorable and him happy if it
began well. Weymar was still in Burgundy, who besides being a great Soldier,
was also a great Politician. I cannot affirm whether his great understanding
made him such, or whether rhyme, occasion, and fortune made him only seem so.
He began at first to assist the French; he knew he could not grow great that
way; then he caused the French to assist him, and this, he knew could not
last; if he got for himself he should want help, if for others hopes. He
thought to make use of the most Christian Kings forces to begin great
enterprises, and by beginning them grow full of reputation, with reputation to
gain forces of his own, and with them, and that, to accomplish his intents.

He saw the King of France desirous to gain Burgundy, and that he knew not
how to obtain it, or being diverted could not. He endeavored to take part of
it himself, thinking to exchange it for Colmar, Leistar, and Benfelt. With
which he designed to overthrow Strasburg, and so maintain himself with his
own forces, to alter the Scene, and personate another man; set up a party of
himself, and gain reputation by War or to conclude peaces with advantage.
These thoughts seem great, and are so. Yet they were no way disproportionable
with the fortune and valor of that renouned Commander. The King of France who
favors no man, so far as to assist him, but only to be assisted. On the
one side fearing the Switzers anger, threatened by the injuries received from
Weymar in Veiglia, a Country usurped from the Canton of Berna; On the other
side grown jealous of his conquests in Burgundy; urged by the Swedes
earnestness, and called upon by the Marquis of Leganes victories, would have
had Weymar give over troubling of Veiglia, agree with the Switzers, entru^t him
with the conquests in Burgundy, and divert the Austrians in Germany.

All these things were instantly moved to him by the French Ambassador
resident in Switzerland who met with him. The discourses were long. He
promised to give the Switzers satisfaction, and fit himself to the times for
the tolls of the Rhine. For that which he had conquered in Burgundy, and for
greater conquests which he promised to atchieve he desired supply of men and
money. And because the Ambassador persuaded him to go and assist the Swede in
Germany, and did peradventure encroach upon him more then Weymars spirit would
bear, though tractable yet stern, they say (being moved) he answered;

That the King of France did always request of him, sometimes Sieges,
sometimes diversions, but he never sent him neither men nor money. That he had
many Holds to defend; That he was threatened by the Duke of Bavaria his Army
affrighted by the King of Spain, and th'Archdutchesse Claudias forces, which
were to join with him, if the Swede should be overcome by the Austrians, all
Germany would fall upon him, round begirt with enemies, having no confederate
Prince near him, only France which was far off, and did not assist him.
That he wanted men, his being almost all dead by war and diseases; That the
Country was able to maintain him no longer, and his money was spent in
providing for Nova-Villa, Brisack, Friburg, Than, Rinfelt, Launfenburg, and
other places upon the Rhine. That he should fall into the hands of the first
that came against him, and in a day lose what he had gotten in so long time,
and with so much labor. That he had no hope left but in his Sword, and the
valor of those Officers who followed him. That he knew his fortune was no
better then other Princes who had assisted the French, he was to be thankful
to her, because she had remained longest with him, he being the last to fall.

The Ambassador sought to quiet him; He promised him money, and did indeed
share some amongst the Soldiers: and whilst they were negociating the taking
of Salins, thereby to gain the good will of the Switzers: or that of Dala or
Besancon, to go forward in their proceeddings, there came news of the
overthrow of Teonville, and the conquests of the Spanish forces which daily
increased in Italy, whereupon laying aside, or deferring these hopes, that
meeting was ended. In the mean time the Switzers were met at Baden.

The late Conquest of Brisacke whereby the Navigation of the Rhine was shut up
the former and present proceedings in Burgundy, by the King of France, and his
confederates forces, and the greater which were feared, caused the most
attentive Politicians to cast their eyes, to see what the Switzers would do
therein, who were bound by confederacy, interested by traffic, and by all
that as was or might befall. Some said that old grudges not yet forgotten*
suspicions (though vain) often renewed, Military art abandoned valor
qualified weapons rustied, and profit proffered, all put together would smother
up conveniencie and reason of State; But the wisest sort held suspicions to be
so vain, and the conveniencie so apparent, that they were confident to see the
Switzers armed in defense of Justice.

If they would know what the King of Spaines thoughts were, they should
consider this Province, which subject to him, has most happily enjoyed all the
blessings of liberty, and profits of Monarchy, the King acting there the part,
rather of a Protector then a King; Leaving to them the pleasure of living free,
and taking upon himself the burden of maintaining their freedom; That in
Burgundy there is liberty, because they enjoy it, and a Lord because they have
none. That in cannot be imagined he will go about to make of
Common-wealths-subjects, who of subjects makes Commonwealths.

If the King of Spain has Burgundy they border upon a great power, but small
because he himself does not border upon Burgundy. If the King of France has
it they border upon the lesser power, but all. And if it were their
convenience, and not their ruin rather, to let that Province be lost, why
should they be enticed to it by proffers of the Salt pits?

It is not to be believed that he desires a companion in his conquests, that
takes away from companions, friends, kinsmen, nephews, and from them most that
he can get most.

That Commonwealths may be bought as well as conquered. When it may avail the
King of France to give away that which is other men's, to gain States; theirs
were not secure, nor they Lords of them. He would give them another to subject
them, and he should prevail most in the world who possessed least, having the
more to give away. That a vain mistrust of the Spaniards, and a most vain
confidence in the French deceived them. That which may do most hurt, ought to
be feared, though it were profitable; and that which can do none, is to be
upheld though it may be thought hurtful. Let them not fear the Austrians,
but the French. A great power dis-joyned from its Lord by having cut the bonds
in sunder with the Sword and abolished the memory thereof with time, (there
be many examplss of it) has returned to its ancient yoke. And many are
likewise read of, that have fallen under another, only to keep themselves from
the first, whom they ought not to be afraid of, his anger being assuaged, the
shame forgotten, and the strength overcome: and yet there is nothing that does
more ruin them then this mistrust, to free themselves from which, they fall
where they thought not. Even so a starting horse being on the secure side
affrighted by some vain object, casting himself inconsideratly on the other
side, breaks his neck down a precipice. One might truly doubt that things
would return to be as they were, by the figure of the heavens from whence they
have their influences. But what then? Though it be circular, they move with
such diverse motions, and that heaven which gives most influences, moves so
slow a pace, that though every instant they vary their aspect, there would an
infinite number of years pass away, before they (if it were possible at all)
returned to the same being.

A Nation so vigilant, that has formerly been moved through a little zeal,
and once moved, has gained such glorious victories, a terrible name, and
warlike renown, how can it now choose but be stirred up with mistrust, wrath,
and shame, seeing a King of Prance endeavor himself to be Lord of Burgundy,
after he had stolen away Loraine, partly usurped, and partly bought Alsatia,
made himself master of diverse places in Savoy, Piemont, and Montferrat, under
pretense of preserving them? That tries to enter into Flanders, and Spain, to
ruin Germany, to overthrow the Empire, and make himself Emperor. And if he
should come to be so (as he undoubtedly would if the house of Austria did not
hinder him) who would then defend them from so great a violence? Peradventure
that Justice which would have no Tribunal Seat to appeal unto? Titles are not
wanting, where there is power. The greedy desire of commanding though it be a
most unjust plague, seems to be the mother of Justice, time the Father, and
both being joined, seem to bring it forth.

That the King of France already blocked up their passages from relief and
trading, and would shut them up likewise for corn, impoverish, starve, and
subdue them; they being not able to live free, who have not means of
subsistence coming to them freely.

If they should so basely forsake their confederates, they would lose the
reputation which their Ancestors had gained with the loss of so much blood,
and so many conquests, and feeing the default could not be ascribed, either to
conveniencie, or reason of State, it would be attributed to fear, and they
would fall in contempt if not slavery; That to preserve their liberty, it was
necessary for them, to fight; And for those, against whom they fought, to
obtain it; It was determined at the Diet, (as it was divulged) that to not
engage themselves they would mediate with the King of France rather to obtain
a neutrality in Burgundy, then to oppose him with violence.

Any one may be a mediator in those things which are already counterpoised in
matter of interest, for they want nothing but one to interpose himself, but
when they are unequal there is no other way, but to make ones self a party;
For in seeking to equal two unequalls, he loses his credit, time and
friends, the one thinking himself offended, because he desired to hinder his
fortunes, the other because he would not help him in his diasaster.

In wars which are already ancient, there ought to be great cause to make one
entermeddle with them. They see those Countries which were fruitful, and
plentiful, made barren, and poor, men impoverished, houses ruined, all things
full of blood, death, and misery. They compare those losses, to their
happinesses. Neither do they think that any bond, shame, or conveniencie, can
be sufficient means to counterpoise the disasters of war, with the
emoluments of peace.

When there are bloody and lasting wars between mighty Kings, they that are
not engaged in them, look on astonished, and dejected, and though they may
wrong them, and sometimes do, yet they can take no true counsel nor
resolution. This which is true in all forms of State, is almost infallible in
a popular: it lives more conformable to nature then to art, it teaches only
to defend its own when occasion serves, and never before. Monarchy and
Aristocracie often lose themselves by seeking to get what is ^nothers: and
Democracie someti^^^ by suffering it to be taken away.

The Switzers to the persuasions of neutrality, had added a protestation, That
if the most Christian King followed the wars in Burgundy, they should be
driven to recall their forces which served him. And because they were but
small, of no profit, and great charge to the King of France, it was a
threatening hurtful to them only that made it, which cansed every one to judge
it vain, and of no moment.

Yet I will adventure to say, that the hurtfuller the Protestation was to the
Switzers, the more it was to be feared by the French King. He that does hurt
in showing himself to be distasted, seems to be by that already satisfied.
He that receives hurt shows a token that he will have satisfaction.

I cannot believe that so warlike and honorable a Nation will so shamefully
forsake the Burgundians in such an urgent case without any occasion, or
infamously by taking a reward to do it.

Weymar left Pontaglier and Joux, contrary to his conveniencie, it being a most
important pass. And burned them contrary to his promise, for which he had
received money sufficient. He went to wards Alsatia, and without attempting
any great matter, either there or in Burgundy, he died.

This Nobleman was a man of his own interest. He was no friend to the King of
France, whom he being a German abhorred as a stranger; He was an enemy to the
house of Austria, which he (descending from Duke Maurice of Saxony) hated; he
was of a turbulent mind, various in fortune, he lost oftener then he got, yet
got more then he had lost. His spirits were generous, his blood royal; expert,
and very valiant in wars; better known through our men's defaults then his
own victories. Seeing the greatest that he obtained were the overthrowing of
John Vert, when he was careless, and the taking of Brisack when it was
unprovided. The hopes which through his reputation he had framed, for the
raising of his Fami^ie, ended with his life.

There happened this year no loss of any value in Burgund^e. The
faithfulness, prudence, trust, attention, and vigilancie of Don Antonio
Sarmiento, who by the Kings command was there; Marquis de Leganes his
victories, which drew from thence the Duke of Longueville his forces; The
battle Piccolomini won, which broke Weymars designs, and his death which
gave no time for the reundertaking of them, defended it.

The Kings Fleets which were in the Harbor of Cadiz, set sail, one very
powerful toward Italy, commanded by the Duke of Naccara; and Maccheda, to be
employed for the Common-wea^th of Venice, if need required; the other commanded
by Don Antonio di O^hendo, directed its course toward the Ocean to fight with
the French ships, and having spent much time in putting out into the Maine to
come up with a scarce wind to the Capes St. Vincent and Finisterre, fell just
upon the Groine. It came not into the Harbor, but stayed only till the ships
under the command of Don Lope de Ozes came out of it which though he performed
with all possible celeritie, yet they could not come so soon, but that the
French ships were retired into their own harbors.

Almost at the same time came his Majesty's Army out of Perpignane, and the
Fleet from the Groine; the rumor of the one made the Duke of Luin return into
France, and the report of the other caused the Archbishop of Bordeaux to
forsake his place.

The coast of Spain being freed from the enemy, they undertook their voyage
to carry the relief into Flanders. Being come into the Chanel, they discovered
seventeen Holland ships. Don Antonio appointed his to go on, and he followed
with the Admiral, but they staying, and he thrusting forwards, found himself
alone in the front of the enemies, who had placed themselves in form of a half
moon for to deceive them. He desired to, board their Admiral, which to
attain unto he was, for almost an hour, forced to be the aim of all their
shot, without answering with his, intending to make use of it at the boarding.
So soon as he came near, he began to shoot, and when he thought to board,
the enemy hoysed up his Sails, and went further off. The next day being made
stronger by sixteen ships, he showed himself again; There began the
horriblest fight that ever was seen at Sea. The noise of so many pieces of
Ordnance hindered their hearing, and the smoke their sight, that little as
could be seen or heard, was the battering of ships, tearing of sails,
shivering of masts, the voices of Commanders, and the groans of dying men.

One of the Kings Ships and a Hulke inconsideratly, or ignorantly straying from
the rest, fell into the hands of the Hollanders reare-ward, Don Antonio went to
rescue them, he rescued the ship, but not the Hulke, finding it already taken
by the enemy. The time being far spent, the Fleets tacked about to get the
wind, and were parted, that of General Ochendo having sailed within sight of
the coast of France, found it self near the English shore, where the
securenesse of the Habours, the friendship and peace between the two Kings, and
finding his Admirals ship evil entreated (having alone fought with sixteen
ships of the enemies) made him resolve to Anchor at the Downs, from whence he
sent over almost all the relief to Mardick in small vessels, though the
Hollander were in the same Harbor increased in shipping to the number of one
hundred and fourteen.

The Spanish Fleet seemed to lie there secure, and was to be so by the
capitulation between the King of England, and the Catholic King. But the
Hollander was not long before he undeceived the world, (if there were any one
in it so simple as to be deceived) by setting upon his Majesty's Fleet though
the two Generals of Spain and Holland had both passed their words to the
Vice Admiral of the King of England, that they would not offend one another,
the Vice Admiral being there, and threatening to fall upon them who should
break their Covenants.

A great boldness and presumption in those Ports and harbors which are their
Asylums and places of refuge, and a dishonor done by them to that King whose
Ancestors first set up their reputation.

But what dare not those people do? They are pernicious to all men and less
to those to whom they most seem to be so more powerful in stratagems then
valorous in strength, without God, without Law, without Faith; friends or
enemies, they measure all in one manner. They hate all that is not
commonwealth, and lay snares for any thing that is a Principality. In one
part they fight against a Monarch, and in another against Monarchy. They seek
to augment the one, and diminish the other. In some places they assault states,
in some the forms of them; And having bin assisted while they were rebels,
they likewise assist rebellion. They are every where framing commonwealths,
which they have ready framed in their minds, and go about actually to set them
up. Part is, and part will be seen.

I hold France to be no Monarchy, it is half a Commonwealth; if not all, it
will be: it is no matter though Heretics possess no Cities there. Walls make
not the form of a state, but laws; which on the one part grant them liberty
of conscience* and persuade it their bodies on the other. If it be said they
are dispersed, it is so much the worse* they work the more, and lie closer
hidden; a fault not common to great and small things, but peculiar to spacious
Kingdoms in which great evils are nourished: they lie hidden, and are not
known until they be past remedy. So bodies of strong complexions bear great
defects, and when they can no longer bear them, they cannot cure them, having
employed all their strength not in correcting but entertaining them: being
entertained they grow, grown they overflow, and not corrected, they kill.
Evils that they may not grow, must be hindered, and good things that they may
not decrease, need help. Mixed together if the one be not assisted and the
other hindered, they unite in a body so corrupt, that it admits no cure neither
of steel nor fire.

I would be deceived. But I fear it, because I have not bin deceived in
foreseeing the like cases; whosoever has seen my writings some few years
since knows it. This is not boasting, but zeal, not to gain glory, but
credit with them to whom it may do good if I gain it.

I take on my course, having digressed for others sakes that they may get out
of laberinths. Don Antonio Ochendo finding himself forced to fight, came out
of the harbor. One and twenty of his ships followed him, the rest (I know not
the cause) peradventure they were out of order, but staying behind, at last ran
on ground most of them.

There began a cruel fight, and though the enemy had a great advantage (having
one hundred and fourteen ships to one and twenty) yet the Hollander continually
shunned the aboard; The Admiralls ship wherein were the General Ochendo, and
Michael d'Orno Admiral, was encompassed with a multitude of ships, and so was
the Teresia commanded by General Don Lope de Ozes: But they all fought
generously. The enemy plied them with Ordnance to sink them, and with fire
ships to burn them, they had their purpose in the Teresia, which irrecoverably
perished in flames, with so much Ordnance, so many men, and (which is most of
all) with so great a Noble man. Ochendo though he much endeavored to come at
it, could not rescue it. They fought fiercely for many hours. Night parted
them, leaving six ships in the enemies hands, and they having lost above
twenty. Don Antonio was coming for the coast of Spain, but the wind turning,
he was forced to put into the Haven of Mardick, only with the Admiral of
Dunkirk, and seven other ships, the fight and tempest having severed him from
the rest.

This was the event the Kings Fleet had. Which having set sail to drive away
the French from the coast of Spain, and to carry relief into Flanders,
performed both. And fighting with such disadvantage, won more then it lost.
Victories being not measured by the losses in a mighty Monarch who wants no
money; But only by the glory, which consists, in obtaining his end, and the
means of obtaining it.

In Italy the most Christian Kings Officers (under the name of the Duchess of
Savoy) propounded a Truce, making the world believe they did it to please the
Princesses womanish humors, that she might not go live in France, nor give
over commanding in Italy.

Their ends were because they would not seem to grow weak, nor breed any
suspicion, thinking under color of her to cover their designs, and salve
their reputations. But all was perceived and known, and the French themselves
could not conceal it, no man's breast being vast enough to hide such a great
desire.

They sought to better the business, by propounding a Peace in Italy, and
make it the easier, by propounding a general one. They asked whither the Kings
Officers had any authority to treat of it, and being answered yea, they asked
time until they might send for the like: and did all things, with indirect,
various, doubtful and confused means, so that they caused every one to
imagine they meant to deceive.

The Marquis of Leganes called a Council of the chief Commanders, to discuss
the business, and found them almost all for a Truce.

They alleged that Truces were always profitable to them who were in
possession, and especially for such as were in danger of losing. That his
Majesty's Army diminished, and would daily grow lesser* even to such a
proportion, that it would scarce bear the name of an Army. That those
Soldiers which had escaped the Sword and sickness, were so tired with
continual lying in the field, and weakened with continual sufferings, that
they were not able to labor any longer. That fodder began to grow very scarce,
and it might be imagined within a while it would quite fail: And if they
should be forced to a retreat, how should they do it (between two Rivers)
without losing themselves?

That hope of Supplies diminished every day, there being wars in all places:
so that they were only to reckon upon those they had there, which were few and
unserviceable. That the enemy superior in strength, with daily supplies
coming out of France, found himself numerous in fresh Soldiers, who were
able to endure hardness, having yet endured none; Provision they had more then
enough, having so much land behind them. The attempting any thing against him
was impossible, to defend every thing from him difficult hindering him from
relieving the Citadel of Turin, past hope, to set against him openly a
madness. The enterprise would be made everlasting and impossible, and not
without danger of losing the City, in steed of taking the Cittadell, if so be
the enemy more numerous, and better fortified should go about to assault it.
That he wanted not recruits, there coming every day fresh to him out of
France, and expecting greater daily.

The Truce would give time to fortify our selves within Turin against the
Cittadell, which being a great Work, could not be done in few days, and with
a few folk, that our men being once secured, we might think upon the
besieging of it. In the mean time our Soldiers might recover their health,
and refresh themselves. The French would waste, and his heat of sighting being
abated by the Truce, he would leave his Colors and return into France as he
used to do. And in case he should go into Burgundy, he might be followed.

There was no need to fear making a Truce, much to refuse it. Our Army not to
be in state of gaining any thing in so small a time, and yet that little, was
sufficient to secure that which was gotten.

That ceasing from hostility, did usually give way to discourses, and
discourses to Treaties of peace. A truce would appease and cool men's hearts,
and being so calmed, many times such things were concluded, as they would not
so much as hear spoken of when they were heated. That we might when the Truce
was ended, if the Treaties proved vain, and we found it not good to confirm
it, again begin war with more advantage.

Some who held the contrary said, that all the reasons the Spaniards urged to
make a Truce, were grounded only upon likelihoods and conveniencie. But the
French proposing it with loss of reputation, seemed to yield. That their
nature was known to be such, that they never would desire such ends, but when
they were so streightened, that they could do no otherwise, wherefore they
might be thought to do it through necessity. And therefore there would be as
much inequality in it, as there is between conveniencie and necessity.

The profit and advantage of the one side, in war was not to be measured
simply in it self, but with relation to the other side whence grows the
littleness or the greatness of it. A man is victorious that kills his enemy
in single duel, though he receives many wounds.

The enemy who proposes a thing, be it what enemy it will, always gives
occasion of suspecting it to be evil: if he be a French man, it is assuredly
so.

That the reasons alleged for our side, were in the realitie, not in the
understanding only, so clear and manifest, that either they were false, or if
true, known to the enemy. And that those of the contrary part, (if they might
be known to us) were so weak and shallow, that they would not counterpoise
ours, if true. And therefore we must imagine the one to be made greater by a
vain fear, and the other strengthened by some secret design, which ought
always to be reputed great, it being known that there is one, but not what it
is.

That Princes and Commonwealths may know what is good or evil for them, by
measuring it with their interests, and the states which they possess. A
Governor of Milan his interest lies a great way off from the State and he
ought to be governed by that which he does not govern. To undertake great
affairs, be it to move discord or war, or to conclude Peace or Truce, he
ought to have the consent of Spain. And he that should do otherwise, might
be thought worthy of punishment by reason of the great danger in which he
might at any time put the Monarchy by not certifying concerning it.

That the enemy may plot to assault Burgundy, set upon Flanders, not be
diverted out of Spain, and secure Alsatia. Burgundy known to be unprovided.
Flanders with small power to defend it self. Spain with the loss of one
place easily rescued. Alsatia by the death of Weymar recoverable. To make a
Truce at this time, might be called letting loose the enemy, who was called
thither, and there chained, conquered and dejected, to the end he may run
where fortune is more favorable to him, and the war easier to increase his
victories.

If the truce be because we want strength, how shall we keep him back if he be
going into Burgundy? it will be harder to follow him out of Italy, then to
conquer him in Piemont.

The Cittadell of Turin, if we should make a truce for seventy days, could not
be besieged till the spring, that it was sufficiently beset for what could be
done to it for the present, and we had time enough to provide against the
future.

If we abounded not in provisions, the enemy was likewise very scarce of them;
if our Army grew weak, the French grew to nothing, being subject to the same
diseases, and wanting that patience to endure; apter to run away, and having
more opportunity to do it.

It is not to be denied but that Truces are good for them who are in
possession, if they be made for a long time, and those who are in possession
pretend to keep that which they have conquered; and wanting for that purpose
sufficient strength and just titles, seek to have their strength increased,
and make their title just by prolonging of time.

The Marcuis of Leganes not content with the opinions or those Commanders who
were present and almost all inclining to a truce; did likewise by letters give
his Majesty's chief Counselors notice of it, in whom finding no
contradiction, he also finding it necessary, concluded it for seaventy days.
They framed articles (which are inserted at the end of the book, because we
would not interrupt the course of the history) and they who signed them on the
one part were Prince Thomas, and the Marquis of Leganes; On the other part the
Cardinal of Vulette and the Duke of Longueville, in the name of the Duchess
also, promising that within the limited time she should ratify them.

The French kept not the truce, and the Duchess did not accept of it. The one
because they took many places, which before they had not; and she because she
did not ratify it, according to their promise.

The Marquis of Leganes found himself obliged to hinder the exchange of six
hundred soldiers in Casal. The Cardinal of Richiliew heard of it and writ him
a letter, which in few lines, with great art, contained many, but weak,
reasons. He praised the Marquis, to gain his good will. Made show as if he
believed not that the exchange was hindered by order from him. He vindicated
the Duchess in that particular of not presently ratifying, saying it was
sufficient that it was done, and that it was no breach of truce being sent so
soon as it was certified that it was not received. Concerning the exchange of
the garrisons of Susa and Avigliana, he interpreted the articles as though they
did not any way hinder it. He confirmed his reason by an argument taken a
simili from the like case, viz. by what was done by the Spaniard in Nizza, and
confirmed it with another argument taken a majori, viz. That the decree made at
Turin against the Duchess was of a nature quite different, making by it one
order against the other. Finally when he had interlaced the letter with many
fair ways of persuasion, at the last he inserted odious ways of threatenings,
mitigated with a pleasing kind of insinuating them, showing rather then
threatening what damages might befall them who did not observe the covenants.

On the other side the Marquis had many reasons to lay down wherefore though he
were as courteous in the manner of doing it he could not be so brief in his
expressions. He thanked his Eminency for the commendations he gave him and
more for the good opinion he had of his Majesty's Officers; That if his
gentleness deceived him in the one, in the other he showed his understanding.

That he was glad to have to do with so eminent an Offiter, and of so great
worth, in the discussing of this case, who would easily be capable of
understanding the truth; That the Duchess ratification was promised within a
limited time, and the Contract was voided by the not having received it within
the time limited, though it were made, and not required, and much more, it not
being made, She staying (as it was said) for order from the most Christian
King, and they having (as it was known) demanded it. That this clause, not
accomplished, excluded her highness out of the Treaty; and the King of France
being included therein, it severed him from his Sisters interests; Showing that
his Majesty's Officers also had therein committed a default, by not withdrawing
their Forces out of such places where they were employed in her Highness
service; because the Truce concluded in Italy with the King of Spain, did not
admit of the securing any of his enemies places: whence might be perceived how
much they had gone beyond that which was agreed upon, by entering into Susa,
Avigliano, and Canor: as if it were the same thing to exchange a Garrison, and
to take possession of a new one; to leave the state of things as it was, and to
better it by the gaining of three places. An act so far from what was agreed
upon, that though the Duchess had ratified the contract, and made of two
parties one, it could not choose but be a manifest breach. He marvelled not,
that his Eminency had spoken nothing of Canor, for having neither reason;
likelihood, nor show to defend the seizing upon it, he would take no notice of
the doing it; seeing the Governor thereof had immediately before the Truce by a
Letter subscribed with his Captains hands, made an acknowledgement of it, to
be the Princes Cardinal and Thomas. That which his Eminency insisted upon of
the like done by us, by bringing in Garrisons, where those of Piemont were, was
not as yet done. And if it had, it would have been a thing very different. The
King his Master with the Princes, being but one party, whereas the King of
France, and the Duchess were two. That it was true, Nizza had changed Lord,
but many days before the Truce; But the French had bettered themselves in
their Works under the Castle of Villa Franca, against and since the
capitulation. That the Decree published in Turin, was no act of hostility, of
policy it was granted, and that if it were of hostility, it might be done
against the Duchess, already excluded from the suspension of Arms. That his
Eminency might know that the Spanish officers had observed the Truce, as if it
had been ratified; And that the most Christian Kings Officers had broken it,
though it had been ratified. And howsoever that the want of the ratification
did debar the most sophistical understandings, from questioning the defects
of the one part, and the subtilties of the other.

His Eminency must excuse him if he did not satisfy his request, and that
he could not remedy the inconveniences, or understand them otherwise, but
that he must hinder the exchange of the six hundred Soldiers from Casal. Nor
would he do it, if the Duchess would ratify, and the King of France desert
those places, which his Officers had taken; not binding them with so much
rigor, but that they might yet have so many days after the truce, to amend
what was past.

The Marquis concluded his Letter which was full of the Cardinals praises,
with proffers, and thanks. I have herein, trusting to the Readers capacity,
not so far enlarged the reasons, nor unfolded them with so much spirit, as
the Marquis did write them; Yet I have not added any thing of mine own, nor
taken away any thing of the substance.

In the mean time the Fort of Salsa^ in Spain, was set upon in four places;
In the most dangerous place wrought the Count Dukes Regiment commanded by the
Marquis of Mortara, and John d'Arza. there the enemy made out trenches, sallied,
sprung Mines, leaving nothing unattempted to hinder the design; but all in
vain. When he sallied, he was driven in sometimes by the one Commander,
sometimes by the one Commander, sometimes by another, still with excellent
valor, and by both of them first beaten into the out Dikes, and afterward
from thence dislodged, giving our men thereby leave to advance, which they
valiantly did. The Governor with great care and watchfullnesse giving every
one way to obtain reputation.

The enemy was closely besieged, without any more hopes of sallying out; the
Count Dukes Regiment being gotten within the Dike, close to the wall to
undermine it. The great fall of rain hindered the work for a time: then the
report of the enemies coming on to relieve it, caused it to be intermitted,
and at last was quite given over through a deceitful report, or relation of
deceived men; For some being run out of the Fort or at least dissembling as
though they had forsaken it, said there was not provision within to maintain
it for a week, and that the Soldiers died for hunger. They showed some of the
Biscuit moldy and stinking, and added so many circumstances, that the Captains
took the news for certain, And to avoid the shedding of blood about a place
of no great importance, and because of the incommodities of rainie and cold
weather, the intemperatnesse of the air which cause diseases in men, and the
necessity of fortifying our selves against the approaching relief; they
determined to lie still, till famine caused it to yield, seeing by force it was
not to be won in less time. The term of many days being spent, and no
yielding spoken of it was attributed to the Governors obstinacy, never
perceiving the deceit. And one week passing away after another, the enemy
within, and without, still maintaining the report of the famine, it was always
judged ill done that they had not set upon it by force; and it was now thought
it could never be taken. Every day some precedent error was blamed, and some
new one committed; losing time through the opinion of having lost it.

I do not affirm there was any error committed, but if there were, it may be
called a most fortunate one: it stayed not the Conquest so long, as it increased
the glory of it taking away from the enemy all manner of excuse, for covering
his defects, even of time.

Leaving men enough to besiege the place close, they began to cast up our works,
and though they were large, they brought them to that perfection that there
might be some hope of defending them.

All this work, which caused the effect of the enterprise, must be attributed
to the Count Duke, who whilst the Generals writ sometimes of impossibilities,
sometimes of difficulties, with effectual Letters, showing them it was not
impossible, relieving them with men, engaged them to go on with the work, and
made it so easy, that in the end of the Siege it was almost inpregnable.

In Flanders the King of France his Army being divided in two parts, one under
the command of the Marshall of Chatiglion. the other of Migliare, the Cardinal
Infanta opposed the first with Piccolomini, and the other with the Marquis of
Fuentes. Few passages happened on either side, the King of France being drawn
into Italy by the Marquis of Leganes his proceedings, and Piccolomini into
Germany by Baniers.

The greatest matter the French attempted, was, after they had raced the Fort
of Rhuminghem, and in vain assaulted Bovignes to seek to pass the river. Don
Andrea set forward with three hundred Musquettiers, to view them. The Enemy
endeavored to cut him off: The skirmish began very hot, and growing on by
degrees, the Marquis was enforced to engage his whole body. They fought Pike to
Pike, and Sword to Sword with so much valor, that the enemy lost a thousand
men, the Spaniard lost two hundred and fifty men, counting the killed,
wounded, and prisoners. The Marquis of Fuentes obtained the renown of a brave
Commander, having with two Terci^es only, opposed the French Army, and
hindered their great designs, and also of a valiant soldier, having with his
own hand taken prisoners, wounded and slain many of the enemies. What the
Prince of Orange did this year, I will speak in few words, and all at once,
for it was almost nothing, if it be not thought much to have diverted and kept
idle so many forces of his Majesty's, and to observe their movings. He desired
to take the pass of Gaunt, but the Count of Fera his vigilancie did frustrate
his intentions. He fortified himself about the Philippines, and besieged
Gelders. The Cardinal Jufante who drew near with the Army, caused him to
retire in the night, not without confussion and loss of men. He faced
Rhinebergh, and sought to lie before Hurst, but because Van Namen was beaten
back when he went to set his men a shore, and Count Fontana happened to be
thereabouts with the Kings Army, and the Cardinal Infant drawing apace that
way, he resolved to give over the enterprise.

These were the Hollanders (I know not whether I should say) motions, or
desires, when the King of France pricked them forward to undertake some notable
enterprise.

I cannot enter into these men's policy: it may be beyond mine understanding, or
it may err. Composers of a fable, movers of engines, spectators of a tragedy,
the end whereof (if it be doleful) may be the beginning of theirs. If he
overcomes who was their Lord they will be as they were; if he that is their
companion, they make themselves as they desire. He that has not thought it a
shame to forsake them in time of peace to settle his Crown upon his head, will
not be scrupulous, being a conqueror to subject them to enlarge it. To say
that these two sovereigns powers are counterpoised, that they waste, and not
end, that they will both lose, and neither overcome: that being afflicted and
weary, they will be brought to a good peace; in which looking narrowly to
their own reputation, the good of their confederates will be well provided
for, would be a good thought if the supposition were not incertaine and the
consequence false, if War were always ended with peace, and not sometimes with
conquest, if arms were laid down, and Wars maintained with the same
passions; if experience had not shown the contrary, and reason demonstrated
it. Rage and hatred being ceased or abated, the scene is altered before the
eyes of the principal parties. Being at peace with his enemy, he considers
his companion, who has incited him to War, helped, that he might be
consumed, hindered, that he might not overcome, false* lying and deceitful,
and seems the more to have bin an enemy, because he should have bin a friend,
and was not. The turmoile by reason of which the heat of emulation could not be
avoided, Or the hope of great conquests: The former being now quenched, and the
latter lost, are now examined, and proves a vexation. And being boren withal
whilst the War lasted, is now revenged when peace is concluded; the desire
whereof comes not, without hatred of that which caused the other. He that
lays down arms and has gotten nothing, thinks he has consumed his money
and men, in the service of his confederates, and coming to make peace seeks
to repair his loss with their damage, counterpoising it with the profit
which he pretends he has received. The cause which binds two enemies to come
to agreement, who have bin so obstinate in War, and grown old in emulation,
is always so powerful, that it suffers them not again to renew such an
appearance, more like then convenience, to not give an example to posterity;
and especially when at other times it has bin given, and has done hurt.
Either they must accommodate themselves to others wills, or War with their own
powers.

But if through the victories of either of the two Monarchies, dangers hang
over their heads, by peace they receive damage, by War profit, why do they
not, before this ease, or that begin, stay the wheel of fortune, and
accommodate themselves with their Lord, who to overcome his competitor with a
glorious victory, or bind him to an honorable peace, would peradventure yield
to that, which at any other time he would deny? Who is a better neighbor, he
that is a borderer upon them with all his power, or he that, does it, but with
a small part? He whom they have known to govern in time of peace without
tyrannizing, in time of trouble fight without subjecting them, in time of truce
help by inviting them; Or he who in time of peace was always an enemy, in
Wars, sometimes has comforted, sometimes forsaken them, and at no time ever
sufficiently assisted them, looking upon nothing but his own proper interest,
and convenience, that never joines with them, but when it does them hurt.

Surely I write as I conceive it to be; I have no recourse to Metaphysics, nor
use any art but think to write the truth, plainly and sincerely, and either
love deceives me, or hatred blinds them.

Under Salsas Spinola found greater resistance in the enemy, then many
imagined, and in our men less constancy. The country people began to retire
home, to avoid the falling waters and the unwholesomnesse of the air;
whereunto adding the necessary retreat of many sick and wounded men, the dearth
of fodder, and the doubtful provision of food, the Army was so decreased, that
he was forced to represent unto his Majesty, the danger of forsaking the
siege, or the necessity of being relieved with Soldiers, munition, laborers,
and provision.

The letters were read in the Tunta of State and War, and news being brought
that the Duke of Maccheda, and Don Charles d' Suarra were arrived in Catalonia
with the other Fleet; the landing of those forces, was thought the only remedy
for to gain Salsas.

Nor could the promise which was made of it to the Venetians, be any obstacle,
seeing the Turk was not known to stir any way And when a man's own house is
on fire, a wise man will not carry his water to quench another. The Venetians
would not blame it, the world would find no fault with it, and his own
subjects would commend it. To this consultation the King made answer, that they
should not think upon the Fleet, he had engaged his word to the Ambassador
Contarini, to send it into Italy to be at the disposal of that commonwealth,
and he would not fail therein by any means. His Majesty's intent was either
to assist it in its, breaches by employing his forces, or further its
accommodations by showing he would have employed them. He slighted the
damages he himself received, touching his reputation with a competitor, in
respect of those a confederate commonwealth might receive in its dominions by
the hands of Gods enemies, and preferred her service to his own; With the
laws of friendship he overcame the sharpness and provocations of emulation
which is most powerful in operation, inmisleading men's hearts. He laid aside
the affection of a competitor, which is always greatest in greatest men, and
showed he was not void of that of friendship, which usually takes root in none
but the meaner sort. The one was occasioned by the greatness of mind, and
State, which admits of no competitor, the other by the sincerity of the heart,
which never deceives, nor forsakes a friend. This King has (a thing which
peradventure is not in other men) all the qualities which are required for the
completing of a Gentleman, without hurting thereby them which make a King
great. He has recalled from banishment the moral virtues, and has placed
them amid'st thrones, and scepters, which virtues had bind expelled, not by the
reasons, but the vices of Politicians. Showing that they which belong to a
Prince, and to a private man are the same; and if there be any difference, it
is not in the kind or species of them, but in the superiority of quality,
converting them out of private into Royal ones, and practicing them as King.

Who would have bin so sincere in this corrupt age? in which (peradventure
through mere emulation) we hate our mothers, fight with our brethren, forsake
our Sisters, persecute our Kindred, and abandon our friends. Or who has done
the like in better ages?

It is much that this King, though he were bred up in good customs, has not
suffered himself to be carred away by an evil ones, by time nor example, and
that he is so pious, when it might be piety enough, in him, to not be impious.
But he can pretend no excuse, from any such imitation, or time, from which his
virtues have always kept him. And he ought always to show himself as
different from men's actions, as he has bin from their vices.

The strict and continual instances of Marquis Spinola, and the seeming
impossibility of remedying all wants, seemed to incline and almost force the
minds of many to raise the siege.

The Count Duke who amidst other men's hopes, had not voted that Salsas should
be besieged, in their despair would not suffer it to be given over. He thought
it a small conquest to take it, and a great loss to not take it after it was
besieged. He durst not with his vote endager his Lords reputation, but it being
endangered by others, he was with his valor bound to secure it. The
difficulties were many each one in it self great, and all laid together, seemed
impossible to be overcome.

But what cannot a subject of eminent understanding do, having great power,
and that insused into him by a great Monarch? He can do what he will, and it
is no marvel if another knows not what he can do, since he himself does
not know it, before he has tried it.

Who fears damage from such kind of men, erres so much the more, the more he
engages them in great affairs; They perform always the greatest, because
they are greater then any thing they undertake. The wise man has no certain
bound, he grows with th'occasions, increases with operating, and like
Powder, gains force by receiving it.

What one only man may avail the greatness of a Monarchy, has not as yet
been tried, as now adays. Or has not been known, either because he has not
been eminent, or because he has not been so alone. So many subjects, famous,
and worthy of respect, both in peace and war, dying within few years, might
have prognosticated some unhappy events, to these most happy states, the Lord
being wont, when he will ruin a Country, to take away such persons as may
sustain it; if it were not that he does it also when he will make some one
subjects worth apparent and profitable by taking away such, as with their
credit might usurp his glories, or hinder them by their competition.

The Venetians who knew by experience, that to stay the course of a barbarous
horse, a golden bit was better then an iron one: after they had with great
preparations valorously shown, they feared not war; wisely bought their
peace, and obtained it, good and honorable. Whereby the King being freed from
his promise, gave the Fleet order, to send men, instruments, gunners, and what
else they could to the relief of the Army under Salsas.

The greatest and most difficult business was the want of provisions, and
especially of fodder. From the neighbor Countries, it could not be expected,
seeing they were spoiled, burned, and wasted. And to have them brought out of
other Kingdoms, the distance of place, the season of the year, it being
Autumn, the foulness of the weather, and the suddenness which the urgent
necessity required, made it almost impossible to be done by any humane
diligence. But the Count Duke, with the greatness of his understanding found a
remedy for it, and effected it with so much celeritie, that within few days
the Army was abounding in provisions and fodder. He was not content to provide
for them one way, he appointed them to come out of Sardinia, Arragon, and
Majora, and they came from all these places; He knew there was no way to
secure hard enterprises, but to provide therein abundantly, and that errors may
happen without ruining. And so those things at last proved easy, which seemed
impossible.

To provide in a Country totally ruined, for a numerous Army, not competencie,
but abundance of provisions, and especially of fodder, from far Kingdoms, in
the end of a rainie Autumn, not by a former determination, but by a suddenly
changed resolution, taken in an instant, in the straitness of time, when a
delay of few days might have lost both the design and the Army, when it
seemed impossible that letters should return soon enough by Posts, and much
more provisions, is such a case, as is certainly unexampled in former ages, and
must pass unimitated to ensuing times, requiring for the performance of it,
many things whereof each one of it self is singular, and altogether
necessary. Great power, an eminent understanding, a worthy breast, and
extraordinary activity. Which qualities cannot come together, if there be not a
Monarch resolute in commanding, a supreme Officer full of spirit, watchful
Officers to put in execution, and most obedient subjects to not disturb them.

When an enemy brings one into streights, it makes him know what may be done;
Many times because it increases the understanding, and for the most part,
because it leaves a man to his free will, taking away the power of Law, with
that of necessity. In engaging he disingageth, in raising difficulties he
makes them easy, changing just things into unjust, and making that necessary
which was but convenient.

Nature, be it slow, wise, or sparing, delayeth her uttermost endeavors, for
the last violent assaults; True it is, that reserving it self to be able to
do it, it often dies without doing it, and oft-times because it has not done
it. One ought not to run upon conquests every time as one may.

In the execution of these orders which were the soul of the enterprise of
Salsas, it is fitting to speak with honor of the vigilancie and care of Don
Hierome of Villanova, Protenotarie of Arragon, a most qualified Officer, acute
of understanding, quick in executing, great in intelligences, and most
faithful in his services. To have great designs come to a good end, it is
enough if he undertakes them, losing one hope he despaires not, and never
forsaking the business, either he attaines to it by valor, or tireth it with
diligence, and always overcommeth it.

This Hold which Marquis Spinola besieged against his will, being ledd unto it
by chances, engaged in it by fortune, kept there through obedience, he won
not only by great valor, gallantnesse and vigilance (qualities by which men
use to win such holds) but also by diffidencie, which ordinarily loses them.
He did as much as a General could do to bring an enterprise to pass; and
writ as much as an officer could, to desert it, sometimes showing a desire to
raise the siege, and almost still giving occasion to be commanded to continue
it.

This way, which gone about by a dejected mind, would have ruined the
enterprise, being undertaken by a high spirit, secured it. The Count Duke was
not daunted, like one that had no heart, nor grew not obstinat, like those that
have no brain. Constancy engaged him to find a remedy for diffidencie, and he
stood not to dispute the matter with reasons, but went on to overcome
difficuties with providing money, ammunition, provision, and men; and the
seemingnesse of want to be greater then, it was; became the cause of having the
conquest by a means thought impossible.

The eminency of understanding causes a man to be fearful, and a great heart
to be rash, where they are equal they oppose one another to get the conquest
the brain would intimidate the breast, and the breast would make the brain
valiant. From that conflict comes forth a mixed, which is not fear, but
consideration; and there they two being qualifyed leave off the contention
between themselves, and with one accord set upon the difficulties, the breast
will not yield to them, the brain will overcome them; and whereas several they
might have lost, the one being abject and fearful, the other obstinate and
rash, being united they overcome with constancy and providence.

I know not whether next to God and the King the glory of the enterprise be due
to the Count Duke; but I know he gave it knowledge, power, will and
accomplishment, giving them order they should not give off the siege, teaching
them how to secure it, providing for the maintenance of it, and with so much
abundance that it might be overcome.

The Cavallerie lay idle under Salsas. There came Intelligence that the enemy
had laid up in a Castle in France fodder and victual, and had not left a
sufficient guard to defend it from a sudden assault. The Generals with the
advice of other commanders resolved to send Duke St. George with eight hundred
horse and five hundred musquettiers to fire it. The enterprise seemed to be
bold, and painful, as grounded only upon doubtful and unlikely advices.

The Duke set forward, and by the way met with a body of Cavallery more
numerous then his own standing in a readiness, whether it were there before,
or by chance, or upon notice given. This unexpected accident, forced him to
alter his mind, but not his valor nor wisdom, and made him resolve to alter
his fire into stee^e, and conquer where he could not burn. He sent th'Infantrie
to take the passes to make his retreat good in case he should discover more
forces, and be with his Cavallery went to charge those horse which were in
sight, he routed and put them to flight, slew them, and took but few prisoners
because he would not trouble himself, and so returned victorious to the Camp.

This Cavalier is son to the Marquis of Torrecusa; his actions which speak
for him, show his father to be not only valiant in fighting but also happy in
begetting of children; Leaving it doubtful in what fortune has most subjected
him to envy, either in what he has performed, or in that he has begotten.

The King of France his Army consisting of twenty thousand horse and foot,
showed it self entrenched upon a little hill, with some few squadrons
descending into the plain, viewed the outward works, to relieve the Place.
Marquis Spinola had disposed all things with watchful prudency, fearelessely
expecting the assault. A troop of horse about midnight endeavored to come
near the trenches, but the ground slippery, and yielding by reason of the
great quantity of rain water engaged some to forsake their horses, which were
fallen and mired there, and the rest to retreat. A thunder bolt fell in the
midst of them the noise gave alarm to the trenches. The night was dark,
tempestuous and rainy. His Majesty's army stood impatient, and desirous to
fight. Having laid aside their muskets as unprofitable, they expected their
enemy with ^pike and sword, when a light descended upon them, which showed the
points of their arms bright in proportion of a star. Whether it was
natural, as well it might be, and signified the clearing up of the air; or
supernatural; which may be believed in a cause so just, and showed heaven to
be favorable to us. But whether it indeed proceeded from a heavenly, or
ethereall, known, or unknown beginning, it was a light, and every one saw it.

The Walloones whose fortifications the enemy threatened, after much silence,
gave a great shout.

In doubtful cases every thing is great. There is no mean between silence,
and shouting. The spirits which in danger run to the heart, cannot move the
tongue, and there is silence. If need require to advantage our selves by
uttering our voice, being all heaped up in a vital part, they run with such
violence to the organs of speaking, that they must needs frame a great sound.
The enemy had a great number of forced, and new men, who being already fearful
of their own nature, and dejected by reason of the waters which incessantly
powered down, terrified and amazed* with the light, arms, and shouting, as if
the thunder and lightning had followed them fled away; the valiantest sought to
stay them, and when they found that to be in vain, they likewise retired and
fled confusedly. Their tents, arms, wagons of ammunition and victual were
left behind for a prey. It seems that these new forced and base men are good
for nothing but to increase the number, and with the number, difficulty to
maintain an army; an engagement to fight, with shame if they be overcome, a
hinderance to conquest, and confusion in retreating. They prevent danger with
their flight, and never stay for it; whereby others are affrighted and follow
them, or endeavor to stay them, and are disordered. If they did but stay for
th'incounter, and a little oppose the enemy, they would be good for something.
And it is hard if the one part be not routed through the others disorder, For
they will follow them that fly, and they that fly being disordered, they who
follow must needs imitate them: so that by the flight of the baser sort, one
may rout the most valorous, and being wearied and disordered slay them.

But experience having so often showed the hurt they do, when the business
has come to a trial, it seems strange to me, that at the instant when one
goes to fight, they will fill up Armies with such kind of folk. I know not
whether man's vanity ought to be blamed for this error, which habituated more in
show then substance, and accustomed to gain thereby, cannot (though it do him
hurt) recede from that habitude, or ignorance, which erring in the manner of
framing an argument, concludes that cowards mixed amongst valiant men will
gain valor, whereas it should rather be inferred, that valiant men mixed
amongst cowards, will lose their valor. Peradventure also it is neither
vanity nor ignorance, but a secret providence of human nature. The great
number, if they do not come to trial, avails much, and especially to avoid
the trial: a thing which nature above all things desires, when it makes the
least show of desiring it. It loves not to come to trial of the arm, and to
that end it uses all kind of means, sometimes multitudes which shall be
either fantastical or fruitless. Sometimes the quality of their outsides,
long hair, gilded arms, humorous apparel, scarfes, and feathers. Sometimes
the noise of horrid outcries, threatening death, or a deep silence representing
it. Sometimes a motion, which being violent may make one run away, or forget
to offend.

There came news into the Leaguer, that the enemy had an intent to attempt the
relieving of the place by water, and by land, both at one time, and to that end
had armed at Leucata certain Brigandines, and great store of Boats, with men
and munition, defended by a great Trench guarded with Musquettiers. It was
judged fitting to fire them. The first attempt took no effect, for it being to
be done by night, our men lost their way. The second time taking expert
Pilots, the charge thereof was given to Lieutenant Don Diego Sanchez; he to
work more like a soldier then an incendiarie* though he might with ease have
fired them, would by force bring them away. Being come to the place, he landed
some Musketeers, who holding them in the great Trench in play, did so far
divert them, that he having seized their Boats; embarked his men, and returned
victorious to the camp.

The praise for the execution of this notable act must be attribured to the
Lieutenant, the advice to the Count Duke; who many times voted in the Iunta;
that some Boats should be fitted and armed in the poole, and though they did
it not (pretending it to be needless or impossible, only because they made it
so) he still insisted upon it, till at last Don Francesco d'Iuarra coming
thither, finding the truth of it, did put it in execution, and after the enemy
had been diverse times damnified thereby, at last it hindered them from this
notable relief.

Only by overcomming great difficulties, are obtained great Conquests. He
whom they are against uses all his endeavors to overcome them he that has
them on his side, trusting in them grows careless; and whereas he should
oppose his enemies wit, with his whole understanding; he opposes it with
rocks, woods, hills, and seas, as though man's understanding had not known how
to go over rocks and hills, and pass through Seas. He is deceived that
trusts the resistance to a pregnant understanding to any thing but to a more
pregnant.

The Prince of Conde blamed the rain in the last attempt, and thinking with
valor to relieve the place, having rallied his Army, he came again within
sight of it, and fortified himself upon the same hill. And having chosen the
best spirits amongst his whole body, he sent them down into the plain,
backed by all the Cavallerie, with the Duke of Luin, to set upon the
Fortifications in two places. The onset was terrible and dreadful, made by men
who were of noble blood, undaunted hearts, valiant, worthy to live for the
defense of Religion, or die in defending it. Five hundred Gentlemen died in the
field, and most part in the Trenches, finding death and burial in the fame
place, and leaving their memories written in the blood of honorable wounds.
May they rest in peace, and let a foreign Pen applaud them, to make their
actions live, who died gloriously valiant.

Amongst our men were most noted, the two Field-Marshals, Molinguen a Knight,
and Don Giusto di Torres, whose quarters were ^et upon. The Field-Marshall John
di Arze* who went with part of the Count Dukes Regiment to relieve them. This
man raifed his fortunes in Flanders by his valor, and passing through all the
degrees of honor, attained to that of Field-Marshall. He is brother to Don
Peter de Arze Secretary of State. The one employes his Pen, the other his
Sword; the one fights, the other writes and gives advice. They strive who shall
do the best service. Which of them deserves best I know not* seeing there is
no difference, in their ability, or will, but only in their profession. It
will then appear when the competition between the Pen and the Sword is decided.

But above all shined the valor of the Marquis of Torrecusa, who sometimes
Leading the head on^ sometimes heartening the men, omitted not any thing
pertaining to a Commander or Soldier, but he did command, and performed it.
He encouraged with words, and when need required with deeds. The enemy being
gotten upon a Trench, taking a pike in his hand, he hindered, disordered, and
overthrew him.

Let Poets have leave to describe their Orlandoes, and Rinaldoes, if under
those fabulous narrations they intended to set down this truth, That one man's
valor is sufficient to gain a victory.

An Army when it has no Commander, is a mere dead carcass, when it has one,
it is sometimes valiant, sometimes cowardly, according to the soul which
assists it. Even as the Members run to the danger where the head is, so the
soldier where it goes. That hand that arm, that fearfully avoides and
shunnes the blow which intends to wound it rashly runs on to meet it, in
defense of the head. When one brutish, and unadvised man goes, all the rest
will follow, (though cowards) to precipitate themselves. So do not the wise.
He suffers himself most to be led* who has least wit, the danger diminishes
wit in many, and takes it quite away from the most part, making them like
brutes follow him who goes before them. Having lost their own discourse, they
now discourse with another. They hold it more secure to sight in his company,
then to fly without him. They would all run blindfold into a precipice, some
through valor, and the most part through ignorance, were it not that many who
should lead on, sometimes stay behind to meet the danger, till it is too late,
and the Army runs away: and whereas before ignorance would have been
favorable to cause him to be followed, it now becomes dangerous to cause him
to be obeyed. All trust remaining now in good advisement which is hard for to
find place in him that fears, and most necessary to alter the course which he
is in. I say not that all the Commanders ought to be such, but such a one there
must be, and that Army which wants such a one as the Marquis of Torrecusa is,
shall not be without a head* but without a heart. The Prince of Conde retired
into France with the body of his Army, or to say better, he dragged it along,
like a sad and lifelesse corpse.

He is a man ordained to do harm where he has received benefits, that
fortune which being adverse, caused him to receive them, seeing him in his
prosperity unthankful, returns to be adverse to cause him to repay them,
showing it self contrary to his designs, yet favorable to his engagements,
where without being either treacherous or unngratefull, he serves his King
faithfully, and because of his ill fortune serves his benefactor happily. And
if he alone be happy, that (according to the opinion of the wise) cannot be
unhappy, who can be so, more then this Prince, who is always sure to obtain
noble renown, whether he lose or conquer, by either deserving much, or paying
a great debt?

The enemy having already twice in vain attempted the relief of Salsas,
driven back sometimes by valor, sometimes by fortune, being now past hope drew
his Army into quarters.

The Truce being expired in Italy, the enemy entered into Chieri, a place which
may he termed to have no walls, and had no men in it. The Marquis drew near
unto them, and hindered their design of besieging Turine; He cut them off a
Convoy of* a thousand Soldiers; He proffered battle diverse times, and they
refusing it, drove them to retire to the hills, he followed and overtooke
them, and forced them five times to change their stations, still gaining them
from them, and had he not wanted time he had strength and courage enough to
have destroyed that Army in two hours.

The enemy left in the field, many dead men store of baggage and munition, and
found himself so rent, that he durst not hinder the Marquis from taking of
Bubio, and Wesme, two great Castles which they had ^eft in those passes.

The proceedings of his Majesty's Armies this year in Italy were those we
have rehearsed which are peradventure greater, then either ancient or modern
histories mention to have been performed in the short space of so few months,
with so many painful circumstances.

The war was between Nations, warlike both renowned and experienced; In a
fruitful Land* full of strong holds, provided of victual and Ammunition,
assisted with old forces and Garrisoned with valiant Soldiers.

The glories gained, were Armies routed, and overthrown, reliefes sometimes
hindered, sometimes given; Forts assalted, won and defended; walls scaled,
great store of places taken, sometimes by sudden assaults, sometimes by short
sieges, none through intelligence, one only through cunning, and that
valorously; Very few voluntarily, and they first terrified, some yiedling to
strength, some to fear, and al to justice.

The Conquests have been th'enlarging of his Majesty's Dominions from Milan to
the Alps by Yurea and Turin, and to the Sea by Monferrat and those places.
Thus were the consultations and advices of the French Ministers of State
deceived, who by not coming into Italy with great forces, bou^ded within a
small compass the possibility of co^quests to the Spanish armies.

The Spaniard who works least, and fights best of other Nations, changing his
fighting into laboring* lost his advantage, and amidst the banks of earth
rather hid his valor, then defended his person. But at last (were it chance,
necessity or choice) throwing away the spade, and taking the sword in hand, he
showed the soldiers were not different from their ancestors, but rather the
commanders; not the valor, but the way of fighting. This sudden
metamorphosis, which in the conquering of places, changed days into hours,
was misinterpreted by them who should have believed it, and because they would
not respect true valor where it was, they accused falsehood where it was not,
and endeavoring rather to secure themselves from that, then defend themselves
against the other, deceiving their own understanding they found themselves to
be faithfully served and valiantly overcome.

To hide the enemies valor from the vulgar sort, because they may not be
disheartened, is a convenience of State. To punish innocent persons, and
conceal the guilty, to deceive the people, to gain repute with the Prince
savours of damnable policy. But for a man to deceive himself, and not believe
what he sees, as if the not believing of it, could unmake the truth, and
th'imagination make the case, is neither humane not diabolical convenience. It
is true that the one destroys the truth, and the other frames the case; but it
being not in the thing its self, but only in the understanding by such an
error they lose both th'understanding and the thing.

It was daily expected at Court to hear of the yielding of the place, and that
shortly, risoners, and those which run over to us did assure us of it;
affirming they drunk cisterne water, eat rottenbisket, wanted wood and salt;
that soldiers fell sick, and dyed, and those who were living did mutiny. That
the Governor talked, though he did not parley: and though his words were
rather of sending to the Prince of Conde then of yiedling the place it was a
sign of faintness, and he would yield it. Likelihood persuaded these things
to be true and especially the desire of those who were unwilling to
premeditate, and knew not how to provide for the damages which delay might
breed, made it serve for a comfort, and a remedy to persuade themselves and
others that it would quickly yield.

It is necessary for an officer to provide for all as he can imagine, and not
for that chiefly which is most likely, but for that which is most dangerous. To
expect a good event quickly, it is necessary first to secure ones self from
evil. One that is to be deceived is never quite and utterly deceived; there
always remains somewhat, in which being not totally deceived, though it does
not undeceive it troubles.

Hope which is framed to sustain one, in great misfortunes being ill used,
precipitates us into miserable calamities, Not content through it to keep our
selves from despair, we would thereby attain to happiness. The future
becomes present, hope is turned into security; And being deceived by our own
desires, and not hopes promises, we call it deceitful and false; which would
not be deceitful if we did not make it so nor false if we did not falsify it.
It deceives none, but leaves them perplexed without any determination; and he
that determines, changes it by his opinion.

The Count Duke who made use of hope* with a proviso that it should not
prejudice wisdom, comforted himself through it as if it were certain, and
did use prevention against it, as if it were false. At this time the art and
deceit of the French was to be more looked too, them their valor, who have
changed their custom, though not their nature, their head, though not their
heart.

That the Prince of Conde was their general, who had openly said in Dola, that
his understanding was much to be feared, his force not so much, and his fortune
but little. That it was unlikely he having had so much time and so covenient a
season had not sufficiently victualled the place.

That it was to be imagined the Governor fearing force, more then want, to
prevent that, feigned he feared that most which he feared least. To eat rotten
biscuit was in wise men, not so much a demonstration of want as an argument of
providence, as they who reserved what was good, against a greater faintness,
and for a smaller number; little regarding the health and life of soldiers,
when they can do no better service, then to dye.

When show is made in any besieged place either of abundance or want, the
contrary is always to be doubted.

His advice was that two thousand of the best old soldiers should be left in
the trenches; the rest should be lodged some where nere thereabouts to refresh
themselves, and be ready upon any occasions. That the void place, which they
left, should be filled up with men our of Catalonia, Arragon, and Valencia,
with a promise of exchanging them if the siege should last long, and if ended,
soon, to discharge them. That the Galleys should return to Naples and
Sicilie, having first landed relief into the State of Milan, and the rest
remain in Spain. And that the ships should make ready for the Indian voyage.

This opinion was applauded by all men, but not wholly effected, by reason of a
rumor which began to be raised of a great relief preparing in France. And
likewise because that some few weeks after, the Governor upon honorable
conditions (which are set down in the end of the book) covenanted to yield up
the place, if he were not relieved by the day of th'Epiphanie.

In the mean time the Marquis of Balbases writ to the Duke of Ferrandina, how
he heard the enemy was advancing with a numerous and strong Army, having a
double intent; Namely, either to force their out-workes, or to keep away our
provisions. He showed that the former was not impossible to be done, and the
latter vere easy. He spoke concerning both, with much valor and yet with some
diffidence an ordinary thing in wife men, and being done with moderation is
profitable to secure one against future times. If it falls cut well it credits
the valor which has overcome the difficulties: if ill, the advice which has
given notice of them.

The Marquis of Villa Franca sent the Letter to the Count Duke.

I have affirmed this to be a great General, who from his Closet can command
Armies. I would be silent in many things concerning the Count Duke, if I framed
a Poem, but I relate them, because I write a History. The former makes use of
what is likely, though false, the later leaves not out that which is unlikely
so it be true.

Be it then granted me to prove the truth of the most unlikely thing. I can
speak in the commendation of this great man, to honor my History by the
Letter he writ to Marquis Spinolis. I will set set down a true copy of it word
by word, without adding or diminishing. I shall secure my self from the
blemish of infamy, if not amongst ignorant and malicious men (the praise and
dispraise of whom I equally contemn) yet amongst understanding and well minded
folk* who alone can commend and discommend.

SIR, There arrived here this morning a letter from the Marquis of Villa Franca
dated the 29 of the last month, and one enclosed from your Excellency of the
27. I confess that if the advices your Excellency writes of, are those which
you expected for certain, I find my self disburthened of three quarters of
the cares I took. An Army which has two designs, does much weaken the action
with the diversity of two intentions, whereas having but one it may do much,
there remaining no appeal to the second. I will now discourse with your
Excellency upon your letter to the Marquis after I have cursorily touched
something concerning the time given for the yiedling of the place, it being
judged to be somewhat long; and though here others consider other points of the
capitulation I only insist upon that of having water in the dike, which being
so extravagant and new to me, makes me suspect (finding no other reason for
it) they desired it, to the end they might have water to drink; and if they
wanted water (seeing thirst cannot be endured two days,) I would by no means
have made any agreement with them, but for a very short time. And if this be a
customary clause, and there be other reasons to enforce it, I refer my self
to experience, which though it cannot hinder the prefixed time from being
thought long, may satisfy the strictest difficulty, and chiefest ground. Now
coming to your Excelencies Letter, wherein you relate the enemies twofold
designs, I will speak what I think of it.

As for the first to force the outworks, I assuredly believe that after so
many months time they are settled in very good form, and that by that means,
and with the help of the Cavallerie, it will be more then difficult for the
enemy to force those works in such sort as to enter them with their Horse and
Ordnance, which not coming to pass, it will be impossible for him to obtain
his desire, which I fear the less, because I know those two thousand men are
making ready for your Excellency, which I suppose you only wanted to secure
the Works; As for the hindering you from victual, if I may speak the truth,
I hold it impossible, your Excellency has within your Trenches provision
sufficient for twelve days at the least, according to the reiterated orders,
and peradventure for longer. They who must hinder them, must return back to
take the way of Estagel, and consequently must pass under your Excellencies
Canon, whereby besides the discouragement an Army receives by going back, you
may have them pursued in the rear; and if that should not hinder their good
order, yet might you keep back their reliefes and provisions, in those rough,
and narrow ways, and provide as is fitting for Perpignane. Out of which in my
opinion it would be good to leave some Commanders of Horse and Foot, who
uniting themselves with the men of the Province might upon any occasion either
obstruct the enemies provisions, or bring him in between those Troops and your
excellency. For as it may be believed and as upon the last Orders advice is
given, that the Catalanes were raising forces, whereof the faintest part,
increasing the bulk, and the best, strengthening Perpignane, would make the
enemies intentions exceeding difficult, if not impossible. Besides, I hold it
very painful, there being no provisions ready upon the Frontiers the 24th day,
to bring all necessary provisions from Sicas, to Rivas altas for an Army (which
stands in want of it) by reason of the great compass which by reason of the
ill way they must fetch, and the short time of ten days, which they have to
work in, your Excellency being abundantly stored with every thing for above
twelve. If the enemy should make his attempt by the way of Rivas altas your
Excellency would not have so much time as I think of between the one, and the
other action. But before any such, passage could be made, you would have had
it, by that which I have spoken of Perpignane, and always cut off the enemies
Convoyes, they being at such a distance, or burn their provisions in their
Magazines. For it is impossible and not to be imagined that he can keep such a
guard upon his provisions and other places, and secure himself.

Whence shall he provide such a strong Army both in quality and quantity as
might stand for seven whole leagues in every place stronger then the body of
your Excellencies, to secure him from receiving a blow, which may disorder him,
and utterly overthrow his design?

I beseech your Excellency to pardon me, as Don Pietro de Toledo was wont to
say, if I soldier it with so great a fouldiour, who am altogether inexpert in
that art. I conclude Sir, that we are and ought to be Gods; hoping he will not
forsake his cause. I send your Excellency money.

I will also rehearse the circumstances; they will seem weak but they are
necessary to lay open the great ones; they will abase my style, but what is
that to the purpose, so they do exalt another glories. He did not elaborate
this letter with his pen, he did dictate it without any intermission, not when
he was quiet and far from any noise, sitting at his desk, but in his coach
running, not imparting it to any, only dictating it to Don Antonio Carnero one
of his secretaries, a man of great understanding and knowledge, of most
unspotted fidelity, and clean hands, in service attentive and infatigable.

I bear with them who set me out for a flatterer. They see me rewarded, they
examine my talent, and because they find no great worth, they blemish it with a
great vice. They find me a writer of great actions, they examine what they can
do, and because they find it come short, they call my relations fables. The
conciousnesse of what themselves would do, causes them to think ill of him
that writes, and that which they cannot do to misunderstand him that does it.
An Historian of understanding flatters himself if he imagines he can avoid
slanders. He has somewhat within him which he concealeth, a great virtue and a
great vice, which being hid from the eyes of the vulgar, when it comes to be
manifested, it seeming he adds it of his own (because that though it were so,
it was not known) they call him, if he writes of excellent good ones, a
flatterer, if of exceeding bad ones, a malicious person.

I would be pleasing to hear vice reproved, but with modesty, and virtue
extolled, but with moderation; and its displeasing to have the secrets of
virtues and vices discovered. They would be willing to embrace the one, and not
have it known, and to not labor for the other, and yet have it imagined that
they have it. They hear the writers expressions blame vice wholly, but in
virtue praise only the greatest, and men having commonly of the one and the
other, and few of the latter excessively, participating of the reproof, which
extends it self even to mediocrity, and not of the praise, which goes only
upon the extremes, on the one part they remain ill satisfied, on the other
offended. Upon the report of the relief coming out of France, his Majesty's
Army was increased by a considerable number of Catallanes (who in this occasion
carried themselves cunningly) and by many soldiers who having recovered their
healths went to employ it in their masters service.

Above all others remarkable was the arrival of the Duke of Naccara and
Maccheda not so much because he brought three hundred of the choicest
musquettiers of the Fleet with him, as for the person of so complete a
Gentleman, who not through any other persuasion but of his own well-guided
courage, voluntarily came to increase it in that Army; and whereas before he
without fear stood expecting the enemy, now fearelesse came to challenge him.
He put himself in the regiment of the Count Duke, under the Command of the
Field Marshall Don John de Arze, to make himself famous with his pike in his
hand.

Let it be a sufficient attestation for the nobility of his blood, that I have
named him; Of the great endowments of his person, the relation of this action.
In the former are rehearsed the memories of his many illustrious forefathers,
and a person is set forth in whom is made the union of all those greatnesses;
in the latter shines, modesty, wisdom, valor, and devotion to the King, and
gallantnesse in serving him.

Th'intelligences which many ways came out of France were, That the most
Christian King was resolved to have the Fort relieved. That to that purpose
came cut of Paris, Monsieur de Poncourle Marquis* of Coastin* Nephew to the
Cardinal of Richelieu. That the old and new Forces of Languedock were
appointed for that purpose, sour companies of foreign Nations, the Regiment
of Lionnois, the Regiment of guards, eight which came out of Lorraine down the
Rone, all the Cavallerie that was in pay, the bound Nobility which was bound to
come, and that which came voluntary; and because they should be enough for such a
great enterprise, there being a scarcity of them in France, they resolved to
remedy it by the same way as it came, taking the Baron of Bassompier out of
prison (for so they write him) that he might with the Duke of Luin, and
Marshall La Force, go to the relief.

All this rumor ended with the approach of the Vanguard within four miles of
the place, the day before that which was agreed upon for the yielding of it;
And to the end the default might be imputed to want of time, or peradventure to
the Governor, because it was not then relieved, and for the former time to the
General, because he could not relieve it. They did nothing at all, and left it
to be doubted what they would have done if they had fought. But what they would
have done, may be known by what they did, when they did fight before. The time
was long enough being four months; the Governor deserved commendations,
having (before he yielded) suffered long famine. deadly diseases, and great
mutinies. The General was justified by the two reliefes which he attempted,
and by this third which was not attempted.

The Governor came out of the Hold according to the agreement the day of the
Epiphanie.

The Lord would not have our King want this place to offer up that day wherein
other Kings present their gifts unto him. And because it should be manifest
what his Majesty's directions do operate in all enterprises, what the Princes
hopefulnesse begins to operate, and what the Count Dukes advice had operated,
this could not happen upon a fittinger day then this, which is his Majesty's
day by his preheminencie amongst Kings, The Princes by his name of Balthazar,
and the Count Dukes by reason it was his birth day. The Sun shines not upon
the birthday of him who was borne for the greatness of this Monarchy, nor
returns not to the place where he was on that day, or celebrates the
festival of it, with a less favorable aspect, then the conquest of a place
regained with so much valor and glory.

There the world being spectator, beheld as on a Theater too great and terrible
Provinces, Spain and France fighting a Duel, not for their states, but for
their reputations, expecting, as the reward of victory, the renown of being
the most valiant.

There with four thousand foot, and two thousand five hundred horse was the
enemies whole forces set upon in their own quarters, and routing them, they
were feign to be beholding to the darkness of the night, to not have it known
whether they retreated or fled.

There in little more then an hour, were assaulted gained and thrown down
their Forts, half Moons, Trenches, and what ever else in so many days was set
up about that place by French art, and understanding to safeguard him from the
the Spanish valor.

There a few forces tired with want, and sickly by reason of the
unseasonablenesse of the air, defended a large and weak circuit of trench,
against a most powerful Army of the King of France increased in great number
by the Soldiers, and Gentry of the adjoining Provinces, and by old regiments
from far parts much reinforced.

There along the Poole with weak Barks was overthrown a Convoy, and a great
aid overcome, which the enemy had embarked to relieve the place with victuals
and Ammunition.

There after they had gathered, together all the power of France, they durst
not appear in the field, being disheartened by the horror of seeing their dead
companions, and discouraged with the remembrance of the overthrowes they had
there received.

Finally the Spaniards have there been always conquerors, a foot^ a
horseback, by land, by water, in open field or entrenched, in assalting, or in
defending trenches; Let it be known that nature on the one fide raines down
plenty, on the other it instilleth valor, to some it gives number, to others
solidnesse and has imprinted the character of superiority in the breast of
them who exceed in valor, not in number.

Articles of suspension of Arms between the two Crowns. The Lady Duchess,
and the Lords Princes of Savoy, from the 14th of August, to the 29th of
October, 1639.
IT being judged necessary for furthering the Propositions made between the
Duchess and the Princes of Savoy, and to prevent the ruin of Piemont, to
have a Suspension of Arms between the two Crowns the Duchess and the said
Princes, as well in Italy, as in all other her highness of Savoys Dominions;
The said Suspension was agreed upon, for the public good and quietness and in
regard of the good offices done by th'Archbishop of St. Severina, Apostolical
Nuntio* until the 24th of October next of this present year 1639. to give
their Majesty's notice thereof in the mean time, and to receive an answer
concerning their pleasures therein. During which time, all manner of
hostilities shall cease on all sides, and that upon the conditions following.

That the Cittadell of Turin shall remain in the Duchess and the Frenches
possession, and the City of Turin in the Princes of Savoy and the Spaniards
possession, as they are at this present with such numbers of men as shall be
judged fit for the guarding of the said places.

That they both may work within the said places during the time of the said
suspension, or as it may be agreed between them, as shall be appointed for the
said purpose, and as it shall be set down in the Covenants made and confirmed
this present day.

The two Armies shall retire each to the Provinces and Towns of their own
side, and into their several Holds, (as more particularly it has been
covenanted and agreed in another writing beating date with these present)
without making any incursions, or doing any other acts of hostility. And if any
thing should happen contrary to this Article, the damage shall be made good
again; and satisfaction given upon the complaint without any breach of this
suspension thereby.

That in such places as are possessed by the two Crowns, the Duchess, and
the said Princes of Savoy, none of their officers, nor any other person of
their party, shall without a Passport go to places belonging to the other
party, nor into their Armies, or much less into any such places, as is
covenanted they should retire into.

As concerning Casal, things shall remain in the state they are at this
present, and no act of hostility to be done on either side.

It shall be lawful for the Field Marshalls and Officers of Justice, and
treasure and other Officers of the most Christian Kings Armies, to go and
return to and from the said Casal, and other places of Monferrat, where the
said most Christian King has any Garrison, as likewise those as shall be sent
by his Majesty's Generals and Officers, or such as shall be within the said
places, with Passes from the most Christian Kings Generals, or the Governors,
or any other person as shall have the command of the place from whence they
shall come, which Passes being shown both at going and coming to the
Governors of such places as shall be held by his Catholic Majesty, and the
said Princes of Savoy, they shall be tied to suffer them to go and come
freely without any let on either side.

All Officers which do not belong to the said Garrison of Casal, and are not
at this present in it, and shall go into it during the time of the said
suspension, shall be tied to come forth again before it be ended, according to
the order which shall be given them so to do by the most Christian Kings
Generals upon pain that all Officers as shall herein offend, shall be dealt
with as breakers of this suspension and Treaty. That the sick and wounded of
the Spanish Army may freely be carried and conveyed from Turin into the State
of Milan along the River Po, with Passes from the Governor of the City of
Turin, together with such as shall conduct the said sick and wounded men, their
goods and baggage, showing the said Passes to the Governors of Casal and
Civasco. And the Boat-men may likewise: return to Turin with their empty
Boats, wherein they shall have carried the said infirm men, without needing
any other Passes then such as they showed at their going, which they shall
again show to the said Governors of Civasco and Casal at their coming back,
without any molestation on either side.

As for the Garrison of the said Casal, it may be renewed to the quantity of
six hundred men, during the said suspension, taking out as many of them that
are in it, in the presence of a Commissary of each part.

The most Christian Kings Officers may cause any goods as they desire to be
brought out of the said place, and carried to what place they please.

The prisoners of both Crowns shall for this time be exchanged; Captain for
Captain, and other Officers, for Officers of the like quality, and soldier
for soldier. And in case there be a greater number of prisoners one the one
side then on the other, they shall be freed, paying for their ransomes one
months pay, and their charge, excepting Colonels, whose ransomes shall be
agreed upon by the Generals; And as for the prisoners of war, who are in the
Dutchesses hands, and the Princes of Savoy's, of either Armies belonging to the
two Crowns, they shall be included in the precedent Article. And as for other
prisoners which are in the Dutchesses or Princes hands, they shall be exchanged
one for another, and being more of one side then the other, they shall be
particularly treated of between the Duchess and the Princes.

And upon the said Articles the said Suspension has been agreed upon,
beginning from this present day the 24. of October this year 1639. Which shall
begin in Turin the day of the date, and in Piemont and Monferrat, four days
after, and in Nizza and Savoy six days. Meaning that it beginning from this
day, the Armies which are in Turin shall not do any acts of hostility on
neither side to any place whatsoever, and if they do, satisfaction shall be
given.

For the fulfilling and performing whereof the under written Lords, do
faithfully and sincerely bind themselves, and it witness thereof have bin
subscribed two copies, the one in Spanish by the most Illustrious Prince Thomas
and the most Excellent Lord Marquis of Leganes; And the other in French, by the
Cardinal of Valletta, and the Duke of Longueville the 14. of August 1639.

Articles agreed upon in the treaty of suspension of arms between the two
Crowns, the Duchess, and Princes of Savoy, concerning the places of Piemont
which are to remain at the disposal of each party.
FIrst all the lands of the territory of Asti, between Po and Tanaro, to the
lands of Monferrat, shall remain at the disposal of the said Princes
beginning from Santena, Casanova Ternavas, Pralormo, la Monta St. Damian and
Gouon unto the Tanaro, together with St. Steven where neither shall lie; and
the Inn which is on this side of the Po shall remain neutrall. And all the
land from the side of Cherasco and Carmagnuola shall remain in the Dutchesses
disposal. All the lands of the territory of Asti on the other side the Tanaro
toward Nizza della Paglia and of the marish side shall likewise be at the
Princes disposal beginning from the way to Asti, to Ceva* Costigliole, Collozo,
St. Steven of Belbe Cossano, Casto, Mombarche, M^llazano, Ceva; And Castagnola
shall remain neutrall, and all the other towns on the side of Alba. And from
the aforesaid Towns to the Tanaro, they remain under the Dutchesses command.
And likewise it is agreed that the said Cossano, and the fort of it shall
remain neuter, because of the passage from Alba to Bobbio, and Vesme. The
towns going from Ceva to Conio on the mountain side shall be likewise at the
disposing of the said Princes; beginning from St. Michaell Villanova Morrozo,
Margarita, Montaner, Castelletto and Conto. And to go from Conio to Revello,
Busca shall likewise belong to the Princes; and Card shall remain neuter for
the passage. And likewise to go from Conio to Dromero, and Valle di Maira;
Bernez and Carallio shall in the foresaid manner remain at the Princes
disposal.

And all the towns, except the aforesaid of St. Michael, Margarita and the
other which are mentioned being on the side of Been, Fossano, Savigliano and
Saluzzo, together with the Vallie of St. Pair, shall be at the Dutchesses
disposing, with the rest of the Towns of Piemont.

And all the towns to go from Jurea to Mass, and from Mass to Flet by the
way of the mountain, which remain between the Dora Baltea, and the river
Orco shall be at the said Princes disposing. And to go from the said Mass to
Turin; Follizo and Leini shall remain neuter; as also Borgaro, and Settimo to
go from the Cittadell of Turin to Civasco. And all the other towns from Mass
to Civasco, and from thence to Flet, with those of the river Orco to Susa shall
be at the Dutchesses disposing, as also Cimena and its territory, St. Raphael,
and Castanetto.

And along by the vale of Lanzo, beginning from the said place, the country
shall be free without any quartering, only it shall contribute to the
Dutchesses horse which shall lie in Viu, because the said Vale may provide, and
carry provision to the City, and Cittadell of Turin, whither the Inhabitants of
the said Valley shall be suffered to go and sell the said provisions at their
pleasures. And it is further agreed, that in the places belonging to the Abbey
of St. Benigno, none shall quarter unless they be passengers.

And in the Lands of Beinasco, Grogliasco, Cogliegno, and Altesano, none shall
quarter, nor much less shall any quarter near to any of the said places where
there is a Garrison of the one or the other side, by two miles.

Articles agreed upon between the most Excellent Lords, the Marquis of
Balbases, and the Count of Santa Colomba Geneneralls of the Armies of
Cantabria, and Catalonia. And Monsieur d'Espinan, Field-Marshall of the most
Christian Kings Armies, and Governor of the Castle and Fort of Salsas, this
Friday 23th December 1639. in the Leaguer under Salsas.
FIrst, it is agreed that the said Monsieur d'Espinan shall come forth of the
Castle and fort of Salsas with all the Garrison, Chieftaines, Officers,
Soldiers, and Persons of what condition soever, the sixth day of January next
at nine a clock in the morning punctually, in case the place be not relieved
the same day; at the same hour. By relieving is meant, if the most Christian
Kings Army does force the outward Trenches, and the Army which besieges the
place to retreat; or does relieve the place with provisions as much as it
wants: so that there being any of those things wanting* the Place shall not be
understood to be relieved; and the besieged shall be bound to yield it up at
the appointed hour, though they might be relieved within a moment after it.

The besieged shall come out secure in their lives and persons, without any
distaste or grievance, with all their Arms and baggage, Drums beating, Colors
flying Matches lighted at both ends, and Bullets in their mouths.

They shall likewise have one of the French pieces of Ordnance which are in the
Castle with its Carriages and other instruments, and Ammunition sufficient to
make twenty shot.

The besieged shall be conducted to Narbona; the shortest and directest way,
and shall go away the same day, and hour as is agreed upon, and shall march
that night to Sixa^, to which place they are to be convoyed, that they may
arrive thither safely. And the next day being the seventh of January, though
the Convoy return, they shall depart to Narbona, unto which place they shall
carry the Hostages. And word is given, that they shall pass to the said City
with the same security.

The besiegers shall furnish them with Wagons as many as shall be needful to
carry away their unable men, their baggage and Arms if they be laid on, and
Monsieur d'Espinan, and the Captains shall have horses.

The besieging Army does covenant, that the water shall run into the More on
both sides, the same day as Hostages shall be given. It lying at their
discretion to turn it away again, four days before notice of the relief be
given: the besieged being not to hinder them from doing it, by no way nor
means.

In case the relief should appear in sight on the eve of the day, the Truce
shall be broken on either side, and all manner of hostility shall be
allowed, which till then shall have ceased, as likewise all manner of offensive
works shall cease till that time on both sides, and the besiegers shall not
work but only within their Trenches; nor the besieged shall, much less, make
any Works, either within, or without, whereby the besiegers may be endammaged.
And in case the relief be beaten back, though it stand in sight without doing
any thing at the appointed hour, the capitulation shall be kept, and the
place yielded up, all the Articles here rehearsed, being observed:

It shall be lawful for Monsieur d'Espinan to send one of his men to his
General, to give him an account of this present Treaty, Conditionally that the
person who goes from the said Monsieur d'Espinan shall not return again into
the place, but may return as far as the Leaguer, and spoke with Monsieur
d'Espinan in the presence of such persons as shall be appointed for that
purpose by the Generals Excellencies, or shall write his mind to him, the
Letter coming open into their Excellencies hands. Giving the person which
shall come forth a pass and a trumpetter, as far as the Cavagne of Palma:

And for the more assurance of this treaty; Hostages shall be given on both
sides. Namely a Captain of the army of that guard which is commanded by the
Marquis of Mortara, and another of a Tercia of Spaniards, another of
th'Italians, and another of Walloons. And on Monsieur d'Espinan his side shall
be delivered, two Captains of the regiment of the Duke of Enguien and two more
of the other two regiments that are in the hold. Which hostages shall be kept
on both sides until this treaty be accomplished, and the horses and carts
which shall have conducted the besieged being come to Narbona, shall be sent
back again, and the hostages likewise, all which things being arrived to the
army, their hostages shall be sent away safe, with a trumpetter.

For the performance of which treaty it shall be subscribed by the most
Excellent Lords General of the besiedging army, and by Monsieur d'Espinan, and
the heads of the regiments which are within Salsas. Given at the leaguer before
Salsas the 23. December 1639.

FINIS.

