THE DEVIL IN KENT, OR His strange Delusions AT SANDWITCH.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXLVII.

Sandwitch, May 13, 1647.
The Examination of John Mowlin of Sandwitch, Tailor, taken before Henry Foster
Mator, William Wilson, Andrew Goffrich, and others his Majesty's Justices there.
THe said Examinant says, that yesterday was five weeks he being at work on
his table, there fell from above (to according his own phrase) a power upon
him, and that he being well and strong in his joints, was cast into a great
depth of mourning, in so much that tears did abundantly gush from him: as he
sewed by his wife, there appeared a Vision before him, of which he was ready to
demand this question, What are thou? but had not strength to bring it forth:
And the first words that were pronounced by the apparition were Thy joy shall
be such as no man shall take from thee; upon which words this Examinant had
much comfort; and then the Vision which he saw being in the shape of a man in a
sad colored coat without a seam, with a powerful voice said, I am he that
have holes in my hands and feet. And the next voice that came from him said, I
am a and o, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last. And the next
voice was, Behold, I am even at the very door: which was all that was spoken at
that time. And this Examinant was all the night following admiring at what he
had seen and heard; and the next morning this Scripture came to his mind.
Through the tender mercies of our God, whereby the day spring from on high has
visited us. And the next day following this Examinant having seen and heard as
before, was questioning with himself whether it should be declared to any or
not; and about nine of the clock it was told this Examinant, it was given him
to declare to those baptized persons with whom he was a member. And the next
Lords day this Examinant was appointed by the Vision to be at one Goody
Foreman's house at three of the clock in the afternoon, which he did
accordingly perform, where there were present about sixteen persons; viz.
Thomas (...), William Wood, Anne Palmer, Goody Higgins, Goody Boykins, Master
Bateman, Goody Godfrey of high street, Goody Nokes, John Smith, Henry Stringer,
and others whom he knew not: and in the presence of all the parties aforesaid
he did declare what before he had expressed. And some of them were great
opposites to what this Examinant had spoken; but who they were he does not
well remember: But upon their opposition this Scripture the night following
came into his mind, The plowers have made long furrows upon my back; applying
this to the opposers aforesaid. And the next night following a word was given
him, I have loved thee, see that the appearance of thy love be seen: then said
this Examinant, he was constrained to love God, because he had loved him first.
And a while after the next words were, that Those whom God had chosen did do
whatsoever he commanded them. Then this Examinant questioned with himself what
God would have him do, and had an inward suggestion to go to John Foremans
house, and there it should be told him what he should do. And about nine of the
clock the last Fast day this Examinant went to Foremans house where the woman
lay upon her bed sick, and sat down; and she asked him if he had any thing to
say unto her: and she said, If you have a word to speak, speak it. To which
this Examinant gave her no answer: but suddenly after this Examinant asked her
how long she had been sick, she answered, three years and three quarters. And
the next words of this Examinant were to the woman, Daughter, the same Jesus
that appeared to me with holes in his hands and feet make thee every whit
whole: and then he went away. And about 3 of the clock in the afternoon
following the woman came to the Examinants house rejoicing; but what her
expressions were he knows not. And a while after another voice came to this
Examinant, and said, Behold she prays; and as Ananias was sent to Paul when
he prayed, to baptize him, so was this Examinant called forth to dip this
woman, whom God had made every whit whole, In the name of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost: and accordingly he did dip her at Beagrams. And afterward upon
another calling, this Examinant did likewise dip one Goody Herwoed, to whom
before that this Examinant had been sent: and he said to her first, that The
pride of thy heart is an abomination to the Lord. And the next was, Thus says
the Lord, the fourth Angel stands over thee with fire in his vial to
consume thee except thou repent. And the third was, We be to you Hypocrites,
except you repent you shall perish: all which was revealed to this Examinant
before he told it her. And within less then half an hour before this Examinant
went away, she was smitten and mourned bitterly: and so this Examinant
departing, had heard that she had kept her bed three or four days afterward,
and did scarce speak sometimes three or four hours together: and the last
Saturday morning, says this Examinant, The word was given from above with
power, Behold, she prays: and so this Examinant went the same morning up into
the chamber unto her about six of the clock, she lying a bed; and the first
words he spoke to her were, Arise sister, the same Jesus which smote thee down,
has sent me that thou should arise; and be baptized in the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost: and immediately she arose and followed this
Examinant to a place called Brewers Bridge, where he dipped her, though she had
been dipped before. And he further said, that a Voice about ten days ago spoke
to this Examinant as he lay in his bed, and said, John Arise: and immediately
he arose and went to work, and wrought until 12 of the clock that day; and
the Voice said, Go to the man that was born blind, and then the blind man
appeared in a Vision: and about one of the clock this Examinant went to him,
and spoke to him as he sat at his door, Henry, Arise; and he answered, he
would: and then this Examinant told him, he was sent to him that he should
receive his sight. Henry answered, Come, let us see what will be done. And so
he arose, and this Examinant bid him lay his hands about his middle; and he
said, Father, thou art in thy throne, get hononr and great name: and then this
Examinant laid his thumbs on his eyes, and said, Henry, open thine eyes, and
receive thy sight: and he opened his eyes, but did not see. All these words
this Examinant spoke to him, leaving God that sent him (as he said) to work the
effect according to his good pleasure.

Here follows the unfolding of the strange delusion of the aforesaid John
Mowlin, by a Vision appearing to Thomas Lipeat of Sandwitch aforesaid: wherein
the mighty power of God was seen in his support, May 5, 1647.
BEtween three and four of the clock in the morning there was a light did shine
in my chamber, my thoughts being fixed on a place of Scripture concerning the
love of God through Christ to the Saints: and casting mine eye aside, I saw a
round ball of fire, and from thence did stream forth great streams of light;
and when I saw it, my flesh did tremble: and in the light there did speak a
Voice to me, and said, Fear not, it is the voice of Peace that speaks to
thee, and it says, The peace of him is at hand. And the 22 day it came again
in like manner, and spoke the same words: and the 23 day it came again and
spoke in like manner, adding withal, that The Deceiver of Nations was gone
forth, and had deceived many; but now the everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ is
to be preached; then the Deceiver of Nations shall deceive them no more: and
said that I should have a message to declare to the sons of men, and that I
should preach the everlasting Gospel to the people, to bid them repent. And the
23 day in the evening there did appear a glimmering light, not as it did
before, and the Lord had drawn forth my spirit to speak to him by prayer, that
the Truth might appear to me, and so be able to judge whether it were of God
or not; that by my speaking God might not be dishonored, nor the Truth suffer;
but that it might appear to the world whether it were of God, or of the Devil:
and the Lord did satisfy me in it, that it was from the Devil: and the Lord
gave me courage to speak to it twice. And this evening it said to me, that I
must go to John Mowlin, and he should breathe on me, and I should be filled
with the holy Spirit. And I answered that I had not faith to believe that. And
the Voice said, thou shall believe it; and that John Mowlin and I were set
apart to preach the everlasting Gospel to all men. And then I spoke to it, and
said, What is that everlasting Gospel? And he said, To bid men repent. I did
answer, that in Scripture I saw no such Gospel: but Jesus Christ is the
substance of the everlasting Gospel to the Saints. And on the 24 day in the
morning it came in the likeness of the Moon, and the Voice spoke to me again,
and said, that as Paul and Barnabas were set apart for the work of the Lord, so
were John Mowlin and I to preach this everlasting Gospel to all men where we do
come. And I did answer again, that that was not the everlasting Gospel that was
to be preached. And the Voice said, What faith have thou? John Mowlin does
believe it. Then spoke I to it on this wise: Shall I say, the Vision of the
Lord, and the Voice of the Lord in the vision spoke those things to me? And the
answer of the Voice to me was; Say not, the Vision of the Lord, nor the Voice
of the Lord in the vision: but say, A Vision did appear, and a Voice spoke
these things to thee. This answer makes it appear to me that it was not of
God. The 26 day in the evening it did appear to me in a strange form, and the
Lord gave me courage to behold it, and to speak to it again: and the Voice said
unto me, Why do thou not go to John Mowlin? And I said, What to do? And the
Voice said, Thou have been showed to him in a Vision; and when thou come to
him he will know thee, and pray with thee, and breathe in thee the holy Spirit;
and he shall baptize thee with water: and thou shall have two witnesses to
witness the truth of it to the world. And the 27 day in the night I had
something revealed to me from the Lord in a Dream, That in the morning I should
see him that had deceived John Mowlin in the shape of a man, and said, When
thou see him thou shall not be afraid, for thou shall be as Mount Sion,
which cannot be shaken: for I have called thee by name, and he shall entise
thee with money, but take it not; For my grace is sufficient for thee, and my
presence shall go before thee; I am thy God, and will not fail thee. And in
the morning it appeared to me in the likeness of a Gentleman, very complete in
his habit, with a fair countenance, who said to me, Why do thou not go to
John Mowlin? And I said, What to do? And he said, To be filled with the holy
Ghost, and to be baptized of him, that thou may go forth and preach the
everlasting Gospel, to bid men Repent. And he did then offer me gold and
silver, and said to me, This will help to bear thy charges, for thou art a very
poor man: and further said, Take it, and appoint me any place, and keep the day
and hour, and thou shall not want all thy life. And I said, I need it not; for
the grace of God is sufficient for me. And he said, Why do thou not believe
my sayings? There be six with John Mowlin that do believe my sayings. And so he
went away. Thus I even see, what is of God shall stand.

Thomas Lipeat.

FINIS.

