Temporis Angustiae: Stolen Hours Recreations.

BEING Meditations fitted according to the variety of Objects.

Martial. lib. 8. Epig. 2. Tune potes dulces ingrate relinquere nugas, Dic
mihi, quid melius desidiosus agas. Sat plene, si sat been. BY THO. MANLEY, Jun.
Gent. And Student, Anno Aetatis 21mo.

LONDON, Printed for John Stephenson, At the Sign of the Sun, on Ludgate Hill,
1649.

TO THE Most virtuous, and truly worthy Gentlewoman, Mrs. A. M.
Thomas Manley wishes all the blessings of this life, and that which is to
come.
Dear Mistress,
OUt of that spare time, stolen from the hours of my more serious studies, I
have here from variety of objects, extracted and rough-drawne a few light
Meditations, the extravagancies of a lighter brain, which I have ^esumed to
dedicate to your Name, hoping that ^^om it, they will gain both weight and
credit: A pre^^nt, I confess, too mean for so great virtue, yet (...) assured
confidence of your goodness, that you ^ill not so much look at the meannesse
of the gift, (...) the good will of the giver, and accept it, because (...)
comes from a friend, was the maine cause of my ^oldnesse, which if you please
to pardon, adding ^ithall a grant of my desire, acceptance, I shall not ^nly
acknowledge my self to be bound to you by the ^trictest tie of friendship, but
shall be bound to ac^nowledge my self

Mrs. Your most affectionate friend, Tho. Manley. Jun.

TO THE Friendly READER.
TO make a tedious Preface to our ensuing short discourses, seems to me as
vain and unnecessarie* as was his work, who made the gates to his City
larger then the City it self; all I shall say to thee, is this, I desire thee
with sincerity to reader, and without Criticisme, to amend what thou find
amiss; so, for such a friend, this short Epistle will be long enough; but if
thou be otherwise affected, and read only, that thou may carpe, to such
I have made this too long; I desire really thou may profit by thy reading, so
shall thou receive comfort, and I my desired reward, thy good will, farewell.

Thine to do thee good. M. J.

Temporis Angustiae.
MEDITATION I.
IT is a Maxim in Phylosophie, that out of nothing comes nothing* but this
would put us into confusion, and reduce us again to a Chaos, unless we were
set upright by Divinity, which assur^s us, that an omnipotent hand out of
nothing has extracted and drawn all things: being then thus rectified, let us
raise our thoughts to their highest pitch, in contemplation of the end for
which we were created; The first and chiefest thing certainly is, to exalt with
praises the power of our God. And the next is to love our brethren, and
neighbors, for if we love not our brethren whom we have seen, how can we love
God whom we have not seen: for the former, our duty toward our God, is to
believe that he is, that he is Almighty, and that all his attributes are true;
what Nation was ever so barbarous which did not acknowledge a superintendent
deity? Nature it self has taught us, that there is somewhat beyond it self,
to whose glory, and for the advancement of whose honor, all our actions ought
to tend. The Scythians, though far remote both from civility and virtue, yet
acknowledged their Jupiter. The Egyptians, whose minds were only stuffed with
the study of Witchcrafts, yet worshipped their Osiris. The Indians, then whom,
who more savage, yet they, rather then will have none to worship, fall down
to the Devil. To conclude, the Turk, though none more cruel, yet have they
their Mahomet; Nay, those Anthropophagi, those man eatting Cannibals, then
whom, though none more devilish, yet have they their Deity, on whose Altars
they offer sacrifices, and to whom they put up, and prefer their Petitions;
And shall we, who are Christians, bought with a price, even the blood of the
Lamb, I say, shall we, be more barbarous then b^^barisme it self? not only
denying the honor due to our great God, but even as much as in us lies, both
denying our God to be, and endeavoring to pull him, if it were possible, out
of heaven by our sins; We know his power, but contemn it, and all men are
sufficiently instrued; but Patience abused is turned to fury. Secondly, we must
love our brethren, Love (says the Apostle) works no harm to his neighbor,
therefore Love is the fulfilling of the Law; and our Savior himself faith,
This command I leave you, that ye love one another. Certainly, the often
inculcation, and repetition of this duty in the Scripture shows unto us, how
strict and diligent we ought to be in the observation of it. It is a command,
upon whose observance depends our whole happiness; for what happiness can
there be, where love is taken away? Or how can that Commonwealth flourish,
where nothing abounds but strifes and contentions? By Concord, small things in
little time grow great, nay, come to the top of prosperity; by discord things
already great, in a small time grow less, nay, vanish into nothing; as by the
one we rise to the highest top of humane felicity, so by the other, we are
thrown into the depth and gulf of all wretched calamities. Hence then you
serpentin brood of Cadmus, who only begin to live, that ye may study and
endeavor to ruin one another: Think you that God created man to be a
selfe-destroyer? nay, we see otherwise in the very beginning; Cain for
murdering his brother Abel, was cursed by God with a heavy curse, to be a
vagabond, and God set a mark upon him, lest any man should kill him; If ye
bite and devour one another, ye shall be consumed one of another; What can be
expected there but desolation, where every man will be in all cases his own,
both Judge and Executioner? When every man may do that which is right in his
own eyes? What society can there be among men, where Love is taken away? Love
is the life of the soul, the maintainer of unity, the bond of peace, the
efficient cause of happiness (and as Logicians say, Causa sine qua non) it is
the builder of Commonwealths, the repairer of breaches, the restorer of paths
to dwell in; We know not God, unless we love, God is love; To conclude, Love
covers a multitude of sins, Love is like the Spring, in, and by which all
things flourish, it is the most noble passion of the soul, which wholly spends
it self in the attaining of a desired good. I could with the Silke-worm,
quite work my self to death, spend my self, all my choysest parts, all my
abilities in this heavenly Subject; he is a child, a senseless creature, a
beast, worse then a beast, that has never been touched with this heroike
passion; but I digress, I transgress; to return, Let brotherly love
continue, so shall we bring to our selves blessing upon blessing, we shall
enjoy the God of love, and by the love of God, we shall be made a mirror of
happiness, the glory of all people; A Nation, of whom it will be reported,
that blessings and happinesses have seated themselves among us; to conclude,
let us serve God truly, and love our brethren and neighbors heartily, so shall
our peace be blessed and lasting, and our happiness infinite and eternal,
Amen.

MED. 2. On the shortness of man's life.
THat the most lasting and durable things, if sublunary, are but frail, I am
sure, no man will, or can deny; the greatest Prince, as well as the meanest
beggar, are subject equally to the stroke of death; the lofty Cedar as well as
the inferior shrubs, are liable to be rooted up by stormy blasts. Craesus with
all his wealth, Aristotle with all his wit, and all men, with all their
wisdom, have, and shall perish, and turn to dust. One being asked what the
life of man is, turned round and went away, showing thereby that it is less
then a vapor; as we are young, and may live, so we are mortal, and must dye;
Philosophers accounted it the chiefest felicity, never to be borne, the next,
soon to dye. The oldest man living, if he but take away the time spent in
sleeping and in idleness, (for the measure of life is not length, but honesty,
and the study of virtue; neither do we enter into life, to the end we may set
down the day of our death; but therefore do we live, that we may obey him
that made us, employ the time and talent he bestows, well, and with wisdom,
and to dye whenever he shall call us) I say, let him but abstract those
times, he will find no length of time whereof to brag. It is true, Age is the
gift of God, yet it is the messenger of death; no man can promise himself life
for a moment: how great use might we make of this meditation; what manner of
persons ought we to be in all godliness and honesty, always to be prepared
against the day of our death (for every man's deaths-day, is his doomsday)
which we know not how soon may happen, for,

Old men must die, young men may die soon,
We see the time's not long 'twixt night and noone.
MED. 3.
WHo would ever trust him that loves to break the trust reposed on him, and
will never do any good, unless it be to satisfy some private ends, some self
interest; as such men deserve not to be trusted, so neither ought they to live,
for in stretching my conscience to harm others, I deceive my self, and while I
strive by wicked and sinister ends to rob others of their hoped, and sought
earthly good, I bar my self from an everlasting, by shutting heaven against
my self; As I would not promise more then I mean to perform, break my faith, so
I would not do more then I could with convenience, least regard of my faith
break me.

MED. 4.
REbellion is as the sin of witchcraft, says the Scripture, and we know that
witchcraft is doomed to death by the laws of God and men; by humane laws with
death here, by divine with death (if we may judge) certainly, (without Gods
great mercy) everlasting; necessity and want of friends shall never make me
take sin for a refuge, I had rather go the narrow way alone, then accompanied
the broad one: I had rather go to heaven by my self, then to hell with a
multitude; and if I must make a Covenant, yet it shall not be with death and
hell, least while I vie iniquity with the devil, I buy the devil, with hell to
boot, for my iniquity.

MED. 5.
HOpe is one of St. Paul's Cardinal virtues, which comforts us, and endures us
with patience, to wait the Lords leisure, for the fulfilling all his gracious
promises to us; as despair on the contrary taints our purer part the soul,
with a rash presumption against, and charging God with a breach of promise.
Hope well, and have well, (says the proverb) I will therefore hope well, that
I may have well, and never despair of not obtaining that, which I have no sure
way to loose, but by not seeking.

MED. 6.
REsolution and policy are the two chiefest things that make up a perfect
soldier; policy to lay designs for themselves, and countervaile their
enemies; and resolution to put them proposed in execution; policy lays the
ground work, the foundation; resolution builds and finishes the structure;
policy without resolution, ^ building, good for little; resolution without
policy, a building without a foundation, good for less; but join them, and
there comes forth a goodly building, excellent ways to obtain both a victory
single, or absolute conquest, and I am sure I shall never attain the Jewels
locked up in the chest of resolution, unless I am able to attain the key of
policy.

MED. 7.
THe child that is now born, cries as soon as it is entered into the world as
foreseeing the miseries that he must undergo therein, and indeed what is the
whole life of man but a compound of misery; since there is nothing here, in
which he may joy, and whereon he may settle his happiness* the greatest
pleasures bring the greatest cares; and if his head be adorned with a crown,
his shoulders shall surely beloaden with cares; every day increases our
sorrow; he therefore is most happy that dies soonest. Our time passes away,
and we know not how, I will therefore always be prepared against that time,
which shall come, I know not how soon, may come presently, will come at last;
and since I know every step brings me nearer to my journies end, and every day
brings me nearer to my death. I will pray, Lord prepare me, for he that may dye
every day, does as it were dye daily.

MED. 8.
AS he cannot be a just man, that contrary to the laws of nature infringes
another man's right by violence, and injury, so he cannot be a good Christian,
that contrary to the laws of God, with a malicious heart, does that to another,
which he would not have done to himself; he that knows not how to obey,
deserves not to rule, for an imperious subject will certainly prove an insolent
Tyrant. I will give to every man his due, to avoid the stain of injustice, and
I will do to all men as to my self, to gain the title of a Christian; I will
learn to obey here, that I may be admitted to rule hereafter, which I may with
Gods grace attain, knowing that for Christ's little flock, there is a Kingdom
prepared.

MED. 9.
LOve, as it is the badge of a Christian, so it is the note of a man, because
it is a passion too noble for any irrational creature to be subject to. For
God having given man a more divine part, the soul, then any other creature, so
his passions are higher, then that they should be subjected by any thing but
reason, but of all, this is most excellent, as always aiming at some good: for
a lovers eye is most peircing, his wit of greatest maturity, his tongue of
greatest eloquence, and all his inward parts (commonly) most excellent; which
he has most need of, because virtue and good are placed among so many their
contraries, that unless his understanding be quicker, he may be deceived, and
grasping, Ixion like, a cloud instead of the substance, an alluring falsehood,
for a pleasing truth: but love is my subject, (or I am his, choose you whether)
and he that will write so divine a thing, had need of a better pen, and a
quicker wit, then my immature youth can yield, least my dull phrase, clog his
lighter wings, and of God Cupid, make him, devil Cupido. Love then is the life
of the soul, and the soul of some men's life, it is a pleasing torment, a
bitter sweet, a lover of truth, a hater of dissimulation, it is the perfection
of all joy, the consummation of all earthly blessings. Cupid by the heathen,
was made a God, which shows his divine power, it is always young, for true
love can never grow old and dye; and nothing does so much sweeten and delight
our life as love; the Crown is the ensign of a King, and no such King as
love; it has subdued all creatures, rational, sensitive, vegetative, yea, and
senseless have their sympathies, the fiercest creatures are tamed by love,
Ardet Amans Dido; etc. and shall I be refractory to so great a power? no, I
will submit and acknowledge it, I rejoice in my slavery. Oh heavenly passion,
that can wrap up my senses in so great delight! Let me but enjoy thy wished
presence, I desire no greater joy; for while it is joined with virtue, it
partakes of its goodness, and what of delight is wanting in one, is added by
the other, a virtuous Love, being nothing else but a love of virtue.

Thus let me love, and there I Will rest,
'Cause virtuous love is always best.
MEd. 10.
I Can never see a candle, that is now burning in its greatest strength and
splendour, presently with one little blast of wind puffed out and extinguished,
but it drives me to the thought of my mortality; for why may not I in the
height of all my jollity be suddenly taken away? Why should I be spared? do I
not see every day me^ of abler parts fall before my face, and on every side of
me? Have I a lease of my life, or have I made a Covenant with Death? If so,
where is my evidence? what have I, that in the least manner may, or can oblige
and tie Death? no, I have no such thing, I confess my frailty, and cannot but
acknowledge, that without Gods mercy, the most contemptible of the Creatures
might arrest me for an action of trespass against my Creator, and deliver me
over to his Jailer, Death, till I could answer for my misdemeanors? But Lord,
if thou should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who then could be
able to stand? Enter not then into Judgment with thy servant, for no flesh
living can be justified in thy sight.

MED. 11.
I Can read in no book, but it presents to my sight some profitable objects,
to remember me of my mortality; for reading in Martial, I found an Epigram made
on a lad, who walking under the caves of some noble house in Rome, in the
winter, when the cold was predominant, and congealed the water into hard Ice,
an Isicle fell down on him, and killed him; herein, me thoughts, was presented
a sad memento to after Ages of their own frailty, when water, contrary to its
nature, shall turn (as I may say) heads-man; Do we fear drowning? When can
we walk with more safety then in winter, when the hard frosts with their
biting sharpness have converted water into a more condense matter, and as it
were made in that element a new Creation, yet then (see the frailty of our
natures) which from such (even) helps, cannot gather any safety: nay, from the
falling Isicle, I collect this, that the meanest things that were by God
created, are of power sufficient to execute Gods wrath and vengeance on us for
our sins; But there is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared, etc.

MED. 12.
LOve is a voluntary affection and desire to enjoy that which is good; Love
wishes, desire enjoyes: now if there be so much sweetness in the theoretick
part, how much more is there in the practick; if there be so much pleasure in
the journey, how much greater joy at the end? If it somewhat tends to virtue,
to wish good, then it is virtue it self to do, to enjoy good; if desire of
good make a man virtuous, then the full enjoyment of it, makes a man perfectly
happy; O divine and heavenly passion, that can at the same time make a man
both virtuous and happy! Let me now begin to love, that I may begin to be
virtuous, and proceed in affection, that I may be truly happy. What happiness
greater then true love? What Paradise more glorious, then that of affection?
Let me then love truly, that I may enjoy happiness, and let me devote my self
to a virtuous affection, that I may have a share in the terrestrial Paradise.

Thou conquer'st all, Love, let not me be free,
I will devote my self wholly to thee;
Thou can make happy, yea, and virtuous too,
Accept me then, I Will be a servant true.
MED. 13.
WHen I see wet wood laid on a fire, as it will not burn without much blowing,
so it will dead and spoil the rest which burnt well before; I cannot but think
of man's inability to good, for of himself, being backward to do any virtuous
thing, when he is clogged with the heavy lumpish mass of the body, it will
even obliterate those good thoughts that were before; seeing then we are so
unable to do any good thing of our selves, let us fly to him that is able to
give us both to will, and to do good.

Lord we are wicked, can do nothing well,
And do in naught but vitiousnesse excel.
That we can do no good* is our hearts grief,
But we believe, Lord help our unbeleif.
MED. 14.
PRide has been the destruction of all its lovers, and always carries them
the higher, to make their precipice the greater: what made Adam lose his
Paradise, but pride* and a desire to know more then was necessary for him? what
threw the angels out of heaven, and of demy-gods made them all devils, but
their too great and aspiring pride? our very common proverb, pride will have a
fall, should teach us to shun that, that we my stand upright; why should I love
that that hates me, and how shall I better know a perfect hatred, then by this,
that it seeks my overthrow? would any reasonable man be altogether guided and
directed by his known enemy, and is it not our greatest enemy that stirrs us up
to that damnable sin? I have no way then to uphold my self, but by following
my master Christ's precept; be ye lowly as I am lowly, I will never therefore be
refractory to those commands that drive me to good, but I will take and submit
to my friends counsel, (and what friend more true, then he that has laid
down his life for my sake?) I will never therefore aspire, or climb high, lest
I take a fall, but I will always be humble, as knowing it is safest standing
on the ground.

Qui jacet in terra non habet, unde cadat. MED. 15.
THe tongue though it is a little, yet it is an unruly member, and unless well
bridled, may bring the whole frame into a confusion. God has given us two
ears, two eyes, and two hands, yet but one tongue, that we should hear and
see, and do twice as much as we should speak; I will not therefore be so
thrifty of any thing as my speech, because a thing once spoken cannot be
recalled; It has never been hurtful to any to hold his peace, to speak,
damage to many. I will therefore keep my tongue as with a bridle, and set a
watch before the door of my lips, that so I may tame that which otherwise
might happen to make me be kept under; And the only way to cover folly is
silence; for though the wise man's tongue is in his heart, yet the fools heart
is in his tongue.

MED. 16.
Envy is an inward repining at another good, and a grief for the prosperity
of others, and herein do envious men imitate their father the Devil, that
knowing their own state to be bad, they hate those, whom God has placed in a
better lot. Sort tua contentus abi, is a precept fit for all men, he then that
is not only not content with his own, but covets another, deserves a double
punishment; first, for violating Gods Laws, and secondly, for infringing and
intrenching on his neighbors right; I will never therefore envy another good
estate, because I have not wit or grace enough to make mine so too. I will
never repine at another prosperity, lest while I seek to impair them, I make
a breach on my self; for he that seeks to climb by such a secret sin, in
all probability will fall with open shame.

MED. 17.
OF all vices drunkenness is the worst, and of all sinners the drunkard is the
most heinous, the sin being a compendium, an epitomie of all other offenses,
and the sinner by it made fit for any, for all enormities. Man when he is at
his best is good for little, but when he is drunk, he is good for nothing; he
is then made such light stuff, that the Devil may carry him whether he li^ts
at every blast, which we may more plainly see, if we do but consider, how
every breath he draws in, drives him from one side of the street to the other.
The Lacedaemonians to make this vice odious to their children, would show them
their servants drunk. Though I commend not their act, yet I cannot dislike
their end, though to make their servants drunk were a fault in the act, yet by
it to make their children shun that svvinish vice, was a virtue in the end;
but we are otherwise taught, not to be evil that good may come thereof; Since
then God has created me with a reasonable soul, that I might follow, observe
and embrace virtue and goodness, I will never so much degenerate from the end
of my creation, as to make my body, which was created a vessel for purity, to
be a sink of iniquity, and to turn a vessel for virtuous things, into a
tun to hold drink.

MED. 18.
BEauty is an excellent ornament of the body, making all men love and admire
that person in whom it recides; but if the heart answers the face, if the soul
be as well repleat with virtues, as the body replenished with beauty, how can
it be but there is a perfect harmony? The beauty of the soul, virtues, are
like goads to stir up the body to good; the ornament of the body, beauty, is
like poison to the soul, to infect it. The beauty of the soul helps to
perfect the body, though the beauty of the body too often proves a snare to
the soul.

MED. 19.
GOds mercy never fails them that truly seek it; it is one of his chiefest
attributes to be merciful, why then should we despair of that, which he does
as it were hold forth to us? If we repent and amend, repent of the past evils
we have done, and amend what has been amiss for the time to come, he is ready
to embrace us in the arms of his son; Why will we rather imitate Achitophell
or Judas, persist in our wickedness and perish, then with the prodigal son
return, and be taken to mercy? Since then God holds forth his mercy, and
says, Return, Oh Shulamite! return, return, I will accept of his counsel,
and embrace his mercy.

If tears once flow but from a Peter's eye,
They Will mercy find, such are my tears, my cry.
MED. 20.
EVen to the poorest Peasants, Nature has taught thus much, to desire content
and ease; and where are these to be enjoyed with greater happiness, then in
the haven of rest? what content greater then to enjoy happiness? and what
hahpinesse greater then to have communion with God? I will so direct my steps,
that they may carry me to that place where rest and happiness dwell, and I
will so order my goings, that at my journies end, I may not fail (with Gods
grace) of the end of my journey, heaven. I will cast the world, and all things
in it at my back, because they are all most vain, and I will only drive at
heaven, because it alone can make me contentedly happy; I will not value earth,
nor principalities, nor powers, but will spurn them all for a door keepers
place in thy house, as knowing, that in thy presence is fullness of joy, and at
thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

MED. 21.
What is it that makes man so much love earth, but that it is most like him, a
heavy and lumpish massy compounded body, good for nothing but to bring forth
briers and thorns, unless well manured and tilled by art and industry, in it
may man easily perceive the dullness of his nature, apt to nothing but what is
by frequent inculcations driven into it; nay, the soul, that immortal and
divine part of man, would fly to heaven, were it not clogged and kept down by
that heavy element: every thing tends to its center, heavy downward, light
upward: man therefore, that is in his body, looks only at that, though in his
soul he aim higher.

Lord make me quit my self, and every thought
That's clogs me down, and makes me do what is naught.
Lord raise my thoughts, and ravish my desire,
That so my soul may to thy heaven aspire.
MED. 22.
REligion by some men is made a cloak for malisciousness, and like Ianus, made
to carry two faces under one hood, by many men it is little, by most not at all
esteemed, and few value it as they ought; some men's Religions are locked up in
their coffers, accounting gain their only heaven, some make gain great
godliness, and others make godliness great gain; others Religion lies in the
Cooks and Tailors shops, and commonly such carry their god about with them: a
third sort there are that place their Religion on popular applause, and count
the voice of the common people, the voice of God: thus every man's fantastic
opinion is his Religion, and according to his desire creates himself a god;
'twas said, Primos in orb deos fecit timor, that their offspring arose from
men's fear of them; but now we fee quite contrary, every man's lust is his god,
and what he likes and loves is his only diety: O insipiens and infacetu^
hominum genus! he that holds an uncertain Religion, and adores a false god,
will hardly ever attain true happiness; no afflictions therefore shall make me
change my true Religion, nor new and daily increasing torments force me to deny
my God, For what would it profit me to gain the whole world, and lose my own
soul?

MED. 23.
I have read of monsters and wild beasts, but an ungrateful man is worse then
either, for I know what to expect of them; but he devours courtesies, and his
best kindness kills; who would sow the wind, or plow the sand? Me thinks
irrational creatures accuse such men, Andronicus his Lion will requite his
Chirurgrons kindness, and will pay the healing of his foot, with the saving of
his life; the earth for received rain and moisture, will keep a kind
remembrance, and pay its due thankfulness with nourishing fruits; Darius,
though he valued not the poor man's cup of cold water, yet requited his love,
not with thanks only, but a just reward. What shall we think then of those who
glory in their shame, and account it their greatest honor not only not to pay,
but to forget courtesies? that think every favor bestowed on them deserved,
and so not worthy a reward, mulus mulum scabit, was the old proverb, One good
turn requires another; as I will therefore have one hand to receive, so I will
have another to repay; and when any ones favor bestows on me, what I cannot
equally and fully requite, I will not be wanting in my endeavors, and what I
cannot perform by my actions, I will fulfill with my desires. He owes most that
pays nothing.

MED. 24.
WHen I see that Spoak in the wheel of a Coach, which was even now at the very
bottom, and ran in the dirty channel, presently exalted to the top, and as it
were, domineering over the rest; me thinks it presents to my view the great
inconstancy of Fortune, that has exalted the meanest of all men to the highest
pitch of earthly felicity, and cast down the noble, and laid them grovelling in
the mire; yet then to see that lowest come to the top, cheers my drooping
hopes, and tells me that their seat is but slippery, and will decline: why
should I then despair of ever rising, because I am now down, our old Proverb
tells me, that when things are come to the Worst, then they will mend. I will
therefore patiently bear the worst, and cheerfully hope the best, so shall not
my present afflictions too much deject me, and the good when it comes will not
so overjoy me, but that I shall know how to make good use of it.

MED. 25.
WHen I walked by the Shambles and saw the harmless sheep, conscious to its
self of its own innocence, how quietly, and with how great patience it receives
the fatal stroke from the cruel Butcher, and presently after, fee the filthy
swine, with how great reluctance, how much roaring, and how great unquietness
it undergoes and takes the knife from the same hand, me thinks it held forth to
me the unspotted life, and quiet conscience of a righteous man, that can
acquiesce, and rest himself in the hope of mercy through his Saviors merits,
and does quietly yield his soul to him that gave it; when the wicked, conscious
to himself of his own guilt, startles at the thought, is amazed with the
terrors, and roares even for fear of death. As I will therefore always do my
endeavor to keep my self from a violent death, so I will constantly live as if
I should die daily, presently; I will always have my Lamp ready trimmed, so
shall I not fear, though the Bridegroom come even now; for an ungodly
unpreparedness makes and increases fear.

MED. 26.
I have read of one Psapho, who being a man of no great esteem, bent his mind
wholly to raise his credit, which he did by this policy, he took birds and
taught them this lesson (...), Psapho is a great god, which they having perfectly
learned, he let them fly among others of their kind, who taught it them,
insomuch that the woods ecchoed with nothing so much as that lesson; which the
people thinking to be divinely taught the birds, believed, and adored him. How
fitly does this resemble some men of these times, who speak through the mouths
of the vulgar, and make the common sort to serve as trunks to convey to them
glory and credit. If credit be my aim, I will never seek to gain it by such
sinister ends; the peoples applause is but a very ticklish subject for me to
make the basis of my honor: certainly therefore I will never look for that
which cannot help me, lest while I hope to enslave the common people to my
credit, my credit make me a common slave to the people.

MED. 27.
A Covetous man of all is most miserable, for he only studies how to keep that
which God blessed him with to make use of; and though he possess many riches,
he enjoys nothing but care; his life is all trouble, care to get, fear to
loose, for every mouse that stirs in his chamber, he fears comes to borrow some
gold: he is never satisfied with a great deal, though a little were too much. I
will therefore pray that I may be contented, since to such a one a little is
enough, and if the best of us had according to our deserts too much, nothing
will satisfy Alexander but the whole world, but I say,

Contents a kingdom, and the greatest store
Is to make use of, and not covet more.
MED. 28.
I can never hear a churlish bauling dog bark at every one that stirs, and
passes up and down, yet will bite none, but that in my opinion it points to
me, and evidently declares the vile nature of detracting carpers, that will
find fault with every thing they see, and glory in their criticismes, that
misconstrue every action, and wrest every word to their own sense; I can liken
such men to nothing but Aesops Ape, who because she was curtaild, would have
all beasts cut off their tails; they judge nothing well done but what is their
own, though themselves can do nothing well. I would not be such by any
means, because by scanning other men's acts, I make all have a strict eye over
mine; I will never therefore seek that by criticismes, which I cannot attain
by virtue; for he who seeks to vilify others, gains no good opinion to
himself; for by seeking to destroy others honor, I make my self but a
footstool, whereby their actions rise according to their desert, and gather
credit out of my fall.

MED. 29.
With what willing pains, and how laborious endeavors, will diverse men run
a race that is set before them, all hoping to attain the glory of the prize,
and to get the first touch of the desired mark, though it can fall to the lot
but of one to be victor; this world is a course, and all that live are runners
in it, but every man almost sets up for himself a mark, which he pursues with
all eagerness. Some aim at, and attain their desire of riches, others not so
much earthie, look somewhat higher, and happily gain their expectations by the
enioyment of desired honor: but a third, which is the only happy man,
heightens his desire, and lifts up his soul, aiming alone at the only
desirable mark, heaven. Let me not, Oh director of my steps, spend my self in
painful labors for the attaining that which will not satisfy, nor run a
whoring after my own inventions: but since I live here, and must make one in
the race, let me direct my steps to the gaining of that mark, which can only
make me happy.

Heaven is the mark that I desire to gain,
Let me so run then, that I may obtain.
MED. 30.
A Waterman is the perfect resemblance of an hypocrite, who goes the quite
contrary way to what he seems, and looks not at the place he goes to; but some
Italian pictures present to our view its absolute pattern, who show on a
straight line a Venus in her most completed beauty, enough to make your
affection, like Pigmalion, adore the Statute; but turn to the other side, it
holds forth the gastliest countenance that ever eye beheld, the terrible
physiognomie of some bloudthirstie monster, or infernal fury. Here you have
the hypocrites very nature; who more Saint like? who carries a more seemingly
sweet aspect? who of a more (though faignned courteous, and affable
disposition; if you look at him with a single eye? but if with a searching and
understanding eye, you take a through view of him, you will find him a devil
incarnate, whose heart and tongue never speak the same things, and of so
perverse a nature, that no infernal hag is half so divilish; he that with
Judas batraies his Master with a kiss, and under an humble obedience hides
treason, deserves a far greater torment then an open enemy. He has great
reason to fear that God will never own him, as not knowing the disguise he so
often uses. Therefore my tongue and heart shall go together, and I will always
seem what I am, and be what I seem.

MED. 31.
VVAlking in the fields, and seeing the tender grass already tincted with a
lively verdure by the forward Spring, and how invitingly with its sweet
freshness, and fresh-sweenesse, it allures the fancy of the delighted walker to
some pleasing meditations. I cannot but think of man's dullness, that is not able
from the sweet showers of Gods grace and mercy distilled on his drooping soul,
to gather thence so much spiritual life as may quicken his thoughts to the
meditation of his happiness. Lord, as we, like the earth of rayn are receivers
and hearers of the word, so let us imitate its thankful fruitfulness, and with
a grateful retaliation endeavor to be doers: ravish our hearts with the
thought of thy love, raise our desires to the performance of thy commands;
grant we may do what thou command, and then command what thou will.

MED. 32.
IN these times I meet with many men whose crazed brains will never let them
enjoy the golden mean, but always drives them to the greatest extremes,
Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybdim, for hoping to escue the one rock
of superstition, they fall and split themselves on the other of Atheism. I can
resemble such to nothing better then Jesuits, and both to Sampsons foxes; who
while they look and strive to run several ways, have a firebrand in their
hearts, with which they endeavor to destroy both Church, and State. Its an old
Proverb, when the fox preaches, let the Geese take heed, for thereby heel only
seek by their security, an opportunity the better to worry them. I love not
the Fox of himself, he is destructive enough, but a Fox with a firebrand is
like an Ignis fatuus, that wholly stupifies our senses, and leads about in
error, till we arrive at our destruction. I will therefore take the wise man's
counsel; Take these Foxes, these little-foxes that spoil the Vines.

MED. 33.
HE that lives all his life time as if he should never dye, or at least should
never come to an account, but drives off his repentance, till he lies on his
deathbed, and thinks then, one Lord have mercy is enough to carry his soul
to Heaven, may perchance find, instead of joy, a gulf of endless, easelesse,
remediless torments: but what say our Ancients, nunquam sera, it is never too
late to do well: why then should I ever despair of mercy? Was not the good
thief on the Cross admitted into Paradise? were not the Laborers sent into
the Vineyard at the eleventh hour, and yet received an equal hire with the
first? As I will not therefore despair, so I will not yet so presume to expect
it as due, I will not with the Epicures say, Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die: but let us repent and amend, since we may dye daily.

MED. 34.
WHen I come among a company of Musicians, and see every one playing on a
several instrument, and singing thereto, with various voices, and yet hear
what a melodious harmony arises out of that discord, which pleases mine ear,
delights my fancy, and luls my senses, as it were into a sleep with content; I
cannot but think of that heavenly joy among the Saints, where all sing
Allelujahs with one consent, what a supernatural content they enjoy! If then
our inferior music can so ravish my senses, what shall I say of those
superior? whose least harmony as far surpasses ours, as the golden ore
excels the contemned sand; the least sounding of whose Angelical voices, as
far exceeds the sweetest melody, and most delightful symphonie of our best
tuned notes and instruments, as the purest Diamond, and most hard Adamant do
the britlest glass. Lord make me one of that heavenly Quire, that sing
perpetual praises in thy presence, that my voice may chant forth Allelujahs to
thy name. Oh heavenly joys, filled both with content and happiness!

Lord raise my spirit that I may attain
To chant forth praises with thy heavenly train,
Ravish my senses, my dull notes inspire
With holier fancies, make me of thy Quire.
The greatest discords shall, that now appear
Be then melodious harmony; Lord hear.
MED. 35.
How useless, and altogether uncomfortable is that room at present, where
darkness is predominant, making me sit in an unwilling idleness, which is
both useful and sociable, when candles are brought in; Lord think I then, how
comfortless is my soul, till thy lightning grace spread its refulgent beams
in my heart; infuse it then into my heart, and then it will be ready to show
forth thy praise.

Lord in my heart, make but thy graces shine,
I shall to praise thee then be wholly thine.
MED. 36.
THough Charity begin at home, yet it must not end there, for no man is borne
only for himself; a man must not spend all his kindness within doors, but
must stretch out his hand to be bountiful to others, whose wants require his
help, and whose penury calls for something of his abundance: As I must
therefore always provide for my own, to avoid the brand of an Infidel; so,
when it lies in my power, I will do all good to others, that I may gain the
Character of charitable. I am not borne all for my self, but somewhat for
others: for it is better not at all to live, then not to live to profit my
Country.

MED. 37.
HOw soon does time pass away, the morning is gone, the noone is already
come, and it will not be long before the night overtake us; the work we have to
do, we must do quickly; before night come, wherein no man can work: our life
is that moment of time, which so soon passes away, the morning of our youth
is fled, before we well know we are borne, the noone of our middle Age is
already come, and yet we are not prepared for that work, which ought to have
been done in our morning; the night of our old age is approaching, wherein the
very stooping of our bodies toward the ground tells us, they are going to
decay, and that now, that we would, we cannot take hold of that happy
opportunity so often before let slip by us. Lord make me always ready to
receive thee; The only way to sweeten death, is always by having it in
remembrance, and the best way to make a happy exit, is by always meditating on
my end.

MED. 38.
When I seriously consider with my self, how with two or three glances of my
eye, I am able to run over that most glorious fabric of the world in a card,
which by perambulation, I was not able to compass in many years, nay in my
whole life; it drives me with admiration to the thought of the wonderfulnesse
of Gods works, of which we may contemplate with ease, yet not be able in our
whole life to attain the perfect knowledge of them; it makes me chide the
folly of those men, who contemn other men's industry and labor, and think by
sitting at home, and finding fault, to gain Knowledge of the mystical secrets
of nature, and the world: I will therefore by praising their deeds, encourage,
and prick forward others to the discovery of that, which my too great sloth
hinders me from, and since I cannot do it my self, I will praise God for
those which can do it for mine and the general good. He only knows to prize
rightly, that understands the worth truly.

MED. 39.
I remember a story of one, who coming into the burial place in Rome, where
Caesar lay, would needs know which was his head, among many others that lay
there; it was answered, that with no nose, which he seeking, and seeing all
want, not being satisfied, demanded yet a second time, and then was told, that
without the teeth, when he looking, and seeing all want, said so, and so could
not learn: whence then tends this great ambition to aspire, and thirst of
riches? Your greatest honor in the grave cannot distinguish you from the
basest beggar; Irus and Craesus, Caesar and the meanest Roman soldier, the
greatest King, and the meanest Peasant are all alike in death; the thought of
this should drive men from such vain thoughts. I will never spend all my time
to gain that, which will at last do me no help, but the chief of my care shall
be, not that I may dye rich, but good.

MED. 40.
WHat a little spark will kindle a great fire? What a little fire will set
whole Cities in a flame? How soon will Napthe take fire? The tongue is this
spark, greater provocations are the fire, and a hasty person is the soon
fire-taking Napthe; How careful then ought we to be, least our tongues by
greater provocations strike that fire in hasty persons, which increasing by
factions, may grow into a flame? I will take heed therefore of saying, or doing
that, which may breed distractions, and I will endeavor to set men together,
but not by the ears.

MED. 41.
WHen diverse men are assembled at a feast, I see that one can eat heartily,
even enough to suffice nature, of that dish, which another man's stomach would
not digest, which another man's palate could not relish. I can gather out of
those greatest calamities that press me, some hopes of Gods love toward me
(for every son he loves, he chastises) and comfort my self in those saddest
afflictions, under which, perhaps another man may faint, nay even despair; We
see that out of the same flower the laborious Be can gather honey, and the
venomous spider suck poison. I will comfort my self with this, that God will
strengthen to bear, yea, and overcome the afflictions he lays on me.

MED. 42.
HOw great is the content of the righteous? when he is departing out the world,
he always accounted himself as a stranger, or pilgrim, and never set his
mind on any thing in this world, knowing them to be altogether vain, and
unsatisfactory, he only now dying rejoices, that he is going to enjoy good:
What traveller having passed many dangerous ways, rejoices not when he draws
near to his Country? What pleasures have we in this world which draws near
to an end every day, and which sells unto us so dear those pleasures that we
receive? I will never certainly brag of an ill market, but I will endeavor to
mend my self: I will not be of their mind, who think nothing good but what is
dear, but I will always seek to have a pennie-worth for my penny.

MED. 43.
What man is not content to depart out of an old ruinous house? who is so
senseless, and altogether neglectfull of his life and safety, as to love
constant fightings and battles? The world is an old decaying edifice, and what
other thing is our life, but a perpetual battle and sharp skirmish, wherein we
are one while hurt with envy, another while with ambition, and by and by with
some other vice, besides the sudden onsets given upon our bodies, by a thousand
sorts of diseases, and floods of adversities upon our Spirit: Who then will not
say with Saint Paul, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ?

MED. 44.
HOw much that candle steeds me at night, which at noon day was of no use? yet
not that now it has more light, but that there is more need of it: every man
will be my friend in the noone, the time of my prosperity, but he is a true
friend, that sticks to me, and helps me with his counsel in the night of my
adversity, when ill fortune has cast me down, amicus certus in re incerta
cernitur, I will alvvayes love, and desire friends; but a friend at a dead
lift, is really alter idem.

MED. 45.
IN the same garden, where we spend many hours to manure the ground, and set
sweet and wholsome herbs; We see how slowly yet they come forward for all our
care; when stinking Hemlock, and other filthy weeds of themselves grow apace,
nature being to these a true nursing mother, to the other but a step dame; and
those very herbs when grown up, if not carefully looked unto, and cleansed,
will be choked by the unwholsomer weeds: with how great reluctancie, and how
much labor is man, sinful man brought to follow good? when all persuasions,
and entreaties, all menaces, and threats, all punishments and sufferings, are
scarce able to drive him one step forward to good; yet the same man runs with
great willingness, much vehemence and violence to evil; How hard is it for a
man to forget sin, or to remember God? to sin is the note of a man, but to
stand in, to persevere in sin, is the Character of the Devil: though I
cannot, as I am a man, refrain from all sin, (for that is impossible, the
evil that I would not, that I do) yet I will not be so much devil as to
persevere in it.

MED. 46.
EVery stomach will not digest the same meat, for what is one man's food is
another man's poison; the Conscience is like our stomach: for what I hold to be
a sin, another perhaps will deny to be one; and as every man's palate will not
alike relish all meats, nor his Conscience abhor all sin; though he
acknowledge theft, he will not do the like for adultery: though he abhor
Sacrilege, he can yet dispense with Idolatry: nay, happily he may stumble at a
straw, and leap over a block; he will strain at a gnat, yet swallow a Camel;
he will not swear at all by any means, though in a lawful cause; but for a
fee, he will bear false witness in any cause; the only way to avoid running
into this Dilemma, will be, to make a Conscience of all sins: I will think
no sin so little, as that I may willingly commit, but I will therefore
endeavor as near as I can to shun all; Qui non ante cavet post dolebit.

MED. 47.
What a various disposition of mind and speech does every Climate affords its
Inhabitants; and not only so, but the very same Clime stamps a several
character of body on every particular Native thereof, insomuch, that in almost
the whole world, one shall never see two men alike in feature, and condition;
nay, some are by nature so contrary to us, that they are made black, drawing
our wonder after them wheresoever we see them, as having in them somewhat
monstrous, rara avis in terris nigroque simillima Cygno. And though every man
be thus bodied, and vizaged severally, yet has God made the heart of like
form in all, thereby showing, that though we differ in all outward parts, yet
our hearts should all agree, tend to one Center, viz. the praise of our
Creator; I will, since God has given our hearts one form, endeavor to
reduce them to one affection, to do the work for which they were created: I
will never raise several opinions in that, which God created but for one.

MED. 48.
ALl manner of Creatures in their kind resemble one another, man only
excepted, amongst whom, it is even a wonder to find two alike, the reason is,
because the mixture of the humors is different in every man. If then the
humors several mixture be the cause of so much variety, does it not argue the
mingler full both of power, and wisdom? Oh the depth of the wisdom and power
of God, that can from such things produce so great a variety! Can we ever
sufficiently praise the rich wisdom of so mighty a Creator? Could we sing
eternal Allelujahs, all would be too little.

As from the humors diverse mixtures grow
A great variety of features, so
From thence a hearty thankfulness does spring
To our Creator, that is a mighty King.
From well mixed humors best conditions grow,
From godly hearts the best thanksgivings flow.
MED. 49.
I Am the way, the truth, and the life, says our Savior: All the while we
live, we are traveling in Christ our way, to attain him to be our truth, and
our life. What is the earth but a passage in a strange land? for Heaven is our
Country; What is this world but a Sepulcher, since our departure out of it is
an entrance into life? what is it to dwell here, but to be plunged in death, and
what is our body but a prison, since to be delivered out of it is Liberty? And
if it be our chief happiness to enjoy the presence of our God, is it not a
misery not to enjoy it? I will earnestly desire to finish my race, yet I will
not take a desperate course and murder my self; I can by steps and degrees
easily and safely descend from the top of that tower, whence, if I cast my
self headlong, I should break my neck; fair and softly goes fair.

MED. 50.
THe strongest and best man begins to dye, before he well knows he lives, as
soon as he is borne; and of the shortness of man's life are given many
resemblances, but amongst all, I think none does re vera more really present
it to our view, then the greek word (...), which signifies to breath, or live:
it consists but of two letters, but the one is the first, the other the last in
the whole alphabet; (...) holds forth to us our beginning, and (...) our
certain ending; he that begins with (...) and proceeds, must of necessity
come at length to (...); Let us not then spend that little time we have here,
so, as if we should never die: we have a long journey to go, and yet little
money, and less time to spend; I will therefore take heed, that I spend not
too prodigally at first, lest my wants make me fall short of my journeyes end.

MED. 51.
IT is the foolish ambition of too many, in this last and worst Age of the
world, either to be best, or not at all, and (...) they cannot attain the
perfection of their desires, they will not desire to be perfect; I am not of
their minds, but since I cannot do as well as I would, I will do as well as
I may, and what I want in my actions, I will perform in my desires. It was
that pride that transformed Lucifer, once a glorious Angel, into a devilish
fiend.

MED. 52.
With how pleasing mirth, and yet mournful melody, does the pretty
Nightingal please the ear of the delighted hearer, while with sad Elegies she
condoles the wretched fate of her brother Itys, the hearing of whose mourning,
making me remember the former story, drives me to the thought of my own
obstinacy, that for greater sins cannot sigh out one complaint, or shed one
relenting or repenting tear; Oh the dullness of humane nature, which the very
birds, and other irrational Creatures can reprehend! Let us therefore alvvayes
take care of doing that, which draws down judgments on us.

MED. 53.
WHen in the beginning of the Spring I walk in the fields, and hear there
the chirping melody of the little Nightingale, how do her sweet notes ravish
my senses with joy, which when I seriously have hearkened unto, and consider
one poor bird can so please, nay, even revive me, then think I, with how much
greater delight should I be vvrapt, when I meditate on those heavenly joys,
where every Singer is a King, and every Minister an Angel, where there is joy
infinite, pleasures everlasting, and happiness without end, where all things
ever flourish, and perpetual Anthems are chanted forth to him that sits on the
throne. Lord, make me but worthy to enjoy a place in that heavenly mansion, and
receive me into those everlasting habitations, where I may count it my
greatest happiness to know, that my felicity is without end.

MED. 54.
A Happy content, is the only contented happiness, and to a covetous man, the
whole world is not enough, though the least part or tittle of it be too much;
Esau, though he confess he has much, yet desires more; Jacob, though he has
little, yet thinks it enough; desire lifts up the poor man toget, the rich man
though he have, yet is troubled to keep. I would not be therefore too poor,
lest I take the name of God in vain, and despair of his love to me; neither
desire to be too rich, lest I say, who is the Lord, and deny him; but make me
able to say with Paul, In what condition soever I am, I have learned therewith
to be content.

MED. 55.
WHat traveller does not patiently endure many weary steps, and hazard his
person in many dangerous ways, that he may at last come to his beloved
Country? what man lives, that is not here, both a Stranger and a Pilgrim? we
must go many steps by temptations, and run through the furnace of afflictions,
before we come to heaven. The way to Canaan is through the Wilderness; the way
to heaven is narrow, and they that travel therein, must turn neither to the
right or left hand, lest they fall into the Desert of Sin, and be torn by the
briars and thorns of Temptations and afflictions. Shall we therefore despair?
no, the Apostle says, In patience possess you your souls. How sore was David
tried in Absoloms Rebellions? yet what a glorious exit from them was wrought by
his patience. I will therefore patiently submit to God in the bearing my own
burdens, as knowing it will have a period: and I will not fret, but quietly
wait, hoping to enjoy his promises of mercy; Da mihi in hac vita patientiam,
in altera indulgentiam.

MED. 56.
HOw great a happiness is there in content, and how contented is that man that
is happy? was not C. Fabritius happy in his content, that would rather, though
poor, refuse the Samnits gold, rather then be rich by dishonesty? Which were
more happy, they, who in the destruction of their Country, sought only the
preservation of their riches, or Byas bewailing its misery, and being satisfied
with his Omnia mea mecum porto: It was a brave speech, Next to Alexander that
has all things, is Diogenes, who contemnes all things, is content with all
things. It is no marvel if we covet more, when in all things of the world
there is no satisfaction; though we may satisfy the desires of our soul, yet
we cannot satisfy the souls of our desires.

Felices animae! quibus haec cognoscere cura est,
Inque domos superas scandere cura fuit.
MED. 57.
HOw great an uncertainty is there in the things of this world? and when a man
is at highest, he is in most danger of falling; Sejanus, as Seneca speaks of
him, presently sunk and fell in a day; and Bibulus, in the height of his joy,
and in the midst of his triumph, was killed by a tile falling upon him: who
would spend himself in grasping that which he is sure he cannot hold! I will
never grieve to lose that which I cannot keep; but I will with the Philosopher,
vvalking in the Fair, thank God he has made so many things which I have no
need of; he that chooses vanity, is lighter then vanity.

MED. 58.
THe wicked vvorldling thinks it the greatest judgment, to endure, and undergo
affliction, when the righteous esteem their condition saddest, if God cease to
be angry, and will chastise no more; for it is then with the soul, as with a
ship, which when the Pilot leaves, no man will look after it, but all run from
it, and leave it, till at last it perishes. I will therefore say with the
Wiseman, Give me any plague, but the plague of the heart, and any anger of God,
but this, that he will be angry no more.

MED. 59.
GOd at first made man in his own Image, that he might glorify him for his
creation, and direct his steps to the following of true goodness; for truth is
a pattern of that Image, in which God at the first made man, and is as a
girdle of many links, whereby we may climb to true happiness; the first of
which is conformity, when we apprehend him as really he is: another is, when we
speak according to what we know, and do according as we speak. Lord, since thou
createdst us all here to end, make us consider, and always remember the end of
our creation, and not as it were emulous of the Serpents curse, to cleave with
our belly to the ground: as we have our being from God, so we have our welbeing
in God.

MED. 60.
What have I done to this angry little dog, that he thus flies at my shins,
and follows me baulling, ready at every step I take to bite me, I neither chid,
or struck, or offered to do any thing else at him: thus do I see how causelessly
an honest man may be persecuted, and how every pedantique fellow will follow
him, not only with mocks and flouts, but bitter railings, and malicious false
accusations; what Christian will desire to be better esteemed then his Savior,
was he not so used? who had greater temptations in this kind then David, a
man after Gods own heart? Lord direct me but in thy way, I shall not regard
then any persecution; it shall never trouble me, though I be persecuted, if it
be undeservedly. I had rather suffer persecution, and not deserve, then
deserve, and not suffer it.

MED. 61.
WHat fruits could the parched ground bring forth, if not moistened with
seasonable rain? what sweet and fertile showers does the heaven send down to
refresh its drough, and enliven the longing hopes of the laborious Husbandman?
How barren would that soul be, where grace through the eye cannot for former
sins drive out one repentant tear? the sin of our soul is the soul of our sin,
and when our eyes cannot dissolve themselves into rivers of tears, our hearts
congeale as hard as rocks of Adamant; yet that Adamant can be broken with
vinegar, and tears of repenpentance will wash away the hardness of our stony
heart.

Lord grant me grace to turn away sins smart,
And make my tears soften my flinty heart.
MED. 62.
THe poor Publican was sooner heard, that said little, and stood afar off,
then the proud-loud-boasting Pharisee: it is not the multitude of our words, but
the zeal of our hearts that God affects: the righteous man in the midst of
trouble can fly to God by his prayer, when the abundant prosperity of the
wicked makes him guilty both of neglect and infidelity: the prayer of the
heart, is the heart of prayer, and where my faith fails, my prayer falls; our
infidelity stops Gods ear, and makes us that we cannot hear when he calls. I
will be humble in prayer, but not fearful, Qui timide rogat, docet negare.

MED. 63.
THe sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, when the prayer of
the righteous is as a sweet smelling odor. Zeno sailing with a company of
lewd Athiests, there suddenly arose such a storm; as drove the most impious
among them to his prayer; peace; quoth he, lest the gods hearing, cast us away,
because you are here: it is our iniquities that separate between us and our God:
I will never therefore absent my self from God by prayer, so long, as that
when I come, I should be taken as a stranger; nor shall the burden of my sins
so clog me down, but that I will fly to my God.

MED. 64.
IN the midst of extremities, to fly to Christ, is the sign of a true Christian
faith; to hope and rest on God, is the best muniment. We read, our Savior
slept in the height of a storm; a quiet conscience is a bed of Down, yet is he
not so secure in himself, but that he can sympathise with his disciples: shall
we say, his suffering them to ingeminate their calls, was either because of a
deafness in his ear, or dullness in his heart? O no, he heard them at first,
but he loved to hear them again, but they no sooner speak, we perish, but he
awakes; me thinks I see our Savior startle at that word: thus do we see the
gentle prayer of a disciple is sooner heard in heaven, then all the thundering
of the creature, and that Christ that sleeps in a storm, wakens with a prayer.

Lord teach me but to pray, so shall no sea
Of woe ore whelm me, for I Will fly to thee.
MED. 65.
HAve you seen the rugged Ocean disturbed with the impetuous blasts of furious
winds, how it curles its angered forehead, with threatening waves, affrighting
with the terror of death, the most skillful Pilot, and valiantest Navigator
that ever sailed on the Maine? but then to remember the storm our Savior
stilled, comforts them, and tells us, that Gods Justice never fails, it
alalwayes meets with the ringleaders in any sedition; neither do the followers
escape unpunished: The winds resemble the leaders, the waters like the common
people, are of themselves quiet, but once moved, montes volvuntur aquarum. I
will never raise such a spirit, which I am not able to allay, lest at last it
pull my house over my head.

MED. 66.
WHen a sudden storm arises, how fast will the harmless sheep run to the
next brambles, where thinking to save her self by its shelter from the fury of
the storm, it is deceived into a greater ill, and returns with some loss of
its fleece; just such think I, many times proves the friendship of some
ungrateful, and self-seeking friends, to whom, when driven by the adverse
blasts of a contrary fortune, I retire my self for help and comfort, they
either altogether cast me off, or prey upon my necessity, so that such help
proves more fatal to me then my worst calamity. I may patiently bear all
outward miseries, and though I am wet to the skin, I can dry my self again,
but when my professed friend, instead of love, works my woe, this, this cuts me
to the heart: Brutus one stroke went nearer Caesar's heart, then the stabs of
all his other enemies.

MED. 67.
WHat a beastly drunkenness will soon surprise that man that sits all day,
and drinks naught but wine, when the same moderately used, is both pleasant
and good. Prosperity is this wine, a constant enjoyment whereof might cast
into a surfeit of sin; God therefore mingles it with affliction, to keep us
sober; Shall I dislike the physic, because it pleases not my palate? I care
not whether it be toothsome, so it be wholesome: we would have it to cure, not
to please us: give me so much prosperity, as may make me mindeful to return,
and cast me not down so much, as to make me despair of thy love: I may as
well starve as surfeit.

MED. 68.
AS the Heart pants after the rivers of water, so longs my soul after thee oh
God. It would be an easy matter to come to heaven, if outward shows and
professions would bring us thither, there must be a hearty desire, an earnest
longing, and a constant perseverance therein; we will run through all
difficulties, to attain what we long for, what we desire: hence then is our
Love to God known to be hearty, if for his sake, we make light of the world,
contemn afflictions, and count all things but dross in comparison of him. I
will not serve God, because others do so, but because it is my duty.

MED. 69.
AM I the first whom a false report has slandered, or do I think I shall be
the last? Why then do I so trouble and vex my self? It is the commonest
thing of a thousand, to be told of our failings, (though what we do well, is
hushed up in oblivion) and can any man think to sin, and not hear of it? yea,
but the falsenesse of the thing laid to my charge, is the cause of my vexation,
they laid to my charge things that I never heard of: but shall I expect better
measure here, then was dealt to our Savior? was not he more maliciously
accused? but this thing will make me take heed to my ways, I will never say,
or do any thing that I would be ashamed to let all the world see and hear.
The only way to deter us from sinning, is, to say, this I am about to act, is
sin, and therefore cannot be secret.

MED. 70.
BLessed are the Peace makers: how happy then is he that composes and allaies
divisions? the greatness of the blessing is never rightly known, but by the
goodness; that Mariner can never truly prize a calm, that has not been in a
storm; in a calm the Sea is the skies looking-glass, it is the still music
of the world. Peace is the vigor of the Law, the honest man's best patent, the
harmony of the soul, the richest casket of a Kings Crown; where Peace is
banished, confusion presently arrives: If Peace be in our walls, then
plenteousnesse will be in our Palaces. The Gospel is the word of peace, it is
the grand blessing of our heavenly Father; Osculum spiritus sancti: it is like
the Dove in the Arc, always with the Olive branch of plenty in its mouth; it is
the brides wedding Ring, and the Bridegroomes garment; Oh heavenly happiness,
wherein we imitate the harmony of the Communion of Saints! Oh thou who give
every good and perfect gift, send us this Peace! I may say of it, as one of
ingratitude, Si ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris: give us this blessing, and we
have an Epitome, a compendium of all blessings. Oh God send us thy peace, then
shall we enjoy thee, the God of Peace.

MED. 71.
WOuld any man desire to be happy? seek it then in the haven of happiness; a
perpetual study and labor in Gods Law, will at length work out a perpetual
bliss. The Saints felicity carries with it perpetuity, in rebus Coelestibus
non consideramus tempus, this flesh can have nothing in it but what is
perishing, but the robe of glory shall never wear out, or suffer a
consumption; the state of perfected bliss shall never be stirred, semper
satiaberis, and nunquam satiaberis, I will never be so impious, to make
salvation an uncertain demise, and in my greatest fainting fit, I will comfort
my self with this, that there is a state of life to hold me up; I will stock
it in heaven, where I shall never need fear of being robbed; Saints, though they
may have some temporary faults, yet they have a certain bliss, peccent
Sancti, non pereunt.

MED. 72.
WIth what earnest, yet humble expressions, does this poor beggar follow,
entreating the extent of my charity in the small gift of a penny, which when he
has received, how many thanks does he return me; when my whole estate will
not serve a griping usurer; Oh God! the least of thy blessings are more then I
deserve, make me thankful to thee, that whatever I do may be to thy glory,
make me pray earnestly, yet humbly, that so by thy grace, I may be freed from
the paws of that hungry Lion, whom nothing will satisfy, but the eternal
destruction of my soul.

MED. 73.
WIth how much glory does the Sun arise, darting forth comfort with his
shining beams, not one ambitious cloud daring to intercept our joy; yet see how
soon after his glittering rays are overspread with dusky clouds, that dim
his heavenly light, and rob us of the joys we should receive from his great
luster: Such think I then are we, when with more curious thought I view the
fleeting course of gladsome youth, how soon his flower decays; If in the
Sunshine of our pleasant Spring, we do not, are not good, how on a sudden are
we hindered from our aim, being overclouded with an older age; for if we thus
neglect our primer years, and suffer youth fruitless to fade away, wherefore
then do we live, or were we borne? I will not therefore neglect my (...), the
present time, but I will do good while I may, for I know not how soon the
clouds of age, or afflictions may let me.

MED. 47.
OUr days fly away like a shadow; so soon passes it away, and we are
gone, says the Psalmist: Can any man think his pleasures here are permanent,
or hope his life will endure for ever, because a little happy? observe we but
how stealingly death steps in, tacito pede, when we think our joys are
surest; no ransom, not the whole world is sufficient to redeem one day; if
worthy acts or valor were sufficient, he then had yet remained alive, whose
twelve labors yet record his fame with honor. And that great Alexander, who
with but a handful of men overthrew the Persian pride, and took the Crown
from off its Monarchs head: but their fall shows our life is but a flower,
growing to day, perhaps nursed by the Suns warmth, and refresht with colder
dew, yet plucked ere night from off its stalk, and withered.

What man is he who can put by deaths dart,
If levelled once, and shot against his heart?
MED. 75.
SEe you that dust with which the sportive wind does play the wanton? now
framing it in curles; anon disperseth it abroad, throwing it now here, now
there, it is perhaps the remaining relics of some fallen beauty: See, even in
death it has not lost its nature, but as before so still, does fly about to
trouble our weaker sight. O insolent, yet empty boast of flesh! though we be
ennobled with the greater honor, and set on the top of Fortunes wheel in our
life, though we leave heirs behind to maintain our name, which will with
everlasting monuments (as much as in them lies) eternize our dying, nay, dead
memory, yet will death betray for all these things our dust to every blast!
Alas poor relic of our glory, vvilt thou still swell with glorious ambition;
or rather is it not to mock weak, yet proud man, who rises straight above his
center by the meanest blast of common praise, ready to think himself now vveak
and falling, stable, yea even immortal.

Leave off this pride frail man, for all thy lust
To beauti's madness, for it courts but dust.
MED. 76.
EXpectation in a weak and vvearied mind, makes an evil greater, and a good
less, but the constantly resolved mind diverts an evil, being come, and makes
a future good present before it come. I expect then the best, I know the
vvorst; vvorst and best will arrive both at their end.

MED. 77.
AS I vvalked about, hoping to please my wandering sight with pleasing objects,
I happened to come into a place separated for the burial of the dead; which
when I had entered, instead of my hoped and desired pleasures, I saw nothing
but signs of mortality, here lay skulls half covered with hair, there bones
almost turned to their first matter, dust; whence I drevv this Conclusion, that
in all our delights and pleasures, we ought still to remember that we are
mortal; no man can promise himself life for a moment, for there is nothing so
mean but may prove his executioner, every tile from the house may fall down on
our heads and destroy us; every disease, though small, every element though
vveak, and every creature, though contemptible, can inflict on us the
punishment and vengeance of a God angry with us for our crying enormities: aut
ubi mors non est? how ought we then to live mong all these dangers, every day
prepare our selves that we be always ready, and may not be taken unawares? we
should with the holy Father, have this sentence always sounding in our ears,
Surge, and veni ad judicium, Arise, and come to judgment: but we are so
forgetful of all things that concern our good, that we had need to have one
every morning to come to our chamber door (like the Emperor of Rome) and say,
Remember there is a judgment, to which thou may be called this day,
therefore prepare thy self.

MED. 78.
IF in this life only we had hope in Christ, says Paul, we were of all men the
most miserable: through how great afflictions, how many tribulatious do the
righteous wade, while they see their wicked enemies live at ease and prosper?
'twere enough to stagger their faith, did they not look higher for their
reward; they are comforted with this, Since thou in thy life time had thy
good things, but he his bad; therefore now is he comforted, and thou art
tormented: I am glad God will so far own me for his child as to chastise me;
and I will with joy submit to his punishment, because it is fatherly to correct,
and not to destroy; and though the wicked do joy in his deferred punishment,
yet let them know, Quod defertur, non aufertur, though God has leaden feet, yet
he has iron hands, he will at last strike home, Sera venit, sed certa venit
vindicta deorum.

MED. 79.
IT is a rule by observation true, that they that fear not to be thought
faulty, will neither be afraid to commit the fault, nor be ashamed to be seen
after the fact, they will braze their face against shame, and steel it against
the bitter taunts of enraged truth; as little fearing the one, as loving the
other, but drawing down vengeance on their reduplicated sins. I will do my
endeavor not to seem, much more not to be faulty, and I will never glory in
my shame, lest at last I be ashamed of my glory.

MED. 80.
GOod duties are base and troublesome to wicked minds, whiles even violences
of evil are pleasant, especially, when by a continued perseverance, sin is
perpetrated with a feared conscience, yet that very conscience, though it may
be without remorse; yet is it not without horor, for there is no wicked man to
whom God speaks not, if not to his ear, yet to his heart; and if the same God,
who in good accepts the will for the deed, condemns the will for the deed in
evil; with what a severe execution of Justice will he punish them, who commit
sin with greediness? He that cares not for the act of his sin, shall care for
the smart of his punishment, for the issue of sin is a thousand times more
horrible then the act is pleasant.

MED. 81.
I Can never read that portion of Scripture, where Jacob cunningly gains the
blessing from his brother Esau, and his vain seeking, and fruitless begging it
even with tears; but it drives me to think, how just might God be to cast us
off, who sin with so high a hand against him; if with Esau we sell our
birthright for a mess of pottage, if we forfeit, and that willingly, our
everlasting heavenly inheritance for the deceitful momentary pleasures of sin,
it is but just with God to cast us off as illegitimate: I will not therefore
hunt after worldly pleasures so long with Esau, as to forfeit my blessing for
my long stay; ere vengeance begin, repennance is seasonable, but if judgment
be once gone out, we cry too late: while the Gospel solicites us, the doors of
mercy are open, but if we neglect the time of grace, in vain shall we seek it
with tears: God holds it no mercy to pity the obstinate.

MED. 82.
WHy art so heavy, O my soul, and why are thou so discontented within me? still
trust in God, etc. It is a part of Gods childrens portion to suffer affliction,
and we could not be current coin in Gods Kingdom, unless we be thoroughly
purified in the fire of distresses: It is not with God as with man, to be paid
your wages as soon as your work is done, no, true spiritual comforts are
commonly late and sudden; the Angel of the Lord neither interrupts, or forbids
Abraham in his Sacrifice, till the knife is up, nay even ready to fall down on
the throat of Isaac: Gods charges are many times harsh in the beginnings, and
proceeding, but in the conclusion always comfortable: I will therefore in all
my affliction wholly rely upon God by faith, so will he make my recompense
glorious, and send me a welcome deliverance out of all my trouble.

MED. 83.
IT is in the soul, as it fares with the body, wherein a wound in it self,
though great, if timely helps be administered, is easily cured, which let alone
to fester, and rankle, may not only endanger a limb, but the whole body: sin
at the first is easily rooted out, but if once it proceed in a custom of
sinning, if sin grow exceeding sinful, then woe is me, who shall deliver me?
I will endeavor to keep this river within his banks, lest it drown me in its
deluge; as I will fear each little vvound for mortal, and so seek a timely
cure; so I will take heed of all sins, and account none little, because my
Savior dyed for the least; who willingly and knowingly does the least, will
fearelessely commit the greatest.

MED. 84.
When I see two Game-Cocks fighting in the pit, and each striving by the death
of the other to remain sole Conqueror, I cannot but take notice of the vain
strifes of great men, who without any cause at all seek the destruction of each
other, endeavoring to make great the plumes of his own ambition, with the
feathers of his adversaries downfall, as if it were glory enough to enrich
himself by others ruins, I am not of that mind: but if I strive to be great,
I will desire to be good, for great goodness is the best greatness, and I
will not with Aesops Daw trick up my pride with stolen feathers, least I be
served like her, that when every man takes his own, I appear not only naked,
but ridiculous.

MED. 85.
HOw great pains will we take, and what hardship will we undergo, to attain
that which we love? Jacob without grudging is content to pay 14. years service
for Rachel; we see the pleasures that God blesses his own children with are
not easily attained; yet see, though we know vice is its own punishment, and
virtue carries her reward with her self, though we know the fruitful
recompense of virtue, and the barren ugliness of vice, yet is barrenness in
the one, preferred before fertility in the other; I would rather choose virtue,
though accompanied with tribulation, then vice clad in Scarlet, and faring
deliciously every day; though I desire to enjoy pleasures, yet shall it always
be with honest virtue, but I will never seek to buy them with the danger of my
soul, nocet empta dolor voluptas.

MED. 86.
AS sinister respects have ofttimes drawn weak goodness to disguise it
self, even with sins, so vitia plerunque virtutis, species induunt, vices
many times strive to mask them with the name of virtue; what far fetched
arguments will the covetous man produce, and all to prove his gains, (or
rather extortion) lawful, and when his proofs are all confuted, he will
retire himself to this, that it is an honest way to get his living; Thus with a
specious visor, does he adorn his crime, and sins securely, not having one
relenting thought, but runs on headlong to perdition; I will never seek to
scrape up so many riches, as that my wealth may prove more irksome to me then
my need, or that I should fear, God means to punish me more in my superfluity
of money, then in the want; I will be jealous of my gain, and more fear then
desire abundance.

MED. 87.
I Can never see a flatterer framing all his actions, and gestures, according
to the humors of whom he flatters, but I think the Polypus a fit resembler of
such a person, who changes his colors, as often as the various objects he
touches do; Art thou sick, so will he counterfeit himself? art thou
prodigal, he will tell thee, it beseemes thy birth? whatever thou do or
say, thereafter will he frame both his words and actions, till he has so
far compassed his own ends, as thou must either trust him, or he will undo
thee; I will not then look altogether at the outside of a fair word, nor
trust too much to the subtle daubings of a cunning flatterer, for outward
appearances are but deceitful guides to our judgment, and they are worthy to
be deceived, that value a flatterer above a true friend; a smiling malice is
most deadly, and hatred does most rankle the heart, when it is kept in, and
dissembled.

MED. 88.
TO see a beast have any one part of a man, produces in us not only a great,
but a just admiration; but to see a man have all the parts of a beast is never
taken notice of; to tumble in the mire like a hog, and after amendment, with
the dog to return to his vomit again, is grown to a common custom, though a
lewd one. Other sins move shame, but hide it; this of drunkenness discovers
it to all the world, it not only makes imperfections, but shows those we have
to others eyes: A man has not then so much rule of himself as to be ashamed:
I will always shun this vice, which will rob me of my self, and lay a beast
in my room, for he that gives himself to wine, is not own.

MED. 89.
I Have read of a certain man, that came with a resolution to kill a Tyrant,
but the stroke intended for his death, opened him a dangerous Impostume,
whereon his Physicians durst not lay their hands; How often does the inscrutable
providence of God, from injurious and bad causes produce good effects? Was it
not a somewhat strange cure, where nothing but danger of death can save ones
life? that which one intends for a mischief to me, may prove to procure my
good, though not to be a benefit; for it is no benefit which I am enforced to
receive, says Seneca; neither is it a benefit, that makes me iudebted to him
I would not. If then thou would do a benefit for me, first, give me the
freedom and power of my self: for,

Thou good turns may do, though thy intent
Had in design to work some detriment.
MED. 90.
AS God loves a cheerful giver, so he hates an ungrateful, thanklesse
receiver: with what high praises is the willing gift of the poor widow
remembered, and what a terrible doom is laid upon the husbandmen, who could not
otherways requite the Lord of their Vineyard, sending for some of his own,
then by beating his servants, and killing his son: Oh inhumane barbarism,
that could not afford a good word for the means of their livelihood: but no
marvel, for he cannot be thankful, that is willingly forgetful of what he
has received; but I will receive courtesies with a gladsome countenance, for
he that receives a good turn with a joyful thankfulness, has already
satisfied the first payment of the requital; but he that carries it in memory,
has already requited it.

MED. 91.
Justice and clemency are the two maine pillars, that uphold a wel-ruled
Commonwealth; Justice to punish obstinate offenders, and mercy to be extended
to those that repent; what a solitude and desolation would there soon be, if
all offenders were tried by the strictest rule of Justice? Is there any accuser
without his fault? Clemency therefore is the most assured safeguard; for
cruelty in governors, increases the number of their enemies, by extinguishing
them; It is better to have thy Subjects hearts tied to thee by love, then their
bodies, a servile fear; I will always be just, but never severely cruel, and
I will be merciful, yet not give a liberty to sin: to save is the property
of an excellent fortune; And I know not whether there be any man more difficult
to give pardon, then he that has often deserved to beg the same.

MED. 92.
Were I to wish a titular happiness, or did I desire a real good, it should
be this, that I might have a quiet mind, and a conscience void of fear, with
whom, when thou conferrest, it can accuse thee of no base acts; thou need no
other indictment for sin, then what thine own conscience will prefer; The
killing of a nest of young Swallows will produce an answer to convict thee of
Parricide.

Fear, suffering, sin, are fellows; conscience will
Accuse thee daily for fore-acted ill.
MED. 93.
SOlanten miseris socios habuisse dolor is. If it be a comfort in afflictions
to have a partner of our grief, how much greater is it to think, that what
has happened to him, all that went before him have suffered, and all that
shall come after must endure; for is there any man so proudly arrogant, that
will think to have himself exempted out of the rank of all others? can any man
discharge some one house from that ruin, which shall destroy the whole world?
therefore says Seneca, has Nature made that most common, which is most
grievous, to the end that the equality thereof might in some sort lenefie the
cruelty of the fate. I will therefore in my sorrow always observe this measure,
that it neither run into impiety or folly, and I will contain me in that habit
which becomes a quiet; and not disturbed mind, though my tears shall flow,
yet at last shall they stay, and though my sighs shall proceed from the
bottom of my heart, yet shall they have an end.

MED. 94.
THe ample revenews (...) ^^ince, if it come (as we say) into Hucksters hands,
consumes and goes away in a moment, when the hundredth part thereof, well
managed and husbanded, would rather increase then prove scarce. Wen I think of
this, I cannot but blame those who cry out of the shortness of their life,
which is not short indeed, but that we lose so much of it, so that I may say
with the Poet, A little part of our life it is we live: And many men die before
they are ready to depart the world. Why then, vain man, live thou so, as if
thou had a warrant to live for ever: Lord, teach me to number my days, that
I may apply my heart unto wisdom. Since all that is to come is uncertain, I
will live out of hand, I will not forget the time past, neglect that is
present, nor fear that which is to come, lest when it is come, I find that I
have been way busy in doing nothing.

MED. 95.
GRatia ab officio quod mora tardat, abest, the goodness of the benefit is half
wanting, when we delay the doing of it; for the expectation of things, how good
soever they be, is both tedious and displeasant: true liberality is quick and
expidite, and it is the property of him that does willingly, to do quickly; as
it is said, Bis dat, qui cito dat; he has, at it were, done a good turn twice,
who does it in time; so he that wills a thing too late, does as it were, not
will it at all; I will never give later then I should do, and weary out both
time and occasion, before I assist and succor the indigent, lest my actions
should witness against me, that I never had a will to do him good.

MEd. 96.
AN ancient Philososper seeing an ungrateful man prosper, taxed Nature of
partiality, in that she had laded a thistle with fruit, ingratitude being both
loathsome in it self, and hateful in all men's opinions; where a good turn is
not only forgotten, but denyd: faulty are those eyes that fear the light, but
blind certainly are they that see not at all: of all men, I cannot but most
hate and wonder at an unthankful person, since to requite is so easy a
matter. Art thou a niggard, thou shall not need to drain thy purse, thou may
requite without expense; or art thou slothful, thou may sit with folded
arms, and take thy repose, thou may without labor satisfy for a good turn:
for ( Seneca says) in that very moment, wherein thou art obliged, if thou
listest, thou may make even with any man whatsoever, because he who has
willingly received a benefit, has restored the same.

MED. 97.
HOdie Craesus, cras Irus, though thou sit to day on a throne, thy Will
standing for Law, and dominering with a proud tyranny over thy inferiors, thou
may to morrow lie with Job on a dunghill; see the inconstancy of fickle
fortune, making, as it were, a tennisball of the world; who would be a servant
to so wavering a Mistress? who would rely on that which is constant to nothing
but inconstancy? I will therefore bare my affliction like my self, as one
subject to chance, but resolved in the change of my fortune; though I may
bewail my fortune; though I may bewail my fortune, and lament my fall, yet
will I not dismay my self, since I know that all corporal damages, that betide
mortal men, are either by means remedied, by patience suffered, by reason
rectified, by time cured, or by death ended; there is a power above the
capacity of men, and comfort may descend beyond the expectation of men.

MED. 98.
WHen I see a sealed Dove mount to such an aspiring height, as if it would
seem to reach at the very heaven it self, on a sudden fall down like a dead
and senseless carcass: It presently brings to my mind the soaring ambition of
a high minded person, whose mind being sealed with popular applause, makes
him, Icarus-like, with those waxen wings, to dare, even at Majesty it self,
till at last, the Sun, either of envy or dislike, dissolve the conjoyning wax,
and he falls down headlong into the sea, both of comtempt and despair, yet who
is frightened with his misery? how soon will another step into his room, and
even strive to outvie his greatness, till the storm of a frown shiprack him?
What clog heavy enough to keep down ambitious thoughts? nothing can outballance
ambitious desire: though it is full of pleasure in its beginning and rise, yet
is its end cruel, and downfall sudden.

While each thing stays within his proper sphere,
It neither danger breeds to 't self, nor fear.
MED. 99.
PRovidence prevents-misfortunes, and gives life to future actions; but
rashness is the mother of ill-luck, and not only blasts promising enterprises,
but nips them in the bud. Is it not a piece of the greatest folly to requite an
imagined wrong with an effectual mischief? I will look at my present being,
not a promised, for promises of advancement are no assurances of enrichment;
and he has a short understanding, that will lose certain favors for uncertain
riches: I will not be either carelessly, or overtimerously suspicious what may
sinisterly or suddenly succeed, but I will be heedfull of the hazard, lest any
oversight may cross my designed endeavors, and so make me both hapless and
helpless.

MED. 100.
DImidium facti, qui been caepit habet: though it were said of old, He has done
the better half of his work that has begun well, yet we know; that non
progredi est regredi, he that goes not forword, goes backward; it were as good
he had never set out, who sits down in the midst of his journey; Jacobs ladder
has many steps; its not enough to begin to be good, but to proceed in
goodness. It is as true as common, that exitus acta probat, the glory of a
thing lies in its ending: It was a law in Rome, that when a soldier was fifty
years old, he should no more bear arms; A Senator having attained to
threescore years, was no more bound to attend the Senate: what should be the
reason, but that after the turmoyles of their tedious life, being freed from
the cares of the world, they might think of their end? I like the Law well, but
yet I will not follow it wholly, for I will not put off the thought of my death
till old age, but will always prepare for it: since ever to meditate on my
end, is the best end of my Meditations.

FINIS.

