THE MANNER AND GOOD SVCCESSE OF THE LORD BROOKS Forces in pursuing the
Cavaliers from COVENTRY. In a Letter to an Honorable person in London, August
24. 1642.
SIR,
I Give you a short, but true Relation of what past yesterday, being the 23. of
August, between the Cavaliers that lately left their breach made at Coventry,
to their shame and loss, and to the great dishonor of their Master, not
daring to enter it; and the thrice Noble, and valiant Lord Brook, Commander in
chief of those Forces sent by the Parliament, for the relief of the
distressed in Warwickeshire, Northamptonshire, etc. The Cavaliers being come to
Dunsmore Heath, from the aforesaid City, and the Lord Brook drawing near to
them, each understood by Scouts, of the neerenesse each to other; the Lord
Brook intended to have reposed himself, his wearyed Troops, and Regiments
after their long March, but understanding that his enemies were upon retreat,
he forthwith advanced, and in the morning early, having set his Army in order,
planted his Canon in a place most convenient for to annoy the enemy, let fly
at them, and made such a lane, that the enemy was so long in re-ordering, that
they thought they would not have made head again, but at last they did, and
made good the fight for 8. or 9. Charges each upon other, the Parliament party
let fly another Canon among the Infantry, who were about 200. and as is
conceived, many were slain, at last the Cavaliers left the field, taking all
their dead and maimed with them, in this encounter not one of the Parliament
party was killed or hurt, but on the other, many; Captain Leg was taken
prisoner, and some others.

Of the Lord Brooks side some 12. were wounded by the firing some powder, and
one shot himself through the foot with his pistol, and another his fellow
through the back: the Messenger will be gone, otherwise I would enlarge, in
telling you of the wondrfull courage and shouts of joy the Parliament party
made when they came in sight of the enemy, and that all the work of the
Commanders, was to order them, and keep them back, all of them being desirous
to be of the forelorne hope if they could: Likewise I should tell you of the
joy of the Country people, that those that pillaged and plundered them, are now
met withal: The Kings Majesty went the night before to Leicester, and thence
we conceive will Northerly, but we hope, what by the pursuit of the Parliaments
Army, and the courage of the Country people, most of the Cavali^^^ will not be
able to overtake him: When a more exact Relation can be had, I shall send it
interim I rest,

Yours.

London Printed for Humphrey Blunden. 1642.


