A BOX OF SPIKENARD Newly Broken.

Not so much for the preparation of the Burial; as for the clearer
Illustration, and Exornation of the Birth and Nativity of our blessed Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus.

CONTAINED In a short and sweet discourse which was at first hinted, and
occasioned through a Question propounded by R.B.P. de K. Which is now answered
and resolved by T.M. P. de P.

(...)

Cant. 1.12. While the King siteth at his Table, my Spikenard sends forth the
smell thereof. London, Printed by J. S. for George Sawbridge, and are to (...)

THE AVTHOR TO THE Indifferent and Impartial Reader.
I Shall use no further Preface or Introduction to this ensuing Treatise, but
only to acquaint thee, that this Task was at first undertaken by me, not only
for the satisfaction of some private intimate Friends and honest-minded
Protestants, who did much solicit and entreat me hereunto; but also for the
confutation of all such peevish and perverse opposers of the Truth. And to stop
the mouths (if it were possible) of such Malignant Antilegons, Antagonists and
Gainsayers; who do much grieve and offend their weak Brethren, by putting a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in their way; even touching things
indifferent and matters of little or no consequence at all. Romans 14.
Such men as these you know are censured and perstringed by St. Paul. And I
know, also that by the Law of Moses they are condemned, Levit. 19.14. Thou
shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stu^bling-block before the blind, but shall
fear thy God; I am the Lord. As for such quaint and curious, difficult and
precise Readers as these, I care not how few these poor labors of mine do meet
with: I know they will be apt, like Zoilus, to look upon them, front
corrugante, with a wrinkled or bended brow; and, with Momus, not only to ^ite
the lipp at them, but, cum dente Theonino, gnash with their malicious teeth,
and be ready to rent and tear them in pieces; I know that they will be apt to
say, that I am become a fool in print, and am very forward to blaze my own
folly and foppery; yea, and to maintain my old Popery and Superstition; yea,
perhaps, they will call me and accuse me; as Tertullus did Paul, Act. 24.5.
to be a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition, and an enemy to the State,
with the like obloquies and exprobrations: But when I meet with such as these I
presently put on Paul's resolution, and say, 1 Cor. 3.4. with me it is a very
small thing that I should be judged of them, or of man's Judgment; yea, I judge
not mine own self, for I know nothing of my self: (i. e.) whereof to boast,
saving of mine infirmities, (as he speaks elsewhere): yet put the case I should
know any thing in my self that is commendable or praiseworthy, yet am I not
hereby justified; but he that judges me is the Lord: Quod olim alte and acute
quispiam, id hic vera voce proclamo: Satis mihi pauci lectores, satis est unus,
satis est nullus: id tamen peto, ut quicunque haec tangens cognoscendi animum
adferat, and simul ignoscendi; namque vetus and verum proverbium est, Ut
facilius est carpere quam corrigere, sic facilius est interrogare quam
respondere. We have in these last and worst times, in these perilous and
pernicious, dangerous and Climacterical days of ours a new brood of those old
Serpents, a fresh generation of Vipers lately hatched and sprung forth amongst
us, as it were a spawn of those proud and insolent and supercilious Scribes and
Pharisees that were amongst the Jews, who vilify Christ, and do both
scornfully and disdainfully think and speak of Him, as they did, Mark 6.3. Is
not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary, the Brother of James, and Joses, and
Juda, and Simon? and are not his Sisters here with us? And they were offended
at him. And how truly did that old good man Simeon Prophecy of Him; saying,
Behold, this Child is set for the Fall and Rising again of many in Israel, and
for a Sign that shall be spoken against: Neither is it without a Mystery which
the Angel told the Shepherds. This shall be a sign unto you; you shall find
the Infant wrapped in swaddling Clothes: Upon which word, devout Bernard descants
sweetly thus, In signum positi sunt panni tui (o bone Jesu); sed, in signum
(...), a sign that is spoken against, a sign that is done against; for we
cannot abide thy Clouts, nor thy Rags (O Lord Jesu), nor any part of thy
Humility: which makes the Proud and Arrogant, and insolent spirits of a late up
start Fantastical and Pharaisaicall Generation; so peremptorily and perversely
to speak, and audaciously to write, against the solemn Remembrance of thy
Nativity.

Courteous Reader, to show their frenzy and madness I have written, and
adventured to divulge these Papers, and if thou do receive any comfort or
profit by these poor labors of mine, give God the Glory, and wish well to him,
Who wishes nothing but well to thee in Christ Jesus.

T. M.

AN Appendix to the Preface.
THere are two things principally required in a Minister, the one that he be
able to exhort with wholesome Doctrine: the other that he has skill to Improve
them that say against it, Tit. 2.9. whereunto agrees that witty saying of
grave St. Austin, that he must be veritatis propugnator, and erroris
expugnator, (i.e.) he must be a maintainer of the Truth, and a withstander of
Error, August, de doctrina Christi. Lib. 4. c. 4.

Author ad Libellum.
Vade sed incultus, --
Candidus Auctoris Amicus, ad Lectorem candidum et benevolum.
REad on good Reader but read aright;
Do not mistake, nor construe things in spite.
It Is a proud word to speak yet true I ween,
That such a Book as this you have seldom seen.
All Books this Christmas, whereon vain men do look,
Are not to be compared to this Little Book.
You cannot play at a more delightsome Game,
Than to handle, and peruse, and read the same.
It Is not Pandora's Box, here is no ill;
Be not afraid, but open't with goodwill.
It Is rather Mary's Box, she brake in love
Of her dear Savior, as't did truly prove;
An Ointment 'twas, so precious and so sweet,
It did perfume the House where they did meet:
Spikenard the same was called, and so it was,
For it did other Odours far surpass.
So if this Spikenard shall afford a pleasing smell,
Such Readers (I wis) shall please us passing well.
It is not for his Burial but his Birth,
'Cause He was born for to redeem the Earth;
Other wise we had all been cast to Hell,
With the Devil and his Angels there to dwell.
O happy time! that ever He was born,
To save poor Sinners that were thus forlorn.
To celebrate the five and twentieth of December,
O let us all, with one accord, remember,
And not forget His kindness toward Man,
But set forth's praise with all the Might we can.
Did not the Augels do the same, and sing
A holy Carroll to our Heavenly King?
Did not the Shepherds and Wise men of the East
Praise Him, and bring presents of the best;
Even Gold, and Frankincense, and Myrrh?
To come so far they did them selves bestir;
In so short a time (I mean) to come so far:
But they were guided by a glorious Star
To Bethlem Town, and to that very place
Wherein that blessed Babe lay-full of grace,
Though mean in show, and laid but in a Manger,
Yet they acknowledged him, though they were strangers;
And down they fell upon their bended knee,
And aid adore and worship him, all three;
Opening their Treasures, and offering such a thing
As did become a Man, a God, a King:
A Mystery! for Myrrh, and Frankincense, and Gold
Do signify the Office of Christ threefold:
For both King, Priest, and Prophet's He
To rule, and pray for, and teach both thee and me.
And this, according to the Christian Poet Juvencus,

Aurum, Thus, Myrrham, Regique Deoque Hominique
Dona ferunt.
Liber ad Lectorem.
Si Natura negat, facit Indignatio Versum.
AND is it News you look for? O Sir, There Is none;
I do but tell you of a thing done long agone:
Yet this is News, for methinks it is very strange
To hear of such an uncouth, and prodigious Change,
That Christmas should be buried! Is old England dead?
Alas! This whimzy comes from a strange head,
Who would have all things new, in spite of old.
Sure they would have a new Christ if they could;
A Christ without a Birth: How strange is this?
Sure they are madd, or else they dote, I wis:
New Lords, new Laws: What, would they have new Gods?
Or do they long to be scourged with new Rods.
War was in the Gates, und many a misery more,
When Israel did the living God foregoe,
To worship dead Idols of wood and stone,
Whereas they should have worshipped God alone.
But mark their reason, which is not worth a rush,
They all want shame, or else they would blush;
Because they know not when Christ was born,
Therefore, like Jews, at's Birth they scorn;
And scoff at us, because that we do dance
Before the Ark, and do Christ's Name advance:
But let them Michol-like disdain, yet we
With holy David, will yet viler be.
The Article of his Birthday they do deny
Such Antichristian Tenet's I defy:
For born he was, and of a Virgin pure,
And did for us the pains of Hell endure,
To bring us unto happiness, and perfect bliss,
Wherein no sense of grief nor sorrow is.
Then cause have we for to observe this time,
And not to account it any fault or crime:
This Feast of Christ has been highly kept of yore,
And never yet esteemed Popery before.
It is not Superstition to eat a Pie;
Sure, he that tells you this, tells you a Lie,
And does dissemble with his glozing tongue.
These Round head Hypocrites do all the wrong:
All ancient customs be they never so good,
They esteem no more than Tales of Robbin-hood.
'Cause Papists keep it, therefore must not we?
'Cause they are good to the poor we will hidebounded be.
Oh no! Not so, my Masters, whatsoever betide,
Let us follow the Scripture for our only Guide,
Which tells us, It Is better to give than to receive;
And he that says not so, does us deceive.
Reader farewell, I do defy
All those which Christ's Birthday deny.
To his Loving Friend Mr. T. M.
IT being my hap, not long since, to find this Treatise of Yours, even before
the printing and publishing thereof, in a Friend's House; And being, upon
Inquiry, informed touching the Quality of the Author, I wondered what man it
was, that had so much Christian Courage in him, as to adventure to vindicate
this Christian Duty of celebrating the Nativity of our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus; contemning the clamorous Censures, and the vain Objections, and
Argumenta mutilata of the weak multitude of Pretenders to Religion and
Learning. Therefore being much affected with your Christian valor, in this
kind, and desirous to commend the same to posterity; It is not in my power to
do it more effectually, than by adding this Epistle to your Treatise, which (if
I were eloquent) I should commend in the Superlative degree. For, although the
valiant and learned Champions, or rather railing Antagonists, of our times,
evemunt quicquid in buccam venit, and spit out their venom against it, and
strive, tanquam pro aris and focis, to maintain that it is a mere vanity to
observe the blessed time of Christ's Birthday: Yet, if they will give me leave
to speak, I shall tell them, That the most learned Arguments that their subtle
brains can invent or produce, are not sufficient to prove it a Sin, to
celebrate this time; and besides, I will tell them, it is an Herculean labor,
and as hard a task as to fetch Cerberus out of Hell. And although they give out
the worst words they can rake out of the sink of their rotten brains, against
it; yet I will tell them, It is easier for them to drive a Sponge into a
Millstone, than to dissuade many godly People from the due Observation of it.

Reader, Whoever thou art, be persuaded in thy self, That the bonouring of this
time is just, honest, commendable, good, and lawful. And I prove it thus, with
a threefold Argument (and you know that a Cord which is threefold, or thrice
doubled, is not easily broken): My Argument is this,

That which God, and the Church of God, and the ancient Fathers have commanded
to be kept and celebrated, ought to be kept and celebrated; and the use of it,
is good, pious, lawful, and commendable:

But God, and the Church of God, and the Fathers, have commanded this day to be
kept and celebrated. Ergo. etc.

I prove that God has commanded it out of Heb. 1.6. (...). And again, when he
brings the first-begotten into the World, he says, And let all the Angels of
God worship Him, Psalm. 77.7. (...) Incurvate vos ei omnes Divi. Luke Chap. 2.
ver. 10.11.

(...)

(...). And the Angel said unto them, Fear not, etc.

That the Church of God, and the Fathers, commanded it to be celebrated, is
exactly proved in the Answers of some of the 14 Arguments, and I need not
recite them here: And I do believe that there is no man in this Nation, who
has lived forty or fifty years, but has known Christmas -- day strictly
observed and kept.

But alas! We can expect no goodness, if we cast but our eyes upon the age
wherein we live. It is most admirably deciphered by the Poet, -- De duro est
Ultima ferro;
Protinus irrupit venae pejoris in aevum
Omne nefas: Fugere Pudor, Verumque, Fidesque,
In quorum subiere locum frandesque, dolique,
Insidiaeque, and vis, and amor sceleratus habendi.
At last the Iron-Age comes blustering in,
I'ch' latter times, and fills the World with Sin;
All Shame, and Truth, and Faithfulness are gone:
Fraud and Deceit, Lords paramount, alone,
Do rule: By snares and violence men get
Estates, and all is Fish that comes to Net.


Which how truly it is verified, every body may see, if not as blind as Moles;
and may feel, if not senseless. I shall now speak a word or two to some which
rail at, and preach down, the Solemnity of this Time: and desire them to spend
the time which they spend in burying Antiquity and lawful Customs, in the
Translating of many things which are not as yet translated, and not to
monopolize Knowledge. I will name some places which are not as yet translated,
viz. Psalm. 56. To the Chief Musician upon (...) Why could not they have
translated it Super Columbam mutam remotis, The dumb Dove in a far Country. And
I am persuaded, that they durst not translate one Word, when they looked on
their own Coats, Zeph. 1.4. I will cut off the names of the CHEMARIMS with the
Priests; meeting with the Word, now and then, in Hosea, they translated it
Priests; but here it being joined with the word PRIEST, my Blades played the
honest (I should have said, the selfish) men, and never translated it at all:
Tremelius and Junius give it a very honest and true Version, Nomen Atratorum
cum Sacerdotibus, The Names of Black-Coats with the Priests. I commend this
Scripture to the serious considerations of our Rigid Presbyterians: and when
they look upon it, let them do as the Peacock does, when he looks on his legs.

I desire the Reader of this Book, not to give credit to every one that speaks
against Antiquity, nor to carp at that which they cannot mend: for I dare say,
and will affirm, that the Author here of has written herein, nothing but what
is true, nothing contrary to the Will of God; to whose Protection I leave him.

The Almighty bless him, and prosper his studies: For such is the desire and
hopes of him, who craves leave to subscribe himself,

Your Humble Servant and true admirer of your Christian Ingenuity, Sincerity,
and Courage. T. J.

Courteous Reader.
MAny of our late Divines bring such poor weak Arguments against the
Celebration of Christ's birthday, that I am almost ashamed to repeat any of
them; much less then, will I trouble my self to answer them, they being so
ridiculous, that (if it were possible) they would cause corpus rationis vacuum,
to laugh them to scorn. Two or three I will repeat: the first is of a Divine
that brought a Rubric or Almanac into the Pulpit to bury this Day, and reads
Arguments out of it to the People, and tells them a tale of a rub without a
bottom; I am sure this Gentleman might have looked in a Jack-Dawes Nest, and
have found as good Arguments there, as any he found in his Almanac.

Another Divine says, It is not only a bad time, but it is the worst of all
times; and thinks, This ignis fatuus, of his giddy brain, is sufficient to lead
men from the Truth; But Alas! I will be so bold as to deny his Proposition, and
I am sure, he cannot prove it, for he has no more skill in arguing, then a Cow
has in dancing.

The third Divine says, It is the Devil's day, and therefore ought to be
buried, and never to be celebrated. But I reply thus: His Body will descend
into Orcus, and his Name will be buried in Oblivion, long before this Day will
be buried: for I doubt not, but it will be celebrated as it ought to be, until
there will be a period put unto all things. I wish all Christian Readers of
this Book, happiness in this World, and a Crown of Glory in that to come.

T. J.

A BOX OF Spikenard Newly Broken.
The Question propounded by Richard B. which was the occasion of this Treatise.
Quest. WHether the Nativity of Christ, commonly called Christmas Day, ought to
be celebrated; R. B. denies it, and endeavors to prove the contrary. His
Arguments are these 14 following.

Arg. 1. There is nothing in the World a Duty, which God has not made a Duty;
But God never made this a Duty: Ergo, it is no Duty.

Arg. 2. If I should observe this Day, I am afraid lest I should deny the
perfection of the Scriptures?

Arg. 3. I am fearful lest by doing so, I should arrogate the making of a Day
to my self: for if I should do so much as in me lies, I should make a Day to
my self.

Arg. 4. I am fearful lest by so doing, I should set up a Day against God.

Arg. 5. It is the Devil's policy to imitate God, and when he will be holy, he
will be holyer then God; and when he sees God will have a Sabbath to be kept,
then he will set up a Day, and he will have a Christmas Day to be kept, and he
will have his Pictures in the Churchwindows, and the Cross made on the
Childrens foreheads in Baptism?

Arg. 6. I am fearful, lest I should be condemned for accusing God for want of
Wisdom, and so make my self wiser then God, as though he knew not what should
be done as well as I, and so derogate from the Wisdom of God.

Arg. 7. I am fearful of being more inexcusable for my sin.

Arg. 8. It seems to me a vain and needless thing, First, because God has
set apart a Sabbath, the Lords Day, for this purpose to meditate upon God's
love in redeeming the World; Secondly, Because I never heard a good Argument
for it.

Arg. 9. It is an impossibility to keep it, and God never made an
impossibility, a duty: no man knows certainly on which day Christ was born.

Arg. 10. I observe God hides things purposely from us, to see whether we will
do any thing on our own heads.

Arg. 11. It has not bin the practice of Christian Churches to observe it?

Arg. 12. In all doubtful Cases a man ought to go on the surest side: Now I am
sure, It is no sin not to keep it, but am not sure, It is no sin to keep it.

Arg. 13. This time ought not to be celebrated; for there is more sin committed
in these 12 Days, then is in all the year after, in Drunkenness, Gluttony,
etc.

Arg. 14. God blesses his own Day, the Sabbath, but has not blessed this,
with success?

Here follows the Answer of Thomas M. to the forerecited Questions and
Arguments: and herein, the honor of Christ his Nativity is Vindicated, or the
Solemnity of his Birthday (which is commonly called Christmas Day), avowed and
averred, (i. e.) justified and maintained to be lawful and good: Even in this
Answer to fourteen arrogant Arguments, or weak Linsey-Woolsy Reasons, which
have been of late eventilated, and divulged in writing to the contrary.

Answer to the first Argument.
You may remember that the first Argument runs thus; There is nothing in the
World a duty which God has not made a duty.

But God never made the Celebration of the Nativity of Christ a Duty, Ergo, it
is no Duty.

Though this Argument is Scholastically and Syllogistically propounded, yet I
shall be so bold as to deny the Minor or second proposition, and that for these
Reasons: for although it be not in words plainly expressed, yet in sense it is
significantly and sufficiently employed, and, by way of necessary consequence,
may be deduced and gathered out of the first Chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, at the 6. Verse. When he brings forth his first begotten Son into
the World, He says, And let all the Angels of Gods worship him; and for proof
hereof, to show the sweet harmony and consent of both Testaments, the Old and
the New, and that one and the same Spirit speaks in both: For the same God is
Author of both, and the same Christ is Subject of both; insomuch that each
Testament is in other: for in the Law there is an hidden Gospel, and in the
Gospel a revealed Law; Being like the two Cherubius on the Mercy-Seat, whose
faces looked one toward the other, Exodus 15.20. St. Paul alleges that in
Psalm. 97.7. And howsoever the ordinary reading of the Psalm is, worship Him all
ye gods; yet the Apostle Interprets it of Angels directly, saying according as
Tremelius renders it out of the Original, Incurvanto se, bonorem exhibentes ei,
omnes Angeli; Let all the Angels of God worship Him: For so we find it to be
true indeed, and so it was at Christ's Birth, and upon the very Day of his
Nativity; That one Angel first reports it to the Shepherds of Bethlehem; and
many other of those Celestial Choristers sing Praises to God for it; Fear not,
said Gabriel, for Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be
unto all Nations; For unto you is born this Day in the City of David, a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord; and suddenly there was with the Angel a
multitude of the Heavenly Host praising God, and saying, Gloria Deo in
Excelsis, etc. Luke 2.13.14. Now I infer from hence, that these Angels came
not about this Errand without some special Commission and Command from God, and
therefore it was a Duty Commanded and Given in charge to them; Now, if the
Angels for whom Christ came not, were to perform it; How much more ought we
Men to observe it, for whose sake, and for whose Salvation he was Incarnate,
and became Man; for verily, He took not on Him, Naturam Angelorum, sed Semen
Abrahami, Heb. 2.10.
not the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, says the Apostle. Dubartas.
Wherefore the Angels, As they are called by a Divine Poet, The sacred Tutors
of the Saints, and the guard of God's Elect, etc: So they may also be called
Tutors and Instructors to us, to instruct and teach us this Lesson, and may be
also exemplary Patterns and Precedents to us, in the practice and performance
of this Duty. Answerable and agreeable hereunto, is the platform of our grand
Master, and blessed Lord and Savior Christ Jesus; who has taught us in the
third Petition of that his most absolute and perfect Prayer, to pray thus, Thy
will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven: wherein we are taught to pray, (as
all the best Orthodoxal Divines do expound it), that the will of God may be
obeyed, and done by us as Cheerfully, Speedily, Faithfully, Constantly and
Continually: as it is done by the Angels in Heaven. And therefore as the Angels
melodiously chanted it here on Earth at the Birth of Christ: So let us likewise
unanimously celebrate, and set forth his praise, and say, Glory be to God on
High, in Earth Peace, good will toward Men. We bless Thee, we praise Thee, we
glorify Thee, we give thanks to Thee for thy great Glory. These words were at
first added to the Heavenly Carroll of the Holy Angels, by that famous Bishop
Hilary, and used by him in his own Church, Anno 340. So says Cassander's
Litturgy, Cap. 22. And that this is a Duty expected and required from us, upon
good ground, and special Reasons and Causes that should move us hereunto, grave
St. Austin tells us wittily, and profoundly, This Quaery has a sufficient
Quaery, Quia verbum caro factum est, and habitavit intra nos, Because the Word
was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and vidimus Gloriam, and we faw his Glory
(says St. John) as of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and
Truth, John 1.14. Wherefore as those Persian Sages (who were both Wisemen and
Kings) being led by the guidance, and assistance, and direction of a Starr to
the place of Christ's Birth, and there did adore and worship Him, and presented
gifts unto Him, Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, Math. 2.10. and this their
coming made to the greater condemnation of the Jews, and to shame their
blockishness and blindness, their sluggishness carnality and infidelity, who
standing hard-by, saw not so much as they who came from far, according to that
speech of Leo, Veritas illuminat magos, Infidelitas obcoecat magistros: So it
is to be feared, lest the Lord for our contempt of Christ, and the unspeakable
benefits that we have received by his first coming in the flesh, lest the Lord
(I say) for our ingratitude, and for our carelessenesse and carnality, take his
Word from us Christians, as he did his King ^om from the Jews, and give it to
such as we think to be most alien from God and his Gospel, even to Moors, and
Tartars, Turks, and Infidells, who perhaps may bring forth better fruits of
Obedience and Thankfulness than we have done and so rise up in Judgment at the
latter day, and condemn us; for if wisemen, brought up in Gentilism and
Idolatry, come to Christ and believe, what excuse then belongs to the Jews? So
if Infidels and Pagans believe and obey, What shall become of us, Christians,
who want both Faith and Obedience? Thus much for the answering of the first
Argument.

Answer to the second Argument.
The Words of the second Argument are these, If I should observe this day, I am
fearful lest I should deny the Perfection of the Scripture; for in the
Scripture all things are contained which are necessary to Salvation, and all
things which are needful to be believed, and done by a Christian man, for the
attainment of Salvation. But the Celebration of Christ's Nativity is not
contained therein; Ergo, If I should observe this, I should deny the Perfection
of the Scriptures.

To this I answer, That the Article of our Faith, touching Christ's Incarnation
and Manifestation in the Flesh, is both commended, and commanded, in the
Scripture; and I refer you or any other indifferent Man, not only to our
Apostolical Creed, which, although it be not Protocanonical Scripture, yet (as
Ambrose speaks) it is the Key of the Scripture, and (as Augustine terms it) a
plain, short, absolute, sum of all holy Faith: It is indeed a sweet and brief
Compendium and Abridgment of the whole Gospel: But also I referr you to the
learned and authentic Creed of judicious Athanasius, (which is an accurate and
complete Exposition of the former;) who says, Quicunque vult salvari etc.
Whosoever will be saved, it is necessary to his everlasting Salvation, That he
believe rightly in the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ: For the right
Faith is, That we believe and confess, that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, is God and Man: And when did He become Man? or when was God manifested in
the Flesh, but on this day? And what fitter day can there be, to confess this
Faith, than on the very same day he was born? For this is to perform, Opus diei
in die suo. And this has been both done and authorized, or allowed of, also to
be done, by as ancient, learned, godly, and zealous Doctors and Divines, as
ever the whole Christian World affoarded, since the first appearance of Christ
in the shape of Man; even by those Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, who were
the chief Orient and resplendent Lights of the times, the Glory of the
Churches, and the only Diamonds, Pearls, and Ornaments, of the places where
they lived, men famous and renowned in their Generations; namely, St. Cyprian,
St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, St. Bernard, St. Chrysostom, Basil, Cyril, Beda,
Theophylact, Euthymius, Ludolphus, Erasmus, cum multis aliis, etc. whose
Sermons, Homilies, and Orations, for this day's Solemnity, are both extant and
eminent: and might be made also evident and apparent (if need were), sufficient
to convince and stop the mouth of any peevish and perverse Antagonist or
Gainsayer whatsoever. To these we may add ( Dia Poemata) the Divine Poems of
those sweet, mellifluous, Christian Poets, Palladius and Prudentius, made in an
honorable memorial of our blessed Lord and Savior's Nativity: And what if we
mentioned here the rate Prophecies and Praedictious of the Sybillaes of old,
who foretold us of these things; and the very Heroical Verses, and stately
Genethliacon's of Heathenish Poets, who lived both before some of them, and
othersome also about the time of the Birth of Christ, who received their
Raptures and Enthusiasms, not only from Sybilla or Apollo, but as some think,
and are bold to conjecture it, from the Spirit of God.

This was it that made Virgil to raise up his Muse to a higher strain, Eclog.
4. Sicelides Musae, paulo majora canamus;
Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia Regna,
Jam nova Progenies coelo dimittitur alto:
Aspice, venturo laetentur ut omnia seclo.
For now return the days of Peace, now the new Progeny is sent from Heaven;
behold, all things shall then rejoice and be glad.

Tully, in Lib. Divinationis, gives this Observation out of Sybil, that she
prophesyeth of a King to come, Quem Regem colere debemus, si velimus esse
salvi; which King we must worship if we would be saved. And this King should
abolish all false Religions whatsoever. Now concerning all these, if you should
cavil and object against them, or any of them, and say, What is this to the
Scripture? Then will I answer you, as our Savior answered the Pharisees,
finding fault with his Disciples, for their crying Hosanna before him, when he
ridd into Jerusalem; I tell you, that if these should have held their peace,
the very stones would cry out and applaud Him. Well then, Have all these doted
and delired in their writing concerning this thing, namely, the solemn
Observation of this high and festival Time, in honor of the World's most
gracious, and glorious, and blessed Redeemer? and are you the only wise man
(as it were) that is now left upon the Earth, to correct them and direct us?
have all these erred? Even so will we. And more sweet shall our Error be unto
us with these, (I speak especially of those ancient and reverend Fathers of the
Primitive Church, whom I named before,) who, I dare say, were all, and every
one of them, as fearful to offend God, in denying the Perfection of the
Scriptures, as you for the very life can possibly be; more sweet, I say, shall
our error be unto us, with these, of whom we make no question, but that they
are all bound up in the bundle of life, with the Congregation of the
firstborn, than a new and recent device and purpose, of burying the
Anniversary remembrance of this day, in the silent Night, and darksome Grave of
everlasting Oblivion, obtruded unto us by you, and such as you, who take upon
them to be the grand Reformers of these times, and great Undertakers, and
principal Innovators, of all ancient, lawful, and laudable Customs whatsoever.
Let others affect Novelty how they please; for my own part, I ever reverenced
and admired Antiquity, especially when I have found it in the way of Verity;
and If I were worthy to admonish our young, upstart, malapert, Masters of these
times, I would wish them to remember what grave St. Austin says in his 118
Epist. and cap. 5. Ipsa mutatio consuetudinis, etiam qua adjuvat utilitate,
perturbat novitate.

Auswer to the third Argument.
The words of the third Argument are these, I am fearful lest I should make a
day to my self, etc.

Sir, I wonder whether your Lectureday is not a day made to your self? I doubt
not but you have done as much as in you lies concerning your Lecture-day, and
both extol and prefer it before the day of Christ's Birth; For this day
happening, not long since, to be upon your Lecture-day, you did not spare to
speak it, nor blush to give it out in the Pulpit, (as I was credibly informed
by some that heard you;) That if that day had not happened on your Lecture-day,
you had not then preached; so that your day, must by all means, be observed and
kept strictly and praecisely, but our Savior's day must be scornfully slighted
and neglected, as a day not scarce fit to be named, much less to be celebrated
and regarded with honor. But I say, Let his Birthday be celebrated, yea, all
praise and Glory be unto him, who was born and died for our Salvation, Amen.

Answer to the fourth Argument.
The fourth Argument is this, I am fearful, lest by observing this day, I
should set up a day against God.

To this I answer, If you observe and celebrate this day, you set not a day up
against God, but for God: for that which you do for Christ, you do for God, for
we know that God and Christ are not divided, but He and the Father are One,
they are his own words, John 10.30. Ego and Pater Vnum sumus: hoc est,
substantialiter Idem, and in Personis Distincti: In which few words, both the
Heresy of the Arrians and Sabellians is sufficiently confuted. For, as learned
Athanasius observes, (who for this was happily called the World's Eye, because
he did see so much, and pierce so far, into this unsearchable and ineffable
Mystery) we must neither confound the Persons with Sabellius, nor divide the
Substance with Arrius, for there is one Person of the Father, another of the
Son, another of the Holy Ghost, but the Godhead of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, is all One; the Glory equal, the Majesty
coeternal; such as the Father is, such is the Son, etc. And therefore the
Glory, Honor, and Worship, that is done to the One is done to the other, or is
both due, and ought to be done, to the other. How then can it be otherwise,
that the least Homage. Honor, and Duty, that is done to Christ on this day, is
accepted of God, if it be done in Faith and Obedience? Why then do you say,
That by keeping this day, you are fearful lest you should offend God, and set
up a day against Him? It may be you will object, and say here, as you do in
your thirteenth Argument, that God is in many places much dishonored by the
great Abuse and Disorders that is committed at this time. To this I briefly
answer by the way, according to that true and well-known Rule, The Abuse of any
good thing cannot abrogate or take away the right and lawful Use of it; and
therefore why should you fear, when there is no such just cause at all to fear?
Remember what Christ says, Luke 9.48. Whosoever shall receive me, receives
Him that sent me; and in the same place, and upon the very same occasion, when
John told Him saying, Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy name, and we
forbade him, because he follows not with us; But Jesus said, For bid him not,
for there is no man which shall do a Miracle in my Name, that can lightly speak
evil of Me; for he that is not against us is for us. And I am verily persuaded
in my Soul and Conscience, that whosoever is truly, really, and sincerely,
addicted and devoted to Christ, neither can, nor will, speak a word amiss
against the due Festivity and Solemnity of this day; thus (as the Apostle
speaks) Romans 14.5. One man esteems one day above another, another esteems
every day alike; Let every man be persuaded in his own mind, he that regards
a day regards it to the Lord; and I am persuaded, if any man regard this day
as he ought to do, the Lord will both regard and reward him for so doing.

Answer to the fifth Argument.
The fifth Argument is this; It is the Devil's policy to imitate God, and when
he will be holy, he will be holier then God, etc.

Sir, This Argument is as strange stuff as ever I have either seen, felt,
heard, or understood; for although the antecedent part cannot be much misliked,
it being taken pro concesso, and confesso, for a thing granted and confessed to
be true, that it is the Devils policy to imitate God (for in many things he is
God's Ape, as some Divines compare him), seeking to counterfeit and resemble
him as an Ape does a Man, in such gestures and tricks which he uses; and where
God will have his Church he will have his Chapel, and he will have his
Exorcisms, and Charms and Spells instead of God's-spell, ( i. e.) the Gospel;
but your Sequel or Subsequent, is a mere new fangled Parodox, and a
Proposition, or rather a Supposition, which is not only absurd, but
ridiculous; not only erroneous, but also blasphemous; and may be ranked and
reckoned amongst those evil-surmisings, and perverse disputings which are
mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.5. and are utterly condemned by him: but let
us examine what you say in the latter part, viz. That when the Devil will be
holy, he will be holier then God; And is that possible? But you instance for an
example thus; When he sees God will have a Sabbath to be kept, then will he
set up a Day, and he will have a Christmas day to be kept; o monstrum,
horrendum, what a horrible, terrible secret is this! Is Saul among the
Prophers? is Satan among the Saints of God? Is it possible? or, it is
probable? or, is it any way likely to be true? That he that was (even like the
great Turk) an Enemy to Christ and all Christendom, should so far be a friend
and favourer of Christ, as to be a prime and forward Erector, Abettor, and
Setter up of a Day for the celebrating and setting forth of his Praise and
Honor: Alas! if this be so, in what a lamentable and pitiful case are we, and
how have we and our forefathers been led hoodwinckt (as it were) and
blindfolded all this while, and have been taken in the snare of the Devil, and
be Captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. We have sure served a very ill
Saint all this while, if, like the People of Callicut, we have worshipped the
Devil in observing that Day which you affirm he has set up; but I say it is
not so, Good Sir, for toto erras coelo, you are foully and grossly deceived in
this point. Shall you, or any man alive make me believe that ever the Devil had
any desire or inclination this way, to propagate or promote the Cause of
Christ, or of his Gospel; who was ever an Adversary, bonis incoeptis in
germine, and whose continual and daily practice is, suffocare Dei filios, dum
parvuli sunt, to smother and murder the Children of God while they are little
ones. Was it not he who stirred up Pharaoh at the first, and moved him to
command and charge the Midwives to drown the male-children of the Hebrew Women
so soon as they were born, Exodus 1.22? And was it not this Merchant or Factor,
or rather that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, who went about the
same design at Christ's birth? did not he instigate Herod to send his Men of
War, and to kill all the young Children of Bethlehem from two years Old and
under, intending thereby to murder Christ in Infancy and Childhood: wherefore,
as devout Bernard cries out in the like Case, so may we; o malitia Herediana
nascentem persequi Christum, and nascentem persequi religionem; O Herodian
malice, to persecute Christ and his Religion in their minority, to destroy the
Sprigg, lest it become a Tree, and break the Egg, lest it prove a Dove, O
divelish malice indeed! for (as Expositors upon the place aptly observe, and
apply it thus) Herod represents the Devil, Apoc. 12.4
who stands before the Woman in the Wilderness great with Child, ready to
devour her Babe; Genesis 3.15.
He knew that the seed which should break his head, was to be born of the Jews,
and therefore caused Pharaoh to murder all the Hebrew Males, Exodus, 1. And
stirred up Haman to destroy the whole Nation of the Jews, Esther 3. And Athalia
to kill all the sons of David. 2 King. 12. And so soon as the noise was of
Christ's Birth, Herod was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him, Math. 2. And he
sent incontinent to cut the throats of all the Children in Bethlehem; yea, more
then this (if if you will believe Josephus, who is a credible Author, and a
sufficient Reporter of that which was true, being testis oculatus, an
eyewitness of many things which he wrote of, and saw them acted and done
before his eyes) this malicious crafty Fox Herod (as he tells us lib. antiquit.
10.) put to death almost all the Nobility of Juda, and burned the Genealogies
of their Kings and Princes, commanding a Pedigree to be drawn out for himself,
as descending from the Kings of Juda. This was a right Matchiavilian policy,
and a deep slight and stratagem of Satan, to extirpate and eradicate the name
of Christ, and the name of Christians for being a People from under Heaven: How
then shall we think, or believe it, that he has any will or desire to set up a
Day for Christ, or to have him worshipped or adored, who set upon Christ in the
Wilderness, and tempted Him, by proffering the whole World, and all the
Kingdoms and Glory of it to Him, if he would but sall down and worship Him: So
that you plainly see, he had rather be worshipped himself, then to have Christ
to be worshipped; All his chief aim is to have the Power and Kingdom of Christ
to be lessened and diminished, and his own Kingdom to be enlarged and
advanced. But what did our Savior answer? or how did he resist his temptation?
Why, surely he defied him, and put him from him, with an Apage Satana, Avoid
Satan, or get thee hence Satan; For it is written, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve, Math. 4.10. As if he had said, If
thou will not worship and serve him in Faith and Love, thou shall be compelled
to worship him in fear and trembling: and for this end is he reserved in
everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great day, says
St. Jude in his Epistle, at the 8. ver. As for Christ we know that all Power is
given unto Him, both in Heaven and Earth, Math. 28. And this was it that the
Angel Gabriel intimated to the Virgin Mary, when he saluted her with that first
happy and ever-joyful news of bringing forth a Son; He shall be great (says
he) and shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord shall give unto
him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall Reign over the House of Jacob
for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end: Semper regnabit quem matter
virge generabit, It was the answer which Octavius the Emperor received from
the Oracle, concerning his Successor. And David himself foretold as much of
him; saying, Psalm. 145.13. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy
Dominion endures throughout all Ages.

Answer to the sixth Argument.
The sixth Argument is this, If I should celebrate this Day, I am fearful lest
I should be condemned for accusing God for want of wisdom, etc.

To this I answer, As our Savior says, This is the condemnation (or this is
the cause of men's condemnation as Beza interprets the place), that light is
come into the World, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their
deeds are evil. For in Him was life, and the life was the light of men, and the
light shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not, John 1.4, 5.
(i.e.) The darkness that was in the Gentiles thoughts and cogitations, and the
Vail of blindness that was upon the hearts of the Jews, 2 Cor. 4.15
when Moses was read unto them, caused them that they could neither apprehend
nor comprehend this light; And therefore they are both censured and condemned
by the Apostle for want of wisdom, and for want of a discerning Spirit, 1 Cor.
1.21, 22, 23, 24. For after that, in the wisdom of God, the World by wisdom
knew not God; it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching [or by that
preaching which the wise men of the World counted foolishnesse] to save them
that believe: for the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom;
but we preach Christ Crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the
Greeks foolishness: but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks;
Christ the Power of God, and the wisdom of God: because the foolishness of God
is wiser then Men, and the weakness of God stronger then Men. And therefore I
wire you not, for being careful and chary of accusing God for want of wisdom,
as they did: and yet whereas you say further, you are fearful lest you should
make your self wiser then God, as though He knew not what should be done as
well as you, and so derogate from the wisdom of God, and herein so far as I
conceive your meaning, you seem a little to derogate from the wisdom of God,
thinking your self not bound to keep this Day, because God in his wisdom has
not directly revealed, or particularly nominated and set down in the Rubric
and Ephemeris, or in the Register or Calender of his Word, what day his Son
Christ was born, and there enjoined and commanded it to be observed and kept,
which, albeit he has not done it immediately from his own mouth: yet mediately
or ministerially has he done it by that heavenly Trumpeter of his, the Angel
Gabriel, who particularly did Preach, promulgate, express and declare it openly
in the Fields to those Shepherds of Bethlehem; Luke 2.
for this thing was not done in secret, nor in a corner. Now I proceed to the
seventh Argument.

Answer to the seventh Argument.
The words of the seventh Argument are these; if I should observe this day, I
am fearful lest I should be the more inexcusable for my Sins.

Sir, This quirk or transcendent ambiguity (as I may so call it) is but petitio
principii, and no better than idem per idem, (i. e.) no more then you have said
in some of the former: yet, in this case I will not say to you as Christ said
to Peter, Mar. 14.21.
when he adventuring presumptuously to walk upon the Water, was afraid, and his
heart deceiving him, or rather his Faith failing him, he began to sink;
immediately whereupon, Jesus stretched forth his hand and caught him, and said
unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? So, wherefore do
you sear, lest, if you should keep this Day, (I mean) the Day of Christ's
Nativity, that then you should be the more inexcusable for your fins? What, do
you conceit that your careful and conscionable observing of this time shall
add to the weight of your sins? or increase the measure and number of your
impieties? What a strange and wonderful, anxious and pensive surmising, and
prejudicate or preposterous misdeeming is this? Wherefore as our Savior
cheared and comforted his Disciples against the Persecutions and Tribulations
which they feared would befall them after his departure from them, John 14.1.
So let me, with your leave, a little rectify, and direct you in this point;
Let not your heart be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me: and I
verily believe it, and am strongly persuaded, that in doing this thing which,
you say, you are fearful to do, lest you should be the more inexcusable for
your sins; you shall be so far from being accused and condemned for it, that it
shall rather be a means to excuse you, and a help to hide and cover your sins
at the day of Judgment: and all the harm I wish unto you or my self, or to any
of the dearest and nearest Friends that I have in his World, is, that we had no
greater Crime or Offense then this to answer for, at the great and terrible Day
of our general and common appearance. For then should we be acquitted and
dismissed with that sentence of absolution; I mean with that joyful and
comfortable, and soul-reviving sentence of Venite Benedicti, Come ye blessed:
And for your further satisfaction herein, and better confirmation of that which
I have affirmed and averred: Let me give you a hint and instance of it, in that
one and remarkable example of Mary Magdalen, who though she were a notorious
Malefactor, and a great and grievous Sinner, Luke 7.
as the History Evangelical effigiates, and sets her forth unto us: yet,
hearing that Jesus sat down to meat in a Pharisee's house, she presnmed and
made bold to go into the house; and bringing an Alablaster-Box of Ointment, she
stood at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears;
and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed
them with the Ointment. Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him, saw it, he
spoke within himself being discontented; saying, This man if he were a Prophet,
would have known who, and what manner of Woman this is that touches him: for
she is a Sinner: And Jesus answering, said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to
say unto thee; and he says, Master say on: There was a certain Creditor who
had two Debtors, the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty; and when
they had nothing to pay, He freely forgave them hoth: tell me therefore, which
of them will love him most? Simon answered and said, I suppose that he to whom
he forgave most, and he said unto him, Thou have rightly judged: And he turned
unto the Woman, and said unto Simon, See thou this Woman? I entered into thy
House, Thou gave me no water for my Feet, but she has washed my Feet with
tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head; Thou gave me no kiss, but
this Woman since the time I came in, has not ceased to kiss my Feet: My Feet
with Oil thou did not anoint, but this Woman has anointed my Feet with
Ointment: Wherefore, I say unto thee, Her sins which are many, are forgiven;
for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little:
Where the Argument is not (as learned Fulk observes, and as the whole
discourse of the Text makes it manifest) from the Cause to the Effect, but from
the Effect to the Cause, Many sins are forgiven her, therefore she has loved
much; (for our Savior had cast seven Devils out of her), therefore she had
good cause to love him much, for to whom little is remitted, he loves little,
wherefore our Savior preferrs and extolleth her kindness both above, and
before the entertainment of the Pharisees House. So that, if we in like manner
do show our love to Christ freely and cheerfully, in celebrating the memorial
of his Birth, as she did in token of his Burial, we shall not only be excused
but accepted as she was; for as St. Mark relates the same story more briefly,
Mark 14. 4. When there were some that murmured at it, and had indignation
within themselves; saying, Why was this waste of the Ointment made, for it
might have been sold for more then three hundred pence, and have bin given to
the poor? But Jesus said by way of Apology for her, Let her alone, Why trouble
you her? She has wrought a good work on me: for you have the poor with you
always; and whenever ye will, you may do them good, but me you have not
always: She has done what she could, she is come aforehand to anoint my Body
to the Burying. Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever the Gospel shall be preached
through out the whole World, this also that she has done, shall be spoken for a
memorial of her, (i. e.) for a memorial of her love, of that good work that
she has bestowed upon me. Wherefore as St. Austin answers some who made a
question, How it was possible a Virgin should bring forth a Child, Fides adsit
and nulla quaestio remanebit; So I say to you, Si amor adsit timor, iste
removebit, if you love Christ in sincerity, as you ought to do, then this fear
will soon remove, and expel such timorous Niceties, and frivolous
Scrupulosities out of your mind: for what says the Apostle St. John, There is
no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear; because fear has torment,
or fear has painfulnesse 1 John 4.18. And let this suffice for the answering
of the seventh Argument.

Answer to the eighth Argument.
The words of the eighth Argument are these, It seems to me a vain and needless
thing: etc.

To this Argument I answer first in the words of the Roman Orator, Quaedam
videntur and non sunt, some things seem to be that which they are not; for
according to the Opinion of the Philosopher, Quandoque sensus fallitur circa
proprium Objectum, sometimes the sense is deceived about its proper Object; as
when a Man sees a Bush a far off he takes it to be a Man, which when he comes
near it, he finds it to be no such matter: even as the Man in the Gospel,
having received a little glimpse and glimmering of his sight, thought he saw
men walk like Trees, ( i.e.) he took them to be as bigg as Trees, because the
Organ of his Eye, being not sufficiently cleansed, he could not otherwise
discern them, Mark 8.24. But it seems to you to be a vain and needless thing.
What? Is it a vain and needless thing to serve God? It seems there were some
who both thought and spoke so in, Malachi's time: Mal. 3.13, 14.
but their gross error and their madness was reproved by the Prophet; even as
St. Peter tells us that Balaam was rebuked for his Iniquity: the dumb Ass,
speaking with Man's veice, forbade the madness of that false Propher, because
he loved the wages of Unrighteousness, and went beyond his permission, being
blinded with the hope of Bribes and Rewards of Divination; 2 Pet. 2.16.
and, Is it (think you) a vain thing and unprofitable to serve the Lord? as
Eliphaz the Temanite says, Job 4.7. Who ever perished being innocent. So, who
ever waited on the Lord and went away unrewarded? He that serves himself
serves a Fool; He that serves the Devil serves his Enemy; He that serves
the World serves his Servant; The only true freedom is, to serve the Lord:
For Godliness with Contentment is great Gain (says the Apostle) 1 Timothy 6.6.
yea, it is profitable unto all things (says he) having promise of the life
which now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. How then can you
justify or affirm it to be a vain and needless thing to spend this time in the
public Worship and Service of God; namely, in the duties of Piety, and
exercises of Religion, in hearing of the Word, and in offering up Prayers and
Praises to God, celebrating it, and lauding his holy and glorious Name, with
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs. singing and making melody in our hearts
to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19, 20.
giving thanks always, for all things, unto God and the Father, in the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ. And especially, and above all things, giving thanks for
this one thing; I mean, that inestimable benefit and unspeakable gift which God
bestowed upon the World at this time. And me thinks, to this end and purpose we
may very well encourage and stir up our selves with the words of David, and
say as he does Psalm. 69.31, 32. I will praise the name of God with a Song; and
magnify it with thanksgiving, this also shall please the Lord better than a
Bullock which has horns and hoofs; yea this shall be as precious and
odoriferous in his Nostrils, and no less pleasing and acceptable in his sight
than that right and costly Spikenard which was spent to anoint our Savior's
feet withal; although it be said of that, That the whole House wherein our
Savior was at that time was filled and perfumed with the odor of the
Ointment, Joh. 12.3.

But the Reasons you allege, to prove it to be a vain and needless thing to
observe this day, are in the next place to be examined and considered; the
first whereof is this, as you affirm it, because God has set apart a Sabbath,
the Lord'sday, for this purpose, to meditate upon God's Love in redeeming the
World, and this seems to be an indifferent good one; yet you know, or at the
least cannot but know, that the Sabbath, or the Seventh day, was at the first
ordained, sanctified, and set apart, only in remembrance of the World's
Creation, as it appears in that passage or Conclusion of the fourth
Commandment, Exodus 20. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea, and all that in them is: Wherefore the Lord blessed the Seventh day, and
hallowed it: For this Commandment is hedged in on every side, lest we should
break out from observing it; with a Caveat and special Memorandum before it,
Remember etc. and with two Reasons after; one drawn from the Equity of the Law,
and the other taken from the Law-giver's, or the Law-maker's, own Example: Six
days shall thou labor; As if God should speak thus, If I permit thee six
whole days to follow thine own business, thou may well afford me one only
for my own Service; but six days shall thou labor and do all thine own work,
therefore hallow the Seventh in doing my work. Six days shall thou labor;
whereupon, both Reverend Calvin, and that learned Gentleman B. Babington, who
was once Bishop of this Diocese, a man of no mean Note, but of good Report
both for Life and Learning, do observe, That these Words ( Six days shall thou
labor etc.) are a permission, or a remission of God's right, who might
challenge all, rather than an absolute Commandment: For as Judicious Perkins
has also delivered it in his Golden Chain, for a sound, Orthodoxal, and
undeniable Thesis, Catena aurea, cap. 13
The Church upon just occasion may separate some week days also to the Service
of the Lord, and rest from Labor, Joel 2.15. Blow the Trumpet in Zion,
sanctify a Fast; call a solemn Assembly. And as days of public Fasting for
some great Judgment, so days of public Rejoicing for some great Benefit, are
not unlawful, but exceeding commendable, yea, necessary: And you cannot in
Modesty, and I hope you will not for Shame, deny this to be the Truth; for
besides the ordinary Sabbath, among the Jews, they had their Sabbaths, and
their new Moons, and appointed Feasts; yea, Almighty God himself ordained, in
the old Testament, diverse and sundry Feasts, to put his People in mind of his
great Benefits bestowed upon them: Amongst the rest there were three solemn
Festivals every year; namely, the Passover, the Pentecost, and the Feast of
Tabernacles, as we read in the 16th of Deuteronomy; The Passover was instituted
in remembrance of the deliverance from Egypt's bondage; Pentecost, in
remembrance of the Law, given in Mount Sinui; The Feast of Tabernacles, in
remembrance of Israel's dwelling in Tents forty years in the Wilderness: Now,
as Hemingius observes in his Postil. dom. 1. post Epiph. instead of those three
Jewish Feasts, our Christian Church (which may challenge as much Liberty as the
Jewish, if not more) has substituted Christmas in honor of Christ's
Incarnation; Easter, in honor of Christ's Resurrection; and Whitsuntide, in
honor of Christ's confirmation of the Gospel, by sending unto us the Holy
Ghost at that time; So that we say, according as St. Austin says in his 108
Epist. cap. 1, Celebrantes Anniversaria solemnitate Pascha, reliquasque
Christianas dierum Festivitutes non observamus tempora, sed quae illis
significantur temporibiu: (i.e.) In celebrating Easter, and other Christian
Feasts, we do not so much observe the times, as the things that are represented
and signified unto us at those times. If then it be granted, as it cannot be
denied, according to your words, that God has set apart a Sabbath (which is
our Christian Sabbath) and is called the Lord's Day, because the Lord rose from
death to life on that Day, and that on this day (in that respect) we are to
meditate on God's Love in redeeming the World; if we must do this once every
week in an ordinary course, how much more may the Church and Spouse of Christ
appoint, and set apart, one day in the year, after an extraordinary manner, to
meditate, and muse, and think on his Love in redeeming her from the hands of
all her Enemies; for so indeed the holy Priest Zacharias tells us, in his Song
called Benedictus, That this was the main End of our Redemption, Luke 1.74.
that we being delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our Life:
Whereupon I infer, That if we must serve him all the days of our life, as he
may justly challenge and require it at our hands, in regard he has redeemed
us, How much more ought we to meditate on his Love, not only once a week, but
also once in every year praise his most Holy Name after a more special and
singular manner? For at this time especially and particularly, it may be said
of Him, as the Psalmist does Psalm. 111.9. He sent Redemption unto his People;
He has commanded his Covenant for ever, holy and reverend is His Name.

But, in your second Reason, you say That you never heard a good Argument for
it: Well, be it so as you say, yet I dare say, that you say it, not so much out
of your Ignorance, as through a misconstruction and sinister Interpretation of
that which you have both heard and read concerning this thing: Wherefore for
answering you, first, Hoc tibi innotescere velimus, we do you to wit, or would
have you to know and understand, That albeit the gray headed Antiquity and
Authority of our dear Mother, the Church of England, and the uniform Discipline
with Us established, for some Centuries of years, making and constituting it an
ancient and laudable Order, and generally approved Custom, may be a sufficient
Plea, Argument and VVarrant to persuade you, or any other rational man to
consent and conform unto it; for what says grave St. Austin, He that will
have God to be his Father, must acknowledge the Church of God for his Mother:
and then, let every Member of this Church remember that good and wholesome
advice of Solomon's, Prove. 11.8. My Son, hear thy Fathers Instruction, and
forsake not thy Mothers teaching: For St. Austin tells us in his Epist. 118.
Extremae est dementiae seu insolentis insaniae, ea negligere (...) repudiare
quae tota observat ecclesia. It is extreme folly, and insolent madness to
neglect and refuse, to observe those things which the whole Church (whereof we
are born Members) does observe; yet for your better satisfaction herein, I have
a desire and purpose to bring in a few Arguments, which perhaps may be thought
by some to be as good, and strong, and forcible for the keeping of this Day, as
any you have hi her to urged, or may hereafter devise and produce, against it.

The first that I shall propound and present to your quaint and curious and
supercilious censure, or to your Austere and Rigid consideration, shall be the
Legality and lawfulness of Ordering and Ordaining, and setting apart of some
days of public Thanksgiving, and holy rejoicing to the Lord for great
Benefits, and public Blessings received; which, if this day of Christ his
Incarnation and Manifestation in the flesh, might be but set up and celebrated
amongst the rest as it deserves, I am persuaded it would contend and strive so
for the Superiority and Pre-eminence above the rest, that it would even devour
and swallow the rest up, as Aarons Serpent did the Serpents of those Egyptian
Magicians and Praestigiators; or excel them, and cast them down, as the Ark
did Dagon; or as the Image of Christ when it was placed by the Senators at Rome
in the Capitol, threw down the Image of Jupiter, Mars, Mercury, and others of
their feigned heathenish gods, as Ensebius and Nicephorus report it for truth;
and the Men of this Generation would soon condescend and yield to this motion,
and not deny nor gainsay this reasonable proposition, if they were not too
much like those blind and blinded Pharisees among the Jews, who were for the
most part, culicem excolantes, and Camelum deglutientes, apt and inclined to
strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Cammel, Math. 23, 24. For if it be lawful to
give God thanks for Corporal and Temporal Deliverances, How much more for our
Spiritual and Eternal Deliverance by Christ, from the thraldom of sin and
Satan; Again, If it shall be thought lawful and allowable to praise God for
the spilling of blood, 2 Kings 6.
and destroying of Men's lives, (which yet neither the Prophet Elisha, 2 Chronicles.
2.8.
nor the Prophet Oded would allow of;) how much more then shall it be lawful
and commendable to praise the Lord for the sparing and preserving of Men's
lives, and for the saving of their Souls, and freeing or delivering both their
Bodies and Souls from the everlasting pains and torments of Death and Hell; For
the Son of Man came to seak and save that which was lost, and God sent not his
Son into the World, to condemn the World, but that the World through Him might
be saved, Joh. 3.17.

The second Argument which I shall here set down for the solemnity of this Day,
I will make bold to borrow from the words of St. Austin, which, I do not only
conjecture, but presume, were Preached and Delivered by him on the very Day; we
find them recorded in his Sermon. 2. and 4. de tempore; Behold (says he), all of
us are bidden on this Day to a Marriage, for Christ came out of the Virgins
Womb, as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber; the Godhead was joined unto the
Flesh, and the Flesh unto the Godhead, and these two were coupled together;
and, after an ineffable manner, in an ineffable Marriage made one. The
marriage-Chamber was the Virgins Womb, (which he abhorred not) out of which
that Sun of Righteousness, Christ Jesus came in the day of his Birth, as a
Bridegroom out of his Chamber, Psalm. 19.5.
and as a strong man joyful to run his race. For the Son of God, knowing that
according to the eternal decree enacted in the Court of Heaven, our Salvation
could not be perfected before he was Incarnate; Gal. 4.4.
in the fullness of time, came down (sealing our Redemption) with rejoicing of
Spirit, and gladness of heart, exsuiting, trium phing, and preparing himself
to the desired work of his mediatorship. Long had the Church waited and prayed
for this coming of Christ in the flesh: Isa. 64.1.
O would God thou would burst the Heavens, and come down: Cant. 8.1.
O that then werst as my Brother, which sucked the breast of my Mother,
partaking the same humane nature with me. I would find thee without, here below
on Earth, I would kiss thee, and familiarly entreat thee without the reproach
of the World. Then I would lead thee, and bring thee into my Mothers house,
though now I am penned up in the Straights of Judea, I would bring thee into
the Light and Knowledge of the Universal Church, whose Daughter I am; and
herefore he was worthily called desideratus omnium gentium, Hag. 2.7.
the desired of all Nations: but when he came, he came merrily; with nimbleness
of Spirit, zeal of Piety, fervency of Love, as the Church espying him, joyfully
relates it; It is the voice of my well-beloved, Cant. 2.8.
Behold, he comes leaping by the Mountains, skipping by the Hills: My
well-beloved is like a Roe or Heart. He came flying on the wings of the Wind, he
out-leapt Gabriel the Archangel, and came to the Virgin before him, by the
Testimony of the Angel himself: Luke 1.27.
Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee. Behold, Gabriel left Christ
in Heaven, but finds him in the Womb: How so? Volavit and praevolavit super
pennas vontorum, he flew, and out-flew him on the wings of the wind; he sent
his Messenger, but (like Ahinoaz) got before him. Will you see his Jumps? He
lept from Heaven into the Womb, from the Womb to the Manger, from the Manger to
the Cross, from the Cross to the Grave, from the Grave to Heaven again: from
whence we look for, and expect his second coming. David sang of this his
alacrity; Psalm. 20.
The King is glad of thy strength (O Lord) and exceeding joyful of thy
Salvation, Quia verbum caro factum est, and habitavit in nobis; because (says
Augustine on those words), The Word was made flesh, and dwelt in us, the Day of
Christ's Nativity was his Day of Festivity, his Birth Day was his Mirth Day,
for then his Mother Crowned him with the Crown of his Incarnation; which was
the Day of his Espousals, or the Day of the joy and gladness of his heart, as
it is so called, Cant. 3.10. This is a great Mystery (says Paul), but I speak
concerning Christ and the Church; and, sine dubio, magnum est pietatis
mysterium; And without controversy great is the Mystery of godliness; How God
was manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, 1 Timothy 3.16.
and received up in Glory; and He being thus ascended and received up into
Glory; for the Heaven must receive Him (in regard of his bodily presence)
until the times of restitution of all things, says Peter, Act. 3.21. And
thus, leaving his Spouse the Church as a Widow, as He has enjoined and
Commanded her in the Gospel to think upon his Love, and oftentimes to remember
him and his Death, especially as often as she receives the blessed Sacraments
of his Body and Blood: So she for her part thinks it meet not only to
Commemorate his Death, but sometimes, also especially once a year to
Congratulate and Solace her self in remembrance of his Birth; That happy and
joyful Marriage day which was once Solemnized betwixt her and that great King
of Glorie's Son, who now sits at the right hand of his Father in Heaven:
even as I have also observed it to be the fashion and condition of many good
and honest Couples whilst they live on Earth together, to keep a solemn
remembrance every year of their Wedding day, even until their Dying day: So
should every good Christian and faithful Soul keep a due and perpetual
remembrance of her Loving Lord, and gracious Head and Husband, Christ Jesus. As
it is reported of that famous Artemisia, That to show her love to her dead
Husband Mausolus, she took the ashes of his Urne or Pitcher, and mingled them
with her Drink, and so intombed his dead Carcass within her living Body: And
it is said of blessed Ignatius after his Martyrdom, that these words were
found written upon his heart (so it were to be wished that they were also
engraven and imprinted in Ours) Amor men's crucifixus, my Love Christ Jesus was
crucified for me. But perhaps here you, will object, and say, that this is
Symbolica Theologiae, and that it is not Argumentativa, (i. e.) that it is an
Argument Rhetorical rather than Dialectical. What say you then to Theologia
miraculis confirmata: which* in the third place I shall allege; namely, the
strange accidents, and wonderful effects that happened at the Birth of Christ,
or rather those rare and singular miracles that were acted and done near about
the time of his Nativity: For a little before, this was it that made a young
Babe while he was yet in the Womb of his Mother to Spring and Sprout, and leap
therein for joy; yea, Luke 1.44.
this was it that made an old man that was dumb before, to speak, and to praise
the Lord with a song; and say, Luke 1.6, 8.
Blessed be the Lord, etc. And this was it that moved another old man, after he
had seen the Lord Christ to hold him in his arms, and desire life no longer. He
was so much ravished and overjoyed with the sight of his Savior, that he
presently chanted out Cantionem Cygneam, that swanne-like song, Lord, now it is
enough, and I am abundantly satisfied because thou have fulfilled my desire, in
performing thy promise to me, that I should not see Death before I had seen thy
Son.

To these we may add the apparition of that glorious Starr which showed it self
unto the Wise men of the East, about the time of his Nativity: which was not an
ordinary Starr, but extraordinary and miraculously created at this time, for
this very end and purpose, not only to signify, but to dignifie and set forth
the Birth of Christ, Math. 2.
for said they, We have seen his Starr in the East, that is, the Starr which he
has newly made, to testify unto the World, that he is born. It differed from
other Stars in Place and Motion, in Luster and Brightness. Haec stella quae
solis rotam vincit decore ac lumine, says Prudentius of this Starr; it has
another way then the way of the Stars from the East to the South, from Persia
to Palestina, it appeared not when other Stars appeared; It shined in the day,
Other in the Night; it did appear and was hid, it was hid and did appear. It
showed it self before they entered Jerusalem, and hid it self while they were
there: but so soon as they left Herod and the City, it did show it self; and
went right forwards in a straight course toward Bethlehem, no otherwise then
the Cloud and Pillar of fire went before the People of Israel at their
departure, and going out of Egypt into Canaan: It kept not the ordinary course
of the Stars, nor any proper way, for it went that way which the wise men
would go, and when they would stand still, then that stood still; yea, it did
not keep aloft like other Stars, but it descended to show the Messiah: the
Messah so poor, so base and contemptible. Whereupon it is that St. Austin
calls it, magnifica lingua caeli, the stately congue of heaven, appointed by
God, as it were, to reveal and preach unto the wise men that Christ was that
Starr of Jacob, prophesied of by Balaam, Numb. 24.17. that he was Stella illa
splendida and matutina, that bright Morning Starr, Revel. 22.16. and that he
was Oriens ab alto, that dayspring from high, that came to visit us, and to
give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide
our feet in the way of Peace, as that holy Priest Zacharias tells us
comfortably in his song, Luke 1.75. Wherefore, as the Roman Orator speaks, so
will I here say, Nihil horum era vultusque movernunt? and as the Roman Poet
elegantly, Quid satis est, si Roma parum: so will I be bold here to speak it,
Quid satis erit illi, cui non sufficient ista? If these things will not serve
to convince you, I know not what will? Mark. 16.^6.
For, if neither the Word, nor Miracles, nor the Word confirmed by Miracles,
will prevail and work upon us to make us believe; then I say, as it is in the
16 of Luke at the last verse, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead: Yet, willingly would I
add here one strange thing more or two, (which are no more strange then true)
as a Corollary and Appendix to the former; which though they were not
Synchronisms, or things Contemporaneous with the Birth of Christ, yet the
People of our Nation, and our own Countrymen can witness them to be true, as I
relate them; The first is the Thorn at Glastenbury in Sommersetshire, which
was commonly called Joseph's Thorn: which for many hundred years together,
even (as it is to be thought) since the first arriving of Joseph of Arimathea
there, which was within five years after the Death and Resurrection of the Lord
Jesus, (as that ancient Historian of our Nation, the Golden-mouthed Gildas
reports) this Thorn constantly budded and showed forth its green leaves,
fair, fresh and flourishing on this Day every year, to the great admiration of
all Spectators that came of purpose to behold it; and this was no other then a
Miracle, and may serve for our confirmation in the faith of Him, who, for our
sakes was contented to wear ( Coronam Spineam) a Crown of Thorns: Or it may
well be supposed, that ir flourished on this Day, to testify the truth of his
Nativity, and to signify the flourishing Estate of the Gospel by Him, which
shall prosper and flourish, manger the head and hatred of all Gainsayers. And
although this Thorn be now, as they say, cut down by some spightful and
malignant Zoilus; yet, those sufficient men of our parts, who, with their eyes
have seen it, and beheld it, will still talk of it, and tell it to their
Children, not for an old Wives Fable, but for truth; and one Gentleman among
the rest of good rank and quality in these Parts (who is a man well affected
and devoted to the power and purity of Religion) for that Thorn's sake, having
seen it, does strictly, and carefully, and conscionably keep this Day, and is
resolved to observe and keep it so long as he lives.

The other rare and strange thing, are the three pitts of Durham, commonly
called Hell kettles, which are adjoining near unto Darlington, whose Waters are
somewhat warm; these are thought to come of an Earthquake, which happened in
the year of Grace, 1179. whereof the Chronicle of Tinmouth makes mention,
whose record is this; That on Christmasday at Oxen-Hall, in the Territories of
Darlington, within the County of Durham, the ground heaved aloft, like unto a
high Tower, and so continued all that day, as it were unmovable, until the
evening, and then fell with so horrible a noise, that it made the
Neighbourhood-dwellers much afraid, and the Earth swallowed it up, and made in
the same place three deep pits, which are there to be seen for a Testimony unto
this Day. Here then we may apply that of the Psalmist, and say, Tremble thou
Earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob, which
turned the hard Rock into a standing Water, and the flint stone into a
springing Well, Psalm. 114.7, 8. But whilst I am relling you a story of a
Thorne-Tree, and of deep pits of Water, you bring me into another difficult and
thorny question, and plunge me, as it were, in a deep pit of non plus, or nil
ultra; and into such a quick and and quagmire of troublesome meditation, that I
shall hardly get out of it; the Quaery is this ninth following.

Answer to the ninth Argument.
The ninth Argument is this; It is an impossibility to keep it, and God never
made an impossibility a Duty: and, that no man in the World knows certainly
what day Christ was born on.

To this I answer, although I first ingenuously confess, according to that
Adage, Davus sum ego, non Oedipus: for it is true which Chrysostom says,
Praestat proba ignoratione detineri quam falsa opinione mancipari. It is easier
to plow in the plain, then in the ground new-stocked; better to write on a
paper free from writing, than on that which is full of lines; and more easy to
reach the simple, then him that is opinionated of his own knowledge: Better it
is for a man, and more commendable to confess a little ignorance, then to boast
of too much knowledge; wherefore, as Beza on that place in 1 Cor. 11.10. For
this Cause ought the Woman to have power on her head, because of the Angels
gives no other note but this, Quid hoc sit, nondum mihi liquet, wherein he
confesses, he did not understand, as yet, what the Apostle meant by these
words: So if we should here yield and acknowledge that we do not certainly know
what day Christ was born on: Vaux.
yet, As a late Starrgazing Speculator takes upon him in his Almanac, to
define the year of Christ his coming to Judgment, but dare not precisely set
down the day and hour of his coming; So perhaps we shall here endeavor, pro
Nosse and Posse, to calculate and discover unto you the year when our Savior
Christ was born, if not the day. And for this I shall referr you to the
Rhemists Marginal note on the second of Luke, which reports unto us that in the
year from the Creation of the World 3199, from Noah's flood 2957, from the
Nativity of Abraham 2015, from Moses and the coming forth of the People of
Israel out of Egypt 1510, from David anointed King 1032, from the first
Olympias 800, from the building of Rome 752, Hebdomada 63, according to the
prophecy of Daniel ( c. 9.) that is in the year 440, or thereabout; in the
sixth age of the World, when there was universal Peace in all the World: the
eternal God, and son of the eternal Father, meaning to Consecrate and Sanctify
the World with his most blessed coming, being conceived of the Holy Ghost nine
Months after his Conception; Jesus Christ the Son of God is born in Bethlehem
of Juda, in the year of Caesar Augustus 42 ( Usuard in the Martyrol) And then
why should not the 25 of December. be as solemnly observed, and kept, as the 5 of
Nov.
December 25 according to the common ancient supputation. But it may be, you
will object against this, and because it comes from the Rhemists, you will
mislike it, and disdain it; yet nevertheless (I say) because it is not thwarted
nor contradicted by Calvin, nor Beza, nor Fulke, nor any other of our late
Protestant Writers; I see no just Cause or Reason why we should reject it, but
rather receive it, Fide historica, and believe it for truth, as it is
faithfully and exactly related by them for a sufficient Author, and ancient
Chronologer, or Reporter of that which was nothing else but a true story, and
cannot be denied or disproved; yet, put the Case here that we neither do, nor
cannot certainly know the Day whereon Christ was born, therefore shall it be
thought a thing impossible to keep it? Then by the same Rule and Reason, you
may as well say, It is impossible to keep the Sabbath day: H. Wolphii Chronol.
lib. 2 p. 1. p. 92.
For the Commandment does not say, remember to keep holy the seventh day, next
following the sixth day of the Creation; or this or that seventh day; but
indefinitely, remember that thou keep holy a seventh day. And to speak
properly, as we take a day for the distinction of time, called either a day
natural consisting of twenty four hours; or a day artificial consisting of
twelve hours, from Sunrising to Sunsetting: and withal consider the Sun
standing still at noon in Joshua's time the space of a whole day, Josh. 10.12,
13.
and the same going back ten degrees ( viz. five hours, 2 King. 26.11.
almost half an arificial Day) in Ezekias time; the Jews themselves could not
keep this Sabbath upon that precise and just distinction of time, called at the
first, The seventh day from the Creation; therefore in such difficult and
doubtful Cases, the best way is to be ordered and guided, and resolved by the
Judgment and Discipline and Direction of the Church wherein we live: for she is
our Mother, says Calvin, Lib. Instit. 4. C. 1. Sect. 4.
forasmuch as there is no other entry into life, unless she conceive us in her
Womb, unless she bring us forth, unless she feed us with her Breasts, and keep
us under her Custody and Governance, until such time as being unclothed of
mortal flesh, we shall be like unto Angels. Again in his Lib. 4. Cap. 10. Sect.
30. He says of the Church and Church-Ordinances, that in outward discipline
and Ceremonies, the will of God was not to prescribe each thing particularly
what we ought to follow, because he foresaw this to hang upon the State of
times, and did not think one form to be fit for all Ages) herein we must fly to
those general Rules which he has given, that thereby all those things should
be tried, which the necessity of the Church shall require to be commanded for
order and comeliness. And forasmuch as he has therefore taught nothing
expressly, because these things both are not necessary to Salvarion, and
according to the manners of every Nation and Age, ought diversely to be applied
to the edifying of the Church; therefore as the profit of the Church shall
require, though it might be thought convenient as well to change and abrogate
those that be used, as to institute new: yet, I grant it indeed, and must needs
confess it, That we ought not rashly, nor often, nor for leight and trivial
Causes to run to Innovation, but what may hurt or edify, Charity shall best be
judge: which if we will suffer to be the Governess, all shall be safe. And in
the next Section at the latter end thereof; It is always meet, says he, for
the public worship and service of God, that there be both certain days and
appointed hours, and a place fit to receive all, if there be regard had of the
preservation of peace. For how great an occasion of scandal, brawling, and
contention should the confusion of these things be, if it were lawful for
every man as he lists to change those things which belong to common State;
forasmuch as it will never come to pass that one and the same thing shall
please all Men, (it being an old and true saying, difficillimum est omnibus
placere) if things be left (as it were) at random, and in the midst to the
choice of every Man to do what he pleases, to have a Psalm, and a Doctrine,
and a Revelation, and an Interpretation by himself, as the Apostle speaks
with a kind of Indignation and Increpation of them that used it, 1 Cor. 14.26.
If any man therefore do Carp and Cavil against us, and herein will be more wise
then he ought, let him see himself by what reason he can defend his own
preciseness to the Lord. As for us, That saying of Paul ought to satisfy us;
If any man seem to be Schismatical and contentious, we have no such use, we
have no such Custom nor the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11.16. Where we may
perceive that that good Man and faithful Pastor of Geneva, though he liked not
the Mass, yet he preached Christ sincerely, and maintained and defended his
Church, and labored by all means to preserve, Tunicam ejus inconsutilem, his
seamlesse Coat to be without brack or breach, Sector Schism, Rent or Division
at all; but still to continue pure and undefiled without spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing. I will then conclude and shut up this passage with the witty
Sentences of St. Austin, Contrarationem nemo sobrius, contra Scripturas nemo
Christianus, contra ecclesiam nemo pacificus senserii. And if we will be the
Children of the Church, as we profess our selves to be, then let us hearken
what the wise man says: Ecclus. 3.1. The Children of wisdom are the Church of
the Righteous, and their exercise is Obedience and Love.

Answer to the tenth Argument.
The words are these, I observe, God hides things on purpose from us, to see
whether we will do any things on our own heads.

I answer, This Argument is derived de profundis, and drawn or fetched ab
absconditis and secretis. It Is true, and we cannot much deny it; For He hides,
or concealeth from us, his Decree of Election, and final Dereliction or
Reprobation, Romans 9.13
because he will have Mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth; And
this he does, because he would not have us like curious Bethshemites to pry
into the Ark of his Secrets, but rather to work out our own Salvation with fear
and trembling, Phil. 2.12.
as the Apostle St. Paul speaks; and as the other Apostle teaches and
exhorts us, 2 Pet. 1.10.
to give all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure. And now is this
to be understood? why, surely thus, if I be not deceived; sure to God. I need
not, I cannot, 2 Timothy 2.19.
the Foundation of God stands sure enough of it self, and the Gifts and Calling
of God are without Repentance, Romans 11.29. ( i. e.) Sine mutatione stabiliter
fixa sunt, says St. Austin, they are irrevocable, immutable, and unchangeable;
but, Sure to my own Soul, I may, I must, by all means labor and endeavor to
make and effect it, or else this Precept is in vain, of giving all diligence to
make our Calling and Election sure. Secondly, He hides the hour of every
particular man's death, and the day of the general Judgment, from us, and
reserveth them in the private Cabinet of his own Foreknowledgeship; Act. 1.17.
For it is not for us to know the times and the Seasons which the Father has
reserved in his own Power: And this he does for this very end, as an ancient
Father of the Primitive Church has told us truly and especially, Ideo latet
ultimus dies, ut observetur omnis dies, It is to make us careful and watchful,
every day and hour, of that last day and hour, Omnem creed diem, etc. And does
not our Savior himself tell us as much, and forwarn us, both in the 24. and
25. Chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel, Watch therefore, for ye neither know the
day nor the hour wherein the Son of man comes; But whereas you say that God
hides things on purpose from us, to see whether we will do any thing on our own
heads, I perceive your meaning is, that God has so hidden and concealed the
day of Christ's Birth from us, to try whether we will celebrate and observe it,
or no, as both you and others of your Fraternity have made the Comparison, and
vented and vaunted it in the Pulpit, touching the body of Moses, how God should
bury it Himself in some secret place, and keep it from the Knowledge of the
Children of Israel, lest they should worship and adore it: So you would have
the Remembrance of this day to be buried for ever, and quite obliterated and
forgotten, lest we should commit Idolatry to it. Now, touching the body of
Moses, we know it was buried by God, as appears, Deuteronomy. 34.6. that no man
should know where his Sepulcher was: Therefore, as learned Fulk answers the
Rhemists on the Epistle of Jude, at the 9th. verse; It is like, the Altercation
and Combat that is there mentioned to be betwixt Michael the Archangel and the
Devil about it, was immediately before that time, when the Devil desired to
have the Body of Moses discovered, that it might be abused to Idolatry; as it
always has been the practice of Satan to persecute the Saints while they
live, and to make Idols of their Bodies when they are dead. That ancient Father
which wrote the Book De Mirabilibus Sacrae Scripturae, which goes under the
name of St. Augastine lib. 1. cap. 35. writes thus of the body of Moses; For
two Causes, as wise men say, No man was privy of his death, nor of his
Sepulcher; First, That no man should see that face, which had shined through
the familiarity of the Lord's Speech unto him, stricken down or dimmed with the
heaviness of Death. And then Secondly, lest the People of Israel, if they had
known where his Sepulcher was, should have adored it. Wherefore, as most men
think, he carried away with him the Rod wherewith he had done Wonders, lest it
should have been adored; seeing the Children of Israel did afterward adore the
Serpent which he made.

But there cannot be the same reason for the burying of Christ's Birthday, as
was for the burying of the Body of Moses; It is but a lame Similitude, neither
can the Comparison be aequivaleut, or any way co-incident or correspondent; for
Moses was but a Servant, Christ a Son; and the Servant abides not in the House
for ever, but the Son abides ever, Joh. 8.35. Moses was a Type and Shadow,
Christ the Body and Substance; the Shadow vanishes, but the Body and Substance
remains. Besides this, the one was but a Man, the other God, even God and
Man; and shall that be counted Idolatry and Superstition, which is a holy
Worship, and devout Service performed to the true God? So that Moses must
yield, subscribe, and give way to Christ; when he is present, the Law must
depart out of the Conscience, Isa. 28.20.
and leave the Bed which is so strait, that it cannot hold two, to Christ
alone: For the Law came by Moses, but Christ has put an end to the Law, and so
Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.16.
( i. e.) Joy, and Liberty, and Freedom, and Justification, and Redemption; for
if the Son once shall make us free, we shall be free indeed. For there is a
great Antithesis, even a great deal of distance and difference, betwixt Moses
and Christ, the Law and the Gospel; the one being the ministration of Death and
Condemnation, and the other the ministration of Righteousness and Life
eternal, 2 Cor. 3. And therefore I say, to conclude this Point, that this day
is not so hidden and obscured from us, but that the very dawning and breaking
thereof is discovered and descryed: For, did not the heavenly Herald proclaim
it in the fields of Bethlehem? and did not the Shepherds find it to be true,
that very day, according as the Angel had told them? and shall we think that
there were no Registers nor Records of it in that City wherein he was born? and
did not that Starr in the East, signifying this Day Star from on high coming to
visit us; did it not directly point the Wisemen to the place of his Birth?
Yea, And Christ himself told the Jews of this his day, Job, 8.56.
saying, Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and
rejoiced: Hic Dies Domini uil aliud significat quam Adventum Christi in carne,
This day of Christ (says Beza, on that place in John) signifies nothing else
but his first coming in the Flesh, which many Prophets and Kings desired to
have seen as well as Abraham; for the Messiah is called The desire of all
Nations, Hag. 2.8. of whom the Prophets enquired, searching when or what time
the Spirit, which was in them, should declare the Sufferings which should come
to Christ, and the Glory that should follow, 1 Pet. 1.11. When Balaam had
prophesied of Christ, There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall
rise out of Israel, Numb. 24.17. he brake forth into this Passion; Alas! Who
shall live when God does this? As if he should have said, Happy men are they,
who shall see that glorious Star, and Sun of Righteousness, coming out of his
Chamber as a Bridegroom; giving light to such as sit in darkness, and in the
Shadow of Death: Oh that thou would break the Heavens and come down, said
the Prophet, Isa. 64.1. Good old Simeon looked long for this day, and with an
earnest desire waited for the consolation of Israel: So did also Joseph of
Arimathaea, that honorable Counselor and great Friend and Well-wisher to
Christ; for he also himself was one of them who waited for the Kingdom of God,
Luke 23.51. So did that ancient and reverend Father St. Augustine, of whom it
is reported that he wished he might have seen three things especially, Rome in
her Glory, Paul in the Pulpit, and Christ in the Flesh. If the Queen of Sheba
reputed the Servants of Solomon happy, for that, attending about his Throne, 1
King. 10.8. 1 King. 4.33.
they heard his Wisdom difcoursing of Prees, from the Cedar that is in Lebanon,
even unto the Hyssop that springs out of the Wall: How blessed and happy then
may we think were the Disciples of Christ, in hearing a greater than Solomon,
Math. 12.4. and in seeing him who was fairer than the Sons of Men, Psalm. 45.3.
and in whom also are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Colos. 2.3.

Answer to the eleventh Argument.
In the Eleventh Objection you say, It has not been the Practice of Christian
Churches to observe the Birthday of Christ.

To this I say, you deserve a sharp rejection, and a serious and severe
reprehension. For it is a mere falsehood, and a gross and manifest untruth; and
I wonder that a man of your account, Countenance and gravity, should suffer
such an unjustifiable thing, to fall either from your tongue or pen; for I say,
contrarium hujus argumenti est verum, and, credat Judaus Apella, non ego,
believe it who will, for I cannot otherwise be persuaded, but you speak herein
that which is contrary to truth: for, besides that it is well known among the
Learned, especially by those who are conversant in the large Volumes, and
accurate writings of the Ancient Fathers; It has been the annual and constant
Practice of the Primitive Church to observe it; especially in the time, August.
118. Epist. cap. 7.
and since the time of Constantine the Great, who gave peace to the Church and
commanded this Festival time among diverse others to be observed. Witness
August. con. Aimant. c. 16.118. Epist. and in diverse of his Sermons de Tempore,
especially in his second and fourth Sermon de Tempore. Witness Fulgentius de
dup. Not. Christi, witness Ambrose de Incarnat. Domini, witness Bernard in
his first Sermon in Not. Domini. for that ingenuous and Religions man, that
witty and Godly Father of the Primitive Church, preaching on this day, in that
his first Sermon, and toward the latter end of it, uttered these words, and
said, Brevitas temporis cogit me contrahere and coarctare Sermonem meum; the
shortness of the time constrains me to shorten my Sermon, at this time; and
ne cui vestrum sit mirum, si brevis esse laboro, Let none (quoth he) wonder if
my words be short, seeing on this day, God the Father has abbreviated his own
Word: For whereas it was so long and so large, that it filled Heaven and Earth
( Jer. 23.24.) it was on this day so short, that it was laid in a Manger: I
wish here unfainedly, with the same devour Bernard in his Sermon in Natalem
Domini, that as the Word was made flesh, so our stony Hearts may be made flesh
also; that we might always meditate on his Sacred Message, and his. Heavenly
Gospel: Unto you this day is born, in the City of David, a Savior which is
Christ the Lord: For all our sound comfort stands in happiness, and all our
happiness is in the Fellowship and Communion with God, and all our Fellowship
and Communion with God, is by Jesus. Christ, for so that good Divine St. John,
tells us in his 1 Epist. cap. 2.3. Wherefore also, St. Austin uses a most
excellent acclamation, to this purpose, in his ninth Sermon de Tempore, which
as it is probable, he also preached on this day, o beatum vagitum Infantuli
beati, oh the blessed crying of a blessed babe, by which every faithful
servant and Son of God, escapes eternal howlings in Hell; o splendidum and
Gloriosum praesepe! Oh famous and glorious Manger, in which our Souls Manna
lay! (...), the bread of life that came down from Heaven, on which if a man
once, etc. o quam dites: sunt panni tui! Oh how Rich and Honorable are the
rags which have made plasters for our sores, even for our sins! I will shut up
this passage with a Hymn of Prudentius.

Mortale corpus sumpsit immortalitas.
Vt dum caducum poytat aeternus deus.
Transire nostrum possit ad coelestia.
And what say you now to these things before said? Can they not yet persuade
you to yield, that it was the practice of Christian Churches in Ancient times
to observe it? Yet put the case, or suppose it was not; you cannot, yea, I hope
you will not deny, but it has been the practice of these our Churches of Great
Britain, I mean the Churches of England, Scotland, and Ireland, for diverse
Centuries, or hundreds of years to observe it; for they are both Christian, and
reformed Churches, and therefore, unless you mean by Christian Churches, the
old Brownists of Amsterdam, or the new Anabaptists, and Antipaedobaptists of
England, and other the like proud and fantastical, and Pharisaicall
Sectaries, and Separatists that are amongst us, in these Giddy and unsettled
times of ours, who think there is no true Christian Church, but what is of
their choosing, planting, and erecting; who, like the Jews of old, cry Templum
Domini, or like the Papists, who will have no Church to be a true Church, but
their Church at Rome; who stand upon their Pontificatibus, and are all for the
justification of their own Opinion, saying as those Justiciaries of old did,
Esaias 65.5. Stand by thy self, or stand far off me, come not near me, for I am
Holier then thou, etc. And here I could tell you a thing (which perhaps also
you are not ignorant of) that the late upstart Seraphicall illuminated
Independents, (as it is commonly thought) are likely to jostle and thrust the
proud, rigid, Fantastical, and Pharisaicall Presbyterians out of their places,
even as they have cunningly supplanted, and undermined the Reverend Bishops,
and their conformable Clergy out of theirs, neque enim lex justior ulla est,
Quam necis artifices, etc. Indeed I never heard nor read of any Christian
Churches, but have observed this day; and therefore howsoever such factious and
Schismatic Wild-brain'd Zelots of our time, refuse to do it, and both write
and speak against it, yet we know that all the Ancient Fathers of the Primitive
Church, did celebrate it with great Solemnities, as Mr, Fisher in his
Vindication of our Gospel Festivalls, has wittily observed in his fifth
Section, even Cyprian, Basil, Nazianzene, Ambrose, Epiphanius, Jerome,
Chrysostom, Fulgentius, alleging and producing their very words, which they
preached on this day, and proving it withal, punctually plainly, and directly,
that it was the 25th day of December that Christ was born on: And further, to
confute your palpable Error, he tells us there, That the Churches of Helvetia,
Bohemia, Leye Sunday a Sab. page 173. Dr. Rayn. Confer. with Heart. c. 8. S. 2.
Bremen, Auspurg, the Churches of Savoy, Poland, Hungary, Scotland, France, and
the Low Countries, do allow the Feasts that belong to Christ, his Nativity,
Circumcision, Passion, etc. The Churches of Denmark, Sweden, and all other
Lutheran-Churches, do solemnly observe the Feast of the Nativity of Christ, and
on that day use proper Hymns of Thanksgiving, made by Martin Luther himself;
Perth. Assembly refuted. page 85.
the Church of Geneva does celebrate the day of his Nativity: wherefore (as he
says here for a Conclusion) seeing we are compassed about with so great a
Cloud of Witnesses, we must, according to the truth, affirm, That the
Celebration of this Feast, is confirmed by the judgment of the Christian Church
in all ages. So we conclude against you, that your eleventh Assertion is a mere
falsehood, and manifest untruth, and no more to be credited or believed, then
that vain fancy, and fond surmise of yours, I mean the Fable and story you tell
us of in your Saints Rest, touching the raining down of Manna, on the Leads of
the Church at Bridgnorth when you preached there: For some Gentlemen of worth
in those parts, have credibly reported it to be nothing else then the seeds of
Hips and Hawes, being the excrements of Rooks and Jack-dawes, which they there
had voyded.

Answer to the Twelfth Argument.
The twelfth Argument is this, In all doubtful Cases, a Wise man ought to go
on the surest side, and I am sure it is no Sin not to keep it, etc.

I Answer, in this Allegation you seem to play the part of a Wise man; but in
my Opinion you are only wise in your own conceit; for my part, this I am sure
of; First, in respect that Christmas day being the day of our Lords Nativity,
is the Lords day, Cant. 4.9.
and by his spouse the Church is set a part to Gods public worship, and our
Souls edification, therefore it ought clearly to be esteemed above any other of
the common Week days. And for people on this day, wilfully and
contemptuously, to follow their ordinary (though at other times lawful)
vocations, or Callings, is in the first place, a breach of the fourth
Commandment, for the day of Christ's Nativity, is a Sabbath or Rest to the
Lord, and God will have us to keep holy the Sabbath or Rest-day. Next, it is a
despising, Perk. cases of Consc. l. 1. c. 5. Sect. 5.
and dishonouring of their Mother the Church, which, whosoever are guilty of,
not only sin against the fifth Commandment, but by our Savior himself, we are
Enjoined to account all such as Revolters from the Christian faith, Heathen
men, and Publicans, Matthew. 18.17. Lastly, it is a ground and inlet to the
violation of all order and decency in Gods Service, which is expressly
condemned in Holy Scripture: and if to break Gods Commandments, 1 Cor. 14.40.
to contemn his Churches Authority, to become Heathens and Publicans, and to
overthrow all order and decency in Gods Services, be sins and Offenses to God;
Then must we conclude, that not to keep this day, must needs be a sin; and that
to work, or follow our vocations on Christmas day, is a great and high offense,
or indignity offered unto God, and his Church. And how then are you sure it is
no sin not to keep it, but that your erroneous Conscience tells you so, and yet
is it so nice and tender? on the other side you are not sure, it is no sin to
keep it; this is the other part of your Dilemma, (for this is called in the
Schools Syllogismus cornutus, or Syllogismus Crocodilinus) Well, sat verbum
Sapienti; If a word to the Wise may serve the turn, then will I answer you in a
word: for although you are persuaded, and sure in your strong Conscience, that
it is no sin not to keep it; yet we, on the other side, in our weak
Consciences, are persuaded, that it is a sin if we keep it not: And therefore
if you remember, the Apostle's rule is, Let not the stronger Christian despise
the weaker, Romans 13.3, 4.
especially in such a Case as this, Let not him that eats despise him that
eats not, and let not him that eats not, judge him that eats, for God
has received him; Who art thou then that judge another man's Servant? to his
own Master he stands or falls, yea he shall be holden up, for God is able
to make him stand. One man esteems one day above another, another esteems
every day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind; he that
regards a day regards it unto the Lord, and he that regards not the day,
to the Lord he does not regard it: He that eats, eats to the Lord, for he
gives God thanks; and he that eats not, to the Lord he eats not, and
gives God thanks: For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to
himself, for the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, and
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and he that in these things serves Christ,
is acceptable to God and approved of Men. Let us therefore follow after the the
things which make for peace, and things wherewith we may edify another, for
meat destroy not the work of God; all things indeed are pure, but it is evil
for that man who eats with Offense. It is good, neither to eat Flesh, nor to
drink Wine, nor any thing, whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is
made weak; You see how wary the Apostle is, to advise us in and for things
indifferent. not to be offended one with another, but to use all good Christian
moderation and discretion, and not to abuse our Christian Liberty, to the
Scandal and Offense of our weak Brethren.

Answer to the thirteenth Argument.
The thirteenth Argument is, That this day ought not to be celebrated because
there is more Sin committed in these 12 days than is in all the year
following, viz. in Drunkenness, etc.

Oh Sir! This Argument and your last, are the least and the weakest of them
all, and therefore I shall more easily answer them, and briefly conclude. To
this 13th I say as I did before, The Abuse of a thing, that in it self is
lawful and good, cannot justly abolish or take away the lawful Use of it; For
the best things that ever God created have been abused through Man's
Corruption; even the whole Creature is subject unto Vanity, that is, to
Destruction, because of Man's sin, Romans 8.20. The holy Temple of our God has
been profaned and defiled, and made a den of Thieves, and a Cage of unclean
Birds, and a very Stable for Barbarous Soldiers Horses to Lodge in, in these
late uncivil Wars; the holy Sabbath of our Lord has been polluted, his Word
and Sacraments abused: Yea, because the Scriptures are in some places somewhat
hard to be under^^ood, therefore those that are unlearned and unstable, do
wrest them and perven them to their own Destruction, (...) P^^. 3.16. And
because of this, must the Scriptures be rejected, and not perused? Because the
good Creatures of God are abuse (...) some ungodly and wicked Miscreants,
therefore must the Creatures be refused, seeing every Creature of God is good,
and nothing ought to be refused, 1 Timothy 4.4.
especially if it be received with thankfulness: for i^ is land ^^ed unto us by
the Word of God. (...) prayer. The like may be said of (...) Sanctuary of our
God, of the Sab^^ (...) the Sacraments; for unto the (...) things are pure; but
unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their
minds and consciences are defiled, Titus 1.15.

But you affirm, and that peremptorily, that there is more sin committed in
these Twelve Days, than in all the year after, in Drunkenness and Gluttony: And
how are you sure of this? for it is impossible that you should prove this to be
true. Can God be more dishonored in Twelve Days, than in twelve Months?
Although a bare Denial might serve here for a sufficient answer: yet put the
case that many men, being at this time apt and addicted, genio suo indulgere,
to give way to their unbrideled lusts, and disordered affections, in the free
use of God's Creatures, should be excessive in their Eating and Drinking, and
so exorbitant and extravagant in other vain Recreations, and idle Gamings and
Pastimes, that God may hereby be somewhat dishonored, and this blessed time of
his Son's Nativity abused, men a little forgetting the right and proper End
wherefore at first it was instituted and ordained: Yet considering the many
good, and gracious, and bountiful Deeds, that heretofore have been done at
this time, the gallant Hospitality, the free and generous Housekeeping, by our
worthy, noble, and renowned Gentlemen, and our rich, honest, able, and
sufficient Yeomen, by relieving the Poor, helping Widows and Fatherless
Children, clothing the Naked, feeding the Hungry, visiting the Sick, and those
that were in Prisons. Take but a Balance, or a pair of Scales, and lay these
many good Alms-Deeds and Works of Piety and Charity in one Scale, and put the
Evil Deeds that have been committed in the other Scale, and I dare say the good
deeds shall outweigh the bad, Zac. 5.7.
though they be as heavy as massa plumbi, a Talent of Lead. And this which I
have here written, has more probability and likelihood of truth in it, than
that which you affirm, in saying there is more sin committed in these Twelve
Days, than in all the year after. But you had spoken more properly and truly,
if you had said, There are more good Deeds done by some good minded and
charitably disposed Christians, in these Twelve Days, than in all the year
after. Yours is a false assertion, and a gross absurd asseveration: and I
verily think, that you vent it to skar and deterr men from keeping any
Christmas at all, because some ignorant, dissolute, and deboist Fellows do
spend this time idely and vainly in excessive eating and drinking, ryoting and
revelling, etc.

But our pious Ancestors, of famous memory, were so addicted and devoted to the
Reverence, and religious Observation of this Time, that they spent it in a
sober, civil, and careful manner, being thankful to God, and rejoicing in the
Lord, for that ineffable and inaestimable Benefit and Blessing which he
bestowed upon the World at this time; and therefore they were willing and
contented, freely and cheerfully to part with their goods, and impart them to
the poor, in plentiful manner: And this they did for his sake alone, who,
being rich, for their sakes became poor, that so they, through his Poverty,
might be made rich, as the Apostle elegantly expresses it, and sets forth
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, in a most sweet, and gracious, and glorious
manner, 2 Cor. 8.9. But where is our Bounty, or our Benificence? Where is our
Charity, Liberality, and Hospitality, in these cold degenerate and Apostate
times? That witty Saying may here be verified, How that one handful of old
Friendship, is better than an an armful of new Courtesy; For all our Love and
Charity, in these days, is turned into nothing else but mere verbal and
external Complement, so true is that of the Apostle, Tit. 1.16. Men in these
days profess that they know God, but by their works they deny him, and
therefore they are abominable and disobedient, and to every good work,
reprobate.

Answer to the fourteenth Argument.
The fourteenth is this, God blesses His own day, the Sabbath, but has not
blessed this with success.

Int his your ultimum Refugium, you think you have paid it home, and bitt the
ver^ Nail on the head: But, Good Sir, What could you say, If any man should ask
you, Why God has not blessed this day? For it has been proved, that this day
is aequal and aequipollent with the Sabbath; and if he has blessed the one, so
questionless he has blessed the other, and sanctified it, and set it apart,
for a holy Convocation, and thankful Commemoration, of the Birth and Nativity
of his only begotten Son; and that in the 118 Psalm, may fitly and properly be
applied unto it, This is the day which the Lord has made, (i. e.) which the
Lord has magnifyed, and advanced, and fingled out, and selected, for a more
peculiar end and purpose than other ordinary days of the year are; And this
Interpre^ation of the Word, that place in the 1 Samuel 12.5, 6. does well approve
of, and allow it: This is then the day which the Lord has made; yea, this is
the day wherein the Lord Himself was made, says Eusebius Emissenus. Therefore
we will rejoice and be glad in it; Fear not (said the Angel Gabriel to those
Shepherds of Bethlehem), for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy; so
that here good Tidings do attend it, and great Joy does accompany it, which
shall be unto all People: for unto you is born this day, in the City of David,
a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And that the Lord has blessed this day
with success, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets, and their harmonious and
unanimous consents, shall bear me witness. First, That Evangelical Prophet
Isaiah prophesyes of it, saying, Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is
given; Datus ex Divinitate, natus ex Virgin, says Eusebius Emissenus on the
words, excellently; In that he is said to be born, it betokens his Manhood; in
that he is said to be given, it signifies his Divine Nature: The Hypostatical.
Union of both does make one and the same (...), or one Immanuel, (i. e.) God
with us: The Government is upon his shoulder, his Name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace; the Increase of his Government and Peace shall have none End, he shall
sit upon the Throne of David, and upon his. Kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it, with Judgment and with Justice, from henceforth even for ever:
The z^al of the Lord of Hosts shall perform this, (i.e.) his singular Love and
Care for his Elect shall effect it. And does not God bless this day then with
snccesse? and does not the Princely Prophet David also sing of this Alacrity,
and chant it to the Tune of his Harp and Viol, and set forth the happy and
prosperous success of this Day, and the flourishing Estate of the Church, by
the Kingdom, and coming of Christ in the Flesh? The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit
thou at my right hand until I make thine Enemies tpy Foot: stool, in Mat.
22.44. we find that Christ Himself gives the Interpretation hereof, and
shows that this cannot be properly applied unto David, but to Himself; and
this appears by the words that follow in that Psalm, Psalm. 110.1, 2, 3.
The Lord shall send the Rod of thy Power out of Zion. For out of Zion has God
appeared in perfect Beauty, Psalm. 50.2. And from thence, this Rod and this
Power of his shall streth forth it self throughout all the World; and this
Power chiefly consists and stands in the Preaching of his Word; and by this
Rod, and by this Scepter of thy Kingdom, which is a right Scepter, be thou
Ruler in the midst of thine Enemies; thy People shall come willingly at the
time of assembling thine Army in holy beauty, (i.e.) by thy Word, thy People
shall be assembled into thy Church; whose Increase shall be so abundant, so
plentiful, and so wonderful as the drops of the Dew of the Morning; For it is
said, The Youth of thy Womb shall be as the Morning Dew, or (as the ordinary
Reading of the Psalm is), In the Day of thy Power shall they offer thee
Free-will-Offerings with a Holy Worship; the Dew of thy Birth is of the Womb of
the Morning. Which howsoever some Interpret it of the Birth of Christ, yet
Junius and Tremelius do understand it to be innumera illa multitudo electorum
quae comparebit in ecclesia tanquam stillans ros a coele, and sub auroram
depluens, That innumerable multitude of the Elect, which shall be as visible
and apparent, and as abundant in the Church, as the dew which distilleth from
Heaven, and lies on the face of the Earth in the morning; as we know the Elect
elsewhere in the Scripture are compared to the Stars of Heaven, Genesis 22.17
and to the sand which is upon the Seashore for multitude; the Prophet Haggai
has also foretold of these things, speaking of the peace, and plenty, and
glory of the Church of God, that should be by the Kingdom and coming of
Christ: Thus says the Lord of Hosts, says he, Yet a little while, and I will
shake the Heavens and the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry Land; and I will move
all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this
House with Glory, says the Lord of Hosts. The desire of all Nations shall
come; (i. e.) Christ, for in Him are all things that can be desired, and all
Nations ought to look for, and desire Him; and therefore in this sense He is
called Rex gentium, the King of Nations, because all Nations ought not only to
seek and desire Him, Jer. 10.7.
but also to serve Him and obey Him: And does not also the Prophet Zachariah
say as much? For he prophesied much about the time as Haggai did, and was sent
of the Lord to help him in the labor, and to confirm the same Doctrine, even
when the time of the 70 years Captivity, prophesied by Jeremiah, was expired;
and he paralleleth or compares that time of their deliverance from Captivity,
to this happy time of our spiritual deliverance from the thraldom and
Captivity of Sin and Satan; saying, Zach. 9.9. Kejoyce greatly O Daughter of
Zion; shout for joy O Daughter of Jerusalem; Behold, Thy King comes unto thee;
He is just, and having Salvation; He is meek and lowly, Riding upon an Ass,
and upon a Colt the foal of an Ass. And I will cut off the Chariot from
Ephraim, and the Horse from Jerusalem, and the Battle-bow shall be cut off; and
He shall speak peace unto the Heathen, and His Dominion shall be from Sea even
to Sea, and from the River (i. e. from the River Euphrates) even to the Ends of
the Earth. Here is success enough, if we observe it; for His Dominion shall be
from Sea to Sea, that is, from the Red Sea, to the Sea called Syriacum: and by
these places, which the Jews knew well enough, he meant an infinite space and
compass over the whole World. As for Thee also, ( i. e. as for Thee Oh Daughter
of Zion and Daughter Jerusalem) by the blood of my Covenant, ( i. e.) the blood
of Christ, Thou shall be saved; and by this blood I have loosed, or I have sent
forth the Prisoners out of the pit, ( i. e.) not the pit of purgatory, or
Limbus patrum, as the Papists would have it understood; but out of the
bottomless pit of Hell, wherein there is no water; ( i. e.) no Comfort, no
Cooling, no refreshing at all, for they that are there, are always scorched
and tormented in these infernal, eternal, and unquenchable flames without any
hope of ease or end at all, as it may appear by the confession of Dives; Turn
ye then to the strong hold, ye Prisoners of hope, even to Day do I declare that
I will render double unto Thee; that is, double Benefit, and prosperity in
respect of that which your Fathers enjoyed, from David's time to the Captivity,
as some Interp^e^ the place; or, as others think, by double in that place, may
well be understood a double deliverance; not only a Temporal and Corporal, but
a Spiritual and Eternal deliverance; no only a deliverance from 400 years
bondage in Egypt, Act. 7.6.
or from 70 years Captivity in Babylon, but from the everlasting bondage,
Captivity, and Thraldom of Sin and Sarban. Wherefore comfort ye my People,
does your God say by the mouth of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 40.1.
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto Her, that Her warfare is
accomplished, (i. e.) That the time of Her affliction is ended, and that Her
iniquity is pardoned, for She has received of the Lord's hand double for all
her sins, ( i. e.) as some understand it sufficient correction for all Her
sins, insinuating that the Lord will afflict his People no more so long, or so
sharply, because his Loving Kindness has overcome his heavy displeasure; so
says Jerome and Calvin, the word [double] ought to be taken for enough, or
full, as it is used by the same Prophet, or as some interpret it, Isa. 61.7.
double grace for double grief; as Jerusalem had a double punishment, one in
her Soul, another in her Body; so now, she shall have by Christ a double
blessing, vix. in this World Collation of grace, and in the World to come
possession of glory: or a double favor; First, in that her travail is ended;
Secondly, For that her sin is pardoned: or double, that is, as Vatablus and
Arcularius expound it, many benefits, a certain number being put for an
uncertain, (which is an usual Hebraism in the old Testament,) for the
sufferings of Christ are a sufficient propitiation for all her sins, 1 John 2.2.
and for the sins of the whole World: yea, where sin abounded, there grace
super-abounded, says Paul, Romans 5.20. For, that place in Esaias before
alleged, is, a direct prophecy concerning the coming of Christ in the flesh,
and the happy success of this Day, as both Musculus and Hyperius and Calvin do
expound it; and the coming of Christ in the Flesh (you know) is the consolation
of Israel, and comfort of Jerusalem, (for so it is called, Luke 2.25.) and this
comfort the God of all comfort will have proclaimed unto Jerusalem by the mouth
of all his Prophets and Preachers, which have bin since the World began, and so
we find in holy Writ, that he stirred up Daniel, Haggai, Malachi, Zachariah,
Ezra, Nehemiah, and other; (until the coming of Christ himself) who did
always exhort his People, to be of good cheer, and to be of good comfort in
the midst of all their afflictions and tribulations, and still to hope against
hope, as our Father Abraham did: Romans 4.1^
So Zacharias, in his Hymn, opens his mouth, saying, Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, for he has Visited and Redeemed his People, raising up the horn of
Salvation unto us, as he speak by the mouth of all his Prophets, which have
been since the World began; So St. Peter in his Sermon, ad populum, all the
Prophets from Samuel, and thenceforth, as many have spoken, have likewise
foretold of these days; and to Cornelius, that pious and famous Captain of
Casarea, Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, That through his
Name, all that believe in Him shall receive remission of sins: Now with what
face can any man say, That God has not blessed this Day with success, seeing
this Day has produced so many good and gracious effects, glorious wonders, and
these not only in the Earth, but also in the Heavens; for if we will believe
Venerable Beda, it was so, nato Domino, stellae dederunt lumen in Custodiis,
and laetatae sunt; plus namque solit^ luxerrent ei cum Jocunditate, qui fecit
illas, quasi sign is sic conclamantes, Hic est dominus noster and non
aestimabitur alius: The Staris at His Birth did shine more clearly and
cheerfully then their custom was; because their Maker was then born, seeming to
tell us; This is the Lord our God, and we must look for none other. Here
methinks, alluding to that excellent saying in Job, I cannot choose but argue
and infer upon it; Did the Stars of the morning praise him, the wise men of
the East rejoice, and so the Shepherds, and all the Children of God ( i. e.)
the Angels rejoice and sing? Job 38.7. And why then shall we be dumb and
silent? and not break forth into the like Exultation, Jubilation, and
Rejoicing? And have we not a warrant so to do, Psalm. 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord,
Oye Righteous, for it becomes well the just to be thankful; Rejoice in the
Lord always, and again I say Rejoice, Phil. 4.4. Yea, let the heart of all
them rejoice that serve the Lord. Let us then here a little correct our Selves
and recollect our Spirits, as those four leprous men did, who returned from the
spoil of the Syrian-Camp; and say, We do not well, This Day is a Day of good
tidings, and should we hold our peace? For mine own part, let the Leprosy of
those men cleave unto my skin, if it be not as joyful a thing to me to record,
and recount, to commemorate and congratulate the honor and happiness, and
good success of this Day, as ever it was to them to carry the happy news of the
flight of Aram: Rejoice then O ye Heavens, and be glad O Earth, for on this Day
Heaven and Earth were reconciled, and God was made Man to make peace between
God and Man: Rejoice, O Grandfather Adam, for on this Day, that first promise
made unto thee concerning Christ, began to be fulfilled, How that the seed of
the Woman should break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. Rejoice, father Abraham;
for on this Day in thy Seed All the Nations of the Earth are blessed, Genesis
22.18. Rejoice, King David; for on this Day God has of the fruit of thy Body,
set a King upon thy Throne, Psalm. 132.11. Rejoice, ye Prophets of the Lord; for
all your prophecyes on this Day were fulfilled. Rejoice ye that are sick, for
on this Day the Physician of the World was borne. Venit de coelo magnus
Medicus, Qui per totom ubique Jacebat agrotus, says St. Austin. Rejoice ye
Virgins, for a Virgin on this Day brought forth a Son: Rejoice ye Children, for
on this Day the great God became a little Babe: Let all People, Jews, and
Gentiles; Bond and Free; High and Low; Rich and Poor, one with another: Let all
rejoice together, for that He who was in the beginning without any beginning;
for He is that true Melchezedeck, who is (...), having neither beginning of
Days, nor end of Life, Heb. 7.3. And therefore in this sense is Styled an
everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6.
because he is the Author of eternity to all Creatures, for that He who was in
the beginning, before all beginnings, and in a time when there was no time
measured or limited out, Gal. 4.4.
yet in the fullness of time was made of a Woman, and wrapped in
Swadling-Clothes; for that He who (...), Luke 2.7.
the Word became Infans in cunis vagiens, an Infant not able to speak one
syllable; so that He, who was God, did vouchsafe to become Deus nobiscum, God
with us; yea, and to dwell amongst us, appearing in the shape of a Man; for as
the Apostle exellently expresses both his humiliation and exaltation, thus
saying, Phil. 2.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Ipse sese exinanivit (i. e.) as Theodore Beza neatly expounds it, Quasi ex
omni seipsum ad nihil redegit, (i. e.) He that at first made all things of
nothing, did afterward make nothing of Himself for Man's sake, He made Himself
of no Reputation, and took upon Him the form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of a Man; and being found in fashion of a Man, he humbled Himself, and
became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross: Wherefore God also
has highly exalted Him, and given Him a Name which is above every Name, That
at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, of things in
Earth, and of things under the Earth: and that every tongue should confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father. To which God the Father,
and God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, three in one, and one in three; one
immortal, invisible, indivisible, incomprehensible, and one only ever wise
God; be rendered and ascribed (as of due belongs) all Honor and Glory, Power,
and Praise, and Obedience, both now and for ever more Amen.

FINIS.

