TO Our worthy friend Mr. John Musgrave, Prisoner (in the FLEET) for standing
for the equity of the Laws, and the just Liberties and Privileges of the
freeborn People of ENGLAND.
WE cannot but take into consideration, your unjust and illegal imprisonment,
by those who would be counted just, and are chosen and sworn to maintain the
Laws of the Land; but violate the same. It is not unknown to us, the great
pains which you have taken in a legal way, for redress of your Countries
grievances, and how faithfully you kept that trust, delegated unto you by the
well-affected of the Country in general, for your Countries good; but now it
appears their legs are cut off, and they made lame, you being most unjustly,
and ungratefully imprisoned, contrary to the laws of the Land (and that by
those who were chosen and set up by the people, to defend and maintain the laws
in their splendor and purity) which being more fully made known unto us, and
receiving more light, by these following Letters and Petitions coming to our
hands, we thought it a very undiscreet and unworthy thing not to impart them
unto our friends, and to the view of our Countrymen, As a word to the Wise, or
seasonable advertisements to all the freeborn people of England; that they may
seriously consider whether these heavy oppressions, by imprisonment from the
Parliament, inflicted upon their choice and cordial friends, who stand for the
public good, do in the least conduce to the Parliaments honor, or good of the
Commonwealth, or is likely in the least, to reconcile these unhappy
differences; for the putting an end to which, so much money has been gathered,
and so much blood spilt, and so many lives lost, and so many families ruinated,
and Countries wasted? Or, whether this way which is taken to stop the current
of justice, under pretense of doing justice, and imprisoning of just persons
for complaining upon, and witnessing against unjust Judges, and i^^^gall
treasonous proceedings, be not the speediest way to breed more divisions and
increase the Wars, to the utter desolations of the Kingdoms.

The Copy of the Commitment, 25. October. 1645.
Upon M. Lisles report from the Committee, to which the Informations given in
by Mr. John Musgrave, and Mr. Osmotherley, against Mr. Barvis a Member of this
House, was referred, Mr. Musgrave refused to answer such Interrogatories as
were propounded unto him by the Committee, upon the Direction and Order of this
House.

Resolved, etc.

That Mr. John Musgrave be forthwith committed prisoner to the Fleet for his
contemptuous refusing to answer to such Interrogatories as were propounded unto
him by the Committee upon the directions of this House, and that a Warrant do
issue under M. Speakers hand for the Commitment of him prisoner to the Fleet
accordingly.

Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.

By virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, dated 25. October. 1645 These are
to will and require you forthwith upon the receipt hereof, you apprehend the
body of Mr. John Musgrave, and him safely deliver unto the Warden of the Fleet,
there to be kept prisoner for his contempt to the said House, until the said
House take further order therein. And the said Warden of the Fleet is hereby
required to receive into his custody; the said John Musgrave to be kept
prisoner accordingly: for which, this shall be your warrant, dated 27. October.
1645.

WILLIAM LENTHALL, Speaker.

To the Sergeant at Arms, attending the House of Commons, or his Deputy. And
to the Warden of the Fleet, or his Deputy.
I do appoint George Bragg, Gentleman, to be my lawful Deputy to execute this
Warrant, dated 27. October. 1645.

Edward Berkhead, Sergeant at Arms.

The Copy of a Letter written by Colonel Cholmley, who is one of the Committee
for Cumberland, which was sent up by the two Commissioners, Mr. John Musgrave,
and Mr. John Osmotherly, to Mr. John Blaxton, a Member of the House of Commons.
MVCH HONORED SIR.
YOur former known virtues and graces, invites me now to crave your favor and
best assistance in the behalf of the good Cause we have in hand: I have perused
some Articles, and a Petition, to the Honorable House of Parliament, I am
satisfied in Conscience (Sir) they be true, and without the Lord be pleased to
make way for redressing of these poor Countries, they will be lost. Sir, the
Lord who has been pleased to make you a happy Instrument for the good of his
Church, and People, I doubt not, but will guide and direct you in this, that my
self and many others, will bless God for you, in doing good to a People in so
great miseries: I cannot but give you thanks for good already received by your
care, which I leave to the further relation of these Gentleman, I will engage
my life for their fidelity: thus beseeching the Lord to bless you in all your
proceedings, I shall ever be

Yours to serve you, THOMAS CHOLMLEY.
Graistock Castle, 22. Apr. 1645.
The Copy of a Letter of Mr. Richard Crakanthrop, a Westmerland Gentleman of
good worth and credit, and a great Sufferer for the Parliaments Cause; which
Letter was sent to Mr. Blaxton aforesaid, and sent by the same Commissioners
before specified.
SIR,
NoT without cause we are at this time troublesome unto you, and desire your
aid to help our distressed condition which appears by these Articles to be
distressed enough, and truly I am so well with the Government of these
Countries under the Parliament, that I could rather wish my self again in
prison for the Parliament; then behold these great oppressions: never was good
intentions so wronged by bad Governors, as here under the Parliament; for
civil men not looking on the cause, but judgeing by the external appearance,
could not but say, the Government under the Array was much better; and unless
the Honorable House employ men of Conscience in Office that hate
covetonsnesse, this Cause for all this will perish, or the Kingdom: These
parts are ready to ruin one another, by reason of distractions through want of
Government: the Committees have given over to set any Cessement for the forces,
Scots or English amongst us, but suffer Commanders to cesse and levy the same,
which causes nothing but plunders, blood and slaughters, yet do not show
themselves, but encourage the Commons underneath to withstand the Scots by open
war, and to pay no Taxes to them, leaving the country to the Scots to set
their own Cessements, and encourage them, then to withstand by the sword: It is
true, the Scots do much wrong in the country, in the raising of their pay; but
the fault is the Committees, that takes not the Country under protection, but
give them over to the Scots, both to set and raise their own pay: For who could
expect, but that soldiers seeking their pay up and down a Country will do
spoil? Now it is said, their Commission is only to set Taxes, and see them
paid; which if true, then they have neglected their whole Commiission, for they
set none. Sir, I heartily desire your furtherance for a good Commander, that
may be confided in, I could wish Mr. Rigby; for these Counties are more
considerable, then they are held: the Commissioners of Array sent nine
Colonels and their Companies to the Earl of Newcastle from hence, and if they
had been men of courage, the Scots could not have taken these Countries with
those Forces: Besides, the Irish may land forces at two Havens here in
Cumberland, if they be not carefully kept: if which be kept, the Mountains do
so inviron the Counties, that save some straight ways which is easy to keep,
the Enemy cannot enter, but sure with no flying Army, and if well manned with no
Army; I am made unusefull for any service, being through long imprisonment
impoverished, besides that which was left, I could not keep: the Scots took one
horse, and the Colonel that commands in the Country for the Parliament
another, while I was in Prison, but that I had another in the Parliaments
service with a man in Yorkshire which came home, I had had none to have rid on:
Sir, if our business in Mr. Musgraves, and my particular can go on, I humbly
pray your aid, and though I cannot promise satisfaction yet be assured, I shall
always remain

Yours to the uttermost of my power, Richard Crakanthrop.
From little Strickland in Westmerland, the 23. of 4. Mon. 1645.
The Copy of a Letter written by Lieutenant Colonel Bellingham of Westmerland,
sent unto London to Mr. John Musgrave and Mr. John Osmotherly.
SIRS,
I Here send you enclosed a Letter, to Sir Ralph Ashton; it is concerning the
business you have in hand for your Country: I have seen your Articles
exhibited to the House, and intend within few days to add thereunto: this is
therefore to entreat you to take Sir Ralph and Sir Thomas Widdringtons advice
and counsel in this same for your better proceedings, I have writ to Sir Ralph
Ashton. that you shall give him a perfect account of the business you have in
hand; thus not doubting of your care herein, whose greatest care is to finish
this good Work begun, and will always subscribe himself to be

Your real and constant friend, James Bellingham.
From Carlisle this 10. of September. 1645.
The Copy of a Letter, sent to Mr. Speaker of the House of Commons; and read
publicly in the House, with this following PETITION.
Right Honorable;
THE present calamity, and the sad condition of my poor country, now subjected
to the cruelty of a barbarous and merciless enemy, and my present bonds,
whereby I am restrained of my liberty, being now prisoner in the Fleet; for a
supposed contempt against the Honorable House of Commons, necessitateth me at
this time in these straits, to implore your favorable assistance and help for
the regaining my liberty, whereby I may be the better enabled to prosecute the
cause of my country, wherewith I am entrusted, and to whom I am to give an
account of all my proceedings therein. I am very sorry I have in so long a time
effected so little, and fallen so far short of my countries expectation; and
it is no small grief unto me to lie here under the displeasure of the House of
Commons, whose Honor I have ever labored to vindicate against all opposition,
and for whose cause I have cheerfully undergone the loss of my whole Estale,
and outward supportance, living in exile for two years; and most part of that
time in a strange Country, and foreign Kingdom: though I had large offers
made unto me if I would have joined with the Enemy, which my heart abhorred to
consent unto; yet are there such Instruments in my Country, who have not only
acted treason, but by Oath have likewise conspired together, not only to
destroy this Honorable Parliament, but all such as did adhere unto it: These I
say are preferred to the highest Dignities, and places of Trust, and Command in
our Country, even contrary to the very letter of you rown Ordinance, Papists
Traitors and Delinquents, countenanced and protected in their Persons and
Estates, which is the ground of our complaint, and charge against Mr. Barwis,
and J verily believe the occasion of the Enemies drawing thither; and calling
their friends out of Jreland, they well knowing what friends they might expect
there, as the case then stood, all which I discovered the last winter, but was
disregarded, which if timously had been taken into consideration; much evil
that since has fallen upon our poor Country, had been prevented, and a
foreign Enemy had had small hopes and less means to have invaded us; I
humbly desire that you will be pleased to present this my Petition here
enclosed to the Honorable House of Commons. I desire nothing but justice
according to the equity and merit of my cause, and I doubt not, but if J may be
heard, to clear my self of the supposed contempt laid to my charge, for which
I stand Committed, and if J have transgressed against any known law, I desire
I may be brought to my trial at law for the same; and I earnestly request you,
that you would do my Country that favor,) which in justice cannot be denied,
(that we may have liberty to prosecute our charge against Mr. BARWIS and
certain perjured Traitors, and conspirators of whom we complain, who have
been the greatest Instruments of all our Countries miseries through their
cowardice, baseness, and treachery: If we make not our charge good, we shall
not refuse to subject our selves to such punishment, as by the Rigor of the Law
may be inflicted upon us, which we humbly desire may be put in a way of trial,
and I shall ever endeavor to approve my self thankful unto you, and a
faithful Servant to my Country.

JOHN MUSGRAVE.
From the Fleet this 28. Octo. 1645.
A Copy of the Petition, which was publicly read in the House of Commons.
To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in the Commons
House of Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of John Musgrave, prisoner
in the Fleet.
Shows,

THat your Petitioner was in the beginning of these troubles, six months
imprisoned by the Justices of the Peace in Cumberland (most of them being
Commissioners of Array) and was after by a Writ of Habeas Corpus, removed from
Carlisle Goal, and thereupon obtained his liberty; But afterward, for
maintaining the privilege of Parliament, and refusing to submit to the
Commission of Array, was forced to fly his Country, and live in exile for two
years, until the Country was reduced to the Parliaments obedience: In all that
time, the enemy was possessed of your Petitioners whole estate, yet Mr. Barwis
a Member of this Honorable House, was protected in his Estate by the Enemy.

That upon the reducement of Cumberland, by the means of the said M. Barwis,
Sir Wilfride Lawson, Knight, his brother in law, was made Commander in chief
there, and all, or the most of the Delinquents and Papists, protected in their
persons and estates, to the great grief of the well-affected: whereupon your
Petitioner, with others, presented their grievances (a Copy whereof is hereunto
annexed) unto the said M. Barwis; and how the said Sir Wilfride Lawson had
betrayed the Country into the Enemies hand, and how he had acted upon the
Commission of Array; all which, the said Mr. Barwis slighted, and has ever
since endeavored to continue the said Sir Wilfride Lawson in his power, and
(as is conceived) by Mr. Barwis means, made high Sheriff of Cumberland, which
is contrary to several Ordinances of Parliament, he being incapable of any
such office, by reason of the treason he has acted against the State; and
since, by the said Sir Wilfride Lawsons oppressions, the Country is made
disaffected, and the Enemy (as is conceived) encouraged to possess themselves
of that Country, to the undoing of many thousands, and hazard of losing the
whole North, if not timely prevented.

That about a year since, your Petitioner, by petition and articles, did set
forth the miscariages of the said M. Barwis, and the unsettled condition of his
Country, which he delivered to a Member of the House of Commons, and
acquainted diverse others with the same; but wearied with attendance, repaired
home to his Country after 13. weeks attendance.

That after diverse of the well-affected, of Cumberland and Westmerland of good
credit, did solicit your Petitioner, and Mr. Osmotherly, to prosecute a
further charge against the said Sir Wilfride Lawson, and the Commanders and
Committees of the said several Counties, which they undertook for the good of
their Country, and upon their coming hither, the same was referred by the
House of Commons to a Committee; whereof Mr. Lisle is Chairman:

That the said Mr. Lisle before the Committee had further order, then to
receive the several informations and Charges to be given by your Petitioner,
and the said Mr. Osmotherley, would have examined your Petitioner, and gave way
to Mr. Barwis likewise to ask us questions before he would except our several
Charges; and upon our refusal, to answer; having received our papers of
Informations, moved the House to have power to commit us, if we refused to be
examined.

That upon further order of the House of Commons to the said Committee, to
enable them to ask us questions; upon examining, the said M. Barwis was
admitted to be present to ask us what questions he would; though not any of
our friends, nor our selves together, were admitted to be present: whereupon
your Petitioner desired to have the questions in writing to consider of for
matter of Law, but it could not be obtained by your Petitioner; whereupon your
Petitioner desired Mr. Barwis might answer the Charge given against him, and
your Petitioner would be ready to prosecute the same according to Law.

That though this honorable House has passed several Ordinances against
Delinquents, for disabling them to be of any Committee; yet the said Mr. Barwis
being desired by your Petitioner, never as yet informed the Parliament, how the
said Sir Wilfride Lawson, with diverse others of the Committee were Delinquents,
yet continued in their Authorities, which is contrary to the Trust reposed in
him by the Country, and his Oath taken in Parliament.

That your Petitioner has attended six months and more, and yet has not got
his Countries Cause put in a way of trial.

That upon report of the said Mr. Lisle, your Petitioner upon his pretended
refusal to be examined, was committed to the Fleet by the Honorable House of
Commons, for a supposed contempt. Since Mr. Osmotherley his fellow Commissioner
for the county, was arrested by one John Fisher, merely for vexation, upon an
Action of 250. l. and is now prisoner in Woodstreet Counter, though the said
John ^isher well knew.

That the said Mr. Osmotherley was sent to the Parliament by the Country, and
was, and ought to have been protected and privileged from all Arrests of that
nature, while he is so employed by his Country to the Parliament: As others
were, and are still privileged in the like case.

That your Petitioner, with the said Mr. Osmotherley, are still ready to make
their Charge good against the said M. Barwis, and the others complained of, if
they may be admitted to proceed, and have the Witnesses to be produced,
examined upon Oath in open Court, and not privately.

Your Petitioner humbly prays, that he may be admitted to the Bar to answer
for himself, and he doubts not, but to clear himself of the contempt laid
to his charge, That he with his fellow Commissioner may be set at liberty, and
admitted to proceed in the prosecution of their Countries cause: That the said
Sir Wilfride Lawson, and all such as are in Authority, either in Committee, or
other Command there, they being traitors to the State, may be removed out of
all Authority, according to your former Ordinances. That their persons may be
secured; to the end, they may be brought to condign punishment for their
offenses, and such further course taken for freeing the said Counties of the
Enemy, and securing the same for the future time; as to your Honors Wisdoms
shall seem meet.

And your Petitioner shall as in duty bound, pray, etc.

The Copy of another letter from Lieutenant Colonel Bellingham, to Mr. John
Musgrave, and Mr. Joh. Osmotherly, received by Mr. Musgrave, since he came into
Prison.
GENTLEMEN,
I Have seen a Letter which you sent to Mr. Crakanthrop; in which Letter you
declare your selves to be much beholding to my Colonel and my self, and are
glad to see us so well affected: In confirmance of which, I do here really and
freely confess to be a humble and loyal servant to my Country, and the
States of this Kingdom; but most especially to find out such that pretend one
thing and does another: I mean such as be for their own particular ends: for
the Lord he knows, too many, we have at this day remaining in Westmerland and
Cumberland; but I make no doubt, but you in time, will rectify most, if not
all such abuses, I here send you enclosed a petition which was preferred to the
Committee of War at York, which Petition the whole County will manage if
occasion be. I pray you let me hear from you, now and than how the business
goes with you, I think it were not amiss, if you seek for the better
settlement of this County: for God he knows, we are daily and hourly in danger
of the Irish: Thus not doubting of your care herein, I remain

Sirs, Your assured and faithful friend, to do you service. JA. BELLINGHAM.
From Carlisle, this 2. of Novem. 1645.
The Copy of another Petition of Mr. John Musgraves.
To the Right Honorable, the Knights, Citisens and Burgesses in the Commons
House of Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of John Musgrave Gentieman,
now prisoner in the Fleet.
Humbly shows,

THat your Petitioner, together with one Mr. Osmotherley in April last, were
sent by sundry of the well-affected of Cumberland and Westmerland, to present
their grievances to this honorable House, thereby setting forth the treasons,
plots, and oppressions of some now in high Authority there, which by this
honorable House was referred to a Committee, whereof M. Lisle is Chairman, who
would have examined your Petitioner, yet refused to give him any time to advise
for his answer, to the great obstruction of Justice. and Rotul. Parl. 1 M. 4
Number. 1.16. Jacob. the Lord Carew case. Cook. 2. part. ^nst. on Mag. chart. ^.29
(...) 25. E 3. (...) 4. ^8. E. 3. c. 3 ^7 E. 3. c. ^8. ^2. Ed. 3.^.3. (...) E.
3. c. 9. (...) 4. E. 3 c. (...) 4, Cook Inst. (...) par upon ^^agn. Chapter (...)
26. and 29,
which the Law allows, in Cases of Treasons, Fellonies, etc.

That upon the report of the said Mr. Lisle, of your Petitioners pretended
refusal to be examined; your Petitioner, though (b) he was not in that case
compellable to auswer, was the 28. of October. last, committed to the Fleet, by
an Order of this House for a supposed contempt: neither as yet has the said
Committee taken your Petitioners Cause into consideration, the same being again
referred unto them upon a Petition and Letter presented to this honorable
House by Mr. Speaker, the 8. of Novem. last, And the said Mr. Lisle has ever
since absented himself of purpose (as your Petitioner conceives) to retard
your Petitioners proceedings; whereby Justice is much delayed, to the dishonor
of this high and honorable Court of Parliament; and (c) which, tends to the
destruction of your Petitioner by imprisonment, being exhausted, and brought to
great straits by his former, long, and fruitless attendance upon the said
Committee, besides the great grief and discouragements which the well-affected
of his Country have received thereby, doubting what things will come unto, being
thus long delayed and put off.

Your Petitioner humbly prays (in regard he is ready to prosecute his ^arge
sec. legem terrae, if he may have his liberty, and the benefit of the law,
which your Petitioner holds to be his 9. H. 3. c. 29. 5 E. 3. c. 4. 37. Ed.
3. c. 18. Cook par. 2. Instit. Marl. peramb. c. 1.
birthright and best inheritance; the same being that golden Rule and
Meet-wand to measure out e^^^nally Justice to rich and poor alike) that Justice
may be done to your Petioner, according to the great Charter of this Kingdom,
it being the chief-Pillar and Supporter of the Fabric of this Commonwealth,
confirmed by Status. Abolish. Star-ch. 17. Caroli.
This, and so many 34. E. 1. c. 4. Petition Right, 3. Caroli.
Parliaments preserved hereunto, by the effusion of so much English Parl.
Protest. 5. Maii, 1645
blood: to the conservance and defense whereof, this honou^ble Parliament has
tied Us and your Selves by so many Bonds and Commants* Oaths and Protestations,
as your Petitioner hops you will invio^bly uphold still the same; And not
suffer your Petitioner to be any longer subjected to the Co^k Inst par. 2.
Magn. Chapter c 29.
dilatory and partial trial by discretion of any Committee, but may have
Justice administered to him by that precious and ordinary trial, per legem
terrae.

John Musgrave,
6. December. 1645.
The Copy of a Letter written to Sir Thomas Withrington, one of the Burgesses
for Barwicke, from Mr. John Musgrave, prisoner in the Fleet.
SIR,
I Expected ere this to have heard of your report to have been made to the
House, upon the vote passed for Mr. ( Crakanthrope and my self for the great
losses that we have sustained by the Enemy, the Justices of the peace, and Com.
of Array in Cumberland, and Westmerland; I here attended the last Winter, 13.
Weeks before I could get the Petition presented to the House, six months upon
the Commit I waited, before I could get any vote passed upon the Petition,
since the vote of the Committee was made, which you are to report unto the
House, it is now nigh four months; yet nothing done, which makes me much fear
that little good is intended us; and that we shall be made more miserable in
seeking the recovery of what we have lost, then in loosing the same, undergo
more hardship and be brought to greater straits by waiting on you, then by
lying in the Enemies Prisons for you. You know the differring of Justice; in
law is holden for denial of Justice. The Parliament put us to an oath to
maintain the lawful liberty of the Subject, the Enemy because I would not
join with them in the breach of it, and in betraying my Country forced me into
Exile, and seized on that little Estate I had; now again upon the report of
Mr. Lisle after his many differrings and putings off even to the hazard of the
loss of our Country, and if Sir John Brown (as is well known) with his
Scottish forces (upon Cumberland forces deserting him) by his valor had not
prevented it, the Enemy by some of our seeming friends who joyn^ with them, had
without any great difficulty, no opposition being made by Colonel Lawson,
effected their designs in that Country of my pretended refusal to answer
which I did not, but only desired the Interrogatories to advise of before I
answered for matter of Law, which contrary to Law he refused (...) grant me,
though earnestly desired, all which may fully appear by my answer and reasons
given for not answering then to the Interrogatories before the Committee (and
taken in writing by Mr. Lisle himself, before the same Committee, and some
other members of the House, and which was then read unto me) am I again cast
into prison, and condemned thereunto unheard, and (...) greatest fault (if any
be) in this case is my lawful maintenance of our Common Freedoms and my
doubting, and desire to be resolved before I should act that which seemed to me
then, and now I know to be not agreeable to Law; and here I lie in prison for
this, while traitors, and the grand Enemies to the State, and by this means
suffered to walk London streets, even they of whom I complaine^ for which I
cannot but blame Mr. Lisle, being thus injuried by him, and my Country almost
undone, for as Sir Edward Cook well observes, it is the greatest Injustice,
when the Innocent is oppressed under color of Justice; whereby he ought to be
protected: I am persuaded that if that honorable House by whom I was committed
were truly acquainted with my suffering condition, and knew the ground thereof,
they would not suffer me to lie in prison one day day longer; and if they
rightly understood the unsettled state of our Country* and what harm the
neglect thereof has been to both the Kingdoms (this and Scotland) and what
advantage to the enemy, and also what further evil may ensue thereupon; I
believe we had not been so slighted as we have been, neither our Contrymen
had had such just cause to have complained of delay and neglect as they by
their letters to me sent daily do, neither had the adversary, I suppose, been
so born out. As long as honest men are thus slighted, neglected, and kept
under, their just complaints thus delayed and suppressed, while traitors,
Papists and Delinquents be thus countenanced and protected, as those of whom we
complain have been and still are; while the greatest places of trust and
command are conferred on, and continued in the hands of traitors, and the grand
enemies of the State, as has been and now is with us, and still they are kept
up in their authorities; while the Parliaments and the Kingdoms faithful
friends and servants are thus molested, oppressed, and shut up in prisons for
their good affection, forwardness, and willingness to serve the State and
their Country) how can we expect the restoration of our ancient and long lost
liberties? how can we look for an end of these our troubles? while things are
thus carried o^, little peace can be hoped for to this poor and distressed
Kingdom. Let us (...) more cherish the Serpent in our bosom, which having got
strength will again wound us, if not destroy us: I could wish that these
troublers and enemies of our State against whom only I inform, and with whom
I only contend, may no longer be suffered to escape, but may be brought to
condign punishment, according to the Law, and merit of their offenses, lest by
others faults the Parliament should suffer in their credit, lest that it should
be thought the Parliament were offended with us for seeking justice, and
pressing forward our Countries just complaints and grievances, lest it should
be thought the Parliament should seem to justify (or connive) at these their
lawless practices and oppressions (which we are ready in a legal way to make
good according to our charge) by forbearance and sufferance of them For it is a
maxim in Law, Qui non prohiber quod prohibere potest, assentire videtur; [he
that suffers and hinders not that which he may let, is conceived and said in
Law to assent.] Let no such blot lie upon that honorable House; let not the
potency of our adversaries over throw the justness of our cause, neglect us no
more, lest (besides the blame and outcries for justice) you bring ruin upon us
and your selves, by leaving us open to the Irish, which may the sooner invite
Ormond to invade us with his Popish and revolted Forces, having such an easy
entrance, if the same be not prevented. As you tended the good and quiet of the
State, timely provide for this, and have respect to our poor Country; let all
delinquents, traitors, and men disaffected, all such as are tainted with
covetousness, or cowardice, be removed out of all authorities, and the same
put in the hands of confiding men, fearing God and hating covetousness, and
all baseness, such as would not be in the worst of times carried away, or
corrupted through fear, or loss of goods, or hope of preferment, to join
with or submit unto the Enemy, or act in a neutrality, which is holden for
detestable: Neglect of those parts may prove of dangerous consequence; There,
The Ports Whitchurch and VVorkington in Cumberland, open to Ire^and.
and not well elsewhere in the North, may the Irish, and at their pleasure; and
daily are expected there, from thence Digby by conveyance of some of our
English Commanders there (as is conceived) had free and ready passage into the
I Will of Man, and so for Ireland; from thence the Earl of Antrim had like
passage, and way into Ireland, with the Royal Commissions for Cessation of
Arms there, which produced such sad effects in that Kingdom: Montrosse made
his way for Scotland twice that way, to the great loss of that Kingdom, he
invaded Scotland and took Dumfreeze; hence the Earl of Newcastle had his
first rise of his popish Army in the North, and daly supply of Men and Moneys
till the reducement thereof by the Scottish Horse, thence since the reducement
the Enemy in Dublin and the I Will of man, had Cole and Victuals, Here the whole
Gentry are Malignants, Delinquents, Papists, Popish, or base Temporizers; Here
not ten of the Gentry in both these Counties, ^ay I dare say not so many, have
proved Cordial to the State, but have submitted themselves, or acted to and
with the Enemy; Here the Gentry have revolted since the reducement thereof,
more then once or twice. Here will and oppression, reign: more then in any
Country now subjected to the state, so long as the powers and authorities
resides in the hands of such Newtrals, Temporisers, Selfe-seekers, Traitors and
Delinquents, as now it is, the Enemy (though peace for the present were
concluded and settled) yet might upon new and after discontents of a sudden,
endanger the loss of the whole North, by the help of that popish faction in
those parts, who have got in their hands the chief places of trust and command
there, though you had no care nor regard of us, yet for your own good, prevent
this mischeife, the which done may produce (though little considered) the
fruit which may prove to be a well grounded peace to the whole Kingdom;
Though neglect of us, could be no prejudice to the public, which will be of no
small concernment (as I have already shown) yet the redress of our Countries
greevances in common equity ought not to be so lightly passed over, all which
hitherto. (but all in vain, for fourteen months together) have been pressed
on, but by one Committee or other still frustrated; and in Justice you cannot
deny us audience, and an equal trial either at the common Law, or in full
Parliament as to your wisdoms shall seem best for the public, and our
particular good, for that the Law is our common birthright; which we may
without offense (J hope) and do challenge and claim the benefit thereof, and
therefore we have no cause to doubt or be fearful in putting our selves forth,
considering how that general rule in Law, is still in force: Quod curia regis
non debet deficere conquerentibus in justitia adhibenda; That the Kings Court
should never be failing (to such as complain) in the doing of Justice. And of
Courts Judicial, we acknowledge the Parliament supreme, which ever has been,
and I hope still will be the great and faithful upholder of the common Law,
and of the rights and privileges of all the loyal and true hearted freeborne
of this Kingdom; I pray you good Sir, peruse these papers, and Copies of
Letters, the Originalls I have all, except two, which Mr. Blaxston has, to
whom they were sent and deliverea; withal, I would entreat you to present
this my Petition to the House of Commons, Mr. Speaker has seen it, and says
he will speak to it, I could not press him further in respect he had formerly
presented one for me: which was referred to the former Committee, but by Mr.
Lisle (who is the Chair man) suppressed, and I could never hear more of it, the
ground of this my Petition; I hope you will let me understand what you will do
here concerning the whole matter, by this bearer Mr. Hobkins (the Warden of the
Fleet) which has shown me kindness, in his readiness to do me this favor,
if by your means and the Justice of the House I may obtain my liberty, and our
countries cause put in a way of trial without further procrastination; I shall
not be unthankful, but ever rest.

From Fleet Prison this 25 of the 12. month, 1645. Yours to serve and honor
you, JOHN MUSGRAVE.

The Copy of another Letter, written by Mr. Musgrave, to Sir Thomas
Withrington; Burges for the Town of Barwick, and a Member of the House of
Commons.
SIR,
THis day I received my Petition back again with your direction, and advice for
altering the same, and how you would present it to the Committee for Petitions,
for your advice I thank you, yet J cannot dec^^ne my former Petition, nor can
J consent, neither hold I it fit to alter it, in respect that I have sent the
Copy of it into the Country, to inform them how things be, as also for that
I hold it convenient to discover Mr. Lisles unequal dealings both before and
since my Petition presented to the House by Mr. Speaker; seeing he is not
ashamed to do us such wrong: I am not afraid to complain, and make it known,
least by silence I should not only loose my self, but like wise undo my
Country, and the Parliament suffer in both, as touching presenting it to the
Committee for Petitions, they have (I conceive) not power to receive it without
special order from the House, it having refer once to so many Members of the
House, to wit so many of the former Committee, as joined with Mr. Lisle, in
making up that report. For my refusing to answer, under which I suffer; you
know the first charge against Mr. Barwis, though committed by the House to the
Northen Committee whereof you are Chairman, yet upon your report it was ordered
by the House to be delivered back in regard it concerned a Member of the House,
and was not read upon Commitment, which you returned back to me accordingly,
and upon an after order it was referred to another Committee, whereof Mr. Lisle
is Chairman; therefore I cannot expect any fruit to accrue by so doing, only
to the House have I appealed, before whom already my cause depends; who, if
they refuse to bear me for my self and my Country, it is impossible for them
either to understand our right, or be able to do us justice, conisder I pray
you my former Letter of the 25. of this instant month, and let us have no cause
to complain, if I have offended let me be brought to judgment, if no evil be
found in me why am I cast into bond? if for my service, and fidelity to the
State, a Prison must be my Portion* I cannot but say it is a bad reward, I have
purchased for my labor; but I am nothing dejected, but am willing to undergo
more for my Country, and am resolved to abide the worst of extremities, rather
then do any act which may dishoner me or my Family, or unbeseeming the Trust
committed unto me.

Sir, If you will put up to the Honorable House of Commons this my Petition, I
doubt not but my innocence will plead for me, and the justness and
considerablenesse of the cause will procure me audience; and then I fear not
but truth shall prevail in judgment, for which we have hitherto contended. I
desire once more to know your further pleasure, and mind herein; And if you
will do our Country this service in presenting my Petition, it will be not only
to your honor, but (will oblige them unto you, and) I shall ever remain to be

From Fleet-prison, the 29. of the 12. Month. Yours to do you service; JOHN
MUSGRAVE.

To his loving Friend Mr. JOHN MUSGRAVE, in the Fleet; These.
BELOVED,
I Received a Letter from you the first of this Month, I am not a little
troubled to hear the strange occurrents of this present evil age, and am very
sensible thereof; but to hear of your trouble in such a cause does much
perplexe me: that while we go about to our great trouble and charge, to do the
Kingdom and Parliament service, to have our Agents imprisoned, I think no age
could parallel such things; it cannot be but there remains a terrible
judgment to this Nation, which in all probability is not far off: There was
nothing ever persuaded me that the sword shall be short sheathed, then the
expectation I had of the Justice of the House of Parliament; for I thought,
that though the genrrall corruption of manners, in this Nation, did much
provoke the Almighty, yet the Piety, Justice, and Zeal of that House, would
mitigate his Ire; but he that does all things, will turn all to the glory of
his Name, and peace of his people, so often promised by His mouth. I have writ
many Letters every Week or 14. days at longest, for this is the 18. Letter at
least, in all things of good consequence:

For that you say of Colonel Lawson, Mr. Darley and Mr. Blakeston are deluded
with false rumors, for Colonel Lawson never (of all his carriages) behaved
himself worse, upon so fair an advantage to have done the Kingdom service; of
his carriage all men cry out, even his own soldiers: Upon the coming in of
the Enemy into Cumberland, he and Sir Patr. Carwen was in consultation, Carwen
came to Penreth, left his house bravely furnished for the Enemy; Lawson made a
show of gathering the Country, and sent to Sir John Brown to desire his
assistance, who willingly agreed to join with him; yet was Sir John Brown
desired to join with a Partee of his own countrymen, and so keep out an Enemy,
rather then suffer him to enter: So he sent Colonel Lawson 100. Horse,
desiring him to make his best resistance, and that himself would make haste
with the rest of his horse for his defense. But Lawson not desirous to fight,
suffered the Enemy quietly to pass without ever skirmishing with him, to the
great grief of Sir John Brown as you may well perceive, who had refused to join
with his own countrymen to join with Lawson: But seeing it so, he desired
Colonel Lawson to keep the water at Bownes, if in case the Enemy retreated,
and he would after him into Scotland, which he did at the same tide, and fell
upon the Enemy upon Annon Sands with 300. horse only, the Enemy being thought
to be 1600. yet had he good success, slew diverse, and so discouraged the rest,
that they made a retreat back to Bownes, from whence Colonel Lawson was gone,
and had withdrawn his forces 5. miles from Bownes; So the Enemy returning,
found a Company of Dragoons of Colonel Cholmleys sent thither, thinking to
find there Colonel Lawson and his Companies, so they took most of the
Dragoons, their Horses and Arms: Yet it is considerable, the Enemy went over
the Water on the 4. day of the Week at night, and returned the 6. yet had
Lawson in that short time called away his forces. This Relation I had from Sir
John Brown himself, and find it seconded by all men, no man but condemning
Colonel Lawson, no not his own friends. Lawson had here such an opportunity to
have done his Country and the Kingdom service, as never a fitter was offered
to any; Sir John Brown had given them no rest, they were so wearied through
want of sleep, that very many were taken by the Country people, and it was
easy enough for Lawson, if he had had any mind to have taken Digby, Langdale,
and many others, who were forced to take a Boat and go to the Isle of Man. Sir
John Brown told me, he would have a Council of War to pass on Lawson for
this carriage: And if Sir John Brown had not repaired what was amiss, he might
himself have been questioned. Thus much for Colonel Lawsons carriage: Remember
me to Mr. Osmotherley, present my best respects to Colonel L. and to all the
Brethren to whom I am known, my troubles are great for you, but the Lord that
delivered us when we were surrounded with adversaries, will deliver you. The
Brethren in Cumberland greet you, and purpose to send shortly to you. The God
of Peace give Peace unto his Church, and grant you patience.

Westmerl. the 6. of the 12. Month. Farewell. Your Brother in the Lord Jesus;
RICH. CRAKANTHROP.

Die Sabbati, 8. Novembr. 1645.
MR. Speaker acquainted the House, That he had received a Letter from one John
Musgrave a prisouer in the Fleet, with a Petition enclosed: The Letter was of
28. October. 1645. and was read, and likewise the Petition, and was concerning
Mr. Richard Barwis, a Member of the House, and others employed in the service
of the Parliament; And it is thereupon Ordered, this Letter, Petition, and
Papers, be referred to the Committee to whom the Papers formerly brought in
from the Scots Commissioners, and from the said. Musgrave, and Osmotherley,
were referred; who are to take the same into consideration; And also a printed
Pamphlet, entitled, Englands Birthright, and to report their opinions
thereupon to the House.

Hen. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

The Publishers to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, Thou may for thine own information in thy Liberty (as
thou art a Freeman of England) read a late published Book, called Englands
Birthright: And Lieutenant Colonel Lilbornes late Book, called Innocence and
Truth justified; being an Answer to Mr. William Prinnes Book, called the Liar
confounded; but chiefly, weigh seriously his discourse against the Merchant
Adventurers and their Monopoly, which begins in that Book Page 46. and
continues to Page. 62.

And if thou be a Christian, and tenderest the good of thy native Country, or
have an affection to the second Table of Gods Law, the standing for which
Master JOHN MUSGRAVE is now imprisoned; take notice of these premises, and if
thou doubt of the truth of any thing therein, thou may repair to that
Gentleman, who is able enough to make good what he has said; yea, and to show
ten times more then what is here related. He is a worthy Christian, and not so
desirous of his liberty, as he is for the prosecution of his Countries cause,
in which he is so faithful and courageous for the weal, freedom, and safety
thereof; and is no wise a betrayer of the trust reposed in him, which (as we
know by woeful experience) too many are, so that he is a sufferer merely for
well doing, and the cause is Gods, for which he suffers. For GOD is the God
of the second Table of his Law, as well as of the first; and except men keep
the second, how can they keep the first? If a man loves not his neighbor, how
can he love God? Stand therefore for the second Table of Gods Law, and
encourage those that do; else thy religion is but vain, and so will not avail
thee before that God, who (when necessity requires) says, I will have mercy,
and not sacrifice.

A WORD TO THE WISE, is sufficient.

FINIS.

