MANCHESTERS RESOLVTION against the Lord STRANGE.

WITH The PARLIAMENTS endeavor and care for the prevention of such sad
calamities that may ensue upon the Nation, by their several VOTES, Resolved
upon in the House of Peers, and in the House of Commons, for the securing the
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.

John Brown Cler. Parliamen.

Also a remarkable passage concerning His Majesty's blocking up of Hull.

July 12. London, Printed for A. Coe, 1642

MANCHESTERS RESOLVTION AGAINST THE LORD STRANGE.
SUch are the several distempers and distractions of this Kingdom, that
former ages could hardly parallel the like. Every day produces heavy news, and
sad novelties of wars, and rumors of wars, proceeding from the Malignant
Party of this Kingdom, such as are open and professed enemies to the peace of
great Britain; and such (I am sure) as bear no good will to Sion, nor to the
tranquillity of Jerusalem. What heinous, and never the like heard of insolences
they have already acted? what impudent affronts they have offered the Kings
Majesty, and his good government? what horrid plots and hideous conspiracies
they have contrived and attempted, both by Foreign invasion and domestic
insurrection, the history of these times does sufficiently testify.

The great Council of the King and this Kingdom (the high and honorable
Court of Parliament now assembled) have been credibly within these few days
informed of 8000. men, which are speedily to be sent from France and Spain
toward the Northern parts: What the designs of those two Kings are, none can
as yet tell; God only knows, and we may all certainly suppose that they do
intend no good to this little Island of ours: They (being of another Religion)
have been heretofore, and will be still adversaries to us, and emulators of
our prosperity. Besides these, the two Houses have had intelligence of late of
Arms and Ammunition to be transported to New Castle, with many Captains and
Cavalliers (who are shrewdly suspected to be the Malignant Party) whose
designs have been malevolent, and (it is much feared) will be little better
toward the peace and welfare of the Kingdom of England, and this City of
London.

There has been likewise a Report made to the upper and lower House of
Parliament, how that the Popes Nuncio has gone about to raise forces for the
aforesaid designs; and to that end, that he might effect, and the better
accomplish his attempts, he has solicited the two Kings of France and Spain
to lend the King of England four thousand men a piece. There has been
likewise a Report made (and it was in a Letter sent from Holland, which was
read in the House of Commons) that the Queens Majesty had provided certain
Ships laden with Ammunition, with a purpose and resolution to go in them
toward the North: As also the Lord Digby that was impeacht by the Parliament,
of high Treason, with Master Piercy (the Earl of Northumberlands brother)
Master Termine, and diverse others that run away the last year, are all a
coming over (as they say) with a great Fleet from Denmark. And (if Fame be
true, and we may give credit to a printed Pamphlet which this day came forth)
there have been strokes given, and bullets shot here in England, which is
lamentable to consider that there should be Civil Wars at this time amongst
us. Upon the fourth day of this instant Month of July, there was a skirmish
between the Lord Strange and the Inhabitants of Manchester in Lancashire; the
occasion whereof was (as that Book makes mention) through the Lord Stranges
Resolution to take away their Magazine by force, having received for that
purpose many forces from York. It Is very strange, if this be true; I wish it
may be false; if it be not, I am certain it is an ill omen to the peace of
England, and does prognosticate no good tidings to the City of London. If this
be the beginning of Civil War, God knows (and no mortal but he) when the
ending will be: When that dreadful time is once come (as God forbid it ever
should) many a weak wife will be husbandlesse, and many a poor child
fatherless: Then will be mourning and lamentation in our Cities and Countries,
many Rachels mourning for their children, because they are not: Many thousands
will then lose their lives before that this Kingdom be agine settled in peace.

A Civil War will tear in pieces our flourishing Kingdom, be a means for
the invasion of a foreign foe, exposing us to the fury and derision of our
enemies, to the pity and deploration of our friends. Bellum Dei fl^gellum,
war is the scourge of God; it will quickly bring a people and Nation to
ruin, vastation and desolation; we have had woeful experience of the miseries
of war. Dulce bellum in expertis. If war be sweet, it is to them that are
ignorant of it. No man truly knows the malignity and cruelty of war, but
those only that have felt and tried it: What a havocke has the Sanguinian hand
of war made in the Christian World? How it has enervated the strength,
vigor and sinews of whole Kingdoms, the direful and sad Tragedies of
Germany, and still bleeding Ireland, do evidently declare and make known what
a lamentable story war is: The very charge and continual cost of maintaining
two Armies will exhaust the wealth and treasure of three Kingdoms. Of this we
have had a dear example in the late skirmishes of Scotland.

After the pacification w^^ concluded between the two Kingdoms, it cost
England (...) then a million of pounds. And such is the vast expe^^^ (...)
^^^^^aining two Armies, that if they be once on foot here (...) Kingdom,
either a sudden encounter will destroy one o^ (...) the keeping them both will
destroy the whole Kingd^^^.

These premises co^, and the present state of this Kingdom seriously weighed,
we have great grounds of strong fears. And for this cause, that wise Senate
our hopeful and happy Parliament have taken into their sage and grave
consideration the present condition of this tottering and distracted Kingdom
and Nation, and finding it to be in such a pitiful predicament as it now is,
they have in their indefatigable endeavors against all oppositions of the
malignant party, and in their conscionable care for the preservation of this
Kingdom, given special order to the right honorable the Earl of Warwick,
Admiral of his Majesty's Navy Royal, to intercept and stop the passages of
all those that shall at any time present or future, transport or cause to be
transported any manner of Arms or Ammunition, Powder or Shot, Furniture,
Victuals, Commanders and Soldiers from Rome, Venice, Paris, Holland, or any
further or nearer places.

The wisdom of prevention (we all know) is beyond the wisdom of remedy; and
that great Council well knows, that it is better keeping out of danger, then
getting out of danger. And therefore with an unanimous consent all aiming at
the peace and happiness of this Land for the prevention of the sword, which is
now brandished over our heads, they have settled the Militia, and settled the
Kingdom in such a posture of defense, as by their several Votes resolved upon
in both houses of Parliament does here appear for the safety and security of
the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales.

Several Votes resolved upon by both Houses of Parliament, concerning the
securing of the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales Resolved upon the
Question by the Lords in Parliament, nemine contradicente.
THat the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the safety and
defense of the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, is not any way
against the Oath of Allegiance.

That the several Commissions, granted under the great Seal, to the
Lievtenants of the several Counties are illegal and void.

That whosoever shall execute any power over the Militia of this Kingdom, and
Dominion of Wales, by color of any Commission of Lievtenancy, without consent
of both Houses of Parliament, shall be accounted a disturber of the peace of
the Kingdom.

Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament.
THat the Kingdom has been of late, and still is in so evident and imminent
danger, both from enemies abroad, and a Popish and discontented party at home;
That there is an urgent and inevitable necessity of putting his Majesty's
Subjects into a posture of defense, for the safeguard both of his Majesty, and
his People.

That the Lords and Commons, fully apprehending this danger, and being sensible
of their own duty; to provide a suitable prevention, have in several Petitions
addressed themselves to his Majesty for the ordering and disposing of the
Militia of the Kingdom, in such a way as was agreed upon by the wisdom of
both Houses, to be most effectual and proper for the present Exigents of the
Kingdom, yet could not obtain it, but his Majesty did several times refuse
to give his Royal assent thereunto

Ordered that the House of Peers agrees with the House of Commons in this
Proposition.
That in this case of extreme danger, and of his Majesty's refusal, the
Ordinance agreed on by both Houses for the Militia, does oblige the people, and
ought to be obeyed by the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.

That these shall be the Heads of a Declaration.

That such persons as shall be nominated Deputy-Levtenants, and approved of by
both Houses, shall receive the commands of both Houses, to take upon them to
execute their Offices.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that these several Votes
shall be forthwith Printed and Published.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

A true Relation of some certain passages between his Majesty and the Town
of Hull.
SIR John Hotham through the care of that trust imposed upon him by the right
honorable the Houses of Parliament concerning the Town of Hull, has
fortified it so, and has floated the water four miles about the said Town
for the defense of it against any that shall oppose it. His Majesty thinking it
to be a disturbance to his good Subjects, has besiedged it with five thousand
men, besides he has planted Ordnance, so that there can be no passage to it by
Sea or Land: And it is thought that it will be rendered up because they will
not be able to subsist long for want of provision.

FINIS.

