Multum in parvo: OR, A SUMMARY NARRATIUE (Not hitherto revealed to public
view) on behalf of Prisoners captived for Debt, and of all concerned Natives:
Faithfully extracted out of the Fundamental Common Law of this Nation, as well
in its Original unalturedpuritie and genuine sense, as in recytall of and
relating to the abusive practice of diverse Innovated Laws since repealed,
repugnant to the Great Charter (being the Abstract or Compendium of the
Common Law, and of the peoples Birthrights, Liberties, and Privileges)
confirmed by above 30 subsequent Acts and Statutes, Parliamentall in force and
unrepealed (which unfold (velamine levato) the misprision and illegallity of
arresting, outlawing, and imprisoning the Body for Debt. Now in these opportune
Times, (professing Reformation and Regulation of the Laws and general
Grievances) presented (for timely redress) to the clement propitious
consideration of His Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL, His Right
Honorable the Counsel of State; and others in Authority; in the pensive Vanne
and mournfullest March of public grievances and calamities, no sorrows being
equivalent to these.

LONDON: Printed for J. H. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchance in
Cornhill.

1653.

Observations Legal.
BY the Fundamental or Common Law equally composed and digested between
Prince and People, Creditor and Debtor, the body or person of man is exempt
from Arrest, Outlawry and Imprisonment for Debt, as well before as after
Judgment, and the Debtors Lands from being extended in Execution, the Common
Law knowing no such course of personal Imprisonment, except in Criminal
Causes or Trespasses committed with Force and Arms: it having bin so resolved
by all the Judges of England, as appears in Sir William Herberts Case cyted
in the Lord Cooks third Reports.

That neither in Process or Execution for Debt any Capias did lie against the
body, this sage Judgment and result being derived and rightly grounded upon the
Law of the Great Charter, Cap. 29. which does caution and provide, That no Free
man shall be taken, imprisoned, or outlawed, but by the Law of the Land then in
use. Magna fuit quondam magnae reverentia Chartae. The manifest legall-motives
hereof were: 1. In respect that by positive Law, the Goods Chattles, and
profits of Debtors Lands, are sovert and liable to these two coercive Writs in
force, (that is to say) A Fiery Facias against the Debtors Goods, and Chattles,
and a Levary Facias against the profits increasing bpon the Lands of the
Debtor, until satisfaction of the debt and damage recovered.

So there is no positive Law for issuing the Capias or Exigent against the body
or person in mere civil causes.

Further Inducives of these provisionall Laws probably were.

1. First to the end, that the creditor might at his own election be rightly
secured and satisfied his just debts, where the same is properly due and
recoverable in the Debtors Estate real or personal, there being no other
means cogitable and consistent with Law and Reason for satisfaction of Debts
and Demands pecuniary; the Body, Blood, Indignity, Thraldom, and precious
Liberty, and Life of Man, being an inconsistent illegal pledge or security for
debt.

2. To the end, That the person or body of man, being a participant living
Member of the common wealth, may not be severed and secluded from it as a
withered branch, by thraldom and incarceration for debt at the insatiate
vindicture humor and passion of merciless malevolent creditors, enemies to
humane-moderation, it being incongruous petulant arrogance in them to exercise
and inflict such barbarous cruelty and domination over their debtors their
even-christians, whether solvent or insolvent, concerning any usurious penal
or pecuniary matters; violence extorted profit, by ruin or damage of others
being Turpe lucrum, a vile ignominious Jewishgaine.

3. To the end, That the body or person might always remain at liberty to
exercise and intend the necessary affairs and accomodations of life and
livelihood for support and subsistence of themselves, their Wives, Children,
Families, and Vocations.

4. To the end, That the body or person might be constantly in free readiness
and capacity according to their best faculties and qualifications, to serve
their native Country, either in Peace or War, as useful Members thereof,
and the Commonwealth not be surprised of that right and privilege, and the
natives untimely bereft of humane dignity and all consolations of life, through
the deteiner and restraint in the living Sepulcher of a Prison, and by that
means become disesteemed, like telluris onus et inutile pondus, an
unprofitable burden to the earth, and a Map of misery to himself, folded after
the fancy and furey of mavevolent cruel creditors.

5. To the end, That the necessary approved Calling, consonant to the creators
a wfull-ordinance imposed on lapsed man, to earne his living sudore vultus by
industry and labor, principally consisting in seasonable acting and advancing
tillage and agriculture, (not to be effected without toil and sweat of the
most sternuous laborious rurall-people) might not by reason of personal
restraint for Debt, be intercepted and discouraged in their painful endeavors
for their own and the common utility and tillage approved by God and man, be
impeached or suffered to decay to the helpless, ruin of the enthraled Debtor,
and all his and the unspeakable prejduce of the common wealth.

6. To the end, That neither any Vocation, Manual or Mechanike Art, Artist,
Trade, Merchandise, Mystery, or Manufactory, (being as the vital pulses,
nerves, and ligaments, which cymment and secure the existence of a
well-composed commonwealth, might not in any wise be dismayed diverted or
frustrated of their expectations, callings, and credits, at the will of the
creditor, and the same become fruitless by reason of personal captivity for
debt, not terminary in any year or time of Jubilee, albeit the common Law has
(as aforesaid) prescribed and providently provided for the creditors
satisfaction of Debts and Demands pecuniary by and out of the debtors Estate
real or personal.

7. To the end, That those excellent impartial Lawmakers, might declare
themselves sensible of the divine Laws, Fiats, and Santions in that behalf,
and that man's privation of that perdulce bonum, precious liberty fatally
opposite and destructive to the prerecited principles and inducements, nature,
reason, religion, the propagation of commonwealths, and the choicest faculties
and felicities of life.

The Petitioners further remonstrate, That these provident propitious Laws for
the personal freedom of the people concerning debt, did flourish and continue
in violate, the space of two hundred and twenty years, after the Norman
conquest, till the thirteenth year of Edw. the first, by the Statute of West.
minster 2c. 11. the first capias and process of Outlawry was introduced in
formality and sucgestion, merely concerning particular persons, presupposed by
that Statue to be criminal, fugitive, fraudulent Accomptants, but really and
intentionally, as seemed by the sudden sad concequence innovated paulatin not
visibly at once, but by degrees to invade and swallow up the peoples
privileges and innumities, for in the face or heels of that capias and
process of Outlawry, by the eighteenth branch of the same Statute, an Elegit
was added against the moyty of the Debtors Lands, being never before liable to
Execution either upon Judgment or Recognizance.

That about 60 years after, and 280 years and upwards, after the Norman
conquest, Anno 25 Edw. 3. by a very short, sharp, and severe Law, the like
Process was granted in Debt as in Account, and this was the first fatal blow
which wounded the Great Charter, and struck at the foundation of the peoples
Liberties, yet it is worthy observation, that there neither was, or indeed
could be framed or invented any preface or introduction to manifest or express
any reason, cause, or motive, to gloss or countenance that innovation,
mutation and mutilation of the Great Charter, and peoples personal freedom
concerning debt.

Anno 42. Edw. 3. The same King and Parliamentall counsel advisedly pondering
the sad consequencies of that former cruel Act of the 25 of his reign (having
been existent about eighteen years) did abrogate and repeal the same,
together with the Mother in law Act, or Parent which had nursed that degenerate
monster, by some reserved State policy (totally if it were possible) to
neneruate and exterminate the memory of the Grand Charter and legal
Privileges of the people, both root, branch, and stem, before that Act of
Grace, of the same King restored and revived it, with the peoples Liberties,
thereby explaining and declaring all precedent or subsequent Acts, tending to
the violation or infringing the same to be void and null, so una eademque manus
vulnus opempue tulit, the same hand that gave the wound, recured it.

That nevertheless, that Capias and Process in debt as in account, relating
indefinitly a like to the universality of the people, they were promiscuously
and incongruiously included and comprehended amongst the sort of those
impeached fraudulent fugitive Accomptants, being probably some few
inconsiderable number; albeit the entire Class of the people were neither
Receivers or Accomptants to any, and yet by reason of that mistake or
misconstructions were severed, scattered, and chased away as chafe or dust
before the wind, and (ex improviso) bereaved of their precious liberty and
freedom, without any distinction of quality or degrees.

That notwithstanding, the then Peers and Nobility (as is probable) either by
reason of their dissaslent or interposition against that destructive innovated
Act of 25 Edw. 3. or in respect of those Arcana Imperii (unsafe to contrevert)
or of some other indulgent caution or connivence, did continue and enjoy their
personal freedoms and privileges, from arrest and imprisonment for debt, (as
of old) along the various intervalls and intervemencies of Time and Government,
until the late Parliament eclip sed their personal Privilege, Peerage,
Votes, and Suffrages.

That during that short chasme or space of Time, wherein that inniovated Act of
25 Edw. 3. had bin vigent and excercised, that dulce venenum or sweet poison of
lucre exhausted from wealthy wilful Creditors, and drilled or extorted from
imprisoned or bayled Debtors, had so enchanted or infested the a varitious a
petites of some eminent persons, otherwise grave and judicious; and likewise the
covetuous desires and apprehensions of some then practick Attornyes,
Under-Sheriffs, Prison-keepers, Arresting-Bayliffs, and other Officers and
Agents then newly elected and actuating in City and Country, to pursue and
perplex as well solvent as insolvent debtors. That those wily craftsmen
(unwilling to relinguish that Golden gain, and spoil) so cunningly and
cautiously contrived that Spyderlike Web, to catch and ensnare the wrongfully
dispriviledged people: That the same usurped illegal course and proceedings
for Arresting, Outlawing, and Imprisoning the body for debt, became a constant
cruel practice and custom amongst them; and it is humbly offered to your
prudent considerations, whether or no partly by reason of the supernumerary
swarms and swervings of some covetous modern titulary Atturneyes, and
illiterall ignorant Soliciters, and other inconsiderable Agents (who like Wasps
or Hornets blast and venom many causes and clyents they grasp or seize on)
some pestilent or more pernicious spirit then those of past ages do not still
range and rage amongst us; animating factious people to undertake impertinent
litigious Suites, and wilful wealthy Creditors to exercise tyranny to the
life, against solvent or insolvent debtors, under color of the said abusive
practice and custom.

The Petitioners humbly conceive, that no illegal innovated practice or
custom, can be so ancient and authentic as law, neither ought any
inconsiderate inadvertence or misconstruction of law, though flourished with
specious splendid pretenses, (or shadowed and obscured under the cloud or false
courtaine of ample antiquity) to be fancied and admitted to create or approve
that to be Law, which revera is not law, but e contra (as in this distressed
case) a mere usurped abusive practice and falacy opposite unto, and unwarrant
by any just incorrupt law, equity, sense or conscience.

For these, and the precedent movies, the Petitioners humbly hope and beseech
further, That your Excelency and Honors, will think meet and declare,

1. That all the said abusive usurped practices, customs, and manifold evil and
destructive effects, in any wise preceding or proceeding by that means, may
henceforth be abolished, cease, and determine, together with all relation,
force or use of those obsolete pernicious Acts, from whence they have rudely
and violently flowed (without ebb or abatement) as from vaste streams poluted
and consisting of many corrupt and troubled waters.

2. That you Wisdoms (having elected for your Objects, the most excellent
ends of Reformation, and Regulation of the law, and insufferable encroached
practice and abuses thereof) will vouchsafe to declare, That the Great Charter
being (as aforesaid) the Epitome of the law, rightly distinguishing between the
then regal legal prerogative power, and the Subjects Rights and Privileges,
together with all the affirmative laws and Statutes for maintenance,
ratification, and establishment thereof, and of the peoples liberty may
remain and continve inviolably in force, the rather for that it does legally
and clearly appear thereby, and especially by the Act of 42 of Edw. 3. That
all repugnant Statutes in any wise infringing the Great Charter, or the peoples
liberties, or which gave the Capias or Exigent in debt as in account, to be
repealed, abrogated, and held for null and or none, they being indeed the
murthering-peeces or engines wherewith the sly and wily Engineeres of those
times, durst and did attempt to batter and invade the liberties, peace, and
tranquillity of the people.

3. That the fundamental primitive laws of this land, being the primitive
results of the venerable conscript lawmakers, who deservedly enjoyed the palm
and priority in compyling apt and equal laws for steering and regulating
Prince and people from swerving astray to the right hand or the left, may
continue as things sacred andinviolable; and the pre-eminence and meliority of
their judgments who made them not suffer eclipse, but that the interpretation
thereof, in their original genuine sense, being as the virgin-voice or Oracle
of the law may be dureable and permanent to posterity, all inter accidents or
innovated practices, pretenses, and evil customs whatsoever to the contrary
notwithstanding.

The divine innocense and verity it self, having thus differenced custom from
truth. Ego sum veritas, non consuetudo. I am Truth, not Custom.

4. Finally, that it is merely the innovated, injurious, evil practices and
customs, relating to void repealed Acts, exercised and intruded against the
prerecited provisionall Common Common laws, Magna Charta, and other unrepealed
Acts in force, against the laws divine and humane, which does beget and
multiply these grievances and crying complaints which the Petitioners and all
therein concerned humbly pray may be forth with regulated and redressed, as
your prudence and piety shall seem meet, unto whose benignity and goodness
herein, they prostrate and present the same, with their lowly Petitionary
Request hereunto annexed: Of which favor they presume the rather for that the
timely rectification and reformation of this general grievance will be
acceptable in the sight of God and all pious minded people, and probably
silence and bury in Oblivion, many other crying Grievances derived from this
occasion, as the Petitioners can manifest whenever themselves, their
Counsel, or Agents shall be appointed personally to attend and be heard viva
voce in your Honors presence, and admitted by further additionall inducement,
or otherwise to defend and maintain their humble proposalls on behalf of
themselves the concerned people, and the true inadulterous law on that behalf.

To His Excellency the Lord Genesis CROMWELL, the Right Honorable Counsel of
State, and others designed for regulation, redress, or abolution of public
Grievances. The submissive Petition of prisoners captived for Debt, some upon
feigned, false, and unjust Actions and pretenses; many willing to pay their
just debts, according to their ability without fraud; and others miserably poor
and altogether insolvent.
Humbly shows and remonstrateth as by their motives annexed, they have showed
and remonstrated.
THat by the Fundamental Common Law, and the clear intendments thereof, and
of Magna Charta re-confirmed and re-established by above 30 subsequent
Parliamentall Acts or Edicts in force and unrepealed, the body or person of man
is exempt from Arrest, Outlawry, or Imprisonment for Debt, inrespect of the
provisionall priopitious laws and reasons in the said motives or inducements
expressed further, which may be more amply illustrated by additionall motives
and reasons in refutation of any opposition or obstruction: In which Case the
petitioners beseech that by themselves, their Counsel or Agents, they may be
heard viva voco in humble defense and maintenance of their proposulls and
requests: the said grand and gracious Charter containing the breviary or
Abstract of the indulterate Laws and Sanctions, being relative to and
reciprocal between the Prince and people, Creditor and Debtor, plaintiff and
defendant, signifficantly and exactly differencing and distinguishing the
legal regent dignity, power, pre-eminence, and prerogative, by what style of
apellation soever; as also, the peoples protection, privileges, innumities,
and personal freadome, the benefit whereof and of the just laws and respective
powers and qualifications of the same, being the prisoners and peoples
inseparable inherent legal right and birthright, as by the said motives is
more fully explained.

That the petitioners crying cares and calamities do still still seem more and
more to increase rather then be diminished and alleviated, representing to
their dismayed minds, and disconsolate apprehensions, those dangerous woes of
the desolate Jews when designed to sudden slaughter and destruction, unheard
and unredressed, until faithful discerning Mordecay, sensible of the general
desolation and ruin intended, did bewail, unfold, and impresse the true sense
thereof, into the intelect of gracious Hester, and that she upon
mature-perpensation of the sad consequencies which might befall, despising all
dangers and dissiculties, resolved to intercede and did prosperously prevailed
with the Persian Justice, clemency, and benignity, (though a pagan) to redress
and recall that cruel bloody Edict, which otherwise had ex improviso, become
inconsideratly and fatally destructive to the entire class or race of the
Jews, wheresoever dispersed throughout his ample Dominions.

That the pensive petitioners, in like manner humbly hope and implore, that
their ceslant sights and echoes of their moanes, lamentations, and lowly
intercessions for timely redress of inexplicable sorrows, may become a like
prosperous and prevalent with your public Spirits and intendments, like
deserving mordecaies and patriots of your countery, and of the peoples
birthrights and personal privileges and immunities; to avert, rectify, and
redress these grievances, you having the apt opportunity under God, to
propituate them, and exchange this their sad condition to that which may render
them happy and you famous to all posteriry.

That in their just and humble confidence and expectations, the petitioners
pray as by their humble motives they instance and beseech.

That it may seem meet to your Excellency and all concerned, (in relation to
the present Government, regulation of the Law, and redresses of crying
Grievances) forthwith to settle and secure the premises and the prisoners and
peoples pristine rights and privileges as to your Wisdoms shall seem meet,
by means whereof the original authenticke course and proceedings punctually
prescribed and intended by the Law and lawmakers on behalf of Creditors for
recovery of their just debts, may be hereafter observed and prosecuted against
the Estate real and personal of the debtor, in pursuance of the said
warrantable provisionall circumspect laws ordained for the creditors
satisfaction, and not against the body.

And finally, that the Petitionary prisoners for debt, may be speedily enlarged
and discharged from their personal imprisonment, and none hereafter imprisoned
and enthralled concerning debt, under color or pretense of any repealed,
cruel, illegal, void, or voidable Act or Statute, or of any abusive innovated
custom or practice thereof, or thereunto relating or deriving, or of any other
recent or new-devised or invented arbitrary fancy or proposal, sinisterly
contrived or insinvated by cruel malevolent Creditors for debt, for the most
part not due or justifiable; such Creditors esteeming slander and calumination
(for their own ends) against the oppressed Debtor, with what cruelty and
injury else their malice can multiply against them neither to be sin or
injurious, albeit the same is odious and abominable in the sight and light of
Truth, Nature, Reason, Equity, Sense, Conscience, and all laws Divine and
Humane.

And the opportune extending of this Justice and Benignity for alleviating the
cares of the concerned; and the rectification and reformation of this important
grievance, and restoring the prisoners, and concerned Natives, birthrights,
liberties, and personal privileges and protect will be indelibly impressed in
their grateful memory, until time cease to be, which is the unfeined prayers
and invocations of the petitioners.

FINIS.

