A WIPE for ITER-BOREALE WILD: OR, An Infallible Cure for the Gout.
GOUT! I conjure thee by the powerful names
Of Monk and Brown, and their victorious fames,
To tell me (speak no doubt thou can: speak, come,
Gout so called in his Letter to Calamy.
A Presbyterian Bishop cannot be dumb)
Why did thou shackle the Poetic feet
Of thy loved Master, when it was most meet
They should be jogging. Can Monk and Brown die,
And Wild be tame? not write an Elegy?
Gout! you are ungrateful: Have so soon forgot
Who made thee Bishop, did he make thee sot?
See Presbyterian Humility;
Even their Distempers Governors must be,
A Gout installed a Bishop! hence we know
Who you had rather should be at your toe.
If thou art Bishop, Gout, speak, what do ail?
Bishops the Churches loss use to bewail.
Gout! keep thy place; if thou can live at ease:
Pity a Bishop should leave's Diocese.
Monk, Brown die unlamented! sad disasters!
See, see how Presbyterians love their Masters:
You that at Public Triumphs sowrely look,
That in your faces even without a book,
A Let'ny may be read; dare you not cry
Good Lord deliver's when such men do die?
That Conventicles must go down it is sign,
When Conventiclers have forgot to whine.
Shall Englands Trusty, Loyal General dye?
And go to's grave without a single sigh?
When Calamy, Rebellious Trump'ter shall
Whole volleys have discharged at's Funeral:
This seems not fair play, Wild, even to us boys,
But you like us love them that make most noise.
Hold! Hold! this is not all: this proud withstander
Cannot choose but hate Monk 'cause he was Commander
Stay furious Muse: Let Us breath a little; come,
We'll in again by-th' help of Haw or Hum.
Hum, Haw, nay stay, what shall we hold forth next?
We'll keep to our business, though we leave our Text.
But to the matter: Wild it is wisely done,
No people yet adored the setting Sun.
To Heathenish customs Saints cannot conform,
When we are calmest, then is their Cue to storm.
We applaud men when they go off the stage;
Witness Iter Boreale.
They when they enter, slighly to engage
Them to their party: Such perverse Comedians
Are all these Crab-like, cross-grained Presbyterians.
Monk! Iter Boreale.
that one Monosyllable out shines
Plantagenets bright name, and Constantines.
They have the art to time things: this was wrote
When George came newly out of the arms of the Scot.
Oh then Wild thought for Kirk he would declare,
And thought he should b' a niggard did he spare:
But mark the end, George proves an honest man,
And's hated by this Presbyterian.
For did he love him, now is a time to show it,
Monk's death's a subject that can make a Poet:
Wild! of that Syllable why now never a word,
The reason's plain; Division it abhorred.
If a recanting Penitent but part
With His errors, saying, Mines a broken heart;
Against him Wild writes: Why? Lee does hardness want,
He cannot be precious if no Adamant.
If George deserved no Elegy* from thee,
Yet shall the Duchess thus rewarded be*
She that from top to toe thee clothed; is it meet
Thou should not give her one poor winding sheet?
Can not be Wild, but thou't be also rude?
See (people) Presbyterian Gratitude.
But stay, the Conscientious Sister-hood
Perhaps do say, Sweet Doctor't cannot be good,
For to revive a dead Monks memory,
We think it savours much of Popery.
Most Sister-like advice! Are these your fears?
Yet sure Brown's name sounds sweet in the Sectaries ears.
This Brown's sure should in thine his Chaplain Wild:
Have thou thy Patron of his dues beguiled?
A Presbyterian is the greatest cheat,
He Will not say Grace where he expects no meat.
Perhaps these petty things Wild has forgot:
He Is thinking what Noncon. dare swear, what not.
I dare not swear they are truly Loyal; but
When we their Swords have, I Will swear they will not cut.
I dare not swear they love to keep the Laws,
But I dare swear they would run to start the cause:
Had they but opportunity to do it,
And Wild would follow, though with limping foot?
For all his Crack-f -- brag: Our King misled,
We'll bite our nails rather then scratch our head:
Or his We'll prove more Loyal, and more true,
And give to Caesar and to God his due.
Wild, has thy Muse no subject? does she want one?
Let her next prophecy on Doctor Manton.
And if he stay, Wild, come and keep his door,
Hang Conventicles, then you will never be poor.
Your City-Brethren sure will give you bub,
And there with one another you may club
For whining tones, against Bishops how to rant,
Rich Wine will make you Doctors loudly cant*
And when guilt robs you of your sweet repose,
Of The Solemn League and Covenant take a dose.
No doubt your hearts with joy it needs must fill
To think you suffer: Why? to please your will.
There read your Iter Boreale over,
And spell that Backward which you wrote before.
Your silence now says you dissembled then,
Yet these are the plain dealing honest men.
Wild vow you will never praise man more, till you know,
Whether he will live and dye your Friend or Foe.
I. M.

LONDON, Printed in the YEAR, 1670.


