A DECLARATION of Captain JOHN MVSGRAVE Prisoner in NEWGATE.

Vindicating him against the misprisians and imputed reasons of his s^^
imprisonment for high Treason against the STATE.

With an Order, or Proclamation: By the Committee of the City of London, with
the Committee of Lords and Commons for safety: for Listing in the late
engagement, etc.

8ber: 23 LONDON, Printed for John Musgrave, and are to be sold in
Newg^^^-^^rket, 1647.

A DECLARATION of Captain John Musgrave Prisoner in Newgate.
THat the Fidelity of the most eminent and faithful in the late Service for
the Parliament have run under the lash of notorious scandals and reproaches, is
evident enough beyond the necessity of my attestation; under which disgrace as
my present Condition has made me an Accessory, so I cannot doubt but when my
Integrity is truly manifested, that general Opinion (which in the Ignorant has
abused me) will, in the judicious find that Construction may plausibly free me
from all the dangers of their calumny, and I must confess I were a Bastard to
my name, an infamy to all that love me, and a reprobate to the Cause I am
under; if (after a general traduction of both the Houses, and the particular
abuses of some Pamphletiers,) I did not in some measure endeavor to give the
prejudicate world some punctual assurance, what Rule I have followed in all my
concernments, from the first of my service unto this minute of my commitment,
not that I itch after a printed credit, or expect an Eulogy from the crier; but
finding the folly of the Press so Epidemicall, my ^^gul^rity shall not hinder
my progress in that ^^^quity.

To this purpose I might run over a Catalogue of particulars from the very
Original of the Service; but in regard the generality of the Officers, (with
whom I have served) and the Impresse of the House upon me, in respect of that
small pay which upon the perusal of several Certificates was (in order)
allotted me, may anticipate a part of satisfaction to those who were ignorant
of me; and for such as truly knew me, I need no prevention, since for the
most part we marched hand in hand together, in the joyful accomplishment of
our Commands.

Upon the point. The Crime I am accused of, does only prove a more then common
constancy in the adherence to those Principles, which at first gave life and
being to our Arms; in the maintenance of which if my blood or my pains had
been too dear, the censure I am under had been too calm; but when the issue
of our toil and sweat returned us home, and that expected Salary (which has
rarely been awanting either to success or perseverance) was not only delayed
us, but we were also engaged, in our attendance unto such patience and
extremity; That it was the only wonder the stones were mute; which had they
been sensible had been less pardonable then the insurrection of the
Apprentices.

Of whom since it is my occasion to be a mentioner, and with whom I am accused
to be a partaker, I must necessarily here protest against my most envious and
serious observer, For my presence in their company will prove neither my
intention or action, then my condition (...) diverse respects may admit of a
contrary construction.

The more serious Traduction (if so I may call it) once formerly my joy, now
made my Scandal. For if those invitations of the Prerogative, the Protestant
Religion, the Privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, etc. Were
out of their severalties molded into an unity of the Covenant, and the
imposition of that, not only made National, but Sacra^e^tall: Why should an
adherency be my Crime, since the various hazard of my life upon it, abetted by
the stamp of your legallity) did make it apparently Religious, as also
Conscionable. If this suffice not, but there needs must be a necessity for
some expiation by a President. Why in the Speakers absence, since the sitting
was declared no Parliament, in case of any ^^^ont or assault, must it then be
made high Treason, and why taken from the Shrubs and not the Oak, from the
sprig and not the root, since the engagement being imputed notorious, and of
eminence, it requires an Annalogy in the punishment; unless according to the
Fable, as Dogs have been beaten in the presence of Lions, only for the
abatement of their natural fierceness; and as boys have been whipped to
intimate a duty to the youthfulness of Princes: So am I probably to be
disciplined out of a life, merely for a rule of Obedience to such, whom in the
height, of Magistracy, endeavoring my encouragement among thousand others in
conjunction with them; they must be taught a dutiful Retractation of their
errors by the subordination of my sufferance.

For my accusation of a power in the disposition of Offices and Commands within
the Tower, is only an allegation from the frivolous vanity of those who are
simply pretenders to my persecution; for Places of that nature, and
consideration, are rarely dispensible to other persons then of such eminence
and transcendency, that could hardly in justice admit me serviceable upon the
smallest resentment of my disabilities; and therefore my accuser, was so far
from the sense of an abuse in this; that instead of my shame, he did
ignorantly endeavor the advancement of my power and credit.

As for spreading of papers in Churches, it was never my Crime nor the tearing
of them; in which place to my best understanding, I have endeavored to shun
Superstition, and to express true devotion, as I conceived might be most
acceptable to God, and inoffensive to man.

As for my being in that bloody business at Guildhall, I was not there,
neither can I be justly taxed for having any hand in that business, as by
many thousands do justly appear.

For other accusations (as I want them not) they are ill applied; in regard
being no way conscious of them, they might have had reference to such a
creature, whose patience and loins had received preparation for such an
injury; seeing the affliction of my bondage, and the want of livelihood so
prevail upon me, that that advancement of grief might better have stayed
with the contrivers of it to abate the exorbitancies of their jollity.

To conclude, For a testimony to those that may be ignorant (for those that
know me these are impertinent) I desire this satisfaction be duly pondered.
That in all the Traductions that aim at my life (if either their verity or
weight could justly touch me) the continuance of it would be a vanity to my
self; But since the uprightness of my Conscience, and the recollections of my
heart, assure of an intensive innocence; I shall henceforth with less trouble
and more liberty, embrace that thraldom, which in conclusion can admit of no
other resolution, then either present Martyrdom or freedom.

JOHN MVSGRAVE.

3 Augusti, 164.
By the Committee of the Militia for the City of London, etc.
WHereas there have been diverse tumultuous and disorderly Assemblies within the
Cities of London, and Westminster, to the endangering the Parliament and City,
and parts adjacent: For prevention thereof, we the Committee of the Militia
aforesaid, according to the duty of the trust reposed in us, do hereby strictly
charge and command, That no Inhabitants, Indwellers, or Strangers, either on
House or on Foot, shall come together in any Assemblies whatsoever, with Arms
or without Arms, except such as the Committee of Lords and Commons for safety,
or this Committee shall raise for the safety of the King, Parliament, and City.
Now if after publication hereof, any Persons shall presume to assemble, or come
together in any tumultuous way, under any pretense whatsoever; That then, and
in such case all Colonells, Captains, and other Officers and Soldiers are
hereby required, according to their Commissions, to suppress and disperse the
same, and in case of resistance, them to sight with, kill and slay at Enemies
to the King, Parliament, and City, and disturbers of the Peace of the whole
Kingdom. A^^ to avoid effusion of blood, all Housekeepers and others in case
of such ^lts as aforesaid (...) comm^nded by (...)

And that all foot Soldiers that will (...) ^^^servation of the King,
Parliament, and City, let t^^^ ^^pair^ to the New-Artillery ground where they
shall b^e Listed, Armed, and paid sev^n shillings per w^^k.

Ordered that this Procl^^ation be f^^^^with Printed and published, and
Proclaimed by the Provost M^^shall by soun^ of Tr^mpet.

Tho. Pa^ing^^r, Clerk to the said Committee.

Lo^^^n Pri^^^d by Ri^^^rd C^^^s.


