The PRISONERS Observation by way of Complaint.

Stay gentle Passenger and take a view,
perhaps of passages you never knew:
Hoh, look about you, and pray please to hear,
see something like a Prison very near.
What say you so? now I will look again,
what makes thus peeping all these honest men?
Pray, what is the matter that you here are staid,
In these sad Times; for Debts, will they be paid
With being so restrained? No, for this way,
will bring Men, Wives, and Children to decay:
Kind Friend be not displeased, it is for no ill
I speak, Read this, and then do what you will.

ARe not those men composed of cruelty,
that crow'd us Debtors up in misery;
Starving us quite, as much as in them lies,
not minding either wife or childrens cries,
Our Times, our Money, Persons, and Estates,
wasted unmanly, coopt in iron grates;
Our liberty infringed our Trades decay,
we locked in prison yet they still cry Pay,
A thing so far beyond man's reach or care,
as is to build a Castle in the air,
And to perform it, prisoners are so far
disabled, as from Heaven to pull a star,
Can men make this Religion thus to do,
which guides them as they would be done unto?
No such belief have I, for doubtless then,
their actions would express them milder men.
But by firce malice, mischeifes cursed brood,
which has dependence on the devil shoode,
So far transports them, that the evil brought,
against some others, their own loss has wrought,
For such as some men's fortunes have withstood,
often in conclusion do themselves no good,
And that such men are crossed it is no wonder,
which strive to rend men's livelihoods assunder,
But walk they never so close, the supreme power,
can bring to light their hatred every hour,
And so unmaske them, that at distance far,
men may discrie Grym Gripe the Vserer.
Hark how the Beagle barks at those that Hayle,
this helpless son of Adam to the Iayle,
Vnmonefi'd and freindlesse stuffed with grief,
not knowing when or where to have releife,
His cloak, his hatt, and band, are drove astray,
and all his wit at once another way,
His wife and children now must seek their bread,
and every one whereon to rest his head,
Caused by hard-hearted men, nay, Monsters which,
forsake all goodness to be worldly rich,
The Officer stands fitted at the door,
to shop him where he never was before,
Thus being housed his adversary then,
may in one quarter wish him forth again,
For why? his money spends his house lies wast,
and now to pay, no means, no time, no have,
If this can raise a Force, or force a way,
to strengthen debtors their just debts to pay,
I Will leave it to the Creditors to think,
whose coin must pass for lodging meat and drink,
Empting our purses fills our hearts with pains,
ruins our stocks, and brings the prison gains,
All debts unsatisfied, men made so poor,
they cannot pay a part, though all before;
Mark what imprisonment does still produce,
some greatly pine with grief, some are profuse,
For sparkie spirits spend at first most brave,
no thought of any future want they have,
some do revive from dullness, and say, lets,
be merry, sorrow never paid men's debts:
Thus are whole families brought low and poor,
being curbed within a noisome prison door,
Which have lived bravely, and might do so still,
might not hard-hearted men have all their will,
Of force the creditor must greatly leese,
for Ned and Dick and Will must have their fees,
Then all is spent the poor man made a slave,
guarded with troops of vermin to his grave,
Now may his foes whose hearts are hard as stones,
for debts receive some dice and all his bones.
Which if such men as are restrained for debt,
had but large time and days of payment set,
Their friends, their means, and all they muster could,
to gain their freedom thus Eclipst they would,
And might obtain it too, and in effect,
give brave content, as creditors expect,
And might with valor truly serve the State,
in these sad days our Rights to propagate,
Not fearing might set forth by fleshly aid,
but serving God, why should we be afraid,
Who will protect his people that indeed,
seek him for succor in a day of need,
Whose promises are just, and will endure,
in spite of opposition firm and sure,
Why should we then despair though here kept in,
as men quite dead, in trespasses and sin;
I tell you faint not, for God has in store,
for those that love him, mercy evermore,
By Francis Mussell.
FINIS.
Printed Feb. 4. 1645.


