FVRTHER INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND,

Declared in a Letter Sent from Captain Muschampe, Captain of the Castle of
Cork, to an especial Friend of his in this City of London: With some other
News from other parts of the said Kingdom.



LONDON: Printed by R. Oulion, and G. Dexter, For Henry Overion, In
Popes-Head-Alley. 1642.

CERTAIN INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND.
Worthy Sir,
I Having not Intelligence of this Bearers going for England, until this very
instant, do hope that you will excuse my Brevity, to give you an account of
the Passages and occurrences of these parts, answerable to that short tract of
time which I have allotted to expatiate my self in. It is like to be a most
miscrable time with us here, if that we should not be speedily relieved with
more force out of England; My Lord of Muskrey exspecteth to be King of Munster,
and intends to beleaguer Cork, and this Fort: But we care not a louse for
him nor for all his Forces. All the Papists in Jreland are up in Rebellion and
have sworn and articled to dye in this quarrel; There is not an Enghlish man
in all Ireland, that has a Cow, Sheep, or Chick left, but what they keep
under the command of a Castle, or walled Town: and by reason of words made
known to me, that some of my houschold did hear some of my Tennants say, I
was willing to withdraw my Estace and Goods from my House at Ballinrea: for
some of my Household, asking some of them what they would do now, in respect
of that rebellion that now ^^s in Ireland, they, answered them, they did intend
to join themselves to the strongest side. After which Information given unto
me of such speeches falling from their mouths, I had taken all that I had from
Ballinrea, and intended to quit the Castle, but that I was betrayed by my own
Tenants, and lost my Wayne and Oxen, and other things, but to no great value:
But they are taken by such neighbors of mine as I wished might take them,
because I hope to have their Lands for it.

To morrow I intend to ride out and to carry a Troops of Horse to Ballinrea,
where I intend to hang and burn most part of my Tenants: and I intend before I
return to have a flirt at. Carby of Balea.

The next week my Lord President will plant a Piece of Battery against his
Castle, which Piece I am now making ready to that purpose: thus time calling me
off, for the present I am constrained to forbear any further Recital of what
is here Novall:

I rest: Your assured Lordships Friend, A. M.
from the fort of Cork, March 11th. 1641.
NEWS FROM ABOUT DVBLIN TREDAM AND KILKENNY
WE have 4000. men, and 500 horse that are now marching up to a place caled
Jallow-Hill, where the Rebels do make us believe, that they will bid us a
battle: But we can scarce credit it, that they will be as good as their words,
we rather think they will not abide the shocke, when it comes to trial. For
they are very much afraid of our great Gunnes. We have six small pieces of
Ordinance, and 2. great Pieces: and they do not love to hear the roaring of
the Cannons; our Cannoneers playing upon them with our great Gunnes is a
dismal sight to them.

There has arrived here from Bristow, 500. Men, and 1000. Men are come over
from Minyard, and my Lord President of Munster, came down to meet them, and
went along with them up to a place called Killkenny which was in the hands of
the Rebels, and he with his forces set upon them and forced them out of it; and
the English and Protestant forces have slain of the Rebels, nigh 2000. and
taken 60. Prisoners of good Rank and Quality.

Also within 5. Miles of Tredah, or thereabout our forces set upon the Rebels
and slew many, took my Lord Netters-feild, and Colonel Read, which Read
perceiving how hard it was like to go on their side, seeing his men drop down
so fast in earnest, thought it good policy for him to drop down amongst the
slain in jest, and thereupon he fell down and did lie still among the
Soldiers that were dead: that so they might think him to be dead also and
pass him by, and thereby he thought, when he had opportunity, to make use of
his legs to save himself. But one Soldier among the rest of our Soldiers,
seeing so goodly a fine Belt upon a Gentleman's shoulders lying on the ground,
and probably thinking that the Belt might be his, as well as another if he
were dead, he did make trial whether he was dead or no, and gave him a good
kick with his foot on the hinder parts: the Gentleman having his sense of
feeling quick, lying down rather upon policy then impotency, got him up, and
away he ran with all the speed he could, but all to little purpose, for he was
quickly taken, and is now fast. Also Philom Oneale was put to his shifts, and
necessitated to escape over into a field of furses, and it being known that he
had made an escape that way, they set the field of furses an fire, and so they
ferrited him out: but he did steal away in the smoke, and whether he is yet
taken or no, we have no certain Intelligence.

FINIS.

