THE RANTERS LAST SERMON.

WITH The manner of their Meetings, Ceremonies and Actions; also their
Damnable, Blasphemous and Diabolical TENANTS; delivered in an EXERCISE near
Pissing-Conduit.

The third day of the Week, being the 2 of August. 1654. With their
Mock-PSALME. ALSO GOD'S wonderful JUDGMENTS Showed upon Ranters, Quakers and
Shakers, and other wicked and Profane Persons at their Meetings and Exercises
in London and other Places.

Written by J.M. (a deluded Brother) lately escaped out of their Snare.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. in the Year.1654.

THE RANTERS LAST SERMON.
ON Monday the second of this instant Aug. a Company of People (called Ranters)
meeting in a House near Pissing-Conduit in Cheap Side, taught many Diabolical
and Blasphemous TENANTS; the very recital of which, makes both my Heart and
Hand to tremble; Yet for the satisfaction of many Godly People, that know not
the d^spositions of these men; and other simple Novices that they seek to draw
in to be of their Atheistical Opininions (as once I was my self, though by Gods
Gracious goodness to my soul, I am now reclaimed from their Errors) I have
adventured to lay open to the World their licentious lives, and most
blasphemous doctrines of Devils; which you may well perceive, if you cast but
your eye upon their TENANTS which they hold and Teach.

1 They taught, That they could neither sce Evil, know Evil, nor Act Evil,
and that whatever they did was Cood, and not Evil, there being no such thing as
sin in the World: Whereupon Mistress E. B. striking fire at a Tinder-box lights
up a Candle, seeks under the Bed, Table, and stools, and at last coming to
one of the men, she offers to unbutton his Cod-piece; who demanding of her
what she sought for? she answeth, For sin: whereupon he blows out her Candle,
leads her to the Bed, where in the sight of all the rest, they commit
Fornication.

2. They taught, That it was quite contrary to the end of the Creation, to
Appropriate any thing to any Man or Woman; but that there ought to be a
Community of all things.

3. That to Feast, Revell, Drink, Sing, Roar, and to swear great Oaths, and
to lie with a Whore, though in the Marketplace, was as good Actions, as to
Pray, Preach, or perform other Duties of Christian Religion.

4. That there was neither God, nor Devil, Heaven nor Hell, Angel nor Feind;
but that all things were by Providence.

5. That our Ever blessed Savior, was a Bastard, and an Impostor and deceiver
of the Christians, as Moses was of the Jews, and Mahumet of the Heathens.

6. That the Sacred BIBLE was but a mere Romance, and Contradictory to it self;
only invented by the Wits of Former Ages, to keep People in subjection, and
(as they term it) in Egyptian slavery; likewise, That there was as much truth
in the History of Tom Thumb, or The Knight of the SUN, as there was in that
Book.

Oh detestable Blasphemies!
After they had discussed upon these Diabolical Errors and Atheistical
Blasphemies for the space of two hours; in the mock and derision of singing of
Psalms, one of them read this lacivious, and Bawdy Sonnet following; all the
rest singing after her.

Their PSALM.
YOu that can Revell Day and Night,
To enjoy the Fruits of Loves Delight
With whomsoere you can acquire,
To quench the flames of Cupid's fire,
You must mark this, that when you meet
(In Garden, Orchard, Field or street)
With Feeble Brethren that scarce can
Perform the duty of a man,
Let them not saly from your lapp
Til you salute them with a Clap;
Dear Sisters, you may freely do it
As easy as to stir a foot,
But if you cannot, tell me now,
And I my self will teach you how.
When you meet lusty men of strength,
That will not bate a jot of length,
Oh hugg them hard, and suck them in,
Until they even do burst your skin,
Spread forth the crannyes of those Rocks
That lie beneath your Holland smocks;
Stretch out your limbs, sigh, heave and strains,
Till you have opened every vein:
That so Loves gentle juice that flows
Like Dewie Nectar, out of those
That press you down may run a tilt,
Into your wombs, and not be spilt
Do this (dear Sisters) and hereby
You shall increase and multiply,
And in some 20 years you will spread
Further then Jacob's Children did.
But (like the Saints) I pray be sure
Your speeches all be fine and pure;
Let Gospel words, and sweet Expressions,
Divine Narrations, and Confessions
Be in your mouths, though lusty T -- ses,
Are stowtly knocking at your A -- ses.
Oh damnable Impieties! oh Monsterous Wickedness! oh cursed Blasphemies! How
can the glorious Eye of heaven behold these miscreants without melting into
tears, to cause a second Deluge over the face of the whole Earth? Must they
needs (like flies) burn themselves in that flame that should light them? A sad
race, to run through all Religions, into al wickedness, and consequently, into
eternal destruction; Never, Never, Never, to behold the face of God: Tell me
O Atheist, Who made those gloriou^ Lamps of Heaven, the Sun and Moon, the
twinkling Stars, the Winds, the Hale, the Rain, the frost and snow, the
Rainbow, Thunder and Lightning, the Night and Day, Winter and Summer, the
Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is? Certainly, none but the LORD GOD could
do this?

All these He cast in the pure mould of LOVE,
That Man might place his soul and thoughts above.
But in vain do I seek to wash these Blackmores white, or to charm these deaf
Adders; Therefore I shall here insert some few of God's direful Judgments
happening on some of these Renters, Quakers, Shakers, and the rest of their
atheistical Crew, as it is instanced by that famous and Reverend Divine, Mr.
Edward Cotton.

A Crew of Ranters meeting at Hammet in Germany, after many days spent in
Riotting and Revelling, Drinking, Swearing and Blaspheming; saying, There was
no God, no Devil, no Heaven, no Hell, but that the Soul was mortal, and the
Scripturture a Fiction; As they were belshing out these Blasphemies, the Devil
appeared amongst them in a very High, Terrible and Monsterous shape, like unto
an invincible Giant, carrying away a Hundred and Thirty of their Children in a
great smoke, and fiery Flame; that they were never seen again to this day.

That at Boulton in Lancashire, the Devil apperred to one Mr Smith a Ranter,
and bid him go to an Apothecaries to buy an Ounce of Arsnick, whereupon the
said Smith presently went, but could not procure the sad Arsnick, unless he
brought sufficient security. That he should do no injury with the same, either
to himself or any other; so he said Smith departing, said He would fetch
securrity, and the next day came again accompanied by the Devil in the shape of
a man, who engaged he should do no harm to any one; but so soon as he had
received the said Asnick, a great flash of Fire appeared, as if it had been
Lightning from the highest Firmament, and carried away both the Ranter and the
Apothecary; neither of them being seen ever after that time to this very day.

That constantly, at their Ranting-Meetings both in this City of London, and in
the Country, the Devil oftentimes appears amongst them, sometimes in the
shape of a man, and other times in the shape of a Woman, and taking them by the
hands very familiarly, he leaves the print of his fowl Paws behind him; which
the Ranters can never after get out, it remaining black and Blue, they being
fearfully tormented thereat, that neither Chains nor cords can hold them in
their beds. Others are plucked out of their beds, and crrried out of their
Chambers by the Hair of their heads, and tossed up and down from one Room to
another.

Many other dreadful Examples of Gods heavy Judgments upon such Atheists and
filthy unclean wretches, and their fleshly foolishness, might be shown at large
to dehort others from their evil Instigations; but this may suffice to show
that these filthy Dreamers are such, that having had some knowledge of the
ways of God, and his holy Word, turning his Grace into wantonness, wrest the
sacred Scriptures to their own destruction, and like Apostate wretches, abandon
God and all goodness, and being given over to all manner of filthiness and
uncleanness, become the very seed and spring of the Serpent, consecrating a
continual Hollyday to all licentiousness of Living, committing sin with
grediness without the least sense thereof, which is most miserable: But if this
be the perfection of new fancied Religions, to run through all into Atheism, I
praise God, that he has given me grace to come out of Babylon, leave them in
the broad way, and seek out the good old Way, the right Path, that leads to
eternal felicity: And truly, when I was amongst them, I saw no Reverence, but
much Impiety, Presumption Profanation, and secret wickedness; which was the
cause I left them; and since renouncing my own carnal wisdom, I rather desire
to be ruled by sound Reason, then carnal sense; look into my felf, and my own
deceitful heart, and so lay my hand upon my mouth, strike upon my breast, and
humble my self to the very dust, and according to Gods holy Word, Work out my
own salvation with fear and trembling, love GOD above all; my Neighbor as my
self, and do as I would be done by; and in what I come short of this, to rely
upon the All-sufficient merits of my Lord and Savior; To whose most holy NAME
be ascribed al Power, Glory and Thanksgiving by Angels and Men in this World,
and that which is to come, AMEN.

FINIS.

