The manner of the Solemnity of the CORONATION of His m^^^ Sacred MAJESTY KING
CHARLES:


The Second Charles, Heir of the Royal Martyr,
Who for Religion and his Subjects Charter,
Spent the best Blood, that unjust Sword ere died.
Since the rude Soldier pierced our Saviors side:
Who such a Father had, art such a Son;
Redeem thy people and assume thy own.
Ascend thy Ancestors Imperial seat,
Of Charles the Good, thou second Charles the Great,
That adds the worth; this luster to the Crown,
Whose solid Glories weighd Usurpers down.
Such Majesty as never was profaned,
While Tyrants ruled it was only Charles that Reigned.
AS the King went from Westminster Hall toward the Abbey, there went first
before, the Aldermen of the City of London, Ushered by a Herald; next the
Knights of the Bath in their Robes, each of them attended by his Equire, and
Page; after them the Judges, the Sergeants at Law, the Kings Attorney General,
and the Masters of Request; then the privy Counselors and the chief Officers
of the Kings Household; next the Barons in their Parliament Robes with Swords by
their sides and bare Headed; after the Barons came the Bishops also bare
Headed, in their Scarlet Gowns and Lawn Sleeves; next them the Viscounts and
Earls in their Coronation Robes, and Coronetted Caps; in the last place went
the Officers of State for the day, Viz. The Lord privy Seal the Archbishop of
Canterbury; the Earl of Dorset carrying the first Sword, the Earl of Essex the
the second Sword, the Earl of Kent the third; the Spurs were carried by the
Earl of Moutgomery; the Globe with the Cross on it, by the Earl of Sussex; the
Golden Cup and Plate for the Communion by the Bishops of London and Winchester:
the Scepter was carried by the Earl of Rutland; the Sword of State naked by the
Marquess of Hamilton; the Crown by the Earl of Pembroke: among the Sergeants
at Arms, went the Lord Mayor in a Crimson Vellet Gown, each of them carrying a
short scepter; next, immediately after the King, went the Earl of Arundel, as
Earl Marshall of England, and the Duke of Buckingham as Lord High-Constable for
that day. The King entered intothe Abbey Church, at the West-Gate, under a rich
Canopy of state, carried by the Barons of the Cinque Ports, and was himself
supported on the one hand by Doctor Niel, Bishop of Durham, on the the other
hand by Doctor Lake Bishop of Bath and Wells; His Train which containted six
Yards of Purple-Velvet was held up by the Lord Compton, Master of the Robes,
and the Lord Viscount Doncastar, Master of the Wardrope: he was met by Bishop
Laud (who supplied the Deans place) and the Prebends of Westminster in their
rich Robes; who delivered into his hand the staff of King Edward the
Confessor, with which he walked up to the Throne, which was framed from the
Quire to the Alter. There were appointed for the King three Chairs: 1. The
Chair of Repose. 2. The ancient Chair of Coronation: 3. The Chair of State,
which was placed upon a square Ascent of six steps. The King, after he had
reposed himself a while, was by the Archbishop of Canterbury presented bare
he^ded to the Lords and Commons, East, West, North, South; of whom the
Archbishop demanded, If they consented to the Coronation of King Charles their
lawful Sovereign? To which after they had expressed their readiness by an
Acclamation made four several times, the King betook himself again to his Chair
of Repose, during the time of Sermon; which ended, the King, going to the
Communion Table, and kneeling down, the Archbishop asked his Majesty, If he was
willing to take the Oath usually taken by his Predecessors? To which he made
answer, That he was willing, arose, and went to the Altar, where several
interogations were rendered to him by the Archbishop to each of which distinctly
the King gave his Affirmative Answer.

ARchbishop; SIR, Will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the
people of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, your lawful and Religious Predecessors; And namely, the Laws, Customs
and Franchises granted to the Clergy, by the Glorious King St. Edward your
predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel
established in this Kingdom, agreeable to the prerogative of the Kings
thereof, and the ancient Customs of the Realm?

KING, I grant and promise to keep them.

A. SIR, Will you keep peace and Godly Agreement (according to your power) both
to God, the holy Church, the Clergy, and the People? K. I will keep it.

A. SIR, Will you to your power cause Law, Justice, and Discretion, Mercy and
Truth to be executed to your Judgment? K. I will.

A. SIR, Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws, and rightful Customs which
the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have? and will you defend and uphold them
to the honor of God as much as in you lies?

K. I grant and promise so to do.

Then one of the Bishops with a loud Voice before the people read to the King
this following Admonition.

Our Lord and King We beseech you to pardon, and to grant, and preserve unto
us and to the Churches committed to your Charge, all Canonical privileges,
and to do Law and Justice; And that you would protect and defend us, as every
good King to his Kingdoms ought to be Protector, and Defender of the Bishops,
and the Churches under their Government.

The King answers with a willing and devout Heart,

I promise and grant my pardon, and that I will preserve and maintain to you,
and the Churches committed to your Charge, all Canonical privileges, and due
Law and Justice: And that I will be your Prot^ctor and Defender to my power, by
the Assistance of God, as every good King in his Kingdom in right ought to
protect and defend the Bishops and Churches under their Government.

Then the King arising was led to the Communion Table, where laying his hand
upon the Bible, He, in the sight of all people made a solemn Oath (to observe
the premises) which was as follows; THe Things which I have promised, I
shall perform and keep; So help Me God, and the Contents of this Book.

Afterward his Robes being taken off, and offered at the Alter, the King stood
for a while stripped of his Dublet and Hose, of Satin; then led by the
Archbishop, and the Bishop of St. David's, he was placed in the chair of
Coronaiton, having a close Canopy spread over him, and while the Archbishop
Anointed his Head, Shoulders, Arms, and Hands with a costly Ointment, the
Quire sung an Anthem of these words; Zadock the Priest Anointed King Solomon.
--

Thence in his Doublet and Hose, with a white Coif on his Head, he was led back
again to the Communion Table, where Doctor Laud the Bishop of St. David's, who
supplied the Dean of Westminsters place, Vested him with the ancient
Habiliments of King Edward the Confessor, and conducting him back to the Chair
of Coronation, presented him with King Edwards Crown, which the Archbishop put
upon his Head, and in the meantime the Quire sung this Anthem;

Thou shall put a Crown of pure Gold upon his Head.

After which, the Earls and Vis-counts put on their Coronetted Caps of Crimson
Velvet; then every Bishop came severally to the King, and gave him their
Venediction and he rising from his Chair bowed to each of them apart. Next King
Edwards Sword was girt about him, which he took off himself, and offered at the
Communion Table, with two swords more, in relation to Ireland and Scotland: His
spurs were put on by the Duke of Buckingham, as Master of the Horse; which done
he offered first gold and silver, then bread and wine, to be used at the
Communion.

Thus completely Crowned, the King was conducted by the Nobility to his Throne,
where he received the Oath of Homage, (the Quire in the mean time singing Te
Deum) The Duke of Buckingham, as Lord high Constable for that Day, who also
swore the rest of the Nobility at the Kings Knee, to be Homagers to his
Majesty; then the Earls and Barons laid their hands upon the Crown, as it was
upon the Kings Head, making a solemn protestation to spend their blood to
maintain it to him, and his posterity: the Bishops took no Oath, but kneeling
down the King kissed each of them; then the King taking out of his bosom a
scrowl of parchment, the effect of which was a promise of pardon under his
broad Seal to all that accept it; gave the scrowl to the Lord Keeper, who read
it four times, East, West, North, and South. From the Throne the King went to
the Communion Table, and after prayers had been read by the Archbishop, the
Nicene Creed sung by the Quire; and the Epistle and Gospel read by the Bishops
of Landaff, and Norwich; his Majesty recev'd the Communion, the bread from the
Archbishop, the Wine from the Bishop of St. David's: and at the same time,
Gloria Patri was sung; which being ended, the Archbishop reading certain
prayers, concluded the Ceremony. After which the King disrobed himself in King
Edwards Chapel, and came forth in a short Robe girt of red Velvet; lined with
Ermins and a lesser Crown upon his head set with precious Stones, and taking
barge with all his Train of Nobles at Westminster stairs, He returned to
White Hall.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. and are to be sold by W. Gilbertson. 1660.


