MY LORD OF PEMBROKES SPEECH TO HIS MAJESTY, CONCERNING THE TREATY: Upon the
Commissioners arrival at Newport, in the Isle of Wight, Saturday Sept. 16. An.
Dom. 1648. taken verbatim by Michael Oldsworth.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

My Lord of Pembrokes Speech to His Majesty, etc.
May it please your Majesty:
WE are once more sent by the Parliament of England to Treat with you,
concerning the settlement of a safe and well grounded peace; but as God shall
judge me, I fear to as little purpose it will prove, as that at Vxbridge, or
Hampton Court; yet because of the clamours of the people, we are resolved once
more to Treat with you; yet for all we Treat, we would have you think that
we scorn to entreat, we are in a better condition then so.

Dam me, were the rest in my mind, there should not want much Treating; every
man has not the gift of Treating, no more have I, and by-God I think the
Propositions are able enough to Treat for themselves; and therefore your
Majesty may save the labor of Treating, and sign them, which if you will, so,
if not so again; we must return from the place from whence we came, and you
again to Carisbroke Castle: Your Majesty cannot say but you are in Freedom,
Safety, and Honor, and have your servants about you, and therefore we
suddenly expect your Answer: Dam me, the Kingdom must not be remed for a
King; we may have more Kings, but we can have no more such Kingdoms; and if
your Majesty will still be an Enemy to the Kingdom, the Kingdom must be an
Enemy to You, and may, and will depose You, or dispose of You (whom they have
made their Steward) at their pleasure, and then elect another.

You cannot expect the Kingdom to be so tame and cowardly, as to let you
strike them, and they not turn again; nor our selves so simple and foolish
(but upon very good conditions) to assist and bring in the Kingdoms Steward,
or Viceroy, to fight with, strike and conquer it self: Dam me, I cannot
imagine that the Viceroy should be above the Roy, nor that Rex should have any
other sense, then to Rule, not Reign: Is a People for a King, or a King for a
People?

What a Pox, are we blind that we cannot understand this? My Lords pray
resolve me, whether is the means, or the end King?

Is not the people Supreme, do they not make a King, and have they not power
to mar a King? Whether is Physic or health King? I say REX is Ruler, not
King, and so by REX we all are Kings, or none are Kings: If Rulers be unruly,
pray who must Rule them? must not the most powerful? and pray who is more
powerful then the People, that have so many hands? Therefore in my judgment a
King in a Kingdom, is no other then a Lord Mayor of a City; the Mayor is by
REX King of the City, in respect of all subordinates, these are only Titles and
no more. Damme, I know I speak against my self, for I write PHILIP Earl of
PEMBROKE, and if I take up Arms and fight against PEMBROKE, and rob and kill
them of PEMBROKE, may not the People of PEMBROKE resist me? and am not I a
Rebel and Traitor to them*

The Lord Mayor is by REX, King of the City; but if my Lord Mayor take up Arms
against the City, or rob them by Sea or Land, or Rebel and Traitor them,
burn their houses, etc. Is not the Mayor a Traitor, a Rebel, for so doing? I
pray you my Liege resolve me.

But you may object, the Parliament has wronged you; pray right your self if
you can, without wronging the Kingdom, and then we will say something to you.

Have not I been wronged, nay wronged by the Parliament, wronged by the City,
wronged, laughed, and jeared at by the University of OXFORD; because I acted
vigourously according to the Orders of Parliament, flung out Antichrist from
his Seat, and set Lambs for innocence, and Doves for wisdom, in their
places; but must I wrong the Parliament, the City, the University, for that
again, and strike the next man I meet withal? much less my Lord and King
the Kingdom.

My Liege, I pray do not take me for a Traitor, and a Rebel: ^ds death, I
had rather suffer a thousand Deaths, then endanger the death of my Lord and
Sovereign the Kingdom; Your Majety must pardon me in that; I will not say to
Your Majesty ^s Your own Country men the Scots, that You are the first, and
Original Cause of all the bloodshed in the three Kingdoms; But ^^mit you were
the first Cause, then those assisting you are the second cause, and so the
Scots themselves are the third Cause, who have lately betrayed their Lives,
Liberties, and Estates into our hands, and are now our Slaves and Vassalls;
therefore, etc.

But for our parts (my Lord) we hope we are more wise, then by such means to
foment our own miseries, or by ou^ own treachery to forfeit our Lives or
Estates, to any but the State it self, and for the State it self: and for my
own part am resolved, and so I think are the rest, to fight against any that
shall fight against our Sovereign King the Kingdom, who is Your King, my
King, and every man's King else.

Yet notwithstanding all this, the Parliament have so low condiscended beneath
themselves, unto Your Majesty, that they have made us their COMMISSIONERS to
Treat with You; they have recalled their own Votes of making no more Addresses
unto You; they have ordered ten thousand pounds for defraying the charge of the
Treaty, whereof six thousand pound Your Majesty is to have for the use of your
self, and those assisting about You; and we Commissioners but three thousand
pounds: therefore who think you will be gainers? They have sent unto You Dr.
REEVE and Dr. DUCK, and I think the Devil and all; 'Zblood, are they not
Parties, and must they treat in their own Cause, or must we treat with
Parties? My Lords you may do as you will, but I Will do as I list.

If Your Majesty do suddenly recall all the Declarations, Protestations, and
the like, that have proclaimed us Traitors, Rebels, etc. You may; if You will
not, You may choose, for I am resolved; for Religion, for all I am Chancellor of
OXFORD, it shall never trouble me; I thank GOD I have Religion enough to say
my prayers, and for more I care not, but will return it to my Chaplain, or
Your Majesty, to do therein as You please: For the MILITIA, and IRELAND, my
Lord of SALISBURY, and my Lord of MIDDLESEX can tell you more then my self,
and so can my Lord SAY, and SEAL too: I think I have said enough, and if any
one can SAY more let them; I say, and say again, That if Your Majesty will
sign to the PROPOSITIONS, it will save a great deal of SAYING more; words are
but wind, and my winde-pipe grows hoarse with speaking this; I had rather see
Deeds, then Words: Saying is one thing, and Doing is another. The Scripture (I
heard my Chaplain say) says in one place, Do this and live; and so I may say
by the PROPOSITIONS, Sign these and live: Do so, and then expect to be Great
and Glorious, for so I heard the Parliament say; but if not, we shall refer
you to the ARMY to be ordered as they shall think fit; yet let me tell you,
a Coach and Horses are coming to your Majesty, and good Sack, and accordingly
(as you behave your self) you shall have other Provisions necessary. If your
Majesty will stand still in your own light, do? Then you must expect what
will light on you after: for my own part, I have discharged my conscience, and
never used to be tedious in my expressions. I know we come to Treat, and Treat
we will, before we go hence, and I hope it will be for the good of the
Kingdom, the Parliament, and Army; I have a long time known Your Majesty, and
You have known me, it is my desire that we may still be friends, and lovers,
nothing but ruin comes by dissentions; and though the supreme authority be
in the people, yet if they shall entrust it still in you, I shall not be
against it, nor the rest that are to Treat with you, that you may have Your
negative voice in Parliament as well as my self, or the rest of the Lords.

May it please Your Majesty, I am no Independent, yet so far an Independent,
that I would have a dependency on Your Majesty and the rest; I never loved
War; for I always would rather pocket up wroungs, then incense, or foment
Wars, as it was known to Your Royal Father, and cannot be unknown to Your
self; Dam me, I desire Peace, no man more, and if we have not Peace, then we
must expect war; and if we have war then we shall have no Peace. Now I
have done, and deliver up what is said to the Judgment of Your Majesty, and
all ingenious, and honest men.

If any one can speak better, I pray hear them, for my own part I shall give
way, and stand for a Cipher amongst the rest.

Yours, Pembroke, and Montgomery.

FINIS.
Vera Copia.


