The Manner of Creating the KNIGHTS OF THE Ancient and Honorable Order of the
BATH, According to the Custom used in ENGLAND IN Time of Peace.

WITH A List of those Honorable Persons who are to be Created KNIGHTS of the
BATH at his Majesty's Coronation, 23 April, 1661.

LONDON: Printed for Phil. Stephens at the Kings Arms over against the Middle
Temple, 1661.

The Manner of Creating the Knights of the Ancient and Honorable Order of the
Bath, etc.
1. WHen an Esquire comes to Court, to receive the Order of Knighthood, in the
time of peace, according to the Custom of England, he shall be honorably
received by the Officers of the Court; sc. the Steward or the Chamberlain, if
they be present, but otherwise, by the Marshalls and Ushers. Then there shall
be provided two Esquires of Honor, grave, and well seen in Courtship and
Nurture; as also in the feats of chivalry; and they shall be Esquires, and
Governors in all things relating to him which shall take the Order abovesaid.

2. And if the Esquire do come before Dinner, he shall carry up one dish of the
first course to the Kings Table.

3. And after this the Esquires Governors shall conduct the Esquire that is to
receive the Order, into his Chamber, without any more being seen that day.

4. And in the Evening the Esquires Governors shall send for the Barber, and
they shall make ready a Bath, handsomely hung with linen, both within and
without the Vessel, taking care that it be covered with Tapistry, and blankets,
in respect of the coldness of the night. And then shall the Esquire be shaven,
and his hair cut round. After which the Esquires Governors shall go to the
King and say, Sir, it is now in the Evening, and the Esquire is fitted for the
Bath, when you please: whereupon the King shall command his Chamberlain, that
he shall take along with him unto the Esquires chamber, the most gentile and
grave Knights that are present, to inform, counsel, and instruct him touching
the Order, and feats of Chivalry: And in like manner, that the other Esquires
of the Household, with the Minstrels, shall proceed before the Knights, singing,
dancing and sporting, even to the Chamber door of the said Esquire.

5. And when the Esquires Governors shall hear the noise of the Minstrells,
they shall undresse the said Esquire, and put him naked into the Bath; but at
the entrance into the Chamber, the Esquires Governors shall cause the Music
to cease, and the Esquires also for a while. And this being done, the grave
Knights shall enter into the Chamber, without making any noise, and doing
reverence to each other, shall consider which of themselves it shall be that is
to instruct the Esquire in the Order and course of the Bath. And when they are
agreed, then shall the chief of them go to the Bath, and kneeling down before
it, say with a soft voice: Sir! Be this Bath of great honor to you; and then
he shall declare unto him the feats of the Order, as far as he can, putting
part of the water of the Bath upon the shoulder of the Esquire; and having so
done, take his leave. And the Esquires Governors shall attend at the sides of
the Bath, and so likewise the other Knights, the one after the other, till all
be done.

6. Then shall these Knights go out of the Chamber for a while; and the
Esquires Governors shall take the Esquire out of the Bath, and help him to his
Bed, there to continue till his body be dry; which Bed shall be plain, and
without Curtains. And as soon as he is dry, they shall help him out of Bed;
they shall cloth him very warm, in respect of the cold of the night; and over
his inner garments shall put on a Robe of Russet with long slieves, having a
hood thereto, like unto that of an Hermit. And the Esquire being out of the
Bath, the Barber shall take away the Bath, with whatsoever appertains
thereto, both within and without for his fee; and likewise for the Collar
(about his neck) be he Earl, Baron, Banneret or Batchelour, according to the
custom of the Court.

7. And then shall the Esquires Governors open the door of the Chamber, and
shall cause the ancient and grave Knights to enter, to conduct the Esquire to
the Chapel: And when they are come in, the Esquires sporting and dancing,
shall go before the Esquire, with the Minstrels, making melody to the Chapel.

8. And being entered the Chapel, there shall be wine, and Spices ready to
give to the Knights and Esquires. And then the Esquires Governors shall bring
the said Knights before the Esquires, to take their leave of him; and he shall
give them thanks all together, for the pains, favor and courtesy which they
have done him: and this being performed, they shall depart out of the Chapel.

9. Then shall the Esquires Governors shut the door of the Chapel, none
staying therein except themselves, the Priest, the Chandler and the Watch. And
in this manner shall the Esquire stay in the Chapel all night, till it be day,
bestowing himself in Orisons and Prayers, beseeching Almighty God, and his
blessed Mother, that of their good grace they will give him ability to receive
this high temporal dignity, to the honor, praise, and service of them; as also
of the holy Church, and the Order of Knighthood. And at the Daybreak, one
shall call the Priest to confess him of all his sins, and having heard Mattins
and Mass, shall afterward be commended, if he please.

10. And after his entrance into the Chapel, there shall be a Taper burning
before him; and so soon as Mass is begun, one of the Governors shall hold the
taper, until the reading of the Gospel; and then shall the Governor deliver
it into his hands, who shall hold it himself, till the Gospel be ended; but
then he shall receive it again from him, and set it before him, there to stand
during the whole time of Mass.

11. And at the elevation of the Host, one of the Governors shall take the
Hood from the Esquire, and afterward deliver it to him again, until the
Gospel in Principio; And at the beginning thereof, the Governor shall take the
same hood again, and cause it to be carried away, and shall give him the taper
again into his own hands.

12 And then having a Penny, or more, in readiness, near to the Candlestick,
at the words verbum caro factum est, the Esquire kneeling, shall offer the
Taper and the Penny; that is to say, the Taper to the honor of God, and the
Penny to the honor of the person that makes him a Knight. All which being
performed, the Esquires Governors shall conduct the Esquire to his Chamber,
and shall lay him again in Bed till it be full Daylight. And when he shall be
thus in Bed, till the time of his rising, he shall be clothed with a covering
of Gold, called Singleton, and this shall be lined with blew Cardene. And when
the Governors shall see it fit time, they shall go to the King, and say to
him, Sir! When does it please you that our Master shall rise? Whereupon the
King shall command the grave Knights, Esquires and Minstrels, to go to the
chamber of the said Esquire, for to raise him, and to attire and dress him,
and to bring him before him into the Hall. But before their entrance, and the
noise of the minstrels heard, the Esquires Governors shall provide all
necessaries ready for the Order, to deliver to the Knights, for to attire and
dress the Esquire.

And when the Knights are come to the Esquires Chamber, they shall enter with
leave, and say to him; Sir! Good morrow to you, it is time to get up, and make
your self ready; and thereupon they shall take him by the Arm to be dressed,
the most ancient of the said Knights reaching him his Shirt, another giving him
his Breeche^, the third his Doublet; and another putting upon him a Kirtle of
red Tartarin: two others shall raise him from the Bed, and two others put on
his nether stockings, with soles of leather sewed to them; two others shall
lace his slieves, and another shall gird him with a Girdle of white leather
without any buckles thereon: Another shall comb his Head; another shall put on
his Coife; another shall give him his mantle of silk, (over the Bases or Kirtle
of red Tartarin) tied with a lace of white silk, with a pair of white gloves
hanging at the end of the Lace. And the Chandler shall take for his Fees, all
the Garments, with the whole array and necessaries, wherewith the Esquire shall
be apparelled and clothed on the day that he comes into the Court to receive
the Order: As also the Bed wherein he first lay after his Bathing, together
with the Singleton and other necessaries: In consideration of which Fees, the
same Chandler shall find at his proper costs, the said Coife, the Gloves, the
Girdle and the Lace.

13. And when all this is done, the grave Knights shall get on horsepack, and
conduct the Esquire to the Hall, the Minstrels going before making music: but
the horse must be accoutred as follows: The Saddle having a cover of black
leather, the bow of the Saddle being of white wood quartered; the
Stirrop-leathers black, the Stirrops gilt; the Paitrel of black leather gilt,
with a Cross pate gilt, hanging before the breast of the Horse, but without
any Crooper: the Bridle black, with long notched Reins after the Spanish
fashion, and a Cross pate on the front. And there must be provided a young
Esquire, courteous, who shall ride before the Esquire bare-headed, and carry
the Esquires sword, with the Spurs hanging at the handle of the Sword: and the
Scabbard of the Sword shall be of white leather, and the Girdle of white
leather, without buckles. And the Youth shall hold the Sword by the point, and
after this manner must they ride to the Kings Hall, the Governors being ready
at hand.

14. And the grave Knights shall conduct the said Esquire; and so soon as they
come before the Hall door, the Marshals and Ushers are to be ready to meet him,
and desire him to alight: And being alighted, the Marshal shall take the Horse
for his Fee, or else C. s. Then shall the Knights conduct him into the Hall, up
to the high table; and afterward up to the end of the second table, until the
Kings coming, the Knights standing on each side of him, and the Youth holding
the sword upright before him, between the two Governors.

25. And when the King is come into the Hall, and beholds thy Esquire ready
to receive his high Order, and temporal dignity, he shall ask for the Sword
and Spurs, which the Chamberlain shall take from the Youth, and show to the
King. And thereupon the King taking the right Spur, shall deliver it to the
most noble and gentile person there, and shall say to him, Put this upon the
Esquires heel; and he kneeling on one knee, must take the Esquire by the right
Leg, and putting his foot on his own knee, is to fasten the Spur upon the right
heel of the Esquire; and then making a cross upon the Esquires knee, shall
kiss him: which being done, another Knight must come, and put on his left Spur
in like manner. And then shall the King of his great favor, take the Sword and
gird the Esquire therewith: whereupon the Esquire is to lift up his Arms,
holding his hands together, and the Gloves betwixt his thumbs and fingers.

16. And the King putting his own arms about the Esquires neck, shall say, Be
thou a good Knight, and afterward kiss him. Then are the ancient Knights to
conduct this new Knight to the Chapel with much music, even to the High
Altar, and there he shall kneel; and putting his right hand upon the Altar, is
to promise to maintain the rights of holy Church during his whole life.

17. And then he shall ungirt himself of his Sword, and with great devotion to
God and Holy Church, offer it there; praying unto God and all his Saints, that
he may keep that Order which he has so taken, even to the end: all which being
accomplished, he is to take a draught of Wine.

18. And at his going out of the Chapel, the Kings Master-Cook being ready to
take off his Spurs for his own Fee, shall say, I the Kings Master-Cook am come
to receive your Spurs for my Fee; and if you do any thing contrary to the Order
of Knighthood (which God forbid) I shall back your Spurs from your heels.

19. After this the Knights must conduct him again into the Hall, where he
shall sit the first at the Knights table, and the Knights about him, himself to
be served as the others are, but he must neither eat nor drink at the table,
nor spit, nor look about him, upwards nor downwards, more than a Bride. And
this being done, one of his Governors having a Handkerchief in his hand, shall
hold it before his face when he is to spit. And when the King is risen from his
table, and gone into his Chamber, then shall the new Knight be conducted with
great store of Knights and minstrels proceeding before him unto his own
chamber; and at his entrance the Knights and Minstrels shall take leave of him,
and go to Dinner.

20. And the Knights being thus gone, the Chamber door shall be fastened, and
the new Knight dis-robed of his attire, which is to be given to the Kings of
Arms, in case they be there present, and if not, then to the other Heralds,
if they be there; otherwise to the Minstrels, together with a mark of silver,
if he be a Knight Batcheler; if a Baron, double to that; if an Earl, or of a
superior rank, double thereto. And the russet Nightcap must be given to the
Watch, or else a Noble.

21. Then is he to be clothed again with a blew robe, the slieves whereof to be
straight, shaped after the fashion of a Priests; and upon his left shoulder to
have a Lace of white silk, hanging: and he shall wear that Lace upon all his
garments, from that day forwards, until he have gained some honor and renown
by Arms, and is registered of as high record, as the Nobles, Knights, Esquires,
and Heralds of Arms; and be renowned for some feats of Arms, as aforesaid,
or that some great Prince, or most noble Lady can cut that Lace from his
shoulder, saying; Sir! we have heard so much of the true renown concerning your
honor, which you have done in diverse parts, to the great fame of Chivalry, as
to your self, and of him that made you a Knight, that it is meet this Lace be
taken from you.

22. After Dinner the Knights of honor and Gentlemen, must come to the Knight,
and conduct him into the presence of the King, the Esquires Governors going
before him, where he is to say, Right Noble and Renowned Sir! I do in all that
I can, give you thanks for these Honors, Courtesies, and Bounty which you have
vouchsafed to me: and having so said, shall take his leave of the King.

23. Then are the Esquires Governors to take leave of this their Master,
saying, Sir, We have according to the Kings command, and as we were obliged,
done what we can; but if through negligence we have in ought displeased you, or
by any thing we have done amiss at this time, we desire pardon of you for it.
And on the other side, Sir, as right is, and according to the Customs of the
Court, and ancient Kingdoms, we do require our Robes and Fees, as the Kings
Esquires, companions to Batchelers and other Lords.

Books lately Printed for Phil. Stephens, at the Kings Arms over against
Middle Temple Gate in Fleetstreet.
AN Entertainment for Lent, by the Famous Pen of Nic. Causinus, Author of the
Holy Court.

The Great Antichrist never till now discovered: and proved no Pope, or Turk,
nor any single person, nor any one Monarch, or Tyrant in any Polity; but a
Pack, or multitude of wicked men, that have combined themselves together by
Solemn League and Covenant, to slay the two Witnesses of God -- By the Right
Reverend Father in God Gruffith Lord Bishop of Ossory.

Some Sermons of Mr. George Masterson, Preached at the Temple, St. Gregory's
near St. Paul's, and at St. Clements.

The Form of his Majesty's Summons, in a Letter from the Lord Chamberlain to
the several persons of Honor, who are to be created Knights of the Bath.
SIR, After my hearty commendation to you,
WHereas his Majesty has appointed the 23d. day of April next for his solemn
Coronation at Westminster, and the day before to proceed publicly through the
City of London to his Palace at White Hall; And according to the Ancient
Custom used by his Royal Predecessors, his Majesty is graciously pleased to
advance certain of his Nobility and principal Gentry into the Noble Order of
the Bath, to attend him in those great Solemnities; and (amongst others) has
vouchsafed to nominate you to be one of that number. These are therefore to
Will and require you in his Majesty's name to make your appearance at his
Majesty's Palace at Westminster, upon Thursday in the afternoon, being the
18th of April next, furnished and appointed, as in such cases appertains,
there to begin the usual Ceremony, and the next day to receive the said Order
of Knighthood of the Bath from his Majesty's hands. Hereof you are not to fail.
And so I bid you heartily farewell.

White Hall March 1. 1660. Your very affectionate Friend MANCHESTER.

The Names of some of those Honorable Persons, who are to be created Knights
of the Bath at the Coronation of his Majesty, April 23. 1661.
THe Lord Richard Butler son to the Lord Marquess of Ormond. Mr. Hyde, son to
the Lord Chancellor. Mr. Egerton, Son to the Earl of Bridgwater. Mr. Berkley,
son to the Lord Berkley. Mr. Peregrin Bartu, 2d. son to the Earl of Lindsey.
Mr. Vere Vane, 2d. son to the Earl of Westmerland. Mr. Bellasis, son of the
Lord Bella is. Mr. Capell, Brother to the Earl of Essex. Mr. Francis Vane, son
of Sir Francis Vane. Mr. Henry Vane, son of George Vane Esquire; Mr. Edw.
Hungerford of Farley Castle. Mr. Monson, son of Sir John Monson, Knight of the
Bath. Mr. Charles Trevanian, whose Noble Father was slain at Bristow. Mr. Nich.
Slannyng, Son of that Loyal Subject Sir Nich. Slanning, slain at Bristow. 26
July, 1643. Mr. Thomas Fanshaw, son of Sir Thomas Fanshaw. Mr. Edward Wise. Mr.
Car Scroop Grandson to the Valiant Sir Gervas Scroop, who received so many
wounds in the Royal Cause at Edgehill. Mr. Butler. Coll. Edward Harley,
Governor of Dunkirk, eldest son of Sir Robert Harley late Knight of the Bath.
Mr. Alexander Popham. Coll. Rich. Ingolsby. Mr. George Brown. Mr. Bourchier
Wray, son of Sir Chichester Wray. Mr. Francis Godolphin. Sir Thomas Trevor. Mr.
Simon Leech. Mr. John Bramston, son of Sir John Bramston, late Lord Chief
Justice. Mr. Wise. Mr. George Freeman, son of Sir Ralph Freeman. Sir Rolls.
FINIS.

