A Mystery which the Angels desired to look into. 1 PET. 1.11.12.
THe end why the Eternal Father did send the Apostles and now sends his
Ministers, is, as St. Paul sets it down, Ephesians. 3.9. To make all men see what
is the fellowship of the mystery which from the beginning of the world has
been hid in God. Ephesians. 3.10.
To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places (
i. to the Angels even of highest degree) might be known by the Church the
manifold wisdom of God. But what was this manifold wisdom? When God had
suffered Adam to fall, Genesis 3.24.
that he might see his own pride and folly, Divine Justice drove him out of
Paradise, and placed at the East end of the garden of Eden Cherubims and a
flaming sword, which turned every way to keep the way of the tree of life; that
so flesh nor blood neither might nor could enter. But Divine Wisdom has found
out a way whereby a reentrance is made; And yet the Decree of Gods justice
stands unaltered, His wisdom, goodness, and mercy manifested, and miserably
fallen men restored: Which when the Angels saw they sang for joy, saying, Luke
2.24.
Glory be to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men.

The way and mystery was thus.
That as in pleasing the flesh, the eyes, and the mind, Paradise was lost (for
so it was) Eve seeing that the forbidden fruit was good for food, pleasant to
the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, took and did eat, and gave
Adam, and he did eat also. And so both they and their whole posterity,
according to a Decree of Almighty God, were cast out of Paradise, left without
God in a miserable world, subject to labor and sorrow till death seized on
them; and then also were without hope of a resurrection or second life. But
Divine Wisdom out of a bottomless Fountain of love, ordained that as in
pleasing the flesh, the eye, and the mind, Paradise was lost, and consequently
all misery, woe, and death it self purchased; So in displeasing these three,
viz. the flesh, the eye, and the mind, and passing by those fiery Cherubims,
suffering death for a good conscience, or at least resigning our self
thereunto, Paradise with a second life might be regained. But this when frail
man, because he was but flesh, Romans 8.3.
could not do; The Son of God was content to take our flesh upon him, and in
this flesh make his own life exemplary for all men, showing them how they must
follow him in way of regradation; that as they had lost Paradise by pleasing
the flesh, the eyes, and the mind, by which death had passed upon all; So they
should regain it by renouncing them, and following him in a voluntary abased
humiliation, to the loss of all worldly things. Rev. 2.7.
They that thus overcome, as he overcame, shall go in, and eat of the tree of
life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, and live for ever, be with
him, live and reign with him for ever and ever. This is that everlasting Gospel
or glad tidings preached unto men.

But because for this work the Son of God was to leave his Fathers bosom, and
the glory which he had with him in the highest heavens, and so descending upon
the earth, must take man's frail nature upon him, and in that nature must be
abased and abused, suffering hunger, cold, nakedness, enduring ignominy,
shame, Heb. 2.5.10.
reproach, and at last dye the most cursed and painful death, even the death
of the Cross; for this his great humiliation, he obtained of his Father, by
way of reward, an extraordinary exaltation. It was decreed he should not only
be received up into glory, Heb. 1.6.
but in the highest heavens sit on the right hand of God Almighty, where all
the Angels of God should worship him: And he should be Prince of this his
Church, which he had purchased with his own blood, and should have all power
put into his hands, both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth, and should be judge of men and Angels. Yea moreover it was
granted, that for his sake, and for his great humiliation, all his followers
should have their sins forgiven them; but the spots and stains thereof must be
washed away by the water of affliction. For there are four things considerable
in sin, the act, the guilt, the stain, the scandal: The act is soon over, the
guilt remains till removed by repentance, and then though in the Court of
heaven atonement be made by Christ's blood, 2 Samuel 12.
as in the case of David's murder and adultery; yet the stain and scandal
continues, and according to the nature of the offense is washed away by the
water of affliction through the Word (a figure of which was the Ark saving of
eight persons in the old world by water; Ephesians. 5.9. and 26. 1 Pet. 3.20, 21
and the like figure whereunto does Baptism now save, observed by St. Peter to
be both figures.) Now this is performed either by a mortified life, or the
afflicting hand of God, or both: As appears by that example of David, also of
Miriam her murmuring against Moses, and many that sinned in the wilderness.
And therefore it is, says St. Paul, that the Lord does judge and chastise men,
that they should not be condemned with the world.

And that this should be the condition of Gods children, Genesis 7. Exodus 3.2;
Exodus 14 29. 1 Samuel 14. Dan. 3. Ioh 3.6. Matthew. 14.24.
was long ago plainly prefigured by Noah's Ark floating upon the roaring floods;
by Moses burning bush, by the Israelites passing through the Red sea; by the
taking of the Ark of God, by the uncircumcised Philistines, by the three
Children walking up and down in the fiery furnace. Again, under the Gospel, by
John baptizing the people in Jordan; By St. Peter's ship tossed to and fro with
a wind which was contrary; Rev. 12. Exodus 2.3.
and by the Dragons persecuting the woman in the wilderness. It was so in the
time of the Law. Moses no sooner born, but laid in the flags by the river
side. Genesis 37.26. Isa 53.4. Exodus 13.
Joseph sold into Egypt. David, a man of sorrows. The Children of Israel no
sooner from under Pharaohs hard bondage, but they are in the wilderness where
they must wander forty years. It were too long to run through all their
miseries, besides their two captivities. Yet all this they hoped would end when
Messiah came, then they expected Halcyon days. But it is no better yet, for
since the days of John the Baptist, Matthew. 11.12.
the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and only the violent take it by
force. His Disciples indeed thought that he would have restored the Kingdom to
Israel, Act. 1.6.
but he tells them they were deceived in looking for a kingdom here. They that
would be his followers, Luke 10 13.
must carry a Cross upon their shoulders, and not a Crown upon their heads,
unless of thorns. And when he sent out his twelve Apostles, Matthew. 10.10.
and that a large journey, to preach the Gospel over all the world; He does not
provide them with as much as necessaries, but plainly bids them, Luke 10.4.
carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: Luke 14.26.
provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass. A hard Chapter! yet to teach it
them the better, he would give them an example. Nay (with reverence be it
spoken) he must do it. It behoved him, Hebr. 2. it behoved him to suffer, and
so to enter into glory; And it behooves us as much. 2 Timothy 2.12.
He calls us indeed to a kingdom, but it is upon condition of suffering. If
we suffer, we shall also reign with him. There is no promise otherwise. A thing
so well known to the Primitive Christians, 1 These. 3.3.
that St. Paul tells the Thessalonians, yea your selves know we are appointed to
suffer; God has predestined us thereunto. Rom 8.30.
For whom be foreknew, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of
his Son. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called: he called to
sufferings, 1 Pet. 2.21.3.9. For even hereunto were ye called: because Christ
also suffered for us, leaving us an example, Matthew. 10.30. Mat. 16 24, 25 Luke
29.23, 24. Luke 14.16.27 Ioh. 12.15.
that we should follow his steps. For whosoever will save his life, shall lose
it: and whosoever will lose his life for my sake, says our Lord, shall find
it. And therefore if any man will be my disciple, and come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. This is our Lords
doctrine left to his Church; and as St. Paul says, his members must fill up
that which is behind, Col. 1.24. Luk 12.4.
of the afflictions of his flesh for his bodies sake which is his Church: and
those that so do are his friends. Ioh. 15.14.
I say unto you my friends, fear not them which kill the body. And again, Ye
are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth I call you not
servants, but friends: such an one was Abraham, Iam. 2.23.
who in temptations and extremities trusted in God, which was counted or
imputed unto him for righteousness, and he was called the friend of God. Romans
5.3.
So are all those that follow Abraham's steps, friends of God, if ye do what
Christ commands, leave this world with the pleasures thereof.

If any desired to be helped to tranquillity, as Zebedees Children did, Mar.
10.39.
he tells them that they must drink of his Cup, that bitter Cup of his passion:
Matthew 26.39. and be baptized with his Baptism. Mar. 9.49.
Every one must be salted with fire, which doubtless is all one with to be
baptized with fire. Matthew 3.11. And this may be the meaning of that place, 1
Cor. 3.15. He shall be saved; yet so as by fire: which by some is applied to
Purgatory. But affliction is the true Purgatory. This is that Refiners fire,
and fullers soap purifying the sons of Levi, Mal. 3.2, 3. which is so terrible,
that at the first sight the Prophet asks the question, Who can abide the day
of his coming? or who shall stand when he appears? Who will follow him, and
suffer the Cross, the loss of all to come to a kingdom? This is that spirit
of judgment, and spirit of burning that washes away the filth of the daughter
of Sion, and purges away the blood of Jerusalem from the midst of her. This is
that cleansing fan by which the floor shall be thoroughly purged. Isa 4.4
Matt ^.12. Rev. 7 14.
Therefore it is, that those that are arrayed in white robes are said to come
out of great tribulation, washing their robes in the blood of the Lamb. Matt.
18 19.
And whatsoever good thing is conducible or helpful to any, that they may the
better follow Christ in this his humiliation, and thereby be regenerated, and
made one with him and his Father, he promises to grant them, yea in this way,
Matt 21.22. Iam. 4 ^. Hab 2.4.
and for this end only (not for men's lusts) but to sit them for heaven, ask
what ye will, says our Lord, and ye shall have it. In this condition or state
of affliction, the Just lives by his faith, relying on God, and waiting the
performance of his promise. As it is written, Isa. 28 16.
he that believes makes not haste, goes not out of Gods presence from this or
that trouble; but with holy Job waits the Lords leisure, going from trouble to
trouble, from faith to faith, from strength to strength, as Israel did, Psalm.
84.7.
from one station to another, through the wilderness to Canaan, a type of our
journey through the desert of this world, Isa. 40.30.
toward our heavenly Canaan. Though the youth faint, and are weary, and the
young men utterly fail, yet they that wait on the Lord shall renew their
strength. They shall run, and not be weary, they shall walk, and not faint.
For in this path does Gods power keep the Christian through faith (who in all
extremities relyes upon him) to that Salvation ready to be revealed in the last
time, 1 Pet. 1.5.
which is the only thing he waits for. Isa. 43.2.
In the interim though he pass through the waters God will be with him; and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow him. When he walks through the
fire he shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon him. Isa. 54.17.
No weapon that is formed against him shall prosper; for strong is the Lord
that keeps him; Not the outward man from destruction, that is decreed, 2 Cor.
4.16. Zach. 2.8.
and in due time must be destroyed; but the inward man, and welfare of it. He
that touches that, touches the apple of Gods eye.

Obj. But what, may some say, needs all this? may we not live merrily, avoid
trouble as much as we can, and yet go to heaven in the end?

Aas. I answer. We read of some indeed that become old, and are mighty in
power, Job 21. Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon
them. Their Bull genders, and Cow calveth: they send out their little ones like
flocks, and their children dance, are brought up to Music, for they take the
timbrel and the harp, and raj ye at the sound of the Organ; But they are
wicked, ver. 7. and in a moment go down to hell. Genesis 49.
ver. 13. O my soul, come not thou into their secrets, into their assemblies,
mine honor, be not thou united. For these are men that have their portions in
this life, Eccle. 3.
whose bellies God fills with the hid treasures thereof. But it is better to go
into the house of mourning, then into the house of feasting. Sorrow is better
then laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better;
and merrier. Eccl. 3.4.
And the wise man says, there is a time to weep, and a time to laugh: but the
laughing time comes last. So said Abraham to Dives, Luk 16.25.
Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise
Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. As both
of them, so all of us have allotted from the hand of Gods providence bad and
good things, torments and comforts: Psalm. 126.5, 6.
they that sow in joy, shall reap in tears; and they that sow in tears, shall
reap in joy. He that goes forth weeping, bearing precious seed, shall
doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him. Those that weep
may be comforted, and those that are persecuted may leap for joy; for Christ
has pronounced them thrice blessed, Luk 6.24, 25.
Luke 6. whilst those that are full, and laugh, and of whom the world speaks
well, have as many woes. Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received your
consolation. Woe unto you that are full, for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that
laugh now: for ye shall mourn and weep. Luke 6.24, 25.

Hence it comes to pass, that the true Christian, whose eyes God has opened
to see these things, laugheth at calamities, and mocketh when fear comes, Pro.
1.26.
and desolation like a whirlwinde. For he (namely, the inward man) is in that
Dothan about which are horses of fire, 2 King 6.13.17,
and chariots of fire compassing. Although there should be no meat in fields,
flocks in folds, nor herds in stalls, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, Hab 3.17,
18.
says Habbakkuk, I will joy in the God of my salvation. For the Lord God is my
strength, he will make my feet like hindes feet, and I shall walk upon my high
places. And such as suffer for righteousness are counted worthy of the
kingdom, Rev. 3.4.
which the Father has prepared for those that love him. Therefore the Apostles
rejoiced over the Thessalonians for their faith in persecutions, and
tribulations that they endured, which is (says he) a manifest token of the
righteous judgment of God, 2 These 1.5.
that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom for which ye also suffer; seeing
it is a righteous thing to recompense tribulation on them that trouble us, and
to them who are troubled rest with us. As for the Apostle himself, who knew the
truth of these things, his whole study was the doctrine of the Cross; he
desired to know nothing else but Jesus Christ, and him crucified: God forbid,
says he, Gal. 6.14.
that I should glory in any thing, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world. And in this he
glories, that he twice in one Chap. makes an apology, as fearing lest men
should think him a fool for boasting so much: 2 Cor. 11.1.16. And then begins:
I will glory of the things which concern mine infirmities. 2 Cor. 12.8.9, 10.10
30.
In Damascus, etc. In stripes above measure, in prisons frequent, in deaths
often. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one, thrice was I
beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck. A night and a
day I have been in the deep: in journeying often, in perils of waters, in
peril of robbers, in perils by mine own Countrymen, and in perils by the
heathen: in perils in the City, in the wilderness, in the sea, in perils
amongst false brethren, in weariness, in painfulnesse, in hunger and thirst,
in fasting often, in cold and nakedness. And besides those things that are
without, that which comes on me daily, the care of all the Churches. And if I
must needs glory, I will glory in the things which concern mine infirmities.
For when I am weak, then am I strong; the more I endure, the more Christ
inables me. And says the Apostle in another place, by this we bear in our
bodies the dying of our Lord Jesus, 2 Cor 4 11.
that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal bodies. Thus
the Lord tries the righteous, but the wicked, Psalm. 11.5. Pro. 3.12. Eccl. 2.5.
and him that loves violence, his soul bateth. For whom he loves, he
chastneth, even as a Father the son, in whom he delights. For gold is tried
in the fire; and acceptable men in the furnace of Affliction. What man is so
foolish as rather to desire gold mingled with dross, than to have it pass the
fire? Thus God served Jerusalem, Zach. 13.9. He tells the people he will bring
them through the fire, and refine them as silver is refined, and will try them
as gold is tried. Then shall they call on his Name, and he will hear them: he
will say, It is my people; and they shall say, The Lord is my God. Indich 8.22,
23, 24. Iam. 2.23.
Thus was our Father Abraham tried, and being proved by many tribulations, was
made the friend of God: Thus Isaac, thus Jacob, thus Moses, and all who pleased
God, by many tribulations became faithful. Wisd 3.5.
That having a little been chastised, they might be greatly rewarded.

Thus is made known unto us the mystery of Godliness, which the Apostle says
is great; 1 Timothy 3 1.
and without controversy it is the mystery which in other Ages was not made
known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed to Gods holy Apostles and
Prophets by his Spirit, that they might preach the unsearchable riches of
Christ obtained by the Cross; of which the ancient Prophets enquired, and
searched diligently; who prophesied of the grace that should come, searching
what, and what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did
signify, which testified beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and the glory
that should follow: which things the Angels defire to look into. A figure of
which were the two Cherubims with their wings lifted up, but their face looking
one toward another, and toward the Mercy seat; which mystery being revealed to
the holy Apostles by the holy Ghost sent down from heaven, and by them
manifested unto the Angels, may minister some ground why the Angels admitted of
adoration in the Old Testament, Numb. 22.31, 32. Jos. 5.14. and refused it in
the New. Rev. 19.10. and 22.10.

Thus does it manifestly appear, that there is no other way to be saved but by
the Cross of Christ, to conform our selves to his sufferings, to follow him in
his abased humiliation; that so we may be like him in his exaltation. For as he
was, so are we in this present evil world. 1 Ioh 4.7.
This he has taught us both by his doctrine and life. And surely had there
been any other way, he would have showed it us. And let us consider though the
forbidden fruit might be real to Adam, yet unto us as it has an influence,
upon these three, viz. the flesh, the eyes, the mind, it is a figure answering
thereunto. St. James esteems the wisdom and strength laid out upon these, to
be earthly, sensual, divellish. Of the same speaks St. John, 1 Ioh 2.15, 16
saying, Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world. For all that
is in the world, the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, Gal 1.4.
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And our Lord
dyed to deliver us from this present evil world: from which S. James says,
Iam. ^.27.
he that is religious keeps himself unspotted.

Every offense that in this world is committed, is either for a beastly
pleasure, a trifling commodity, or for some vain estimation with man. And as in
a glass face answers face, so do these three kinds of transgressions to those
three qualities of the forbidden fruit: Genesis 3. And therefore it is that the
Christian in Baptism promises to renounce these three, the world, the flesh,
and the devil, and to follow our Lord under the Cross; the performance of
which through Christ is that which saves, called by the Apostle not the
washing away the silth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience. And
this is that spiritual and fiery Baptism of Christ, namely, a Baptism into
his death; unto which whosoever subscribes, stands engaged to a crucifixion,
and daily death for a good conscience; 1 Cor. 15.
and is in jeopardy to dye every hour. As it is written, if the dead rise not,
why are we baptized for the dead? and why stand we in jeopardy every hour? I
protest, says the Apostle, by our rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus I dye
daily: therefore it is that the Lord Christ to the baptized is a Captain, a
Leader; and every such that has resigned up himself to be his Soldier, and to
follow the Lamb wherever he goes, this his skillful Captain will lead
through crooked paths, and bring fear and dread upon him, Ecclu 4.11 18.
and torment him by discipline; but after will comfort him, and show him
secrets. Therefore says the Apostle, After ye have suffered a while, 1 Pet. 5
10.
he shall stablish, strengthen, settle you. This is the Lords way to save the
sons of men. And as Eiihu said, these things God works thrice, yea often with
man, to bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of
the living. Job 23.
That man whom God intends to dignifie, he visits every morning, and tryes him
every moment, Job 7. Hebr. 12.
and chastises him for his profit, that so he may be made partaker of Gods
holiness; indeed be regenerated, made one with the Father, and the Son, as our
Lord said, Verily, ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son
of man shall sit upon the throne of his glory, ye shall sit upon twelve thrones
judging the Tribes of Israel. Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren,
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my Names
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inberit everlasting life. This
in our Lords opinion is the very means of man's regeneration, namely, Isa 51.2,
3. Ps 1 44. Job 34.7. Isa. 50.6.
a patient following him through all afflictions, to be as a lamb dumb before
the shearers; to lay the body as the ground, and as the street to them that
pass over; patiently bearing reproaches, and drinking down scorning like
water; to give the back to the smiters, the face to the spitters, and the
checks to them that pluck off the hair. But this doctrine to flesh and blood
seems strange, that the Scripture says, Lord, who has believed our report? 1
Cor. 1 23.
To the Jews it is a stumbling block, to the Greeks foolishness: Hab. 2.10.
and 5.9.
but to the Christian believer it is the power of God to salvation. For by
means of the Cross, the Christian is made like his Master, fitted for heaven,
and perfected as he was perfected; Hab 1.^0 59.
and he that endures most for him in this life, that comes nearest to him in
suilerings, shall come nearest to him in glory in the next. Therefore let us not
think afflictions (when God sends them) so strange a thing, Job 7.17, 11.
but rather with holy Job in secret (admiring that God should take such care
for to make us partakers of his holiness) say, Heb. 12.10.
Lord what is man that thou should dignifie him? that thou should set thy
heart upon him? that thou should visit him every morning, and try him every
moment? But Lord, what may be thought of those men that take up the sword
against the Cresse? Those that have caused so great effusion of Christian blood
for liberty, Jesuits and heady Sectari^s.
yea liberty to the flesh, which must be crucified, that so they mayserve God
as themselves please; and that without any trouble in this world. How are these
ignorant, and also Enemies of the Cross of Christ?

The holy Apostle wept to think that there should be any such among Christians;
Phil. 3.19.
telling the Philippians that such made their belly their God, their glory
their shame, earthly minded men, their end was destruction. Alas, alas! what
shall become of those among Christians, that for this end, because they may not
have liberty, speak evil of Dignities, and despise Dominions, following the
footsteps of Cain, Corab, Dathan, and Abiram, and will not be warned by their
judgments? Which examples as standing Pillars of Salt remain to all
generations. Woe is them, woe is them, for them in especial, says St. Jude, is
reserved blackness, and darkness for ever. Jude 8.13.

Did the blessed Trinity in their wisdom find out this only means for the
restoration of lost mankind? Did the holy Apostles rejoice in it? the Angels
admire it? the universal Church embrace it? and do we fight to make it void?
The very thoughts thereof cause my knees to tremble, my lips to quiver, and
rottenness to enter into my bones. For God with vengeance will come with
thousands of his Saints, as Enoch prophesied, to execute judgment on all belly
gods that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds, and of all their
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

These, Jude 19.
says that Apostle, are those that separate themselves, sensual, Ier 7.29.
not having the Spirit. O Lord what have we done? that thou should suffer us
to stray, and in knowing times to be so strangely deluded.

By what degrees of sins have we ascended to such unmatchable wickedness. O!
the Christian Religion how it is disgraced! Cut off thy hair, Ier. 7.29.
O Christian, and cast it from thee, and take up a lamentation in all thy
public places, and say:

O Lord, if it be possible open our eyes, Deu^. 19.18. Act 1.23.
and remove this bitter Gall, forgive this great iniquity. When Israel had
sinned in making the golden Calf, thou shewedst mercy upon thousands. To
Manasses which caused Jerusalem to swim with innocent blood, and had no works
of righteousness. Exodus 23. 2 King 11.16.
Thou declaredst thy great mercy in pardoning him. Thou restoredst Israel from
captivity, which had lived like beasts. 2 Esds 8.29, 30
The Thief upon the Cross had nothing but sins to present thee with, yet thou
pardonest him, for thou art a God of mercy, art called merciful, Ier. 3.12.
Exodus 34.
and delightest in mercy, and have treasures of goodness laid up for them
that have none for themselves. O Lord hear, and consider. Look not upon the
sins of thy people, but look on thy Sanctuary and worship which lies waste.
Defer not to help for thy Names sake, for thy honor sake. In pity for thy
Christ's sake look upon our miseries, for there is no healing nor help left, and
we grow worse and worse. Our sins increasing are grown up unto the heavens. We
have committed this great evil, and that Jesuitically by blood; we think to
build our nests on high above the stars, Hab. 2.9.
that so in this world we may escape the Cross of our Lord, and be free from
the power of evil. But, O Lord, in so doing we have refused our own health,
the waters of Shiloh, Isa. 56.
and put from our selves that holy Cup of Salvation, of which our Lord himself
drank, and himself with his own blood tempered and seasoned for such as will be
his Disciples. O Lord in judgment remember mercy, Ier. 6.16.
and bring us once again to that ancient old good way, that walking therein we
may find rest to our souls. Amen.

The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him.

Psalm. 25.14. And if any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God.

Joh. 7.17.
THat you might the better think of that which you and I lately spoke of
touching the sufferings of Christians, Postscript.
I have committed the same to writing; and have here according to my promise
sent it you. Think upon it, for it is no vain thing, Deuteronomy. 32.47.
but it is that whereby our lives shall be prolonged in the Land beyond Jordan,
whitherunto we are going. The necessity of the serious thinking on this
doctrine appears, in that our Lord took such pains with his disciples to
inculcate, radicate, and settle it in their hearts. For having spoke of their
sufferings, Luke 21. Settle it in your hearts, says he, ver. 12, 13, 14. In
another place, says he, Let these sayings sink down into your hearts. Luke 10.
And again, These things have I spoken unto you that you should not be offended;
and that when the time comes, you may remember I told you of them: Joh. 15.20.
Joh. 16.14. By all which and many other places, this appears a matter of
great concernment, and of some difficulty to be believed. And of this doctrine,
or this report, Isa, 53.
we with the Prophet may well say, Lord who has believed? unto such is the
power of God manifested, and they shall grow up before him as a tender plant,
and as a root out of dry ground. And without doubt the highest favor that the
Almighty bestowed upon the sons of men, is ability to suffer for his Name. It
is that great feast, Luke 14. to which all are invited. The riches that
accompany it exceed all the treasures of Nations; and the people that endure
are such as God esteems the world not worthy of. And therefore the holiest of
men, even the Apostles, rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer.

I have now done. The Lord settle these sayings in our hearts, and grant us to
be those spiritual worshippers, Joh. 4.23, 24 not to worship the Father with
bodily sacrifice, but in spirit and truth: instead of Burnt-offerings, to offer
up our bodies and souls a living sacrifice, and so to account of our selves but
as sheep appointed to the slaughter; and to prepare for bonds and afflictions,
which, Act. 20.23
as the holy Ghost witnesses, abide us in every place: for that through much
tribulation and violence, the kingdom of heaven must be entered. Act. 14.22.
And that as the grace of flowers fade, so may our carnality and worldly pomp,
glory and honor decay, decrease; Iam. 1 11. Phil 3.3, 8.
yea that we may attain to the high price set before us, let us account those
things dung; and that we may so do, let us watch, Luke 16.
fast, pray, give alms, as good Soldiers endure all hardness, that so being
faithful in small things, we may be trusted with great. Which is the earnest
prayer of your faithful Friend.

Imprimatur

Joh. Downame.

FINIS.

