A MUZZLE FOR CERBERUS, and his three VVhelps Mercurius Elenticus, Bellicus,
and Melancholicus: Barking against Patriots and Martialists, in the present
reign of their unwormed rage.

With Critical reflections, on the revolt of Inchequin in Ireland.

By Mercurio-Mastix Hibernicus.

To every unpartiall Reader, Clear and Candid, without prejudicate Opinion.
OH! be not prepossest (as much I fear)
With a forestalled opinion, as no ear,
Nor eye to lend, this Antidote swift flying
On paper wings, against three Mercuries lying:
(For in all books, prejudicate opinions,
Do baine the best of all the Muses Minions.)
Let not thy wits in wilde-Goose chase so wander,
As not to tract the paths of Alexander.
Who ever such unpartiall Justice used,
To keep one ear for him who was accused.
As a wise man, hear then both parties speak:
So shall thou try Wolves bark, yea Rats who squeak,
From bleats of Lambs, from moanes of mournful Doves.
Pure Gold from tinckling brass, the touchstone proves.
When Steeles and Flints be smit, the fire comes forth,
So in cross tones, the truth here vents true worth.
London Printed for R. Smithurst, and are to be sold near Hosier-Lane, 1648:

In laudem Authoris, Et in fraudem derisoris.
THanks to thy pains: I speak it to thy praise,
I never read more strong lines, spun in two days,
So many quoted Authors, mixed with wit
And judgment, in short space, I scarce viewed yet.
Thy learned truth, the lying spirit has shamed,
Of a poor sneak, not worthy to be named:
I put thee on this task; thou have repeld them,
In forty hours, thy night or days pains queld them.
In truth I do not flatter thee at all,
Awalking Library, if I thee call.
Its fit thy meritting worth should be rewarded,
And thy strong active parts and pains regarded.
If any Whale or Otter vent, the like
To this, thy pen-spear, his fond head can strike.
M. J.

AS an Antidote against Cavilling Cavilliering exception, ready to find a knot
in a straight rush, or as Mice and Rats in walls, and Apes and Monkies in pure
lawnes, to make or rend holes where they find none; lest I mistake in the
number of these railing Rabshakehs: I must confess, I am a doubting Sceptick,
and an unresolved Didimist, whether only one furious fantastic make his
three fools bolts which he throws (as sometimes Thirsites against Ulysses,
Semei against David, Rabshakeh against Hezekias, Scopius against King James,
and Endemon or Cacodemon, against our worthiest Peers and Church lights) in the
very face of the Parliamentary Patritians of our state, and against the Militia
in his malitia flying bird alone, as an individuum vagum, or a Woodcock in a
mist of ignorance; or rather like one Goliath defying the host of Israel, it
being something probable that here we find the tongue and tooth but of one
Cerberus with three heads, or of one monstrous Chimera in three shapes; like
one echo (composed like this wordy work of wind and air) often resonating and
redoubling three or four sounds, as one babbling Battus and verbalist, three or
four words to as small purpose, as the sounding of an empty Hogshead: Or that
there be three Rakehells twisting and twining this their rope Rhetoric to
choke or strangle our best Patriots, with their three paper cords, as the
Turkish mutes often the best of Bashawes with their halters, at the mere lust for
Law of their tyrannizing Ottomans: but the matter is but like a matter of
Moonshine in the water, whether one Moon-calfe here bleat in three libels, one
Ass brey, one Wolf howl, and one Owl houte against the shining Sun of
Magistracy and Ministry, high Court and Camp; or there be three Curs all
barking, or three Mastive dogs, like Butchers dogs with bloody mouths, biting
and snarling at emulated Supremacy; as like one another in their stigmatizing
style, as John a Nokes in the same case and cause to John a Styles; or as a
Snake to Snake, Serpent to Serpent, Viper to Viper, all stinging the breasts
that have bred them, and fed them.

All three (if three) led like Ahabs false Prophets in their vain prognostics
by one deluding spirit, al birds of one black and bloody feather, all frogs
croaking one tone out of the infernal pit; all broken bells better for hanging,
ringing of the same peale in their large and loose appeals (like Libertines)
from all Parliamentary Laws; all like Armenian Dragons spitting fire, with
tongues set on fire by hell, more flamivorous then the Northern Hecla, the
Sicilian Aeina, or that Vesuvus which choked the good Patriot Pliny; all like
Simeon and Levi brethren in iniquity, never a barrel better Herring, all
fellows well met at football, even to make foot-balls (if cursed cowes like
Jezabel one against Elias, and the Arrians against Athanasius had not short
horns) even of our wisest and worthiest heads, even such spurned Bulls as
cruel Scilla made of the head of Matius, Mark Anthony of the head of Tully
that eloquent speaker, and ungrateful Ptolomy and Scep^^nius the head of their
best deserving friend undaunted Pompey; but if they plead that they know not
one another: Sure if similitude be the cause of love, and the adomant of
friendship, they may be acquainted without a couple of Capons, as soon as the
Devil with the Collier, they are so like, that they cannot but say (when they
meet at Dawes cross, or in Knaves alley, or in Tospot alley, like kind
Poetasters or pot tasters) ego novi sinonem and sinon novit me; its merry when
knaves meet, to keep Hillary Term, Cicada, Cicadae, Chara, one Grasshopper and
Creckit cleats to another mulus mulum scabit, one scab'd mule knaps another,
and graculus assidit graculo, one jaw jangles with another; we sing all one
song, though clean out of tune, as that ungrateful scabgooke; the Cuccow in
June, after she have torn (like our Church and State Vipers) the kind bird
who bred her and fed her: yea I say more, though these three junior
Rabshekah's, should be as snarling heretofore one against another as hounds in
a kennell, or in couples, yet as they are united Nimrods in hunting to the very
death, if they could, the most honorable and noble blood which runs in the
veins of both Houses, with bloody pens and tongues (till they get Cains sword,
and Herod's axe, for all innocuous John's, Naboths and Abels) me thinks eo
nomine, even this tie of fraternity in villainy, should reconcile them, as much
as ever Herod and Pilate against Christ. Ephraim and Manasses against Judah,
Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, against true Protestants, Antinomians, Socinians,
Familists, Arminians, and other Heretics, all against the orthodox and true
believers, how ever different all amongst themselves, like the heads of the
serpent Amphis^ena, one fighting against another (as indeed Bees agree together
in one hive, Pismires in one mossie hill; yea sevis inter se convenit ursis,
Bears in one cave; Foxes in woods, yea in Towns, in sheeps clothing; in
Cities in fox fur gowns, yet all against innocent Lambs) as Devils agree
together in one hell, and their agents, and Jesuitized, Achitophilized,
Hammanized, Papized, Athized working tools on earth, as Tobiah the Ammonite,
and Sanballat the Horonite, and Geshem the Arabian against our Ezraes and
Nebemiahs and the Elders of Israel, to hinder the re-edifying of our Jerusalem,
the Reformation of Religion, and the repairing, and purging of our Temples,
Neb. 2. 19. and 6. 2. as the Scribes and Pharisees, and Saduces, and Herodians,
still against Christ and his Disciples, his true Ministers and his Messengers,
as the Syrians, the Ammonites, and the Moabites, against every zealous
Jehosaphat, 2 Chr 20. 2. as the Elders of the people, the Priests, and my Lord
Pashur whilom against Jeremy, to imprison his body, to smite him with the
tongue, and not to hearken to his words, Jer. 18. 18. (more then Schismatickes,
Episcopists, and deaf adders now, to such true Seers, and Prophets, as God
has sent and set amongst us) all that bear evil unto Sion, and that hate to
be reformed, Ps. 50. now being tied and combined together like Sampsons foxes,
with firebrands in their tails and in their tongues too, to fire our Church
and State in new raised combustions, as we may see the nature of every other
Fox and Malignant wolf in the Church even in these now, who by their lewd
Libells, and poisonous Pamphlets, have cast aspersions both upon our Senators
and Synod, as foul as false, to bring them in contempt with the fluctuate and
credulous mutable multitude, who will believe their ears in a manner before
their eyes, and take up ought like a ball at rebound, and snugge in any
scandal, chiefly against great men and good men their superiors, though they
knew the Devil were the author of it, or his hell hatched Seminaries, like
these lying Mercuries: with whom to grapple a little closer.

First, I wonder they blush not, as they would, if they had not impudent
harlots brows of brass, and foreheads of iron, to stumble so foul at the
threshold (as Crassus did when he went his fatal expedition against the
Parthians, and Caesar to the Senate where he was stabd, even in the Title
wherewith they christened the spurious brats of their brains with the name of
Mercury, which Mercury if we believe Poets or Historians, was as very a Thief,
as ^^yron, or Ca^us, or our English Luke Hutton and Mannering, or any of our
Robcarriers in these late wars (though now of the Hastings, deserving a
Newcastle) with all he was a cheater, and a liar, a couzener, and an imposter,
like the Turkish Mahomet, the Spanish Gusman, Lazarillo de Tormes, and our most
nimble Troynovant City Sinons, besides he was euripus homo a wavering wimble, a
fluctuate fellow, an unconstant weathercocke, suited as a temporizer for all
persons and places, as the plannet Mercury is said to be good with the good,
and bad with the bad, like our Mercurialized newters, Disciples with Disciples,
and Traitors with Pharisees, as once Judas; soft wax fit for any impression,
and white paper fit for any print, as Camelions for any color but white (being
every thing but honest.) Fourthly, as Hermes was one of the names of Mercury,
joined with Aphrodite, signifying the Sea foame, one of the Epithites of Venus,
there was produced a kind of masculine feminine monster, called Hermophrodite
(like some Harres and Hienaes) neither male, nor female, but both, as these our
Mercuries are: as we say of archized Buffons and Tarltonists, neither knaves,
nor fools, but both; as a mule is neither an Horse nor an Ass, but both; a
Cynecepholist neither Ape nor Dog, but both; a Meer-maid neither fish nor
flesh, but both; mulier formosa superne desine as in piscem: thus like some
Popes in their own usurped names, these Chaiphasses or Catiffes, have
prophesied trulier of themselves then they wist; Naball is a name, and folly is
in it; and Mercury is their name, and lying, and leizing, and colouging, and
rouging, and dissembling is in it, as in that grand Impostor the Egyptian
Moses, and Bencosba the son of lying in Josephus, and in these Pseudo Princes
recorded in the same Josephus, lib. 17. cap. 14. antiq. and in Melancton
Chronicle lib. 4: p. 358. and in Tacitus lib. 18. page 587. and in Munsters
Cosmography page 171. who took upon them the names of great Potentates, though
they were but Peasants, Se convenient rebus nomina sepe suis, as which
Resetters, Thieves have sympathies, so to their names answer our Mercuries.

Lastly, as Mercury an Outlandish drug, is as rank poison as either Ratsbaine
or Henbaine, or Cicuta, or Bulls-blood that poisoned Themistocles, or any other
poisons not worth naming, by which the Athenians poisoned Socrates and Phocion,
Queen Elinor, fair Rosamond, the Roman Calphurinus his sleeping wives, and
Pope Alexander and his Bastard Borgias themselves, instead of some Cardinals:
so there is as much tongue-venome and poison dropped from the pens of these our
lying libelling Mercuries, as there were diseases in the opened ^anidraes box,
or armed Greeks in the Trojan horse to the intended ruination of all true
Trojans, loyal Patricians in the Senate, and godly well-affected Ministers in
the Synod: yea I add more, As Mercury is a poisoned drug, though enclosed in a
gaudy Apothecaries box, or given like Jaels butter to Sicera in a Lordly dish;
or in the Sacramental bread or wine, as the Monks once so poisoned King John
of England, and Henry the seventh, an Emperor of Germany; So these and such
like mercurialized Scycophants, how did they flatter regallity, and sooth it up
to an unlimited transcendency, in a Persian and Turkish trampling upon all
Laws human, divine, natural, national, and municipall, being like Craterus
rather friends to Alexanders fortunes as a King, then to his person like
Ephestion; yet for all their dawbings, and sowing cushions under their elbowes,
like their Court Chaplains, they give them but poisoned pills in sugar: Joabs
kisses, Judasses, Hail Master, and Ravillacks Jesuitized cringes, with a
rotten heart, and often a truculent hand; they do but pave their way, as
Damocles to Dionisius to injustice, cruelty, and usurpation, yea to their own
acted Tragedies, as with oil and butter; they do but hang them (as once
Darius had prepared) with golden halters, stab them as with Heliogabulus his
golden knives, sting them as the Serpent Tarantula lurking in green grass till
they die laughing, claw them as Tigers to mollify them to themselves, and to
put the spur of oppression to all others; as Patritius in his second Book of a
Kingdom, tit. 1. page 82. and he that writes the Political Courtier, page 82.
resolve their own questions? What made Nero so well educated by Seneca, so
cruel? Caesar such an usurping Rebel against his own Country? Rehoboam so
stern and austere? Tygranes the King of Pontus so tyrannical, ere the Romans
curbed him: in one word, their verdict is to every query, adulatio, adulatio,
flattery, flattery? Mercurialized flattery (which though at first, like sweet
poisons, it be pleasing to the pallat, yet at last, as Solomon speaks of wine
and women, Prove. 9. 17. 18. and cap. 23. 32. it stings like a Serpent and bites
like an Adder, which caused Sigismund the Emperor, as Melancton has it in his
Chronicles ( lib. 5. page 630.) to hit a flatterer a good box on the ear,
with this memento, Cur me mordes, why do thou bite me, and caused Zerpes
says Strigellus in his Chronicles part. 2. page 119. to desire Demaratus a
wise Counselor ever to speak to him, rather vera, things that might profit
him, then jucunda, delightsome things to please him: This caused also Attila
the King of the Huns, to cast some scycophantizing Poems of the Calabrian Poet
Marulus into the fire, in which he had too hyperbolically extolled him:
Antigonus for the same cause, says Tholosanus in his Commonwealth, lib. 6.
cap. 12. page 339. distasting and detesting the flaughing Poems of Hermoditus,
because he would have made him (as they some Gnatonists, Alexander) the son
of Jupiter, and si quid mea carmina possunt: if I might be held wise or worthy
enough to censure, our Mendatious and malignant Mercuries mixed with saturnall
spirits, which cast aspersions on our state Ephorists and Patriots as black as
their inck, or that which the fish Scilopendra vomits out to blunder often, and
to trouble clean waters; and these Court holy waters more poisonous then those
of the Stygian lake, which they sprinkle upon a Princely Monarchy, to do after
the Persian Law, quod libet, licet, every thing, or any thing, without being
questioned, Pope like, with cur ita facis, why does it so? or without such
relation to counsel and counselors (as the best temperamentum ad Pondus, in
the body Politic) as the hot Heart (an emblem of regality) has reference to
the bellows of the lungs to blow upon it, and to cool it: I say, I would have
all such Mercurialized gilded paper poisons, merely consumed by Tobacco pipes,
like Tobacco, to smoke, or like the flattering Courtier Thurinus by smoke, as
merely consecrated to Vulcan; or in the best use, if reprieved: I would have
them employed by some Chandelours to stop Mustard-pots; or by Monsier A-jaix,
as Harringtons Satyrs have metamorphized him.

Withal I further expostulate with my mercenary Mercury, or Mounsier Mendax,
why he, or any of his fraternity, was so long from the 10, 11, and 12, to the
17, 18, 19 of April in weaving a poor spiders web or Arachnees clew out of
their own invenomed bowels, to catch poor credulous plebeian flesh fleas; or
rather in hatching of a wind egg or two, which by the incubation of some
Toads, as poisonous as themselves, may bring forth Cockatrices; egregiam certe
laudem and spolia ampla tulisti, every one of you have stoutly lied and vied
for the whet-stone: and after some pumping of your hide-bound genius, with Juno
Lucina fer opem, perturiunt montes, nascitur riduculus mus, you have brought
forth a mouse to get into the Trunkes of Alephants, or rather a black Rat to
gnaw all Parliamentary papers and edicts; yet I prophecy, that if you be once
caught out of your lurking holes, and Cacus dens, where you securely croake (as
all Schismatic frogs) in corners, we have state storkes would catch you by
the crags, and Lionized Cats, would clapper-claw you till you squeaked; and
perhaps you may at last find by woeful experience, that you may sigh or sing
Ovids Elegiackes, with ingenio perii; your own wits may be your own woes, as
Cambises and Saul were slain with their own swords; as Adonijah spoke words,
and a Lieutenant of the Tower write lines, like Vrias his letters, to their
own deaths; so your own pens (with propriis configimur pennis) with which
you prick and pierce our Senators, as with the sharpened quills of
Porcupines, may pierce your selves; as its noted that Cassius and Brutus,
killed themselves with those very swords which they drew against Caesar; it may
be you may know what it is to pulLions by the beard; you may buy repentance as
dear by your abused wickedwits spurted (as mad dogs their slavers, as enraged
Boares their froth, and horses their foams) in the very faces of disgraced
Grandees; as Antiphon bought his bold jest broken upon Dionisius which cost
him his head; or as Anaxarchus bought his sarcismes cast upon Anacreon, which
afterward brayed him in a mortar; as Pantaleon was cast into a dark cave, and
fed with the bread of affliction to his dying day for his base aspersions cast
upon Arsinoe the wife of Lisimachus. No less tragical were the Iromes which
some of the Nobles of Arragon spurted on Ranimirus their King, recalled out of
a Monastery, which cost no less then eleven of them their lives, with this
caveat, ignor at vulpecula, cum quo ludat, the Fox knows not with whom he
plays when he is too bold with the Lion, as the tongue tragedies of these and
many more, you may see writ in their own blood (as yours may be in time) if you
have either will to read them, or skill to understand them, largely historified
by Collenutius in his first book of the History of Naples p. 20. by Hagaceus
in his Bohemian Chronicle, part. 2. page 171. by Strigellius upon Justin. page
169. by Woffius in his memorables Tom. 1. page 359. chiefly by Erasmus in his
Apothegmes in his sixth book, fol. 478, 479. sc. 548, 549, and in his 7 book
fol. 633. to all whom their own licentious and scurrilous wits, unguided like
Bellirophus horses, without the Minervaes bridle of wisdom, were as fatal and
tragical, as the horse of Sejanus was to Cassius and Tolobella, and to every
one of his Masters, and the Tholous gold to every one that possessed and
plundered it, in whose broken glasses you may see so far your own faces; that
as generous spirits (like Alexander in pardoning King Porus, and in killing
audacious Clitus and too bold Calisthenes) are always more exasperated with
words then with swords, and will rather pardon Targets against them then
tongues; so you may at last come to buy your impetuous scurrility in your
scandalum magnatum in the highest degree, as dear as Semei his reviling of
David, 2 Samuel 16. as Ra^shekah his railings against Ezekias, 2 Kin. 19. as
Michol her mockings of her royal husband, 2 Samuel 6. as Ismael and Hagar their
profane scoffs against Isaac* Genesis 21. yea as copious as I have heard his
invectives against a Platonicall Rex pacificus, revenged by an English Heroes;
or as those brats of Bethlehem brought their hereditary scurrilous taunts
against that Roundhead, sound-head Elisha, torn (as their tongues had torn
him) by She-bears in a just retaliated vengeance, 2 King. 2. such Curs as you
bawling so long against Lions, and such Crows as you, chattering so long
against incensed Eagles, that they may lacerate and tear you as Hercules did
Ops, since patientia lae sa furor, the most noble and masculine patience abused
turns into rage, as sweet wine into sour vinegar; even a patient Abner too
far provoked beyond his temper may smite with his sharp spear a scurrilous
Hazael, whose loose tongue runs swifter then his heels, 2 Samuel 2. 23. and for
your parts, were you known, I am persuaded as you speak and write what you
will, you should suffer what you would not, nemesis a Tergo, a just revenge,
dogs and haunts your unjust railing, like Brutus his ghost, you have a Cerberus
that barks within you, called conscience, if it be not seared and cauterized,
that multa miser timeo, quia seri multa proterve.

Needs must I fear to suffer much ere long,
Since against earthly Gods raged has my tongue.
I have brought on me earth, and Heavens ire,
By my inflamed tongue, with hels hot fire.
In Phlegeton my tongue must feel most flames,
Because it here has scortcht most noble names.
Poena culpa proportionata.
My punishment shall answer my demerit,
When I belch out my Lucianized spirit.
Since against Christ, and all his Saints I fought,
My wage must suit the work that I have wrought.
As I have acted parts of Porphi^ie,
And Julian, their hell still gapes for me.
In the mean space, quod defertur non aufertur, adest Rammisia nemesis, Thy
tongue devises mischief like a sharp raizour, working deceitfully; Thou
love evil more then good, and lying rather then to speak rightcousnesse;
Thou love all deceiving words, Oh thou deceitful tongue, God shall likewise
for ever destroy thee, he shall take thee away and pluck thee out of thy
dwelling house, and out of the land of the living; the righteous also shall see
and fear, and laugh at thee, Psalm. 52, 53. 4, 5, 6. The verdict is past, the
decree thou see is gone out like the decrees of the Medes and Persians from
the upper house of Heaven, how ere thou slight, villifie and nullify this
lower house on earth, where God is terrible in the assembly of his Saints, both
in the Senate and the Synod: but thou say, quid haec ad rom bum, what is
this to sly Mercury, thou scofest them as bruta fulmina, squibs and
fire-workes, lightning and thunder, without bolts, and sleights the decrees of
God, as much as of our terrestrial Gods, yea, as over shoes, over boots,
adding thirst to drunkenness, the Cain-like defense of the sin to the
offense, thou with a brazen brow pleads recte fecisti; like Saul, that thou
have said and done all well, I Sam. 15. though mors in olla, death be in the
ink pot, and in penna Gehenna, hell be in the pen (as in the sanguinnolent
letters once of Ahab and Jezabel against Naboth, 1 King. 21. 6. of the Scribes
and Pharisees against the primative Saints, Acts 9. 2, 3. of that accursed
Court Commet Hamman, against the Jews, Hester 6. and (as some say, aut
mentiuntur poetae) out of the English Court Frenchified into Ireland, dyed red
with the blood of a C. and so thousand Protestants) yet Matchiavillian Mercury
like Solomon's Harlot wipes his mouth, and says, he has not sinned; he
presents like some Churchwardens once omnia been all is well on his part, he
finds an ignoramus in himself of any delinquency against the Parliament, he is
not loose in the fast, he will stand stiffly to his tackling, and like Tom tell
troth, justify what he has said, as a plain Macedonian, calling a spaid, a
spaid; he is not bird-mouthed, he will say more; but to stop his mouth with
this bone to gnaw on, or choake-peare, and to cope up this Bear with this
muzzle: how is it then, that like the Persians and our wild vilde Irish, he
throws his poisoned darts and runs away? how is it that after crowing before
the victory, this Craven flies the pit (as the French coward once in a duel
from the Irish Coursey) ere ever stroke be given? how is it that he plays
least in sight, walks by owl-light, and keeps hearts in Tenebris? how is it
that like a wag-taile, a Scarabaean flea, or a Gentleman in debt, he skips here
and there, as a squirrill in a tree, we know not how to seize on him; nay as
though he had Gyges his ring, walking invisibly? how is it that we cannot find
him? how is it that he dare not father his bastard-lyes, of which his corrupt
heart was the mother, his tongue the midwife, and the wicked world (now
fostering all villainy) the nurse; sure truth seeks no corners: And if Mercury
reply that I am an Anomist as well as he, and so retort upon me medice cura
teipsum, to cure my self in what I think him diseased; I tell him impar
congressus; there is not the like case nor cause: for first, its probable I am
known, or may be ex consequenti, as Hercules his proportion by his foot, and
the Lion by his paw, so far as I can scarce be concealed, if I would live,
lurk, and sleep in a warm skin. Secondly, why should I reveal my self to an
Antagonist? I know not against whose imaginary person to fight, I should but
beat the air, sow the wind, and reap the whirlewind: but let Mr. Mercury be
Mercury sublimating, or- Mercurius sublimus, hold up his head like a man; sub
dio, sub jove f^igus, let him not as the woodcocke from the fouler, or the Ass
from the Woolfe, hide his head in a bush; or as the Panther hides his horrid
head from the lesser beasts till he devour them, showing them only his
speckled, and spotted body, and then I will so show my self in displayed
colors, that we will run at Tilt, till I hope to unhorse him, though perhaps
I shall never un-Asse him, making himself here a wicked witty fool in Print,
a mere As in presenti, that to please his Malignant masters, he may have As in
futuro, so many yellow dusted studs, as may trap him, like Apulejus his golden
Ass, being as yet but mere Eu^nanus his Ass, faining to roar in a Lions
skin, or a sympathizing foale of Balaams Ass boldly kicking both at Prophets
and Patritians, to kick both out of Ecclesiastical and secular seats.

But I have curried this Ass enough with my toothed pen in general
satirizings, only to make him as humble as that Ass who only of irrationalls
carried Christ (as Saint Christopher and his Virgin mother of rationalls) being
for the present as proud in his imaginary carrying of Regality on his back to
Westminster, as that Ass was in the Poet, which carried the goddess Isis; or
that Mule in the French Stevens Apology, who being borrowed of a Lady, to carry
a Pope, would never suffer any to bestride her after, but the Pope, as though
she had been a Beucephalus, and her carriage an Alexander.

But let us hear the Mercurialized Ass (in his own conceit, tanquam Asinus
ad Liram, or Asinus ad Tribunal) brey in his own dialect, as far from the
wit of a true Mercury indeed, Nuncius deorum* who charmed Argus, or of
Mercurius Trismegistus, who was the Legifer of the Aegrohans, as Thirsites is
far from the wit of an Ulysses, or wisdom of Nestor, or Bavius and Mevius
from the sweet numbers* of Virgil and Ovid; but listen how he begins, as the
Irish, with an*

O hone, like a Bittern and dying Hena.

With a groan, O, he cries, Sick, sick, sick.

Alas! what is the matter? some Gallienist or Paracelsian soon to* cast his
water, or some Jupiter menecrates to save himself, we lose a most precious don
quipot, whose wits sparkle like salt in the fire, and make such pastime-passing
measure, as there needs no other fool nor fiddler where he comes: But what is his
sickness, sure he has* took no surfeit, like his Idolized Prelates of slit
noses and cropped ears, whose heads have been ever since wrapped with rent
rotchets; nor is he pained with the stone in his Pharoized heart, for that as
white powder and sulfuration kills without noise; but its probable by his hot
mouth and his furd tongue that had need be escaped by some Skinner, it is so
foul, that his blood is wonderously distempered in the burning feavor of some
raging lust: I see by his color he is troubled with a very bad liver, and I
smell by the vapors of his stinking breath, blasting even pure white paper,
much more Patutians, that he has very rotten lungs; and without question he is
much troubled with the spleen, that Epidemicall disease spreads further then
any plague amongst all his fellows, from all parts of the land, running as
frenzy and Popery in a blood, as an hereditary disease amongst them; or it may
be this Bacchanalean, is top or tap heavy, he has wanted sleep so long, that
he begins to rave or talk idly, he had need have some poppy, opium, or
dormitory drug, or Hellibore to restore him to his right wits.

Oh, but he is sicker then he was, call in neighbors, hold up his head, he
begins to perbreake his mind in a dog-sicke drunken vomit, a besome and a
bowl presently, or a Scavinger, up with it man, if it be but a gallon it will
ease thy stomach; I doubt he will disgorge his very gal, there comes matter
from him as black as ink, as poisonous as Sodomes lake, which infects the fish
thrown in it, and the birds which fly over it. The only way to cure him
thoroughly now, that he casts naturally, and as physically as any hawke (since
he still raves) is to phlebotomize him in his vain veins, and to make an
incision into his scull (perhaps there may fly out^dotterils, widgyns, and
woodcockes, and to take out his brains and well washed with holy water, and
stopped like a calves head with salt and sage, so stitch it up again with some
sollid counsel, he may come to be as sound both in body and brain, as the
eight wise men, or a gull of Gotham, capable to be vicar of all fools, chiefly
if he be dieted daily with Rue, and Thrisis and True love, and Heartsease, and
All heal, alias patience, and rubbed over a while with unguentum baccalinum, or
Crab-tree oil in Bedlam, or Bridewell, he may yet live many a fair day, to
come to the office of Mr. of Revels or Rebels, or Lord of mis-rule: but he is
not only sick himself, as I gather by his groaning O: and by the symptoms of
his diseases, dropped even from his polluted pen, but as though this
Mountebanke quacksalver, or some of his fellow Empericks, pitied them, or could
prescribe their cure, he tells us that the Saints are sick, and he disturbs
their distempers with more distemper in himself (as Diogenes once trampled
Platoes pride with his dirty feet in greater pride) that the Saints are sick I
marvel not, yea sick to the very heart, mourning like Doves in the desert,
and Pelicans in the wilderness, yea washing their very couches with tears, and
their beds with weeping, for their own sins, and the sins and sufferings
of the times, as did David, Hezekias, Lot, Jeremy, Ezra, Nehemiah, and other
holy mourners in Sion, in their days, Psalm. 6. Psalm. 38. Psalm. 51. 2 King. 20.
Esaias 38. 2 Pet. 2. Nehem. 1. Ezra 10. Jer. 9. 1. as indeed they have now more
cause then ever to be soule-sicke, and to weep streams of blood for the
slain of the people both corporeally and spiritually; to see still the
distempers of these unjoynted cuperate, bleeding, if not last breathing,
Antipodized times, in which the whole head is sick in the body Political, and
the heart heavy; yea from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot,
nothing but wounds, blaines and putrifactions, Esa 1. 6. and likely to mend
(like winter ways, sour Ale in summer, roten apples, and old gangreen ulcers)
still worse and worse, chiefly when the State Physicians are obstructed in
their cures by such rash and rude Empericks as himself, who all infected as
with the Kings evil, from Dan to Beershebah, would so cure Church and State,
by reducing again Papized, Diotrephian, domineering Episcopacie, without any
modification, as by prosecuting in statu quo prius, Altar bowing, and turning
all Religion like* bottle Ale into frothy Ceremonies, drawing in so, perverted
Popery by Hispaniolized and Frenchified stratagems, as by head and shoulders
(as Talus beasts into his den) by bringing upon us downright Popery, to the
probable more then Parisian Calabrian, Merindolian, and Queen Mary's Mass
massacring of our bodies, to the loss of Religion, the life of our souls, by
a conflagration, and a Phaetonian confusion of all; he and his Parliamentary
antagonists, would so bring us peace with loss of grace: as the sons of
Brutus brought peace to themselves and Rome, in sweating to bring in the
bannished Taraquins; or as the Duke de Alva, that Storke amongst Belgicke
frogs, brought peace to the Netherlands, in laboring with Cardinal Greenvill
to plant (with Bishops) the Spanish Inquisition; or as the Macedonian Phillip,
proffered peace to the Athenians upon the delivery of their City Atlas, (the
Speaker in their Parliament) Demosthenes; which was as he told them, parallel
to the Wolves, who would swear peace and truce with the Shepherds, upon
condition they would hang up all their dogs, the keepers of them, and of their
flocks. Alas poor Quacksalvers, you knew much the true cause of our war, or
cause or cure for grace and peace, as if you should cure an ulcerous rankling
wound with oils of mace or vitruo, without cutting out the poisoned bullet:
you are so drunk with wine and wrath, or prejudicate opinion, as Crows with
vomiting nuts, that you discern of things that differ, as blind men of
colors, yea betwixt transcendent regality, and legality (keeping it Sea-like
within its bounds and limits) as Midas with his Asses ears, betwixt Pans harsh
and untuned pipe, and Apolloes harmonious lute. This mental madness, and
intoxication of French Philters makes Mercury smile (to give you his Rhymes
without reason) to see our Senators cursed plots should want success, and
leave them sots; in which to give him a Rowland for his Oliver, and to pen
prick this windy bladder, or watery bubble, lest he swell too big, even till he
burst like the fabled frog.

WHat a Simplician, what a Sot,
Have I to grapple with, God wot?
By what inventions, wiles, and strains,
Shall I beat wit into his brains?
With what Collirium Celidine,
Shall I rub, scrub his dazzled eyne?
Where shall I beg, or buy in sadness,
Right Hellibore to cure this madness.
Of this unworm'd, mouth-foaming Cur,
Who foists, and keeps a stinking stur.
As Cerberus his fiercest whelpe,
Who against Sun and Moon does yelpe;
Our Plannets, and our fixed Stars,
As Centaures bold, once managed Wars
Against Heaven: and Pelion piled high
On Ossa, for to scale the sky:
How this mad head, malignant heart
Re-acts again, each furious part
Of Ajax, Hercules enraged,
And Bajazet in irons caged:
Who like that demonaick Saul
Just Jonathans would nail toth' wall;
Our David's, our sage Senators kill,
And stab with his Goose (poisoned) quill;
That to a Pistol turns his pen
To shoot to death out Statiz'd men.
Now Cyclopst, like blind Polipheme,
Ulisses does no more esteem,
Then a Phlebeian Corrydon,
Who woolfe-like would gnaw on his bone:
What Orphean lire, can charm brute blocks,
More then wild Tigers Panthers fox:
When they a quarrel mean to pick,
Both sheep and shepherds blood to lick:
For who, but an incarnate devil,
A villainy trained and flesht in evil,
Like Jaques Clement, Ravillack,
Faux Lopus, worst of all the pack,
Of Papiz'd Serpents, subtle snakes,
Fresh spawned from the stigian lakes,
Would make such dire and damned constructions,
That they should be the States destructions,
Who are State Decians, Phocions,
Horatians, Scipioes, Fabians;
Yea the Kings friends, and in their wars
Foes to his Gavestons, Hammans, Cars;
With all props to our Churches vines
For falling, rotting, it declines
To dregs of Papal superstition,
The worst of any vines condition;
To call such Catoes, Catelines,
Hanniballs, our Hectors in base lines;
Heretics, and Schismatics, our Divines,
Orthodox in Sinod, or dry vines;
Our Patriots, Pirates, Pilates, Traitors,
Tymous misanthropists, Prince-haters;
Our strongest Pillars, Caterpillars,
Canniballs, assidates, blood-spillers
Our peace projectors, and protectors,
Delinquents, Censors, and Correctors:
Who but known knaves, Dulmans proud sots,
Would stigmatize, all these for plots.
But I leave descanting in Verse, to plain prose, like plain dealing, (Poets
being the best of writers, except Orators in prose, by Sir Henry Savils
censure;) only I take notice of his jeare, risi successuposse carere dolos,
that their plots, as he blasphemes their political proceedings should want
success; so had they been successful he had hugged them, as doli boni, and
pia frauds, very legal plots in his own phraise: blind buzzard, that
measures the regularity or irregularity of an action by the success: so no
doubt this Simplician had applauded the powder Treason, had it succeeded as
much as Pope sextus the assassinating of the French King, or Mariana the
Parisian massacre, or Cardan his Nero, and Cateline, or some the Sicilian
evening song, in butchering the French, and Yorkes betraying of Devontree;
Sinon of Troy, Zopirus of Babylon, Pope Clemens and the French Kings ruinating
of the Templers, (as some Carnalists now justify, the barbarous cruelties, and
Canniballized inhumanities of the Irish wolves, lately devouring our English
Protestants) because of their good success: O Pasquill Mad-caps, and
giddyheaded Ganders, to measure actions fame-worthy in their own nature, to be
blameworthy because of bad success; blame the preaching of the word then,
because it is to some the savor of death, as it was to Herod, Judas, Pharaoh,
the unbeleeving Jews and Gentiles; blame the Sun, because it hardens the
clay, causes weeds and tares to grow as well as fruits and corn, and makes
dunghils to stink; blame good seed, because falling into stony and thorny
ground, it brings forth no fruit; blame a skillful Physician, and his best
physic, because it always works not wished effects in some impatient
patients, which effects must come from God, as we may see in the cases of
Hezekias and Asa, 2 Chr. 16. 2 King. 20. for non est in medico semper relevetur
ut aeger, bad causes often producing good effects, as ex malis moribus bonae
leges, good laws proceeding from bad manners; as pearls, its said, are got in
the heads of some Serpents, yea Antidotes against poisons, even from poisonous
snakes and newtes: And the Redemption of the world, by divine providence helped
forward by Judas his treachery, and the Jews cruelty, Acts 4. 27, 28. as the
Lord gets glory in Justice or Mercy, in punishing or pardoning, even from the
sins of men, Romans 5. 20. so on the contrary, good causes often produce bad
effects: as zealous preaching, like a good mother, produced bad daughters, in
the undeserved imprisoning of Paul, Silas, Jeremy, the beheading of John
Baptist, the burning of Hierome of Prague, John Husse, Savinoriola, our
Latimer, it costing him his hearts blood, as he often prophesied it would. Oh the
madness not only of this many headed beast the multitude, but of all other
Brutized Carnalists, Moralists, Newters, papized, and ill-affected of all
sorts, who bellow against the Parliament, and gore them in the sides, and toss
them as mad Bulls of Basan, on the horns of their powers, because their
devoures and endeavors as yet want wished and expected success; having eyes
as quick as Linceus, or the Serpent Epidaurus to look at their real or
imaginary failings perhaps as men (they being neither Gods nor Angels, but men,
subject to errors like Moses, Aaron, David, Solomon, and the rest, the best)
and like Cocatrices and Basilisks, poisoning what they spy in their Heteroclite
successes: but being blind as moles in descerning what God has done by them
already (eaten bread being forgotten) in securing the Kingdom from foreign
invasion, in removing or obstructing Achitophellized counselors and counsels
from the King, in preventing that massacre which was plotted for England, as
well as Ireland, by Cardinal Barbarino Cimeus, the Popes Nuntio, and other
sanguinnolent agents here, discovered in Mr. Pryns Romes Masterpiece, by
securing every man's propriety from a sic volo, sic jubeo, Dominus opus habet,
chiefly from an overflowing and innundation of Popery, as it broke in upon us
in many opened sluices unstopped, but daily made wider, as any may see that is
not purblinde, or shuts not his eyes against the Sun.

And what though as is pretended, and as this Ismalitish Mercury scoffs, that
the Parliament has an Army of Sectaries, though the Husbandmen perhaps were
too supine, whilst these tares were sown by Jesuits unsuspected, undetected,
camelionized into pretended Tradesmen* and Soldiers, Enthusiastically
inspired, as Lay plebeian preachers; yet these Sectaries are not so strongly
radicated as Popery, nor so sanguinnolent, and State-firing, nor so difficult
to be suppressed, being but like their primitive predecessors in all ages,
nubiculae cito transenutes, cloud which will soon be blown over, felt we but
once the Favonian winds and gales of a gracious-peace, besides these Sects are
not to be ascribed to the Parliament more then Goodwins sands to Steutertons
steeple, they being but as ill humors to be purged out, or as Kibes,
Carbuncles, Botches, glassie eyes, and wooden legs in the body; no part of the
body Political or Ecclesiastical; and suppose they be too glutinous and
viscous, as yet to be purged, yea that the sons of Zerviah be as yet too strong
for those of the house of David, Zach. 12. 10. yea suppose to speak mystically
that Themistocles his young boy should by degrees and gradations, sway too much
in Athens; yet our Parliamenteires are to be pitied as passives, not scoffed as
actives, if in any thing exposing them to the stars or spits of construction,
they be as some in a Coach carried or hurried, not in their own natural, but
in a more coactive motion, as in some cases (as I have found experimentally in
my self and others) and as many can give the probatum est, a man as David
once, yea a conglobed society may be in such streights, 2 Samuel 24. 14 sailing
as it were betwixt the Scylla of some inconveniences, and the Caribdis of some
mischiefs, that do what he can with the improvement of all his best powers
and parts, he shall split upon one or other with some shipwreck, will he, nill
he; like to him in the Fable, who held a wolf by the ears, who if he held him
longer would be sure to bite him, yet if he let him go, he would worry; and is
it not with State Physicians think we, as with corporeal? the patient may be
in such a posture by contrary diseases, some from hot, some from cold causes,
that their best skill and will knows not so to cure one, but they must to
their grief, and nonplussing of Physic increase the other, the salve being
often as ill or worse then the sore; and the medicine more precious then the
disease, dangerous.

But to trace this tripping Mercury further in his impudiating humor, he
danceth without a piper, and cuts his cross capers and Levaltoes, as though he
had a Welsh harp, or Scotch bag piper tuned in such Martial streyns as his
heart could wish; our present frets being his mental music, he plays as a
Porpoyce and a Dolphin, in our supposed storms, and makes himself merry (with
that which makes every gracious heart sorry) with the City murmuring, the
Apprentices mutining, the Scots voting the Parliament Covenantcrackers, false,
fraudulent, every one cursing them, ready to cut their throats, the West and
Wales, and all against them; and this is his sandy and unglewed argument that
therefore their cause is naught: he might as well have concluded as much
against Elias when Ahab, Jezabel, the Priests of Baall, all Israel bowing to
Baal, he thought himself Bird alone, not one to stand for him, 1 King. 9. 14
and against Jeremy when the Fedifragous King, the fluctuate people, the
perfideous Elders, the Prelaticall Pashur, and all were against him, except one
Blackamore, and he saw nothing but pikes, perils, imprisonments, death and
danger; all being so adulterous and treacherous against him, that he wished for
a wilderness to lurk from them, Jer. 9. 2. cap. 20. 2. and 9. 10. and against
Moses and Aaron, against whom the people so often murmured, and were so sore
incensed, that they took up stones to stone them, Exodus 15. 24. cap. 16. 2. 3.
Number. 20 3. cap. 21 5. Numb. 16. 41, 42. but chiefly against David, against whom
as the trial of his faith, fortitude, patience and dependence on God, ere God
settled him in his promised Kingdom, that he might first crown his sufferings
(as he did Jobs patience, and Paul's perseverance, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. and make him
exemplary to all employed by God in great works, for his glory, and the good
of a people) he set not only Saul against him to hunt him as a Partridge, but
the Zephins, Achitophel, Doeg and his own wife Micholl to mock him, and
Shemei to revile him, yea the very people to stone him, being often in such
straights, (greater then our Parliament ever yet) that he thought there was
but a step betwixt him and death, 1 Samuel 20. 3. chap. 23. 16. chap. 24. 14.
chap. 30. 6. Yea, might not this fellow have concluded as much against some of
the German Henry's, and Fredericks: fighting the Lords battles, when one
Antichristian Pope after another had excommunicated them, and armed their own
Subjects against them: yet some of them for all this marvelously, and
miraculously delivered, as were often the Hugonites in France, Huniades in
Hungare, Luther in Saxon, Queen Elizabeth here in England, the late Polsgrave
(called the King of Bobemia) and millions more in History, whom God preserved
and reserved to better times, and to better ends and purposes, after he had
pulled them as brands out of the fire, and brought them Daniel-like out of the
very jaws of Lions, and as his three courageous servants out of the very
flaming furnace, where they were tried as pure gold, ere the Lord effected by
them those great works of reformation, or preservation of a people, for which
he fitted them by many fiery trialls, and sure if the Parliament stand for God,
as he has promised to stand for them, and to deliver them as all his true
Members, Ministers and Magistrates, out of all their troubles, and to honor
them which honor him, Josh, 1. 5. Heb. 12. 6. Psalm. 34. 18, 19. 1* Sam. 2. 30.
Act. 18. 10. Esaias 43. 1, 2, 3. Though all the created principalities and powers
in earth and hell were against them, they must prosper and flourish: if their
work be of men, I must confess the decree is against them, it will come to
naught, Act. 5. 38* the branches that are not in Christ wither, Joh. 15. 6. But
if their work be of God it cannot be overthrown, Act. 5; 39. who fight against
it fight against God, as glass tilting against brass, to their breaking, as
waves surging and blustering against a rock, dashing themselves to froath and
foame; omnes priminter divinitus, he that consults with many Instances given by
Melancton in his Postills, part, 3. p. 553. and Strigellius on the Psalms, page
66. in Psalm. 8. shall see Gods hand fearfully on those who have had heads,
hearts, or hands against his Church: as also other Instances given by the same
Author, in Psalm. 41. page 334. in Hezekias, Constantine, Obediah, Abdemelech,
the widow of Sarepta, John Frederick the Duke of Saxony; and I may add our
English late Deborah, our Elizabeth, with many more, friends of the Church, in
hac vita gloriose ornati, ever gloriously honored and patronized in this life,
which I prescribe as a cordial and cooler to our Senators, against the hot
tongue poison of this Mercurialized son of Beliall, who being more perfect in
his lying, then in his Latin-tongue, tells us of the brave exploits of two
turn-coats in Wales, Poyer and Powell in three times defeating the forces sent
against them, though I have it from the mouth of a credible Colonel, that
being but one 100. or 2000. sent against them, have driven them into their
Cony-burrowes, their Castles (stronger then Tyrones old Forts of bogs, woods
and mountains) but I see in most lying and flying news, most speak not as
the truth is, but as they would tune it, as they are affected and infected; but
leaving this as trivial, that in which his serpentina quedam sanies, his
serpentine spirit shows it self the most is; that as Satan's working tools
desirous to cast his Ataes ball, and Phaetonian flames betwixt the Scots and
Parliament. This Bedlam blatters that they have voted them Covenant-crackers,
false, and fraudulent in all their undertakings. A sharp fang'd Cur, indeed he
bites deep in taxation, if the clapper of his tongue were not loose hung in
his probation; venting but merely like the echo, an airy sound, for it were
better his tongue were cheese, and all the Cats in the Town were nibling it,
ere this were any truer then Aesops fables, or Lucians Dialogues.

I hope our Parliament has more care of credit with man, and confidence with
God, then to break that Covenant which is witnessed and sealed by oath before
the great God of heaven, which even medea in euripides, calls Juramentorum
custos, the great Lord Keeper of oaths inviolable, most severely always
punishing their infringers; as any that will but consult Historians, chiefly
Honicer his Theater of examples, our D. Beard in his Theater of Gods
judgments, and Paul of Hitzin in his Ethics, lib. 2. cap. 18, 20. shall see
the fearful justice of Earth and Heaven, falling upon Zedekias breaking* his
sworn fealty with Nabuchadnezzar, upon the Carthaginians, so often in fringing
their oaths with the Romans. One Hatto the Bishop of Mentz at last eaten with
Rats, by perjury betraying Albert the Marquess of Bamburg, to Lodovick the
third Emperor chiefly, on Paches the Athenian Captain, killing himself after
he had by a false oath murdered Hippias, and won his besieged City. One
Laudislaus King of Hungary and Poland, who the year 1614. by the counsel of
Cardinal Julian breaking his sworn truce with Amurath the Turk, brought him
into Europe severely to revenge it, with the loss of his life and Crown; as
also of the great Macedonian Phillip, who by the judgment of Pausanias
perished so miserably with all his blood, because according to the proverb and
practice of Lisander, he thought Peers and Princes were to be deceived with
oaths, as children with bables and toys; but I hope I need prescribe no salve,
where as yet I find no sore.

In his next morris dance, this hobbyhorse neighes out profane mirth, in the
revolt of the Lord Inchequin from the Parliament, of whom I will only
interpose thus much:

First, that to give him his due, he has done acts worthy of a brave
Gentleman, a pretented Protestant, and a Martialist, because to the Irish, so
long as he was himself tuned in a right key, as Tanibut sometimes was to the
French, and Huniades, and Richard the first to the Turks, Terror malae gentis,
a terror to his wicked natives; but finis coronat opus, what is it to begin
well, as did Paul's Galathians, Judas the Disciple, Demas Paul's follower, Julian
the Apostate, Nero in his quinquennium: the mutable Occebolius, and some
Pernized weathercocks in our days, and to end ill: to make shipwreck in the
haven, to give, like the Cow, a good meal of milk, and to throw it down with
her heels; to weave and unweave a Penelopes web, since the end crowns every
work; and constancy next to conscience is the grace of every great man, who
would gain and retain the repute of a good man.

Secondly, his revolt is more distastefull to such judicious ones as have
observed his postures as he was active or passive, in that he was not (as vox
populi, which is not ever vox very, has reported him) in any great wants or
exigents in defects of moneys, ever held the very nerves and sinews of War,
since he received as much as any in the Kingdom, large sums from the
Parliament, besides his considerable contributions from the greatest part of
the Province of Munster; for I know the want of men, munition and moneys, has
often much distracted and distressed many Heroyick spirits, and put them upon
strange exigents and inconveniences, when their silver music was too long in
tuning, and made them all frets.

Thirdly, I distaste it the most, that he is joined to the Rebels; but though
I cannot say, as Noah of his son, nec de ^o melius putavi, that I never hoped
better of him; for indeed, his flowery spring promises yet a better harvest
then Popery: yet thus much I say, as I thought once of the great Ormond when he
protected so many Rebels, to the no small prejudice of the Protestants, and
suffered some in Castles to fly out as Wood-cocks in a mist, some officers who
had them in a pinfold, being blinded with white and yellow dust: So I have
thought of Inchequin in some political respects, that at last tandem
aliquando, Joseph could not, would not forget his brethren, more then Queen
Hester could forget her people and kindred, Hest. 8. 6. Nor more then a
Catholic Queen can forget her Catholics, not lying for nothing in the
bosom of a Protestant Prince. Yet notwithstanding I persuade my self he is so
resolute a Protestant, that Totman will not so far turn French, as that he
will revolt to Papisme; the grounds of my persuasion is this:

1. Because his vessel was seasoned with the truth in his childhood, therefore
its hopeful to savor of the tincture, quo semel est imbutare.

Secondly, his conversion from Popery was not coactive, as whipped to it when he
was a ward, as by a violent motion, non trabendo sed ducendo, but by a work of
illumination upon him in hearing of Sermons, therefore more probable to be more
sincere and permanent, it being very observable, that those that are haled and
drawn to any Religion by force or fear, are like Cytteron strings too high
stretched, to stand long in tune without breaking (as Sigebert in his Chronicles
tells us of some Jews enforced to be baptized in Leo Isaurus the third his
time, presently washed it off again, and returned like judaizing dogs to their
own vomit, the like did some Jews in Ratisbone in Henry the 4* time, anno
dom. 1086. as P. Diaconus relates in his Roman History, lib. 11. and Tholosanus
in his Commonwealth, lib. 12. cap. 4* page 722. records the like, Pageants of
some Jews in Spain, anno dom. 694. and Cranzius in his History, lib. 5. cap.
14. of some Vandals, who after the death of their Protestant Prince
Gotschalcus, revolted as sowes to their wallowing, presently to Paganism, but
ex meliori luto finxit precordia Titan, it was not so with Inchequin.

Yet thus much I prognosticate further, That as I hear, he is strongly
Episcopized, this without question was a great prologue to his Regalizing, as
it is indeed judiciously observed, both by Melancton in his Postils, part I
page 77. And Strigellius in his Chronicles, part. I. page 233. that as Princes
do accommodate Religion to the splendor of their Courts (as it was glorious
to see my Lord Bishop like a Pope in pomp, or a Cardinal with his train: so
amongst most Courtiers and Nobles, there be some that even in their Religion,
serviunt principium cupiditatibus, do too much comply with the humors and
inclinations of Princes, pinning their Religion on the sleeves of Monarchs, to
carry which way they will, as true or false, to heaven or to hell; as Pencer
observes in his Chronologicall Lectures, anno 1570. how far both Peers and
people sympathized with Jeroboam in his Golden Calves.

Lastly, I partly prophecy (though like Calchas or Cassandra perhaps I be
scarcely believed) that this confederacy of Inchequin, a Protestant, with the
bloody Canniballized Popish Rebels, will be no more successful, then the
federacy or confederacy of Jehosaphat with wicked Ahab, which we know the issue
it had, 2 Chro. 18. 31. and how sharply God reproved it, 2 Chronicles. 19* 2. even
with a threatened wrath: for I believe Bucholcherus in his Chronicles, page 358.
That Covenants made with the wicked, are both invisa Deo, hateful to God, and
pernitiosa hominibus, dangerous to men: And he that has books to read, and
brains to understand, shall see this, not only affirmed but confirmed in many
instances both of Christians and Pagans, by Melancions Chronology, lib. 1. page
6. by Strigellius in his Chronicles, part. 1. page 56. and his Common places,
part. 3. page 414. as also by Chitreus on Genesis page 282. and in his
Chronicles of Saxony, lib. 14. page* 423. and by our Modern Historians, our
most judicious* Guiccaronie in his Politics, part. 2. page 29. and page 100.
and Cominaeus in his passages lib. 2. page 52. betwixt the French Lewis and
Charles, whither in this rapsody, for brevity, I refer my Reader, as also to
Manl^us his Common places, p. 407. Strigenitius his third Sermon of the calling
of Jeremy, page 18. and to Pencers Historical Lectures, anno 1569. December. 3.
and 1570. July 29. where any shall see Covenants made with Heretics,
Idolaters, men of strange Nations, Natures, Religions, to be as prosperous
usually as for hens to hold leagues with hawks, Israelites to join in
affinities and compacts with Canaanites; as Doves with Eagles, and Sheep with
Wolves.

But once more to retrive my Sprung Woodcock, and to pounce him to some
purpose; as the Poet said, sepe Jocum sepeque bilem vestri movere tumultus. I
know not whether I shall more pity Mounsier Mercury as a witty fool, or be
angry with him as a professed enemy, as Paul said of Elimas the sorcerer, Acts
13. of all goodness and grace; or as Peter of Simon Magus, in the very gall of
bitterness and bond of iniquity, Acts 8. First in tearming the Rebels of
Ireland Catholics (he means good Catholic subjects as ever man hanged upon
his hedge) and with these Catholics forsooth, and the Lord Taffe, a professed
polypragmaticall Papist, a great stickler in the last massacre in Ireland, and
still a firebrand and incendiary in both Climes, he tripudiates that Inchequin
is to join against an Army of Sectaries: very good stuff, Christ must be
untrue, his verdict must not stand, Satan's kingdom must be divided by
Mercuries divinity, his servants and agents for his hellish Hierarchy, must
like the brethren of Cadmus oppose one another, and as the Medianites thrust
their swords in the sides one of another, Sectaries against Sectaries, Irish
against English. 2. Or it may be he means the Papists in Ireland must (as they
fought for the King before, under that color) be employed once more for the
purging of the Temple from Independency and Presbytery, for the re-establishing
and re-planting of Episcopacy, for setting the petty Popes af Lambeth, London,
Lincoln, and other parts, once more on Cock-horse to ride to Dunstable, or to
the Devil, over the necks, and backs of all zealous, powerful, and painful
preachers.

In conclusion for confusion, they must forsooth reform Religion, as Woolves
heal and tear ulcerous and rotten sheep; as clay and mire scour vessels
brighter, as soot and ink wash foul faces fairer; as Mercury heales green
wounds, vinegar sore eyes, the sting of an Aspe takes away the ache in the
flea-blowes; all these the more increasing maladies, miseries, pains, and
perplexities, this reforming being as though Verres and Gusman were appointed
Judges to scour their Circuits of Rogues and Thieves, as Claudius and Clodius,
to reform adulterers, Messalina and Pasiphad, Curtizans Bawds and Concubines,
by inflicting corrective mulcts upon them for their incontinency, and to read
them directive Lectures for chastity.

But to strike with the maine Hammer, reflect a little on Mercuries policy, as
well as piety, and see what a wise and well-wishing worthy Patriot Mercury and
his Mercurialized ones are to their Country, in that they would bring in under
the conduct of Inchequin, now an Army of known, real, foreign Rebels from
another Country, where they are flesht in blood, to fight for their King
forsooth, whom they love as I love their Pope, against his real friends, his
mere imaginary foes, the Westminsterians, whom Mercury marks for Rebels;
bringing them in forsooth, into England to side with his Regalists against
Roundheads, with as much wisdom as the Carians to their cost brought in Cyrus
to end their Civil wars; as the Thebans called in the Macedonian Phillip to
help them against the Phocians; as Duke Boniface brought into Afric,
Genserick the King of the Vandalls against the Emperor Valens, as Leo the
Grecian Emperor fetched in the Turks against the Bulgarians; as Lascus called
in Solomon the Ottoman into Hungary against Fardinand. Theodosius, the Goths
against the Franckes; Stillico the Durgundians, and Swedes against the Goths,
Heraclus the Arabians against the Persians, or the Spaniards in modern times
were brought into Scicily and Naples against the French; or as the last Caliph
of Egypt, called Sarracon, the last Sultan of Siria, into his Country against
Almericus the successor of Baldwin King of Jerusalem, even with such success
as these, and many more, which I could Historifie from Authors and experiments
at this day, may we perhaps bring in for either divided party, either Irish,
French, Spaniard, or Pope, or any foreign Nation, as these recited felt to
their cost, to fish in our troubled waters, to catch silver Eeles in our muds,
our bloods, like Buzzards to swapper at, and tear both Frog and Mouse
fighting, to suck our bloods, sponge our goods, possess our seats, and once
got in amongst us, not to get out, more then pitch out of the bottom of a Can,
scarce rensht out with silver streams, running as clear as Tyne or Tweed: as he
that will be fully possessed of the prejudice of other states, as the glass of
our fates in fetching in foreign Nations to end our controversies, as the
Wolf to be umpire betwixt the Sheep and the Ass, let him read the verdicts of
Politicians, and the Tragedies of these recited, with numerous more. In
Bucholcherus his Chronology, page 389. In Melanctons Chronicle, lib. 4. page
301. 443, 444. In Strigellius his Chronicle part. 1. page 207. part. 2. page
60. In Crutreus his lesser Chronicle, Amor. 93, 94, 95. page 44. In Tholosanus
his Commonwealth, lib. 11. cap. 3. page 656. In Bodius Commonwealth, lib. 5.
c. 5. page 888. In Patritius his Commonwealth, lib. 9. ^it. page 396. As also
in heathenish Authors, chiefly Polibus, lib. 1. p. 15, 16. And Heroditus l. 6.
p. 163. and l. 7. p. 207. which Authors I allege as on a sudden, in two
days I recollected them, both to discover the folly of this frivolous Mercury,
in spinning a web to catch Grandees, with mere rock and spindle of a natural
wit, without any yarne of reading or judgment, as also to muzle or puzle him
from barking any more against, either the Parliament or the Authors, I
allege throughout this Rapsody, the Champions against his cavills and
ungrounded calumny.

In the rest of his Sarrismes, this Don quipot fights as it were with Rams and
poasts, and Wind-mills, for Giants, I mean with his own mere airy and windy
conceits, as the Cat plays with her own tail, chiefly he fights as with his
own shadow, when as a mad man he casts his brands at King Noll, whom his
fellow Melancholicus, or his alter ego, his second self, plainly calls King
Crumwell, a man that is not in rerum natura, not so much as in the orb of the
Moon, nor on the center of the Earth, within the sphere of our knowledge; for
although many meaner men for gifts and place, then the Martial Crumwell, even
some Country Peasants, by similitude of physiognomies, have usurped the names
of Kings, as one Wooldeman a Miller in Marchia, in Pencers Chronicles, lib. 5.
page 60. and in Lauclavius his Turkish History, page 291. and a Pseudo sinerdis
in Persia, who went long under the name of the son of Cyrus, in Justin. page
23. lib. 1. and in Heroditus lib. 3. 90. and one Phillip in Thessalia, a mean
Plebeian in the third Punicke war, related by Florus in his Epitome, lib. 49.
50. and 52. and a Peasant in Saxony, a false Frederick, anno 1262. in Cuspiman
page 440. also we know in Henry the seventh days, what broils were kindled by
Lambert and Perkin, Warbecke, vulgar youths pretented to be of the blood
Royal; yet that ever Crumwell, or his fame-worthy General, called or counted
themselves Kings, or were so held or reputed by their Soldiers, shall be
proved in Platoes great year, or in the Callends of the Greeks when all
Priapized Priests, and Friars, and all the vestall Nuns of Venus, live chastely
together; or when Jesuitized Papists, what ere they pretend shall love a
Protestant Prince so well, unless molded downright their creature, as to
spare him in the Basilicall veins, more then the two French Henry's, so long
as they had ever at hand a junior Faux, Rivillack Parry, Lopus or Lupus, with a
poniard, a poison, or a pistol in his hand, as Treason in his heart.

In his next streines, which deserve neck streyning, as though he were an
Incubus or Succubus, or one of the College of Bird or Merlin, and Mother
Shipton, or were some Witch, or Conjurer, or had some Mephistophiles or
familiar spirit, as once Doctor Faustus, Cornelius, Agrippa, Simon Magus, and
other Nicromancers; or at least were some judicial Ass-stronomer, Ass Colens,
Astra: consulting with the stars, or at best some Familist, and mushrump
Enthusiast, as once John a Leidan, and Munster his Prophet; he takes upon him
to prophecy, sepe malum hoc nobis predixit ab ilice cornix) as ominously and
fatally, as the prognostics of any ominous Scritchowle, croaking Raven, or
howling dog; yea with as much confidence as any blessing, white Witch, Gypsy
or Fortune Tellers of strange and heavy news, that we both have it, and must
have from France, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, every part of the Kingdom, and the
vertuall Island to: more specially as though he should cry, the Fox gives you
warning, and I give you warning to take heed of your Geese: this Jack Iugler,
or Hocus, Pocus, shootes off a terrible warning-piece, like a Balaams curse, a
Papal excommunication coming out, or a Brutum Fulmen, to take heed of the 28.
of June, for 28. was like to prove a fatal number, to all Parliamentarians,
such as these dies nefandi, these unlucky days which the Romans held as
fatal, in which Caesar was stabbed in the Senate, and in which they lost so
much blood and honor in the battles at Canna and Thrasimen, but mira Cannat
non credenda Poetae, your Almanac is held to be merely like your self, a
Mercurialized liar, and you are thought to study only Errapater; for when did
you pry into God's Ark, or were admitted into Gods Cabinet-counsel? If Grandees
hold you fitter to be of their Privy (as Sco^gan once to the French King) then
of their Privy-counsell, and if you scoff at Plebeians, for perking from
plowes and shops into Moses his chair; how dare you perke into Gods chair, to
reveal his secrets locked in his own decree: sure as there is a ^easting
Epitaph of one Fiddle, That the one and twentieth day of June, John Fiddle he
went out of tune: so the eight and twenty day of June, thy Cuckowes note goes
out of tune. Much I know the Platonists, and Pithagoreans, have ascribed to
numbers, and to their days, yea years fatal, chiefly to their
Climactericalls in their revolutions of sevens and nines, ominous in the falls
of great Peers and Princes; as much at large is said for numbers by Cornelius
Agrippa, de occulta Philosophia, lib. 3. and many instances are given by
Levinus L^mnius in his second Book of the secrets of Nature, cap. 32. page
381. and by Ranzovius in his Climactericall years, page 227, 228. and seq.
Patritius also in his Commonwealth, lib. 5. tit. 7. page 234. interposeth much
to this purpose; and for my poor part, I have read how fatal the twenty
eighth year has been to many great ones, Atropos then cutting short the
thread of the lives of Phillip King of Spain, father to Charles the fifth, of
Lodovicke the sixth, Lamdgrave of Thuringo, of Oswald an English King, son to
Acha, sister to Edmund called the Saint; of Cardinal Hipolitus medices, at
those years poisoned of C. Caligula, Caesar, son to Germanicus stabbed with
thirty wounds, of John Medices, father to that great Cosmus Duke of Hetraria
slain with a Canon; as also of Persius the Satyricall Poet, Daniel Gricaeus,
Hierom Vrsinus, and many more, who in the prime and April of their years, at
the age of twenty eight years, acting short parts on the worlds stage, were
then struck nonplus by death, most by a violent rather then a natural
stroke. But for any great disasters that have fallne on the twenty eight day of
June, I have not slept with the Lune: Nor am I verst so in the Skies, To vent
with Mercury loud lies.

But these are but the off-scums of the wit of this junior Rombus, this fritter
of fraud, this seething pot of iniquity (as I could pay him home in his own
coin, in retorting jeasts as sharp as the teeth of a Pike, to nip this
Gudgeon) at best these are but ludicra genii, vel ingenii, the spots of his
wit, the playing but the Buffon, or the Monkey, to make himself and others
sport, with his, Come a loft Jack an Apes with a whim wham: but in his
rhyme-doggerills, which in them have no jot of rhyme nor reason, like snow in
June, and Harvest out of season; in these his toothed Satyrs, on his Epitaphs,
or nipping-taphs, as the Countryman mis-called them, which the malicious momist
makes on our Parliament men ere they be dead, (who perhaps may live to eat of
the Goose which grazed on the grave of this Gander of Gotham) in these he
shows himself in his colors indeed, like the devil in his horns, there he
tosseth them on the pike of his pen, as a baited Royston Bull, the valerous
Mastives; there he acts the parts not of a Davus only to disturb all, but of a
Demon a devil to destroy all, as homo homini demon, he verifies in his damned
desires, that one man is a devil to another in boiling wrath, like wild fire,
and the coals of juniper, scarce quenched by dead ashes: for he so far like a
snarling Fox shows his tongue and his teeth, when he is coopt in his chain,
that he cannot worry as he would, that if he could he would sevire in manes,
tyrannize over their very deaths, as the Greeks which abused Hector; and the
Papists (in acts fitter for Wolves and Hienaes then Christians) in digging up
the dead bodies of Paulus Fagius, and of Peter Martyrs wife; for whereas in his
other Satiricalls, ( his Satyrae satirae) he stings like a Serpent (as its said
of a Serpent that eats a Serpent) in his detestable Epitaph, he proves a Dragon
spitting wilde-fire; besides some rough passages betwixt Hierom and Ruffinus,
Chrysostom, and Ephanus, Erasmus, and Julius Scaliger, Luther and
Carolostadius, more indeed then well became grave Divines, and modest
Christians. I have read invectives as sharp as raizours, and cutting swords of
Salust, against Tully, Tully against Mark Anthony, Varres and Cateline,
Estchines against Demosthenes, and of latter times of Cocleus and Bolsecus
against Luther and Calvin, of Himmimus Ecardus, and most ridged Lutherans
against Calvinists, more then against Papists; of Stapleton in his Promptuary,
Faverdentius upon Jude, Kellison in his scurrilous Survey, and most Romish
Rabshekahs against all Protestants, chiefly of Turner in his orations against
Queen Elizabeth: but as if the spirits of all these in a Pithagorean
transmigration, with all the Satyricall spleen of Lucian against the learned
(called the Cerberus of the Muses) and of Tom Nash against the three Harvies,
marching as though their guts with his Gunpowder terms, were infused into his
eldest son of Satan, as Polycarpus called Marcion, he so sympathizeth with
Satan in his false accusations; all these concurring as one (as the venom of
all Serpents in one Basiliske) they could not express worse then he is in his
damnable Epitaph upon the fictious deaths of the chief Ephorists of our state;
for like an Atheist little heeding, nor believing the Epithites and Titles,
with which the Scriptures honor them, as of Rulers, Heads, and Elders of the
people, 1 King. 4. 1, 2. Number. 11. 16, 17. Deuteronomy. 33. 10. Privy-counsellours to
Kings, as sometimes to Ashuerus, Hester 1. 3. and to the Kings of Israel, Jer.
26. 10. and conjoined with them in their Edicts, Jonas 3. 7. nor regarding the
honorable names of Patritians given to such as they in Rome, of Ephorists in
Lacedemon; of Senators in Venice, of great Dons in Spain, of Peers in France;
of pillars, ribs, sides, foundation, strength, of the Empire in Germany; by the
Bull of Charles the fifth, Cap. 3. 12. 24, 26. all these honorable and
authoritative Titles, being spurned of such blatrant beasts as this malevolent
Timonist, as dogs and hogs spurn pearls, he squeezes his wits, pumpes his
brains, digs as low as hell for gunpowdered calumnies, and borrowes more
galling, girding, stigmatizing opprobries to cast in their Faces, and on their
places, then ever Tailours, Poets, Players, Perriwig-makers, and Courtiers,
borrowed fantasticalities, or Jews and Jesuits new invented poisons; or as our
new Shakers and Seekers, new invented Heresies and Sects of black Pluto
himself. Oh how he roares as in a Pumpe, though in other passages this hot
Gamester play all his tricks at noddy, ever turning up knave oth' Clubs, yet
here he trumpes no less then Treason, and plays all his prankes at Loadum, or
Loadhome, loading our wisest, and worthiest Senators, with the base and bloody
imputations of ambition, rebellion, pride, lust, murder, sacrilege; and what
not? as give the devil an inch, and he will take an ell, over shoes, over
boots in villainy; now that he is in his Rope-rhetoricke in a high way march
(like railing Jesuits from Tiber to Tyburne, up Gallows gate, and down
Hemp-street) he cannot get out, he can no more be got out of his tract, then a
Carriers horse in his way to Dunstable, or Dublin, or the devils Inn, where
he intends to take up his lodging: hence he bites them further with his
Theonine teeth, sharper then Foxes and Badgers, and more poisoned then the
teeth of Vipers and Adders, and sets his brands and imistions upon them of
grand Impostors, perjured Knaves, out-veying any, otherwise Newgate-bird,
Pick-hatch, Shoarditch, or Turnball-street Cockatrice, or the most hot-mouthed
Scold, and black-mouthed cursing Witch, in all the devils Territories; such
black and base stinking stuff he vomits, as would make the Devil himself,
the black Dog of Hell, sick to lick it up: for my part, it smells worse to
me, or to any right nasuted man, then any Fox or Fowmart, yea then any carrion,
or assafaetida, as any may read what the blawant beast roares out in his
reasonlesse raging rhymes, in aspersions more false and foul then ever were
cast upon Themistocles and Socrates in Athens, on Cato himself the marrow of
Justice, and the two Scipioes and other Patriots in Rome often questioned by
calumniating emulating spirits even in the Senate (as well as ours now) yet
ever came fairly or squarely off, and bore the Bucklers (as ours may do) and
then rumpantur ilia Codri.

But to conclude, I retort these his rascally raylings, with Epithites of
honor, yea with this Epitaph of fame, if they should perish in their projects
and prosecutions of the common good, incuria and injuria temporum; by the
ungrateful and ungracious times: yet this Encomium is fitter to be engraven on
their graves, then his Roguish Rhymes.

THough Codrus guts should burst asunder,
Here be interred our ages wonder.
The famed physicians of our Seat,
Recorded with unworthy hate
Of dog sick Times; who not enduring
Their purging pills, did snarle their curing;
Yet their undaunted zeal, stood shocks,
And storms of Time, like Neptunes Rocks:
And like the two fixed Poles in Sky,
They touched all strings; all ways did try
To curb and cure the maladies
Of Albions felt feared Tragedies;
Both the Kings evil in the head,
And Gangreens through the body spread,
By strong French Philters and slye tricks
Of Michavillian Empericks:
The surging streams did rise so strong
From Po, Rhemes, Tiber; and so throng
From fluctuate froathy fools the waves
In their mad moodes, and Bedlam raves:
Yea so Antipathiz'd was their hate,
Against all reformes in Church and State,
That they are swallowed (as by whales
Just Jonasses) in Tragic falls:
Yet Phoenix like burnt in the flame
Of love and zeal, they shall again:
Rise and out live an ancient story,
As Albions Patriots, Englands glory;
Whom Prince, Pope, Pests, nor vulgars lust
Could once divert from Laws, right, just;
They sacrificed their dearest blood,
Against Englands sins, for Englands good.
Let Zoilists, Momists here defaee them,
This Epitaph in their urnes shall grace them.
Their honored ashes against the times
Shall rise, for all thy Roguish Rhymes.
And so I leave thee, and all thy croaking frogs and ominous Owls and Ravens
of thy base, black, and bloody feather, chiefly thy Comraide Mercury Bellicus
and Melancholicus, since as striking two Wood-cocks with one bolt, in putting a
hook in thy nose I also hook them, you hanging together in one subject, like
burs, as you deserve to hang like bells; or reasty Bacon, much better for
hanging: for I prophecy, if you hold on to vent your invenomed gals as you do,
your libelling lines may cut short the lines of your loathed lives, dabit Deus
his quoq* fluvem, and then you may sing or sigh your Lacrimae per varios casus,
per tot discrimina rerum, tendemus in laqueum:

Through different, base, bad courses, all our hopes
Tending, their ending have, in Tibornes ropes.
FINIS.

