A fourth word to the wise, OR A plain discovery of Englands misery, and how
the fame may be redressed; set forth in a Letter written by a Prisoner in the
Fleet to Commissary General Ireton, and published by a friend of his and
lover of his Country for Englands good.
PLutarch relates, that a certain poor old woman often petitioning King Philip
of Macedon to have her cause heard; the King at length gave her this answer,
that he was not at leisure, she instantly replied noli itaque Reguari, do not
then reign: Which speech the King admiring forthwith not only heard her cause
and complaint, but of many others in his proper person. O that our house of
Commons would imitate Philip the heathen, and no longer put us off to partial
and justice-delaying, I had almost said justice-perverting Committees! Much and
long have I solicited all such as sit in the house in the right of our
Country, except your self who has been long a Nonresident, to present my
Countries grievances and complaints, and to have rhem put in away of trial;
But they not only tell me that they have no leisure, but that they will not, to
their shame be it spoken, The heathen will Judge them, Nay they were not only
the chief instruments of geting me cast into prison, fearing I should by some
other hand bring on my Countries cause to hearing: but most perfideously they
have got such in authority with us, as are notorious Delinquents declared
traitors, not yet compounded for their treasons (for treasons be now made
salable, and but amony matter) though they profess to favor honest men hear,
and such as be called Independants; Yet when I got such men of approved and
known integrety, to be a Sub-Committee for accounts for Westm^rland and
Cumberland; they procured them upon a false certificate to be put out of
Commission, and others to be in their stead, as were delinquents and profess
enemies to all honest men, and in particular to Independants, Nay they got
Commissions for Oyre and Terminer, and Goal delivery for our Country; but not
one of the Commissioners therein named living in our Country, other then
Delinquents, and against whom whom there be several charges of high nature,
two years ago exhibited to the House of Commons; which we have much labored
to bring to exammination, but cannot g^^ it done; Yet have they been so
countenaunced, and borne out by the Lord Wharton, Sir Wilfride Ermyn, Mr.
Blackston, and some others I could name as Sir Willfride Lawson, was continued
high Shrieffe for the mo^^ part of the last two years; who has more
tira-nized and exercised (...) greater arbitrary power, committed far greater
insolences and ounage^ then ever the Earl of Stafford did in this Kingdom or
Ireland di^, Not t^ speak^ of his late committing men to prison for not
conforming to Stat^ worship, neither how he and other Justices caused to be
indicted 3^ persons, the Parliaments cordial friends at Midsummer Sessions
last, for not repairing to the steeple houses and book of Common Prayer, M.
Briscoe the Lord Whartons learned Steward his now bosom friend, and by him
preferred to be a Justice of peace, Deputy Lieviennant Committe^ man and
Commissioner of Oyre and Terminer; Yet while the Count^^ was in the enemies
hands, the Gentleman joined with the enemy, to^^^ an Oath of obedience to the
Commissioners of Array, and sent out ho^^^ and Arms against the Parliament. At
Midsummer Sessions last, he very learnedly discoursed in his charge, how there
were a new kind of Recusant^ worse then Papists, (for indeed Papists he
protects) and not one Papist troubled for his Religion there Meaning the
seperatists and Independants, and that they were the cause of all these
troubles, and the enemies of the Kingdom, whereupon the poor people were
indicted: This is the bestoffice the Lord Wharton ever did for us: I know many
here have a good opinion of the Lord Wharton, and the rather for that he has
brought you, Mr. Lawrence, and Mr. Sallaway into the house; Indeed you have
been for the greatest part absent, so we could not exspect much from you:
neither could we well inform you of the true state of our Country; but Mr.
Lawrence and Mr. Sallaway have both of them been with me; yet did me nor my
Country no good, them I acquainted how the Lord Wharton had used us. I told
them how I got our Papers presented to the House by the Scots Commissioners
mean s, which I did with Mr. Rigby our kind friend his approbation and good
liking, who had conference with the Scots Commissioners about our business,
and for a good compliance betwixt them and us, for the further quiet and ease
of honest men in our pa^s; which had in all likelihood been brought about, had
not Mr. Blackston abused our friends in the house, by misinformation, in making
our friends believe, Mr. Borwis was Independent and Scottish, and that I
carried one the Scottish design, which was false, though I acknowledge I was
beholding to some of the Scots Commissioners for courtesies rec^ived, all which
is since clearly manifested; For no sooner was I cast into prison, but Mr.
Barwis thinking to make the Scots in (...) base way, his friends upon a
certificate from Lawson, Brisco, and ^^e rest of the Committee against the
Church in Cumberland, complai^d to the Northern Commit here, that in the
beginning of the Parlia^ent their was but two Sectaries: meaning Mr.
Crackanthrop and my self; (...) we were increased to a hundred, did preach in
Private-houses, refu^^d to Baptize our children and made their ministry
contemptible, and if ^e were suffered would grow to greater numbers, desiring
some order for ^^^ressing us; But having no countenance from the Committee, and
re^^^ving a check by some Parliament man, went away in chafe much (...);
saying, though he could not then be heard, time would come he ^^^bted not but
to have us all suppressed. I, think Colonel Liburne (...) then present, he
can tell you the particular passages; For Lievtennant Colonel Lilburne his
brother was the man that told it me. I further told (...). Lawrence, how Mr.
Prinne upon sight of the Scotch Papers given into ^^e House, very readely
procured at my instance a Commission to honest ^^^^oved men, all or most of
them Independant^, to be a Sub-Committee of ^^^^^pts for Westmerland and
Cumberland, not one I named being either ^^^^quent, accountable, or persecuter,
yet all of them suffi^ient men for (...) employment, and of considerable
estates, my self being one of the ^^^nest, that same being put upon me by Mr.
Prinne undeserved. Yet (...) Lord Wharton did under his hand certify to the
Grand-Committee (...) accounts here, that the men were of no estates and of so
mean equa^^^y, as they could neither write, no raed, nor cast up an account;
Where^pon our Commission was revoked. And upon the like false certificat^ ^^om
the Lord Wharton and Sir William Ermyn, others oppointed in o^^^ ^^^d, who were
notorious Delinquents and themselves accountable, and (...) disabled by
Ordnance of Parliament to be of that Committee; Thus the Parliament was abused,
and our Country wronged, I dare really say or Country was damnified 10 thousand
pounds: and the Parliament lost thereby a hundreed thousand pounds. Herein the
Lord Wharton did a double wrong to us and the State. First, in putting out
honest men, and commending and putting in Commission Knaves and Traitors. Thus
while the Lord Wharton would seem a Saint, he verefies the old proverb: the
white Divill is most dangerous. The Lord Wharton being in the Country, Mr.
Crackanthrop was commended to him, and put in the last for the standing
Committee, but he put him out, Saying, he was an Independent, and non
Covenanter. Thus he plays Machevill, and Janu^ like, here Independent says,
but in the North an opposite and Presbi-ter; but to get out the Commissions of
Oyre and Terminer, and Goal delivery (...) our Country, the Commissioners
therein na-med living in our Coun^^y potorious Delinquents, and professed
enemies to all honest men, and and persecuters of Independants he was very
active. If you doubt of this, the Clarke of the Crown Office will better and
further satisfy you therein; the Lord Wharton, Mr. Allen and Mr. Lawrence, for
you were absent before the Commissions were sealed or given out, were desired
to prevent or stay them, and acquainted with the exceptions given in to Mr.
Speaker, and your father in law L. G. against them. Yet they did pass^ and so
now, the declared Traitors have power over life and death: (...) thing the King
never did before the Wars begun. Now I acquainted Mr. Lawience (but he sits
upon the pinnacle of the Temple) and the Lord Wharton, how the Committee of
Cumberland being Delinquents, had (...) on Garth their Soliciter and Agent,
much countenanced by the Lord Wharton and Barwis, which Garth is a Delinquent
and a poor shufling Attorney, and a professed enemy to all honest men. Yet
this fellow is allowed by the Committee 100 l. per annum, for waiting here and
stoping all complaints against the Committee, but the poor Country p^ies for
all. All this I am able to prove, and herewith I acquainted the Lord Wharton.
Your Father in law in your absence promised to do much for us, but did nothing;
many letters I wrote to him, I could wish he now act not against us, if he do,
it may prove, his own destruction, 2500. l. per annum given him, will not bear
him out, when his friends* be cut off, I have used all means possible t bring
our Countries cause to try all, but by Mr. Lawrence, Mr. Allen, Mr O. Salloway,
and Lord Wharton failing us, and their double-dealing, I have labored but in
vain; therefore, I say to you, and as many as sit in the House, in right of our
Country, even a^ the old woman said to King Philip, if you have not leisure, or
will no^ present our just Complaints and Petitions, come forth, and sit no
longe^ there for our Country.

One thing I had almost passed by, in reference to the Lord Wharton, (...)
thing worthy your observation, a poor woman of our Country, having been at
London about Law suites, upon her return home, at the instance and complaint of
Henry and James Pearson, two Delinquents, brothers and Attorneys, was carried
with her husband before Sir Will. Lawson, a Commissioner of Array, and by his
direction the woman was bound in a Care laid on her back, with her head ahd
face upwards under the horse tail, and the horse forced to gallop with her, to
the endangering her life; and before they put her in prison, stripped her to her
smock; and after Sir Wilford Lawson gave direction to lay Irons upon her; and
all this, for no other cause, then that she was (as they pretended) an
Intelligencer for the Parliament, and for searching her for Parliaments papers:
Yet my L. Wharton so pitiful he is to the poor, and regardfull of his Oath
and Covenant (...) ^^ch talked of, as he will not present her Petition to the
house of Lords, tel^^ng her, he can give her no encouragement to petition,
though M. Bradshaw (...) Lawyer did entreat him to do it.

Now consider our condition, I assure you, the whole Militia and autho^^ty in
our Country, are settled in the hands of professed Enemies, and known
Delinquents, not one that has been faithful to the Parliament, or is a lo^^r
of his Country, has any command or office with us. Therefore, if you ^^band
your Forces before these Newtrals and Delinquents, and great oppressors be
removed and secured, we are betrayed by you, and may say, you purposely gave us
up into the hand of the Enemy, having made first what you could out of us your
selves.

For if this Army were broken, which under God is the strength of the Kingdom,
in one month the Enemy without any difficulty may possess themselves of the
whole North, and doubtless will do it; the Irish may ^^d with us in 11 hours,
premoniti, praemuniti. You see of late how we have (...) enthralled, under the
name of Conformity persecuted, and under notion of a privilege, a new kind of
tyramie set up, It belongs to wise men to ^^^e-see and prevent a mischief
before it happens, and it is the reward of (...) unhappy, and fools, to lament
it to late, when woe is come upon them; the medicine and physic that is
ministered out of season, is killing and works (...) to the benefit of the
Patient; the counsel is without fruit that comes af^^^ the fact, and it will
be to late to apply the remedy after the evil be fallen upon us: where tyrants
turn their authority to oppress: and destroy innocents, to hold up arms for
our own^ safety, can be no breach of obedience.

If you wish our Countries welfare indeed, and be the men you profess, and be
not carried away with ambitious and covetous desires of honor and riches, and
under shadow of the weal and benefit public respecting-selfe, and particular
interests, making Religion and Liberty a cloak to your greatness and own
profit, you will not expect and temporize till we be brought to the last
extremity, for then our recourse to remedies will be to late, and we shall
stand fondly to lament the harm and mischief which we might have easily
before avoided. It is to late to provoke to vomit, when the poison has
pierced the bones.

Therefore, gird up your loins like men of resolution, and do not forbear
while you have time and opportunity to provide for the safety of your selves
and Country, be not curious in conscience, to defend and stand for law,
li^erty, and justice, then which you cannot offer to God a temporal sacrifice,
^^re acceptable and worthy. Pulcrum est pro patria mort, the Heathen could ^^,
be wise, its said, the English be, ^agis a^mi poten^es q^am politici, when
William the Conqueror, contrary to his oath, begun to oppress the English, and
would have brought them under the yoke of the Norman law, the English counting
the same no other then their fetters, sought to cast them off, made gatherings,
were fully resolved to make their sword their Judge, if the King would not
confirm their liberties, the King by his Espials understanding the increase of
their powers, and knowing to his restless trouble, the unwilling subject o^ of
the English to slavery, being a very politic fair spoken Prince, did wind
himself into their good opinious so far, as they laid down their arms, and he
for his part, fearing to lose the Crown with shame, which he had got with
effusion of so much blood, gave his oath to observe, and inviolaby to keep the
ancient laws of the Land, especially the laws of King Edward the Confessor,
which as the event proved, he little meant to do it.

Peace being thus established, and the Kings oath received, the English Armies
disband themselves, as dreaming they had arived at the haven of their wished
desires, and hoping the greatest storms of their dangers had been over and
past, which presently proved but a dream indeed, a vain surmise. For KiWilliam
working upon advantage, began extremely to hate the Rebels (so were they then
called that affected liberty) and with full resolution of their distraction,
suddenly set upon them apart, which he durst not do, being united and in a
body: So that slaying many, imprisoning others, and persecuting all with fire
and sword, well was he that could first be gone. K. Stephen (his son) used the
like policy to confirm the English unto him, against his elder brother Robert
of Normandy, promising he would reform the overheard laws of his
Predecessors, and mollify the extremes thereof to the peoples own liking,
under his Seal and Charter, and by his Charter did a on firm and restore the
ancient laws; but those immunities (says my Author) he granted rather to
clear their eyes, then with any purpose to manacle his own hands with such
parchment chains: much like has ever bin the event and success of Court wars,
where the making of new parties and factions, without destruction of old
friends, we cannot be received, and trusted by old Enemies: These, say the
French, be the blows of the old art of fencing, at this Game England is become
very skillful, and is not to learn. For how often has Magna Charta, by Oaths,
by Kings, by Parliaments, bin confirmed, but what fruit have the people over
received thereby? how many bloody battles have been of late fought crowned with
victory, for regaining Englands liberties?

But after all this, are we the more free, Never more Oaths, Vows,
Protestations, and Covenants have been contrived, made, and taken, for doing
impartial Justice, and bringing the Enemies to condign punishment, yet the
outcries for justice never so loud so long: oppressions, exactions, and
boldness to offend so never great, so general. We are made more miserable and
wretched, in seeking and waiting for Justice, then by the Enemy in oppressing
and destroying: illegal co^mitments, and long imprisonments of the
High Commission, Scar-chamber, and Councell-Table, Sir Peter Temple a
Parliament man did most cruelly beat one for asking 25. l. which he owed him f
r Oats for his horses, but as yet none other payment then blows has the
honest man had.
were never so many so frequent, as by our Lords and Committees of late,
betwixt Prorogative and Privilege, we are broken as Corn in a Mill; yet I
confess, never did I hear, the King did ever beat or assault any for demand
of a just debt, as some Parliament men have done their poor Creditors, for
asking, or rather petitioning for their own, as for the capital Enemies of
the Kingdom, Vi^^a^o^s of our laws, perverters of justice, and destroyers of
our liberties, and such as have been declared Traitors, or so far from being
brought to the ^eate of Justice, as that they are not only permitted to walk
in Westminter Hill in their silks, but are preferred to the highest places of
honor, command and au hority in the Commonwealth, though we have our ^^^ses,
chambers, and studies broken up, and searched for pre^e^ded Pamphets, books
and writings and our selves, and wives, and servants, cast (...) prison, before
any legal charge or conviction; yet cannot we be heard against the common
Enemies of the Kingdom, nor have them ^^ought in to answer, our legal charges
exhibited against them confess, lybelling against any private person, or
against a Magistrate, or other pub^^^e person, is a great offense, and deserves
severe punishment. For though the Lybell be but against one, yet does the same
provoke all of the same ^^^^ly, kindred or society to revenge, and so
consequently causes quar^^s, breach of peace, and oftentimes much blood shed,
and other great inconveniences, if the Lybell be against a Magistrate, or
other public person the offense is the grea^er.

But ballad mongers take liberty to sing Lybels against King and Parliament in
open streets yet unquestion^
For, as learned Cook says, that concerns not only the breach of peace, but
is a scandal of the government.

For, says Cook, What greater scandal of the government can there be, th^n to
have wicked and corrupt Magistrates to be appointed and deputed to govern the
people, greater imputation to the State cannot be, then to suffer such corrupt
men to sit in the sacred Seat of Justice, or to have any meddling in or
concerning the administration of Justice. Therefore it is not to the purpose
(says Cook) whether the Lybel be true, or the party against whom it is made be
of good fame, or evil, for in a fetled State of Government, the party grieved
ought to complain of the injury or wrong done in an ordinary course of Law,
and by no means to revenge himself, especially by that odious course of
Lybelling, that passionate expression on of Job the Mirror of patience, But in
Parliament time men have no other way to make known their grivances when
petitions be rejected, but by publishing the same in print. By Lawsons indirect
means being then high Sheriff and H. Pearson his under Sheriff a Delinquent,
sir Will. Armyns son was returned Sheriff of the Shire for Cumberland.
when he was libelled against, may she how forceable libelling is to provoke
impatience, and make contention and stir up strife, they were, says the
children of sooles, yea children (...) base men, they were viler then the
earth, and now I am there song, yea, (...) am there by word, Job 30. v. 8. and
9. out of this moral consideration the R^mans, made an excellent Law for
preventing this manner of lybelling, (...) odicus to all men, and pernicious to
the State, that without any danger, ^ven one of Romes Senate, might be accused
by any private man, and if h^^ proved the charge, he received a reward:
otherwise severely punished. B^^ the defamer or lybeller was to be banished, by
which law of liberty lo^^ the Roman State flourished.

But for want of this liberty, from libelling the Republique of Fl^renc^ fell
into factions, and soon was its ruin, felix quem faciunt aliena p^tis^ la
cautum, such a law to England would be profitable, if duly executed but alas!
through the prevalencie and potencie of some in authority, is become now less
dangerous to act the treason, then to discover, or a^cuse the traitor.

For instance, Sir William Armyn who has by indirect, means an illegal
choice, got his son, a beard less boy, to be brought into the honou^rable
House of Commons, was so bold, as to tell Lieut. Col. Beacker, th^^ if he
appeared or acted against that grand traitor Lawson, it would under him, hinder
his preferment, and thereby lose all his friends in the Hou^^ of Commons.

And Mr. Barris a Member of your House, sent his man into our Country, and
caused by him or through his means to be read in public a^semblies, that
whosoever would deny their subscriptions with us against Lawson, should not be
punished. I know a Yorkshire Gentleman that wa^ted upon the House of Commons
more then half a year, with a charge (...) discovery of the treasonable
practices, and great oppressions of Mr. Th^^ the Lawyer, amongst many other his
wicked practices against the Parliament and his Country: this Lawyer, first by
persuasion, then by threat attempted to have got Sir John Hotham to betray his
trust, and to her delivered up Hull to the Kings party.

But upon Sir John's refusal, Mr. Thorpe caused that then deservin^ Gentleman
(that Sir I. H. had retained still his integrity) to be proclaimed Traitor by a
Harrolds at Arms, but not a Yorkshire Gentleman of the House would present the
same, now Mr. Thorpe is a Parliament man, (...) in the House of Commons in that
great Council unquestioned, untryed no man may sit in your House unless he
take your Covenant, but if Covenant-breakers were put to death, as of old in
Israel many of the great ^^ge^ thereof would not escape, in all this I blame
not the House but some ^^rupted Members thereof that falsyfie and betray their
trust, and as much as in them lies, seek the destruction of that House and
their Country, it ^^reth with that honorable house, as of old with King
Antiochus, who being hunting on a time in pursule of his game, he strayed from
his company and Courtiers, and so was enforced to take up a poor man's Cottage
for his Inn, as the King sat at supper with his Country Host, and his poor
people, he began to discourse with them concerning the Kings government:
whereupon the poor people replied, that Antiochus was of himself a very good
King, but he committed the mannaging of his affairs as his friends and
Courtiers, who were ill men; himself mean while out of his overmuch love to
hunting, negligently omitted necessary things, whereby his people were
oppressed, and things ill governed, the King for that time held his prace; but
the next morning when his Guard and Courtiers had found him out at the Cottage,
bringing him his purple Robe and Crown, the King thereupon said to his
Courtiers, from the ^y I first received my Crown, I never heard true speech of
my self be^^^ yesterday; if that honorable house did h^^e what the poors of
the ^^^ntry, yea, and in all other parts speak of them, they would say no other
(...) Antiochus did, and would follow the advice of Th^opom^us, who being
demanded by what means a King might safely hold his Kingdom, replied, if he
gave his friends free liberty of speech, and avenge the i^^^^ies and wrongs
done his people, for that the latter can never be well performed without
granting of the former.

Now the Kings friends be those, and no other, of what sect or religion soever
they be, and indeed non can be enemies to the Parliament, whether Covenantors
or non-covenantors, Presbyterians or Independents, so they be friends to
peace, and lovers of justice and their country, from this cousideration I could
wish our honorable Parliament Lords and Commons, ^^o are semented together
into one body, would with An^^nine, that good Emperor, allow free exercise of
Religion to their friends, as the wise and now flourishing States of the
Netherlands do, and in doing justice impartially (for Justice now of late
stands a far of) and is become a ^^^anger in our Land, would imitate Romes
liberty, testore Brutus who for ^is peoples safety and preserving their
liberties, chosed his own two (...), with some other Nobles, for affecting
tyranny, and attempting to in^^^ the people to their lawless wills, publicly
to be whipped in the Mar^^^ place, and then to be brought to the block, and
beheaded, the like exemplary justice King Alfred, within this Kingdom did, he
not only provided for good Laws, but took care for the better ordering and due
administration of justice, to have the same exactly observed: in one year h^^^
put to death 44 wicked and corrupt Judges, for their false judgments, the
fruits whereof was such as notwithstanding multituds of soldiers were
continually employed, yet it is recorded, that in his days a Virgin might have
traveled along through all his Dominions, without any violence offered her,
and that bracelets of gold were hanged in the highways, and no man so bold as
to take them away, yet then theft was not punished with death: the chief
Justice of the Kings Bench in King H. 4. his time, faithfully and as an honest
Judge, discharged his place, when he spared not to commit the Prince for a
Riot to prison, no privilege or protection was then pleaded, however not
allowed: Hereas was the King displeased? nay he much rejoiced, in that he had a
Son so obedient to his Laws, and a Judge so upright and bold, in
administering of Justice without fear or favor.

But Justice Bacon, who now supplies that place, the other day did ^^^re
otherwise, he being petitioned unto by my country woman Mary Bl^^thwaite, whom
I mentioned before, to be admitted into Forma Pu^^^^, would not allow her to
sue Sir Willifrid Lawson, because a great man, and then high Sheriff of
Cumberland, But against some mean ones, who earryed her to prison upon Sir
Willfred Lawsons warrant, he allowed her to proceed and prosecute.

This nothing agreeeh with the Oath of a Judge, but if our corrupt Judges had
received from our Parliament the like punishments for the^ false judgments for
Ship Money, as Siz^^^us did from Cambises, such as succeeded in their places
would have been more careful and conscious in the discharge of their duty: for
I read that Cambises caused this Sizamnus, being one of his Judges to be flaid
alive, for an unjust judgment given by him, and his skin to be hung up over the
judgment Seat; after which he bestowing the Fathers office on the son,
willed him to remember, that the same partiality deserved the same judgment.

Let Judges and Justices escape with fining, it will not much trouble them, a
part of their ill-gotten wealth will not only discharge the same, but soon
restate them in their old places: for most of them were mercenary men before
they were made Judges, and laws or distinctions they ever have in store to
please Kings, and satisfy States and times, though never so corrupted. While I
was writing this my letter, Judge Ienkins Vindication was brought unto me,
wherein he condemns, and would ani^ilate the whole proceedings, Orders and
Ordinances of this present Parliament ever since the Kings departure as
illegal, and not binding for want of the Kings consent. I and if God permit, to
set forth and discover the vanity and wickedness ^^^eof at large; for the
present I desire him to read the Abusions of the ^^^mon Law written by Andrew
Horn in the time of King Edward the (...), in his mirror of Justice: The
first and chief Abusion of the law, (...) Horn an approved Authout) is, that
the King is set above the Law, ^^^eas he ought to be subject to it, as it
contained in his oath. I would ^^ly then know of Judge Jenkins, if the King be
under and subject to the law, how he or any other is to be proceeded against
for transgressing the law where his consent is not, if the same be necessary,
as the cause sins (...) ^on: With Horn, Judge Fortescue afterward Chancellor
to King ^^^ry 6. agrees, who tells us that England is a kingdom political,
and says, Adtutelam legis subditorum and little co^porum Rex est erectus, and
h^^^ prestatem a populo effluxam ipse habet, quo ei non licet potestate alia
suo popula ^^^nari Forteseue folio 32. The King is made for the defense of the
law of is subjects, and of their bodies and goods, whereunto he receives the
power of his people; so as he cannot govern his people by any other power.
Then he tells you how the Kings of Egypt first lived, not after the licenti^^^
manner of after Kings; but keep themselves as private persons in subjection to
the law, as also did the Ethyopian Kings order their lives according to the
laws, assigning neither reward nor punishment otherwise then law appointed.
And with Fortescue concur the two great Maxims of the Common law, often
cited by Cook, and other Sages of the Law. 1. The Common law has so admeasured
the Kings prerogative, that it cannot take may the inheritance of any. 2. Nihil
tam proprium est imperti, quam legil^^ vivere: There is nothing so proper to
ruling, as to live by laws.

Now if the body politic, which is the people, or the representative body the
Parliament, could not without the Kings consent act, then by his prerogative he
might hinder the due execution of the law, contrary to the first approved
Maxim, the statute law confirms the same, Marl. Br. chap. 5.52. Hen. 3.
Magna Charta. In singulis teneatur tam in his quae ad Regem partinent quam
^lies, Magna shall be holden for good as well in those things that appertain to
the King, as to others: So as all pretense of prerogative against the execution
of the law, or administration of justice, is taken away. And indeed it may be
said the people give laws to the King, but the King cannot give any law to the
people without their consent; so as Regality in it self is good, and for the
good of the people; and what ill custom or ^^d laws are brought in, the same
be by our own default, and not the Kings: for the people are the lawmakers.
The next Abusion of the law that Horn cites, is, that we have not a Parliament
every half year, that is to say, Parliament men changed and elected anew, and
no strangers but res^nts, according to the Common and Statute law: which done,
would prevent much faction, oppression, partiality and injustice. I may add a
third abuse, as the King by his prerogative imprisoned, so for the Parliament
whether by Lords or Commons, to imprison before the party be brought to their
Bar, unless for want of Bail, is against the common law: for by the common
law before conviction, no man having bail may be imprisoned either for Felony
or Treasonn, Cook 2. part. Instit. fol. 189. And so the same is a
disfranchizing of the Subject of his Freehold and Birthright: And however it
cannot be justified to keep any in prison longer then the next Jail-delivery
after the party be committed. Herein Scotland is praiseworthy; no Prisoner
there longer detained for debt, then one year, and to be provided for at the
Plaintifes charge, if the prisoner be not able to maintain himself, and no
prisoner for any contempt or felony beyond the next ordinary Sessions, which is
commonly every quarter of a year, and sometimes oftener: There wants nothing to
make that people happy, but a free tolleration of exercise of religion, whereby
every man may serve God in the way he is persuaded is most approveable, and not
be compelled to live by another, or a blind and implicit faith Romanist-like,
they have there laws pleaded and recorded in their own na^ive tongue and no
such delay of justice, nor the like, excessive, and exorbitant fees as with us,
for indeed though it be said in our law, we will sell justice to no man; yet
have we neither process nor proceedings recorded, but in an unknown tongue,
and bought at a dear ra^e, oftentimes driven to spend more in one Term,
besides our travel, then the thing in question is worth.

But no more of this subject for the present, I will return again to speak a
little concerning my self, and so I have done,

Sir, I have been here a prisoner this 18. months, and was committed upon a
fa^se report, as refusing to answer interrogatories, since the Speaker
presented my Petition, and procured it to be committed, though never yet taken
into examination by the Committee is 18. months, a thing never heard of
before, that a Parliament Committee, whereof there be 29. Parliament men in 18
months not to meet together, about a business of so great and general
concernment, not one man that sits in the House in the right of our Country,
once in all that time to speak one word in our Countries behalf, nor do me
the favor as to present a petition for me, unless I would decline, and betray
my Countries cause, which if I would have done, sundry of them, and others of
the house; whom I can name, would not only have undertaken the presenting of
my petition, but likewise promised me to procute me my liberty, there names I
will forbear for the present to mention, for I take no pleasure to discover
their shame, unless they force me to it: but this I may say, and truly our
case and condition now, is as b^d as the Britains were of old, when they writ
to Action the Roman, thus to Actius thrice Consul, the Sighs of the
Britains, the barbarous enemy bo^tes us to the Sea, the Sea beats us back to
the enemy, we are either murdered or drowned I leave the application to you,
and say no more but this, if you will present this my petition to the house,
procure us justice, and an impar^iall and speedy trial, upon the hazard of my
life, I will undertake to prove our charge, and make good what I write, having
said nothing either for contention or ostentation, but for necessity and
justice, in testimony whereof he subscribes his name, who is yours, if you will
honestly discharge your place and trust for our Country, by which you have the
honor to sit in the highest Judicature in the Kingdom.

JOHN MVSGRAVE.
Fleet Prison the 5. Month, called Moy the 6. 1647. and the 10. day of the 19.
Month of my imprisonmen^ for Countries cause and freedom.
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce I was committed to this P^ison, I could never obtain that favor to go
into the Town, yea, not with a keeper, either for my healths sake, or about my
own or mothers business, who is so sore oppressed by our Country Committee
with us, as out of 200. l. a year, she has not received 20. l. this three
years, and for 20. l. a year, I nor mine have not had 40. s. since I came into
this Prison, the King gave noble allowances to his prisoners, though men of
good estates, to some 3 l. a week, who have since had for their imprisonment
5000 l a wan from the Parliament: But they are Parliament men, but we your p^^r
prisoners, though we have done better service for you, then some of those to
when you give thousands, and have committed nothing deserving this our
imprisonment; yet cannot have so much favor from you as common justice, which
you allow to Rogues, Thieves, and Murderers in N^wgate every Sessio^ to wit, a
legal trial, which we have petitioned for, and cannot have it, you are so far
from giving us reparations for our lo^^es and plu^ders we have sustain^d, for
maintaining your cause, as you put us to that extremity as to make (...) poor
prisoners, pay Ex^ise for the s^^^lest c^p of be^re we drink, for the old was
raising many by subsedge, and not by Country, then the rich would bear their
equal burden, wh^re now the poor paye^ the greatest s^^^ to maintain you in
your silks and fattens, Satan-like.

But for Traitors, upon Mr. Knightleyes ticket, they can have liberty to go
abroad, without any keeper; not only to go abroad into the Town, but also to
go into the Country. Nay, I can name some prisoners committed for treason, and
exempted from pardon in the Propositions sent to the King, upon their word,
have liberty to go abroad, yea to reside at their own dwelling houses. Whether
this be not the height of Arbytrary power, or no, consider? and how this
agrees with your Covenant so much urged, I know not; and what encouragement
this may be for us, or any honest man that is not mercenary, or a dependant
upon some of you, to spend our estates, and venture our lives for you in the
future, as formerly we have done, let God and the World judge.

J. M.

The deplorable condition of John Musgrave, Commissioner for the well-aff^^cted
party in Cumberland Westmerland, presented to the Honorable House of Commons
assembled in Parliament.
MAY it please you to consider, what obstructions I have met with in attending
this Honorable House, in presenting my consciences grievances, since April
1645. besides 13. weeks attendance, the winter before, using what lawful
means possibly I could to present my Countries oppressions to this house,
under those that were set in Authority over our Country for the Parliament,
most of them having been before very active, or in office for the King against
the Parliament. At length Mr. Blackstone did undertake to present the same,
which he did afterward present to the House, and was by the House committed
after I was gone down into the Country, having waited for presenting them 13.
weeks as aforesaid, then told he some friends of mine here in the Town, what
he had done, they might send me word that our business wanted but a man to
follow it, And in April following, 1645. I came to Town with Mr. Osmotherley,
a Commissioner with me, appointed by the well-affected of Cumberland and
Westmerland, hoping to have had audience, and not doubting to have our
grievances redressed? but when we came to London, Mr. Blackstone deserted us,
and denied what he had done for us, but we having got the order for committing
our former Charge, after our grievances were read at the Committee, and
reported to the House, Mr. Blackstone upon his motion in the House, procured an
order to have the Charge delivered back to me, which was done accordingly by
Sir Thomas Withrington, Chaireman of that Committee: then we sought all means
we could to present our Countries grievances by other Members but could not get
them presented: afterward we fell acquainted with the Scots Commissioners, who
soon procured them to be presented with their papers to their Honorable House
in July following, and by the House was then referred to a Committee for the
Scots papers, whereof Mr. Lisley was Chaireman, that they might examine our
papers together with the Scots papers given in against M. Bar^is and others of
whom we complained, but the Committee laid our papers aside, refusing to
receive them before they had examined us upon interrogatories, to some of them
we then answered, (being then ignorant of our liberty) having not seen^ the
order of the House. The next day that the Committes sat, they would have
proceeded in examining us, before they would receive our papers, but we having
then the order of the House (which we had not before) the same being to receive
our papers, and not to examine us upon interrogatories, we then replied, that
the order of the House was to receive our papers which we desired they would,
and if they would put ou^ business in a way of trial we offered to make good
our Charge against Mr. Barwis and others of whom we complained, or according to
law to suffer punishment, The Committee having read our papers, moved the House
to enable them with authority to examine us upon in^^rrogatories, which Mr.
O^motherley refused to do, saying it was against Magn^ Charta, and the liberty
of the subject, but I refused not to answer, when such order was obtained from
the House, but desired a ^opy of the interrogatories; or to have liberty to
write them my self from their ^^^thes, and they to figne them, that so I might
consult with Council as I had done before, we gave in our Charge, and this I
conceive was the privilege of every free borned o^en, but the Committee would
not grant me that liberty, then I conceived by the order of the House, I was
not bound to answer extempore, especially the Committee door being shut, my
friends kept out, and some against whom I articled permitted to be present with
their hats on their heads allowed to ask as questions and examinus: whereupon
I desired the Committee to move the House that I might have the interrogatories
in writing to peruse before I were put to answer them, and that Mr. Barwis, and
those of whom the Scots Commissioners and we complained might first answer, and
make their defense to the Scots Commissioners, and our Charge before (...) were
put to make proof or examine witnesses, and I offered to undertake take to
prosecute and make good my Charge, as I hoped the See's Commissioners could and
would do theirs, the Committee then missed that they would acquaint the House
with my desire, and some of them did say, that my request was reasonable,
notwithstanding all this, Mr. Lisley misreporteth to the House, how that I had
contemptuously, refused to answer Interrogatories, not making any mention of
Mr. Osmotherleyes refusing to answer Interrogatories upon the order of the
House, wherein not only Mr. Lisley his parciality, but likewise his intention
and desire to obstruct Justice plainly appears, upon which report made by Mr.
Lisley, I was committed ^o the Fleet, by an order of the House, of the 27. of
October 1645. as contemp^ibly refusing to answer Interrogatories, after this
being ^n prison, I sent a letter to Mr. Speaker, dated the 28. of October 1645.
wi h a Petition enclosed to the Honorable House of Commons, which Letter and
Petition the honorable Speaker presented, and procured to be openly read, and
deb^ted in the House, upon the 8, of November 1645. and both the letter and
Petition was referred to the same Committee, for the Scots papers, and Lisley
being the Chairman thereof and then present, but presently af er my Letter and
Petition was committed, and Lisley then withdrew h mselfe for along time, and
came not to the House after Mr. Lisley came to have a Copy of the order for the
committing my Letter and Petition being procured, the same was sent in a letter
from Colonel Rigby a member of the House, desiring him to take some course
about me, and my Countries business. But his answer was to my friends that
came to him from Colonel Rigby, that if Colonel Rigby or Sir Thomas
Withrington, who knew me and my cause, would do any thing, they might; but he
could do nothing: which was as much as to say, (as I conceive) he would do
nothing, although the house had ordered otherwise. And since the time my letter
and petition was committed upon Mr. Speakers presenting, I have written many
letters, and sent petitions therein enclosed both to them that sat in the
House in the right of our Country, and to others of the House also, entreating
them to present mine and my Countries grievances to the House; and doubting the
justice of the House, being once truly informed of my state, and my Countries
cause; yea, and if I might have legal and impartial hearing, I doubt not but
to make it appear that Mr. Lisley is in the contempt in disobeying and
slighting the orders of the House. That Committee having power from this
Honorable House, to send for me as often as they would; but to this day was I
never sent for by him or that Committee: Therefore I conceive, that Mr. Lisley
and that Committee to be the cause of my continued bonds, and Countries long
oppressions, for his and their non-observance of the Houses Orders; by which
means justice has been obstructed a long time. And such as the Parliament
hat^ declared Traitors and grand enemies (being disabled and prohibited by
several ordinances of Parliament, to bear any Offices,) diverse of them yet
uncompounded for their Treasons and Delinquencies, are yet upheld in places of
power and trust, to overruled and oppress our Country now under the
Parliament, more then when they acted for the enemy, as I can prove and show by
many letters written to me before I was committed to this prison. And in
reference to my self, if I have in the least offended against any of the just
Laws, Privileges, Orders or proceedings of this House, I am haertily sorry,
though I am no ways conscious to my self, that I have offended in the least,
but have ever been tender of the just and lawful Privileges, Orders, and
proceedings of this House, together with the liberties, Rights, and Franchises
of the meanest subject: For which, and my affection to the Parliament, I was
imprisoned half a year by the Commissioners of Array, and Justices of peace
in Cumberland, after driven to live in exile for two years, and that little
means I had possessed by the enemy. And when it shall be made appear, that I
have offended this Honorable House in the premises, or in any other thing, then
I shall not not only confess my fault and error publicly to the whole
kingdom; but also willingly and cheerfully submit my self to the judgment and
censure of this Honorable House, to undergo what punishment this House shall
think sin Therefore my humble request is, that this honorable House will take
my take my cause into consideration, to enlarge me from my bonds, and put mine
and my Countries cause into a legal way of trial, and enable me with power to
prosecute my several charges, and give unto me and my country just and
fitting reparations for our losses and wrongs we have sustained, agreeable to
the wisdom and justice of this Honorable House: And if we make not good our
several charges, then to punish us according to the law; and not to refer me
over, nor our countries cause to an Arbitrary, partial and Justice-delaying
Committee. But that I may be brought to your Bar, or some other public
tryell. And then I nothing doubt but to clear my self of the contempt
unjustly laid to my charge; and for which I have suffered 18 Months hard and
close imprisonment. And if I may but have the benefit of the Law, to make good
our particular chrrges against those of whom we complain. And as in duty
bound, I shall ever pray to, and praise God for you.

JO. MUSGRAVE.
Fleet 5. May, 1647. and 9. day of 19. Months of my imprisonment.
I have for these last four months had some friends daily attending upon Maj.
Salloway, Mr. Allan, Mr. Laurence, Mr. Bellingham, for presenting, this my
petition; but after they had the same a long time, they returned i^ back to me,
refusing to do it. Mr. Bellingham said, he could not (...) it unless I could
show authority to command him: not many days since, Mr. Rigby moved the House
for my liberty, but Mr. Tolson, the knight of the Shire for Cumberland, one of
the new election, stood up against me, and desired I might no^ be enlarged till
I acknowledged my fault: for said he, it is against the order of the House, to
enlarge any without acknowledgment of their offense; and so I lost the benefit
of Mr. Rigbys motion. I must not be enlarged without petition, and all refuse
to present my petition consider mine and my countries sad condition. If you
desire to know what this Mr. Tolson is, he is no other then a beardlesse Minor,
taken the other day from the Gramm^^ school, and now elected by a delinquent
Sheriff, through the votes of Malignants and delinquents of Cumberland, by Mr.
Bar^i^ procure meant. Tolson being the meanest family of any of the Gentry in
the North. Not long before Tolson was brought into the House, he came from the
enemies garrison then at Oxford, his Father a neutrall, and had his estate
protected by the enemy, Mr. Tolson, Mr. Barwis, the L. Wharton, and others that
sit in the House in the right of our County, procured the commissions for Oyer
and Terminer, and jail-delivery, directed to be declared traitors, M. Tolson
and his father are great persecuters of honest men, under the name of Sectaries
and independents; but favor and protect Papists and Malignants. Mr. Bellingham
the Knight of the Shire for Westmerland; is so yo^g as he has not any hair of
his face, refuses to inform the House how the Committee for Accounts of
Westmerland and Cumberland were declared traitors, and men accountable, and so
betrayeth his trust and his Country, as his father before him did; who being
the Knight of the Shire, is his son is new in his stead, in the beginning of
these troubles left the Parliament, yet professed to his country for a time he
would not join with the enemy; but traitorously and deceitfully (when his
Country expected he would have stood up with them for the Parl.) deserted
them, and joined with the enemy, to the loss of that country, was after a
Colonel for the King, very active against the the Parl. and one of the Oxford
Juncto, his son begins to (...). When he came into the House he promsed
fairly, but now begins to trend in his fathers tract. These Ianus and
Sinon-lik^ men, whether o^d or young, be the pest of a Commonwealth, and the
worst and most dangerous enemies any State can have, not fit to be trusted or
employed in any office, Martial or Civil; seldom you can confide in the son,
where the father has betrayed you. Beware ever of a reconciled foe, and
time-servers. Farewell.

PROVE. 28.15. As a roaring Lion and a ranging Bear, so is (...) wicked Ruler
over the poor people.

P. 2. l. 3 for Wilford Ermine r. William Ermine. line 37. for Scottish, r. I
Scottish, p. 3. l. 20. for undeserved r. undesired. l. 38, for faith, r. South.
p. 5. l. 15. for 11. r. 22. p. 6. l. 23. for K. Stephen, r. K. William. l. 23.
for clear, read bleare.


