NEUTRALITY is MALIGNANCY: ASSERTED In a Letter from an eminent Person in the
Army, to his friend at Westminster: AND Clearly evidenced by an examination of
a factious Malignant Libell, ENTITLED, THE MODERATOR: WHEREIN The Author
thereof THOMAS POVEY Esquire, under a false pretext of Moderation and
Neutrality, grossly slandereth the PARLIAMENT, and endeavors to dissuade the
People from yiedling Assistance, or Adhering to them.

PROVE. 14.15. The simple believes every word: but the prudent man looks well
to his going.

Prove. 26.26. Whose hand is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be showed
before the whole Congregation.

Printed in the year, 1648.

NEUTRALITY is MALIGNANCY, etc.
SIR,
YOu well remember the contest we had not long since concerning a Book,
entitled, THE MODERATOR: At which time, though in respect of your heat, and the
civility I bare unto so friendly a meeting, I seemed at length to yield unto
your commendation of that Pamphlet; yet lest the Public Cause (for which I
have often jeoparded my life, and am still in Arms ready to maintain) should
suffer through an over-modest silence, I have written these lines to let you
understand, how small satisfaction you then gave me, and how stiffly I adhere to
my opinion, that The Moderator is a factious-Malignant Invective against the
Parliament, as empty of sense, as conscience.

Nor can sober men expect any other then a muddy stream from a dirty fountain.
Is not Master Povey the Author of this Libell? Witness the Gentlemen of
Grays-Inne, Witness the Stationers, Witness the title of Moderator, wherewith
his companions do frequently salute him: And what can we look for from a Cavee
(yea, from one who for his notoriousnesse is styled, THE CAVALIER) but
malignancy?

And to come up close to the manifestation and proof thereof, his own words
suffice to his conviction. For without further ceremony then an impertinent
Preface, he falls hot upon the Parliament, and declares them to be the
Authors of the late War, and by consequence guilty of all the blood and horrid
distractions of this Kingdom. p. 3. l. 2, 4, 6.
Their courses (says he) did usher in this War: And to these miseries we have
been unhappily betrayed, by a fourfold means:

1. By the Parliaments endeavoring without success, or providence, or enough
of both, a high and Imperious Reformation. Fit words, and modest, are they not?

2. By putting the Militia, the Navy, and the Ports into new confiding hands:
p. 3. l. 34, 35, 36.
Which, alas tender Heart! (He professes) did sorely perplex him with the
expectation and fear of bloody showers.

3. By discountenancing the Gentry and removing them from their Commands, p. 4.
l. 11.
and so from the usual respect they had in their Country: making little
difference (or not the right) because they then wanted Mr. Povey's help to
judge between the Gentry and Yeomanry. Which he turns off with a flour, p.
15. a. l. 23.
They may be thus excused; they did not think it justice to look upon any man
according to his quality, but as he was a Subject; I hope this was all the
reason.

4. By making Sides and Parties amongst the people; p. 4. l. 22.
To which end the Parliament took such courses as might incite the MOST, and
published that first Remonstrance, p. 14. l. 19, 20, 25.
(December. 15. 1641.) The most seasonable and happy Alarm that ever came to an
oppressed languishing Nation, yet the Moderate Gentleman is so audacious as to
style it, THE UNHAPPY HISTORY OF THE FOREGOING TIMES. And what (says he) is
the Result of all these Plots, p. 4. l. 26.
Sidings and contrivances? But, The King therefore removes Northward, to find
out that safety which is denied him here: p. 4. l. 32.
Henceforth we must look upon the Parliament as a Council of War; we must not
expect to find it punctual in the observance of any fixed Law; Only, SALUS
POPULI must be produced as a general Warrant for all their undertakings, and
LEX NECESSITATIS must be made to justify all manner of severity and violence.
The Sword must become Chief Justice; Robbery change its name, and be called no
more a crime then borrowing; p. 5. l. 29.
The killing of our Countrymen must be called valor and a service for the
State; Disobedience to the commands of our Prince must be called Loyalty; and
in brief, we must see an inversion of all order, Confusion in all our services
t^ Heaven and Earth, and a Chaos, in stead of that admirable composure which
many years of peace had e're now fixed this State in, if Those that have of
late times been over us (namely, the PARLIAMENT) had done their parts. Is not
this pure Oxonian language? Search the Kings Declarations, consult with
Williams, Fern, Aulicus, and you shall not find them more agreeable to
themselves, then your Moderator is to them.

You see then the first Branch of this malignant Pamphlet is an Accusation of
the Parliament, and that of less crime then the procuring of the late War with
all its sad and direful effects. The other Branch is a Disswasion of the
People from joining with them; Which he endeavors under a pretext of Moderation
and seeming Neutrality, and pursues this Theme with store of words and a rabble
of vain circumstances; but the substance of all may be reduced to these five
Heads or Grounds:

His first ground of dissuading the People from joining with the Parliament,
is, because the late War was without Reason: p. 6. l. 6.
When Reason (says he) shall tell me how requisite the prosecution of that War
was, and how it may advantage the State, I shall be convinced.

His second ground is, because the Parliament at that which (in his
apprehension) is evil, p. 6. l. 16, 25.
as to bring in an Aristocracy and make themselves States: Or, at that which is
vain and impossible, to wit, a Through Reformation; p. 25. l. 34.
then which (if this Forsooth-sayer mistake not) they will sooner reach their
own destruction.

His third ground is, because the Yeomanry that take part with the Parliament
are nothing so considerable, as the Gentry of this Realm who take part with the
King: p. 15. a. l. 39.
For (says he) the Gentleman follows his Resolution close, and wins of his
silly neighbors many times, either by his power, by his example, or his
discourse, when as they have an easy faith, quickly wrought upon and upon the
next turn will fall off in sholes.

His fourth ground is, p. 16. b. l. 14.
because the King is the more likely to draw to Him the affections of the
People, in that the pressures and miscarriages of His late Government are
passed, and almost expiated by His acknowledgement of them, and a promise of
redress, and are (as it were) forgotten by them, who resent more their
present, Grievances then a thousand overpassed transgressions, which are driven
out of their Remembrances by agravating every mistake, every circumstance of
injury and violence, which the Parliament, either against their will, or upon
necessity (the common excuse of Statesmen) does commit.

His fifth and last ground is, because the Parliament is a crasie, helpless,
impotent thing in comparison of His Majesty. The Parliament (says he) has
nothing to cement it self, p. 16. a. l. 7, 16, 21.
to increase and fix their Party, and keep it from staggering, but a little
temporary reputation, and a resolution to hold fast to the Public good, and
this (if things run so high as they do now) will be called rebellious
stubbornness, and be branded with the foul imputation of Treason. Whereas the
King (as the chief Master and Dispenser of the Commonwealth) is able to fit
the humor of every man that he has a mind to take off: He has the power of a
Pardon to hold out like a Lure, to fetch in such as have turned tail. By His
Agents He will keep off the aid of foreign States from them, but is seldom
denied some contribution toward His own defense. p. 15. b. l. 31.
The controling presence of awful Majesty takes off, prevents, and counter
plots the designs of any that are working near to it. The King (a syllable, of
as much advantage as an Army) in His very Name is sacred and powerful, p. 16.
b. l. 23.
and shakes the consciences of many, who would else have willing hands and
ready purses to oppose Him. He has the advantage of the written Law, which he
can use now, in His defense; and by the authority of it, joined with the power
of His Sword, can thunder out Accusations, and the Penalties of Treason against
those whom He shall call His Opposers. Now the whole Kingdom must witness,
the King has often called and declared the Parliament and their adherents His
Opposers; and therefore, what does the Moderator hereby insinuate, but that all
Parliamentarians should be hanged, drawn, and quartered, had the King power to
excuse the Law? If this be no malignancy, let Judge Jenkins be acquitted.

Needless it were, and time mis-implyed to ravell further into the garbage of
this slanderous-bitter Libell against the Parliament: For, if what I have at
present laid open, (thought I confess much more may be alleged there-out to
the same purpose, and shall be alleged when the Cornish Elections come into
debate) be not sufficient to convince your judgment, for me go on; and be
confident, hereafter you will say, A friend once gave good you advice. But yet,
before I leave, let me tell you, that in this Pamphlet, there are not only
Malignant, but also non-sensicall and most irreligious expressions.

What kin is this sentence to a Bull; p. 2. l. ult.
Wars, like diseases, are a long while working upon the humors, before they
discover themselves; unless the Moderator can prove that men fight some years
under ground, before they fight above? What sense in this, p. 5. l. ult.
How like to these calamities the miseries we have felt already are, the sad
experience of too many may witness, who have drunk deep of this bitter Cup?
That is in plain English, such who have tasted of these calamities, can
witness how like they are to these calamities: These like to these, a man like
to a man; Is not here good stuff? And what sense or reason is there in this,
p. 24. l. 3.
The Commonwealth is now in the same, yet in more danger, then ever they saw
it? As if a thrust through the body were the same as a prick with the swords
point; Or, a shilling the same as a penny.

As for Irreligious Expressions, be you your self judge. For, though the
Scriptures testify, we are all in the hands of GOD, Romans 9.21.
to be disposed of according to His Divine pleasure, Esa. 45.7.
and that all peace and cessation of Arms is from Him alone; Psalm. 46.9.
Yet this Moderator fears not to say, p. 2. l. 15.
It is in our own election what shall become of us. Though the Scriptures
exhort, with patience to wait upon the Lord and not limit the Holy One of
Israel; Psalm. 27.14.
Yet this Moderator professes, his Faith shall go no further then his Reason;
p. 6. l. 4, 5.
and like one in despair, cries out, Now or never, Sudden Peace or certain
Ruin. Though the Scriptures teach, that a man swearing to his own hurt, should
not change; Yet this Moderator says, p. 21. l. 15.
It cannot be expected that a Prince, if he be wise as well as pious, shall be
so superstitious to the strict sense of any Protestations, as to neglect his
interest, which may suffer very much whiles he makes a conscience to do things
fit and requisite. And what is this but to say, A Prince that makes conscience
of his Oath, when the breaking it may advantage, him, is a superstitious fool?

I might also note unto you the ragged composure of this Pamphlet; and the
Authors fantastic, proud, self-conceited, pragmaticall humor, which
discovers it self in every Page, as clearly, as if you had heard him speak,
seen his posture, and taken an account of his Mornings work: But my lines are
multiplied already to a greater bulk then at first I intended, and therefore I
shall without further circumstances break off; Only desiring you to lay aside
passion and partiallity, and with a serious consideration to weigh what is here
written unto you from a friend; who has no other aim but to prevent (as far
as in him lies) your deserting the Parliament and their Cause: For be assured,
if you are not for them, you are against them; Neutrality and Moderation is the
Cavaliers last refuge, and a cloak for Malignancy. So fare you well,

And number me amongst those who are ever ready to serve you, J. M.

FINIS.

