THE HOPE of ISRAEL: Written By MENASSEH BEN ISRAEL, an Hebrew Divine, and
Philosopher.

Newly extant, and Printed in Amsterdam, and Dedicated by the Author to the
High Court, the Parliament of England, and to the Council of State.

Translated into English, and published by Authority.

In this Treatise is showed the place wherein the ten Tribes at this present
are, proved partly by the strange relation of one Antony Montezinus, a Jew, of
what befell him as he traveled over the Mountains Cordillaere, with diverse
other particulars about the restoration of the Jews, and the time when.

Printed at London by R. I. for Hannah Allen, at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley,
1650.

To the Parliament, the Supreme Court of England, and to the right Honorable
the Council of State, Menasseh Ben Israel, prays God to give health, and all
Happiness.
IT is not one cause alone (most renowned Fathers) which uses to move those,
who desire by their Meditations to benefit Mankind, and to make them come forth
in public, to dedicate their Books to great Men; for some, and those the
most, are incited by Covetousness, that they may get money by so doing, or
some piece of plate of Gold, or Silver; sometimes also that they may obtain
their votes, and suffrages to get some place for themselves, or their friends.
But some are moved thereto, by mere and pure friendship, that so they may
publicly testify that love, and affection, which they bear them, whose names
they prefixe to their Books; let the one, and the other, please themselves,
according as they delight in the reason of the Dedication, whether it be good,
or bad; for my part, I best like them, who do it upon this ground, that they
may not commend themselves, or theirs, but what is for public good.

As for me (most renowned Fathers) in my dedicating this Discourse to you I can
truly affirm, that I am induced to it upon no other ground then this, that I
may gain your favor and good will to our Nation, now scattered almost all
over the earth; neither think that I do this, as if I were ignorant how much
you have hitherto favored our Nation; for it is made known to me, and to
others of our Nation, by them who are so happy as near at hand, to observe
your apprehensions, that ye do vouchsafe to help us, not only by your prayers;
yea, this has compelled me to speak to ye publicly, and to give ye thanks for
that your charitable affection toward us, and not such thanks which come only
from the tongue, but as are conceived by a grateful mind.

Give me leave therefore (most renowned Fathers) to supplicate ye, that ye
would still favor our good, and farther love us. Truly, we men do draw so
much the nearer to Divine nature, when by how much we increase, by so much we
cherish, and defend the small, and weak ones; and with how much diligence do
you perform this, most renowned Fathers? who though ye seem to be arrived to
the highest top of felicity, yet ye do not only not despise inferior men, but
ye so wish well to them, that ye seem sensible of their calamity; ye knowing
how acceptable to God ye are by so doing, who loves to do good to them who do
good. And truly it is from hence, that of late ye have done so great things
valiantly, and by an unusual attempt, and things much to be observed among the
Nations. The whole world stands amazed at these things, and the eyes of all are
turned upon ye, that they may see whither all these things do tend, which the
great Governor of all things seems to bring upon the world by so great
changes, so famously remarkable, of so many Nations; and so all those things
which God is pleased to have foretold by the Prophets, do, and shall obtain
their accomplishment. All which things of necessity must be fulfilled, that so
Israel at last being brought back to his own place; peace, which is promised
under the Messiah, may be restored to the world; and concord, which is the only
Mother of all good things. These things I handle more largely in this Treatise,
which I dedicate to ye (most renowned Fathers) ye cannot be ignorant, that it
is not only not unprofitable, but very useful for States, and Statesmen, to
foresee the issue (which yet is ever in Gods hand) of humane Counsels, that so
they may observe, and understand from Divine truth, the events of things to
come, which God has determined by his Spirit in his holy Prophets. I know that
this my labor will not be unacceptable to ye, how mean soever it be, which I
trust ye will cheerfully receive, because that ye love our Nation, and as part
of it, the Author of this Discourse. But I entreat you be certain, that I pour
out continual prayers to God for your happiness. Farewell, most renowned
Fathers, and flourish most prosperously.

Menasseh Ben Israel.

MENASSEH BEN ISRAEL to the courteous Reader.
THere are, as many minds as men, about the original of the people of
America, and of the first inhabitants of the new World, and of the West Indies;
for how many men soever they were, or are, they came of those two, Adam, and
Eve; and consequently of Noah, after the Flood. But that new World does seem
wholly separated from the old, therefore it must be that some did pass thither
out of one (at least) of the three parts of the World, sc. Europe, Asia, and
Africa; but the doubt is, what people were those, and out of what place they
went. Truly, the truth of that must be gathered, partly out of the ancient
Histories, and partly from conjectures; as their Habit, their Language, their
Manners, which yet do vary according to men's dispositions; so that it is hard
to find out the certainty. Almost all who have viewed those Countries, with
great diligence, have been of different judgments: Some would have the praise
of finding out America, to be due to the Carthaginians, others to the
Phenicians, or the Canaanites; others to the Indians, or people of China;
others to them of Norway, others to the inhabitants of the Atlantic Islands,
others to the Tartarians, others to the ten Tribes. Indeed, every one grounds
his opinion not upon probable arguments, but high conjectures, as will appear
farther by this Book. But I having curiously examined what ever has hitherto
been writ upon this Subject, do find no opinion more probable, nor agreeable
to reason, than that of our Montezinus, who says, that the first inhabitants
of America, were the ten Tribes of the Israelites, whom the Tartarians
conquered, and drove away; who after that (as God would have it) hid themselves
behind the Mountains Cordillerae. I also show, that as they were not driven
out at once from their Country, so also they were scattered into diverse
Provinces, sc. into America, into Tartary, into China, into Media, to the
Sabbaticall River, and into Aethiopia. I prove that the ten Tribes never
returned to the second Temple, that they yet keep the Law of Moses, and our
sacred Rites; and at last shall return into their Land, with the two Tribes,
Judah, and Benjamin; and shall be governed by one Prince, who is Messiah the
Son of David; and without doubt that happy time is near, which I make appear by
diverse things; where, Reader, thou shall find diverse Histories worthy of
memory, and many Prophesies of the old Prophets opened, with much study, and
care. I willingly leave it to the judgment of the godly, and learned, what
worth there is in this my Book, and what my own Nation owes me for my pains:
It is called, The Hope of Israel; which name is taken from Jerem. 14.8. O the
hope of Israel, the Savior thereof. For the scope of this Discourse is, to
show, that the hope in which we live, of the coming of the Messiah, is of a
future, difficult, but infallible good, because it is grounded upon the
absolute Promise of the blessed God.

And because I intend a continuation of Josephus his History of the Jews, our
famous Historian; I entreat, and beseech all Learned men, in what part of the
World soever they live (to whom I hope that shortly this Discourse will come)
that if they have any thing worthy of posterity, that they would give me notice
of it in time; for though I have collected many Acts of the Jews, and many
Histories out of the Hebrews, the Arabians, the Grecians, the Latins, and
other Authors of other Nations; yet I want many things for this my enterprise,
all which I am willing to perform, that I may please my Nation; but rather to
the glory of the blessed God, whose Kingdom is everlasting, and his Word
infallible.

The Translator to the Reader.
THis Discourse of a Jew coming to my hand, and having perused it, I thought
it not inconvenient to make it speak English; for the benefit of my
Countrymen, who wait for the redemption of Israel; and at the same time, of
the Gentiles also. That the Author is a Jew, ought to be no scandal to us
(though some of us Christian Gentiles are ignorant of, and scandalized at the
notion of the conversion of the Jews, as the Jews of old were, concerning our
being Converted, and grafted into the true Stock, as in Acts 11.3.) for though
God has rejected them, yet not for ever, Romans 11.25, 26. And also the many
Prophesies both in the Old, and New Testament, which concern their being
received again to grace, gathered from their dispersion, and settled in their
own Land; and their flourishing estate under, now our, and then their and our
Prince, Jesus Christ the Messiah, who will then triumph gloriously, and all the
people with him; these and many more Promises would want a fulfilling (which
the God of Truth will never suffer) if there should not be the revolution of a
time, in which they shall be converted, and grace and peace be poured out upon
Jews and Gentiles; though first upon the Jew, then the Gentile. But beside
this, the Author expresses so much learning, that he deserves honor of all;
so much ingenuity, and (so far as his light reaches) so great a measure of
the knowledge and fear of God, that he may well be set for a pattern to us
Christians, who profess much better than he, but live much worse. One thing is
very remarkable in him, that whereas many of us (like them who cannot see Wood
for Trees) though Environed with mercies in these late revolutions, (I speak
not to them who measure mercies only, or chiefly, by plentiful tables, full
purses, rich accoutrements, and the like; that wretched Generation is unworthy
of the name of Men, much more of Christians) yet will unthankfully cry out, What
have we got by all these troubles? and what has been done? surely this Jew
shall rise up in Judgment against such unchristian Christians; for he in his
Epistle dedicatory says, The whole world stands amazed at what the Parliament
has done; besides, he cordially and openly ownes the Parliament, who as far
as I know, never did him, or his Nation any further good then to pray for them;
(though we hope, and pray, that their favor may extend to realities, toward
that people, to whom certainly God has made many, and great Promises, and
shortly will give answerable performances:) but many among us, who enjoy peace
under them, and many other blessings, (too many for an unthankful Generation)
do refuse to acknowledge them, do curse them whom God has blessed, and even
in their prayers to that God who cannot be deceived, or imposed upon; do vent
themselves against this present Government, in expressions so wild and false,
that such Language would be accounted most unworthy, in our address to any
considerable person, much more then to the great God. I shall only add this,
sc. Do not think that I aim by this Translation to propagate, or commend
Iudaisme (which its no wonder if the Author does so much favor, especially in
his thirtyeth Section) no, through Grace I have better learned the truth, as it
is in Jesus: but to give some discovery of what apprehensions, and workings
there are at this day in the hearts of the Jews; and to remove our sinful
hatred from off that people, whose are the Promises, and who are beloved for
their Fathers sakes; and who of Jews, we shall hear to be, ere long, real
Christians.

The Authors of other Nations, which are quoted in this Treatise.
A.
ABrahamus Ortelius Agathias Augustinus Alexis Vanegas Alfonsus Cemedro Alonsus
Augustianus Alonsus de Erzilla Alonsus Venerus Arias Montanus.
B.
Baronius Berosus Boterus Bozius.
C.
Constantinus.
D.
Diodorus Siculus. Dion Duretus.
E.
Eselius Geradus Eusebius Cesariensis.
F.
Famianus Strada Franciscus de Ribera Franciscus lopez de Gomara.
G.
Garcilassus dela Vega Genebrardus Goropius Guil. Postellus Guilielmus Blawius
Guil. Schikardus.
H.
Henricus Alangre Hugo Grotius.
I.
Jacobus Verus Joan. de castillanos Joan. de Bairos Joan. Roman Joan. de Laet
Joan. Huarte Josephus d' Acosta Joan. Linschoten.
L.
Lescarbotus Lucanus.
M.
Manuel Sa. Marcilius Ficinus Marinus.
N.
Nicolaus Trigautius
O.
Origines Orosius Osorius Lusitanus.
P.
Petrus de Cieza Plancius Petrus Simon Petrus Hernandes de Quiros Petrus
Teixera Pineda Plato Plinius Pomarius Proclus Porphyrius Possevinus Plutarchus
Picus Mirandulanus Ptolomaeus
S.
Semuel Bochardus Solinus Strabo Suetonius Tranquillus
T.
Tacitus Thomas Malvenda
X.
Xenophon.
Z.
Zarate.
The Hebrew Books, and Authors.
TAlmud Hierosolymitanum Talmud Babylonicum Paraphrasis Chaldaica R. Simhon ben
Johay Seder holam Rabot Ialkot Tanhuma Joseph ben Gurion R. Sehadia Gaon R.
Moseh de Egypto R. Abraham Aben Ezra R. Selomoh Iarhi Eldad Danita R. David
Kimhi Eldad Danita R. David Kimhi R. Benjamin Tudelensis R. Moseh Gerundensis
R. Abraham bar R. Hiya Don Shac Abarbanel R. Joseph. Coen R. Abraham Frisol R.
Mordechay Japhe R. Mordechay reato R. Hazarya a Adomi
THE RELATION OF ANTONY MONTEZINVS.
IN the 18th. of the Month of Elul, the 5404 year from the Worlds creation,
and according to common compute, in 1644. Aaron Levi, otherwise called Antonius
Montezinus came into this City Amsterdam, and related to the Sieur Menassih ben
Israel, and other Cheisetaines of the Portugal Nation, Inhabitants of the same
City, these things which follow.

That it was two years and an half, since that the going from the Port Honda
in the West Indies, to the Papian jurisdiction, he conducted some Mules of a
certain Indian, whose name was Franciscus Castellanus, into the Province of
Qulty, and that there was one in company with him and other Indians, whose name
was Franciscus, who was called by all Cazicus. That it happened that as they
went over the Mountains Cordillerae, a great tempest arose, which threw the
laden Mules to the ground. The Indians being afflicted by the sore tempest,
every one began to count his losses; yet confessing that all that and more
grievous punishments were but just, in regard of their many sins. But
Franciscus bad them take it patiently, for that they should shortly enjoy rest:
The others answered, that they were unworthy of it, yea, that the notorius
cruelty used by the Spaniards toward them, was sent of God, because they had
so ill treated his holy people, who were of all others the most innocent. Now
then, they determined to stay all night upon the top of the Mountain. And
Montezinus took out of a Box some Bread, and Cheese, and Junkets, and gave them
to Franciscus, upbraiding him, that he had spoken disgracefully of the
Spaniards; who answered, that he had not told one half of the miseries, and
calamities inflicted by a cruel, and inhumane people; but they should not go
unrevenged, looking for help from an unknown people.

After this Conference, Montezinus went to Carthagena, a City of the Indians,
where he being examined, was put in prison; and while he prayed to God, such
words fell from him; Blessed be the name of the Lord, that has not made me an
Idolater, a Barbarian, a Black-a-Moore, or an Indian; but as he named Indian,
he was angry with himself, and said, The Hebrews are Indians; then he coming
to himself again, confessed that he doted, and added, Can the Hebrews be
Indians? which he also repeated a second, and a third time; and he thought that
it was not by chance that he had so much mistaken himself.

He thinking farther, of what he had heard from the Indian, and hoping that he
should find out the whole truth; therefore as soon as he was let out of
Prison, he sought out Franciscus, believing that he would repeat to him again
what he had spoken; he therefore being set at liberty, through Gods mercy, went
to the Port Honda, and according to his desire, found him, who said; He
remembered all that be had spoken, when he was upon the Mountain; whom
Montezinus asked, that he would take a Journey with him, offering him all
courtesies, giving him three Pieces of Eight, that he might buy himself
necessaries.

Now when they were got out of the City, Montezinus confessed himself to be an
Hebrew, of the Tribe of Levi, and that the Lord was his Gods; and he told the
Indian, that all other gods were but mockeries; the Indian being amazed, asked
him the name of his Parents; who answered, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; but said
he, have you no other Father? who answered, yes, his Fathers name was Ludovicus
Montezinus; but he not being yet satisfied, I am glad (says he) to hear you
tell this, for I was in doubt to believe you, while you seemed ignorant of your
Parents: Montezinus swearing, that he spoke the truth, the Indian asked him, if
he were not the Son of Israel, and thereupon began a long discourse; who when
he knew that he was so, he desired him to prosecute what he had begun, and
added, that he should more fully explain himself, for that formerly he had
left things so doubtful, that he did not seem at all assured of any thing.
After that both had sat down together, and refreshed themselves, the Indian
thus began: If you have mind to follow me your Leader, you shall know what
ever you desire to know, only let me tell you this, whatsoever the journey is,
you must foot it, and you must eat nothing but parched Mayz, and you must omit
nothing that I tell you; Montezinus answered, that he would do all.

The next day being Monday, Cazicus came again, and bid him throw away what he
had in his Knapsack, to put on shoes made of linen packthred, and to follow
him, with his staff; whereupon Montezinus leaving his Cloak, and his Sword,
and other things which he had about him, they began the journey, the Indian
carrying upon his back three measures of Mayz, two ropes, one of which was full
of knots, to climb up the Mountain, with an booked sork; the other was loose,
for to pass over Marshes, and Rivers, with a little Axe, and shoes made of
linen pack-thread. They being thus accoutred, traveled the whole week, unto
the Sabbath Day; on which day they testing, the day after they went on, till
Tuesday, on which day about eight a clock in the morning, they came to a River
as big as Duerus; then the Indian said, Here you shall see your Brethren, and
making a sign with the sine linen of Xylus, which they had about them instead
of a Girdle; thereupon on the other side of the River they saw a great smoke,
and immediately after, such another sign made as they had made before; a little
after that, three men, with a woman, in a little Boat came to them, which being
come near, the woman went ashore, the rest staying in the Boat; who talking a
good while with the Indian, in a Language which Montezinus understood not; she
returned to the Boat, and told to the three men what she had learned of the
Indian; who always eying him, came presently out of the Boat, and embraced
Montezinus, the woman after their example doing the like; after which, one of
them went back to the Boat, and when the Indian bowed down to the feet of the
other two, and of the woman, they embraced him courteously, and talked a good
while with him. After that, the Indian bid Montezinus to be of good courage,
and not to look that they should come a second time to him, till he had sully
learned the things which were told him at the first time.

Then those two men coming on each side of Montezinus, they spoke in Hebrew,
the fourth Verse of Deuteronomy. 6. Semah Israel, adonai Elohenu adonai chad; that is,
Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one God.

Then the Indian Interpreter being asked, how it was in Spanish, they spoke
what follows to Montezinus, making a short pause between every particular.

1 Our Fathers are Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Israel, and they signified these
four by the three fingers lifted up; then they joined Reuben, adding another
finger to the former three. 2 We will bestow several places on them who have a
mind to live with us. 3 Joseph dwells in the midst of the Sea, they making a
sign by two fingers put together, and then parted them. 4 They said (speaking
fast) shortly some of us will go forth to see, and to tread under foot; at
which word they winked, and stamped with their feet. 5 One day we shall all of
us talk together, they saying, Ba, ba, ba; and we shall come forth as issuing
out of our mother the earth. 6 A certain Messenger shall go forth. 7
Franciscus shall tell you somewhat more of these things, they making a sign
with their finger, that much must not be spoken. 8 Suffer us that we may
prepare our selves; and they turning their hands and faces every way, thus
prayed to God, DO NOT STAY LONG. 9 Send twelve men, they making a sign, that
they would have men that had beards, and who are skillful in writing.
The Conference being ended, which lasted a whole day, the same men returned on
Wednesday, and Thursday, and spoke the same things again, without adding a
word; at last Montezinus being weary that they did not answer what be asked
them, nor would suffer him to go over the river, he cast himself into their
Boat; but he being forced out again, fell into the river, and was in danger to
be drowned, for be could not swim; but being got out of the water, the rest
being angry, said to him; attempt not to pass the River, nor to enquire after
more then we tell you; which the Indian interpreted to him, the rest declaring
the same things both by signs, and words.

You must observe, that all those three days the Boat stayed not in the same
place, but when those four who came went away, other four came, who all as with
one mouth, repeated all the forementioned nine particulars, there came and
went about three hundred.

Those men are somewhat scorched by the Sun, some of them wear their hair
long, down to their knees, others of them shorter, and others of them much as
we commonly cut it. They were comely of body, well accoutred, having ornaments
on their feet, and legs, and their heads were compassed about with a linen
cloth.

Montezinus says, that when he was about to be gone, on Thursday evening, they
showed him very much courtesy, and brought him whatever they thought fit for
him in his journey, and they said, that themselves were well provided with all
such things, (sc. meats, garments, flocks, and other things) which the
Spaniards in India call their own.

The same day, when they came to the place where they had rested, the night
before they came to the River, Montezinus said to the Indian; You remember
Francis, that my Brethren told me, that you should tell me something, therefore
I entreat you, that you would not think much to relate it. The Indian answered,
I will tell you what I know, only do not trouble are, and you shall know the
truth, as I have received it from my forefathers; but if you press me too
much, as you seem to do, you will make me tell you lies; attend therefore I
pray, to what I shall tell you.

Thy Brethren are the Sons of Israel, and brought thither by the providence of
God, who for their sake wrought many Miracles, which you will not believe, if I
should tell you what I have learned from my Fathers; we Indians made war upon
them in that place, and used them more hardly then we now are by the Spaniards;
then by the instigation of our Magicians (whom we call Mohanes) we went armed
to that place where you saw your Brethren, with an intent to destroy them; but
not one of all those who went thither, came back again; whereupon we raised a
great Army, and set upon them, but with the same success, for again none
escaped; which happened also the third time, so that India was almost bereft of
all inhabitants, but old men, and women; the old men therefore, and the rest
who survived, believing that the Magicians used false dealing, consulted to
destroy them all, and many of them being killed, those who remained promised to
discover somewhat that was not known; upon that they desisted from cruelty,
and they declared such things as follow:

That the God of those Children of Israel is the true God, that all that which
is engraven upon their stones is true; that about the end of the World they
shall be Lords of the world; that some shall come who shall bring you much
good, and after that they have enriched the earth with all good things, those
Children of Israel going forth out of their Country, shall subdue the whole
World to them, as it was subject to them formerly; you shall be happy if you
make a League with them.

Then five of the chief Indians (whom they call Cazici who were my Ancestors,
having understood the Prophecy of the Magicians, which they had learned of the
Wise men of the Hebrews, went thither, and after much entreaty, obtained their
desire, having first made known their mind to that woman, whom you saw to be
for an Interpreter, (for your Brethren will have no commerce with our Indians)
and whosoever of ours does enter the Country of your Brethren, they presently
kill him; and none of your Brethren do pass into our Country. Now by the help
of that woman we made this agreement with them.

1 That our fifth Cazici should come to them, and that alone at every seventy
months end.

2 That he to whom secrets should be imparted, should be above the age of three
hundred Moons, or months.

3 And that such things should be discovered to none in any place where people
are, but only in a Desert, and in the presence of the Cazici; and so (said the
Indian) we keep that secret among our selves, because that we promise our
selves great favor from them, for the good offices which we have done to our
Brethren, it is not lawful for us to visit them, unless at the seventy
months end: Or if there happens any thing new, and this fell out but thrice in
my time; First, when the Spaniards came into this Land; also, when Ships came
into the Southern Sea; and thirdly, when you came, whom they long wished for,
and expected. They did much rejoice for those three new things, because that
they said, the Prophesies were fulfilled.

And Montezinus also said, that three other Cazici were sent to him by
Franciscus, to Honda, yet not telling their names; till he had said, you may
speak to them freely, they are my fellows in my Function, of whom I have told
you, the fifth could not come for age, but those three did heartily embrace
him; and Montezinus being asked, of what Nation he was, he answered, an Hebrew,
of the Tribe of Levi, and that God was his God, etc. which when they had heard,
they embraced him again, and said: Upon a time you shall see us; and shall not
know us; we are all your Brethren, by Gods singular favor; and again, they
both of them hidding farewell, departed, every one saying, I go about my
business; therefore none-but Franciscus being left, who saluting Montezinus as
a Brother, then bade him farewell, saying, farewell my Brother, I have other
things to do, and I go to visit thy Brethren, with other Hebrew Cazici* As
for the Country, be secure, for we rule all the Indians; after we have finished
a business which we have with the wicked Spaniards, we will bring you out of
your bondage, by Gods help; not doubting, but he who cannot lie, will help us,
according to his Word; endeavor you in the mean while that those men may come.

The HOPE of ISRAEL.
SECT 1.
IT is hard to say what is certain among the so many, and so uncertain
opinions concerning the original of the Indians of the new world. If you ask,
what is my opinion upon the relation of Montezinus, I must say, it is scarce
possible to know it by any Art, since there is no demonstration, which can
manifest the truth of it; much less can you gather it from Divine, or humane
Writings; for the Scriptures do not tell what people first inhabited those
Countries; neither was there mention of them by any, til Christop. Columbus,
Americus Vespucius, Ferdinandus Cortez, the Marquess Del Valle, and Franciscus
Pizarrus went thither; and though hitherto I have been of this mind, that I
would speak only of solid, and infallible things, (as those things are which
concern our Law) and the obscurity of the matter, making me doubt, whether it
would be worth a while for me to attempt it; yet at last I was content to be
persuaded to it, not that I look to get credit by it, but that my friends, and
all who seek for truth, that have put me upon this work, may see how very
desirous I am to please them.

I shall speak somewhat in this Discourse, of the diverse opinions which have
been, and shall declare in what Countries it is thought the ten Tribes are; and
I shall close, after that I have brought them into their own Country, which I
shall prove by good reasons, following the Revelations of the holy Prophets,
who I believe cannot be expounded otherwise, whatever some think; yet I intend
not to dispute these things, but according to my custom, shall lay down
fairly, and faithfully, the opinions of the Jews only.

SECT. 2.
YOu must know therefore, that Alexis Vanegas says, that the first Colonies of
the West Indies were of the Carthaginians, who first of all inhabited
New-Spaine, and as they increased, spread to the Island Cuba; from thence to the
continent of America; and after that toward Panama, New-Spaine, and the Isle
of Peru. And he grounds himself on that reason, that as the Carthaginians (who
of old did most use the Seas) so those of Peru, and the Inhabitants of
New-Spaine, did make use of pictures instead of letters.

But this opinion does not satisfy, because they anciently were white men,
bearded, and civil in converse; but contrarily those of Parama, St. Martha,
and of the isles of Cuba, and Barlovent, went naked. Farthermore, who can
think that the language which; he says, they first spoke, should be so soon
changed, that it should be wholly another: and there is no agreement between
the one and the other. The learned Arias Montanus thinks, that the Indians of
New Spain, and Peru, are the offspring of Ophir the son of Jokton, the
nephew of Heber. And he backs his opinion, by the name Ophir, which by
transposition of letters, is the same with Peru; and he adds, that the name
Parvaim in the duall number, does signify the Istimus between New-Spaine and
Peru, which first was called Ophir, then Peru; and that these countries are
that Peru, from whence King Solomon brought gold, precious stones, etc. as in 1
Kin. chap. 9.6.10. and 2 Chronicles. 9.21. This opinion seems more probable than
the other, and may be backed by another name of the River Liru, which according
to Gomoras, lies in the 2d degree from the Equinoctial line, from Panama 222.
miles; as also by the name of the Province Jucatan, which may be derived from
Joktan the father of Ophir. But besides that this notation is somewhat far
fetched, it crosses what Josephus Acosta affirms in 1. Histor. of Jud. c. 13.
who says, that the name Peru was unknown to the Indians themselves before
those Spaniards gave that name. Add to this what Garcillasso de la Vega in the
first part of his Commentary on Peru, c. 4 says, that when a certain
Spanyard, Basco Nunnez de Balboa, lived in that country, and asked a Fisherman,
what was the name of that Province, he answered Beru; (which was the Fishermans
own name, he thinking that was the question) and he farther said, that the
name of the River where he fished, was called Pelu. Hence you may see, that
Peru is made of both those words; which also many Spaniards besides him, we
have mentioned, do testify. Besides, who can think that Solomon neglecting
the East Indies, a place so rich, and abounding with all things, should send a
Fleet so far off as to the West Indies. Also we read in 1 King. 9. that
Solomon made ships in Ezion-Geber on the shore of the red Sea, which also
Jehosophat did, with Ahaziah, as Ezra says, in 2. Chron. 20. and it is
certain that those of those countries went that ordinary way to India. And it
will not follow, that because the holy Scripture sometimes says, that they
went to Tarsis, and sometimes that they went to Ophir, that therefore both
those places are the same; since that Tarsis is not, as some think Carthage,
or Tunes in Africa; for that the navy of Solomon did not set sail from Joppa,
a Port of the mediterranean, but from Ezion-Geber, a Port of the red Sea, from
whence they could not sail to Carthage, but to the East Indies. The answer of
Isaac Abarbanel to that argument, cannot be admitted, who says, that an arm
of Nilus did run into the red Sea, and another arm ran into the Mediterranean,
by Alexandria in Egypt; since it was never heard, that ships of great burden,
did swim in those rivers; and would not he then have built his Navy in the Port
of Alexandria? It is more true that Tarsis is the Ocean, or Indian Sea; and
because they came into the Ocean, after that they had sailed over the red Sea,
which is but narrow, therefore the Scripture says, They Sailed to Tarsis.
Rabbi Jonathan ben Vziel follows this opinion, who in his Paraphrase, for
Tarsis, puts (the Sea.) The same says Franciscus de Ribera, in his Comment on
Jonah, and also Rabbinus Josephus Coen, in his Chronology; who ascribe the word
Tarsis, to the Indian Sea; because that Ophir is the same country, which of old
is called The Golden Chersonesus; and by Josephus, The golden Land; and at this
day Malacca; from whence they brought Ivory, for the great number of Elephants
which are there; none of which are in the West Indies, And Solomon's Navy stayed
in those Ports of India, 3. years, because they traded with the Inhabitants I
know that learned Grotius, and famous de Lact think differently; as also those
quoted by them; but I shall not insist in confuting their opinions because I
study brevity. I do like of, in part, the opinion of the Spaniards who dwell
in the Indies, who by common consent do affirm that the Indians come of the
10. Tribes. And truly they are not altogether mistaken, because in my opinion,
they were the first planters of the Indies; as also other people of the
East Indies came by that Straight which is between India, and the Kingdom of
Anian. But that people, according to our Montezinus, made war upon those
Inhabitants the Isralites, whom they forced up unto the mountains, and the
inland countries, as formerly the Britains were driven by the Saxons into
Wales.

SECT. 3.
THe first ground of that opinion is taken from 2 Esdras. 13. v. 40. etc,
(which we quote as ancient, though it be Apocryphal) where it is said, that the
10. Tribes which Salmanaster carried captive in the reign of Hoseas, beyond
Euphrates, determined to go into countries far remote, in which none dwelt,
whereby they might the better observe their law. And as they passed over some
branches of Euphrates, God wrought miracles, stopping the course of the Flood,
till they had passed over; and that country is called Arsareth. From whence we
may gather, that the 10. Tribes, went to New-Spaine, and Peru, and possessed
those 2 Kingdoms, till then without Inhabitants. Genebrardus, quoting Esdras
concerning that wandering of the 10. Tribes, says, that Arsareth is Tartaria
the greater, and from thence they went to Greenland; because that America is
lately found compassed with it, and so it is to be on that side farther from
Sea, than it is upon other sides, being almost an Island; and they might pass
from Greenland, by the Straight of Davis into the country Labrador, which is
now called India, being 50. miles distant from thence, as Gomeras says in his
History: The same journying of the 10 Tribes into India, is confirmed by that
which P. Malvenda reports. That Arsareth is that Promontry which is near to
Scythia, or Tartary, near the Sea, called by Pliny, Tabis, where America is
parted from the country of Anian by a narrow Sea; which also on that side parts
China, or Tartary from America; so that there might be an easy passage for the
10. Tribes through Arsareth, or Tartary into the Kingdoms of Anian, and
Quivira; which in time might plant the new world, and firm land; which in
bigness equals Europe, Asia, and Africa put together; Alonsus Augustinianus
counting from the shore of the north Sea, from the country of Labrador 3928.
miles, and from Sur 3000. miles; but Gomaras counts from India by the South,
and Sur 9300. miles; which space is big enough for the 10. Tribes, that they
may there spread in places hitherto unknown.

SECT. 4.
HE strengthens this opinion, that in the isle S. Michael, which belongs to the
Azores, the Spaniards found Sepulchers under ground, with very ancient Hebrew
letters, which Genebrardus has Printed, in lib. 1. chro. p. 159. From whence
we gather, that in that inscription there is a mistake of the Letter (T), so
that the sense of it is, How perfect is God. Sehalbin is dead. Know God. Unless
you will have them to be proper Names, and to signify him that is dead, and
his Father, in which sense for (M) you must read (B), and then the sense will
be, Meetabel, seal, the Son of Matadel; such names ending in (el) are common in
Scripture, as Raphael, Immanuel, and the like. Let it suffice him who is
pleased with neither of those conjectures, that Hebrew Letters were found
there. And though that Island is remote from the West Indies, yet it might be by
accident that they might put in thither.

SECT. 5.
THat seems to be to the purpese which Garcillasse de la Voga says in his
Comment on Peru, lib. 3. c. 1. That in Tiahuanacis a Province of Collai, among
other Antiquities, this is worthy of memory, (being situated at the Lake which
the Spaniards call Chutuytu) That among the great buildings which are there,
one was to be seen of a very great pile, which has a Court 15 fathoms broad; a
wall that compasses it, 2 furlongs high; on one side of the Court is a Chamber
45 foot long, and 22 broad; and the Court, the Wall, the Pavement, the Chamber,
the Roof of it, the entrance, the posts of the 2 gates of the Chamber, and of
the entrance, are made only of one stone; the three sides of the Wall are an
ell thick; the Indians say, that that House is dedicated to the Maker of the
World. I conjecture that building to be a Synagogue, built by the Israelites;
for the Authors who writ about the Indies, tell us, that the Indians never use
iron, or iron weapons. Also the Indians were Idolaters, and therefore it could
not be that they should build an house to God. P. Acosta in lib. 6. Ind.
histor. c. 14. mentions such buildings as are in that place; and he reports
that he mesured a stone which was 38 foot long, 18 foot broad, and 6 foot
thick. Petrus Cieza in his first part of his Chonicles of Peru, c. 87. relates,
That in the City Guamanga, which is situated by the river Vinaque, there is a
vast building, which because then it seemed almost ruined by time, it therefore
had lasted many years. He asking the neighboring Indians. Who built that
great Pile? he learnt, that it was made by a people (who were bearded, and
white as the Spaniards) who came thither a long time before (and staid some
time after) the Indians reigned there; and the Indians said, that they had
received it from their Fathers by Tradition. The same Cieza cap. 10 5. of the
Antiquity of Tiguanac, says, that what the Indians boa^t to be very ancient,
can by no means be compared with that Ancient buildings, and other things.
From all which you may well gather, that the first inhabitants of that place
were the Israelites of the 10 Tribes because they were white, and bearded.

SECT. 6.
TO this opinion add an argument taken from what Logicians call a simili; for
he that will compare the Laws and Customs of the Indians and Hebrews
together, shall find them agree in many things; whence you may easily gather,
That the Indians borrowed those of the Hebrews (who lived among them) before,
or after they went to the unknown mountains. The Indians of Jucatan, and the
Acuzainitenses do circumeise themselves. The Totones of New Spain, and Mexicans
(as Roman and Gomaza in the general history of the Indians testify) rend
their garments, if their happen any sudden misfortune, or the death of any.
Gregorius Garcias in Monarchia Ingasonum, an Isle of Peru, says, that
Guainacapacus hearing that his son Atagualpa sled for fear of the army of his
enemy, he rent his garments. The Mexicans, and Totones, or the Totonacazenses
kept continually fire upon their altars, as God commands in Leviticus. Those of
Peru do the same, in their Temples dedicated to the Sun. The Nicaraguazenses do
forbid their women who were lately brought a bed, to enter their Temples, till
they are purified. The Inhabitants of Hispaniola think those do sin, who lie
with a woman a little after her childbirth. And the Indians of new Spain do
severely punish Sodomie. Many of the Indians do bury their dead on the
Mountains; which also is the Jewish custom, and Garcias says, the name Chanan
to found in those countries. You may wonder at this, that the Indians do every
50. years celebrate a Jubily, with great pomp, in Mexico, the Metropolis of
the whole Province. Also that on the Sabbath Day all are bound to be present in
the Temple, to perform their Sacrifices, and Ceremonies. They also were
divorced from their wives, if they were not honest. The Indians of Pern,
New-Spain, and Guatemala did marry the widows of their dead brethren. May not
you judge from these things, that the Jews lived in those places, and that the
Gentiles learned such things of them? Add also to what has been said, that the
knowledge which the Indians had, of the creation of the world, and of the
universal Flood, they borrowed from the Israelites.

SECT. 7.
THe 4th ground of this opinion is, that the Indians are of a brown color, and
without beards; but in the new world, white, and bearded men were found, who
had never commerce with the Spaniards; and whom you cannot affirm to be any
other than Israelites; because also as they could never be overcome, so they
shall never be fully known: as appears by what follows. Petrus Simon a
Franciscan, in his History of finding out the firm land, says, that in the
reign of Charles the 5. he commanded one called Philippus de Vire thither, to
discover, and plant those countries; that he found them unknown toward the
north of America about 5. degrees, in the Province of Omeguas, which is near
the Province of Venezuela, and now is called Garracas. And he having learned of
their neighbors, the greatness of that people both in wealth, and in war, he
determined to war upon them. Who when they had marched a good way, at last
found a rich city, full of people, and fair buildings; and not far off 2
husbandmen tilling the ground; whom they would have made prisoners, that they
might be their interpreters. But when they saw themselves set on, they fled
apace toward the city; but Philippus d' Vire and his Soldiers followed them
hard on horseback, and had almost taken them; whereupon the husbandmen stood
still, and with their Spears wounded Philip in the breast, piercing through
his Breast Plate made of wool to keep off arrows. He wondering at the
dexterity of that people, judged it a wiser course, not to make war upon that
Province, and people so expert in war, and who dared to resist armed men.
Therefore he retreated with his Company. And to this day none go to that
people, neither is it known which way to go to them. It is probable that they
are Israelites whom God preserves in that place against the day of redemption.
Alonsus de Erzilla testifies the same thing, in 2. part. sua Araucaniae, Cant.
27. where describing those places, he thus speaks in Spanish, Some Countries
there, so populous are seen,
As one continued City; which have been
Never as yet, discoved; but unknown
To other Nations; have lain hid alone;
Not found by foreign sword, nor foreign trade
Do either seek, nor suffer to be made*
But unacquainted live, till God shall please
To manifest his secrets* show us these.


SECT. 8.
IOanues Castilianus Vicarius living in the City Pampelona of Nova Granada in
Peru, says, that when Gonzalus Pisarrus had revolted from his people, he sent
some to search out new countries of the Indians who lived eastward, whose
number could never be known, because that (as some say) their country is above
2000 miles in length, if you compute from the head of the river Maragnon, which
runs near Andes of Gusco, unto the place where it runs into the Sea, where
therefore the River began to be navigable, Petrus d' Orsua being a Captain,
went by water, and h^s Soldiers with him, in Vessels called Canows; which when
they were too small for the sorce of the stream, he built Brigandines, on the
bank of the River Guariaga, which washing the Province Chachapoyas, runs into
Maragnon. He was scarce gone aboard his Brigandines, when one of his own
Soldiers named Aquirre, a stout man, killed him, who by common consent
succeeded the slain* When they had gone a little way, they found a plain
without a mountain, where many houses stood on each side of the bank of
Maragnon, being built by the Indians. They still went on for 48 hours
together, and saw nothing but tall, and white houses, which they feared to go
into, because the Inhabitants were numerous, and because they heard the noise
of Hammers; for which cause they thought the Inhabitants to be Goldsmiths. They
went on still, and now sailed in the north Sea, but always near to the shore
of the Province of Margarita, where Aquirre was caught by the Inhabitants and
hanged; for they heard that he had killed his Captain Petrus de Orsua.

SECT. 9.
CAspar Bergarensis (whom I have often spoke with) went from the City Loxa, which
is in the Province of Quiti in Peru, and accompanied the Colonel Don Diego
Vaca dela Vega going to seek a new Country.

In the year 1622 they came to the Province Jarguasongo, which had been
discovered by Captain Salines; and they passed the Mountains Cordillerae,
where the River Maragnon is not above a stones cast over. In the Province of
the Jude Mainenses they built a City, whose name was S. Franciscus de Borja, at
Esquilache. In his company were an 100 Spaniards in Canows. Having conquered
those Indians, and compelling them to swear fealty to the King of Spain; the
Colonel being instructed by the Mainenses, went to other places, after he had
put a Garrison into his new City. Having sailed fifty leagues in the River (he
found some Cottages of the Indians which there hid themselves) by favor of
many Rivers which there run into Maragnon. When they had sailed into the River
Guariaga, where Petrus de Orsua had built his Brigaudines, and was killed by
Aquerra; they asked the Indians whom they had taken (who were called Guariaga,
from the Rivers name) what people do live on the Rivers side? they told the
Colonel, that 5 days journey off, there live men of tall stature, comely in
presence, and have as great beards as the Spaniards have, valiant, and warlick,
who are not skilled in Canowes, though the rest of the Indians use no other; he
presently returned the same way he came.

SECT. 10.
IN Fardambuc about 40 years since, 8 Tabaiares had a mind to look out new
Countries, and to see whether the Land that was beyond, and unknown, were
inhabited. They having spent 4 months in traveling Westward, they came to
mountains, to whose top they got with difficulty, and found a plain which a
pleasant river did compass, by whose bank side dwelt a people who loved
commerce, they were white, and bearded; and this 5 of the Tabaires (for 3
perished by the way, and only 5 returned) told to the Brasilians after 9
months.

SECT. 11.
IN our time, under King Philip the Third, Captain Ferdinandes de Queiros being
returned out of India (where he had spent most of his life) to Rome, he showed
a Table of Lands yet undiscovered. From thence he went to Madrid, and 5 ships
were given him by che Governor of Panama (to whom he was sent) to perfect his
design. He began his journey, and was scarcely entered the South Sea, but he
found land, which he called, The Isle of Solomon, and Jerusalem, for reasons
which he told me. He in his course of sailing always kept close to the shore
of those Islands; he saw those Islanders of a brown color, and took many;
others dwelt in greater Islands, and more fruitful; these were white, and wore
long garments of silk; and the Pilot being bid to bring his Ship near the
shore, he split his Ship upon a Rock, and the Islanders running greedily to
the sight) which being sunk, the Captain went thence, looking for the firm
land, which he found to be forty degrees beyond; and he went 300 miles near
the shore And when he perceived the Country to be inhabited, by the smoke
which he saw, and would put into a Port on the side of the River, there ran to
him many white men, of yellow hair, tall like Giants, richly clothed, and of
long beards. But one of the Vessels being wracked in the Havens mouth, he was
forced to put out to Sea; whereupon the Islanders sent 2 Chaloffi of a brown
color, (as the inhabitants were of the first Island) with sheep, and other
provisions, and fruits, but desiring, and threatening them, if they did not
depart: The Captain brought those Coloffi into Spain, from whom the Spaniards
could learn nothing but by signs; and in stead of answers, (when they were
asked) would show their beards, as if such those were, who were their Lords,
and had sent them, and if they were asked about Religion, they would hold up
their fingers to heaven, implying, that they worshipped but one God. A little
while after, they died in Spain. The Captain returned to Panama, having left
his 2 Ships which were wracked; and when the Governor sued him, by means. of
the Senators, who are over the Indian affairs, he was dismissed, and returned
with his Ships into Spain, where he abode 2 years before his matters were
dispatched. But the King created him Marquess of the Countries found out by
him, and commanded to give him a good Army, wherewith to compass his designs.
But he scarce got to Panama, when he died, not without suspicion of being
poisoned by the Governor.

SECT: XII.
THat which I am about to tell, shall serve for a proof of that which I said of
the West-Indians. A Dutch mariner told me, that not long since he was with his
ship in America, seven degrees toward the North between Maragnon, and great
Para, and he put into an harbor in a pleasant river, where he found some
Indians who understood Spanish, of whom he bought Meats, and Dy-wood; after he
had stayed there six months, he understood that that River extended eighteen
leagues toward the Carybes Indians, as far as the ship could go; and that the
River is divided there into three branches, and they sailing two months on the
left hand, there met them white men, and bearded, well bred, well clothed, and
abounding with gold and silver; they dwelt in Cities enclosed with walls, and
full of people; and that some Indians of Oronoch went thither, and brought home
much gold, silver, and many precious stones. Which he having understood, sent
thither some Seamen; but the Indian died by the way, who was their guide, and
so they did not proceed, but stayed there two months, and trucked with the
Indians who were sixty leagues from Sea. That Province is called Jisbia, and is
subject to Zealand; they have no commerce with the Spaniards, and the
Inhabitants travel securely every way. I heard that story by accident from
that Dutch master of the ship; whence some of us guessing them to be
Israelites, had purposed to send him again to enquire more fully. But he dyed
suddenly the last year, whence it seems that God does not permit that those
purposes should take any effect till the end of days.

SECT: XIII.
YEt I give more credit to our Monterinus, being a Portingal, and a Jew of our
order; born in a City of Portingal, called Villefleur, of honest and known
parents, a man about forty years old, honest, and not ambicious. He went to
the Indies, where he was put into the Inquisition as the successor of many who
were born in Portingal, and descended from them whom the King of Portugal Don
Manuel forced to turn Christians: ( O wicked, and unjust action, says Osorius;
and a little after, This was done neither according to Law, nor Religion,) and
yet to this day they privately keep their Religion, which they had changed,
being forced thereto. He being freed from the Inquisition, very diligently
ought out these things, and often spoke with those men; and then was not quiet
till he came hither, and had told us that good news. He endured much in that
journey, and was driven to great want, so that no house would give him food, or
give him money for his work. I my self was well acquainted with him for six
months together that he lived here; and sometimes I made him take an oath in
the presence of honest men, that what he had told, was true. Then he went to
Farnambuc, where two years after he died, taking the same oath at his death.
Which if it be so, why should not I believe a man that was virtuous, and having
all that which men call gain. And who knows but that shortly the truth of that
prognostic may appear, which our Monterinus learned from the Mohanes;
answerable to that which Jacobus Verus an Astrologer of Prague writ after the
apparition of the Comet in Ann. 1618. and dedicated to his Highness the Prince
Palatine, where he thus discourses: The Comet going toward the South, does
intimate that the Cities and Provinces which God does threaten, are those of
the West Indies, which shall revolt from the King of Spain, who will find
that loss greater then he imagined, not that the Indians rebel against him of
themselves, but that they are provoked to it being stirred up by others.
Neither did the Comet only foretell that, but the eclipse of the Sun, which was
in that Country the year before. Thus far the Astrologer. Our ancient Rabbis
say, though we do not believe the Astrologers in all things, yet we do not
wholly reject them, who sometimes tell truth.

SECT: XIIII.
THus far of the West Indies; of which Isaiah may be understood (because it
lies in the midst of the Sea, and also has many Islands) in Isa. 60.9. The
isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring their sons
from far, their silver and their gold with them. Jer. 31.10. Hear the word of
the Lord O ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He that
scattered Israel will gather him. Psalm. 97.1. The Lord reigns, let the earth
rejoice, and the multitude of isles be glad. Where part of the ten Tribes do
dwell unknown to this day.

SECT. XV.
YOu must know, that all the ten Tribes were not carried away at the same time.
Pull the King of Assyria (as I show in the 2d: part of my Reconciler) conquered,
and carried away the Tribes of Reuben, Gad, and half Manasseh, in the reign of
Peka, as you may see in 1 Chronicles: 5.26. and Josephus in li. 9. c. 11.
Tiglah-pileser 8. years after took Ijon, Abel-beth-maachah, Hazor, Gilead,
Galilee, all the land of Naphtali, and he carried away all the captives into
Assyria, in 2 King. 15.29. At last Shalmaneser king of Assyria, nine years
after, in the reign of Hoshea the son of Elah, besieged Samaria three years;
which being taken, he carried away Hoshea, with the rest of the Tribes, in 2
King. 17.6. Of those three times the Prophet Isaiah speaks, Isa. 9.1. saying,
the first captivity was gentle, if you compare it with the last, which was
grievous, and unsufferable, when the kingdom, and Monarchy of Israel ceased.

SECT: XVI.
THe ten Tribes being conquered at several times, we must think they were
carried into several places. As we believe they went to the West Indies by the
strait of Anian, so we think that out of Tartary they went to China, by that
famous wall in the confines of both. Our argument to prove it, is taken from
the authority of two Jesuits, who erected their Colleges in those Countries.
Nicolaus Trigantius a Dutchman in his discourse of the Christian expedition
undertaken by the Jesuits to Sina, says, We find that in former time the
Jews came into these kingdoms. And when that society had for some years seated
it self in the Court of the Pequinenses, a certain Jew came to P. Matthaeus
Riccius; he was born in Chamfamfu the metropolis of the Province Honan, and was
surnamed Ngay; and now being licensed to the degree of Doctor, he went to
Pequin. But when he read in a certain book writ by a Doctor of China,
concerning the European affairs, That our fathers are not Saracens, and know no
God but the Lord of heaven, and earth; and would persuade himself that ours did
profess the Law of Moses, he went into the Church with P. Matthaeus Riccius.
On an altar there was the effigies of the Virgin Mary, and the child Jesus,
whom St. John his forerunner worshipped with bended knees; now that day was
the holy day of John the Baptist. The Jew thinking it was the effigies of
Rebecca, and her two sons Jacob and Esau, he bowed also to the Image, but with
this apology, that he worshipped no Images, but that he could not but honor
these who were the parents of our Nation. And he asking if the four
Evangelists on both sides of the altar, were not four of the twelve sons of
Jacob; the Jesuit answered, Yes, thinking he had asked of the 12. Apostles.
But afterward the Jew acknowledged to the Jesuit that he was an Israelite; and
he found the Kings Bible, and acknowledged the Hebrew letters, though he could
not read them. By this occasion our people learnt, that ten or twelve families
of Israelites were there, and had built a very neat Synagogue which cost 10000.
crowns; in which they have kept the five books of Moses with great veneration
for 600. years. He also affirmed, that in Hamcheu the metropolis of the
Province Chequiona, there are far more families, with a synagogue; and
elsewhere that many families live without a synagogue, because that by little
and little they are extinguished. He relating many things out of the old
Testament, he differed but little in pronouncing those names. He said, that
some among them were not ignorant of the Hebrew tongue, but that himself had
neglected it, having studied the China tongue from a child. For which cause he
was counted almost unworthy of their society, by the ruler of the synagogue.
But he chiefly looked after this, that he might get to be Doctor. Three years
after P. Matthaeus Riccius sent one of our brethren to that metropolis, who
found all those things true. He compared the beginnings, and endings of the
books which the Jews keep in their synagogue, with our Pentateuch, and saw no
difference, this only, that those had no pricks. The other Jesuit is Alfonsus
Cimedro, who likewise says, that there is a great number of Jews in the
Province of Oroensis, on the West part of China, who know nothing of the
coming, and suffering of Jesus. And he from thence gathers, that they are of
the ten Tribes, (which opinion I also am of) because those Chinese observe
many Jewish rites, which you may see in a manuscript, which the noble Jaochimus
Wicofortius has. And why might not some of them sail from China to New-Spaine
through the Straight between China, and Anian, and Quivira, which do border
upon New-Spain; and from thence they went to the Isles of Panama, Peru, and
those thereabout. These in my judgment are those Chinese of whom Isaiah
speaks, Chap. 49. ver: 12. (treating about Isreal's return to his country)
Behold these shall come from afar, and these from the North, and from the West,
and these from the land of Sinim. And so Ptolomy in lib 7. c. 3. tab. 11. calls
it, The country of Sinim, or Sina: and this is the true sense of the words;
Aben Ezra therefore is mistaken, who derives it of Seen, a bush, or wood, which
he places in Egypt.

SECT: XVII.
I Could easily believe, that the 10. Tribes as they increased in number, so
they spread into more Provinces beforementioned, and into Tartary. For Abraham
Ortelius in his Geography of the world, and map of Tartary, he notes the place
of the Danites, which he calls the Hord, which is the same which the Hebrew
Jerida, signifying A descent. And lower, he mentions the Hord of Naphtali,
possessed by Peroza in the year 476. Schikhardus in his Tarich, or series of
the Kings of Persia, amplifies the history of this war, where ex lib. 4. of
Agathias he thus says, A little after when they were eased of that plague, (
sc. 7. years drought) in the time of the Emperor Zeno, Firuz made a double war
with Naphtali, in which at last he was destroyed. For first of all he was
brought to the streights of places unknown; who then sought for peace upon this
condition (and obtained it) that he should swear that he would never after
provoke them; and that he should do reverence to this Conqueror in token of
subjection: which afterward by the counsel of the Magicians he performed
craftily, for he bowed toward the Eastern Sun, that his own people might think
that he bowed rather to the Sun (after his Country custom) then to honor his
Enemy. But he did not truly perform that first agreement, though confirmed by
Letters Patents; who because he could not digest the disgrace of bowing to his
Enemy, he prepared a new Army and went against them; but a second time he being
entrapped by the badnesse of the country, he lost his life, and many with him,
in a gulf which the Nephthalites had prepared for him, having dressed it over
with reeds, and some earth thrown a top; they having left in the middle some
high grounds, and trees where their Souts were, that their stratageme might not
be found, and that the Persians might more confidently attempt the ditch. Thus
a rash King paid for his perfidy, he excelling more in daring, then in
counsel, as Agathias says. The Patent by which peace had been agreed, was
hung upon a spear, and might be seen of him at distance, that he might remember
his oath, repent, and disist from his enterprise: but he cared little for that.
But when by his unexpected fall he saw he should die, it is said that he pulled
off from his right ear a pearl of huge bigness, and whiteness, and lest any
after him should find it (more likely that his carps should not be known) he
threw it a great way off. The same Author asks, who those Nephthalites were?
and by many arguments he proves that they are the relics of the Jews; says
he, I do wholly think that they are the relics of the Jews of the tribe of
Nephtali, whom Triglath Pilesser the Assirian carried into those places, in 2
King. 15.29. For 1. The name, in the best copies of Agathias, which
Lewenclavius has mended, is the same fully; in other books it wants nothing
but an (b); now it is searce possible that in a word of many syllables that
should fall out by chance. 2. Their countenance discovers it, for as Procopious
J C says they are not black, or foul in their countenance, as the Huns are
among whom they live, but the only white men of that country; that it may
evidently appear that they came from some other place thither. 3. Their manners
agree, for the same. Author says, that they are not Nomades, as the Huns who
are unconstant in their dwelling, and eat up one place after another; but they
inhabit one certain place. Beside, they observe Law and equity, as the Romans;
and have policy, being well governed by their Prince: both which is rare among
their neighbor Nations. Also they do not lay abroad their dead, as the
Barbarians do, but they desently cover them with earth. Lastly their jornals do
testify that many Jews live there, especially in the mountains, who have
searched to the mid-land countries of East-Asia. R. Benjamin. f. 23. From
thence (the coast of Persia) is 28 days journey to the mountains Nisebor,
which are near the river Gozan. The Isralites which come from thence into
Persia, say, that there in the Cities of Nisebor, are 4. Tribes (so: Dan,
Zabulon, Aser. Naphtali,) of the first captivity, which Shalmaneser the
Assyrian carried thither, as in 2 King 17.6. he brought them to Habor, and
Halab, the river Gozan, and the mountains of Media. The compass of that
country is 20. days j^urney; and they possess Cities, and Castles upon the
mountains, by one side of which, runs the river Gozan; neither are they subject
to the Nations, but have a Governor over them, by name R. Joseph Amarkela a
Levite, and there are among them some who study wisdom. They sow; and reap;
yea they ^rage war to the Country of Cuth. In the same place O^telius adds,
in the country Tabor, or Tibur ( which Solinus commends, in c. 49.) they dwell
a people, who though they have lost the holy writings, they obey one King; who
came into France, in Ann. 1530. and spoke with Francis the first, was burnt at
Mantua by the command of the Emperor Charles the fifth, because that he did
privately reach Judaism to Christian Princes, and to the Emperor himself.
Boterus says the same in his relations of the farthest part of Tartary. But
both these were deceived; for Rabbinus Jesephus Cohon, a man worthy to be
believed, relates this more truly in his Chronology, saying, that the Jew who
came out of that country, was the brother of the King of the Israelites, was
called David the Reubenite; and having seen India in his passage, he came to
Portugal, where he converted the Kings Secretary to Judaism, who fled from
thence with him, taking the name of Selomoh Molho; he in short time was so well
versed in the Law, yea in the Cabala it self, that he made all Italy admire
him. The Secretary together with the Rendenite, endeavored to draw the Pope,
Charles the fifth, and Francis the first to Judaism. Selomoh Molho was taken at
Mantua, and burnt alive, in the year 1540. He yet was offered his life, if he
would turn Christian. The Reubenite was by Charles the fifth carried prisoner
into Spain, where he shortly after died. Abraham Frisol Orhotolam remembers the
Reubenite, saying, 45. years agone David Reubenita, a Prince of the Israelites,
came from Tabor, a Province of Tartary, into Europe, who said that two Tribes
are there; and other Tribes a little farther, under their Kings, and Princes,
and also an unspeakable number of people. Perhaps the Province Tabor is the
same that Habor; which is mentioned in ^ King. 17.6. that the ten Tribes were
brough^^ by Salmaneser to Habor, and Halah; now the Hebrew letters (h) and (t)
are near in fashion. Eldad Danita of the Tribe of Dan, came out of those
Countries 500. years agon ( a letter from whom, which we call Sephar Eldod
a-Dani, is kept to this day) and being examined by the Rabbis, was found an
approved man. The learned Rabbi David Kimhi, who lived 450. years since, in
etymol. suo in the word Segiah, he says, Rabbi Jonah writes of the name of
Rabbi Juda Aben Karis, that he heard Eldad Danita say, etc. And so what I said
is true, as appears by the testimonies produced

SECT: XVIII.
PArt of the ten Tribes also live in Ethiopia in the Habyssin Kingdom; as
diverse Habissins reported at Rome. Boterus in his relations speaks the same
thing, that two potent Nations do live near Nilus, and that one of them is that
of the Israelites, who are governed by a mighty King. A Cosmographer who has
added notes to Ptolomyes tables, says thus in his table of New Africa; that
part of new Africa was unknown of old, the head of Nilus not being known, which
is in the mountains of the Moon, as the Ancients call them; where there dwells a
great number of Israelites, paying tribute to Prester John. Rabbi Abraham
Frisol in the book already quoted, says, that in his time some who had been in
those Countries, reported the same to Hercules the Duke of Ferraria. And
without question from hence the Habyssins learned circumcision, the observation
of the Sabbath, and many more Jewish rites. Of these Isaiah seems to speak, in
Isa. 18.1, 2. Woe to the land which under the shadow of sails does sail beyond
the rivers of Ethiopia, by whom (the Prophet says) are sent ambassadors in
ships of bulrushes, (such as the Ethiopians use, commonly called Almadiae.)
Bring back a people driven out of their country, and torn, and more miserable
then any among us. Gifts shall be brought to the Lord of Sebaoth, in the place
where the name of the Lord of Sebaoth, is worshipped, in the mount Sion. The
Prophet Zephany says the same, in Zeph. 3.9, 10. Then will I give to the
people that they speaking a pure language, may all call upon the name of God,
whom they shall serve with reverence; from beyond the rivers of Ethiopia they
shall bring to me for a gist, Hatray the daughter of my dispersed ones, (that
is, the Nations of Ethiopia). Which agrees with that of Isa. And your brethren
(which are the 10. Tribes) shall bring gifts to the Lord.

SECT: XIX.
ANd without doubt they also dwell in Media; from thence they passed Enphrates,
whither they were first brought, as in 2 King. 17.24. and in the book of Tobit.
Josephus also speaks of them in the Preface of his book of the War of the Jews,
that the Jews did think that their brethren, who dwelt beyond Euphrates, and
farther, would rebel against the Romans. Agrippa in his oration to the people
of Jerusalem, that they would not rebel against the Romans, speaks thus, What
associates do ye expect to join with you, in your rebellion, and war? does not
all the known world pay tribute to the Romans? Perhaps some of ye hope to have
help from them beyond Euphrates. And in lib. 2. Antiquit. c. 5. speaking of
those who in the time of Ezra returned from Babylon to Jerusalem, he says, All
Israel dwelt in Media; for two Tribes only dwelt in Asia, and Europe, and lived
subject to the Romans; as the other ten on the other side Enphrates, where they
are so many, that they cannot be counted. It is not therefore to be doubted, the
people increasing after their first transportation, they sought out new places,
which we have formerly mentioned.

SECT: XX.
LAstly, all think, that part of the ten Tribes dwell beyond the river
Sabbathion, or sabbaticall. Rabbi Johanan the Author of the Jerusalem Talmud,
who lived 160 years after the destruction of the 2d: Temple, says in his
treatise of the Sanhedrim, ca. 17. That the 10. Tribes were carried into 3.
places, sc. to the Sabbaticall river, to Daphne the suburbs of Antioch, and
thither where a cloud comes down and covers them: and that they shall be
redeemed from those three places; for so he opens that place of Isa: Chap.
49.9. That they may say to the captives, go forth, ( sc: to them who were at
the Sabbaticall river) to them that are in darkness, show your selves, ( sc:
to them who are compassed with the cloud) and to all, they shall be refreshed
in the ways, ( sc: to them who live in Daphne of Antioch which is in Syria).
Whence you may observe, that the learned man l'Emperiur translated it ill, at
the sides of Antioch, whereas Daphne is the proper name of a pleasant grove
near Antioch. Sedar olam makes mention of that cloud, and calls them mountains
of obscurity. And in Talmud tractat. Sanhedr. c. 11. R. Jonathan ben Vziel, who
lived an hundred years before the destruction of the 2d: Temple, in Exodus
34.10. where the Lord says, I will do wonders before all thy people, such as
were never done in the whole earth, or in any Nation, etc. and he refers all
those things to the transportation of the people. He shall draw them to the
rivers of Babylon, and shall carry them to the sabbaticall river, and shall
teach them, that those miracles were never performed to any Nation of the known
world. Our ancient Rabbis in Beresit Rabba (no mean book) in Perasach, do say,
that Tornunfus asking how it should appear that the day which we keep, is the
7th. day, on which God rested after the Creation of the world: Rabbi Aquebah
(who lived 52. years after the destruction of the 2d: Temple) answered by an
argument taken from the stones of the Sabbaticall river, which in the six days
are tossed up and down with a continual motion, but do rest on the Sabbath
day, and move not. The same is said in the Babylonian Talmud, tractat. Sanhed.
c. 7. and in Tanuah Perasach. c. 9. In eodem Beresit Raba, in Perasach 37.
Rabbi Simon says, The ten Tribes were carried to the Sabbaticall river, but
Juda and Benjamin are dispersed into all Countries In Asirim Raba, the last
verse of the Song, its said, Our bed is flourishing; that it is meant the ten
Tribes, which were carried to the Sabbaticall river; and that river running all
the week, does cause the ten Tribes there remaining to be shut up; for though
on the 7th. day the river does rest, yet it is forbidden by our Law to take a
journey then; and for that reason they remained there miraculously, as lost,
and concealed from us. So that of Isa. 49. That they say to the prisoners, go
forth, is interpreted of them in Jalcut. R. Aquebah after the same manner
explains that of Levit. 36.38. And ye shall perish among the heathen. And that
of Isa. 27. ult. and they shall come, who were ready to perish in Assyria.
Because they are remote from the rest, therefore another Rabbi in Bamibar Raba
Parasa 16. applies to them that of Isa. 49.12. Behold them who come from far:
that so all those Authors mention that River. The testimony of Josephus is
famous, lib. 7. de Bell. Jud. ca. 24. saying, The Emperor Titus passing between
Arca, and Raphanea, Cities of King Agrippa, he saw the wonderful River, which
though it be swift, yet it is dry on every seventh day; and that day being
past, it resumes its ordinary course, as if it had no change; and it always
observes this order. It is called Sabbaticall, from the solemn feast of the
Jews, because it imitates their rest every seventh day. I know some do
otherwise expound those words of Josephus, but they hit not his meaning, as
appears by this, that he calls the River, Sabbathio, or sabbaticall: which word
cannot be derived but from Sabbath; and who does not see that it cease to
flow, or move, on the Sabbath day; and so Josephus must be understood according
to my sense. Pliny also confirms this opinion, lib. 1. Not: hist. c. 2. he
says, In Judea a river lies dry every Sabbath; yet I think Pliny is deceived,
and ill informed, when he says it is a river in Judea; neither is it to be
found in Judea, but in another place, where many Jews live. R. Selomoh Jarchi
who lived 540. years since, mentions that River in Comment. Talm. saying, The
stones, and sand of that River do continually move all the six days of the
week, until the seventh R. Mardochus Japhe in his learned book Jephe Thoar
says, The Arabians derive Sabbathion from the Sabbath, who use to add the
particle (ion) to adjectives. The same says, that it was told him of an
hour-glasse filled with the sand of Sabbathion, which ran all the week till the
Sabbath. And I heard the same from my father; which testimony I account as
good, as if I saw it my self; (for fathers do not use to impose upon their
sons.) He told me that there was an Arabian at Lisborn, who had such an
hour-glasse; and that every Friday at evening he would walk in the street
called the new street, and show this glass to Jews who counterfeited
Christianity, and say, Ye Jews, shut up your shops, for now the Sabbath comes.
Another worthy of credit, told me of another hour-glasse, which he had some
years before, before the port Mysketa. He saw him by chance (or the Judge of
the place) passing that way from Cadez, and being asked, what he was? he
commanded him to be taken away; rebuking the Mahometans that by this mean they
did confirm the Jewish Sabbath. I should not speak of these glasses, if the
authority of such a man whom I have alleged, did not move me; though I believe
that God did not only work that miracle, that he might keep part of the 10.
Tribes there, but other also, as you may see in Esdras. R. Moses Gerundensis a
learned Cabalist, and Interpreter of the Law in Parasa Aazinu, thinks the river
Sabbathion to be the same with Gozan, of Guz, which signifies, to snatch away,
because except the 7th. day, on all the other, it carries with it, by its
swiftness, the very stones. Of this there is mention in 2 King. whither the
King of Assyria led his captives; and so relates Benjamin Tudelensis in his
journall, that part of the 10 Tribes dwelt at the bank of that River. But I
know not where the river G^zan is. In the year 5394. that is, 15 years agon, in
the City Lubin, two Polonians after they had traveled long, they wrote in Ducht
a book of the original of the Sabbaticall river, but the Senate commanded it
to be burnt at the Mart of Breslaw, by the persuasion of the Jesuits. Abraham
Frisal in his Orchot Olam, c. 26. will have this river to be in India, he
says, The head of the Sabbaticall river is in the country of Upper India,
among the rivers of Ganges. And a little after, The sabbaticall river has its
original from the other side of Kalikout (which lies far above the bound of
Lamik, which he places beyond the sinus Barbaricus) and it parts the Indians
from the kingdom of the Jews, which river you may certainly find there. Though
he takes Gozan for Ganges, for some nearness of writing; yet its not to be
doubted that in that place there are many Jews, witness Joannes de Bairos in
his Decads. Eldad Danita speaking of the 4. Tribes, which he places at Gozan,
says, The Sabbaticall river is among them. Josephus says, that Titus saw the
sabbathion between Arca, and Raphanea. Which testimony seems the truer, because
its not to be thought that Josephus would tella lie of him, by whom be might be
rebuked. I think that ye must look for it not far from the Caspian Sea: and I
am not alone in this opinion. What ever it be, it appears that this river is
somewhere, and that part of the 10. Tribes are hid there; and I may say with
Moses in Deuteronomy. 29.28, 29. And the Lord cast them out of their land in anger,
and in wrath; Secret things belong to the Lord our God. For it is not known
when they shall return to their Country, neither can it perfectly be showed
where they are, God suffering it, as its said in Deuteronomy. 32.26. I determined to
cast them forth unto the ends of the earth, and to make their remembrance cease
from among men. As if he should say, I will cast them unto the farthest places
of the world, that none may remember them; and therefore they are truly in
Scripture called imprisoned, and lost.

SECT: XXI.
NEither is there weight in the argument which some have brought to me, if they
be in the world, why do we not know them better? There are many things which we
know, and yet know not their original; are we not to this day ignorant of the
heads of the four Rivers, Nilus, Ganges, Euphrates, and Tigris? also there are
many unknown Countries. Beside, though some live in known, and neighbor
Countries, yet they are unknown by being behind mountains; so it happened
under the reign of Ferdinand, and Isabel, that some Spaniards were found out by
accident, at Batueca, belonging to the Duke of Alva, which place is distant but
10. miles from Salamanca, and near to Placentia, whither some Spaniards fled,
when the Moors possessed Spain, and dwelt there 800. years. If therefore a
people could lie hid so long in the middle of Spain, why may we not say that
those are hid, whom God will not have any perfectly to know, before the end of
days?

And these things we have gathered concerning the habitations of the ten
Tribes, who, we believe, do still keep the Jewish rites, as in 2 King. 17.26.
when the Israelites were carried captive by Salmaneser, and those of Cuthah
came in their stead, an Israelitish Priest was sent by the King, to teach them,
because Lions infested them, for that they were ignorant that there was another
worship used in the land: but when the Priest saw that it was impossible to
take that people wholly off from idolatry, he permitted them to worship diverse
gods, so that they would acknowledge one to be the mover of all things. The
same is also sufficiently proved out of all the Histories which we have
alleged. And our brethren do keep the Law more zealously out of their land,
than in it, as being neither ambitious, nor contentious (which has sometimes
happened with the family of David) by which means they might easily err in the
true Religion, not acknowledge Jerusalem, and withdraw that obedience, which is
due to the Lord, and to his Temple.

SECT: XXII.
WE learn out of the first of Ezra, that none of the 10. Tribes entered the
second Temple; for it is said that only some of the Tribe of Judah, and some of
Benjamin did return. Ezra also says the same in the 1 of Chronicles, that
Salmaneser carried the 10. Tribes to Hala, Habor, and Hara, and to the river
Gozan to this day: so that you may gather, that at that time they were there.
So likewise Josephus in Antiq. Jud. lib. 11. c. 5.

Perhaps some will say, since Media, and Persia are near to Bahylon, why did
they not return to Jerusalem with the two Tribes? I answer, because so few of
the 2. neighboring Tribes did return from thence to Jerusalem, for that they
were well seated in Babylon; or else because they heard the Prophets say, that
they must not look for any redemption but that which was to be at the end of
days. How then can we think that they, who were more remote, and also had
learnt the same things of the Prophets, should leave their place, perhaps to
suffer new miseries, and calamities? Beside, we do not read that Cyrus gave
leave to any to return, but only to the two Tribes of Juda and Benjamin. And
also it is probable (as some Authors affirm) that they could not go up from
thence, because they had continually wars with the neighbor people.

SECT: XXIII.
HItherto we have ihewed that the ten Tribes are in diverse places, as in the
West Indies; in Sina; in the confines of Tartary; beyond the river Sabbathion,
and Euphrates; in Media; in the kingdom of the Habyssins; of all which the
Prophet Isaiah is to be understood, in Isa. 11.11. It shall come to pass in
that day, that the Lord shall set his hand the second time to recover the
remnant of his people, which shall be left from Assyria, from Egypt, from
Pathros, from Ethiopia, from Elam, from Sinear, from Hamath, and from the
Islands of the Sea. From whence you may gather, that it is meant of those
places where the ten Tribes dwell. Syria, and Egypt shall be the two places of
their general meeting; as more fully hereafter.

Pathros, is not Pelusium, nor Petra, but Parthia, near to the Caspian Sea,
where I think, with many others, the Sabbaticall river is. Although there is a
Pathros in Egypt, as the learned Samuel Bochardus says in his holy Geography.

Chus, according to common opinion, is Ethiopia, as is proved out of Ier.
13.23. and in this place of Jeremy are meant the Israelites, who live in the
Country of the Abyssins.

Elam, is a Province in Persia, as it appears in Dan. 8.2. where are desert
places, in which, perhaps, the remnant of the ten Tribes is.

Shinar, is a Province about Babylon, as in Genesis 10.10. where Babel is said to
be in Shinar; and Dan. 1.2. it is said, that Nebuchadnezzar carried the holy
vessels to the land of Shinar.

Hamath, there are many Hamaths mentioned in the Scripture, many understand it
of Antioch; but because Geographers reckon up 12. places named Antioch,
therefore we can affirm nothing for certain; but I think, that that is meant,
which is placed in Scythia. The seventy Interpreters by Hamath, understand the
Sun, from Hamath the Sun; and they translate it, From the rising of the Sun;
and I think it is no ill translation; for hereby all the Israelites who are in
greater Asia, India, and Sina, may be understood.

The Islands of the Sea; so almost all translate it; but I think it is to be
rendered, The Islands of the West, for I am in holy Scripture signifies The
West, as in Genesis 28.14. and in many other places; and upon this account those
Israelites are employed, who are Westward from the Holy Land, among whom the
Americans are.

SECT: XXIIII.
THe Prophet adds in Isa. 11.12. And he shall set up a sign for the Nations,
and he shall assemble the out-casts-of Israel, and gather together the
dispersed of Judah from the four quarters of the earth. Where he notes two
things: 1. that he calls the Israelites outcasts, but the Jews scattered; and
the reason is, because the ten Tribes are not only far off from the Holy Land,
but also they live in the extremities and ends of Countries; from whence the
Prophet calls them cast out. But he does not say, that the Israelites are to be
gathered from the four quarters of the earth, because they are not so
dispersed through the world, as the Tribe of Judah is, which now has
synagogues, not only in three parts of the world, but also in America The
Prophet adds in v. 13. The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the
adversaries of Judah shall be cut off. For then there shall be no contention
between Judah, and the 10. Tribes, which are comprehended under the name
Ephraim, because their first King Jeroboam was of that Tribe. And then, as it
is in Ezekiel. 37.22. One King shall be King over them all, and they shall be no
more two Nations, neither shall they be divided any more into two kingdoms.
There shall be one King to them both, of the family of David. Also the Lord at
the redemption will dry up Nilus, and Euphrates, and will divide it into seven
streams (answerable to his drying up the red Sea when they came out of Egypt)
perhaps that the seven Tribes, which are in those parts, may go over it; as
they pass into their Country, as Isaiah, says in chapter 27.12, 13. And it shall
be in that day, and he shall shake off from the bank of the river (some
understand Euphrates) unto the river of Egypt (Nilus) and ye, O children of
Israel, shall be gothered one by one. Which was never done in the captivity of
Babylon.

The Prophet Isaiah says in chap. 11.11. that he will return them the second
time, etc. Now the redemption from Babylon, cannot be called such an one,
because all of them were not brought back to their Countey. But the redemption
shall be universal to all the tribes, as it was when they went out of Egypt;
which redemption shall be like the first in many things, as I show in the third
part of my Reconciler; and so it may be called the second, in reference to that
first from Egypt. Whence Jeremiah says, Chap. 23.7, 8. That then it shall not
be said, He that brought Israel out of Egypt, but from the North, and from all
countries, whither he had driven them. That they shall not mention their
departure from Egypt, for the cause forementioned.

SECT. XXV.
THe same Prophet, sc: Isa. 43.5, 6. says, I will bring thy seed from the
East, and will gather thee from the West: I will say to the North, Give up; and
to the South, Keep not back; bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the
ends of the earth. For Media, Persia, and China, lie on the East; Tartary and
Scythia on the North; the kingdom of the Abyssins on the South; Europe on the
West, from the Holy Land. But when he says, Bring ye my sons from far, he
understands America; so that in those verses he understands all those places,
in which the Tribes are detained. Also in Chap. 49. from ver: 7. to the end of
the Chapter, he says, that that return shall be most happy. And in ch: 56.
ver: 8. God says, He that gathers the outcasts of Israel. And the Prophet
Jeremiah in ch: 33. ver: 16. In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem
shall dwell safely. It is certain, and Ierom assents to all our Authors, that
when Judah is joined with Israel, by Israel the ten Tribes are meant. The same
adds in ch: 31. ver. 15. in the comforting of Rahel, who wept for the carrying
away her sons Joseph, and Benjamin, the first by Salmaneser into Assyria, the
last by Nebuchadnezzar into Babylon, he says, in ver: 16. Refrain thy voice
from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be rewarded. And it
follows in Cha. 33. ver. 7. And I will cause the captivity of Judah, and the
captivity of Israel to return, and I will build them up as at the first. Ezekiel
says the same in Chap. 34.13. and in Chap. 37.16. under the figure of two
sticks, on which were written the names of Judah, and Ephraim, by which he
proves the gathering together of the twelve Tribes to be subject to Messiah the
Son of David; in ver. 22. he says, And one king shall be King to them all;
according as Hosea says in Chap. 2. So also says Amos in ch: 9. ver. 14, 15.
And I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel, and they shall build
the waste cities, and inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and drink
the wine thereof: they shall make gardens, and eat the fruit of them. And they
shall he no more pulled up out of their land which I have given them, says the
Lord thy God. So also Mica in ch: 2.12. I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of
thee, I will gather the remnant of Israel, I will also place him as the flack
in the sheepfold. For that in the captivity of Babylon all were not gathered
together. The Prophet Zechariah in ch: 8.7. and in ch: 10.6. and all the rest
of the Prophets do witness the same thing.

SECT: XXVI.
BUt which way that redemption shall be, no man can tell; but only so far as
we may gather out of the Prophets, That at that time the ten Tribes shall come
to Jerusalem under the leading of a Prince, whom some Rabbis in the Talmud,
and in some places of the Chaldy paraphrase, do call Messiah the son of Joseph;
and elsewhere Messiah the son of Ephraim; who being slain in the last war of
Gog, and Magog, shall show himself to be Messiah the son of David, who shall
be, as Ezekiel, and Hosea say, The everlasting Prince of all the twelve Tribes.
Our wise men do, in many places, especially in the Babylonian Talmud, in tract.
suca. c. 5. make mention of that Messiah the son of Ephraim; where they say,
that he shall dye in the last war of Gog, and Magog; and they so expound that
of Zach. 12.10. And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son. They add also, that
the four captains, of whom the same Prophet speaks in chapter 11. are, Messiah the
son of David, Messiah the son of Joseph, the Prophet Elias, and the high
Priest; which four are those dignities, which shall show their power in that
blessed age. Observe, that sometime they call Messiah the son of Ephraim
sometime of Joseph; for he shall come out of the Tribe of Ephraim, and shall be
Captain of all the 10. Tribes, who give their name to Ephraim, because that
their first King Jeroboam was of that Tribe. Not without cause do they call him
the son of Joseph, for he was the true type of the house of Israel, in his
imprisonment, and future happiness. Add to this, that he was so long hid from
his brethren, that they did not know him: as in like manner the ten Tribes are
at this day, who are led captive, but hereafter shall come to the top of
felicity, in the same manner as Joseph did. That Messiah of Joseph shall dye in
the battle of Gog, and Magog, and afterward shall rise again, that he may enjoy
the dignity, not of a kingly Scepter, but the office only of a Viceroy, as
Joseph in Egypt; for that the Empire of the house of Israel fell, under the
reign of Hosea the son of Elah; as the Prophet Amos says in chapter 5.2. Therefore
the Kingdom of the 10. Tribes shall not be restored, as Ezekiel says in chapter
37. under the reign of Messiah the son of David, who shall be everlasting; and
by the death of Messiah the son of Joseph, the 10. Tribes shall see, that God
will not that they should have more Kings then one. As its already spoken.

SECT: XXVII.
THose Tribes then shall be gathered from all quarters of the earth, into
Countries near to the Holy Land; namely, into Assyria, and Egypt; and from
thence they shall go into their Country; of which Isaiah speaks, in chapter 27.13.
And it shall be in that day, that the great trumpet shall be blown, and they
who were lost, shall come into the land of Assyria; and they who were cast out,
into Egypt; and shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem. As if he
should say, as trumpets sound, to call any army together: so they shall come
together, who were dead (that is, dispersed through all Asia) into Assyria; and
the outcasts (that is, which are in America) shall come by the Mediterranean
Sea to Alexandria of Egypt; and in the like manner those who are in Africa,
when Nilus shall be dried up, and Euphrates shall be divided; as we have
already said. And because the gathering together of the captivity, shall begin
at those, who are in America, therefore Isaiah says, The islands shall trust in
me, and the ships of Tarsis (that is of the ocean) first of all, that they may
bring thy sons from far, and with them, their silver, and gold. They shall then
come with speed from those countries, prostrating themselves at the mountain of
the Lord in Jerusalem, as the Prophet Hosea says of that redemption in chapter
11.11. They shall come as birds out of Egypt, and as doves out of Assyria: so
says Isaiah in chapter 60.8. Who are those that fly as a cloud, and as doves to
their nests? They which come first, shall also partake of this joy, to see
others to come to them every moment; for which cause the same Prophet says,
Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold them who gather themselves to thee.
And because the two Countries of Assyria, and Egypt, shall first of all kindly
receive the people of Israel, and shall know the truth, first of all embracing
the Religion of the Jews, sacrificing, and praying to God, therefore the Peophet
Isaiah says, in chapter 19.25. Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of
my hands; but Israel is my inheritance. For so those words are to be understood.

SECT: XXVIII.
ALL those are the sayings of the holy Prophets, from whence does appear the
return of Israel into their country. It is given to none to know the time
thereof, neither it is revealed to Rabbi Simeon ben Johay, the Author of the
Zoar; because that God has reserved that mystery to himself, as Moses says,
It is hid with me. And Isaiah in chapter 63.4. For the day of vengeance is in my
heart, and the year in which the redemption shall come. Which the Rabbis thus
interpret, I have reveiled it to my heart, and not to Angels: and elsewhere, If
any man tells you when Messiah shall come, believe him not. So also the Angel
says to Daniel, chapter 12 9. All things are closed up, and sealed to the time of
the end. Therefore all those, who search after that time, as Rabbi Seadiah,
Moses Egyptius, M^ses Gerundensis, Selomoh Jarchi; Abraham bar Ribi Hijah,
Abraham Zaculo, Mordehai Reato, and Isaac Abarbanel, have been mistaken; for
that they would go beyond humane capacity, and reveil that, which God
concealed. And even to Daniel himself (to whom was made known the secret of the
change of the four Monarchies) it was so revealed to him, that he confessed he
did not understand it. Our Ancients did point at this from the letter (m) in
Isa. 9 7. where he says: Of the increase of his government: which (m) in the
Hebrew, being such an (m) which they write only in the end of words, and a
close letter, yet is put in the middle of the word, against common practice:
because that the time of the fifth Monarchy shall be hid, till the time when it
shall begin.

SECT: XXIX.
YEt this I can affirm, that it shall be about the end of this age; and so the
Prophets speak of that age about the end of days: and that after many labors,
and a long captivity. So Balaam prophecies, Numb. 24.17. I see, but not now; I
behold, but not near; a Star shall come out of Jacob. Isa. 24.22. They shall be
cast into prison, and they shall be visited after many days. And Isa. 49.14.
And Sion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Hos.
3.4, 5. The children of Israel shall be many days without a King, and without a
Prince: And after that they shall seek the Lord their God, and David their
King. The King, and Prophet complains of that delay, in Psalm. 44. Psalm. 69.
Psalm. 74. Psalm. 77. Psalm. 83. And after that, in Psalm. 89.50.51. he thus
concludes, Remember, O God, the reproach of thy servants, who suffer so many
injuries of so many people: wherewith they have reproached the steps of thy
Messiah. As yet at this day it is said, that ALTHOUGH THE MESSIAH WERE LAME, HE
MIGHT HAVE COME BY THIS TIME. Though we cannot exactly show the time of our
redemption, yet we judge it to be near. For,

1. We see many prophecies to be fulfilled, and others also, which are
subservient to a preparation for the same redemption; and it appears by this,
that during that long, and sore captivity, many calamities are foretold us
under the four Monarchies. David says in Psalm. 120.7. Lord, when I speak of
peace, they speak of war. And elsewhere, We are slain all the day for thy name,
and are accounted for sheep which are slain. In Isa. 53.7. He shall be led as a
sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before his shearers: he shall be dumb,
and shall not open his mouth. O how have we seen these things in the
banishments of England, France, and Spain! and how have they proved those
crimes, which most false men have said that ours did commit! Behold they have
slain them, not for wickednesses, which they did not commit, but for their
riches which they had. O how have we seen all those things done by divine
providence, for that those misfortunes for the most part happened on the 9th. day
of the month Ab, an ominous, and unhappy day, on which the first, and second
Temple were burnt, and the spies wept without cause.

SECT: XXX.
What shall we say of that horrible monster, the Spanish Inquisition, what
cruelty has not daily been used against a company of miserable ones,
innocents, old men, and children, of every sex, and age, who were slain,
because they could not divine who was their secret accuser? But let us see, why
in all those places (in which that Spanish tyranniaall Empire rules,) they were
slain, who would observe the law of Mosts; and by how many, and how great
miracles, has that law been confirmed? and what unrighteousness is there in
it? We daily see examples of constancy in ours, worthy of all praise, who for
the sanctifying of Gods name, have been burnt alive. Truly many who are still
living, can witness all those things. In the year 1603. At Lisbone, Diego
d'Assumeaon, a Monk of 24. years, was burnt alive, who defended himself in the
Inquisition against some, who would have reduced him, to Christianity, who was
born a Christian, and made a Jew; which all wondered at; the Inquisitors being
grieved that they had published the reasons which he had alleged, would have
recalled their sentence; but it was then too late; for it was divulged through
the world, which I my self have by me. Also the Lord Lope de Vera y Alarcon
deserves the praise of martyrdom, who being born of a noble, and eminent
family, and very learned in the Hebrew, and Latin tongues, did embrace our
religion; neither thought it sufficient to be such himself, but discovered
himself to many others; thereupon in Ann. 1644. in the 20th. of his age, he
being imprisoned at Valladolid, though he lived in the dark, yet he discovered
light to many; neither could the great number of Doctors, nor the greater
affliction of his parents, move him from his enterprise, either by tears, or by
promises. He circumcised himself in prison (o strange act, and worthy of all
praise!) and named himself believing Judas; and at last, as a 2d: Isaac,
offered himself to the flames, contemning life, goods, and honors, that he
might obtain immortal life, and good things that cannot perish; in the 25th.
year of his age. Now though those were not of the family of Israel, yet they
obtained an immortal glory, which is better then this life. Also we have many
examples of our own, which did equalize them, of which that is one, which is
done in our time, and is worthy to be remembered; Isaac Castrensis Tartas (whom
I knew, and spoke with) a learned young man, and versed in the Greek, and
Latin; he being but newly come to Fernambuc, was taken by the Portugese, and
carried to Lisbone, and burnt alive; he was a young man of 24. years old;
scorning riches, and honors, which were offered to him, if he would turn
Christian. They who say he was a traitor, do lie egregiously; for he did defend
that place where he was Governor, most valiantly; as ours do deport themselves
in those fortified places which are committed to their charge. The same
martyrdom was undergone at L^m^, by Eli Nazarenus, in Ann. 1639. Januar. 23.
who after he had lived 14. whole years in prison, all which time he eat no
flesh, lest he should defile his mouth; he called himself by that name, after
he had circumcised himself. Such a Martyr also, this year, was Thomas Therbinon
in the City of Mexico.

SECT: XXXI.
IF the Lord fulfilled his word in calamities, he will fulfill it also in
felicities. Therefore Rabbi Aquibah laughed, when he says a wolf run out of
the Temple being destroyed, though his companions wept; he saying, Now is
fulfilled that prophecy of Jeremiah, in Lament. 5.18. And the foxes shall walk
therein; and he added, and those blessings also shall follow, which the Lord
has promised. We see all the curses of God come to pass, which are mentioned
in Levit. and Deuteronomy; as well as those, which concern our being scattered
to the ends of the earth (which is Portugal) and those concerning the
calamities of the Inquisition; and those of our banishments, as I have opened
in my book, De termino vita; from whence it appears, that all the happy
prophecies shall be fulfilled. And as we have perished, so also shall Bozra
(that is, Rome) pe^^sh. See Isa. 34.6.

SECT: XXXII.
SEcondly, the argument which we bring from our Constancy under so many evils,
cannot be eluded, that therefore God does reserve us for better things. Moses
in Levit. 26.44. says, Though they be in the land of their enemies, yet I will
not cast them away, neither will I abhor them to destroy them utterly, and to
break my covenant with them, for I am the Lord their God. And truly these
things are now fulfilled, for that in this captivity, and among the many
reproaches which we Jews suffer, yet many of ours are honorably entertained by
Princes, with a singular affection. So D. Ishac Abarbanel, who comes of David's
line, is Counselor to the King of Spain, and Portugal. By this also he has
got a great name, for that he composed the differences, which arose between the
King of Portugal, and the Republique of Venice. And from that family of
Abarbarnel (which I note by the by) do proceed my children, by my wifes side.
And in the house of his son, D. Samuel Abarbanel, and of his wife Benuenida,
the Lady Leonora de Toledo, was brought up at Naples, who is the daughter of D.
Peter de Toledo, the Viceroy of Naples; who afterward was married to the most
eminent Duke Cosmus de Medicis, and having obtained the Dukedom of Toscani,
she honored Benuenida with as much honor, as if she were her mother. That
peace, which the Venetians made with the Emperor Sultan Selim, 75. years
agone, was made, and ratified by a certain Jew Don Selomo Rophe, who was sent
Ambassador to Venice, and received with great pomp, by the Venetians. At
Constantinople D. Ben Iaese, Anaucas, and Sonsiaos are of great authority with
the Turk. In Egypt the Jews were always Saraph baxas, and also at this day is
D. Abraham Alholn. Who knows not that D. Josephus Nassi, otherwise called
Joannes Michesius, about the 66. year of the former age, was Duke of Naccia,
Lord of Milum, and of the seven Islands, of whom see Famian. Strada in Histor.
Belgic. part. 1. lib. 5. He was raised to these honors by Sultan Selim. As
also by Sultan Amurat, Jacob Aben Jaes, otherwise called Alvaro Mendez was made
Governor of Tyberias; witness Boterus in Relation. part. 3. lib. 2. In
Barbary* the Lords Rutes were always Governors of Sekes, Phes, and Taradanta.
In Ann. 1609, D. Samuel Palaxe was sent Ambassador to the States, by Mulai
Zidan the King of Maracco. But he died at the Haghe in Ann. 1616. And the m^st
eminent Prince Maurice, and the Nobles, were at his unerall* In Persia who
knows not of what account they are? There, thirty years since Elhazar was 2d.
to the King, and as it were Governor. Now David Jan succeeds him, to whom
others also being joined, they live in the Court. And that must not be forgot,
that when the most eminent Duke of Holstein sent Otto Burchmannus Ambassador to
Persia, in Ann. 1635. he desired commendatory letters from our Jews at Hamburg,
to them, who (as we have already told you) do live there in the Court, that
they would make way there, for him that was a stranger; that he might dispatch
his affairs. Which was also performed. By which mean ours, who are in Persia,
dismissed Burchmannus, with rich gifts, and with Letters to the most eminent
Duke of Holstein, which the 12. Chuzae, or Princes, had subsigned. A copy of
which Leteers the most excellent D. Benjamin Mussaphia, one familiar with the
Prince, helped me to. Also Claudius Duretus en son thresor des langues, fol.
302. says, that there are almost an infinite number of Jews in Asia,
especially in India, and that King Cochini is their great favourer. Yea
Linschotes says (where he treats of Cochini) that they have Synagogues there,
and that some of them are of the Kings Counsel. At Prague, Mordocheas Maisel
had Arms given him by the Emperor Matthias, who also knighted him. Which
honor Jacob Bathsebah also had, under the Reign of Ferdinand; and many other
Families are graced with other honors. And in this very captivity (who could
think it) they are so wealthy, that (Gods providence favoring them) they may
challenge to themselves a place among the most Noble.

SECT: XXXIII.
Who can enumerate the number of ours, who are renowned by fame, and learning?
The learned R. Moses bar Maimon was Physician to Saladin the King of Egypt.
Moses Amon to the Emperor Sultan Bajaseth. Elias M^ntalto to the most eminent
Queen of France, Loysia de Medicis; and was also her Counselor. At Padua Elias
Cretensis read Philosophy; and R. Abraham de Balmas, the Hebrew grammar. And
how much honor had Elias Grammaticus at Rome? And almost all the Princes of
Italy honored with all kind of honor, Abraham Kolorni; as appears by a
letter writ to him by Thomas Garzoni nella sua piazza universale del mundo.
Picus Mirandula (who used to say, That he had but small understanding, who only
looked after his own things, and not after other men's) and others, had Hebrew
teachers. David de Pomis dedicated his book to Pope Sixtus the fifth, who
lovingly, and courteously received both the Author, and work. So at this day we
see many desirous to learn the Hebrew tongue of our men. Hence may be seen that
God has not left us; for if one persecute us, another receives us civilly, and
courteously; and if this Prince treats us ill, another treats us well; if one
banisheth us out of his country, another invites us by a 1000 privileges; as
diverse Princes of Italy have done, the most eminent King of Denmark, and the
mighty Duke of Savoy in Nissa. And do we not see, that those Republiques do
flourish, and much increase in Trade, which admit the Israelites?

SECT: XXXIIII.
MOses says in his last song, that God would revenge the blood of his people
who are scattered. And Jeremiah says in chapter 2.3. Israel is the Lords holy
thing, the first fruits of his increase; all who devour him shall be found
guilty; evil shall come upon them, says the Lord. And that the histories of
diverse times, even from Nebuchadnezzar, to these very times, do testify. Have
not the Monarchies of great Princes been destroyed? Consider with me the
miserable ends of Antiochus, of Pompey, of Sisibuthus, of Philip the King of
France, of Alonsus the son of John the 2d. And we may remember, how King
Sebastian with his 4th. generation, and with all his Nobles, was slain in a
battle of Africa, in that same place, in which he had caused the Jews to be
banished. Ferdinand, and Isabel were the great persecuters of our Nation, but
how did both he, and she die? as for him his son-in-law, and his own subjects
did persecute him; and his only son died (leaving no issue) on his
wedding day, being 17. years old. His daughter being Heir of the Kingdom, and
of her fathers hatred, would not marry to Emanuel king of Portugal, unless he
would compel us to be banished, and change our Religion. But she dyed in
childbirth of her son Saragoci, and also her son, before he was half a year
old; and the succession was devolved upon the Kingdom of Spain. It is not long
since, that the Spaniards exercised upon us at Mantua, what ever cruelties they
could invent; what shall we say of that, that at Madrid, in the year 1632. was
done by the Inquisition, the King, and Princes of the Kingdom concurring; but
in the very same month dyed the Infant Charles, and their kingdom declined.
What wonder is it if God has chastised diverse kingdoms by sundry ways: but
of this I treat farther in my History of the Jews. Let us conclude therefore,
that that good, which God has promised, will shortly come, since we see that
we have suffered those evils, which he has threatened us with, by the Prophets.

SECT: XXXV.
3ly, THe shortness of time (when we believe our redemption shall appear) is
confirmed by this, that the Lord has promised that he will gather the two
Tribes Judah, and Benjamin, out of the four quarters of the world, calling
them Nephussim. From whence you may gather, that for the fulfilling of that,
they must be scattered through all the corners of the world; as Daniel says,
Dan. 12.7. And when the scattering of the holy people shall have an end, all
those things shall be fulfilled. And this appears now to be done, when as our
Synagogues are found in America.

SECT: XXXVI.
4ly, TO these, let us add that, which the same Prophet speaks, in chapter 12.
ver: 4. That knowledge shall be increased; for then the prophecies shall better
be understood, the meaning of which we can scarce attain to, till they be
fulfilled. So after the Ottoman race began to flourish, we understood the
prophecy of the two legs of the Image of Nebuchadnezzar, which is to be
overthrown by the fifth Monarchy, which shall be in the world. So Jeremiah
after he had handled in Chap. 30. the redemption of Israel, and Judah, and of
the war of Gog, and Magog (of which Daniel also speaks in chapter 12.) when he
treats of the Scepter of the Messiah the son of David, of the ruin of the
Nations, of the restoration of Judah, of holy Jerusalem, and of the 3d: Temple,
he adds in ver: 24. The fierce anger of the Lord shall not return, till he
has executed it, and till he has performed the intents of his heart; in the
latter days ye shall understand it. From whence follows what we have said,
that the time of redemption is at hand. And because Jeremiah in that chapter
makes an abridgment of all things that shall be, therefore it is said in ver:
2, Write thee all the words which I have spoken to thee, in a book. By this
mean making the prophecy clearer, by relating in a clear style, what ever the
Prophets had foretold; imitating Moses, the last words of whose song are, Sing,
O ye Nations, with his people, in Deuteronomy 32.43. Also the last words which he
spoke, after that he had blessed the Tribes, are these, Happy art thou, O
Israel: who is like to thee, O people? saved by the Lord, who is the shield of
thy help, and the sword of thy excellency; and thine enemies shall be found
liars to thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places, in Deuteronomy. 33.29.
From whence it appears, that God will revenge the blood of Israel, which has
been shed. Joel confirms the same in chapter 3.19. Egypt shall be a desolation, and
Fdom shall he a filthy desert, for the violence, and injury offered to the
Jews, and because they have shed innocent blood in their land. And as they
shall be punished by the just judgment of God, who wish us evil: so also God
will give blessings upon them who favor us. And those are the trees of the
field which then shall rejoice. So God says to Abraham, in Genesis 12.3. I will
bless them who bless thee, and curse them that curse thee.

SECT: XXXVII.
THese are the things which I could gather concerning this matter, which has
not been heretofore handled; from whence these consequences may be deduced.

1. That the West Indies, were anciently inhabited by a part of the 10. Tribes,
which passed thither out of Tartary, by the Straight of Anian. 2. That the
Tribes are not in any one place, but in many; because the Prophets have
foretold their return shall be into their Country, out of diverse places;
Isaiah especially says it shall be out of eight. 3. That they did not return
to the 2d: Temple. 4. That at this day they keep the Jewish Religion. 5. That
the prophecies concerning their return to their Country, are of necessity to
be fulfilled. 6. That from all coasts of the world they shall meet in those two
places, so: Assyria, and Egypt; God preparing an easy, pleasant way, and
abounding with all things, as Isaiah says, Chap. 49. and from thence they
shall fly to Jerusalem, as birds to their nests. 7. That their kingdom shall
be no more divided; but the twelve Tribes shall be joined together under one
Prince, that is, under Messiah the Son of David; and that they shall never be
driven out of their land.
SECT: XXXVIII.
I Return to the relation of our Montezinus, which I prefer before the opinions
of all others, as most true. For that Peru should be derived from the name
Ophir, as Gulielmus Postellus, Goropius in Ortelius, Bozius de signis Eccles.
lib. 2. c. 3: Marinus in arca Noah, P. Sa. in 3. Reg. Pomarius in his Lexicon,
and Possevinus lib. 2. Biblioth. c. 8. do think, cannot be proved; as Pineda
has well observed, in Job, c. 28. p. 500. for we have said out of Garcilasso
de la Vega, that that name was unknown to them of Peru. Ophir then is
East India, if we believe Josephus, lib. 8. Antiquit. Judaic. c. 6. and Acosta
in lib. 1. Histor. Ind. from whence Solomon fetched gold, and precious stones.
But what Gomara in part. 1. hist. Ind. fol. 120. and Zarate in proaem. hist.
Peru, would have, that ours did pass over that famous, and much praised Island
(by Plato in Critia, and Timaeus) of Atlantis, and so went into the neighbor
Islands of Barlovent, and from thence to the firm land, and at last to the
kingdom of Peru, and New-Spaine; it is deservedly exploded as fabulous; and
Acosta laughs at it, in lib. 1. hist. Ind. c. 22. But Marsilius Ficinus in
comment. in Timaeum, c. 4. and Critia, that he might defend Plato, thinks (and
his disciples, Porphyry, Origin, and Proclus do follow him) that all that which
is in Critia, and in Timaeus, is to be understood allegorically. And who will
believe Lescarbotus, who says, that they are the Canaanites, who fled thither
for fear of Joshua? For I cannot be persuaded that they sought out Countries so
far remote. They who will have them of Peru to have come out of Norwey, or
Spain, may be confuted by their very form, manners, and the unlikenesse of
their languages. But that is more false, that they are Israelites, who have
forgot circumcision, and their rites. For they are of a comely body, and of a
good wit, as says Doctor Johannes Huarte, in his book which is called, Examen
ingenior. c. 14. But contrarily all men know that the Indians are deformed,
dull, and altogether rude. And we have abundantly shown, with how great study,
and zeal, the Israelites have kept their language, and Religion, out of their
Country.

SECT: XXXIX.
MOntezinus then speaks most likely; that as other people forced the Israelites
to betake them to the mountains: so America being first of all inhabited by the
persecuting Tartars, they were driven to the mountains of Cordillecae, where at
last they were hid, as God would have it. Truly, comparing the Israelites
themselves, or their laws, with other people, I see not any thing that comes
nearer truth. Perhaps also America was not of old contiguous to Asia on the
North side. It does not seem to me such an absurdity, to say, that the
Israelites went out of Tartary into America by land; and afterward, that God,
to preserve his, among other miracles, also wrought this, to make that a Sea,
where now is the straight of Anian. Yea that might be done without a miracle,
by accident, as we know that more than once, the Sea by a violent storm has
carried away the Land, and made Islands. Xenophon in suis aequivoc. mentions
the inundations of Egypt, which happened in the days of Prometheus, and
Hercules. Also Berosus in lib. 5. and Diodorus li. 6. mention the inundation of
Attica, in which Athens stands. Pliny in lib. 2. c. 85. and lib. 13. c. 11.
Strabo in lib. 1. and lib. 12. and Plutarch in Alexandr. relate the drowning of
the Isle Pharaonica; of which Luther speaks so elegantly in lib. ultimo.
Beside, who knows not how many, and how great Cities have at diverse times been
almost wholly ruined by several earthquakes? Sueton. in Tiberio, c. 48.
writes, that under Tiberius, twelve Cities in Asia have been by this mean
ruined. Orosius lib. 7. c. 4. and Dion Cassius, lib. 57. do affirm the same,
though they differ about the time. Tacitus in lib. 14. and Eusebius in Chron.
relate the destruction of that famous, and rich City of Laodicea. Origin tom.
28. in Joan. and Baronius tom. 2. Annal. Ecclesiast. Ann. 340. do speak of
other Earthquakes, which have destroyed diverse, and very many men, and Cities.
And P. Alonsus in suo manual tempor. relates, that the same has happened in
our days; says he, In the year 1638. a great Earthquake happened in the
Islands of the Tercerae, but especially in S. Michael, where the Governor
dwells; for that unheard of shaking of the earth, and houses struck so great a
terror into the Inhabitants, that all fled out of their houses, and lived in
the fields; a little after, two miles from thence, they saw the Sea vomit up
abundance of fiery matter, which made a very thick smoke, which covered the
very clouds; and it cast up many great stomes, which seemed like rocks; part
whereof falling down again, made an Island in the Sea, which was half a mile
over, and sixty fathom high, and an hundred and fifty fathom deep. That hot
exhalation which that fiery mountain sent forth, pierced the very waters, and
stifled so many fishes, that two Indian ships could not carry them. The same
Island two years after, was swallowed up again of the Sea.

SECT: XL.
HE that does seriously weigh those things, may (I think) well gather, that the
Sea of the Straight of Anian was an inundation. By affirming which, this doubt
may be answered, sc. That after the universal Flood, mankind increased
again, and all beasts, which had been preserved in the Ark. But how could so
many kinds of beasts, (which come by propagation, and are not bred out of the
earth,) be found in those Countries? Some did swim thither, some were brought
thither by some huntsmen, some were bred out of the earth, as Av^^^ thinks it
happened in the first Creation. But what Land-beast can swim over so great a
Sea? And would Huntsmen carry Lions thither, and other such kind of beasts,
oftentimes to the great hazard of their lives? And if God would have created
those beasts out of the earth, he would not have commanded Noah to have kept
them in the Ark. I am fully persuaded, that the beasts which are found there,
passed that way into America; unless any thinks that this new world is joined
to the old, on some other side, as Herrera believes, Dec. 3. Lib. 11. c. 10.

SECT 42.
AS for the other things in the relation of our Montezinus, they say nothing
which savours of falsehood. For their saying that Semah, truly it is the custom
of our people, in what part soever of the world they live; and it is the
abridgement of the confession, and religion of the Jews. That revelation of
the Magicians; whom they call Mohanes, it agrees with those things which in 2
Esdras, you may see, concerning the Miracles which God wrought for the
Israelites, as they passed over Eu^^rates, concerning those conditions of not
revealing secrets to any, but such an one who has seen three hundred Moons,
(which make twenty five years) it appears to be true, by what the famous De
Laet tells, in many parts of America, that the Indians do compute their years
by Moons. That a secret must be told in the Field, does not that argue a
Jewish custom, which the ancients have observed in Jacob. who being about to
depart from Laban, he called his Wives into the field.

I now conclude this Discourse, in which this only was in my intention, that I
might briefly, and compendiously declare mine, and the Rabbis opinion,
concerning those things which I have handled. I hope t^^^ this my endeavor
will not be unaccep^^ble, being desired by many men, famous both for Birth, and
for Learning; not unprofitable, having therein explained the relation of
Montezinus, with what brevity I could. The Name of God be blessed for ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

