The Malignants treacherous and Bloody Plot against the Parliament and City of
Lo: which was by Gods Providence happily prevented May 31. 1643
ye Conspirators
The Conspirators consulting togeither of ye fine Design and the Com^ission
brought from Oxford by ye La: Aubigny



ye Army
Their Army consisted of 3 sorts* Completely armed. 2d with Clubs and Halbards
3d with what they could get



ye Tower
The Chief place for the Magazine without the City was the Tower to be seized
upon.



Mount Mill
In the next place they intended to seize the Forts and Out Works to prevent
all supplies.



Guild Hall
Within the City at Guild Hall they thought a fit place for ye Magazine also
at Alderman Foukes and Leadenhall



The City
In the City of London the Lord Major with all ye Com^ittee for the Militia
were to be seized on.



ye House of Lords
In ye Lords House they nominated 2. members to be seized upon. Viz: the Lord
Say and Lo: Wharton



ye House of Com^ons
In the House of Com^ons Sr. Phillip Stapleton, Mr. Hambden, Mr. Stroude, Mr
Pym, should be seized upon.



St. James
At St. Iameses the Kings two Children they nominated to have seized upon



ye Kings Army
Here the Kings Army should have bynne near at hand to enter the City.



ye Covenant
ye Thanksgiving.
For ye discovery and happy prevention of this wicked Plott was kept a solemn
day of Thanksgiving. June 15th and a Covenant to be taken by the Parliament and
whole Kingdom. Come let us join our selves to ye Lo: in an euerlast ling
Covenant which shall not be forgotten. Isa 50: 5.





ye Execution.
Lastly here follows the man^er of the Conspirators Execution at several
times which they acknoledg'd was just



Michaell and Satan each with each, Rev: 12. 7.

For Sions safety, Sions Breach
Her Rice, Her Fall* Her Weal, Her Woe, Contends,
The doubtful Victory at last
Does Sion Raise, and Satan Cast,
Whose Hartned Sociats, Whose faint hearted friends*
There Praise to God, their fears even to despair extends.
Noe Instrument Shield, Isa: 54. 17.
Sword, or Spear.
Noe Curse from Pisgah, No: 23. 14.
or Mount Peor,
Which Balaacks wrath, or Balaams wit can frame,
Noe Ammon, Edom, Amalecke,
Noe Iabin, Zeeb, noe Midianite,
Shall once prevail* Isa: 63.1
to root out Isreal's name
Sion ore Conquered heavs shall Victory proclayme.
Succession of all Ages tell
And Witnesses in Heaven, and Hell,
Cries Woe to all, that Sions fall endeavor;
The Masters of this Portrayed Plot
Says nothing* but a halters, got.
To stifle br eath, all joys on Earth togeither
Perpetual shame* and blemesh name (poor game) for ever.
Sease* sease Malignants do not strain,
Your wit, your strength, your selves in vain.
You strive against the stream, once you shall see,
That though Philistines get the day,
And carry Isreal's Arc away,
Dagon shall fall, and Ash dod, men shall flee
Naught is their gain* but fwoefull pain and misery*
God is in Sion, She in God,
On Earth, in Heaven, except your Rod
Drives him from hence* and her from thence above,
Sion shall stand when you shall fall,
And live, when you shall perish all,
Most safely in the Rocks this turtle Dove,
Shall feed with Cheer, her Man^a the^s Gods love.
God and your Country shall defy
Your Name your Race, your Memory
Shall Rott and Stink, your own Posterity
(With anguish cake shall Curse the day
Wherein you Basely gave away.
Their Native Rights, their Laws and Liberty
Subdud their Necks to the iron Yoke of Slavery.
You may Succeed and prosper here
A while, bult this shall cost you dear
In future times, the Lord shall all inuit
To witness how you do destroy
His Saints, which do not you annoy.
Your Epitaph in Ashes men shall write
And theirs in Marble, thus shall men with praise Recite
Dear was their God and Countries good,
God and their Country has their blood
Their Souls with God, their Blood for Vengeance cries.
Corruption turns there Corpse to dross.
The Resurrection shall that loss
Return with gain and wive their watery Eyes
And shall for aye, with vengeance pay their Enemies.
This is Entered according to order (...)

Io. Hancock


