Yet another word to the Wise: SHOWING, THAT The lamentable grievances of the
Parliaments friends in Cumberland and Westmerland. Presented by their
Commissioner, Mr. John Musgrave, to the House of Commons above two years ago,
are so far yet from being redressed, that the House of Commons not only
protecteth Mr. Richard Barwis, one of their own Members, from the Law, being
accused of High treason, as appears by the great charge against him in this
treatise contained.

As also against Sir Wilford Lawson, Commander in chief of Cumberland, who
betrayed that County into the enemies hands. And after he was Commissioner of
Array, carried Men and Arms out of the Country for the King against the
Parliament.

But in stead of doing justice either against them or other accused Traitors to
the Commonwealth, they have most unjustly committed that worthy Gentleman, Mr.
John Musgrave, (their Accuser and prosecuter to the Fleet prison) above these
12. months, without any kind of allowance to himself or Family, or so much as
any appearance yet of any fair hearing, trial, or deliverance.

Matters worthy all the freemen of Englands serious observation.

ECCLES. 4.1. So I turned and considered all the oppressions that are wrought
under the Sun, and behold the tears of the oppressed, and none comfort
them, and lo the strength of the hand of them that oppress them, and no man
comfort them.

Printed in the year 1646.

To our honored friend Mr. John Musgrave, who through God has done and
suffered valiantly for Truth and Iusti^e, and the Freedom of the Nation, Grace
and peace be multiplied.
SIR,
WHereas in the midst both of our own particular grievances and of the general
judgments, which (lik^ the waves of the Sea) do so succeed one another, that
they seem to strive which of them shall first make an end of this idolatrous
and sinful nation, we look with sorrowful hearts upon your deplorable
conidition, with all those that are nearest and dearest unto you; and that for
no evil, but for your welldoing; which tends greatly to all our comforts.
For in regard of your Fidelity, Magnanimity, and Constancy, you were chosen by
the well-affected party in your Country, to present their grievances to the
House of Commons, it being one of the chief ends wherefore the whole Kingdom
has chosen and assembled them.

But the house of Commons in stead of hearing and redressing your grievances,
have added new grievances unto those which formerly you have suff^red in their
own quarrel against the common enemy, they have unjustly imprisoned you these
12 months, protected traitors amongst themselves from the Law, permitted them
not only to set up malignants and other traitors in chiefest places of trust
and command in your Country, but left an open passage there, both for Montross
and his wicked c^^e to go through and opp^esse Scotland, and for the Irish
rebels to enter England; so that by these and such means they hastened the
desolation of both Kingdoms, if God had not a gracious protection over his
own, and did not both continue Kingdoms, and reprove Kings and States for their
sakes.

Yet we shall rather with tears seek their repentance, then their persisting
in such courses, seeing they are placed in lawful authority, and have a good
cause, though they seek too much their own, and too little the Kingdoms good
in managing it* and that they might be first reformed at home amongst
themselves, before they go abroad to reform others: otherwise if they shall
still advance themselves, and not hear the cries of the poor, nor pity the
Widow and Fatherless, nor the heavy groans of the oppressed, nor the sighs
of the prisoners, they themselves shall cry and not be heard.

And as for their lamentable submission to the Bishops servants, the
Presbyterian Synodians (as if the servant were above the Lord) in establishing
that will worship and Popish maintenance which now themselves do well know to be
jure Di^bolico through these blind guides, their Diviners and Sooth sayers
inability to answer their querees (whereby to prove themselves ^ure divine)
surely, if they will notwithstanding obstinately persist in such wilful,
dangerous, and unwarr^n^^bl^ courses (not being any longer blind folded as at
first it might have seemed) they will doubtless show themselves to be fighters
against God, his truth and people to the^r own destruction, without speedy
conversion.

Farewell.
Articles and Propositions for the Counties of Cumberland and Northumberland.
INprimis. That Sir John Lowther and Sir Philip Musgrave procured the Commons
of Westmerland to subscribe the Petition to the King at York, as Sir Richard
Greham and the Gentry there did the Commons in Cumberland, and went to the King
at York to tender their service; which is conceived to have more insited his
Majesty to take up Arms.

2 That about 1000 within the Barony of Kendal, about the same time petitioned
the Commons House of Parliament, thereby tendering their service, and would have
stood for the Parliament, as many more in the said County, who had provided
Arms for that end, if (...) would have joined with them, which they would not
do, yet then professed to be for the Parliament, whereby the Commons were
deceived, and so more easily by Sir John Lowthers policy, and Sir Philip
Musgraves threatenings, brought under the power of the Commissioners of Array.

3 That the Committees for Westmerland appointed, or the greater number of
them, are either such as Joined with the Enemy by Contribution or otherwise, or
are Tenants to the Delinquents there, and such as have not, and is feared dare
not oppose themselves, against the Delinquents in any great business.

4. That (...) is joined to the enemy, is a great Delinquent and now (...) and
now made Commander in chief, in Westmerland, as is said, whereby complaints
will not be so well heard against the Delinquents, neither are the Delinquents
estates Sequestered there, which is the cause of great taxes, and heavy
seasements upon the Commons.

5. That Richard Barwis Esquire a member of the House of Commons, and one of the
Commissioners for both Kingdoms, at his being at Edinburgh (with the consent
and advice of John Hodgson, who was protected in his estate by the enemy, and
was the first man that drew Brough Barony to submit to pay contrybution money
to the enemy, appointed and named for Commit^ees in both Counties, men then in
actual rebellion, and such as complied with the enemy.

6. That said Mr. Richard Barwis from Edinburgh sent sundry letters to the
Commissioners of Array, in both Counties, by the said Hodgson to be conveyed to
them, which was done accordingly.

7. That most of the Committee appointed for Cumberland are Delinquents, and
such as have dependence upon the enemy, and have not opposed themselves,
neither dare displease the Delinquents there, against whom Mr. Barwis would not
hear, nor receive complaints brought unto him.

8. That the Sequestrators are such like. and many of them of the same Committee

9. That the Commander in chief, Sir Wilfride Lawson, over the forces in
Cumberland now appointed upon the commons taking up arme^ against the Array
men, there procured himself to be commander (...) chief over them, upon his
promise to be faithful to them, and then presently without any compulsion, but
voluntarily joined with the enemy, and took the Oath for the Earl of
Newcastle, and did send sundry to prison for the Parliaments cause; And since
he was (...) commander in chief, conveyed away one Ducket a Papist and a
great Delinquent, which Mr. Barwis would take no notice of, though acquainted
therewith.

10. That several propositions and grievances were presented by some Gentlemen
and others to the Parliament Commissioners, but were not allowed or regarded,
whereby others were and are discouraged further to complain; a copy of which is
hereunto annexed.

11. That heavier and greater burdens and taxes are laid upon the Commons now
by the Committees, then were under the enemy, and such as the County is not
able to bear; yet few or none of the Delinquents estates Sequestered.

12. That if the Militia be not better settled, these t ^^o Counties will be
easily reduced back under the enemy, upon the Scots removing thence.

13. That if more faithful honest and able men, be not chozen for Committees
and Sequestrators, the County will be ruined or lost, and most of the
Sequestrators imbecilled and private men, yea the Delinquents friends wholly
enriched thereby.

14. That if there should be two commanders in chief in these countyes, it
would much hinder the Service, besides the charge incident to the same, for
these were allwaies in the time of Queen Elizabeth, under one, and so while
the enemy had power over them; Therefore some honest and able man should be
chosen for that place, who may be added to the Commissioners for both Kingdoms.

15. That the chief of the commissioners of Array in these countyes, be either
imprisoned or confined in, or to some remote place, which will much conduce to
the furtherance of the service, and better settling of the peace there; Their
Tenants being thus freed from the fear and op ression of their wicked
Landlords, most of the commons there holding their estates in Taintright.

16. That the grievances and desires formerly presented to the commissioners of
both Kingdoms (a copy whereof is hereunto annexed) may be taken in
consideration, and wherefore the same were not regarded, neither answered unto
by the said Cammissioners.

17. That the castles and strenghts in these countyes, be committed to non but
honestand apporved men.

18. That care be taken that Stewardyes, Barliweeks, and clerkships of
Stewardyes and such like offices, be put into the hands of honest and able men.

19 That Mr. Richard Barwis is brother in law to some of the greatest
Delinquents there cozen german ^o, or otherwise nearely allied, to most of
the notorious Delinquents of both Countyes, and labored to put all command
there, upon his and their friends, or themselves, so as without good assistance
these countyes will not be well settled, without removing such persons from
public employment, which are not found fit to be trusted, and to place such
other in their rooms, with such power and authority as shall conduce to the
public service, and to settle a course that the Militia may be put in
execution, and that there may be appointed sit Deputy Liestenants, and one more
sit to command in chief over the forces of those County es, that they may be
always in a readiness for the defense of themselves, and assistance of their
neighbors, upon all emergent occations.

20 That the said Ricard Barwis at his being at Sunderland, had intercourse by
letters with the chief Malignats in Cumberland, espetially with Baronet Graham,
Baronet Musgrave, Baronet Curwen, and Sir Wilfride Lawson, as appears by the
confession of Thomas Watson Mr. Barwis his letter carye^.

21. That the said Sir Richard Graham and others the Delinquents there,
procured the lands and goods of the said Mr. Barwis to be protected, wherewith
Prince Rupert being made acquainted at his being in Lancashire allowed the
same, and so Mr. Barwis his wife did quietly without molestation or plundering
enjoy the same, till the Scots coming thither, not any other standing for the
Parliament having the like favor or freedom in these parts.

22 That the said Thomas Watson confessed to Mr. Osmotherley that the said Mr.
Barwis was the hinderer of the Scots not taking in Cumberland and Westmerland
upon their first coming in and after, and that the said Mr. Barwis told the
same unto him, which has been great loss and damage to the State, and benefit
of advantage to the Enemy.

23 That the King, since the Scots last coming into England, has had about
seven thousand men sent forth upon his service, whereof two thousand to
Hartlepoole, the rest to Prince Rupert for York, beside great sums of
moneys being raised there for the Kings use.

24 That twenty thousand pounds per annum, may be easily raised out of the
Bishops, Deane and chapter, Papists and Delinquents estates, in their lands,
rents, fines and tithes, if honest and able men be e^trusted therewith, whereby
the poor commont may be disburdened of many great taxes, wherewith they are
oppressed, and through which they begin to be disaffected; all which this
Honorable House is desired to take into consideration.

Representations and Considerations offered to the Commissioners for the
Parliament of England, by some of the sufferers and late banished men in
Cumberland for the Parliaments cause.
FIrst, it is desired that none be admitted to be of any Committee, or have any
command, that have either subscribed the Petition to the King at York, or have
joined in assistance with the Commissioners of Array by forcing others, or have
taken upon them any command or Office under the Earl of Newcastle against the
Parliament, or have persecuted any standing for the common cause.

2 That the chief of the Commissioners of Array of such and the Gentry, as
have been urgers of the new Oath against the Parliament upon the Commons, for
better securing the country, may be apprehended and detained in hold, as is
done in other places, without which the country cannot well he secured.

3 That already the Committee for this county has chosen or assented to
Commander for chief Sir Wilfride Lawson Knight, who before, together with
Baronet Curwen, injuriously betrayed the trust reposed in them by the country,
and joined with the Enemy. And now has admitted of and given command to many
Officers and Commanders formerly commanding under the Earl of New Castle, and
other wicked and vain men, to the great discouragement and grief of the well
affected, and the said Sir Wilfride is allied, and in confederacy with the
greatest Malignants of this county, in which said Sir Wilfride the commons
cannot confide.

4 That such of the commissioners of Array, or other the Justices of the peace
as have sent any to Carlisle prison for the Parliaments cause, may be attached
and kept in hold for securing the said prisoners until they be released.

5 That Sir Richard Graham and the late Sheriff procured the commons of
Westmerland by Sir Philip Musgrave, and Sir John Lowther to subdue and plunder
all such as stood for the Parliament in this country; by whom Mr. John Barwis,
and Mr. John Osmotherley, with many others, were plundered and banished, and
great cruelty exercised by them and the rest of the Malignant Gentry.

6 That some of the Committee, now appointed, have assisted the Enemy in their
wicked designs, some of them have dependence upon the Enemy, others of them
much feared to connive at the Enemies doings, and to favor them.

7 For that few of the Committee have not as yet, and as we fear, well dare
not represent unto you the Malignants doings and practices, we humbly desire
some faithful and honest men of Lancashire, or elsewhere, be desired and
admitted to join with the Committees of those Counties for the good of the
State, safety of these Counties, and the better discovery of Malignants wicked
practices.

8 That in the mean time none of the favorers or friends of Sir Richard
Graham and the late Sheriff (against whom many just and great complaints will
be brought) may be admitted to be of any committees.

9 That forthwith some good course may be taken for the discovery and
punishment of the malignant, wicked and scandalous Ministry of the county,
which have been and will be the greatest fomentors and abettors of the commons
and gentry against the Parliament.

That present course be taken for the securing of Whithaven, Parton and
Workington over against Ireland, the same being Havens

11 These and other the grievances of our country, we are humbly bold to
represent to your Honors grave consideration and wisdoms, and shall be ready
to approve our doings in the premises as your Honors shall direct, for the
furtherance of the peace of this country, and justice to be done upon
offenders. In testimony whereof we have subscribed our names.

These Propositions and Articles were delivered to the Parliament Commissioners
at Penreth in Cumberland, the four and twentieth day of the ninth month
called September, 1644. by me John Musgrave, for and in the name, and by the
direction of the Subscribers: But the same were slighted and dis-regarded by
Master Barwis and Sir William Ermyne, though much desired by Master Robert
Fenwick, one of the commissioners to be taken into consideration.

Persons desired to be removed from being of the Committy in Cumberland.
William Briscoe Esquire. William Penington Esquire Thomas Lamplough Gent. Miles
Halton, and all the other Delinquents.
Persons desired to be removed from being Sequestratours in Cumberland.
Sir Wilfride Lawson, Knight. William Briscoe, Esquare. William Lawson, Gent.
Peter Mawson. Nicholas Mawson. John Stodders. and all other Delinquents.
Reasons for their removal.
Sir Wilfride Lawson, See Artic 9. William Briscoe a Delinquent, and took the
Oath imposed by the commissioners of Array. Thomas Lamplough a Delinquent, and
took the Oath against the Parliament. Miles Halton, an Officer and Tenant to
the Earl of Arundell, one that never did not dare oppose the Delinquents, and
voluntarily joined and contributed to the Enemy. Peter Mawson and Nicholas
Mawson his brother, voluntarily contributed to the Enemy, and such as have
not, nor dare oppose, nor displease Sir John Lowther and Sir Philip Musgrave.
Master Pennington, (...) Sheriff, contrary to the Ordinance of Parliament
detaines the Ship Money in his bands, being not paid into the Exchequer.
Persons desired to be removed from command, and office of war in Cumberland.
Sir Wilfride Lawson Knight, the Commander in chief. Lieutenant colonel
Offeere Captain Musgrave. Captain Stoddert. Captain Story John Hodgson
Governor of Brough Barony, And all other Delinquents.
Reasons for their removal.
Sir Wilfride Lawson, for the reasons above said, See Artic. 9. Lieutenant
colonel Orfeere, a notorious Delinquent, and formerly a captain under the
Earl of New Castle. Captain Musgrave a Delinquent, formerly a captain under
Sir Richard Graham. Captain Stoddert a Delinquent, formerly an Officer under
the Earl of New Castle. Captain Story a Papist, was first a Lieutenant to Sir
Francis Howard, then joined himself to Master Osmotherley, who was for the
Parliament, and after deserted Master: Osmotherley, and joined with the Enemy.
And, as he confesses, has slain four men of the Parliaments party, he
became a Lieutenant to Sir Henry Fletcher, a colonel for the King; but upon
the Earls retreat back out of Scotland upon Hodgsons promise to procure him a
place, came into Scotland, from whence at his pleasure he went over into
England to the Enemy, and was familier with the Enemies captains and officers,
neither he nor the said John Hodgson were plundered till the Scots coming into
Cumberland, one Patrison a Lieutenant to captain Carleton, was taken but by
the said Story conveyed away into Scotland, and so got into Carlisle again^ to
the Enemy, wherewith Master Barwis was acquainted, but Story never questioned.
John Hodgson, a man of very mean estate, an Ale housekeeper, who procured
Brough Barony first to submit and contribute to the Enemy voluntarily, after
his going into Scotland had daily recourse, and took liberty to go into
England to the Enemy, See Artic. 5, and 6.
Persons desired to be removed from all Offices,
Sir John Lowther Knight-Baronet, Edward Robinson and all other Delinquents.
Reasons.
Sir John Lowther a notorious Delinquent, one of the chief Commssioners of
Array, both in Cumberland and Westmerland, with the first Petitioned the King
at York and tendered his service, and was the contriver of that Petition, he was
colonel over a* Regiment, and Governor of Kendall for the King; Sir John
Lowther pressed one Cleasby for a soldier, for saying he would not fight for
Papists, who after fled, but being taken again, the said Sir John Lowther
caused him to be put in close prison, where he is yet, and has endured great
misery for these 10 months, yet is the said Sir John Lowther again put in
command for the Parliament, upon the letter of Mr. Barwis, as is said. The said
Sir John Lowther committed to prison one David Brown a Scotsman, where he lay
in Carlisle in great misery a long time, and till the Scots coming unto
Cumberland. Sir John Lowther did take him for an Jntelligencer for the
Parliament, but was not. When by some of the House of Commons it was moved to
have Sir John Lowther put in command for the Parliament; Mr. Blackston
acquaited the House that he had these Articles in his hands, and desired he
might not be put in Command, where upon Sir John Lowther was put by.
Edward Robinson, a notorious wicked man, of evil fame, formerly borne out by
Sir Richard Graham, one who has done much hurt, and got much by plundring, an
officer under the Earl of New Castle, and since under Str Philip Musgrave, but
now to the countries grief employed by Mr. Barwis about Sequestrations, yet Mr.
Barwis would not hear any complaint against him.
To the Right Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, assembled in the
Commons House of Parliament.
The humble Petition of sundry well affected Gentlemen, and other persons, in
the Counties of Cumberland and Westmerland.
WHo most Humbly pray this honorable House, to take into your serious
considerati^ns, these Articles annexed, to provide a speedy remedy, while the
Scots forces remain in these quarters, lest the same fall again into the
bondage of the Array, and that if it seem good unto this Honorable House, to
send a faithful commander unto the counties, to command in chief over both, for
that the one cannot be kept without the other, and that the Counties may be
eased of their great oppression, and taxes in maintaining soldiers, by
allowing the Sequestrations, as well of lands as goods, for the maintenance of
forces against Ireland, to which they lie open, and for the service of the
Parliament and Countries; And that faithful and honest men the^ have suffered
for the Parliament, may be put in office, and that none be admitted to be in
office, or be of any Committee, that are by the ordinance of this Honorable
House, judged Delinquents.

Westmerland Articles.
FIrst, that in the counties of Cumberland and Westmerland through the evil
government of commanders and committees, the commons are so oppressed that in
their affections they are quite fallen from the Parliament, who heretofore
stood well affected to the same, and are now ready to embrace, nay, much desire
to see any opposite forces.

2 That such as bear office and command are many or most of them Delinquents,
as the principal commander, Sir Wilfride Lawson, a commissioner of Array, and
many of chose forces that entered the South of Scotland, called the Black-band,
under the command of Marquess Mountrosse, are received and have command under
the said Sir Wilfride Lawson.

3 That the said commanders do take and raise great sums of moneys of
Delinquents to free them from public service, and do put on and off soldiers
for money, through which and their oppressions mutinies are raised, the
countries endangered, an^ the Parliaments service diverted.

4 That the commanders exact moneys by way of loan, and enforces the
country, groaning under other great taxes and burdens thereunto.

5 That great sums of moneys are raised of the said counties under pretense of
the public service, which upon strict examination would be found to remain in
the hand of Officers and Committees or Delinquents protected.

6 That diverse of the Committees are noted Delinquents, who showed great
for^ardnesse against the Parliaments service, some have borne Arms and joined
in Acts of Association, and taken oaths against the Parliament.

7 That such as have suffered imprisonment and banished for the cause of
Parliament, ^aue bin plundered by the same commanders, are not countenanced but
threatened and ^^^^ed by them, and their persecutors countenanced, and have some
of them command.

8 That the Commissioners of Array, and other disaffected and notorious
Delinquents are protected both in their persons and estates, go armed up and
down the coun^^y upon the best horse of the country, suffered to keep Arms and
Ammunition in their ^^^uses, send and go at their pleasure out of the country to
the Kings forces, or any way (...) up mutinies, and publicly and openly show
their malignancy, both by word and deed.

9 That diverse of the Enemies Scouts and soldiers have been taken prisoners
sally^^g out of Carlisle by the Forces of Sir Wilfride Lawson, which he had made
Comman^ers under him, and suffered prisoners to lie in irons in Carlisle for the
Parliaments ^^^se without relief.

10 That the said Sir Wilfride Lawson did before-time under pretense to stand
for (...) Parliament, break a well affected party that stood for the
Parliament, and with the ^^^stance of Sir Patricius Curwen, brought the
Counties under the bondage of the ^^ray, working that by fraud, which the
Commissioners of array could not do by force, (...) leaving the country to the
plunder, he with the said Patricius fled to the Enemy, ^here they took the Oath
for the Earl of New Castle.

11 That certain Commanders were set to keep the Havens over against Ireland,
who ^^re Commanders on the other side.

12 That small or little is made of the Sequestration, by reason of the favor
showed ^elinquents, many of which have had time to conveigh away their goods,
and the rest (...) sequestered, or at small rates, and the Committees refuse to
take information and ^^^^overy of Delinquents and their estates, and to
sequester them.

13. That the Committee for Sequestrations, nor any Officer for Sequestrations
have taken the oath enjoined by ordinance of Parliament, nor any prisement made
by Oath.

14. That the standing Committees have given over to set taxes, or seasements,
for forces or soldiers in the said Countyes, or undertake any collections, or
payment of the same, but suffer officers and commanders to set sesments, and to
leavy the same at their pleasure, whereby great oppresion and plunders do
ensue, rapes, and murders, nay open rising in arms, and slaughters both of
commons and soldiers.

Cumberland Articles.
FIrst that the counties of Cumberland and Westmerland, through the evil
government of commanders, and Committees, the commons are so oppressed, that in
their affections, they are quite fallen from the Parliament, who heretofore
flood well affected, and are ready now to embrace, nay do much desire to see
any opposite forces.

2. That such as bear any office or command, are for the most part
Delinquents, and many those forces that entered the south of Scotland, called
the black band under the command of Marquess Mountrose, are received, and have
command.

3. That the said commanders do take and raise great sums of money, of
Delinquents to free them from all public service, do put on and off soldiers
for money whereby mutinies are raised, the counties endangered, and the
Parliament service diverted.

4. That the commanders exact and raise money by way of loan, and inforceth
the country (groaning under other great taxes and oppressions) there unto, and
put the country to unnecessary charges, by raising more forces then needful,
or they have commission to do.

5. That great sums of money are raised of the said countyes, under pretense
of the public service, which upon strict examinations, there will be much
found to remain in the hands of commanders, and committees, or Delinquents
protected.

6. That diverse of the committee are noted Delinquents, most of them have been
forward against the Parliament, some borne arms, and taken the oath, for the
Earl o^ New Castle.

7. That such as have suffered imprisonments, and banished for the cause of the
Parliament, have been plundered by the said commanders, and are no ways
countenance^ but threatened and hated by them, and their persecuters
countenanced and have command.

8. That the commissioners of Array, and other disaffected Gentlemen, and
notorious Delinquents are protected both in their persons and estates, go
armed up a^^ ^owne the country, upon the best horse of the country, and at
liberty go to the King forces, and send letters, and openly and publicly
show their malignancy both (...) word and deed.

9. That diverse of the enemies have been taken prisoners, sallying out of
Carli^^ which are made commanders again, under our commanders, and yet
prisoners suffere^ to lie in irons in Carlisle for the Parliaments cause above
one whole year, and (...) in a^ged.

10. That some of the commanders do give protection unto Delinquents and
Sco^tish Papists, which did betray the town of Dumfre^e, into the hands of
those called the Black-band, as Marquess Mountrose and that company, the same
are protected, which in Scotland were proclaimed Traitors, these have free
liberty to go amongst (...), to see the state of our country, and to give the
enemy intelligence, whereby great d^^ger may ensue, if not in due time
prevented.

11 That some of the chief commanders did before time, under pretense to be for
the Parliament, break and divide a certain well affected party that stood for
the Parliament, and with their assistance, the Country was brought under the
bondage of the Array, working that by fraud, which the rest of the
Commissioners of Array, could not do by force, who leaving the Country to the
plunder, fled to the enemy, where they took the oath for the Earl of
New Castle, and made in that service Commissioners of Array, and cruelly
persecured those that were well affectted to the Parliament by imprisonment.

12 That diverse of the Delinquents are suffered to keep their arms.

13 That small or little profit is like to be made of the Sequestrations, by
reason of the favor shown to the Delinquents, many of which have had time to
convey away their personal goods, and the rest either not sequestered, or at
small rates valued, or suffered to sell their goods after Sequestration.

14 The said Committees for sequestrations, or any officer for sequestrations,
have not taken the oath enjoined by Ordinance of Parliament upon them, nor any
presentment made by oath, save such as is done by de^^^quent Justices.

15 That malignant scandalus, and de^^^^^ent Ministers, and such as are
non-preaching and maintainers of superstition, and have been great urgers, and
abettors of the gentry and commons against the Parliament, and such as cast
aspersions upon the well-affected, pressing the book of common prayer, are
borne out and counte^^anced.

Some informations delivered by the Scottish Commissioners to both Houses of
Parliament, given to them by the two Commissioners of the well affected of
Westmerland and Cumberland, sent hither to present Articles to the Honorable
House of Commons
THat many of the Commanders, and members of the Committees, who were in
actual Rebellion against the Parliament, under the Earl of New Castle, and
did take the oath prescribed by him, are still continued in their former
ch^arge, and imploiment.

That generally the gentry of those Counties are Papists, Malignants, and very
disaffected to the Parliament.

That very little of the Sequestrations of Westmerland, and Cumberland, have
been uplifted, many of those to whom it is entrusted to, put the Ordinances of
Parliament in execution, being themselves Delinquents.

That some of the Committee for Cumberland, being desired to sequester the
estates of Delinquents, said they wished there were no Sequestrations at all,
and that they had warrant from the Commissioners of Parliament, not to
Sequester.

That if the Sequestrations had been duly up-lifted, they would have maintained
the Scottish forces, that quartred in those two Counties, and the Country no
ways ho^^ ^^^n burdened.

That the reason of the Scottish forces imposing asseafements upon the
Counties, did proceed from the Malignity of the Committees, who either refused,
or neglected their duty, in assessing the Country and uplifting thereof, and
yet under hand stirred up the Commons, to withstand the Scots taking up
assessements.

That Sir Wilfride Lawson brother in law to Master Richard Barwis, a member of
the House of Commons, and one of the Committee of both Kingdoms, with the
Scottish Army, is a known Malignant, was actually in Rebellion, under the
Earl of New Castle, against the Parliament, and continued in Arms, till those
Counties were reduced to the obedience of the Parliament, and yet
notwithstanding, is now entrusted with the Command in chief of the Parliaments
forces in those Counties and is also made High Sheriff of Cumberland, and one
of the grand Committee for the Northern Assosiation.

That Sir Wilfride Lawson, with the assisstance of John Barwis, Uncle to Master
Barwis the Commissioner, and William Briscoe cousin to Master Barwis, have
without consent of the rest of the Committee, levied great sums of moneys
upon the Country, distrained their goods, and committed their persons to prison
who refused it, and have also raised great sums of money, under pretense for
the public service, which they do still deraine in their own hands.

That when the country people complained of Sir Wilfride Lawsons soldiers, and
condescended, both upon the names of the persons, and the goods, neither the
persons were punished, nor the goods restored.

That Sir Wilfride Lawsons men had pay from the Country, and yet took free
quarter, and stole horses, whereof they would make no restitution.

That Colonel Cholmeley, having desired Sir Wilfride Lawson to cause his
soldiers to discharge their quarters with money they received, as he did in his
Divition: Sir Wilfride Lawson wrote a bitter railing letter against him,
whereof Colo. Cholmeley sent the original to the Commissioners of Parliament.

That Sir Wilfride Lawson did formerly, and of late, protect diverse Papists,
and others, declared Traitors by the Estates of Scotland.

That Sir Wilfride Lawson, Major Thomas Barwis, kinsman to Mr. Richard Barwis
the commissioner, and others his officers, conveyed in victuals to the enemy
in Carlisle.

That the enemy falyed out strong and frequently upon the Scots, and colonel
Cholmeleys Quarters, but kept fair correspondence with Sir Wilfride Lawsons
Quarters.

That when they came out upon Sir Wilfride Lawsons Quarters, sometimes the
soldiers wanted powder, and when they had powder, they were discharged upon
pain of death to shoot against the enemy, though the enemy was much inferior,
in number.

That Thomas Barwis Major to Sir Wilfride Lawson when any of his own soldiers
were taken prisoners had them released at his pleasure, and also released other
soldiers that were taken prisoners, for money.

That they are fully persuaded that the Town of Carlisle had been long since
taken, but for the correspondence and supplies given to the enemy, by Sir
Wilfride Lawsons forces, and i^ all probability, those parts had been again
put under the Enemies power, and the well affected in at had condition as
formerly, if the Sea as forces had been with drawn from Carlisle.

That many of those forces that entered the South of Scotland, called the Black
band, under the command of the late Earl of Mountrose, are received, and have
command under the said Sir Wilfride Lawson.

That Thomas Lamplough was in Arms, and actual Rebellion against the
Parliament, and took the Oath prescribed by the Earl of New castle.

That the said Thomas Lamplough, brother in law to Mr. Barwis the
Commissioners, is a savourer of Malignants, and procured the releasement of
Thomas Fleeming Kinsman to Mr. Barwis the Commissioner, who was imprisoned by
Col. Cholmeley for offering a sum of money to one, to betray Graistock-Castle
to the Enemy.

That Mr. Richard Barwis, one of the members of the House of Commons, and of
the Committee of both Kingdoms, with the Scottish Army, is a protector of
Delinquents, and Malignants.

That when those Countices were under the Enemies power, Sir Richard Graham
procured a warrant from the Earl of New Castle, for protecting Mr. Richard
Barwis the Commissioners estate, and his Wife lived there quietly, and
peaceably, in the Enemies quarters, without molestation. That now the said
Master Richard Barwis protected Sir Richard Grahams estate, who is yet with the
Enemy, in Rebellion against the Parliament.

That he did entrust the command of the Castle of Rose to one L. Colonel
Orfeere, a great Malignant, and a commander under the Earl of New Castle.

That when the said Mr. Richard Barwis was in Scotland, before the Scottish
Army came into this Kingdom, and afterward at Sunderland, he kept
correspondence with the Enemy.

That John Barwis, Uncle to Mr. Richard Barwis, and Michael St^i^holme, who was
present at the meeting, told him that it was agreed upon, In Mr. Richard Barwis
commissioners chamber at Edinburgh, before the coming in of the Scottish Army
into this Kingdom.

That Sir Henry Bellingham, Sir Wilfride Lavvson, and Mr. Thomas Lamplough,
both brethren in law to the said Mr. Barvvis commissioner, and diverse others
Delinquents, should be put upon the Committee of Westmerland, and Cumberland,
though then all three in Arms, and actual Rebellion against the Parliament,
and accordingly when the country was reduced by the Scottish Army, these
parties were put upon the Committees.

Concerning the Insurrection made in these counties, they inform, that the
first insurrection was not pretended to be against the States, but that they
openly professed themselves Enemies against the Parliament; That the manner of
it was this, Major Brigs procured from the Lord Fairfax a commission to
himself, to be a colonel, and summoned all the county to appear before him,
that he might make choice of soldiers, that he and his Officers dismissed such
as would give him 206, and detained the rest, but afterward diminished the
price to ten shillings, then to five shillings, then to 12 pence, and within a
few days after they summoned the country of a new again, and made their
benefit of them as formerly.

That being before Skipton Castle with some forces, upon Sir Marmaduke
Langdaile coming to raise the Siege at Pontfret, he came away from before
Skipton, and summoned the county again to appear, and demanded the half of
their goods to maintain a garrison in Apleby, that there were diverse
Skirmishes between him, and the country people about that time, that afterward
he did again summon all the country to appear, and dismissed all those that
would give him money, whereupon the country, and colonel Brigs falling into
differences, the Papists and Malignants made use of the opportunity, and
chiefly Sir John Lowthar a notorious delinquent, cousin german to Mr. Barwis
the commissioner, and whom Mr. Barwis presented to the House of Commons to be
commander in chief for Westmerland, and the attendants and servants of the said
Sir John Lowther, possessed themselves of Bolton church, and appointed the
country people to come to a Randezvouse there, with an intent to sease upon all
the Strengths and Forts in those parts; according to this intimation the
country met, the Lady Lowther furnished them with Ammunition, and the Enemies
Garrison at Shipton were drawing out for their assistance, but all their
designs were disappointed, and the meeting of the country people dissolved
upon the appearance of the Scottish Horse, who were advertised of their
intentions, and invited thither for the assistance of the well affected, that
about a fourthnight after there was another Plot of the Papists and Malignants,
for betraying of Kasewick Isle, raising of the country, beating a way the
Scots, and cutting of the well-affected, but this design was discovered by a
gunner of Sir Wilfride Lawsons, who was hired to be an actor in the business,
but being troubled in conscience revaled it, and Sir Wilfride Lawsons Uncle,
who lives in the house with him, was upon this plot.

That the Papists, and Malignants, failing in both these designs, stirred up
the country people against the Scots, pretending the great Brethrens of the
country, and exactions made by them for maintaying the forces before Carlisle.

That generlly all that joined in that Insurrection were Papists, Malignants,
their Tenants and servants.

That at the time of this Insurrection, they did apprehend John Musgrave one of
the informers, and William Wheelewright, saying they deserved no quarter, but
should be hanged, especially Mr. Musgrave, because he had been in Scotland, and
as they said was a chief Instrument in bringing in the Scots to take away the
Service Book.

That they further could him, that they were able to perform what they had
undertaken, that they would not want assistance for Northumberland, Cumberland,
Yorkshire and Lancashire would rise with them, to beat all the Scots out of the
Kingdom; And accordingly those of Cumberland did rise, and likewise the
Papists and ill-affected of Northumberland afterward:

Where-upon the Scots commissioners desired by their paper presented to both
Houses of Parliament in these words
That the money and provision taken up by the Scottish Army in those parts, may
be speedily brought to an account. That these Informations may be speedily put
in a way of trial and examination, and in the mean time some persons of
unquestioned affections, and fidelity to the Parliament, may be sent into the
country to take charge of the Parliaments forces there, and look to the
security of these parts.

The Scottish Commissioners Answer to the Parliaments Demands, concerning the
Informations given in by them, and received from the Commissioners of the well
affected of Cumberland and Westmerland.
ACcording to the desire of the House of Commons, that we should acquaint the
Members of that House, that are of the Committee of both Kingdoms, upon what
grounds we delivered the Informations we received concernings Member of that
House, and other persons* We return this Answer:

That these Informations were delivered to us by John Osmotherley, a Member of
the Committee of Cumberland, and John Musgrave Gentleman, under their hands,
who declared, they were ready to justify and make them appear.

That they showed to us these Articles under the hands of above seven-score of
the Gentlemen, and Inhabitants of this Country.

That they had Recommendations from colonel Cholmeley, a colonel of a
Regiment of the Parliaments Forces there, who is a religious and worthy
Gentleman, of whose affection and forwardness in the cause, the Kingdom of
Scotland has had much experience.

That colonel Cholmeley in his Recommendation approves of the Articles, and
Ingages his life for the fidelity of Master Osmotherley and Master Musgrave.

That we received diverse testimonies from persons here in Town, to whom we
give much credit of the fidelity of the said Mr. Osmotherley, and Mr. Musgrave,
as:

1 Before the coming of the Scots Army into this Kingdom, John Osmotherley
^ised in the service of the Parliament of his friends and servants five hundred
men, and opposed the Commissioners of Array, till they were betrayed by Sir
Wilfride Lawson, and Sir Patricius Curwen, near kinsman also to Master Barwis,
who being chosen Commanders by the country, joined with the Enemy, whereupon
they were all unexpectedly seized on and disarmed, and the said Master
Osmotherley was forced to fly for his life.

2 That Mr. Musgrave suffered much under the tyranny of the Earl of Strafford,
and in the beginning of these troubles was six and twenty weeks imprisoned by
the Commissioners of Array, and afterward was banished his own country.

3 That Master Musgrave is of a different judgment from the Church of Scotland
in matters of Church Government, and stands for the Independency of particular
congregations, and therefore his Information is the less to be suspected of
partiality toward the Scottish Army.

Concerning the matter of the Information.
FIrst, We find them to agree with the Informations we received from the
Scottish Army.

2 That it was no new business, that they had attended the House of Commons
thirteen weeks in Winter with Articles against those persons. And in February
last were referred to a Committee by the House of Commons, but nothing done
thereupon.

3 That they were returned with further Articles and Informations against those
persons were attending the House, but by reason of multiplicitie of business
could not be heard: And therefore entreated for our Assistance* which in
matters of that consequence, that did so much conduce to the preventing of
mis-understandings between the two Kingdoms, and vindication of the Scottish
(...) we could not deny.

These were the grounds upon which we delivered in these Informations, and upon
the whole matter we desire that the business in so far as concerns the
Scottish Army, may be examined by a commit^ee upon the place authorized by both
Kingdoms for that purpose, according to the ninth Article of the late Treaty
between the Kingdoms, viz. That all matters of differences that shall happen to
arise between the subjects of the two Nations, shall be resolved and
determined by the mutual advice and consent of both Kingdoms, or by such
Committees as for this purpose shall be by them appointed, with the same power
as in the precedent Article.

To the Honorable the Committee of War residing at York.
The humble Petition of diverse well affected persons in the County of
Westmerland.
THat whereas this poor Country of Westmerland languisheth under heavy
pressures of these times, is not in all likelihood longer to continue, nor able
to do service required, who never so willing if not timely relieved by your
pious vigilant, careful provision, the many grievances considered it now groan
under, do in all humbleness present unto your Honors some few of those many,
humbly beseeching your Honors judicious consideration of them, that in this
eminent time of danger, our poor Country may be speedily so ordered by you, as
that pious men void of selfe-gaine, and vainglory, having the command of us,
we may be preserved, able to our willingness to observe such orders and
command as shall come from your Honors or any other whom the Parliament has
put in Authority: And your Petitioners, whose names are here-under written,
shall, as in duty bounden, daily pray for a happy success of all your good and
godly proceedings.

First, we show to your Honor that there is, and ever has been a great
neglect in the Committee for sequestrations, their no^ sequestring known
Delinquents, and their proceedings therein is by a disorderly way.

In possessing themselves of certain of the Delinquents goods to their own
profit.

That there is not a Solicitor for the Committee of Sequestrations appointed,
which is the maine reason, as we conc^eive, of their disorderly proceedings.

That the Deputy Sequestrators, appointed by them, have not taken the Oath
appointed by the Parliament, Ordinances which does much hinder the benefit of
sequestrations, so as the County is not any way relieved therewith.

But that the Committee has laid upon the County ^o^ the pound in the book of
Rates, which amounts the sum of 1000 l' and above, whereas the Ordinance of
Parliament does only demand 600 pound, this being done in contrary to some of
the Committee for the Assosiation.

That Colonel Edward Brigs has by his disorderly carriage much hindered the
raising of then for the Assosiation, etc.

The said Colonel did leave his Regiment before Skipton without Orders, as
Colonel Lambert can best declare it, being a great encouragement for the
soldiers to leave their Colors, which they did, save only one company, by
which means many were lost, and lef^ in that country, which now causes us to
be altogether destitute for want of Arms: It being intended by the Committee
for this County to have taken as many men out of the Regiment, as should serve
for the County in the assosiated Army, which now they are forced to go in a
more inconvenient way.

That the said Colonel Brigs did suffer, if not give order, with Richard
Braithwait one of the Committee for the Assosiation to certain Officers of the
said Colonel Brigs his Regiment, to levy and distrain for arreares of their
pay; in color of which they did much wrong to your Petitioners,

That the said Colonel does not accept of the soldiers that is sent him,
unless they bring with them twenty shillings, which he calls advance money.

That the said Colonel does turn diverse off for money, some for fire pound,
some four pound, some for three pound, and some for two pound, so that the
present service is much hindered and neglected, and the fault undeservedly laid
upon the Country.

That the said Colonel did of his own authority call a general. Muster
without acquainting any of the Committees; that when the Country made their
appearance, nothing was either said to them or done.

Now that all these grievances being taken into your Honors consideration, we
doubt not but to receive some redress from your Honors, or at least your wise
advice and counsel what best is for us to do.

And your Petitioners, as in duty, shall daily pray. This is seen by me, and
approved

by your Honors most humble and obedient servants James Bellingham, Thomas
Pickering Esquire



These Articles were sent to me by L. Colonel Bellingham, subscribed with his
own hand and Master Pickerings, with fifty names more, which with his Letter
of the 2. November. 1645. I received since I came into prison.

John Musgrave

November 10. 1645.
The Information of Edward Smith against William Cape, Robert Chambers, and
John Jackson, etc.
FIrst, Shows that Master Richard Barwis, a Member of the Honorable House of
Commons, has sent down his servant with certain Articles exhibited to the
said House, against the evil government of the Commanders Officers, and
Committees in Cumberland and Westmerland, and has published the said Articles
with other writings two or three several days in one Church, saying, That
those which will deny subscribing to the same, should be no more troubled.

2 That the servants of the said Mr. Richard Barwis, with one William Capt,
Col. Lawsons Tenant, and a Quartermaster, does go up and down the country,
parswading, threatening, and desiring such as subscribed the said Articles, to
deny the same, in all, or in part.

3 That the said parties so employed, finding of such that subscribed, do
inquire after others of the same name, and procures them to disclaim
subscription, and subscribe to what they desire, as John Wilkinson of the
Gilbank, for John Wilkinson of Loeswater, and Thomas Symm of the New-towne, for
Thomas Symm of Ederside, and Thomas Chambers of Hartlow, for Thomas Chambers of
old Bawbrey, and so others.

4 That the foresaid Cape being thus employed, did come into a house where
Edward Smith, servant to Mr Osmotherley, was, and begun to examine and question
the said Edward, about subscription to the said Articles, but the said Edward
refusing to make answer, he not showing any Authority for his so examining the
said Cape, did there-upon say he would commit the said Edward by Authority he
had, and so laid hands upon him, but the said Edward making an escape, the said
Cape did command some men to fellow, and he himself laid wait for him, and
sought houses where he suspected the said Edward to be.

5 That with the said Cape there was one Robert Chambers, and one John Iackson
a Quartermaster, which gave the said Edward Smith reproachful speeches, the
said Chambers wishing that the said Smith had been Smoothered in his Mothers
belly, and said if he could get him at the Abbey, he would kill the said
Edward, and Iackson the Quartermaster said, the said Edward was a seducing
fellow, in drawing some to subscribe the Articles, and the said Edward had cost
the Lopp of Holme, twenty-score pounds, in being an instrument to Mr.
Osmotherley, now a soliciter for the said Articles, to raise the Holme in Arms
for the Parliament, Colonel Hodleston an enemy, coming against the same.

6 That the said Cape said, if he could get the said Edward, he would take a
leg or an arm from him; the said Cape did also send word to Mr. Osmotherley,
that he should not keep the said Edward Smith for a servant;

Witness Edward Smith, Thomas Grave, John Satterthraithe.

This information written with Edward Smiths own hand, was by him sent and
delivered unto me about the 12. 4. mon. called April 1645.

John Musgrave.

The complaint of John Robinson of Mosser, and Francis Smith of Egermond
against the Committee of Cumberland
Shows that the above named persons, who have suffered fining, plundring,
banishing, and imprisonment, for the cause of the Parliament, having their
dwelling houses, door, and windows broken, and violently robbed, cruelly
bearen, and blooded, also being mocked, and called thieves, murderers, and
much more, and all disaffected persons to the Parliament, whereupon we made
complaint three several days unto the said Committee, and could have no
redress, not so much as our witnesses examined, but we our selves threatened
with punishment, by the said Committee, and after this our sufferings under
great Malignants, without cause or offense committed by us, thus we were made
a prey unto the will of Malignants, by reason of injustice, and for our
laboring for Justice, we are exposed to further and greater misery.

The Complaint of Margaret Robinson of Pardsay Widow, Against Sir Wilfride
Lawson Colonel for Cumberland.
Shows
THat the above named Widow Robinson, being plundered by Francis Story,
Captain under the command of the said Colonel Lawson, of some certain goods,
to the value of about seven pound, where-upon I made complaint to the said
Colonel Lawson, five several times, by which I was put to great trouble and
charges, near half of the former losses, to the great rejoicing of many
Malignants to know me* who stood still desirous to see our Country possessed by
the Parliaments forces, and the Enemy therein suppressed; to suffer so much by
them, and not to enjoy the benefit of Justice, by the said Commanders, though
voluntarily I promised half of the same to the public purse, yet for all
this could not get any satisfaction.

This complaint was sent to me in 2. Mon; 1645. John Musgrave

To the Knights and Burgesses Assembled in the Commons House of Parliament
The Humble Petition of a well affected party in Westmerland, and Cumberland,
for Mr. Musgraves Liberty.
THe great care this Honorable House has had of this distressed Kingdom,
together with the distressed condition of these two Counties of Westmerland and
Comberland, makes us again to be humble suitors unto this Honorable House,
that as it has pleased this Honorable House, to establish a grand Committee
for accounts for this whole Kingdom, impowring them to nominate a sub
Committee for accounts in several parts of the same, to act according to the
Ordinances of this Honorable House made in that behalf, which grand Committee
having appointed within these two Counties, and there-upon has ministered the
Oath expressed in the Ordinance, unto Mr. John Osmotherley and Mr. John
Musgrave, two whom they had appointed for execution of the same; Persons of
approved fidelity in this grand Cause, and entrusted by a well-affected party
of the said Counties, to present the great grievances of the same by Petition
and Articles to this House, for which we return hankes unto this Honorable
House, as also unto the said grand Committee of accounts, but since it has
pleased the all Directer so to appoint, that the said Mr. John Osmotherley
being to return into his Country, having the carriage of the said Commission
and Ordinance, had the same taken from him in his Journey, being likewise robbed
as of the said Commission and Ordinance, so of his horse money and other
things; And the said Mr. John Musgrave being by a Committee of this Honorable
House imprisoned, whereby these distressed Counties groaning under the great
oppression of Commanders and Committees, does find themselves no way cased, but
continually more burdened, without great care of this, Honorable, will tend
to the destruction of those Counties.

Your Petitioners humbly pray this Honorable House, that in porsuance of your
former care, that the said Commission with Ordinances may be again sent down
to these two Counties: And that Mr. John Musgrave who cannot be touched with
the least reproach of infidelity to this Honorable House, and the Commonweal
(as we are confident) may be enlarged, and enabled together with Mr.
Osmotherley and others to act in the said Committee, as they have taken the
said Oath, and that the said Petition and Articles exhibited to this Honorable
House, by the said Mr. John Osmotherley and Mr. John Musgrave for these
oppressed Counties may be put to trial, and that men known to be of public
spirits, may be put in the said Committee of accounts;

And your Petitioners shall pray.
This Petition was sent me the 2. Mon. 1646. subscribed by 90. of the Gentlemen
and other well-affected of Cumberland and Westmerland.

A warrant of the Commissioners of Array in Cumberland subscribed by Sir
Wilfride Lawson who was one of that number there.
Whereas all the Counties of this Kingdom now lie groaning under the heavy
yoke of this unnatural Rebellion, war against their Sovereign, yet
notwithstanding all or most part of these Counties, have submitted to a
voluntary contribution to his Majesty, toward the maintenance of his
Majesty's Royal Army, Cumberland and Westmerland only excepted, and there-upon
information given to the Lord General his Excellency, of our slacknes in not
addressing our selves the same way as others did, who there-upon had given
order for sending three thousand horse to be billetted among us, and some
before that time billetted in the Country, if not by the careful solicitation
of Sir Philip Musgrave and Sir Richard Graham, who were sent from both the
Counties, his Excellency had not been diverted from that way, would have ruined
the Country, and thereupon such horse as was already billetted, were by his
Lord-ships command removed out of the two Counties, and whereas his Majesty in
the late war with the Scots, did by his Royal proclamation command all his
Free-houlders in chief, to be attendant on his Person at York, yet such was
his care over this County, that his Majesty by his warrant under his prime
Signet did discharg these Counties of the said Proclamation, all which acts of
grace, and to prevent the biletting of horse among us, and other inconveniences
that may happen unto us by our neglect, we having taken into consideration,
do hereby testify our obedience to his Majesty's service, and therefore will
and require you the (...) and the Constables of Ribtonand little Broughton, and
that you do Assesse your whole Parish at the sum of two pound ten shillings,
and the same so assessed by that, then you and all of you forthwith demand,
collect and receive of the said Inhabitants there, and pay the same to Leonard
Dikes Esquire, High-sheriffe of the county of Cumberland, at Cockermouth the
first day of April, to that end the same may be presented to his Majesty as a
free contribution of his well-affected subjects in Cumberland, toward the
charge of his great affairs, fail not as you tender the furtherance of his
Majesty's service;

Given under our hands at the City of Carlisle thirteenth of April 1643. Richard
Graham Edward Musgrave Philp Musgrave Henry Fletcher Wilfride Lawson Patricius
Curwen William Dalston George Dalston Thomas Dacre


Sir Philip Musgrave Commander in chief over the Kings forces in Cumberland and
Westmerland, and Leonard Dikes a Commissioner of Array their warrant against
Henry Bluthwait and Mary his wife
Cumberland

FOrasmuch as we are informed, that Mary the wife of Henry Bluthwait is one
that does not stand affected to his Majesty's service, and is suspected to
disperse scandalus pamphelts. These are therefore to will and command you, that
you take and arrest the bodies of the said Henry Bluthwait and Mary his wife,
and them carry before the next Justice, to enter in Recognizance with good
sureties, not only to appear at the next Sessions, but also not to depart this
County without License of the commander in chief, whereof fail not.

Given under our hands this nineteenth of April 1644. Philip Musgrave Leo.
Dikes


To the Constables of Withope Seckmurther and Embleton, and if they refuse to
become bound as abovesaid, that you commit them to the Jail at Carlisle.

Philip Musgrave:

A warrant of Sir Wilfride Lawson then a Commissioner of Array and now
High-Sheriffe of Cumberland, and Commander in chief over the Parliaments forces
there.
Cumberland

SIr Wilfride Lawson Knight one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace within the
county of Cumberland, to the Constables of Seckmurther, and to the Keeper of
his Majesty's Jail at Carlisle, whereas the said Constbles of Seckmurther had a
warrant from Sir Philip Musgrave Knight and Baronet, and Commander in chief of
the county of Cumberland and Westmerland, and from Leonard Dikes Esquire, to
arrest the bodies of Henry Bluthwait and Mary his wife of Sickmurther
aforesaid, and them to bring before the next Justice that such course might be
taken as to Justice appertains, in pursuance of the aforesaid warrant, the
said Constables brought the said parties before me; but the said Mary Bluthwait
the wife of the said Henry Bluthwait snatched up the warrant and does detain
the same. These are therefore to will and command you the constables immediately
upon the receipt hereof, to convey the body of the said Henry Bluthwait for
refusing to observe the said warrant, and the said Mary his wife, for the
misdemenour aforesaid, as also for refusing to observe the said warrant safely
to his Majesty's Jail at Carlisle, there to remain until such time as he and
she shall be enlarged by due course of Law Isel. 6. May 1644.

Wilfride Lawson

Upon this warrant Bluthwait and his wife were imprisoned the woman was bound
in a Cart, with her face and head upward, and under the horse tail, and the
horse so driven that he galloped with her to the danger of her life, and before
they put her in prison caused her to be stripped to her smock, under pretense of
searching for suspected papers, and afterward Henry Pearson and James Pearson
Brothers and two Delinquents, Atturneys, gave direction and command in the name
of Sir Wilfride Lawson to lay her in Irons.

Philip Musgrave Baronet, and Simon Musgrave Esquire, two of his Majesty's
Justices of the peace within the county of Cumberland:
To the Constables of Penreth, and all other his Majesty's Officers and loving
Subjects within the said County; as also to the Keeper of his Mejesties Jail
at Carlisle, and to every of them greeting;
Whereas we are credibly informed that Richard Crakanthrop late of Stickland
in the County of Westmerland Gentl. has lately much strived to seduce and
mistead his Majesty's loyal subjects within these two Counties of Cumberland
and Westmerland, (since he got his enlargement out of prison) from their duty
and allegiance to his Majesty, the Laws of the Kingdom, and Religion
established; and has likewise publicly attempted to raise and levy war
within the two counties before named, and has also publicly opposed himself
against those who are put in Authority by his Majesty, to the evil and wicked
example of all his Majesty's well-affected subjects. These are therefore in his
Majesty's name to command you, that you do carry the said Richard Crakanthrop
to his Majesty's Jail at Carlisle: And you the Keeper or Keepers of the said
Jail, that you do receive him into your custody, and him the said Richard
Crakanthrop in safe custody to keep in your said Jail, without bail or
mainprize until his Excellence, the Lord Generals pleasure, of his Majesty's
Army in the North-partes be further known, or otherwise until he shall have a
legal trial by Law, for his said offenses and misdemeanors, according to the
Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom. Whereof fail ye not, at your perils:

Given at Penreth under our hands and Seals the six and twentieth day of
February, Anno Dom. 1642. Philip Musgrave. Simon Musgrave

Copia concordat cum originale.

Per me Richardum Kirkbrid-tum Jailer.
Witness hereof, Thomas Gibson. John Cleasby.


A Letter of Sir Patricius Curwen Baronet, Knight of the Shire for Cumberland,
afterward a Commissioner of Array, written with his own hand to his brother
Eldred Curwen, a Papist, and Captain Lieuetenant to Colonel Hudleston.
BRother, I should have been glad to have heard from you by a line or two, I
must confess the business you undertake is of so high a concernment for his
Majesty's service (in which I beseech God send you all good success) as I
durst not adventure mine advice to you, lest I might have been thought a
hinderer to that service, to which no man living can wish more happiness: No
man can blame me to say that mine adventure in it (of three brothers) is more
than ordinary, all things considered. And if I should wish two might have
served, and you had staid I deserve no great censure for it. I am very sorry
for nothing but that you took not mine advice, but your own wisdom, I might
and do submit unto, and pray for your good fortune: And I am confident when you
reflect of my former carriage toward you, and my affectionate valuatiation of
you, you will think that such a hazard does work with me, knowing how things
stands with me; if at your leisure I may hear from you, and that you have such
a Command as is worthy of you, you shall do me a favor, and tie me to let you
hear of the welfare of your friends here: In the mean time accept my best
wishes and prayers for your good success, and remember my love to my brothers
with you, and my service to your noble Colonel; and be ever assured you shall
never find me wanting in any respect that may most manifest how really I am, Sir

Work: Febr. 6. 1642. Your affectionate Brother and servant, Pa. Curwen.
I doubt not but you will be careful that all be done fair at Wotten castle,
where I hear you are, that no wrong be done there, either by your own troop,
or any others, that you can help, for I dare say my brother Darcy thinks you
very wel-come there, especially if you have made choice of that place your
self; this enclosed I pray you do your best in it, the man's name is William
Peale.



Extracts of several Letters to John Musgrave.
FIrst, Beloved here are the Black-band, and many of Prince Ruperts Forces all
the country over, it is thought no less then five thousand horse and foot; Sir
Thomas Glemmon has been here with the Governor and the Commissioners of
Array, they have been these three days in consultation at Penreth, what was
done there is yet unknown to me, the Forces that has been raised already in
this country lie at Penreth with the rest of the foot of Prince Ruperts, the
Marquess Mountrose, the Earl of Niddesdaile and Hurry are all in this Town.
The Marquess of New Castle did grant the lands of Master Barwis, the
Parliament man, to William Mercer, your cousin Sir Edward Musgraves man and our
Jailer, who did thereupon sease of them, but it was obtained by Sir Richard
Graham to prevent another, for he did no more but sease, and Master Barwis his
wife does enjoy the same as fully, nay, more fully then any man of whether side
soever in all this country; it does only serve for a protection. Your cousin
Sir Edward and Sir Richard Graham had it articled against them to Prince
Rupert, that they had obtained a protection for Master Barwis, and that
between him and them Letters did pass; and they were thereupon accused to be
on the Parliaments side, but came fair off, and this testimony is true. Now
how others suffered is known to you, while I am writing, news is brought me
that all the Gentry of the country are coming to this Town, Sir Philip
Musgrave, Sir John Lowther, and Sir Richard Graham and the Sheriff, Sir Edward
Musgrave your cousin, who came not here this long time, because of the breach
between them and the Governor, who with Dikes did, as I said, Article against
them. If Master Barwis (as you write) was the hinderer of the Scots taking in
these Countries, then is he guilty of the blood of all these country people
that have been slain, of all the blood shed by them, of all the spoil done
now to this country, if not of the wrong done of late in Lancashire, of the
spoil done by the Black-band in Scotland, of all the great charge, the Scots
have been, and are at, by keeping the Border, besides many of the Gentry of
this country that neither were nor would have been against the State at the
coming in of the Scots, that have been and are drawn to be enemies to the
State, to the routing out of themselves and their posterity.

Carlisle Jail, 10. 8. mon. 1644. RICHARD CRAKANTHROP.

SEcondly, Beloved, I have labored above one whole year for the good of this
my native country; and for the good of Scotland without ceasing, and all this
with the Scots I have given diverse reasons unto them of weight, warning and
foretelling them of their danger before it ensue, whereby they might have had
time to have prevented it, but all in vain, it was the cause of my abode in
this place, when I might have been exchanged upon demand all the last year,
whereby I have lost the time I might have done good elsewhere, for I suppose
upon the reasons I showed I could have brought the business to pass, and have
done good service to the State; I have incurred the danger of my life, in as
ample wise as if I had been in every battle, for though God has kept the
thing from them, yet do they intend evil against me; the Sheriff Sir Edward
Musgrave has been with me and my fellow prisoners, to press us to be
soldiers for the King, and that with such violence as to threaten to take our
lives for refusing as Traiters; I pleaded my tenor of Knights service, and
that I was not by law to be pressed for a common soldier, who yet told me his
voice should go to take our lives, and they have appointed a Gaole-delivery to
be within fourteen days, as he told us, to try us; you know what manner of
men they be, it boots not to speak to them either law or reason: I put was in
close prison for refusing to take up Arms with the Earls to invade Scotland;
and now the Sheriff would needs have irons presently laid on us for refusing,
affirming we were in the highest degree of Treason; the Under-sheriffe and our
Gaolour persuading what in them lay, and but that he had no irons, (for our
Jailer would find him none) he had laid them on us: by this you may perceive
what danger I were in, if but one Letter came to light; they have made a pair
of gallows in the Marketplace. I purpose to spend no more time with the Scots,
but employ my self another way, and get from under the hands of Tyrants; this
day they hanged one of the Moss Troop upon the gallows in the Marketplace,
by this view my danger; and put me to no more business until you have some
that may exchange me, as you love my life.

Farewell, RICHARD CRAKANTHROP.

THirdly, Beloved counsel by some is respected, as the Counselor stands in
their esteem, of others, as the Council is without respect of the person, the
latter of these have good success wi^^ the former perish; I showed several
reasons of consequence, that these Counties should not have been neglected, and
what such neg^ect might bring forth, was (I may not condemn the wisdoms of
States) yet I will say, (...) me it is very strange, that the Scots should
invade by the East, and leave themselves open by the West to their enemies,
whom I suppose they expected were asleep, but ^^^h advantages were able to
awake the drowfiest spirits. I am now to relate unto you, that the Earl of
Niddisdaile will invade Scotland by this way, who is now coming with five more
Earls and Lords with him, and diverse troops of horse and foot rai^ed of part
of the Kings, and part of the Earl of New Castle Forces into this Country, and
here to raise men, and so presently for Scotland, two thousand were sent hence
to New Castle, two thousand will be the least for Scotland, they expect many
Scots to as^^. The Scots will have a sufficient trial of their enforced
Covenanters and inven^^d Presbyteries they so much glory, Mich. 7.13. Yet I
wish I could bring a spoonefull of water to quench this flame, I writ a letter
to you when your Mother sent you the 48 shillings, in my letter was enclosed a
ten shilling piece of gold for you, this makes me suspect you are not well
dealt with, neither I and the State may suffer by the loss of it.

As I then writ the situation of these Counties, is so advantageous that it may
either help a standing Army, or relieve distressed forces, the Sea by the West
flanking it, no place of landing but Workington and Whithaven, two forts there
made, but irregular one would be sufficient to keep the Havens being manned
with a few soldiers, against any sh^ps that there can land, the South
mountains only toward any Enemy, one straight passage Stainmoore, which might
easily be kept against 1 000 with 500 soldiers, one small irregular fort being
there made* the other straight ways Grayrig house, Crook-daile house, and the
way between Furnessefel and Milholme they face toward Lancashire, so there is
no danger as the case now stands, but if danger were they are as easily
fortified as Staismoor, on the East, all mountenous, no passage until you come
to Naworth (which way the Earls now come) which were no great business to
defend, likewise now none but out of Scotland, of which (as the case now
stands) I for bear to speak, lo here a brave and strong Camp easily defended,
some way about 60 ^0 no way under 40, or least 30 miles broad, here no
starving, here may you both plough and sow, hither might any brethren forces
repair, and gather n^w strength, and stop the pursuing Enemy, no question if
the Enemy knew the advantage of this place might afford to routed forces at
would not be left at random as now it is, these Counties must either therefore
be taken in or let Scotland be sure to smart soundly by them: any ways these
Earls must either be met-with before they get into Scotland, or else it will
be dangerous, but if they get footing then forces must be spared from the Scots
Army, now at New Castle by Nawarth, to come and subdue these Counties, and so
either go on the back of the Earls, or at least no more aid go to them this
way, this done, then are the Earls enclosed behind and before, and shall
surely come to ruin, to help the Scots, Lancashire must be desired to set on
Kendall to divide the Counties and it will be found the Scots will have feeble
Adversaries in these parts, the Commons will be more ready to lay down their
arms then fight, had they any hope of their own peace.

I would have you with the Commissioners of Parliament, and make these things
known to Mr. Darley, remember me to Mr. Osmotherley, and though I know, him
not by face, yet yet I wish him peace, and that you would go together, it may
be God will find you a resting place, I could wish you in Northumberland, God
dispose of you best to his glory, your Mother takes all very very patiently,
grace and peace be with you and the Israel of God: let me hear of you, for
thereby am I much comforted: Farewell.

Rich. Crakanthrop.

This letter was sent some 20 days before the Earls invaded Scotland, and
took in Dumfreze.

FOurthly, Beloved, the Earl came this last night to Carlisle, their forces is
sai^ ^o be 5000. Mountrose is Lieut^^ant General under Prince Rupert, who i^
General against the Scots, I was a true Prophet to the Scots, that these
Counties would be as troublesome to them as New Castle to the parliament, here
are great forces raised to join with the Earls, they expect a grea^^ part^^
in Scotland, it is said 36 Lords are all of the band, the Presbyters and Synods
will God find work for, get from them, and let all good people make ha^^ a
way; my advise is to go to the Parliament Commissioners, the Lord direct you,
make have away, for the Earls it may be in on the Lords day, but within seven
days at ^u^^hest, acquaint the Scot^ therewith, but speak not of me, but to
the Parliament Commissioners, remember me to Mr. Osmotherley and M^nge ^^ther^,
I sent you twenty shillings, consider well my former letter, there was one
Thomas (...) [whom I sent unto, upon my other letter writing] he of zeal to
his Country left this side and came to bring them this news, whom they have
imprisoned, see how erroneous human judgment is, I witness the man's zeal to
his country made him hazard his life, which he had lost, if be had been taken
here; I was acquainted with his purpose, and this witness is true* Farewell.

Richard Crakanthrop
Carlisle Jail
This letter was written the sixth day of the week, and I received it on the
Lords day after, early in the morming, and the day following the Earls came
into Scotland and took Dumfreze.

John Musgrave

Extracts of several Letters sent to me before and since I was Committed.
FIrst, Beloved; the affairs of these counties stands for the most part as
they did, our Counties should have besieged Carlisle, and the Scots have gone
away, and have lain at Penreth twelve days, but the Scots would not remove,
Brigs is a forward man to have the Scots go away, himself would be Commander
in Chief before Carlisle; the County is more and more Malignant, would gladly
have gone to Carlisle, but not for any good, for they profess against the
Scots, say for the Parlialiament, and are for the King, it will be a wonderful
work if ever the Country be-brought to affect the Parliament, even to fetch
water from the well of Bethlem, no thing is done for the general good, every
man's private is so looked after, the souldiersly in free Quarter, yet we pay
taxes, I had al teer from Colonel Cholmeley, wherein he writes to me of the
unfaithfulness of Colonel Lawson, he was to raise a mount nearer to Carlisle
then therest, Lawsons horse and foot was to attend the work, when the town
sallied out slwe diverse of Colonel Chalmeleys men, hut and took many, and
Lawsons men never offered shot, and upon examination it was found they had not
powder.

Richard Crakanthrop
26. 5. Mon. 1645.
SEcondly, Beloved, if the smalnesse of our forces be but considered, I think
there has been no greater oppression used in any place then in this Country,
Murders, Rapes and robb^ries is common there, is not any respect had by our
Commanders whether he be well affected to the Parliament or no, he shall have no
favor for that, nay if it be thought that he is zealous for the Parliament,
then shall he be hated, it is so well known my affection that I dare not come
at Apleby, but am afraid to be Imprisoned, and Colonel Brigs has threatened
it, yet are Delinquents protected, Sir John Lowther is Inlawed, the
Commissioner Mr. Barwis, and it is said Sir William Ermyne has been feasting
at Low there, and presently Sir John Low there appears from his Ambush, upon the
going of the Commissioners out of the Country Mr. Barwis and Sir John was with
the Colonel, and some of the Committee after they are gone, Sir John is sent
for by a party of horse, and had to Apleby, the next day set at liberty, and
has since collected his tithes and rents, yet has he sent his Some beyond
Sea; nothing is done about Sequestrations unless it be small things to put it
in some men's purses, of all the noted Delinquents Dudley only is a prisoner,
committed by Colonel Cholmeley; the Commissioners before their coming for
London, had received your Articles, since when the Committee of* Westmerland
have sent out their Orders, that if any have any cause of complaint against any
officer, he shall be heard, yet before no man could have any redress, neither
I think will yet have, Mr. Dalston is at his own house, and now the
Delinquents are in their former state. An information was showed me against
Richardson the Vicar of Brugh, and it did accuse him to have in his prayer
before his Sermon, praid to make the rebellious Scots like Oreb, and Zeeb like,
Zeba and Solmunva, and that God would send deliverance by Prince Rupert or some
other man, which has been informed the Committees, and I think the
Commissioners, for the party went unto them, being neglected by the Committee;
but tho he be a great Delinquent, yet is he protected in person and estate,
these Counties are as Malignant as ever, the Officers seek nothing but the
ruin of all, the Kingdom will be utterly ruined, if they employ not men of
conscience, in their affairs. We hear of a new list of a Commander which is
much desired, for these by their spoil make the people believe the Parliament
intends no good to the Kingdom, but like the persons employed in their
service, look for their own ends; which thing seduce many, even all but such
as know the good intents of that house, let not the cause go back for money,
pains I know it wants none: Salute our friends, and Mr. Osmotherley; the God
of peace bless you in your business, to whose protection I commit you.

Your brother in the Lord Jesus. Richard Crakanthrop
Penreth, 22.7. Mon. 1645.
An extract of another letter to J. M.
BEloved, this new Commission is now in setting in this Country, it was told me
I was a Commissioner, but I think it was in derision; I wonder I hear not from
you concerning it, it being a business of so great importunance, and once
settled unalterable, if these men command, all is wrong, your being at London
was thought would have procured us favor in this Country, but it is supposed
you are waved, and we are the more despised; I could you I durst not come at
Apleby, nor will I at Pe^reth any more, if no lover of God have the Command
here, we shall be as much as ever in slavery, if it be possible, and the Lord
give a blessing, you must not fail to look to this, or else you and we cannot
expect here to live: It is said Mr. Barwis promised Colonel Brigs that he
should Common here, and Lawson in Cumberland, and be Governor of Carlisle, as
they themselves give out; confer with Mr. Rigby, and acquaint him that the
Militia here be in Delinquents hands.

Mr. Barwis showed the Articles to Colonel Brigs and our Committee, who
thereupon sent out their warrants, that if any had suffered by his troops, upon
Complaint they should have redress, but the Complaints are so great, that
neither his not the Committees estate^, are able to answer and give
satisfaction; Colonel Ch^^^eley told me, that one assured him, that he will
prove Colonel Brigs to be the cause of all the business against the Scots, and
William Airey told me Colonel Brigs gave a barrel both of powder and ball, to
Captain Brown [formerly a Lieutenant under the Kings command] for that
purpose; nothing is now spoken of Sequestring any, and how should it be
otherwise, for how can Delinquents Sequester Delinquents, ask our worthy
friend Mr. Rigby the question from me; let the Parliament expect no good from
such a Committee: We are all well, God have the honor; salute all our friends;
the God of peace prosper you, Farewell.

Your brother in Christ Richard Crakanthrop.
4. of the 8. Mon. 1645. little Strickland.
THirdly, Beloved, I received your ninth and tenth letter, and this is the
ninth of mine, I refuse to excuse my self seeing others have done it, I
perceive you have got a Commission for taking accounts of the Committees, but
notwithstanding my being in it, if some of more note be not joined with me, it
will avail little, so if my Lord Docre can be put in, and Mr. Bellingham of
Gathorne, he writ to you before, the Lord Dacres seeing the badnes of the
Committee, told them if the Devil were here he would find friends and
partakers, he gave me great countenance before the Committee, to their grief, I
shall be glad to join with such a one as the Lord Dacres, I much desire if it
be possible, to have a Commander in chief for both these Counties, it will
prove beneficial to the whole Kingdom; in Cumberland may the Irish land at
their pleasure, and are daily looked for; and so may the Dane come about the
Isles of Scotland, where our ships come not, no place stands more need,
Delinquents and mean men are put in high places, either of which enough to
ruin a Kingdom* Jervis Benson and Br^mthwait, the first made Colonel, yet
has but a house and no land, his Education no better then a Register,
[formerly under the Bishop of Chester] who yet executes that office, the other
you know and has little, a L. Colonel, but will be rich enough if this world
would hold, I sent you before an information against Lawson, but it perished
with my letter, and many more things of consequence, which I cannot keep in
mind, Farewell.

Richard Crakanthrop.
12.10. Mon 1645. little Srickland
An extract of a Letter from Master Crakanthrop to Master Osmotherley.
Sir
I do much admire that you are not long since wearied out, with this long and
tedious business: your friends, and I do much admire of your courage; the
truth is dwee are all grown faint, and I had rather that it were quite given
over, then be held with a continual expectation, you know and so Mr. Musgrave,
the strength of our friends who purpose only was to discharge themselves, in
making known their Countries sufferings, but if no cogniza^ce will be taken
thereof, yet do they hold themselves discharged, and not all ways held to
consume the little they have, with continual attendance, it may be you will
think I do not herein play the part of a comfortable friend, but do rather
weaken, then strengthen you, I must confess I did expect to have received some
better satisfaction, then the last Orders did give me, yet do I refer all to
your wisdom, and will always endeavor to apply my self to give you
satisfaction in your desires, and to submit my self, to your judgment; I have
not written to you this 14. days, we have had the Enemy to keep us so busy,
who came from New wark, with about 1500 horse under the command of the Lord
Dighy, and at Sherburne suffered some loss, and so marched for Cumberland by
Millam, upon whose approach Barronet Curwen, and Colonel Law son was together
at Isell, the Enemy came to Workinton, where they found the house provided of
all things for their entertainment, from whence they went for Scotland:

And abut Annon, Sir John Brown with some few horse, fell one them, taking the
nights opportunity, cut of diverse, and took diverse Prisoners Lawson called the
Country together, making a show to do something, but did nothing, only
withdrew his companies, which kept the water at Bownesse, whereupon the Enemy
retreated back, to Workington, but staid but a day, the Baronet came to
Penreth, but the Enemy was frustrate, and went to the I Will of man, the rest
disperced and fled, being rather smitten with terror from God, then cause of
such fear a party came over at Mooredovocke, yet none give notice to the
country before them, only I was told of that parties coming up Cunnerkeld, and
with as good a party as I could make of the night time, did make on to
Strickland head, and missing on them, we went for Rosgill where we heard some
of them were, but they had not there stayed, so we missed of them, yet are the
most of them taken, in some place one, some two, and some three, and many in
Lancashire, so they are utterlyrouted, and and overthrown, what ever their
design was, which some say for Scotland, to Mountrose but I rather think for
the landing of Irish, who missing of them, upon their first approach, made as
they had been for Scotland, but returned again, and so missing again, above
workington dispersed, some of Cumberland fled to them, John Scenehouse of
S^lkild, of Whitehall, and Sir Edward Musgrave but I think you will have the
relation from Sir John Brown, who did gallantly, who have given you
information enough, Mr. Bellingham does not yet send the Articles, and whe-^^er
he will or on I know not, he did send a petition with articles to York, to this
pur-pose, he has had letters from Sir Ralph Ashton, and Sir Thomas
Witherington, that if he would have a Solicitor, the time was, or not at all,
we supposed you would have seen to it.

The L. Wharton of late has put a great many of his, Tenants that had formerly
ben of the Committee, of this Committee for affocation, we thought to have
heard from you of this too, if a Co^mittee be obtained, I wish Mr. Allen
Bellingham were in it. I sent away your letters to your wife, who I hear is
well; she writ to you twice to my knowledge: desire Master Musgrave to look to
his own business: his Mother is well and the Children, but cannot get any
thing out of Vaux for her maintenance, desire him to see what he can do with
the Committee of Justice for her, and to advise us. The Lord Dacre is come to
London; desire Master Musgrave to return him thanks for his mother, and to
tender my service unto him: he will I hope acquaint you with the Cumberland
Committees Carriage; so Sir refering all to your serious consideration, I take
leave, and will always remain,

Yours in what I may, Richard Crakanthrop.
Little Strickland the 30. of the 10. month 1645. To my Much respected friend
John Osmotherly or to Mr. Musgrave in his absence.
Lieu. Col. Bellinghams Letter
THis is the Countries own petition for I transcribed it, and sent it them at
York; if you can make any use of it I pray you delay it not, for loss of time
is dangetous; thus leaving it to your consideration, I remain now as ever,

Your assured friend James Bellingham
The 2. November. 1645
For Mr. John Musgrave and Mr. Osmotherley.
FOr news, we hear Master Barwis has so prevailed with my Lord Gray, as he
has got a Commission, to Sir Wilfride Lawson, Master Briscoe, Master Lamplongh
Master Barwis, Master Tolson, and Master Curwen, as some of them report, to be
Lieutenants, Justices, and Committees of accounts for Cumberland, in whose
hands the monyes and goods remains, that is to be accounted for,

John Osmotherly
26. Janu. 1645.
BEloved, your mother is so oppressed by Mr. Vaux, through the help of
Nicholas Mawson, the Earl of Strafford never put an Arbitrary power more in
execution, then these Committees, they would needs have Townson your sisters
husband to be bound to the behavior for coming to your mother, and have given
their Order to Vaux that he shall not come their, nor lodge there, but yet not
him only, but the intent is that none shall be assistant to her, or do her
service, yet did Towenson Stoutly tell the Committee and Vaux, that he would
come to her when she desired him, and do her service, and stay as long she
would: I can say no more unto you; knowing your labor herein, for freeing us
of these Arbitrary governors that regard the Parliaments Orders, and theirowne
Commissioner no more, nay not so much as those that were Enemles to the
Parliament, their will is their Law and Order they go by, and now they think
they may do what they will, no complaint is heard against them, you know they
took eight and twenty beasts from me (bought in your presence) without a law,
but their own wills: Whereupon their Order came out, what power more Arbitrary?
Nicholas Mawson the great Adversary of your mothers, and one that does what he
will, is now coming to London, he is the great receiver of all the sums of
moneys both for the Scots and the Committees, and yet is he of the Committee of
Accounts, you say nothing of that business to me, whereof I wonder; I hope you
received our Petition by Henry Dalton, surely if the Grand Committee be
suffered to name such a Committee, who are all, unless two in either County
for mere fashion, the one John Thwaits of Apleby [one who never flood for the
Parliament, but for the Enemy] they are all accomptable, nay, they had the
setting, receiving, and disbursing of all moneys, and are the principal men
to be accomptable. You sent me a Petition to subscribe but you may easily
think that if the things be never so just, yet will none now subscribe from
our hands; you have brought us so far in disgrace with all who look upon the
outward face of things, and not at the right end.

Farewell Westmerland. Richard Crakanthrop.

Written about 4. 4. Mon. 1646. and received the twelfth of the same month:

John Musgrave.

A Letter from my Mother.
Dear son, the great distress I here suffer by the means of Master Vaux is
unsupportable, I cannot obtain from him any of the Quarterly ten pound which he
is to pay me, as you know, and there is now an hundred pound behind, for be
has paid me none since the Earl of New-castles Forces came into these parts,
pretending me to be (while they bare the sway) for the Parliament, and
therefore kept my Rent back, and since the County was subdued by the Scots, he
has got such favor of the Committee, that they would not afford me any thing
that I could get of him; I heartily desire and authorize you to present this my
Petition to the Parliament, who, I hope, will take it into consideration, and
grant some relief suitable to my estate and means which he has got by me [
being two hundred pound per Annum, he having then (though a Gentleman) no
estate at all.] So with my prayers to Almighty God to enable us to go through
the vale of misery to the glory of his Name, and comfort of his people, which
shall be the daily prayers of

Your distressed Mother Isabel Vaux.
Catteden, the fifteenth of April 1646.
To her son Jo. M.
The Copy of a Letter sent out of Westmerland, to a worthy aged Citizen of
London.
SIR:
THe great troubles that the poor people of God in the County of Cumberland are
in, and the knowledge that I perceive you have of the same by Master Musgrave
our brother, of whom, as I understand, so ne who otherwise faithful (but
herein misinformed, have complained unto you) I thought it my part to certify
you of the constant fidelity of our brother Musgrave, and of the hard condition
of the poor Church of God in Cumberland the cause of our great grief.

God who works as he will, when he will, and of whom he will, has in that
barren County of Religion, chosen unto himself a people, that to the glory of
his Name, are in Church fellowship, and I may say a more faithful people is
not to be found in this kingdom, none more desirous to know and practice the
truth, yet poor in wordly estate, and of mean degree, which does wide open
the mouth of adversaries, and make them more odious to the world, especially
the Committee.

Now they having a good affection to the Parliament, made complaint by articles
exhibited by their agents Mr. John Osmotherley and Mr. Musgrave of the
Committee, and others, of which we have got no expected answer, enough to
affright us and others from watching over our Counties and the public weals
good: but this we purchased, even envy, for which doing this poor Church of
God is so threatened ^^en to be rained: but he that planted, I hope will defend.

About the first of this month, the Committee and Colonel Lawson desired the
said people to give them a meeting, and they would bring some Ministers to give
them satisfaction as they pretended, but the truth was to entrap them, for they
brought a Priest one Linger who was come out of Ireland, and was reported to
them to be there of the Prelates faction, and a persecuter of the contrary
party, he mightily reviled the poor harmless people, who was not admitted to
dispute, but was examined, accused, and arraigned, and two of them committed by
Colonel Lawson and the Committee to close prison, the rest so threatened to
deter others, and to make them come to their assemblies.

The ground of their Mittimus was, that they should have said in private to a
friend, that this Linger had persecuted in Ireland as they had heard, yet
Linger himself fearing to have them committed, upon this, desired their
liberty, to whom Colonel Lawson answered that they were not committed for
that, but for public business; his meaning (as was plain) was their
petitioning the Parliament against him and his fellows.

The Committee sore examined them of their covenant, and other things about
their Church and order, and writ what they would, intending to send the same to
Mr. Barwis a member of the House of Commons, to inform the House against them:
It is to be feared, that they will certify much untruths against them, to make
them contemptible, and to procure some order, to restrain their meetings or
liberty.

Now I desire of you, that if you hear of any strange thing informed against
them, not to believe it, but rather to persuade the contrary, for no foraigne
nor strange thing do they maintain, but our own grounds, and that you labor
in their behalf, I humbly pray that things may be examined (before they be
condemned) surely, you shall do God good service, for many are looking to the
truth and assemble with them; and if trouble fall upon them, may be hindered in
their progress: this Church has increased to near forty persons, and forty
more separated, not yet admitted, and in that Coun^^y which makes the Committee
so to starme against them.

Sir, I perceive you have acquaineance with some people that think well of Mr.
Barwis, I pray you certify them hereof, and how much the Gospel is hindered by
his friends, and such as have employment by his means: Yet I must tell you the
men are again at liberty, how long we know not, for they are sore threatened,
and all or the most of them are Independants that did article and petition, I
doubt not but you will carry the business judiceously, for the glory of God,
and the peace of his people the thing above all things, I most desire, and
shall ever rest,

your brother in the Lord Jesus Richard Crakanthrop
Sir, I humbly thank you and your people, for your kindesse to our brother
Musgrave, and I desire of you to have a good esteem, what ever be said to the
contrary, for his fidellity will aloud preclaime it self to the world, to the
trouble no doubt of oppressors.


Westmerland, 27. 1. Month 1646.
The Copy of a letter sent by Master Isaac Autrobus, Minister of Egrement in
Cumberland, to Mr. William Ben Minister at Lambeth, upon the 27. of the first
month 1646.
Dear Sir
THe burden of the ministry (as you partly know, for I did discover my mind
unto you) lies heavy upon me, you see the Lord has revealed the unlawfulness
of our calling to the eye of the world, and now that we are upon chang^ing, it
were good that we should learn the right and infallible way to Zion; for then
the Lord has promised a blessing, and life for ever more. I would do as much
as the most of our Cumberland ministers, but I have in my eye that which they
want. I desire you to be a means to help me to acquire means for my
livelihood.

I have written to Master Buroughs for his help herein, and to your self, but
I fear all have miscarried. I was indebted before the times of trial, but
these have added to my load. Twice was I plu^dred by Sir Chri. Lowther and John
Senhouse, before the Parliaments forces came here, but the Lord Digby and his
forces swept all away. It cost me for the Parliame^ts service this last year a
hundred pounds, which I think cordially, well bestowed. I have complained to
our Committee for some relief, for the losses I suffered by the Enemy, but no
help from them: We have now in Cumberland very cruel times. The present
government here by our Majestrates, seems to be matter of policy, rather then
of justice, as one kinsman goes out of office on the Kings side, another comes
in for the Parliament, and so the match is made up again, the oppressors are
only changed, but the oppression continues; justice falls in the streets,
corruption prevails, those few that be real for the Parliament, are quite
discouraged, so that the Cavaliers carries it still, the honest religious men
about Broughton are beat and imprisoned etc. so that I fear our misery in
Cumberland is but beginning.

If the Parliament would do that for us which they have done in other
Counties, we might yet enjoy happiness, viz. send down Magistrates, that
have no kinted here, then its like there would not be so much partiality. You
may be a good instrument for your Country, if the Lord move your heart you
shall. Sir, I desire you to consider of these rude lines, and to lend me your
helping hand. You have done good to me and your Country. Go on and the Lord the
al-director prosper you with the tender of my thankfulness, and loving
affections to your self, I remain,

Yours in the surest bond, Isaac Autrobus
Egrement 27, of 1. Month 1646.
The Copy of a Letter written to one of the House of Commons.
Sir,
I am bold to be trouble some unto you, in acquainting you with the cause and
ground of my sufferings, which are largely set forth in my letters and
petitions published to the view of the world, what is mine I am ready to own.
Other things of the publishers or printers, I own not, yet as I do not
justify them in their doings, so I will not condemn them, for truth is still
truth, by whomsoever it is spoken.

The several charges, the Scottish papers with my reasons for not answering,
without deliberation and advice, are in the hands of Mr. Lisle, and the copy
of such other things as are in my hands. I have sent you. I am still ready to
answer such interrogatories as shall be propouded to me agreeable to Law; but I
cannot consent to betray the trust which my Country reposeth in me, neither
give way to prove my charge, I have already avowed with my partner, until the
parties accused have answered, yet if the same be referted over to the common
law (as I have proved in my letter to Sir Arther Haslerig it ought to be) I am
ready to prosecute and make good the same, or else to suffer profalso ^^more.

It is strange that I cannot have the parties accused brought to answer, nor
delivered up to the law, when as daily the Committee of Examinations commits,
and then puts them to answer in criminal causes, before any charge be brought
in against them, as I my self was committed and so brought before that
Committee: I desire to know the Houses pleasure, whether I may have the benefit
of the law, and be admitted to proceed in prosecuting my Countries cause; if
not, then I desire I may have my liberty, with satisfaction and reparation for
my losses, from Mr. Lisle for my imprisonment, which I have undergone upon his
untrue report.

What the state and condition our Country is in, you will better understand by
these papers here enclosed, and by this our Counties petition to the House,
which I desire you, to present or return to me again. The not redressing of
our Countries grievances, makes their adversaries insult over them, and they
are now under far more heavy pressures, then formerly they were, under the
Kings party, our neighbor Countries are very little better, as I am given to
understand, in Bishopric.

Sir George Vane a notorious delinquent, and a professed enemy to the state, is
now made high Sheriff by an Ordinance of Parliament, and so the posse
Comitatus, committed to a traitor to the great grief of the well affected
party there: Yorkshire is in no better condition, as appears also by their
petition* How those things answers the Parliaments under^akings, promises,
oaths, and protestations, I leave it to your selves to judge. The revolting
Welsh may be a caution to you, to commit such high commands and trust to any
that have formerly joined with the Enemy.

Sir, I pray you as you tender the good of the State, and such as fear God,
let these things be timely amended, and let these Achans and troublers of our
State, be brught forth and taken out of the way, and deliver us from our
oppressors, and as we have never been unfaithful to you, so you shall not
find us unthankful. My liberty is very dear unto me, yet little comfort
should I have in it, unless our Country be likewise freed from Tyrants and
oppressors.

I understand there is an Order for my freedom, upon bail. I desire either to
come forth a freeman and justified, or else I am willing still to continue
prisoner, till the House bring me forth unto trial: Only I desire that the
House would take some care for my provision and maintenance, and that I may not
be given up into the hands of spoylers, as I was of late, for two of the
Sergeants men of your House, under pretense of a warrant from the Committee of
examinations, to search my lodging for books entitled (Another word to the
wise) would have robbed and taken from me my history, and Law books, Bible
and writings, if (by Gods help) I had not by strong hand prevailed against the
Warden of the Fleet, refusing to join with them in any such wicked act, though
they imperiously commanded him to assist them, which he rather did, because he
saw me willing to give way to their search, even to my very shirt in obedience
to their warrant.

Sir I carnestly entreat you to take into your serious consideration, what
evil may ensue to the State, and what reproach and evil report it will bring
upon that Honorable House, in denying us justice, and suffering the Enemy thus
to insult over us, and how by thus slighting your friends, ye both strengthen
the hands of your adversaries, and weaken your selves. However, God will not be
mocked, who is righteous in all his ways, and will revenge the quarrel of his
Saints, to whom formalities and bare professions are always hateful without
real tie and sincerity, therefore, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, i^ there be
any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things, and then
doubtless God will prosper you, which is the earnest desire of him who is,

Yours in all due respects, John Musgrave
Fleet prison the 4th of the 3d Month 1646.
Another Letter to Sir Arthur Haslerig.
Sir,
I Hope by my former letter which I sent you, that you are satisfied of my
integrity and end, in applying my self to the Scottish Commissioners, for the
preferring my Countries cause to the House of Commons: And for after time I
desire you not to be so credulous, and forward as to condemn, or mis report
any, espcially such who have so dearly undergone and approved themselves by so
many hazards for the public as I have done, and shall be ready upon all
occasions, when the same shall conduce to the good of the Commonwealth.

Upon the bare report, or suggestion, or rather Clandestine recrimination of
the adversary. It troubles me not a little, after so many perils and sufferings
undergone, that not only I here, but likewise your faithful friends in the
Country are cast into prison for no other fault wherewith they can be charged,
but for their good affection and readiness to do you service, whilst the
common Enemies and Traitors to the State, are set and do rule over us,
contrary to all Law and justice, I expect from you as you are entrusted for the
public, and so consequenly engaged to preserve the right of every freeman of
this Kingdom, chiefly such as have suffered with and for you, that without any
further begging or puttings of that forth with you, present my petition to the
House of Commons which I formerly sent you; that it be your care not to suffer
me any longer to languish in prison, nor the Militia with us, nor any other
commands and offices be any longer continued in the hands of Traitors and
Delinquents, against whom we have already petitioned and articled; and that
they be such, is well known to some of your members and officers of the House
of Commons: that just ce may no longer be denied us, being the expected fruit
of all our troubles, and other engagements, and for which and no other end you
sit there, and we have foughten, otherwise if you fail us herein, we have
just cause to complain of you, and you will discover your selves to be such as
have set up and make your selves great, by the casting down and ruining them
who have chosen you, and have adventured their lives and forsaken all for your
sakes, which if you do, it will prove in you the height of ingratitude; but I
hope better things from you, and could wish that I may have no cause hereafter
further to doubt of your reallity and faithfulness, in the due performance of
your great Oath whereby you have bound your self to preserve and uphold the
just liberties of the subject, which are daily so much encroached upon, and to
assist us to your utmost endeavors to bring to condign punishment, the enemies
and Traitors to our Country, and in so doing I shall subscribe my self.

Yours as I am the Commonwealths Servant, JOHN MVSGRAVE
From Fleet prison the first month of my Captivity for my Countries cause and
freedom.
Sir,
WE of the Church at Broughton in Cumberland are all well at present though in
a mavelous suffering condition from our adversaries, the Lord has been and
is pleased to add unto his Church daily: We need not to desire your
assistance for our liberty, for we are confident of your unwearied endeavors
therein. We are glad to hear of your courage for your Country; you have our
Prayers for the effecting of what the Lord has determined for us, and we
believe that the Lord Christ who has begun this good work in you will perfect
it; and bring down the enemies of his truth; we desire you to go on, be not
discouraged strengthen your self and then prosper: with the remembrance of our
loves we remain your loving brethren.

Mungo Rothero. John Bowman. John Robinson.
In the behalf of the Church at Broughton.
The 21. day 4. Mon. 1646.
Worthy Kind Coz. Rigby,
I Humbly thank you for your favor and good will in my business, showed to my
Sister, whom I (not being able my self) got to go to seek relief for me in
the high Court of Parliament; having been my self (and my Father, in whom I
also sufferextreamly and seldom the like heard of) oppressed by one of their
entrusted Servants, being as I think made by the Parliament a Deputy Lieutenant
of our Country a Commit man Lieutenant Colonel in effect Colonel, all which
(I take it) Mr. Holcraft professed himself to be, and made use of these powers,
to the ruin of my Father, my self, and his family, as far as in him lay, I
am not acquainted with the Laws of the Kingdom in that point, but I am sure
by the Law of God he ought to suffer death, for violently with the Parliaments
Troops under him stealing and carrying a way my Nephew, my Fathers apparent
Heir, to my Nephews, extreme grief and terrer, and all ours, for my felfe, I
have often heard of Magna Charta for which (and Religion) I have freely ventred
all I have, so that when we sent in the beginning of these times, all the
little plate we had, I durst not in conscience keep back so much as the handle
of my Fan, and ever since we have to the utmost of our power showed our
loves and service to the Parliament, and knowing and feeling the state of the
kingdom, do not now or at any time petition for payments or rewards, but
being freeborn subjects, I humbly petition for the benefit of that great
Charter, and of the good Acts made by this honorable Parliament, especially
that of the eigth of this Kings Reign, as I hear intuled an Act for the
taking away of the Star Chamber, where they say no freeborn may be put out of
their franchize or freehold, except they be fore-judged by the course of Law,
which I never was, and they that shall so do, shall forfiet 500 pounds to the
party greived.

All the Law I ever heard of from Master Holcraft, was by his Captain Jeffery
Holcraft and his troopers being the Parliaments forces, to show their pistols
and weapons to my Tenants, telling them that that was their Commission, whereby
they would force the payment of my rents to them, which they did, and so
clearly has put me out of my Franchize and my free-holds.

I am not able to go to law with Master Holcraft, but humbly beseeches this
High Court of Parliament, to do me justice upon their wicked servants, and
according to their Act, they will be pleased to Order Master Holcrfat to pay me
500 pounds: In all which I desire you to be my just and favorable friend.

I have one suite more unto you, that is, I humbly beseech you as you love our
Lord Jesus Christ, and know we shall all appear before him, be a friend to
Master John Musgrave now a prisoner (as I hear) and if he has done no
wickedness against the known laws of the Land. Be a means that the servants
of Christ may not in these times languish in prisons: pity the just causes of
his poor servants, praying God to sanctify and strengthen you, and that great
House whereof you are a member, to his glory the comfort of his poote people,
and your, and their exerlasting fame and praise I shall be,

Your loving Cozen to serve you Eliz. Worsley
York 1. Jan. 1645.
For my respected loving Cousin Alexander Rigby Esquire, member of the High
Court of Parliament this present.
To the right Worshipful Committee for King and Parliament, in the County of
Cumberland. The Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of the Lordship of Milham.
Humbly Shows,
THat whereas the said Inhabitants have in all things expressed their
willingness, in obeying and observing all Ordinances of Parliament, and Orders
from the right Worshipful Committee, and commands of all others in Authority.
Are now by the great and manifold pressures, taxes, lone-monies, free quarters
(not nominating many other grievances) so impoverished that they are
constrained to present some of their particular grievances unto this right
worshipful Committee, and to declare in part what vast charges the said
Inhabitants have been put to: viz. paid in assessements to Colonel Lawson and
his Officers, 1300. pounds, and to maintain the siedge against Milham Castle
100 pounds. In lone moneies to the said Col. 128 pounds, besides all their
taxes to the Scots, and the free quarter, and other losses, which may parralell
if not exceed the total of all the rest.

The Inhabitants have pald 200 pounds and above, for the maintenance of the
Garrison of Milham Castle. Likewise, the said Inhabitants further show, that
whereas they received a warrant for the levying of 45 pounds (which your poor
petitioners could not with that expedition) for the want of the same but one
night and a day, your petitioners were enforced to double the said sum of 45
pounds, and 10 pounds more.

And whereas some of the Inhabitants did also petition unto this Worshipful
Committee (at Penreth) that the abatement of 30 pounds, out of 80 pounds then
demanded, which the Commissioners granted, and the Colonel in their presence
consented unto, nevertheless, your petitioners were constrained to pay the
total. And although they have been put to all this charges, yet the said
Lordship being charged with 90. soldiers, horse and foot, for the service of
Carlisle; Yet the said Soldiers got little or no pay at all.

Moreover Liutenant Radeliffe did send out a warrant the seventeenth of this
instant July under his own hand, to cause the Assessors and Constables come
before him at Boutle, and there showed a warrant from his Colonel for the
levying of 299 pounds, 5 shillings 9 pence, by what surther order, or for what
use, your poor petitioners know not. And the said Radeliffe, quartred his
troopers upon the Assessors till they have taxed the same.

May it please therefore this worshipful committee, to take into your grave
consid^ation, the just complaints of these your oppressed petitioners, and that
you would vouchsafe to grant, that your petitioners may have redress for th^ar
lone moncies, and that the, 55 pounds doubled for a days deferring, may be
repayed, and also that the soldiers may have so much pay as they have served
for (and by us paid, but not by them recreved) and that the 30 pounds
consented unto, to be allowed out of the 80. pounds, may be restored; and also
that the sums, now by Radeliffe demanded may be cleared, and the said
Radeliffe and his soldiers may be called out of the said Lordship, And your
petitoners according to equity rectifyed they not being ableo therwise to
subsist, but must delinquish the Total.

And Your petitioners (as in duty bound) shall ever pray
This petition was delivered to Cumberland Committee, that we not reliyed any
ways thereupon.

The Postscript written by a well wisher to all those whom God has endued
with a public spirit (consisting of fidelity, magnanimity, ability, and
constancy) to stand either for Spiritual or Temporal freedoms, or to suffer
for the first or second Table of Gods Law, against all the oppositions,
temptations, and insinuations of the mighty, innumerous, strong, and deceitful
enemies of these sinful, sad, and dangerous days.
IF thou be judicious and impartial, who have read the variety of matters in
this little volume, and in two former of the same Author, namely, A Word, and
another Word to the wise, I doubt not but as the wise man did reduce all the
works and vanities which he had seen and observed under the Sun, to this
period or total sum, even to fear God and keep his Commandments, these
being the whole duties of man, so thou have (or mights have) observed, the good
and evil p ractices of men, in their several inclinations and dispositions,
which according to the two ways whereinto they enter, after they pass the
gate of death, may be reduced to two sorts.

For though God in all his outward mercies be alike good and gracious to all,
equally and indifferently, yet we see by daily experience that the Sun
shining, and the rain falling on diverse objects or subjects, make diversity of
effects, the one mollifying the wax, and hardening the clay, and the other,
though it be very acceptable manured ground, and thereby the ground made more
excellent and fruitful, yet it is always rejected of stones and had channel,
so that they still remain barren and fruitless.

The one sort of men may be justly called godly, true, and honest, in that they
endeavor in their speeches and actions, to follow the paths of worthy Patrons
and public spirited men upon divine record, as Moses, Paul and Mordecay, who
did not regard themselves so much, for their private affairs, as the public
and general good of their nation and Country: And the other sort deserve no
better title then to be called ungodly, false, and deceitful like Haman, Doeg,
and Achitophel, who partly for vain glory, and to obtain their own private
ends, base selfe-seeking, and sinister respects, care not though the whole
world should be drowned again, provided that they can but securely and timely
build a strong and mighty Ark of their own wealth, pre-eminence, case, and
pleasure, to carry them as aloft almost as now they are in their Charoches sit
in their co^sultations, and preserve themselves alone with those that are
nearest and dearest unto them, from the violence of the tempestuous winds, and
turbulent waves of these ocean troubles without taking in any other whether
male or female with them (according to Gods Ordinance and Noah^ practice) to
keep so much as seed of any other alive: if ever these troubled waters should
clear, and these boystrous winds cease and be calm, so malicious are they,
and so void of love to God, or those that bear his image, and that chiefly by
standing in the gap, and defending of justice, peace and truth, against the
strong and several streams of iniquity, and mystery of iniquity, works
abundantly in these dangerous and deceitful times, where in the very Elect
would be deceived, if it were possible, all which, because a few words are
sufficient to the wise, I leave both the application and explication to thine
own construction and discretion, and for thy further satisfaction, I add here
the Preamble of a late little book called Englands Birthright, and conclude
with some passages from the words of truth.

Read Eccles. 5.6. and 16.7. and Prove. 11.4. Lev. 28. and Mieah 3.

The Copy of a Letter written to Sir Thomas Witherington, one of the Burgesses
for Barwicke, fit to be taken into consideration.
SIR,
I Expected ere this to have heard of your report to have been made to the
House, upon the vote passed for Mr. Cracanthrop and my self, for the great
losses that we have sustained by the Enemy, the Justices of the peace, and Com.
of Array in Cumberland and Westmerland; I here attended the last winter, 13.
weeks before I could get the Petition presented to the House, six months upon
the Committee I waited before I could get any vote passed upon the Petition,
since the vote of the Committee was made, which you are to report unto the
House, it is now nigh four months; yet nothing done, which makes me much
fear that little good is intended us, and that we shall be made more miserable
in seek^ng the recovery of what we have lost, then in losing the same, undergo
more hardship, and be brought to greater straites by waiting on you, then by
lying in the Enem^es prisons for you. You know the deferring of Justice; inlaw
is holden for denial of Justice. The Parliament put to an oath to maintain the
lawful liberty of the Subject, the Enemy because I would not join with them in
the breach of it, and in betraying my Country, forced me into Exile and seized
on that little estate I had; now again upon the report of Mr. Lisle (after his
many deferrings and putting off, even to the hazard of the loss of our
Country, and if Sir John Brown (as is well known) with h s Scot sh forces
(upon Cumberland forces deserting him) by his valor had not prevented it, the
Enemy by some of our seeming friends who joined with them, had without any
great diffi^ulty, no opposition being made by Co^. Lawson, effected their
designs in that Country.) Of my pretended refusal to answer, which I did not,
but only desired the Interrogatories to advise of, before I answered for matter
of Law, which contrary to Law he refused to grant me, though earnestly
desired, all which may fully appeace by my answer and reasons given for not
answering then to the Interrogatories before the Committee (and taken in
writing by Mr. Lisle himself, before the same Committee and some other members
of the House, and which was then read unto me) am I again cast into prison, and
condemned thereunto unheard, and my greatest fault (if any be) in this case, is
my lawful maintenance of our common freedoms, and my doubting, and desire to
be resolved before I should act that, which seemed to me then, and now I know
to be not agreeable to Law; and here I lie in prison for this, while Traitors
and the grand Enemies to the State, are by this means suffered to walk London
streets, even they of whom I complain; for which I cannot but blame Mr. Lisle,
being thus injured by him, and my Country almost undone, for as Sir Edward
Cook well observes, it is the greatest Injustice, when the Innocent is
oppressed under color of Justice; whereby we ought to be protected: I am
persuaded that if that Honorable House by whom I was committed were truly
acquainted with my suffering condition, and knew the ground thereof, they would
not suffer me to lie in prison one day longer; and if they rightly understood
the unsettled state of our Country, and what harm the neglect thereof has been
to both Kingdoms (this and Scotland) and what advantage to the Enemy, and also
what further evil may ens e thereupon; I believe we had not been so sl ghted
as we have been, neither our Countrymen had had such just cause to have
complained of delay and neglect, as they by their letters to me sent, daily
due, neither had the adversary I suppose, been so borne out.

As long as honest men are thus slighted, neglected, and kept under, their just
complaints thus delayed and suppressed, while Traitors, Papists, and
Delinquents be thus countenanced and protected, as those of whom we complain
have been and still are; while the greatest places of trust and command are
conferred on, and continued in the hands of Traitors, and the grand enemies of
the State, as has been, and now is w th us, and still they are kept up in
their authorities; while the Parliaments and the Kingdoms faithful friends and
servants are thus molested, oppressed, and shut up in prisons for their good
affection, forwardness, and willingness to serve the State and their
Country: How can we expect the restoration of our ancient and long lost
Liberties? How can we look for an end of these our troubles? While things are
thus carried on, l^ttle peace can be hoped for to this poor and distressed
Kingdom. Let us no more cherish the Serpent in our bosom, which having got
strength will again vvound us, if not destroy us: I could vvish that these
troublers and enemies of our State, against whom only I inform, and with
whom I only contend, may no longer be suffered to escape, but may be brought
to condign pun shment-according to the Law, and merit of their offenses, lest
by others faults the Parliament should suffer in their credit, lest that it
should be thought the Parliament were offended with as for seek^ng justice,
and pressing forward our Countries just complaints and grievances, lest it
should be thought the Parliament should seem to justify (or connive) at these
their lawless practices and oppressions (wh ch we are ready in a legal way
to make good according to our charge) by forbearance and sufferance of them:
For it is a maxim in Law, Qui non prohibit quod prohibere potest, assentire
videtur; [He that suffers and hinders not that which he may let, is
conceived and said in Law to assent.] Let no such blot lie upon that Honorable
House; let not the potency of our adversaries overthrow the justness of our
cause, neglect us no more, lest (besides the blame and outcries for justice)
you bring ruin upon us and your selves, by leaving us open to the Irish,
which may the sooner invite Ormond to invade us with his Popish and revolted
Forces, having such an easy entrance, if the same be not prevented.

As you tender the good and quiet of the State, timely provide for this, and
have respect to our poor Country; let all Delinquents, Traitors, and men
disaffected, all such as are tainted with covetousness, or cowardice, be
removed out of all authorities, and the same put in the hands of confiding men
fearing God, and hating covetousness, and all baseness, such as would not be
in the vvorst of times carried away, or corrupted through fear, or loss of
goods, or hope of preferment, to join with, or submit unto the Enemy, or act
in a n^vtrality, which is holden for detestable: Neglect of those parts may
prove of dangerous consequence; There, and not well elsewhere in the North,
may the Irish land at their pleasure; and daily are expected there, from thence
Digby by connivance of some of our English Commanders there (as is conceived)
had free and ready passage into the I Will of Man, and so for Ireland; from thence
the Earl of Antrim had like passage, and way into Ireland, with the Royal
Commissions for Cessation of Arms there, which produced such sad effects in
the Kingdom: Monnesse made his way for Scotland twice that way, to the great
loss of that Kingdom, he invaded Scotland and took Dumfrece, hence the Earl
of Newcastle had his first rise of his popish Army in the North, and daily
supplies of men and moneys, till the reducement thereof by the Scottish Horse,
hence since the reducement the Enemy in Dublin and the I Will of M^n ^had Cole and
Victuals: Here the whole Gentry are Malignants, Delinquents, Papists, Popish,
or ^^se Temporizers; Here not ten of the Gentry in both these Counties, nay, I
dare say, not so many, have proved Cordial to the S ate, but have submitted
themselves, or acted to and with the Enemy; Here the Gentry have revolted since
the reducement thereof, more then once or twice. Here Will and Oppression,
reigns more then in any Country now subjected to the State, so long as the
powers and authorities resides in the hands of such Neutrals, Tempori^zrs
Selfe-seekers, Traitors and Delinquents, as now it is, the Enemy (though peace
for the present were concluded and settled) yet might upon new and after
discontents of a sudden, endanger the loss of the whole North, by the help of
that popish faction in those parts, who have got in their hands the chief
places of trust and command there, though you had no care nor regard of us, yet
for your own good, prevent this mischief, the which done may produce (though
little considered) the fruit which may prove to be a well grounded peace to
the whole Kingdom; Though neglect of us, could be no prejudice to the
public, which will be of no small concernment (as I have already shown) yet
the redress of our Countries grievances in common equity ought not to be so
lightly passed over, all which hitherto (but all in vain, for fourteen months
together) have been pressed on, but by one Committee or other still frustrated;
and in Justice you cannot deny us audience, and an equal trial either at the
Common Law, or in full Parliament, as in your wisdoms shall seem best for the
public, and our particular good, for that the Law is our common birthright;
which we may without offense (J hope) and do challenge and claim the benefit
thereof, and therefore we have no cause to doubt or be fearful in putting our
selves forth, considering how that general rule in Law, is still in force:
Quod curia regis non debet deficere conquerentibus in justitia adhibenda; That
the Kings Court should never be ta^^ing (to such as complain) in the doing of
Justice. And of Courts Jud^^iall, we acknowledge the Parliament Supreme, which
ever has been, and I hope still will be the great and faithful up-holder of
the Common Law, and of the rights and privileges of all the loyal and true
hearted Freeborn of the Kingdom; I pray you, good Sir, peruse these papers,
and Copies of Letters, the Originals I have all, except two, which Master
Blaxston has, to whom they were sent and delivered; withal, I would entreat
you to present this my Petition to the House of Commons, Mr. Speaker has seen
it, and says he will speak to it, I could not prosse him further, in respect
he had formerly presented one for me: which was referred to the former
Committee, but by Mr. L^ste (who is the Chaire-man) suppressed, and I could
never hear more of it the ground of this my Petition; I hope you will let me
understand what you will do here concerning the whole matter, by this bearer
Master Hobkins (the Warden of the Fleet) which has shown me kindness, in his
readiness to do me this favor, if by your means and the Justice of the House
I may obtain my liberty, and our Countries cause put in a way of trial
without further procrastination; I shall not be unthankful, but ever rest

Yours to serve and honor you, JOHN MUSGRAVE.
From Fleet Prison this 25. of the twelfth month, 1645.
Errata.
PAge, 1. line ^. for Northumberland, Read Westmerland p. 2. l. 13. for
Sequestrators. r. Sequestrations l. 24. for ^^tentright r. renantright. p 3 l.
10. for of, r. and r. 20. shillings. p. 12. l. 23. for brethrens, r. burdens.
p 14 l. 28. for 106. r. 10. shillings p. 16. l. 24. for lop r. Lordship p 18.
l. 2. for hankes r. thanks. l. 31 for warrer. and war p. 19. l. 1. for prime
r. privy. l. 22. for bluthwet r. Blaithwaite. p. 21. l. 23. for might r. must
p. 24. l 9. for mountains r. mountainous, l. 10. for 1000, r. 10000. l 11. for
house r. hause. l. 14. for slavesmore r. stainemore l. 19. for brethen r.
beaten. p. 34. l. 15. for against r. against them. p. 37. l. 45. for del^nquish
r. relinquish. p 38. l. 34. for caroches r. coaches. p. 39. l. 23. for put r.
put us.

To the Right Honorable the Commons in Parliament Assembled The humble
Petition of John Musgrave Gentleman, Prisoner in the Fleet.
Humbly shows,
THa^ your Petitioner was half a year imprisoned by the Justices of Peace,
and Commissioners of Array in Cumberland, for refusing to submit to their
usurped authority, was after driven into Exile, and all his means possessed by
them, until the reducement of Cumberland to the obedience of Parliament. Which
his sufferings, this Honorable House referred to the Northern Committee,
whereof Sir Thomas W^herington is Chairman. That your Petitioner was sent to
this Honorable House, by sundry of the well affected of Cumberland and
Westmoreland, with a Petition and Articles against Sir Wilfrid Lawson end
others of the Commanders and Committees, being such as were Delinquents and so
declared Traitors, yet ^ut in Authority by Mr. Richard Barwis, contrary to his
oath and trust.

That your Petitioner is still ready to prosecute and make good the charge, if
he may have his liberty, he having been imprisoned now 10 months upon an untrue
report made to this Honorable House by Mr. L^^^e. That your Petitioner his
wife and children, by the cruelty and loss sustained by the enemy, were much
impoverished and wasted, and now by your Petitioners long imprisonment deprived
of all means of outward subsistence, and left in a petishing condition, so as
without his liberty and some just Reparations for his former losses, he is in
danger to s^ar^e and famish and he destroyed in your prison, and his wife and
poor children in the mean time exposed to all manner of misery. And all this
for no other cause, but for your Petitioners discovery and complaining of the
oppressions and treachery of yours and the Kingdoms enemies.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays, that Sir Thomas Withrington be
required to make the report, agreed on a year since by Vote of the Committee
for your Petitioners reparations, whereby provision may be made for your
Petitioner, livelihood. That this Honorable House would be pleased to take
into their consideration, the miserable and sad condition of your Petitioner,
his wife and 6. children, to gr^nt him his libe^ty, and not to suffer him any
longer to languish and be destroyed by your long imprisonment of him, which
both law and nature obhorreth, whilst the known and professed enemies of this
Kingdom, and distroyers of their country, are allowed to live at liberty and
enjoy their wealth, gotten by spoil and rapine, without any account making for
the wrongs done to your Petitioner, and others his suffering oppressed country
men.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray John Musgrave.
1. September 1646.
The PREAMBLE, To all the Freeborn people of England.
BRethren and Fellow-Commoners, God and the world knows, that the well affected
party or this Kingdom (discerned by their voluntary bid to the Parliament
shaving tried all possible and fair ^^ans, as much as any People for number
and power of any Kingdom or Nation ever did, by Prayers, Assistance,
Concur^ence* Attendance, Petitions, Oblations Informations, and Discoveries, as
well of Treasons as of utter desolations: and perceiving themselves now at last
to be in a fa^^ (...) condition, both in number and power (their Lives and
states, yea and precious time also being so far spent) (...) were at the first,
and like to loose all, and scarely to have (or leave) so much as their Lives,
Laws, or liberties for a prey.

And seeing, by manifold examples of grieveous exp^^rience, that neither
Petitions can be easily accepted, justice truly administered, the Presses
equally opened the cries of the poor heard, the tears of the oppressed
considered, the sighs of the Perisoners regarded, the miseries of the widow
and Fatherless pittyed nor scarcely any that are in distress relieved, but
Laws any way wrested, most of our freedoms restrained, Ordinances,
Protestations, Oaths, and Covenants slighted the hearts of all Estates, King,
Parliament, Priest and People ob^ured, the wicked for the m^st port absolved,
the just often times condemned, and most of all in Authority perju^ed, not
others to take, but nevertheless, by persecuting those who make Conscience to
(...) it, even because they will not break it. In deep sad, serious, and
lamentable con^^deration of all these grievous proceedings, and as much by
feeling the smart, as ^^ring, seeing or ^nowing the verety thereof chiefly the
Opressions, taxations Insurrections, Rebellions, Persecutions, Violences,
Robberies, Sequestrations, and Com^^stions, I with my poor one Talent, in
stead of him that has Ten, out of a duti^^ull and co^sciencious love tender
and p^tifull respect to my Nation, now in this her great defection, and
apparent desolation, chiefly for the remnant thereof (who mourn in secret both
for her great abominations, sins, desolations, and their own particular
transgressions, and who doubtless are marked to escape the fury of Gods
fearful indignation)

Have used my best endeavors h^re both to show the maladies and remedies of
this sick, swouning, bleeding, and dying Nation, that if God has not orda^ned
it, like Babell, to sudden, inevitable and utter destruction, it may yet be
cured, and a remnant reserved, according to the Lords usual dealing in all his
visitations, remembering his tender compassions and mercy, even in the midst of
his fearful judgments and severity, that in despite of Satan and all his
instruments, they may do ju^^^ce and judgment, and praise him in sincerity.

FINIS.

