A NOTABLE PLOT DISCOVERED IN A LETTER SENT By an AGENT here in LONDON, TO The
Earl of CLEVELAND at the HAGUE: SHOWING, How the said AGENT set the Committee
of Mincing-lane on work, to procure an Act to put out all the old Officers of
the Custom-house, by which means the Customs will be destroyed.

Printed (together with a List of the Names of the said Committee, and of the
Officers Cashiered, and to be Cashiered) for the Information of the Commons of
England; Especially such as hold any Offices in the Kingdom.

To the Right Honorable The Earl of CLEVELAND, at the Hague these present.
My Lord,
IN my last of the 15 of April, I gave your Lordship an Account how Affairs
then stood in the Custom House at London, and what I conceived would be the
Issue in relation to those many Particulars then signified unto your Lordship:
since which time, things have fallen according to our own hearts desire, the
Gentlemen at Westminster having turned out all the cunning Knaves or old
Officers at the Custom House for the Port of London, without so much as giving
them any Charge of their Delinquency: Their Names are, Sir John Jacobs, Sir
Thomas Dawes, Mr. Jo: Holloway, Mr. William Tonces, Richard Chambers Alderman,
Mr. Edgar, Mr. Henry Kersley, Mr. Edward Brewer, Mr. William Thornbury, Mr.
Ratcliff, Mr. Richard Lane, Mr. Wilmor, Mr. Edward Watkins, Robert Wakeman, Mr.
Leaver, Jo: Norwood, Jeford Baily, Mr. Ever, Mr. Edw: Pelling, Mr. Christopher
Rotheram, Mr. Cheatwood, Mr. Broden, Mr. John Blunke, Master John Davis, and
Mr. Adam Edwards: these are the chief men-chashired in the Port of the City of
London, besides many score more, whose Names at this present I cannot send unto
your Lordship, in regard I have not yet had time and opporuunity to procure
them, from my Friends the Committee in Mincing-lane, with whom I have the
felicity to hold a strict Correspondence; especially with Mr. Moyer, Mr. Shute,
and Mr. Penoyer, three prime Saints: into whose Acquaintance I have so scrued
my self, that at any time they will unbosome themselves, and entertain me with
as much confidence, as if I were a real Member of the godly Fraternity. But we
must use all Arts to bring things about underhand by sleight, since we are not
yet in a condition to act openly; and so I can effect the business wherein I
have the honor to be engaged, I shall make no scruple (as the Proverb says)
to light a Candle to the Devil, and Court his Creatures: For, I have so
cajoled these three Wittals in the Courses they have taken, that (I dare say)
they have (though much against their wills, God wot) done more for 102. than
all the Carpet-Knights of our Cavalry ever did with their Drinking of Healths.

But here (my Lord) before I proceed, be your Lordship pleased (with me) to
admire the wonderful Justice of God, in the sweet Justice done by the
Gentlemen of Westminster, toward these old Officers of the Custom House
before-named; who having (for their own private respects) made shipwreck of
their Loyalty, and imbarqued Themselves, their Lives, and Estates, in the
Service of their good Masters at Westminster, to the destruction of the King,
Nobility, and Gentry, receive no other reward but to be turned off (without any
Cause shown) like profane Delinquents, with their Wives and Children, to
share in the common Calamity: So that the good men at Westminster have dealt (I
may say) with these their good Servants, as the merciful Turk did with an
Italian whom he had in his power, promising him Life if he would renounce
Christianity and turn Mohammedan; which the Italian had no sooner done, but the
Turk immediately cut his Throat, reckoning it too small a Revenge to destroy
the Body, except he damned his Soul too: In like manner, the old Officers of
the Custom House having been drawn by the Suggestions of the two Houses from
that Allegiance they owed unto His Majesty, merely to preserve Themselves of
Office, have now lived to see themselves turned out of all: and so They may
even go to the Devil for a Reward, since They are like to fare no better from
those their merciful Masters.

Now (my Lord) that which tickles me most, is, to see how finely I have managed
the Interest I had with the Committee of Mincing-lane, in making Them the
Instruments to destroy the Customs of the City of London, and let many
Advantages slip by private Conveyances beyond sea to His Majesty: For,
wel-knowing that little could pass a Discovery as long as the old Foxes were
in office; therefore the principal work was so to order the matter that they
might be turned out to make room for new ones; which falling out as ones heart
would have wished, the Men of Westminster have put in a Company of their own
Creatures, a sort of cracked Citizens, and ignorant Rascals, Fellows that have
been frighted out of half a dozen Religions and Factions, that what with the
sharking of some, and the ignorance of others, the Customs will not amount to
half so much as they did formerly: And this I humbly entreat your Lordship to
assure 102. of, with my humblest Service to him, upon all Occasions.

One thing (my Lord) I had almost forgot, which Moyer himself told me; how that
now he had cried quittance with Watkins the Head-Searcher, for seizing on his
Lead at Graves end, by causing M. Walton of the House of Commons, and the
Committee of Mincing-lane to report his Place to be unnecessary. Po^ take them,
that they did not make this Report a year ago; For, then J. P. had received
the two hundred pounds which that Fox Watkins seized on: But he being taken out
of the way, we shall deal well enough with the new Novices, and send over G.
freely to supply our Friends; For, no man but Watkins (with his Birdseyes) can
pry so narrowly, or know how to make a stop of transporting Money. Sometimes I
have cracked a Cup with him to sooth him in his way; and when he is once in, he
says, he finds Gold in Moore-Fields, and Silver at the Custom house: And
though then the Fatling looks like the God of good Company, as if he minded
little else, yet sure I am he is a subtle Youth and has notable intelligence,
as if (like our new Saints) he drove a Trade in Vision and Revelation, and
tumbles like a Firkin in every corner: In earnest, I know him to be a very
crafty Fellow in his Place; and I think it none of my least Services to 102.
in breaking the neck of his Employment; which I effected by the means of
Master Walton, Master Moyer, and the Committee of Mincing-lane: I have likewise
by setting Friends of mine upon Master Wilson of the Council of State, made
him very active against Watkins that he may never come to play again: And this
Master Wilson may be the rather induced to, in regard himself and the Guinny
Company are resolved to transport all their Gold which lately came home from
Holland, and it amounts to about 30000 l. which I request your Lordship to
signify to 102.

And that your Lordship may know who they are of the Committee in Mincing-lene,
with whom I correspond, I shall give you their Names; and by the way I must
tell you, I manage my Correspondence with each of them so warily, that not one
of them knows I deal at all with the other: they are the two Thompsons,
Master Shute, Master Russell, the two Penoyers M. Hutchinson, Master Moyer, and
Master Bartlet; a refined Generation that count Gain great Godliness, and
therefore lie at catch to advance Themselves and their Creatures upon the
ruins of others, and put any Tricks (for their Profit) upon the Account of the
Public: And though they have all had a hand in undoing the old Officers; yet
it is sport to see, how they disclaim the business one after another, when
any of those Officers come to entreat their Favor; which they grant them only
in fair words, confessing it is a sad business, and they are sorry, whenas
their Designs are to keep them out of their Offices for ever, and expose their
Wives and Children to Beggary; which makes the poor cashired Starvelings
consider now, that it is an ill way to gain a Livelihood by forfeiting their
Loyalty: And it may convince the world of this Truth, that it is (and ever has
been) usual with all Master-Rebels and Usurpers, when they have once gotten
their ends, first to rid their hands of those who have been most serviceable to
them in their Usurpation, and level those very Steps and Stairs by which they
ascended to their height of Greatness.

Therefore as they have given a Purge to all the old Officers at the
Custom House of London, I assure your Lordship the Men of Westminster intend
likewise to proceed in the same Method to the cashiring all the Officers of the
Out-Ports, it being designed already that they shall follow the Fate of their
Brethren; And here I shall set down a List of their Names, as they were
delivered to me by one of my Friends in the Mincing Committee, Edward Nuttall,
and Edward Man, of Ipswich. John Burgis, Henry Shield, Barwick. Tho. Welby,
George Sten, Boston. William Bond, Hugh Nuttlebury, Bridgwater. Luke Hodges,
Thomas Shewell, Will: Hill, Hugh Lewis, Bristol. Hugh Lindsey, Will: Edwards,
Chester. Edward Herbert, Jo: Bird, Cardiff. Jo: Row, Mr. Cockeram, Chichester.
Vincent de-la-bare, Richard Davis Bomkeeper. Dover. Richard Sanders, Walter
Dibble, Exon. Robert Hill, Sam: Bruston, Gloucester. Matthew Aldred, Rob:
Morton, Tho: Somerscall, Hull. Henry Creamer, Tho: Tole, Lyn. John Bowen,
Nicholas Squire, Milford. George Fenwicke, George Blakiston, Newcastle. Nich:
Opie, Henry Hatsell, Plymouth. Henry Champant, Tho: Tulfsis, Matthew Lock,
Southampton. Robert Fowler, Rochester. George Plea, Thomas Walton, Weymouth.
Will: Greenwood, Will: Barret, Yarmouth. John Robinson, Graves-end: who are all
designed to lose their Places, as the Officers of the Custom House have done
at London; And many of them are so poor, (their Livelihood depending on their
Places) that their Families must go a begging; yet they shall be put out
without any cause shown, save only the will of the Gentlemen of the Committee
of Mincing-lane; whereby they will be made as sad Examples of disloyalty as
their Brethren of the Custom House at London.

I beseech your Lordship fail not to let 102. see this Account, which I hope
to bring to such an Issue as may conduce much to his Service: For, when all the
old Officers of the Ports are once cashired, the new Ignoramuses will
contribute to our advantage beyond imagination, as well as the Ignorance and
Covetousness of the Brethren of the Mincing Committee has done at the
Custom House of London pretty well already: For, besides the benefit of privy
Transportation (which the new Owls will never epsy) half the Customs must
needs be lost through their want of discretion; which will no more displease the
Merchants, in having an opportunity to cosen that Thing called the State, than
it will me to see Things at the same pass in the Out-Ports, as they are now at
London: Concerning which, I shall labor and watch to give a farther Account
unto you,

London, May 2. 1649. Stylo loci. (My Lord) Your Lordships most humble, and
most faithful Servant, J. M.

FINIS.

