AN EXACT BOOK OF ENTRIES, Of the most Select JUDICIAL WRITS USED IN THE
COMMON LAW.

Translated from the Original Manuscript, which was Collected by the Hands of
that Eminent CLERK, ROBERT MOYLE Esquire. Late one of the Prothonotaries of the
Court of COMMON-BENCH.

A Work of much Industry, as may appear by the Authors great Pains in quoting
of Book-Cases, Opinions of Judges, number Rolls, and many other Requisites, for
the confirmation of every Entry, whereof none have been ever published before.

Printed now for the use and benefit of all, but aimed most especially for such
as are most conversant in the Common Law.

By J. H. Gent.

With a perfect Table in which may be found the Principal matters therein
contained.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Crofts at the Crown in Chancery Lane, under
Sergeants-Inne, 1658.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
KNOWLEDGE is a thing desirable for it self, because it does enrich the mind
of man, but then it calls for the most esteem when it is lodged with such as do
employ it for Public advantage. It has been the happiness of the Studients of
the Law in this later Age, to receive such aides from the ingenious
Communication of those who went before them; That the ancient Dust is not only
now wiped off from those old Records and Presidents, which lay secured in
Scriniis sacris, but the Rolls themselves transmitted by Copy into every man's
Study, and an access hereby provided to them easy and familiar. This present
Work is a great example both of the diligence and industry of the Author in
collecting the several select forms of Entries of Judicial Writs used in the
Common Law; Though the Work be Posthumous, yet it is so just a Translation of
the Original Manuscript; that if the Worthy Prothonotary were now surviving,
he would not be ashamed to own it: wherefore thou have no reason to be ashamed
to use it.

Farewell, J. H.

AN EXACT Book of the most select Judicial WRITS Used in the Common LAW.
Abatement.
HILL. 39. Eliz. Rot. 506. ss. Abatement pleaded to a Sci. fac. in debt against
an Admistrator, for that there were two Administrators, who administered, and
but one of them is named in the Sci. fac.
A Scire facias in Debt against an Administrator, upon a judgment against the
Intestate, the Administrator appears, and hereupon the same W. the
Administrator says, that the said S. ought not to have execution against him
for the debt and damages aforesaid, of the goods and chattells aforesaid;
because he says, that the said Intestate at E. in the County of N. within the
Arch-Deanry of N. dyed intestate, after whose death, and before the day of
purchasing of the said Writ of Scire facias, to wit, 5. February Anno etc. at
L. in the County of N. the Administration of the goods and chattells which were
of the said E. at the time of his death, etc. by C.L. Doctor of Laws, etc. was
committed to one M. Relict of the said T. and to the said W. Which said M. and
W. admin^stred all the goods and chattells which were of the said T. at the
time of his death, as Administrators of those goods and chattells, by virtue of
the Administration aforesaid, to wit at G. which said M. is yet surviving, and
in full life, to wit at G. aforesaid. And this he is ready to verify,
whereupon for that the same M. is not named in the said Writ of Scire facias,
the same W. prays Judgment of that Writ, etc.

Admission.
Admission to a fine after commitment to the Fleet upon a Cepi corpus returned
upon a Capias pro fine for the King, tam pro fine as for the execution at the
suit of the party.

Satisfaction given to the party.

Admitted for six shillings eight pence paid into the hands of one of the
Prothonotaries.

Audia elongat. returned in a retorn. habend the defendant appears and pleads
non cul. and afterward the plaintiff prays to be admitted to his fine, and
gives security, and the Justices ass^sse the fine.


T 12. H. 8. Rot. 159 Afterward to wit the fourth day of July Anno, etc. came
here into the Court the Defendant in his own person, by the Sheriffs of London,
by virtue of a Writ of the said Lord the King (De capias pro fine) of the said
Lord the King taken, and by occasion as well of the said Fine, as by occasion
of the execution of the Judgment aforesaid, at the prayer of the Plaintiff,
was committed to the prison of the Lord the King of the Fleet, says, that he
is ready here in Court to satisfy the Plaintiff of his damages aforesaid, and
brought the money here into the Court; which said money, the said Plaintiff here
in Court does receive of the same Defendant: Therefore the said Defendant be
quiet for the said Damages, and hereupon the same Defendant prays to be
admitted to a Fine with the Lord the King, to be made by occasion of the
premises, and he is admitted etc. for six shillings and eight pence, which the
said Defendant in the Court of the King here by the command of the Justices
here paid to John Jenour one of the Protho^otaries of the Court here, for
diverse reparations to be made here in Court, and the said Defendant go thereof
without day, etc.

P 4. H. 8. Rot. 159. ss. It was commanded the Sheriff, whereas T. I. in the
Court of the King here, had been summoned to answer T.R. of a plea, wherefore
he had taken the Cattle of the same R. C. and had unjustly detained them
against Sureties and Pledges, the same T. R. in the same Court of the King here
had made default, for which it was considered in the said Court of the King
here, that the said T. I. should go therefore without day, etc. And that the
said T.R. and his Pledges to prosecute should be in mercy, and that the said T.
I. should have return of the Cattle aforesaid, and the King commanded the
said Sheriff that without delay he return to the said T. I. the cattle
aforesaid, and should not redeliver them at the complaint of the said T.R.
without the Writ of the said Lord the King, which should make express mention
of the Judgment aforesaid. And in as much, etc. he should make known here at
this day, to wit, 15. Pas. And now here at this day comes the said T.R. in
his proper person, and the Sheriff now returns, that the cattle whereof
mention is made in the said Writ, are eloyned to places to him unknown, by the
said T. R. so that he could not have view of them, and therefore he could not
make return of the said Cattle to the said T.I. as to him it was commanded,
whereupon the said T.R. as to the eloynment of the Cattle aforesaid, says,
that he is in no wise thereof guilty: As to the contempt not guilty.
And of this he puts himself upon the Country, etc. But that costs, labor,
and expenses may be spared about the Issue of the Country in this behalf to be
tried, prays himself to be admitted to make a Fine with the said Lord by
occasion of the premises, etc. And hereupon the said T. R. found pledges in
Court here to the said Lord the King for that contempt, to wit, T. S. and R. C.
whereupon the Justices of the Lord the King here do assesse the Fine of the
said T. R. by occasion of the Premises ad propert sup. dict. Therefore the
said T.R. of that contempt be quiet, and go thereof without day, etc.

P. 3. Ca Reg. rot. 42. amongst the Pleas of lands: Brownlow: The admission of
the third Prothonotary unto his Office.
Be it remembered, That the seventh day of May, that same Term, Thomas
Richardson Knight, chief Justice of the Lord the King of the Common Bench, here
freely granted to R. M. Gent. one of the Clerks of Richard Brownlow Esquire,
chief Prothonotary of the Court of Common Bench aforesaid here, the Office of
the third Prothonotary of the Bench aforesaid here, now being void by the death
of Thomas Waller Esquire, late third Prothonotary of the same Court of the
Bench aforesaid here: And admitted the same Robert to that Office, to have hold
and enjoy to the same Robert for term of his life as his free Tenement,
according to the custom of the Court aforesaid, from the time whereof the
memory of man is not to the contrary, used and approved. And also the same
Robert as well the Oath of the Kings Supremacy according to the form of the
Statute in this case made and provided, as his corporal oath well and
faithfully to carry and behave himself in the same Office, before hand taken,
as the custom is into corporal possession of the same office put and
instituted, to hold, occupy, and enjoy the same in form as aforesaid, so fully
and wholly, and in the same manner and form, Vad.
as the same Thomas Waller late had and occupied the same office, perceiving in
the same office, Wages, Fees, Profits, Commodities and Emoluments to the same
office due and accustomed, etc.

T. 12. Ed. 4. Rot. 494 Copley, Midd. ss. The admission of the second
Prothonotary unto his Office.
Be it remembered that William Comberford lately having and occupying in the
Court of the King here, the Office of one of the Prothonotaries of this Court,
the same, to wit, the office which Thomas Brown during his lifetime in time
past, and immediately before the same Thomas Brown had exercised and occupied,
and which said office William Wakefeild during his life time, in time past, and
immediately before the same Thomas Brown had exercised and occupied the eleventh
day of June, that same term died, after whose death that office was vacant,
and continued so vacant until the fifteenth day of June then next following
which said fifteenth day John Fogge Knight, chief Clerk of the Lord the King,
and Keeper of the Rolls of the said Lord the King of this Court, to whom by
reason of that office, the Donation or Presentation of one of the
Prothonotaries of this Court is known of right to belong, Came here in Court in
his proper person, and gave to the Court here to understand that the said
office of one of the Prothonotaries by the death of the said William Comberford
was void, and gave and granted to Roger Brent, and constituted and ordained him
to have and occupy that Office: And the same Roger being in his proper person
to be admitted to the said office, was presented to Thomas Bryan chief Justice
of the Lord the King of this Court, to whom by reason of his office belongs
the admission of every person to the same office whenever it is void, by the
chief Clerk of the Lord the King, and keeper of the Rolls and Writs of the said
Lord the King of this Court for the time being present, requiring the same
chief Justice that he would admit the same Roger to the said office of one of
the Prothonotaries, and that he would think worthy to put in full possession of
the same. And hereupon the same chief Justice here in the premises, by mature
deliberation, and advisement: And as well to the ability as to the long and
tedious continuance, attendance, and exercise of the said Roger in this Court,
consideration, and respect being had, admitted the same Roger to that office,
and swore him well and faithfully to occupy and exercise the same office, and
put the same Roger into full possession of the same office, to have and
exercise the same to the said Roger for term of his life, as fully and
entirely, and in the same manner and form as the same William Wakefeild T. B.
and W. Comberford, or any of them, or any other, the said office before their
times had and occupied, receiving in the same Wages and Fees, Profits,
Commodities, and Emoluments to the same office due and accustomed.

Accedas ad cur. to remove a plaint cut of a Court Baron, etc. and a Procedendo
granted, for that the cause is sufficient to remove the plaint and the Common
Bench will not hold plea thereof. M. 13 and 44. Eliz. Rot. 2175. T 18 Iac. Rot.
1959 H. 9 Jac. Rot. 2008 and 1425.
Accedas ad Curiam.
T. 13. Eliz. Rot. 1276. ss. The Lady the Queen sent to the Sheriff of
Southampton, her Writ closed in these words. Elizabeth, etc. That taking with
you four discreet and lawful Knights of your County, In your proper person you
come to the Court of Gabriel White Esquire, in O. in full Court there, and
cause to be recorded the Plaint which is in the same Court without our Writ,
according to the custom of the same Court, between William Marquess of
Winchester, and the Lady Eliz. Warham Widow, of a certain Trespass to the said
Marquess by the same Eliz. done as is said, and bring that R^cord before our
Justices at West. in Cro. Trinitatis, under your Seal, and the Seals of four
lawful men of that Court, who shall be present to the same Record, and that
you prefix the same day to the parties, that they should be then there to
proceed in the same Plaint as shall be right, And have you there the names of
the same four lawful men, and this Writ, Witness our self at Westminster,
the eigth day of May, An. etc. 13. because the same Eliz. claims to hold the
Tenements wherein the Trespass aforesaid is supposed to be done by the Common
Law, Cause.
and not according to the custom of the Manor of O. for which that Plaint in
the same Court ought not further to be drawn, let execution be done upon that
Writ if the cause be true, and the same Eliz. shall desire this, or otherwise
not. By virtue of which said Writ G. Wells Esquire, Sheriff of the County
aforesaid, now here at the said Cro. Trinitatis returned, that he took with him
S. C. I. H. G. H. and I.H. four discreet and lawful Knights of his County, and
in his proper person came to the same Court of the said G.W. and in full Court
there, held the tenth day of May, An. etc. 13. abovesaid, and caused to be
recorded the Plaint aforesaid, which was in the same Court, without the Writ of
the said Lady the Queen, between the parties aforesaid, in the Plea aforesaid:
And has the Record before the Justices here at the said Cro. Trinitatis under
his Seal, and the Seals of I.F.I.P.I.P. and T. L. four lawful men of the same
Court, of those who were present at the same Record, And had prefixed the same
day to the parties aforesaid, that they should be here to proceed in the same
Plaint as shall be just. And now here at this day came as well the same
Marquess, by Rich. Lee his Attorney, as the same Eliz by W. Plomer her
Attorney, Judgment that the cause is insufficient to remove the cause, and a
writ of Procedendo is granted.
whereupon the cause aforesaid being seen in the Writ aforesaid recited; It
seemed to the Justices here, that cause to be insufficient in Law to remove the
Plaint aforesaid, out of the same Court of the said G.W. of his Manor
aforesaid: And that the Court of the Queen here ought not to take Cognizance of
the Plea therein, And that the Bailiffs of the said G.W. of his Manor
aforesaid in the same Court of the said G. ought to proceed in the Plaint
aforesaid: Therefore it is considered that the same Bailiffs, notwithstanding
the Writ aforesaid, in the Plaint aforesaid, according to the Law and Custom
of the Manor aforesaid, at the prosecution of the said Marquess proceed with
effect; and that they exhibit to the parties aforesaid full and speedy Justice
therein, according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, etc.

P. 11. Iac. Rot. 2215 ss. Entry of a writ of Accedas ad cur. to remove a
plaint out of an inferior Court, and a Procedendo awarded for that the damages
in the plaint are under 40 ^.
The Lord the King sent to the Sheriff of Lincoln, his Writ closed in these
words: James, by the Grace of God, etc. to the Sheriff of Lincoln greeting: We
command you, that taking with you four discreet and lawful Knights of your
County, In your proper person come to the Court of Edward Dymock Knight, of his
Soak or Manor of H. and in full Court there cause to be recorded the Plaint
which is in the same Court, without our Writ between I. etc. and W. in a
certain Trespass upon the case to the same I. by the same W. done as is said,
And have that Record before our Justices at Westminster. Mense pas. under your Seal,
and the Seals of four lawful men of the same Court, who shall be present at
that Record, and that you prefix the same day to the parties, that then they
should be there to proceed in the same Plaint as shall be just, and have you
the names, etc. Test, etc. because the same Defendant, for the favor which
the same Plaintiff has in the same Court, cannot have Justice there as it is
said: Let execution be done upon that Writ if the cause be true, and the same
Defendant shall desire it, or otherwise not. And now here at this day, to wit,
at the same Men's. pas. I. L. Knight, Sheriff of the County aforesaid returned,
that he by virtue of the Writ aforesaid, took with him I. D. R. R. I. D. and F.
Fenn, four discreet and lawful men of his County in his proper person, came to
the Court of Edward Dymock aforesaid, and in full Court there caused to be
recorded the Plaint whereof mention is made in the same Writ, And the Record
thereof has before the said Justices here at the same Men's. pas. under his
Seal, and the Seal of I. Heart, R.S.I.N. and W. Stoke, four lawful men of the
same Court who were present at that Record, and prefixed the same day to the
parties, that then they should be here to proceed in the Plaint aforesaid as
should be just. Horncastle cum Soca ss. At the Court of Pleas of Edward Dymock
Knight, Tenant or Farmer of the Reverend Father in Christ H. Bishop. etc. held
such a day and year, etc. T. complains against W. late of. etc. of a Plea of
Trespass upon the case; Pledges to prosecute Io.D.R.To. And now here at this
day came the same T. by R.O. his Attorney, Cause alleged for a Procedendo,
because the damages exceed not 40 s. and the Common Bench cannot take
cog^izance of the plea.
and given the Court here to understand and be informed that the Damages to the
said T. in that Plaint supposed to be sustained do not amount unto four
shillings: And for that cause prays a Writ of the Lord the King de
procedendo, in this behalf to be granted him. And because the same W. nor any
other on the behalf of the said W. came not, nor alleged any thing in Court
here to the contrary, for certain causes the Justices here specially moving and
chiefly for that the damages which the same T. supposed himself to have
sustained in the said Plaint, do not amount to forty shillings, in which case
it belongs not to the Court here to hold Plea thereof: It is considered that
the Stewards and Suitors of his Soak of the Manor aforesaid, may further
proceed in the Plaint aforesaid, between the parties aforesaid: Therefore it is
considered that the Steward and Suitors of the Soak of his Manor aforesaid,
that they further proceed in the Plaint aforesaid, according to the law and
custom of his Soak of the Manor aforesaid, the same Writ of the said Lord the
King, Procedendo aw^ ded, non obstante, etc.
before therein to the same Sheriff directed notwithstanding. And that they
exhibit full and speedy justice therein to the parties aforesaid, according to
the Law and custom of his Soak of the Manor aforesaid, should be to be done,
etc.

Allowance.
H. 3. I. Rot. 220. c. Brownlow; Entry of a Writ of allowance for one of the
Justices of the Common Bench by reason of his infirmity.
The Lord the King sent to his faithful and beloved George Kingesmill Knight,
one of the Justices of the said Lord the King of the Common Bench, his Letters
Pattents in these words; James, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, King Defender of the Faith: To the Treasurer, Chancellor,
Chamberlain, and Barons of our Exchequer, And also to our faithful and
beloved, George Kingesmill one of our Justices of the Common Bench greeting.
Know ye, that we, considering the debility of the body of the said George K.
broken with infirmities and old age, And also the tediousness and prolixity of
labor which attends the Office of one of the Justices of the Common Bench,
which he is wont to undergo, as in the Letters Patents, etc. And further of our
more abundant and special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, and for
the laudible service to us and our dear Sister the Lady Eliz. late Queen of
England: And also for all things to the republique heretofore in the
Administration of justice performed, for us, our heirs, and successors, we
give and grant to you the said George K. one Annuity or annual Rent of a
hundred pounds of lawful money of England, yearly, to you the said George
Kingesmill and your Assigns, for and during the natural life of you the said
George Kingesmill to be paid at the receipt of our Exchequer, our Heirs and
Successors, by the hands of our Treasurer and Chamberlain, and of our Heirs and
Successors for the time being, out of our Treasury, in the hands of our Heirs
or Successors, from time to time happening to be at the four Feasts, etc. by
equal portions yearly to be paid, during the natural life of you the said
George K. Wherefore we will, and by these Presents firmly enjoining, we command
as well to our T.C C. and Barons of our Exchequer, our Heirs and Successors for
the time being, as to all and singular other our Officers and Ministers, and
all our Heirs and Successors whatsoever for the time being, to whom it shall
belong in this behalf, that they and every of them upon the sole demonstration
of these our Letters Patents, or the Inrolement of them, without any Writ or
Warrant, from us, our Heirs, or Successors, to be prosecuted or obtained, the
said Annuity of a hundred pounds by the year to the said E. K. and his
Assigns, they should pay and deliver in form as abovesaid, or should cause to
be paid and delivered: And that these our Letters Pattents, or the Inrolement
of them shall be as well to the said Treasurer C ^ and Barons of our Exchequer
aforesaid, and of our Heirs and Assigns: As to all and singular other our
Officers and Ministers, our Heirs and Successors whatsoever, for the time
being, to whom in this behalf it shall belong, a sufficient Warrant in this
behalf, for that no express mention of the true yearly value, or of the
certainty of the Premises, or of any of them, or of any other Gift or Grants
by us or any of our Progenitors to the said George Kingesmell before these
times made, in these Presents be not made, or any Statute or Ordinance,
Provision, Proclamation, or Restriction to the contrary thereof before now, be
had, made, done, ordained, or provided, or any other thing cause, or matter
whatsoever, in any thing notwithstanding in Testimony, etc.

Amercement.
The Sheriff amerced for making of an insufficient return upon a Writ in wast.
M. 19. H. 8. Rot. 260. At which day here came the said Elizabeth, by her
Attorney aforesaid, whereupon the Premises being seen, and by the Justices
here sully understood: It seems to the Justices here, that the return of the
Writ aforesaid is insufficient in Law, for that in the same return no mention
is made, that the said Sheriff in his proper person came to the places
aforesaid wasted: Therefore the same Sheriff to wit H. A. Esquire, in mercy.
And he is fined by the Justices here at twenty shillings, And as before, let
another Writ be made thereof to the said Sheriff in form aforesaid, returnable
here in 8. S. Trinitatis, etc.

The Sheriff is amerced for not returning of a Capias utlagat.
E. 12. Iac. Rot. 2243. ss. Edw. R. Esquire, Sheriff of the County aforesaid,
for that he returned not here into the Court a certain Writ of Capias utlagat.
against P. P. at the Suit of T. T. in a plea of Debt returnable before the
Justices of the said Lord the King here 1. die, etc. that same term in mercy,
and is fined by the Justices here at ten pounds.

The Sheriff amerced for not returning of a Cap. sat. after several days
given him by the Court.
ss. I. P. Esquire, for that, that at several days to him given by the Court
here, he returned not the Writ of the Lord the King of Capias ad satisfaciendum
for forty pounds for debt, and sixty pounds for damages, to the same Sheriff
directed to satisfy M.T. Knight Plaintiff, against E. D. of, etc. Gent.
returnable here Mense Mich. that same term in mercy, And is fined by the
Justices here at a hundred and three pounds six shillings eight pence, etc.

The Marshall of ^he Court of Common B^nch for that he attended not up on the
Judge upon the Ess. in day, is fined twenty pounds.
M. 10. Eliz. Kot. primo Whoteley ss. It is considered by the Court for that,
that Andrew Billesly Marshall of the Court aforesaid, kept not the day of
Essoynes here in Court S. Trinitatis, that same term, nor attended upon
Humphrey Brown Knight, o^^ of the Justices of the Lady the Queen of the Bench,
here then at that day being for the receiving of the four Essoynes of the same
Cro. S. Trinitatis: And also further, because those things which appertained to
his Office of Marshall in that behalf were not done: Therefore the same Andrew
in mercy, and is fined by the Justices at twenty pounds.

Appearance.
LOndon ss. It was commanded the Sheriffs, Entry of an appearance upon an
attachment of privilege, in discharge of an Obligation made to the Sheriff for
his appearance, and bail in Court to the Action.

T. 3. Car. Reg. rot 2002. H. 19. Jac. rot. 1. c. Brownlow the like.

E. t y of the appearance.


that they should attach T. F. so that they might have him here at this day, to
wit, upon Saturday next, after the morrow of the holy Trinity, to answer I. C.
one of the Attorneys of the Court of Common Bench of the Lady the Queen here,
according to the liberties and privileges of the same Court for such Attorneys
and other Ministers of the same Bench, from the time whereof no memory is
extant, used, and approved in the same, in a plea of Trespass. And the Sheriff
now returns, that he is attached: And now here at this day came the said T.
in his proper person, and says, that he, and diverse other persons of his
friends, at his request, who are bound by their writing obligatory to the said
Sheriffs of London, in a great sum of money, that he should personally appear
here this day, to answer to the said I. in the plea aforesaid: And as well for
his indemnity, as for his security aforesaid, prays that his appearance by
the Justices here at this day may be recorded, etc. whereupon the appearance of
the said T. at this day is recorded, etc. And hereupon came here into the Court
certain N. F. of, etc. and W. S. of, etc. and undertook, and both of them
undertook in the sum of a hundred pounds for the same T. and the same T. being
likewise present in Court in his proper person, Entry of the Reco^nizance upon
the Manucaption.

Bayl in Tres^ass


and assumed upon himself in the sum of two hundred pounds, that if it should
happen the said T. to be overcome in the said plea, that then the said T.
should satisfy to the said I. of the damages for the same I. against the said
T. in the plea aforesaid, in the Court aforesaid to be recovered, or adjudged:
Or that he the same T. for that occasion render himself to the Prison of the
Lady the Queen of the Fleet, which said sum of a hundred pounds, both of the
Manucaptors aforesaid, acknowledge to be made of their lands and Chattels, and
which said sum of two hundred pounds, the said T. acknowledges to be made of
his Lands and Chattels, to be levied to the use and behoof of the said I. if it
shall happen the said T. to make default in any of the premises, and thereof
to be lawfully convicted, etc.

M^dd ss. It was commanded the Sheriff, Entry of an appearance upon on
attachment of privilege and bail thereupon.
that he attach I. H. so that he might have him here at this day, to wit, upon
Friday next after Cr. Trin. to answer I.F. chief Prothonotary of the Court of
Common Bench of the Lady the Queen here, according to the liberties and
privileges of the same Court for such Officers and other Ministers of the same
Bench, from the time, etc. in a plea of Trespass, as in the President before
(mutat. mutandis) until you come to: And the said I. H. being likewise present
here in Court in his proper person, assumed upon himself in the sum of eighty
pounds, that if it should happen the same J.H. in the plea aforesaid, by any
lawful means to be convinced, then the same R.R.G.W. and J. grant, and every
of them for himself grants, that all damages, costs, and charges, to be
assessed to the said J. F. by occasion of the Trespass aforesaid, or in any
manner to be addjudged, may be made of their Lands and Chattels, and levied to
the use and behoof of the said J.F. if it shall happen the laid J.H. not to pay
to the said J. F. all such damages, Bail in Trespass.
costs and charges, or upon that occasion render himself to the Prison of the
said Lady the Queen of the Fleet, etc.

Entry of an appearance upon an arrest in discharge of the Manucaptors upon
mean process.
ss. T. 8. Jac. Rot. 2257. Waller, Be it remembered, that David D. late of, etc.
came here into the Court the twentieth day of June, that same Term in his
proper person, and said, that he, and diverse other persons of his friends at
his request, by their Writing obligatory are held to the Sheriff of the County
aforesaid, in a great sum of money, that he should appear here at this day, to
wit (tres Trin.) to answer to T. M. in a plea of debt. See the old book of
Entries title appearance, fol. 42. the like entry.
And as well for his own proper indemnity, as for the security of his friends
aforesaid, prays that his appearance by the Justices here at this day should
be recorded, whereupon the appearance of the said D. by the same Justices here
at this day is recorded, etc.

Attachment.
H 15 Eliz. rot. 557. the like for Wilson.
MIch. 19 Jac. Rot. 1873. Precipe for Broke, Attachment for debt in the Court
of the Mayor, etc. the Attachment was disattached by Bail, and the Plaint was
removed by a common Writ of Privilege, without a Certiorare.

Entry of an attachment in a Quare Impedit and awarding of a Distress.
P. 4. Jac. Rot. 2259 North. ss. G.C. Esquire, by his Attorney offered himself
the fourth day against Thomas Bishop of the Borough of Saint Peter, otherwise
Peterborough, and W.C. his Clerk, of a Plea, that they permit him to present a
fit person to the Church of W. which is void and belongs to his Gift, etc.
and they came not, and the Sheriff is commanded that he attach them, etc. And
the Sheriff returns that they are attached by Pledges, I.P. and R. S.
Therefore they in mercy, etc. And the same B. and W. are distrained, that they
be here Quinq. Pas. Note that the distress is peremptory in this Writ, and
this by the Statute of Marlburge, Cap. and days are given from fifteen days
in fifteen days, Natura Br. fol. 26. a.

T. 11. Jac. Rot. 3910. c: W^llaston Ebor. ss. It was commanded the Sheriff
that he attach G. B. of C. E. E. Gent. and I. T. Clerk. that they should be
here at this day, to wit, Entry of an attachment in a Quare Impedit, and
Summons and severance, one of the Plaintifs comes not, Iu^gment, the other
Sequat. solus, and the Bishop essoins which day is given to the others.
in Cro. Trin. to answer M.W. and F. S. Esquire, of a plea that they permit
them to present a fit person to the Church of S. which is void and belongs to
their donation, etc. And that he summon by good Summoners the said F. that he
should be here at the said Term, to follow his plea aforesaid against the said
B. E. and I. together with the said M. if, etc. And now here at this day came
the said M. by A.B. his Attorney, and the said F. the fourth day of the Plea,
being solemnly called came not: And the Sheriff now returned that he is
summoned by J.D. and R.F. Therefore he in mercy, etc. And it is considered that
the said M. follow alone without the said F. the Plea aforesaid, etc. And it is
to be known that the said B. cast himself an Essoyn de malo veniend. against
the said M. and F. in the plea aforesaid, and as well the said B. as the said
E.E. and I. T. have therein day by the Essoin of the said B. here until Oct.
S. Mich. etc.

T. 13. Jac. Rot. 3668. Brownlow ss. Amerciament vic. upon attachment of
privilege.
It was commanded the Sheriff that he attach I.H. so that he have him here (
die lunae Proxime post 15. S. Trin.) to answer Jo. Martin Gent. one of the
Attorneys, etc. in a plea of debt: And now here at this day came the said
Martin in his proper person, Cepi corpus returned.
and offered himself against the same I. H. in the plea aforesaid, and he came
not, and the Sheriff now returns, that he took the body of the said I.H.
whose body he has ready here at this day, according to the intent of that Writ
to him thereof directed: Merciament 40 s.
And because the same Sheriff the body of the said I.H. at this day has not
ready: Therefore the same Sheriff, to wit, William K. Baronet in mercy, etc.
and he is fined by the Justices here at forty shillings; Habeas eorpus awarded.
And it is commanded the Sheriff that he have here upon Monday next after Cr.
Annimarum the body of the said I. H. whom* etc. to answer the said John Martin
in the said plea, etc.

T. 13. Jac. Rot. 3627. c. Brownlow, the like is entered upon an Attachment of
Privilege, for a Judges Clerk of the Common Bench, with an Amerciament and
awarding of an Hab. Corp.

M. 10. Jac: Rot. 1920. Norf: Amerciament of a Bailey of a liberty upon a Cepi
corpus returned, and a Distringas awarded upon an attachment of privilege. M
19. Jac. rot. 1948. M. 21. H. 8. rot. 529 11 H. 4. fol. 43. pl. 12,
ss It was commanded the Sheriff that he should attach I.G. so that he should
have him here at this day, to wit, upon Friday next after Men's. pas. to answer
H.S. Gent. one of the Attorneys, etc. as in others, in a plea of debt: And now
here at this day came the said Henry in his own person, and he came not: And
the Sheriff to wit, T.C. Esquire, now returns, that he by virtue of the Writ
aforesaid to him directed, commanded Hen: Hobart Knight and Baronet,
Attorney-generall of the Lord the King and Bailiff of the liberty of the said
Lord the King of his Duchy of Lanc. in the County aforesaid, who has the fall
execution of all Writs within the liberty aforesaid, and the returns of them,
within which execution of that Writ wholly vesteth, to be made, for that no
other execution in any other place out of the said liberty can be made by the
Sheriff, which said Bailiff answered to the said Sheriff, that he had taken the
body of the said I. whose body he had ready before the Justices here at this
day: And because the said Bailiff has not the body of the said I. ready here
at this day: Therefore the said Bailiff in mercy, And is fined by the Justices
here at forty shillings: Therefore the Sheriff is commanded that be distrain
the said Bailiff by all his lands, etc. and of the Issues, etc. so that he have
here upon Friday next after Cr. Trin. the body of the said I. whom, etc. to
answer to the said H in the plea aforesaid, etc. See Trin: 14. Jac: Rot: 2151.
c. Brownlow, a Distringas awarded after a Cepi Corpus returned by the Sheriff
upon a Mand. Bal. against the chief Steward of the liberty of Bury.

Duces tecum awarded the Sheriffretu ned a Languidus in prisona upon an
attachment for contempt.
M. 2. Car. Reg. Rot. 843. c. Brownlow, War. ss. It is commanded the Sheriff as
at another time it had been commanded to the said Sheriff, that he should
attach I.B. of, etc. if, etc. and safely, etc. so that he should have his body
here at this day, to wit, upon Satturday next after fifteen Trin. to answer to
the said Lord the King now of such things as at that day should be here
objected against him. And further to do and receive what the Court of the said
Lord the King here should consider of him in this behalf. And now here at this
day came here into Court Robert Heath Knight. Attorney-generall of the Lord the
King now, who for the same Lord the King in this behalf follows. And the same
John being solemnly called came not, And the Sheriff, to wit, Io. N. Esquire,
now returns, that by virtue of the said Writ to him directed, he took the
body of the said I. B. whose said body was so languishing in the Prison of the
Lord the King in the County of War. and held with diverse infirmities, so that
he could not have his body ready here at this day, as by the said Writ to him
it was commanded, etc. And hereupon in the said Court of the Lord the King
here, on the behalf of the said Lord the King it was testified, that the said
John is whole and sound and able to labor: Therefore it is commanded to the
said Sheriff, that he or his under Sheriff be here upon Thursday next after Cr.
Martini, bring here with him the said Jo. whether he be unsound or infirm, S^e
the old book of Entries fol. 41. title Annuity in process 7. See T. 2. Car. Reg
rot. 2681. c. Gulston.

Upon an appearance to an attachment upon contempt, and thereupon examined,
submits himself to a fine.


to answer the said Lord the King now, of and upon the premises aforesaid, in
form aforesaid: And this he by no means omit under the penalty of ten pounds,
which the Sheriff shall know himself to loose, if he shall not do it.

H. 10. Eliz. Rot. 549. Buk. ss. It was commanded the Sheriff that he should
not omit for any liberty of the County aforesaid, but that he should attach
J.R: so that he should have his body here at this day, to wit upon Thursday
next after Cr. Pas. that same term, to answer to the Lady the Queen of and upon
such things which then here on the behalf of the Lady the Queen should be
objected. And now here at this day that same Term came the said J. in his
proper person, by the Sheriff of the County aforesaid, by virtue of the Writ
aforesaid, to him directed, brought here to the Bar, whereupon the Court here
is given to understand, that the same J.R. present here in Court that same
Term, in the face of the same Court behaved and carried himself evilly and
unjustly in giving evidence to twelve Jurors of the same County of Buk. to try
a certain Issue of the Country, between certain G.G. and A. his wise
Plaintiffs, and certain W.H. late of, and J.L. late of, etc. in a plea of
Trespass in the same Court here joined, And prays that the same J. R. may be
fined to the said Lady the Queen for that occasion, whereupon the same J.R.
being asked by the Justices here, if he had or knew any thing to say for
himself, wherefore he ought not to be admitted to make a Fine with the Lady the
Queen therein, who says, that he will put himself upon the favor of the
Court, to do what the same Justices here should consider of him in that behalf:
And hereupon the same I. R. is admitted to make his Fine with the Lady the
Queen, by the occasion of the premises at forty shillings to be paid here in
Court into the hands of R.L. one of the Prothonotaries of the Court of the Lady
the Queen here, for diverse Statute-books in the Treasury-house of this Court
remaining bought. Therefore the same I. go thereof without day, etc.

Ballivo amovendo.
P 10, H. 6 Rot. 324. Be it remembered that Thomas May, Entry of a Writ De
ballivo amovend. to remove a Bailiff for continuing in office above one year
togeher against the form of the statute.
the third day of June, that same Term delivered here to J.H. under Sheriff of
Kent, two Writs of the Lord the King closed, directed to the Sheriff of Kent in
form of Law to be executed, which said Writs the same Sheriffs here in Court
opened, whose Tenors severally follow in these words, Henry, by the Grace of
God, etc. to the Sheriff of Kent greeting, whereas in the Statute in the
Parliament of the Lord Henry late King of England, our Father at Westminster
lately held, amongst other things it was ordained and established, that such
who are Sheriffs Bailiffs for one year, should not be in any such Office for
three years next following (except Sheriffs Bailiffs, whose Sheriffaldries are
Hereditary.) And you by your Oath lately taken are bound firmly to observe the
statute aforesaid: And we have understood that N. K. one of your Bailiffs of
your County, which Sheriffraldry is not hereditary to you as it is said, has
continued by more years in the same Office against the form of the statute
aforesaid, we willing inviolably to observe the statute aforesaid, command you,
as other times we have commanded you, that if it be so, that then you remove
without delay the same N. from his said Office, and suffer him not further to
execute in the same Office in the County aforesaid, against the form of the
statute aforesaid, or signify the cause to us wherefore you have non-obeyed
our command at another time therein to you directed, Test humfr. Duce Glouc.
Keeper of England at West. 17. Febr. An. Reg. nostri 9.

Capias ad Satisfaciendum.
Entry of a Testat. Casam for residue of a debt whereof parcel was levied upon
a Testat Fi. fac. Here the return of nulla bona by the Sheriff of Wilts. is not
recited, which ought to have been.

Parcel levied, nulla bona returned.

P. 6. H 8. rot. 158. T. 5. Eliz. rot. 381. Cap. after Elegit, after an nihil
is returned.

Non invent. returned.

Testat. casam awarded to the Sheriff of Glouc.


T 13. Jac. Rot. 632. Brownlow C. Glouc. ss. The Sheriffs were commanded that of
the Lands and Chattels of R.F. etc. otherwise called, etc. Gent. they would
cause to be made as well a certain debt of a hundred and sixty pounds, which R.
F. in the Court of the Lord the King now here recorded against him, as eighty
shillings which to the same R. in the same Court of the Lord the King here,
were adjudged for his damages which he had by occasion of detaining of that
debt: And that he should have those moneys here at this day, to wit, in Cro.
Trin. to render to the same R. for his debt and damages aforesaid, whereof he
was convicted. And now here at this day comes the same R. by J. T. his
Attorney, and the Sheriff, to wit, R.B. Esquire, now returns, that he by
virtue of the Writ aforesaid to him directed, of the Lands and Chattels of the
same R. in his Bayliwick caused to be made sixty shillings parcel of the debt
and damages aforesaid. And further that the said R. had no other Lands and
Chattels in his Bayliwick, whereof he could make the residue of the debt and
damages aforesaid, or any parcel thereof; hereupon the same R. prays a Writ
of the Lord the King to be directed to the Sheriff of Witls. where his
original Writ first issued to take the said R. to satisfy to the said R. of
a hundred and sixty one pounds, residue of the debt and damages aforesaid: And
it is granted to him returnable here, Tres Trin. whereupon it was commanded the
Sheriff of Wilts. that he take the said R.F. if, etc. and safely, etc. that he
may have his body here at the said Term to satisfy the said R. of the residue
of the debt and damages aforesaid, in form aforesaid: And now here at this day,
to wit, tres Trin. came the same R. by his Attorney aforesaid. And the Sheriff
now returns that he is not found, etc And hereupon it is testified in the
Court of the said Lord the King here, that the said R. does lie hid, and run
from place to place in the said County of Glouc. Therefore it is commanded to
the Sheriff of Glouc. that he take the same R. if, etc. and fafely, etc. so
that he have his body here in Cro. Annimarum to satisfy the said R. of the
residue of the debt and damages aforesaid, in form aforesaid, etc.

Capias pro fine, and ent^y of an Exigent thereupon.
H. 26. Eliz. Rot. 1737. c. Ford. Angl. ss. The entry of an Exigent upon a
Capias pro fine.

T. 26. Eliz. Rot. 2148. c. Ford. Monmoth, Lennard Custos br. Crompton
Chirographer, Com^osition made by the Justices for Fines in Monmoth.
a composition made by the Justices for Fines in Monmoth shire.

SVff. ss. Hill 41. Eliz. Rot. 2118. ss. It was commanded the Sheriff, that of
the goods and Chattells which were of R. S. of, Entry of a Casam after a F^fac:
and special return de devastavix against the Executrix, upon the Inquisition.
etc. at the time of his death in the hands of A. F. and M. his wife, Executrix
of the Testament of the said R. in your Bayliwick, he cause to be made as well
a certain debt of sixty pounds, which T. B. in the Court of the Queen here, to
wit, at Westminster. recovered against the said R. Smith as twenty shillings which to
the said T. in the same Court of the said Queen were adjudged for his damages
which he had by occasion of detaining of that debt: And that he should have the
moneys before the Justices of the Lord the King here, to wit, at Westminster. Men's.
Mich. to satisfy the said T. of the debt and damages aforesaid, whereof he was
convicted. And whereupon it was considered in the same Court, that the said T.
should have execution against the same A. and M. of the debt and damages
aforesaid, of the Goods and Chattells which were of the same R. at the time of
his death, in the hands of the same A. and M. to be administered by default:
Recital of the Testat: fi: fac: de bonis testatoris.

Suggestion de bien.


And whereupon our Sheriffs of London returned to the Justices here, to wit, at
Westminster. tres Trin. last past, that the said A. and M. had no Goods or Chattells
which were of the said R. at the time of his death in their hands, in their
Bayliwick to be administered, whereof the debt and damages aforesaid, or any
parcel thereof, they could cause to be made, whereas it was testified in the
same Court here, that the said A and M. had sufficient of Goods and Chattells
which were of the said R. at the time of his death in their hands, in your
Bayliwick to be administered, Vic: Mandavit ballino libertatis: Nulla bona:
Suggestion that the Executor wasted diverse goods, with the intention that
execution might not be done.
whereof they might cause to be made and levied the debt and damages aforesaid:
And the same Sheriff to the Justices here at that day returned, that for the
execution of that Writ, he had commanded the chief Bailiff of the Lady the
Queen of her liberty of Bury St. Edmund in his County, who has full power to
execute all Writs and Warrants within the liberty aforesaid, and return of
them: To which said Bailiff execution of that Writ does wholly remain to be
done, for that execution of the same Writ elsewhere out of the said Liberty in
his County, by the said Sheriff cannot be done, which said Bailiff did answer
the Sheriff, that there were no Goods or Chattells in his Bayliwick, which were
of the said R. S. deceased, in the hands of the said A. and M. to be
administered, whereof the debt and damages aforesaid, or any parcel thereof he
could cause to be done: And because the return aforesaid does seem to the Court
of the Lady the Queen here insufficient, and in delay of execution of the
Recovery aforesaid to be done: And in the Court aforesaid, before the said
Justices here, on the behalf of the said T. it is testified, that the said A.
and M. diverse Goods and Chattells which were of the said K. at the time of his
death in the hands of the said A. and M. to be administered, have sold, and the
moneys received for those Goods and Chattells, have converted to their own
uses, and the residue of the Goods and Chattells which were of the said R. with
intention that the said execution should not be thereupon done by the same A.
and M. are eloyned or converted unto the uses of the said A. and M. The Lady
the Queen now unwilling that such things which in the Court here are rightly
acted and adjudged by art or ingeny to be avoided, A Writ awarded to enquire of
the wast.
commands the same Sheriff of Devon. that of the Goods and Chattells which were
of the said R. at the time of his death, being in the hands of the same A. and
M. in his Bayliwick, he would cause to be made the debt and damages aforesaid,
if they could be found in his Bayliwick: Otherwise it was commanded to the same
Sheriff, that by the oath of honest and lawful men of his Bayliwick, he should
make diligent enquiry, what Goods and Chattells which were of the said R. at
the time of his death, were by the said A. and M: after the death of the said
R: sold, eloyned, or converted to their own uses: And if it shall appear to the
said Sherif by that Inquisition, that the said A: and M: the Goods and
Chattells which were of the said R: at the time of his death, to the value of
the Debt and Damages aforesaid, or of any parcel thereof, after the death of
the said R. have sold, eloyned, or converted to their own uses, then of the
proper Goods and Chattells of the said A: and M: in his Bayliwick he should
cause to be made the Debt and Damages aforesaid, to the value of the Goods and
Chattells which were of the said R, at the time of his death so sold eloyned,
or converted to their own uses, and that he should have those moneys here at
this day, to wit, in Oct. S: Hill: to answer the said T: of the debt and Damages
aforesaid. At which day here came the said T: in his proper person: And the
Sherif now returns that the said A: and M: have no Goods nor Chattells which
were of the same R: S: at the time of his death in his hands to be administered,
whereof the Debt and Damages aforesaid, or any parcel thereof could be made:
And the same Sherif further returned here a certain Inquisition, taken at St.
E: B: in his County, the sixteenth day of January, An: 41. Eliz: Reg: before
the same Sherif by virtue of that Writ, by the oath of twelve honest and
lawful men of his County, who say upon their oath that the said A: and M: have
sufficient of the Goods and Chattells which were of the said R: S: at the time
of his death in their hands to be administered to satisfy the Debt and Damages
aforesaid: And that the same A. and M. have sufficient of the goods and
chattells which were of the said R. S. at the time of his death in their hands
to be administered, to satisfy the debt and damages aforesaid, Devastavit found
by Inquisition.
and that the same A, and M. the same goods and chattells have sold, eloyned
and converted to their own uses, and that the same A. and M. have no proper
goods or chattells in his bayliwick, whereof he could make the debt and
damages, aforesaid or any parcel thereof, therefore it is commanded the
Sheriff that he should take the same A and M if, etc. And safely, etc. so that
he might have their bodies here, A die Pas. in fifteen days to satisfy the
said T of the said Debt and Damages aforesaid, etc.

Pettifers case, Coke 5 fol. 32. Where such course is adjudged ill and
erroneous, such a president is in Mich. 2. Jac. rot 1756. Quaere, if this form
be usual or not, because the case aforesaid is adjudged to the contrary.

H 7 Iac. rot. 904. Brownlow, London ss. It was commanded the Sheriffs, Entry
of a writ of Testat. ca. sat. in the County Palatine after resort upon a
Devastavit returned against the Executors upon a Testat. fi. fac. de bonis
testatoris. Entry of a fi. fac de bonis testatoris. Nulla bona testatoris
returned.
that of the goods and chattells which were of T L late of etc. otherwise
called, etc. at the time of his death in the hands of F L late of, etc.
Executor of the Testament of the same T being in your bailiwick, you cause to
be made as well a certain debt of one hundred seventy three pounds, eighteen
shillings four pence, which Francis Nedham in the Court, etc. as forty
shillings which etc. If the said Francis Looker has so much goods and
chattells, which were of the said T at the time of his death, in his hands to
be administered, and if he have not, then the damages aforesaid to be levied of
the proper goods and chattells of the said Francis Looker, and that they should
have those monyes here at this day, to wit, in Oct. ab. S. Hillarii, to render
to the said Francis Needham for his debt and damages aforesaid, whereof he is
convicted, and now here at this day came the said Francis Needham by John
Gulston his Attorney, and the Sheriffs now returned, that the said Francis
Looker has no goods nor chattells in their Bailiwick, which were of the said T
at the time of his death, in his hands to be administered, whereof the debt and
damages aforesaid, or any parcel thereof could be made or levied, nor any
proper goods or chattells in their Bailiwick, Testat. fi. fac. awarded.
whereof they could make or levy the damages aforesaid, or any parcel of them.
And hereupon it is testified in the Court of the King here, that the said
Francis Looker has sufficient goods and chattells which were of the said T at
the time of his death, in his hands to be administered, in the County of
Middlesex, Middlesex.
whereof they may make and levy the debt and damages aforesaid Therefore the
Sheriff of Midd. is commanded, that of the goods and chattells which were of
the said T at the time of his death, being in the hands of the said F. L. in
his bailiwick, he cause to be made the debt and damages aforesaid, if the same
F.L. has so much goods and chattells which were of the said T at the time of
his death in his hands to be administered, and if he have not, then to levy the
Damages aforesaid of the proper goods and chattells of the said Francis; and
that he have those moneys here in Octab. Pur. to render to the said F. N. for
his debt and damages aforesaid, in form aforesaid, De vastavia returned.
etc. At which day here came the said F. N. by his Attorney aforesaid, and the
sheriff of Middlesex, to wit, S. H. and W. C. now returns, that the goods and
Chattells which were of the said T at time of his death to the value of the
debt and damages aforesaid, after the death of the said T came to the hands of
the said Francis to be administered, and that the said Francis L. all the same
goods and chattells before the coming of the said Writ wasted, and converted to
his own proper use, Null bona propria ad levand, dampna
whereby he could not make or levy the debt or damages aforesaid or any parcel
thereof. And further that the said Francis has no proper goods or chattells in
his Bailiwick, whereof he could make the damages aforesaid or any parcel
thereof. whereupon the said Francis N prays a Writ of the said Lord the King
to be directed to the sherifs of London, Resort to the County whence the
original writ first issued. Ca. sa. awarded.
whence his original Writ first issued, to take the said Francis Looker, if,
etc. and it is granted to him, etc. Therefore the sheriffs of London are
commanded that they take the said F L if etc, and safely etc. so that they
might have his body here Quinque pas. to satisfy to the said Francis Nedham,
of the debt and damages aforesaid, etc. At which day here came the said F. N.
by his Attorney aforesaid, and the said Sheriffs of London did nothing therein,
Continuance of the Capias ad satisfac. Al ca awarded
nor sent the Writ thereof therefore as before let another Writ thereof be made
to the said Sheriffs of L. in form aforesaid, returnable here Tres trin. etc.
At which day here came the said F. N. by his Attorney aforesaid, and the
Sheriffs of London now return, that the said F L is not found, etc. And
hereupon it is testified in the Court of the King here, Return thereof.
that the said F.L. does lie hid, and run from place to place in the County
Palatine of Lancaster, Therefore it is commanded to the Chancellor of the Lord
the King, of his County palatine of Lancaster, or to the Keeper of the place
there, that by a writ of the said Lord the King under the seal of the County
Palatine aforesaid to be duly made, Testat. ca. sa awarded, Canc. Comm.
Pallentini Lanc.
he command to the Sheriff of the County-Palatine aforesaid, that he take the
same F L if, etc. and safely, etc. so that he have his body here before the
Chancellor at a certain day, to him by the said Chancellor in the said Writ of
the Lord the King to be prefixed, so that the said Chancellor may have his body
here in Cr. A. to satisfy the said F. N of the debt and damages aforesaid, etc.

Cap. ad sat. sued by the Executors, after the death of the conusee. Mortuus
returned, and an extent of his (...) lands awarded
P 19. Jac rot. 1945. Entry of a Capias ad satisfaciendum, upon a statute
Merchant, sued against the Conusor, after the death of the Conusee by his
Executors.

T 22 Iac. rot 934. Brownlow, Entry of a Capias upon a statute Merchant for G.
against W. the Sheriff returns, that W. against whom the action was is dead,
and an extent is prayed against his lands by the statute, and granted in the
County Palatine of Lancaster.

T 13 Iaec. rot. 3486. Salop, Entry of a Capias upon a statute Merchant and
upon Laici and non invent. returned, an extent awarded.

See the old book of Entries, fol. 594. title stat. Merchant. T. 20. Jac. rot
1759. Brownlow Dors. ss. NB. administratrix of T C sues out execution against
R. C. upon a statute merchant, The R^cognizance showed. Return.

Extents awarded.


Brownlow ss. It was commanded the Sheriff that he should take the bodies of R.
R. of etc. and R.D. of etc. if they be lay men, etc. and safely in the prison
of the Lord the King now, etc. until they had fully satisfied to F. S. of etc.
of two hundred pounds which the same R. and R. the twenty eighth day of August.
anno 41. Eliz. before R.C. then Mayor of the City of Coventry, and B. C. Gent.
Clark, deputed to take the Recognizances of debts, according to the form of
the Statute Merchant within the same City, acknowledged himself to owe to the
said F. which they ought to have paid him at the Feast of Saint Michael the
Arch angel then next following, and which they have not yet paid him, nor
either of them has yet paid, etc. And in as much, etc. he should make here at
this day to wit, tres trin. And now here at this day comes the said Francis by
W. F. his Attorney, and brings here into the Court the Recognizance
aforesaid, which the Defendant aforesaid in form aforesaid testifies, and the
Sheriff now returns that the said R is dead, and that the said R is a Lay
man, and is not found, etc. and hereupon the said Francis prays several
Writs of the said Lord the King by the statute, etc. one to wit to the Sheriff
of Salop, another to the Sheriff of Stafford, another to the Sheriff of
Warwick, and they are granted him, etc. and in as much, etc. Every of the said
Sheriffs make appear here in Cr. an. the same day is given to the said F. here,
etc.

H 4 and 5 P. and M. rot. 521. Day is given to bring the Recognizance into
^ou^t. Nota. Nota.
Day is given to bring the Recognizance upon a statute Merchant into the Court.

See Mich. 37 H. 6. fol. 6. pl. 11. per Cur. If the plaintiff show not the
Statute in the Common Bench, he shall not have an Extent, for without it the
Court has not sufficient direct on to make an Extent.

That the c^urse is upon the return of a Nichil, to make Livery to the
Recognizee of such lands as the Conusor had at the time of making the
Recognizance.

MIch. 12. Iac. rot. 2048. Brownlow, Continuance of the Extent where the writ
is awarded in one County.
At which day here comes the Conusee by his Attorney aforesaid, and the said
Sheriff has done nothing therein, nor sent the Writ thereof, therefore as
before let another Writ be thereof made to the same sheriff in form aforesaid
returnable ^ere in Octab. S. Michaelis, etc.

T. 5 Eliz. rot. 373. Monmouth ss. A Capias ad satisfaciend. awarded, after the
She^iff had returned upon an Elegit, that the D^fendant had no goods no^ lands.
At which day here came the said W. by his Attorney aforesaid, and the Sheriff
of the said County of Middlesex, now returns that the said C has no goods
nor chattells in his Bailiwick, which he could deliver to the said W. and that
the said C at the said 15. Novem. Pas. nor at any time afterward had any lands
or tenements in his Bayliwick, whereof he could deliver a moiety to the said W
as by the said Writ to him it was commanded, and hereupon the said W prays a
Writ of the said Lady the Queen of taking the said C to be directed to the
Sheriffs of London, where the Original Writ first issued, and it is granted to
him etc. Therefore it is commanded to the Sheriffs of London that they take the
said C if etc. and him safely keep, so that they might have his body here in
Cr. S. Martini, to satisfy the said W of the debt and pamages aforesaid, and
see the Roll 381. see 17 E 4 fol. 4 After the return of a Nichil upon an
Elegit, after judgment in a Scire facias, the Defendant prays a Capias ad
satisfaciendum and has it, and with this case, Hobart and Winch agree, as at
large appears in Foster and Jacksons case, in Mich 12 Iac. but Warburton and
Nicholls were of a contrary opinion, 34 H 6 f. 20 a. with this opinion,
Littleton agrees.

Entry of a case in the proper County, and Non inventus returned, and a Testat.
ca. sat. awarded into a foreign County.
M 19 Iac. rot. 510. Brownlow Norfolk ss The Sheriff was commanded that he
should take H P late of London scrivener, if etc. and safe etc. so that he
should have his body here a die S. M: in und. mensem to satisfy I C of twenty
seven pounds and four shillings, which to the same John were adjudged for his
Damages, which he sustained by occasion of not performing of certain premises
and assumptions to the same John by the said Henry at London, in the County
aforesaid done, whereof he is convicted, and now here at this day comes the
said John by E H his Attorney, and the Sheriff now returns that he is not
found etc. And hereupon it is testified in the same Court of the King here, on
the behalf of the said John, London.
that the said Henry does lie hid, and run from place to place in London,
Therefore the Sheriffs of London are commanded that they take the same Henry
if, etc. and safely etc. so that they may have his body here in Octab: S.
Martini, to satisfy to the said John of his damages aforesaid, in form
aforesaid, etc.

Entry of a Capias ad satisfaciend. M 2. and 3. Eliz Dyer fol 193. pl. 29. Cepi
corpus returned.
M 2 and 3 Eliz. rot. 1239 Lennard, Middlesex ss. It was commanded the sheriff
that he should take Francis Kemp Gent. if, etc. and safely, etc. so that he
should have his body here at this day to wit in Cr: S. Martini, to satisfy
Christopher Rich Gent: one of the Attorneyes, etc. according to the Liberties
and privileges, etc. of one hundred and four pounds which to the same C in the
same Court here were adjudged for his damages, which he sustained by occasion
of a cereaine trespass to the same C by the same F with force and arms, and
contrary to the peace of the said Lady the Queen now at C in the County
aforesaid done, whereupon it is considered, etc. And now here at this day came
the said C in his proper person, and the Sheriff, to wit, T R and C D now
return, that he before the coming of the said Writ, took the body of the said F
K by virtue of another Writ of the Lady the Queen of capiend. in a plea of
trespass against the same Francis, at the suit of the said Creturnable here
Die Sabbati, next after Tres Michaelis last past, and after the coming of the
said first Writ, and before the return of the same the same sheriff also took
the body of the same Francis, by virtue of this writ, the body notwithstanding
of the same Francis at the same day of Saturday, in the same former Writ
specified before the Justices here at Westminster, caused to be brought, as the
same first Writ in it self does exact and require, whereupon the same now F
present here in Court, is committed to the prison of the Lady the Queen of the
Fleet, there to continue, etc. Afterward to wit, the twentieth day of November
that same Term came here into the Court the same Francis in his proper person
by the Warden of the prison of the Fleet brought here to the bar, and
delivered to the Justices here, a Writ of the Lady the Queen closed to them,
directed in these words, Elizabeth, etc. A Writ of mainprise out of Chancery
directed to the Justices to bail the Defendant being in Execution, and to
prosecute an attaint upon that, whereupon he is in execution.
To her faithful and beloved James Dyer Knight and his associates, our
Justices of the Bench greeting, Whereas F. K. has arrayed before you by our
Writ, a certain jury of twenty four Knights, to make a jury, by whom a certain
Inquisition was late taken before you at Westminster, by our Writ between
Christopher Rich Gent. one of the Attorneyes, etc. in the same Bench, the same
Francis in a certain Trespass to the same Christopher by the same Francis
done, as it is said, on the part of the same F. we have received, That he by
pretense of the process in the said plea of Trespass made, is taken and
detained in our prison of the Fleet, insomuch as he cannot prosecute the said
Jury. Whereupon he supplicated us to exhibit to him a fit remedy, we willing
that the same Francis may be so detained in our Prison, as that he may and
ought to prosecute the Jury, we command you, that if the same Francis shall
find to you sufficient maintainers, who shall undertake to have him before you
to prosecute against him, or that he should not prosecute that Attaint
aforesaid. and the Attaint determined, if it should pass against him, or that
he should not prosecute that Attaint, that he should render himself to our
prison aforesaid, and to satisfy as well in that which to us, to the same
Christopher in that which belongs to him in the premises. And further to do
and receive what our Court shall consider of in this behalf, then you cause the
same Francis to be delivered out of prison upon such bail to prosecute his
Attaint aforesaid, witness our self at Westminster the ninth day of November,
Anno 2. And hereupon here came R. G. Knight, and A K Esquire, in their proper
persons, and undertook for the same Francis, that he here at the Term in the
said Writ of Attaint contained, and so from day to day at every day of the plea
therein, until judgment be given therein should appear, and that the same F K.
should prosecute his Writ with effect, and if it shall happen judgment against
him to be given, in this behalf, that he shall render himself to the prison
of the Lady the Queen of the Fleet, there for the occasion aforesaid to stay
until etc. to wit each of them under the penalty of 200 l. which each of them
acknowledges to be levied of their Lands and Chattles to the use of the said
C. If it shall happen the said Fr.K. not to prosecute her writ aforesaid with
effect or at any day of the Plea aforesaid therein to make default, or that
judgment therein be given against him, shall not render himself to the Prison
of the Fleet, in the same until he shall have satisfied the same C. for his
damages aforesaid, to abide etc. And in the mean time the said Fr. is
dismissed from the custody aforesaid by bail aforesaid. And also the said To.
and Ant. undertook to wit each of them in 200 l. for the same Fr. that the same
Fr. shall render himself to the Prison of the Lady the Queen of the Fleet and
satisfy the said Lady the Queen of that which belongs to her if the Attaint
aforesaid shall pass against the said Francis, Dismissed upon bail.
or that the same Francis shall not prosecute his writ aforesaid therein, And
further that the same Francis shall do and receive what the Court of the said
Lady the Queen shall consider in their behalf which said 200 l. both of the
Manucaptors aforesaid acknowledged to be levied of their Lands and Chattles
aforesaid to the use of the said Ric. If it shall happen the said Fr. K. in any
of the premises to be don do make default toward the Lady the Queen. And in
the mean time the same Fr. is dismissed from the custody aforesaid by the
bail aforesaid, etc. Afterward to wit the 11. day of February then next
following came here in to the Court the same Christopher in his proper person
and acknowledges that he is satisfied of the same 200 l. above to him
acknowledged therefore the same To. O. and Ant. K. of the said 200 l. to the
same C. in form aforesaid acknowledged are quiet, Satisfaction.
etc.

Commitment.
P 23, H. 7. rot. 284. James Hobert who follows for the Lady the Queen came
here in Court the 10. Special commitment for levying of a Fine in the name of
another person which had first refused to a knowled
day of May An. 13. Reg. nunc. and gave the court here to understand that
whereas R. T. and others the 4. day of January An. Regni, R. nunc 13. out of
the court of Chancery of the Lord the King here to wit at Westminster had
prosecuted 4. several Writs of the said King against Miles Harconet Esquire. and
Ann his wife to the Sheriff of the county of Oxon. Leci, Sussex and Surr.
severally directed, by which said writs so directed to the Sheriffs aforesaid
the King commanded that justly, etc. they should hold to the said I. T. and R.
covenants between them made of the Manor of E, in the county of G. and of the
Manor of D. in the county of Leic. And of the Manor of P, in the county of
Sussex. and of the Manor of D. in the county of Surr. whereupon the said Miles
and Ann. the third day of February Ao. 13. abovesaid, before Io. Vavasor one of
the Justices of the Lord the King of the Bench, (the said I. U. then having
power to receive the acknowledgment of such Fine between the said Miles and Ann
and the same To. Io, and T. of the Manors and Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenancus at Shorditch in the county of Midd. the same Miles being
examined, made his acknowledgment there and the same Ann to make any
acknowledgment in the premises, that any Fine from thence afterward might be
levied upon her acknowledgment, then and there altogether refused and denied,
And afterward the said Miles and John Mill of London Gent, indevouring the
said Ann maliciously to hurt disinherit and defraud, falsely and fradulently
stirred up and councelled a strange woman to assert and affirm that she was
the wise of the said Miles, and she under the name of the said Ann Wife of the
said Miles acknowledged upon the Writs aforesaid that a Fine upon her
acknowledgment, and the acknowledgment of the said M. as before is said, taken
and recorded, might be made and levied By pretext of which said counsel and
exitation to the said Io. Mill and the said strange Woman under the name of Ann
the wife of the said Miles, afterward to wit the 8. day of February before the
said Io. Vava. etc. at Bedlam in the Parish etc. at the instance and request of
the said Miles and Io. Mill came in their own persons, And then and there the
said strange woman falsely deceitfully and maliciously, under the name of Ann
wife of the said Miles acknowledged the Manor and Tenement aforesaid as in the
concord with warranty of Miles and his heirs against all men to the
disinheritance of the said Ann and her heirs in contempt of the Lord the King
now and pernicious example of his Liege People; the said John Vavasor then
perceiving she the said woman not to be the wife of the said M: And prays
that the say Miles Io, M. and the said strange woman may be punished to the
example of others, And prays process may be made against them to be directed
to the Sheriff of Midd. to Attach them to answer the said Lord the King of and
upon the Premises, And of and upon such things, which on the behalf of the
said Lord the King shall be then and there objected against them and it is
granted to her retornable here upon Wednesday next following, At which day here
came the said John Mill in his proper person, by virtue of the Writ aforesaid
taken and brought to the bar, And thereupon the said John Mill is committed to
the Prison of the Lord the King of the Fleet by occasion of the premises,
there to stay until etc.

M 9. H. 7. rot. 295. Attachment was awarded against Pecock to do and receive
etc. A Commitment for sorging of writ and counterfeiting of the Seal.
and at a day the said I. P. was by the Sheriff brought to the bar, etc. And
the Kings Attorney informed against him for Forging of Writs and counterfeiting
the Seal of the court, And Pecock confessed the Forging of Writs, but denied
the counterfeiting of the Seal, but said that the writs were sealed with the
Seal of the Kings Bench by the Keeper of that Seal of Fraud etc. Ignorantly,
And he is committed, etc.

Commitment for making of a feigned writ of Supersedeas, assevering that he was
one of the Judges servants whereas he was not. Commitment to the Fleet up on a
Cepi corpus upon a Capias velagat with a remittitur into London to answer a
plaint there, wherewith he is charged, after which the outlawry is discharged,
and security given in Court to answer the Plaintiffs upon a writ thereupon in
debt. Commitment to the fleet, of one in execution upon a judgment in the Bench.
M 8. H. 7 rot. 419. the court is informed of a fictitious writ of Supersedias
of Privilege, for one assevering himself to be one of the Judges servants
where he was not so, And upon examination thereof he is committed to the Fleet,
And a Fine put upon him to twenty shillings.

P 19. Eliz. rot. 2. ss. It was commanded the Sheriffs of London that they
should not omit etc. but that they should take R. F. of etc. Utlawed in London
such a day at the suite etc. And now here at this day came the same R. to the
custody of the said Sheriff brought here to the Bar, And the same Sheriffs to
wit A and B now return that they took the body etc. The said Sheriffs also
returned that the said R. is detayned in their custody by virtue of a certain
plaint against him the 10 day of May last past levied in the court of the Lady
the Qu. before the said A. one of the Sheriffs. etc. by the name etc. At the
suit of I. A. and B. his wife in a Plea of Covenant broken, whereupon the said
R. is committed to the Prison of the Fleet of the Lady the Queen by occasion of
the utlawry aforesaid there to stay until etc. And when as the said R. shall
be pardoned or otherwise discharged from the Utlawry aforsayd, there let him be
remitted into the City of London to find sufficient securety in Court here, to
answer the said I. and B. in the Court here of the plaint aforesaid there
levied upon a Writ thereof by them in the court here to be prosecuted, etc.

T 25. Eliz. rot. 21.62. ss. a Hab. corpus, to T. H. in prison etc. retornable
etc. And hereupon came here into the Court one G, by B his Attorney and prays
that the said T may be committed to Prison in execution as well for a certain
debt of 100 s. which etc, As for 10 s. which etc. As it appears in Hill term
etc. Roll etc, whereupon that Roll being seen by the Justices here, It is
demanded of the same T. whether he be the same person which is convicted to the
said G. in thed debt and damages aforesaid or not, who says that he is etc.
Therefore the said T. as well for those debt and damages, as for those occasions
in the Schedule aforesaid specified, is committed to the Prison of the Fleet
safely to be kept to stay there until, etc.

Commitment of one in execution upon a Sci. fac. upon a Judgment.
H 5. Ia, R, rot, 1757. Isham against Pill until according to the form of the
recovery aforesaid if etc. And here now at this day came as well the said E, by
T, R, his Attorney, As the said T. Pill in his proper person under the custody
of I. P. warden of the Prison for the prison of the Lord the King of the Fleet
by virtue of a writ of the Lord the King of an Hab. Corp. to the said warden
directed was brought here to the Bar and the Sher. now returns that the said
T, Pill bath nothing etc. nor is found etc. And hereupon the said Eusebius
prays execution against the said T. of his debr and damages aforesaid to him
to be adjudged

And the said Tho. Pill says nothing in Bar or hinderance of the execution of
the said E. aforesaid whereby the said E, remains against the said Thomas
therein without defense. Therefore it is considered that the said E. have
execution against the said Thomas for the debt and damages aforesaid, etc.
Afterward to wit the said 12. day of February that same Term came here into
the Court the same T. P. in his own proper person under the custody of the said
warden of the said Prison of the Fleet by virtue of a Writ of the Lord the King
of Hab. Corpus, to the same Warden directly brought there to the Bar, And at
the petition of the said Attorney of the said E. there he is committed to the
prison of the Fleet in execution for the debt and damages aforesaid there to
stay until, etc.

M. 37. H. 6. Rot. 124. A Committitur entered of one committed to the Fleet for
rasure of a Record in the Common Bench, being convicted by his own confession,
and afterward was admitted to a fine by pledge I. D. and afterward set at
liberty.

T 27. Eliz. Rot 12. London ss. Entry of a Hab. Corpus, at a day certain and
the causes certified, and he was committed by the judgment Roll without any
process sued of Execution, etc. And now here at the said Thursday the said
Prisoner in his proper person, by the Sheriffs aforesaid brought here to the
Bar, And hereupon came here in Court W. O. attorney of B, and says that he to
wit in Easter Term last past recovered here in Court against the said W. O.
as well a certine debt of 100 l. as 10 l. which etc. whereof he is convicted as
it appears in Easter Term Roll. And prays that the said W. be committed to
the Prison of the Fleet for that occasion, Entry of a commitment of a
Prothonotaries clerk and of a sheriffs clerk for rasing of a writ of execution
in the test and return and for arresting of the defendant with the same writ
before it was new Sealed.

T. 15 H. 9. rot 112 commit. of an attorney for alting a counter-plea of the
voucher. H. 6. I rot. 1002. entry of a Commitment of one P. to the fleet for
rasure of a fine and a fine imposed upon him by the Court.

H. 16. Eliz. rot. 956. Grevills case examinaiion of fraud in the defendatns
attorney for suffering a judgment, the judgment is vacated and especial entrey
of a judgment. New books of entries to 344. title Hab. corpus 1. Harisons case
Dyer folio 149.

The party in execution suggesteth to the court that the case issued out of the
court in Easter term^ retornable tres Trin. and that he was not found, and that
afterward it was rased in the Test and retorn, and not sealed again and that
he was taken in execution upon that writ, which had no continuance upon the
roll and prays to be discharged of the execution.


and because to the Justices here it sufficiently appears upon Record that
the allegation of the said W. C. is true, Therefore the said W. G. at the
prayer of the said W. O. is committed to the Prison of the Fleet by occasion of
the premises there to stay until, etc.

M 7. and 8. Eliz. Rot. 1848. It was commanded the Sheriff that he should take
Thomas Thurland late of Savoy in the county of Midd. Clerk or otherwise called
T. T. etc. if etc. and safely etc. so that he shauld have his body here To.
Mich. to satisfy to W. Whitaker and Ralph Day executors of the Testament of
Jo. Ward of S. in the County of Hertford Yoman, otherwise called, etc. and R.
D. of Puckeridg to be my executor as well of a certain debt of 60 l. which the
said John in the Court of the Queen here recorded against him as of 27. l. 11
s. 4 d. which to the said John in the same Court were adjudged for his damages
which he had by occasion of detayning of that debt whereof he is convicted, And
whereupon it was considered in the same Court here that the same Executor
should have execution against the said Thomas for those Debt and Damages, And
whereupon the Sheriff of the County of Hertfort aforesaid returned to our
Justices here A die Pas. in 15. days last past, that the said Thomas was not
found in his Bayliffwick, whereas it was testified in the same Court here, that
the said Thomas did lie hid, wander, and run from place to place in the said
County of Midd. and now here at this day came the same W. W. and R.D. by Antony
Stebbnig their attorney and the Sheriff of the said County of Midd. to wit I.
R. and I. H. now retorneth the Writ aforesaid by L. D. and E.I. late Sheriffs
of the County of Midd. indorsed in Form following to wit that the same late
Sheriff by virtue of the said Writ to him directed, had took the body of the
said T. T. whose body together with that Writ in his departure from his he
delivered to the said I.R. and I. H. now Sheriff of the same County of Midd.
And which said body of the said T. T. together with the Writ aforesaid, in
Form aforesaid indorsed, the same now Sheriff of Midd. before the Justices
here at this day has ready, As that writ in it self does exact and require.
And the said now Sheriff the body of the same T. T. by virtue of that Writ, by
him to the Bar brought and had, prayed that the Justices here would receive
that Writ from the said now Sheriff, amongst other Writs de trib. Septim. S.
Mich. is to be Filed in the Bench, here by the Custos br. of the Lady the Queen
of the same Bench, And that the said Sheriff by the Court here may be
discharged from further Custody of the body of the said T. T. by virtue of the
said writ, whereupon it was given to the Court here to understand by the same
T. T. that that writ by the said now Sheriff brought and showed in the Court
here, is of no force in Law, And by the same Court there ought not to be
received for a writ of the said Lady the Queen to be Filed amongst other writs,
for that, that the said writ in Easter term last past issued forth of the
Court here retornable before the Justices here, tres. Trinitat. last past, And
then the said writ had the test of Easter term before which said tres Septim.
S. Trinitatis, was not found within the Balywick of the said late Sheriff of
the said county of Mid. And that long after the said tres. Sept. S. Trinit.
elapsed, that writ was found rased in the test and in the return of the same,
and then by color of the said writ so opened and rased, and not sealed, and
whereof then there was not any Record in the Court here remaining, whereupon
the said writ so rased, had not any day of continuance after the said tres
Septim. S. Trinitatis, the said T. T. after the said tres Sept. by the said
late Sheriff was taken and arrested, and prays that he may be dismissed out
of the Custody of the said now Sheriff of the said County of Midd. whereupon
the truth of the premises being by the Justices here in Court inquired into,
whereupon one I. S. Citizen and Goldsmiths of London and Sebastian T. late one
of the Clerks of R. L. one of the Prothonotaries of the Court of the Lady the
Queen here by command of the Justices here present here in court, Justices
inquire of the premises
And the same I. F: his corporal oath being by him taken, was conferred with
by the Court hereof and upon the premises who being examined said, That the
said executors in Easter Term last prosecuted out of the Court of the Bench
here the said Writ against the said T. T. directed to the then Sheriff of the
said County of Midd. and returnable here at the said tres Septim. S.
Trinitatis, then next following, which said writ, with the seal of the said
Lady the Queen deputed to seal the writ of the same Lady the Queen in the
Bench here was sealed, And that the said executors delivered that writ so
sealed to the said I. F. desiring the same I. F. to act and prosecute in that
behalf for them and in the names of them the said executors in that behalf to
do what could be don by Law, Examinations of 3. or 4. in court and their
depositions and confessions in fact recorded.
And the same I. F. that writ so sealed and returnable at the said tres Trin.
etc. in the term of the holy Trinity last past in the names of the said
Executors at London delivered to one W. Y. one of the Clerks of Humphry M:
Gent: then deputy and under Sheriff of the said late Sheriff of the said county
of Midd. to be executed in form of Law, And afterward to wit one Month being
elapsed, after the said tres Sept. S. Trinitatis last past the same I. F: See
M. 8. Eliz Dier fol. 242. pl. 50. and fol. 244. Pl. 61.
came to the said W. Y being then in one of the counters in London, and
requested him the said W. Y. in the names of the said execuors to make a
certain warrant upon that writ, to take and arrest the same T, T. for the debt
and damages aforesaid, to whom the said W. Y. then said, that the day of
return of that writ was past, And that the same I. F. ought to have that writ
amended in the test and in the return of the same by some of the Clerks of the
said R. L, whereupon the same I, F: came to the said Sebastian T. then one of
the Clerks of the said R. L. being then in London, and requested the same S: to
amend the said writ in the test and return of the same which said Sebastian
rased the said writ in the test and return of the same, And put in the said
writ le test 11. die Julii and return of the same writ A. die S. Mich. in tres
Septim., And immediately after the amendment of the said writ so made the same
I: F: delivered to the said W. Y. that writ so rased and amended, but not new
sealed, and the same I, F, being asked by the Court here, wherefore he caused
not that writ to be new sealed, said that he knew not whether that said writ
ought to be new sealed or not, And further, the said I. F. said, that by virtue
of the said writ the same H. M. then being Undersheriff of the said county of
Midd. at the request of the said I. F. in the name of the said executors made,
made a certain warrant to take the same T. T. for the debt and damages
aforesaid, And that the said T. T. by virtue of that warrant was taken in the
said County of Midd. and afterward brought to the dwelling house of L. D.
situate in London there one of the Sheriffs of the same County of Midd. And
also the said Sebastian having taken his corporal oath, was likewise by the
Court here conferred with and examined whether he rased and altered les Testes
and retorns of the said writ as aforesaid at the request of the said I. H or
not, or whether he made any continuance of the same writ in any record or roll
of plea thereof in the same court here remaining, or not, said that he at the
request of the said I. Clerk of the said R. L. his Master rased and altered the
said writ in the les Test. and return of the same as is aforesaid, And that he
made not any continuance thereof any record or Roll in the Court here here of
remaining, whereof the roll of the entries of Pleas of Hillary term last past,
in which term judgment to have execution for the debt and damages aforesaid was
entered, being brought here into the Court it evidently appears, and the Court
here by the inspection of the said Justices in the roll of Pleas number 941.,
the said writ had day of continuance from the said tribus Septi. S. Trinitatis
until the said tres Septi. S. Michi. then next following, And being by the
court there asked who made that continuance, und when the same continuance was
made, it is given to the Court here furrher to understand, that one H. S. one
of the Clerks of the said R. L. had made it, which said I. S, present here in
court after he had taken his oath, being conferred with and by the court here
fully thereupon examined, said that he the first day of that Term of S.
Michael at the request of the said I, made the continuance, for that he is one
of the Clerks of the said K. L. attending in the Office, and entered the Plea
thereof in the same Roll 940. And the same W, Y. being likewise present here in
court and having likewise taken his oath by the same court being examined of
and upon the premises said that he in the beginning of the Term of the holy
Trinity last past received by the hands of the said I. H. the writ aforesaid
then sealed, and long after the end of the term of the holy Trinity, the same
I, F, came to him desiring him the same W, to make a certain warrant upon the
same writ, to tak^ the same T. T. to which said I. F, the said W, then said,
that the day of the return of the said writ was then past, And further the said
I. H. that he should cause any of the Clerks of the said K. L. to amend the
test and the return of the said Writ, And that the same W. afterward received
from the said I. H. the writ aforesaid in Form aforesaid rased and amended, but
not new sealed, And that the same T. T. by virtue of that writ, and by virtue
of a certain warrant upon the said writ as aforesaid made was taken and
arrested, And further the said W. said that the next day, betimes in the
morning, to wit about 4. a clock before noone of the same day, by the command
of Humphry Moseley his Master, came to the house of W. Forest, situate in
Fleetstreet London, in whose custody the seal of the Lady the Queen deputed to
seal Writs, in the Bench aforesaid, remained, and caused the said Writ to be so
sealed, Fee for the common Seal in the Bench seven pence.
and paid for the sealing of the said Writ seven pence to the said W. F. And
afterward, to wit, the same day, the said W. Y. that writ so newly rased, and
then newly sealed, delivered to the said H.M. his Master, which said H.M. being
likewise present here in Court having taken his oath, and by the same Court
here being examined, of and upon the premises, said, that he at the time of
the taking and arresting of the said T.T. knew no otherwise, but that the writ
so rased, Commitment of the offenders to the Fleet.
was sealed of new, but as soon as the same H had understood that the same writ
after the alteration of the same was not sealed of new, said to the said W.Y.
his Clerk, that he should cause the same writ to be sealed, And thereupon the
same W. Y. caused the same Writ to be sealed, the same H further said, that
he having the writ aforesaid sealed of new, at W in the County of M that Writ
to the same T. T. then and there being under the custody of the same H showed,
and read it, The plaintiffs examined in ihe Court, whether they were consenting
to the alteration or not.

The Plaintiffs pray that the Defendant may ce committed in Execution by force
of the Writ, or of the record of the Judgment in Court, if it may be by the
Law af the Land.


and the same T. by virtue of that writ to one P. delivered to be safely kept
in the prison of the said Lady the Queen for the debt and damages aforesaid,
and hereupon the same I F S T and W Y present here in Court by occasion of the
premises, are committed to the prison of the said Lady the Queen of the Fleet,
there to abide until, etc. Afterward, to wit, the third day of November, then
next following, the said then Sheriff of Middlesex came here to the bar, and
brought the Writ aforesaid, together with the body of the same T T under the
custody of the said Sheriff, being by virtue of the Writ aforesaid detained,
and the same Sheriff prays that the Writ aforesaid here in Court may be
filed, etc. and that he from the custody of the same T T may be discharged etc.
whereupon the same Executors the same third day of November by the command of
the Justices being present here in Court, having taken their oath, were
examined by the said Court here, whether they were conscious or consenting to
the rasure and alteration of the said Writ, and to the taking and arrest
aforesaid, who said that not, and the same Executors being conferred with by
the Court here, that they would have done against the said T T in this behalf,
or require, who say, that if the said T T by virtue of the Writ aforesaid here
showed in Court, or by virtue of the judgment aforesaid against the same T here
remaining upon record, and to the Justices here in Court showed, The Justices
will advise.
ought to remain in execution for the debt and damages aforesaid by the Law of
the Land, then the same Executors prays Execution against the same T T and
that he may be committed to the prison of the Fleet, for the said debt and
damages, and hereupon it is said to the said Executors by the Justices here,
that the same Justices will advise themselves at another day therein, for that
not as yet, etc. And aftrwards, to wit, the fourteenth day of November then
next following, all which premises aforesaid with their circumstances, The
writ is received and filed, and the Defendant at the prayer of the plain iffs
is committed in execution.

The Delinquents come to the Bar and pray to be discharged, and are discharged
One makes a fine before he be discharged.

Admitted to his fine at a hundred shillings by pledges.

The Sheriffs are fined at ten l.

The Prothonotary of the Bench pays the fine by him received of the party for
a misdemeanour to the barons of the Exchequer, by the commandment of the
Justices of the Bench.


by the same Justices here being fully examined, seen and understood, upon
great and diligent advisement and consultation by the Court here in that behalf
before had the Writ aforesaid by the Court here is received and filed, and the
same T T at the petition of the said Executors, for the debt and dama^es
aforesaid, by the same Court here, is committed to the prison aforesaid, there
to remain until, etc. And afterward, to wit, the sixteenth day of November
then next following, came the same I F. S T and W Y in their proper persons
brought here to the bar, by the Keeper of the prison aforesaid, and pray that
they may be delivered from the prison aforesaid, etc. Whereupon the same S. F.
and W. by the Court here, by occasion of the premises, out of the prison
aforesaid are discharged, and set at liberty, and it is said to the Court here,
that the same I F that he should make a Fine with the said Lady the Queen by
occasion of the premises, before he should be delivered out of the prison
aforesaid, and hereupon the same I prays to be admitted to make a fine with
the said Lady the Queen by occasion of the premises, and is admitted at a
hundred shillings by pledge, therefore the same I go therein quiet, etc. And
that he should be delivered and discharged from prison, to go at large, etc.
And afterward, to wit, the same sixteenth day of November, came here into
Court the said W. and E. I. late Sheriff of the County of Middlesex in their
proper persons, and pray themselves to be admitted to make a fine, with the
said Lady the Queen by occasion of the premises, and are admitted for ten
pounds paid into the Court here by the hands of the said H. M. late
undersheriff of the said late Sheriff, to the said R. L. to the use of the
said Lady the Queen, which said ten pounds the same R. L. the eight and
twentieth day of November, then next following, by the command of the Justices
aforesaid, before the Barons of the said Lady the Queen of her Exchequer, in
full Court there brought, and by the command of the same Barons, paid it to one
I. H. to the use of the said Lady the Queen, therefore as well the said I. D.
as the same E. I. and the said Humphry M. as the said Richard Love, of the said
ten pounds are quiet, etc.

Entry of a Habeas corpus, and commitment of a prisoner to the Fleet, in
execution in the Term time at the chief Justice his chamber the writ bore
test, 4 July 1^. Jac. And note that the Term ended 5 July 18 Jac. and the
party was committed to the Fleet in the Term from the Judges Chamber in
Sergeants Inn in the afternoon and the Judge delivered the Commitment to be
enrolled the next day, being the last day of the term.
T 18 Jac rot 3060 Brownlow, London ss. It was commanded the Sheriffs of London,
that they should have the body of Leonard Bawtry Sergeant at Law, by whatsoever
name reputed, in the prison of the Lord the King, under the custody of the same
Sheriffs, together with the day and cause of his taking and detaining, before H
H Knight and Baronet, chief Justice of the said Lord the King of the Common
Bench, at his chamber situate in Sergeants Inn in F street, L, T. 17. Jac. rot
3094. 3279. 3270. 2871. 2000. 2170: T 24, Eliz. rot. 2142. the like.
immediately after the receiving of this Writ, that the same Chief Justice
seeing the cause aforesaid may do in that behalf what of right according to
the Law and Custom of the Realm of the Lord the King of England, and the
liberties and priviedges thereof ought to be done, and that they should have
then there that Writ, afterward, to wit, the fifth day of July, Anno Reg. etc.
18. immediately after the receiving of the said Writ, before the same chief
Justice, at his chamber aforesaid, came the same Leonard in his proper person
under the custody of R. D. and I. C. Sheriffs of the City aforesaid, and the
same Sheriffs to the said chief Justice then and there returned, that the
execution of the said Writ, did appear in a certain Schedule annexed to the
said Writ, the Tenor of which said Schedule follows in these words, London
ss. We R.D. and I. C: Sheriffs of the City of London do certify to H. H.
Knight and Baronet, Chief Justce, etc. that before the coming of the said Writ
annexed to the Schedule, to wit, Return of the causes by the Sheriffs.
the fourth day of July, Anno, etc. 18. Leornard B. Sergeant at Law, in the
same writ named, was taken in the City aforesaid and kept in the prison of the
said Lord the King under the custody of us the said Sheriffs, by virtue of a
Writ of the said Lord the King directed, the Tenor whereof follows in these
words, James, etc. To the Sheriffs of London greeting, Attach Leonard B. one of
the Sergeants at Law, otherwise called L. B. of Boston, in the County of
Lincoln Sergeant at Law, otherwise called L. B. De Boston, in Com. Lincoln.
ob. ad legem, so that you may have him before our Justices at Westminster, on
wednesday next after Tres septim. S. Trin. to satisfy Richard W. Gent. as well
of a certain debt of eight hundred pounds, which the same R in our Court, etc.
as of forty shillings, which to the same R. in the same Court were adjudged,
etc. whereof he is convicted, Commitment, and this was outo sCourr.
and whereupon it was considered in our said Court, that the said R. have
Execution against the said L. for the debt and damages aforesaid, for default
of the said L. and have you there their writ, test H H at Westminster, 16.
Junii, Anno 18. and Scot. 53. Maier Waller. And this is the cause of taking and
detaining of the said L. B. in the prison aforesaid, whose body they have ready
according to the Tenor and Exigency of the writ aforesaid; to this schedule
annexed, which being seen, read, and by the same chief Justice understood, the
same L was committed to the custody of Allexander Harris Esquire, Warden of of
the prison of the said Lord the King of the Fleet being then present in his
proper person, for the occasions aforesaid, there to remain until, etc. which
said Leonard the said Warden then received into his custody into the prison
aforesaid, for the occasions aforesaid to remain until, etc. Which said
commitment of the same Leonard unto prison, the same Chief Justice the said
fifth day of July that same Term, delivered here into Court with his own
proper hands to be enrolled upon Record, etc.

Entry of a Commitment to the Fleet brought by the Sheriffs of London in their
custody in vacation time.
P 1 Car. Regis, rot. 5010 London ss. It was commanded the Sheriffs, that the
body of I. M. etc. before Henry Hobart Knight and Baronet Chief Justice, etc.
at his Chamber, etc. immediate, etc. As in the Writ next before, which writ
bore Test 10. Aprilis apud Camer. praedictam Anno Kegni, Car. Reg. primi,
propter mortem Regis Jacobi super 27 diem Martii 20 precedend, Afterward to
wit, (...) day of April Anno Rigis nunc primo, before the same chief Justice
at his Chamber aforesaid, came the same John in his proper person, under the
custody of the said Sheriffs, and the same Sheriffs, reciting the Return,
whereupon the same I by the said chief Justice, then and there was committed to
the prison of the Fleet, etc. to remain, until, etc. which said commitment,
etc. as in the next before, afterward to wit, the fourth day of May, that same
Term, etc. which was the first day of the same Term following, etc.

Entry of a commitment of a prisoner to the Fleet in Term time brought to the
Bar by Habeas corpus.
P 1. Car Regis, rot, 700. Brownlow, London ss. It was commanded the Sheriffs
that they should have before the Justices of the said Lord the King now here,
to wit, at Westminster on Satturday prox post Cr. Assen. Domini, the body of W.
R. etc. And now here at this day came the said W. in his proper person, under
the custody of the same Sheriffs, and the Sheriffs, to wit, etc. showing the
Return, whereupon the same W. R. by the Court of the King here, is committed to
the prison of the Lord the King of the Fleet for the occasions aforesaid, there
to remain until, etc.

One who forged a Cirographe of a fire supposed to be levied in the Common
Bench where no such was levied, was brooght to the bar by a Habeas corpus and
upon his own confession, and examined, was taken in the County by special
commissions and read in Court, be was committed to the Fleet, and fined at C I.
H 6. Jac. rot. 1002. Hereford ss. It was commanded the sheriff that he should
have here at this day to wit, on Friday next after the morrow of the
Purification of the blessed Mary, the body of Philip Philpot of Rosse, in the
County aforresaid, Gent. in the prison of the Lord the King under the custody
of the same Sheriff detained, to answer the Lord the King now, upon those
things, which to him on the behalf of the said Lord the King should be
objected, and to do and receive what the Court of the Lord the King here shall
consider of him in this behalf, And now here at this day came the same John in
his proper person by the sheriff of the County aforesaid, to the bar here
brought, and the same Sheriff, to wit, John Kirle Esquire, then here returned,
that he by virtue of the Writ aforesaid to him directed, the body of the said
John has ready here at this day as by the same Writ it was commanded him, etc.
whereupon one John Brewster, one of the Clerks of (...) Chirogapher, of the
Court of the Common Bench here on the behalf of the said Lord the King now,
gives the Court here to understand and to be informed, that the same John
after the last general pardon of the Lord the King now in the Parliament held
at Westminster aforesaid, the fifth day of November in the third year of his
Reign falsely and corruptly procured one Adam Launder to write in parchment
indented, to the like form of the Cirographer of fines in the Court here
levied, the Cirographie of the same Fine, between Tho Holland and Thomas
Woodward Plaintiffs, and one Edw. Woodward Deforceant of Tenements in the
County of Worcester, whereas in truth there was never any such Fine between the
parties aforesaid of the Tenements aforesaid levied, nor any Cirographie of any
such fine, by the Cirographer of this Court made, and the same Cirographie so
written, for a true and just Cirographe of a fine levied of the Tenements
aforesaid, between the parties aforesaid published, and delivered to the same
Thomas Holland, receiving of the same Thomas Holland therein fifty shillings,
falsely and in deceit of the Court aforesaid, and in contempt of the Lord the
King now, etc. as if it had been duly made by the Chirographer of the same
Court here, and because as well by the examination of the said John Powell, and
of the same Adam Launder, before Robert Pie of Hereford, and Thomas Connisby
Knight, and in Court here openly read, as by the proper acknowledgment of the
same John Philpot here in Court made who has confessed his falsity and deceit
aforesaid; it evidently appears upon the same information of the said John
Brewster, on the behalf of the Lord the King, against the said John Philpot in
form aforesaid made to be true, therefore the same John P. for his falsity and
deceit aforesaid, by the Court here is committed to the prison of the Lord the
King of the Fleet, there to remain until the Court here shall consider of his
corporal punishment, etc.

And further the same Justices here do assess for a fine upon the said I
Philpot, for his falsity, deceit, and contempt aforesaid in this behalf done
and committed, to be forfeited to the Lord the King now to a 100 l. etc.

M. 28. Hen. 6. Rotulo 315. Wydestade, Be it remembered, An Attorney committed
to the Fleet, and fined at 13 s. 4 d. for that he prosecuted a Capias in
Trespass, and no original was filed to warrant the same writ of Capias. P.
20. H. 6. rot, 325. tiel. T. 20 H. 6. fol. 37. pl. 6. T. 27. H. 6. fol. 378. M.
5. and 6. P. and M. rot. 993.
that the sixth day of Novembar that same Term, it is given to the Court here
to understand, that one John Wellis, one of the Attorneyes of the Court of
Common Bench here; falsely and deceitfully a certain Writ of the King,
supposing that Writ from the Roll of John Wellis one of the Prothonotaries of
the Bench here of that same Term, Rotulo 110. to have issued, whereas it did
not so issue, The Tenor of which said Writ follows in these words, Henry,
etc. reciting the Capias, wherefore he brake the Close, etc. Test I. P. at
Westminster, the fourteenth of October Anno 28. Rotulo Carolus 20. Whereupon
the files of Writs being searched, of the said County of Hereford, of that same
Term here in Court filed, no Orginall Writ nor Roll received here in Court,
which ought to warrant the said Writ, whereupon the same John Wellis being
solemnly called, as the custom is to call the Attorneyes, in his proper person
appeared, and upon his oath, by the Court here examined, expressly
acknowledged, that he wrote the said Writ, to take Henry Collet and sealed it
with the Kings Seal of the Bench here, no Original Writ whereupon the same
Writ ought to be warranted, returnable in Court here, nor in the Roll
aforesaid, nor in any other Roll in that same Term is enrolled, for which the
same John VVellis present here in Court for his Fasehood and Deceit, is
committed to the prison of the Lord the King of the Fleet, there to remain
until, etc.

Afterward, to wit, the day of N that same Term the same I.W. came again here
into Court, under the custody of the Warden of the prison aforesaid brought
here to the Bar, and prays to be admitted to make a fine with the King here
by occasion of the premises, and he is admitted for thirteen shillings four
pence, which the same I paid here in Court, which are assigned and paid to the
Sheriff of Middlesex for diverse Reparations, etc.

T 35 H. 6. Rotulo. 494. Last Roll, Be it remembered, That for as much as great
Troubles, Subtilties, Falsehoods, and Deceipts have been caused and done before
this time in the Kings Court of Common Place, as well for lack of attendance of
the Officers of the same place, as by comers and sitters within the same which
be not sworn, nor have to do within, there be certain orders made at the
Utasse of Saint John the Baptist, the year of the Reign of King Henry the
sixth, after the Conquest 35. by John Prisot chief Justice of the said place,
by the advice of all the Judges, of the same in Form following,

FIrst, That every Prenotary, Filoser, Exigenter, Kings Clarke, and every other
Officer of the same place, such as they and their predecessors have used to
occupy their Offices in their proper persons, and they or their Deputies sworn
that have used to occupy their Offices by their Deputies, from henceforth
attend upon their said Offices, in their places accustomed for the same, and
occupy them in their proper persons, upon pain of Forfeiture and Leesing of
their Offices, Always foreseen, that if any of the said Officers or Deputies,
for sickness or other cause, reasonably be licenced or had excused, by the
Chief Justice of the same place for the time being, that he be not prejudiced
by this Ordinance.

ITem, That none of the said Officers, nor Deputyes take upon them to license
or to set any Clerk or other in any of their places, or by them to occupy in
their said Offices or for any other cause without License of the Chief Justice
for the time being, saving such as have been accustomed to have their Clarks
sitting by them, that is, to wit, every of the Prothonotaries two Clerks, for
the Clarke of the Streets two Clerks, for the Keeper of the Writs or his
Deputy one Clark, upon pain of Imprisonment and making fine to the King,
therefore neither that no man take upon him to sit within the said Common place
that is none Officer, nor has no place within, without leave of the said
chief Justice or Justices upon the same pain.

ITem, That no Attorney, nor no other, make any manner of Writ or Process in
any Officers name of the same place, saving only every Officer in his own name,
nor intermeddle with any other ones office, nor of any other thing that
pertains thereto, without leave of the chief Justice of the said place for
the time being, or of the same Officer in whose name he writes, and that he
the said Officer will allow and affirm the same upon pain of Imprisonment,
and making Fine to the King as aforesaid.

P 4 Car. rot. 1236. Brownlow ss. Be it remembered, Commitment of an Attorney t
rown over the bar for diverse falsities.
that the tenth day of May that same Term, for that it manifestly appeared to
the Court here upon the examination of diverse faithful persons, and upon
other matters here in Court brought, that William Juby one of the Attorneyes of
this Court, had unduely prosecuted diverse Writs of Capias without any Original
writs out of the Chancery obtained, to maintain the issuing out of such Writs
of Capias in deceit of the Lord the King now, and of this Court, and that the
same William Juby had impleaded diverse Subjects of the Lord the King without
any just causes, but only for vexation, and some of them through the
multiplicity of Arrests are compelled to agree with the same William Juby, to
redeem their vexations. And that the same William Juby, diverse Falsehoods,
Deceits and Misdemeanors, committed and perpetrated to the hurt and vexation
of diverse subjects of the Lord the King dwelling in the Counties of Norff. and
Suff. against the oath by the same William taken, when the same William was
admitted to the office of an Atrorny in this Court, Therefore it is considered
by the Court here that the same William Juby be altogether forejudged from the
office of an Attorney in the court here, and that in the Office of an attorney
from henceforth he should not intermeddle but his privilege therein should
altogether loose, and that his name out of the Roll of Attorneys of this Court
be blotted out, And the same William by the cryers of the court was put out of
the Court here beyond the Bar and committed to the prison of the Lord the King
of the Fleet there to remain until the Court here should othewise consider,
etc.

Debt.
Entry of a Writ, Ad levand. debin. de bonis inobil. Cli. upon statute
Merchant, and upon return nulla bona mobilia And that he is beneficed at D. and
awarding of an Extent, etc. See the Register of Writs, fol. 148. An action 147.
C. B. F. N B. fol. 131. A. M. 39. H. 6. rot. 134. fi. fa. de bonis eccliastices.
H 45. Eliz. Rot. Rot. 1211. Brownlow, C. Ebor. ss. The Sheriffs were commanded
that 400 l. of the movable goods and Chattles of Richard. Baitson of B. in the
county of York Clerk in the Bailywick, without delay they levy and cause to be
had to Eliz. M. of the City of York merchant which the same Richard the 9th
July Ao. R. nunc 44. before T. M. Mayor of the City of York and Thomas Royston
then clerk deputed to take Recognizance of debts according to the form of the
statute merchant within the same city, acknowledged himself to owe to the same
E. which he ought to have paid to him at the Feast of St. Michael then next
coming and the same to him has not yet paid, etc. And in as much, etc. They
should make known here at this day to wit in October Pur. S. Mariae, etc. And
now here at the day came the same Eliz. by James Bry^ his attorney here into the
court the Recognizance aforesaid, which the debt aforesaid, in Form aforesaid
testifies, And the Sheriff now retorneth, that the same Richard has no
movable goods or chattles in their Bailywick whereof they could levy the debt
aforesaid or any parcel thereof, And that the same Rich. is a clerk and
benificed within the Dioces of York, to wit at B. aforesaid, And that he has
no lay Fee within their Bailywick, and hereupon the same Eliz. praveth a writ
of the Lady the Queen by the statute etc. to the Reverent Father in Christ to
Matthew Archbishop of York Primate and Metropolitan of England to be directed,
and it is granted to him, etc. And in as much, etc. the same Archb. should make
known here, 15. Trin. the same day is given to the same Eliz. here, etc.

Distringas.
Distress against the Lord of a manor in aneient demesnes to hold his court
etc.
Mich. 1. Mariae. Rot. 123. entry of a writ of distress against the Lord of a
Manor of ancient demesnes, to hold his court, so that the Sheriff recordari
fac. Loq. in a writ of false judgment, upon a writ, de recto clause.

T 3. Ca. Rot. 1887. Pytt Philizer London. ss. Entrey of a distringas against
the Sheriff for returning of Pettit issues and the plaintiff prays a Test.
Distringas to a foreign county that the defendant may be distrained by
greater issues. omnia issues 10 l.
It was commanded the Sheriffs, as more times the King had commanded the same
Sheriffs that they should destrain the Mayor Cominalty and citizens of the city
of London otherwise called M, C. and C. of the city of London by all their
lands, etc. and that of the issues etc. And that they should have their bodies
here at this day to wit in Cr. Trin. to answer D. B. widow R. B. Esquire and
T. B. gent. executors of the testament of Tho. Bennet otherwise called T. B.
the younger citizen and Alderman of London of a plea that they render unto to
them 1500 l. which from them they uniustly detain, etc. And now here at this
day come the same D.R. and T. Bennet by Richard Williams their attorney and
offered themselves the 4. day against the said Mayor and Cominalty and citizens
of the city of London in the plea aforesaid, and they came not, and the
sheriffs to wit R. F. and E. Brumfeyld now retorn that the same M. and C. and
citizens of London are distrained by their chattles to the value of 40 l. and
bayled by I. G. and R. R. Therefore they in mercy, and because it is testified
in the same court of the Lord the King here on the behalf of the same
executors that the said Mayor and C. and. citizens of London have diverse lands
and chattles in the county of Surrey, Testat. distringas awarded to the Sheriff
of Surry.
whereof they may be distrained for better issues of their lands and chattles
so that the Lord the King now may be answered of better issues of the lands and
chattles of the same Mayor and Cominalty and citizens of the city of London, if
the same Mayor and C. C. of the city of London in the same court here will not
soon appear to answer the same D. R. and T. Bennet in the plea aforesaid,
Therefore it is commanded to the sheriff of Surrey that he destrain the same
Mayor and Cominality and citizens of the city of London by all their lands,
etc. And that for the issues, See the old Book of entries fol. 226. title
distresses pl. 4. accord. Surry
etc. so that he may have their bodies here tres Mich. to answer the said
Dorothey Rich. and Tho. Bennet in the plea aforesaid, etc. And it is to be
known that a writ thereof the Justices here have delivered to Theophi. Tipton
undersheriff of Surrey present in Court here that same Term to execute in
Form of Law, etc.

Elegit.
M 19. Ja, Rot. 1949. Entrey of a writ of Elegit in the same term wherein it
was returned and not upon the indictment Roll, nor upon the Roll of the writ of
Scire facias the custom it, But note that the writ of Elegit is demanded and
adjudged to the enter upon Roll of the entrey of the Scire fac. The like form
of entrey of Elegit, P 10. H. 4. Rot. 140.
It was commanded to the sheriff of Derb. whereas lately in the court of the
Lord the King now here to wit at Westminster it had been considered that P.
Moyl should have execution against Robert Turner Gent. one of the attorneys of
the Court of the common Bench of the Lord the King here as well of a certain
debt of 40 l. which the same Prudence in the court of the Lord the King here
had recovered against him as of, etc. which to the same P. in the same court of
the King here were adjudged for her damages which she had by occasion of the
detayning of that debt whereof he is convicted. The same Prudence afterward
came into the same court of the Lord the King here, and by the statute therein
provided, chose to be delivered to her all the goods and Chattles of the same
Rob. besides his Oxen and necessaries of his Plough, H. 12 Eliz. rot: 1470. s.
Fylmer T. against L. entry of a Writ of Partition by prec. fuit vic. P. 12
Eliz: Rot: 1016. the like upon an extent. T. 20. Jac. Rot: 2080. B. against M.
H. 19 Jac. Rot: 3192. S. g. J.T. 1. Ca^: Regis rot: 569. M. against C.
and likewise the moiety of all his lands and Tenements in your Bayliwick to
hold to her the goods and chattles aforesaid, as her proper goods and chattles,
And also to hold the moiety of the lands and Tenements aforesaid as her free
Tenements to her and her assigns according to the form of the statute
aforesaid, until he had levied the debt and damages aforesaid thereof of all
which goods and chattles, besides the Oxen and necessaries of his Plough, And
likewise the moiety of all the lands and Tenements of the said Rob. in your
bayliwick whereof the same Rob. the 6. day of November An. etc. 17. which day
judgment there in was given, or at any time afterward was seized, without
delay he should deliver by a reasonable price and extent, to hold to her the
goods and chattles aforesaid as her proper goods and chattles, and also to hold
the moiety aforesaid as her freehold to her and her assigns according to the
Form of the statute aforesaid, until the debt and damages aforesaid were
levied thereof. And in as much as he had executed that command he should make
appear, The Sheriff returns that the Defendant such a day was possessed of
diverse goods to the value of 6 l. which he delivered to the Plaintiff at the
same value, in part of satisfaction of the debt and damages.

Note that in an Elegit the goods ought to be appraised by the Jurors, and to
be returned by the Inquisition, with the Lands, etc. 1 Mar: Dyer f. 100. Pl.
71. accord.

And further the Sheriff returns an Inquisition wherein it was found that the
Defendant at the day of taking of such Inquisition was seized of diverse lands
in fee to the value of 22 l. by the year, besides reprises, the moiety whereof
he delivered to the Plaintiff, to hold according to the Statute until he had
levied the residue of the said debt and damages.


there to wit at Westminster aforesaid upon the Thursday next after the morrow
of St. Martin, And that he should have then here that writ, etc. And now here
at this day to wit the same Thursday next after the same morrow of S. Martin,
came the same Prudence by T. T. her attorney, and the sheriff of the same county
of Derb. to wit John Milward Esquire. now here retorneth a certain Inquisition
before him at Chesterfeild in the said county of Derb. the 6. day of October.
last by the oath of 12. etc. taken whereby it is found that the same To. Turner
was possessed of 2. Cowes and one Mare price 6l. as of his proper cattle and
chattles, and the same day of the taking of that Inquisition, was seized in his
demesne as of Fee of and in one Message or tenement with the appurtenances in
H. in the county aforesaid wherein the same Rob. then lived. And of and in one
close of arrable land there whereupon the message aforesaid stands, one
other close called G. S. one other close called M. S. etc. as in the
inquisition. Value of the land found besides the reprises.
All and singular which messuages are worth by the year in all issues besides
reprises 22. And and that of the same Sheriff the same day of taking the
inquisition aforesaid, delivered to the said Prudence the cattle aforesaid at
the price aforesaid to hold to the same P, as her proper cattle and chattles,
in part of satisfaction of the debt and damages aforesaid, and that the said 5.
closes late purchased of A.F. the said cloase caled W. Carrmeadow, with the
grove in the same, and the said close called Wellflat, The Sheriff draws the
moiety out of the Tenements.
are the true and equal moiety of all and singular the lands and Tenements
aforesaid which said moiety the aforesaid sheriff of the said county of Derby
the same day of the taking of the Inquisition aforesaid made to be delivered to
the said Prudence Moyle to hold the same P. as her Free Tenement to her and her
assigns according to the Form of the statute aforesaid, Delivery of the
moiety.
until the residue of the debt and damages aforesaid were levied thereof, and
further by the Inquisition aforesaid it is found that the said R. Turner
neither the day of the judgment aforsaid given to wit 6. Nov. An. 17. abovesaid
nor at any time afterward, until then, nor at the day of taking the
inquisition aforesaid had any other, or more lands or Tenements nor any other
goods or chattles in his bayliwick to the knowledge of the Jury of that
Inquisition which he could extend or appaise or deliver to the said P. Moyle,
The Defendant has no more lands or goods.
as by the same writ it was commanded him etc.

M 20. Iac. Rot 3371, Entry of a Writ of Elegit against a Clerk, whereupon the
Sheriff returned that he is a Clerk and beneficed at Hab, non hab. laicum
foeod. And a Writ awarded to extend the goods and lands ecclesiastical. T. 21.
H. 6. rot. 326. Sequest. spec. is entered upon the Distring. Ex. ad hab. Clra.
etc. and spec. intr. upon the sequestration for issue
Brownlow Suff. ss. The sheriff was commanded whereas Antony Hobard Esquire. lately
in the court of the Lord the King now to wit at Westminster by the
consideration of the same Court, had recorded against Thomas Barker late of
Holton in the county aforesaid Clerk as well a certain debt of 80 l. as 48 s.
which to the same Antony in the Court of the king here were adjudged for his
damages which he had by occasion of the detayning of the said debt whereof he
is convicted, the same Antony afterward came here into the Court of the Lord
the King here, and by the statute therein provided chose to be delivered to him
all the goods and chattles, etc. As in the writ before until, and in as much
as he shall have executed our command aforesaid he should make appear here at
this day to wit 15. Trinit. and that he should then have here that writ, etc.
and nowhere at this day came the same Antony by E. H. his attorney and the
sheriff to wit W. Whittle Esquire. now retorneth that the same Thomas Barker is a
Clerk and beneficed at H. in the county aforesaid in the dioces of M. having no
lay Fee in his bayliwick, Therefore it is commanded to the Reverend Father in
Christ Samuel by divine permission Bishop of Norwich that all and singular the
goods and chattles Eclesiasticall lands and tenements of the same Thomas in the
dioces of the same Bishop he should deliver to the said Antony by a reasonable
price and extent to hold the goods and chattells aforesaid, Note that in T. 13
Ia. upon the motion of Richardson Sergeant the Court then agreed that he should
not have an Elegit to the Bpp. but a Fire Facias de bonis, ecclesiasticis and
thereupon a fiieri fac. de bonis ecclesiasticis was made in that case.
as his proper goods and chattells, and also the Lands and Tenements aforesaid
as his Free tenement to him and his assigns according to the Form of the
statute aforesaid, until he shall have levied the debt and damages aforesaid.
And in as much as that command shall be executed, he shall make appear here in
Cr. Anim. by the letters of the same Bishop sealed, etc.

T 18. Iac. Rot. 3057. Brownlow Essex. ss. Whereas John Hill lately in our
court before our Justices at Westminster by the consideration of the same court
had recovered against Mary Wroth late of London widow otherwise called M. W.
etc, as well a certain debt of 400 l. as 80 s. which etc. whereof she is
convicted, the said John afterward came into our said court and by the statute
etc. chose to be delivered to him all the goods and chattles of the said Mary
besides Oxon and cattle of her plough, and likewise the moiety of all her lands
and tenements of which the same Mary in Crastino S. Trin. last past upon which
day the judgment aforesaid was given against her or at any time afterward was
seized without delay, Entry of an Elegit after an elegit.
he should cause to be delivered to the same John by reasonble price and extent
to hold to him the goods and chattles aforesaid, as his proper goods and
chatties and also to hold to him the moiety aforesaid as his free tenement to
him and his assigns according to the form of the statute aforesaid until the
debt and damages should be levied thereof and in as much etc. he should make
appear to our Justices here at Westminster in Cr. Pur. S. Mariae last past.
And you at that day returned to our Justices at Westminster a certain
Inquisition taken before you at S. L. in your county the 12. day of Dec. last
past by the oath of 12. etc. taken, by which it is found that the same Mary at
the said Cr, S. Trinitat, and after that day was seized in her demesnes of Fee
tenant for term of life of and in the Manor and chief mesuage of L. al. L.
with all their right members and appurtenances, etc. And further that the same
Mary at the said day of the judgment aforesaid given or at any time afterward
had any other goods or chattells or any other or more Manors lands tenements
in your County which to the knowledge of the Jurors of the Inquisition aforesaid
could be extended or appraised, and you further returned to our Justices at the
same day, that none came to you on the behalf of the said John to pray
deliverance to be made to him of the moiety of the manor and Tenements
aforesaid by the inquisition aforesaid found, so that to further execution of
the said writ you could not proceed, whereupon the same John came into our said
Court saying that the same Mary a the time of the judgment aforesaid given, and
afterward had diverse lands and Tenements in your County to the value of 40 l,
besides the Manor and Tenements in the inquisition aforesaid specified, and
also was possessed of diverse goods and chattles to the value of 100 l. which
you could have extended and apprised and delivered to the same John And
therefore we command you, as more times we have commanded you that all the
goods and Chattles of the same Mary besides Oxon, etc. And likewise the moiety,
etc. besides the same manor and Tenements in the Inquisition aforesaid
specified of which the same Ma. at the time of the judgment aforesaid given or
at any time afterward was seized and possessed of, and also the moiety of the
Manors and Tenements in the inquisiton aforesaid specified, you cause to be
delivered to the said John by reasonable price and extent to hold as his Free
tenement to him and his assigns according to the form of the statute, etc.
until the debt and damages be thereof levied, And in as much as you shall have
executed this our command you make appear, etc.

SVff. ss Whereas E. T. and Mary his wife in our Court before our Justices at
Westminster by the consideration of the same Court had recoverd against John
Addams 20 l. for the value of the dower of the same Mary of one message and
one Garden with the appurtenances in Bury S. Ed. from the time of the death of
R. Cage her late husband. Entry of an Elegit for the value in Dower.
As for their damage which they had by occasion of the detayning of the said
dower whereof he is convicted, And the same Io. and Mary afterward came in to
our said Court and by the statute therein provided chose to be delivered to
them, etc. As in others, to hold to them and their assigns according to the
Form of the statute aforesaid, until the said 20 l. for the value and damages
aforesaid shall be thereof levied etc. in as much, etc. he should make appear
here Men. Pas. etc.

P 29. or 30. Eliz. Rot. 651. Tender of the body in execution, in discharge of
the Manucaptors.
London ss. Be it remembered that the third day of May that same term came here
into the court M. F. in this own person, And offered his body in execution upon
the judgment for damges cost and charges, which W. F. in the Queens Court here
recovered against him, as in a certain action of trespass upon the case,
according to the Form of a certain Recognizance here by the same M. and
certain Henry Lues of the Parish, etc. Butcher, and Giles Holden of the
Parish, etc. haberdasher, in Mich. term Ann. Reg. Regin. 27 and 28.
acknowledged for and in discharge of his Manucaptors aforesaid etc. And
hereupon William Knight attorney of the said W. F. by the court here conferred
with, if he would commit the body of the said M. in execution for the debt and
damages aforesaid to the prison of the Fleet there to stay upon that occasion,
or not, said that not, Therefore as well the said Manucaptors as the said M.
from the Recognizance aforesaid and sums of money contained in the same
Recognizance, by the Court here are discharged, etc.

Tender of the body in execution, after judgment had against the principal in
discharge of his ^ureties. M 9. Jac: Rot: 2739. H 10. J. Rot: 3241. H. 22. J
Rot. 2429 Error brought.
T 20. Eliz. Rot. 125. Between Younger and Tompson. Afterward to wit such a day
An. etc. came here into the Court W. T. in his proper person and as well for his
own proper indemnity as of his suerties aforesaid prays that he by the court
here may be committed to the prison of the Lady the Queen of the Fleet by
occasion of the judgment aforesaid there to stay until, etc. And L. and T.
Manucaptors of the said W: of their Manucaptions and acknowledgment in this
behalf made by the court here are fully discharged, etc. And afterward Error
was entered upon the Roll and the Record sent into the Kings Bench, And after
the end of the same it is entered as follows, Afterward, to wit, ter. die
came here into the Court, the said W. by the Keeper of the Prison aforesaid to
the Bar here brought; and says that he ought not longer to be kept in the
prison aforesaid, for that the same W. at his own request and not at the
request of the said Plaintiff was committed to the Prison aforesaid, and for
that cause prays that he may be dismissed at large from the prison aforsaid
by the Court here, The Defendant is discharged out of Prison for that the
Plain^iff prayed him not in execution.
And because the Justices here by due examination in this behalf made and that
it sufficiently appears by the Record that the allegation of the said W. is
true therefore the said W. by the Court here is dismissed from the prison
aforesaid: And the said Keeper of the Prison aforesaid, by the said court here
is discharged from the custody of the said W. etc.

M 15. Jac. Rot. 2167. e Walter between Willby and Davenant in a Scire Facias
against C. and B. Manucaptors in a Recognizance of 740 l. that the said
Davenant should appear to an account of 330 l. at the Suit of the Plaintiff,
Nota bien.
and alleges that the Defendant appeared to an Original of 330 l. and that
afterward in Mich. 4. Jac. R. nunc, the said Davenant was condemned in the
said 330 l. and in 80 s. for damages, and afterward that the Plaintiff
remitted 25 l. 6 s. 4 d pro ut, etc. the said Davenant has not rendered his
body in execution for the judgment aforesaid for 208 l, 13 s. 9 d. residue of
the debt and Damages aforesaid in the same Court neither has satisfied to the
plaintiff for the residue of the debt and Damages aforesaid the Defendant
Pleads that the Plaintiff ought not to have execution, etc. because he says
that after the Judgment aforesaid given, to wit the 23, day of January An. 14.
abovesaid came here into the Court the same Davenant in his proper person, and
then and there rendered his body to the prison of the Lord the King of the Fleet
in execution for the said 208 l, 13 s. 4 d, residue of the debt and damages
aforesaid against the said Davenant in Form aforesaid Recorded, and in
discharge of the said several Recognizances by the several Manucaptors
acknowledged, And that the said Plaintiff then and there altogether refused to
receive or Charge the said Davenant in Execution for the said 208 l. 13 s. 4 d.
And this they are ready to verify, etc. the Plaintiff protesting says that he
never refused, etc. And for that he did not render his body pro ut, etc. issue
per Pais, And it was moved by Sergeant A. that the same ought to be tried by
the record and not by the county. See Easter 6. H. 8. Rot. 432. And in this
case diverse presedents were showed as well of Ancient as of modern times M.
Easter 12, H. 8 Rot. 324. and Easter 29. Eliz. Rot. 651. T. 12 H. 8. Rot 331.
Easter 6. Ja. Rot. 105. such rendering their bodis in execution in discharge of
their Manucaptors, but note that there is no tender but to discharg the bail.
See M. 27. ort. 37. Eli. Rot. etc. Trin. 16. Ia. Rot. 786. tender of the body
in execution to discharge the bail.

P 14. Ia. Rot, 2175. W. against B. who tendered himself in execution in
discharge of his sureties the Plaintiff prays him in execution, and the Court
will advise themselves of such commitment; for that a writ of Error was brought
and the Record with the Recognizance certifyed away; but at length he was
committed in execution, notwithstanding the writ of Error in discharge of his
Sureties.

H 9. H. 5. Rot. 461. Henster Bristoll ss. Extent upon a Statute-merchant by an
Executor.
It was commanded the sheriff that he should take the body of W. C. late
Burgess and merchant of the Town of Bristoll if, etc. And in the prison of the
Lord the King safe, etc. until he shall have fully satisfied unto R. Scot and
William Scot executors of the testament of John B. late Burgess of the Town of
Bristoll of 120 l. which the said W. Coombe the third day of April An. R.
Rich, post conques. se. 5. before W. C. then Mayor of the City of B. and I, W.
then Clerk deputed to take Recognizances of debts at B. acknowledged himself
to owe to the said I. B. And which they ought to have paid him at the Feast of
the apostles Philip and Jacob then next, and the same to him as yet, etc. and
in as much, etc. he should make known to the Justices here at this day to wit
in Oct. Pur, beat. Mariae, etc. And now came the said Thomas Stanford on the
behalf of the said executors: And the said W. Comb came not and the sheriff
retorneth that he is dead, and hereupon the said Thomas Stanford prays a Writ
thereof by the statute, etc. and because the Justices here are not yet advised
whether they ought to grant that Writ at the petition of the said Thomas in
this case, or not, 2 R. 3 f 8 Pl. 16. P. 2 Eliz. Dyer f. 180. Pl. 49 H. 18 E.
f. 10. Pl. 35. against this Sci: fa^.
day therein is given to the said Executors by the said Thomas here until 15.
Pas. At which day here the said Thomas Stanford and T. B, and I, B. who answer
for the said Executors as their attorneys by writ of the Lord the closed
directed to the Justices here and to them delivered and pray a writ by the
statute. And because the Justices here are not yet advised whether that writ
ought to be granted at the petition of the said attorneys, Dyer f. 180. 49. e
con^r. quaere.
in this case or not, day is given therein to the said Executors by their
attorneys here until in Octo. S. Trin. At which day here came the same
Executors by the said Thomas Stanford their attorney and they bring here into
Court the statute aforesaid and also the letters Testamentary of the said Io.
Barstable, by which it sufficiently appears to the Court here the said Robert
and William to be the Executors of the Testament of the said I. B. and thereof
to have the administrations, etc. and pray thereof a writ by the statute, etc.
and to them it is granted retorneable here A die S. Mich. in un. Mensem, etc.
and in as much, etc. the sheriff should make known here at the same Term, etc.
before which day the Plaintiff aforesaid remains without day, for that the
Lord Hen. late King of England the 5, after the conquest dyed, afterward to
wit in the Term of S. Hill. An. 1. Hen. 6. now King of England after the
conquest, namely the same W. Scot executor. by the same Thomas Sanford his
attorney, and for that the same W. S. coexecutor with the said W. of the
testament aforesaid is dead, prays a Writ by the statute, etc. and it granted
to him retornabl here tres Pas. and in as much, etc. the sheriff should make
appears here at the same Term, etc. at which day here came the said W. Scot
executor, etc, by his attorney aforesaid, and the sheriff sent not the writ, P.
12. Jac: Rot: 448. entry of a Sci: fac: by the Administrator during the
minority of the Executor to have execution against the Conusor, where the
Conusce died before the Cap. returnable in the Common Bench.
etc. and as before prays a writ thereof by the statute, etc. and it is
granted to him retornable here 15. Mich, and in as much, etc. the Sheriff should
make known here at the same Term, at which day came the said W. Scot executor,
etc. by his attorney aforesaid and the sheriff sent not the writ, etc. therefore
as more times let another writ thereof be made to him by the statute, etc.
retornable here Men. Pas. and so it is continued until 15, Mich. at which day
came the said W. Scot executor, etc. by his attorney aforesaid, and the sheriff
sent here a certain extent before him taken at B. upon Thursday in Cr. S.
Mich. Arch. An. 2, H. 6. Post conq. by virtue of a certain Writ of the Lord
the King, directed to the same Sheriff by the oath of 12, etc. who say upon
their oaths that the said W, Comb had and held to him and his heirs coming
of his body, the day of the acknowledgment of the debt aforesaid 2. gardens
with their appurtenances in the Suburbs of B, in Pyle-street, and six tenements
with their appurtenances in the Suburbs aforesaid in S. which said gardens and
tenements M, B, of Bristoll now holds, Extent returned.
and are clearly worth, by the year besides repaires 34 s. and also says that
the said W. Comb had and held to him and his heirs coming of his body, the
same day of the acknowledgment of the debt aforesaid, and afterward 12 s. rent
of Assize, issuing out of one tenement in the Suburbs aforesaid in
Tonkerstreet, which A. D. late held, which said rent I. D. now holds, And
also says that the said W. Comb had and held to him and his heirs, coming of
his body the same day of the acknowledgment of the debt aforesaid, and
afterward, 5. shops with their appurtenances situate, etc. which the said W.
Comb afterward gave and granted to T. B. Knight his heirs and assigns for
ever which are clearly worth by the year besides reprizes 40 s, and also etc.
which all and singular messuages lands, Tenements, shops, Sellers, Gardens and
Rents above recited, one N. V. Viccar of the Church of Saint Mary of R. W. M.
and others, gave and granted long before the acknowledgment of the Debt
aforesaid to the said W. Comb, to hold to him and his heirs of his body coming
for ever, by virtue of which gift, the said VV. C. of all the aforesaid Mesnes,
Lands, Tenements, Shops, Cellars, Gardens, and Rents, with the Appurtenances,
were seized to him and his heirs of his body coming, by virtue of the gift
aforesaid, the day of the acknowledgement of the debt aforesaid and afterward.
And further say, that the said W. Comb, had no other or more Lands, Tenements
or Rents, goods or chattells within the County of Bristoll, the day of the
acknowledgment of the Debt aforesaid, or at any time afterward which they
could extend or appraise, as the same Writ requires as the Jury aforesaid can
enquire.

Fieri Facias.
T 16. Jac. rot. 3112. Brownlow. Testat. fi. fac. de bonis propriis after a
Devastavit.
Entry of a Testat. fi. fac. of his proper goods, after a Devastav^t, between
D. and B.

MIch. 12. Jac. rot. 2216. Brownlow War. ss. Entry of a fieri facias where
parcel of the money returned levied, and a fi. fac awarded for the residue.
It was commanded the Sheriff, that of the lands and Chattells of I. C. late
etc. otherwise called, etc. in the Bailiwick of the same Sheriff, he should
make as well a certain debt of thirty pounds, which W. K. in the Court of the
Lord the King now, of the Common Bench here, to wit, at Westminster, in the
County of Middlesex, recovered against him, as forty shillings which to the
same W. in the said Court of the King here, were adjudged for his damages,
which he had by occasion of detaining of that debt, and that he should have the
monyes here at this day, to wit, Men's. Michaelis, to render to the said W. of
the Debt and Damages aforesaid, whereof he is convicted. Return parcel of the
debt and damages levied
And now here at this day came the said W. by A. L. his Attorney, and the
Sheriff now returned, that he by virtue of that Writ, caused to be made eighty
shillings of the Lands and Chattells of of the said I. parcel of the debt and
damages aforesaid, which he had ready at the day and place aforesaid, as by
the said Writ it was commanded to the same Sheriff, And that the said I. had no
other nor more Lands or Chattells in his Bailiwick, whereof the residue of the
Debt and Damages aforesaid, or any parcel thereof, he could by any means cause
to be made, therefore it is commanded to the Sheriff of War. that of the Lands
and Chattells of the said I. in the Bayliwick of the same Sheriff, A fi. fac.
awarded for the residue.
he make the residue of the Debt and Damages aforesaid, and that he should
have the residue of the monyes here, to wit in Cr^pur. to render to the same W.
in form aforesaid, etc.

Entry of a fieri facias where the Sheriff returned Nihil habet, and a fieri
facias awarded to the Ordinary De bonis ecclesiasticis. M 11 Jac, rot: 189. H.
26 Jac: rot: 3031 M. 14 H 6 rot: 124.
T 19. Jac. rot. 1020. Brownlow, Norff. ss. It was commanded the Sheiff, that of
the Lands and Chattells of Edward Mundy late of H. in the County aforesaid
Clark, otherwise called, etc. in your Bailiwick he should make as well a
certain debt of a hundred pounds, which Thomas C. in the Court of the King here
recovered against him, as ninety shillings which were adjudged for his damages,
which he had by occasion of the detaining of the said debt, and that he should
have those moneys here at this day, to wit, Tres Trin, to render to the said T.
for his debt and damages aforesaid, whereof he is convicted.

And now here at this day came the said Thomas by M. P. his Attorney, and the
Sheriff, to wit, E. G. Knight, now returns, that the said E. is a Clarke and
beneficed at L. in the Diocese of Norwich, having neither goods nor chattells
of Lay fee in his Bailiwick, whereof the debt and Damages aforesaid or any
parcel thereof he could cause to be made, Therefore it is commanded to the
Reverend Father in Christ, John by Divine Providence Bishop of Norwich, and
Ordinary of that place, that of the goods Ecclesiastical of the said Edward
within his Diocese, he cause to be made the Debt and Damages aforesaid, and
that he have those monyes here in October. S. Mich. to render to the said T. for
his debt and damages aforesaid, etc.

Entry of a Writ of fieri facias de bonis testatoris the Sheriff returned that
the parcel of the debt is levi^d De bonis testat. and as to the residue, that
the Executor had wasted etc. and that he had made the damages De bonis propriis
and execution awarded, De bonis propriis, for the goods wasted.
PAsch. 12. Jac. rot. 2167, Norff ss. It was commanded the Sheriff, that of the
goods and chattells which were of I. B. late called I. B. of W. in the County
of N. Yeoman, in the hands of Joan B. of F. in the County aforesaid Widow,
Executrix of the Testament of the same John in your Bailiwick, he should cause
to be made as well a certain debt of an hundred pounds, which F D. in the Court
of the King here, to wit, at Westminster, recovered against him, as two pound
six shillings eight pence which to the same F. in the same Court of the King
here were adjudged for his Damages, which he had by occasion of detaining of
that Debt, if the same Joan had so much Goods and Chattells which were of the
said John at the time of his Death in her hands to be administered, and if she
had not, then the damages aforesaid of the proper goods and chattells of the
same Joan to be levied, and that he should have those monyes here at this day,
to wit, 15 Pasch. to render to the same F. for his debt and Damages aforesaid
whereof he is convicted. And now here at this day came the same Francis B. by
S. L. his Attorney, and the Sheriff, to wit, James Calthrop Knight, now
returns, that after the death of the same I. B. and before the coming of the
said Writ, the goods and chattells which were of the said J at the time of his
death, to the value of fifty eight pounds four shillings and two pence, came to
the hands of the same Joan after the death of the same I. B. to be administered,
of wh ch said goods and chattells twenty seven pounds eight shillings and two
pence of the debt aforesaid he caused to be made according to the Exigency of
the same Writ, Devasta vit.
and that the same Joane before the coming of the said Writ, wasted the residue
of the goods and chattells aforesaid, and converted to her own use, so that the
residue of the said Debt or Damages aforesaid of the same goods or chattells he
could not cause to be made, but that of the proper goods and chattells of the
same Joane by virtue of the Writ aforesaid, he cause to be made the Damages
aforesaid and those moneys, together with the twenty seven pounds eight
shillings and two pence, of the goods and chattells of the said John, as
aforesaid levied, before the Justices here at this day, to render to the same
Francis according to the Exigency of that Writ he had ready, T. 14. H. 6. rot.
318. A Devastavit returned and thereupon an Elegit is awarded.
as by the same Writ to him it was commanded, etc. Therefore it is considered
that the same Francis have Execution against the same Joan for the residue of
the said fifty eight pounds four shillings two pence, by the same Joan as
aforesaid wasted, of the proper goods and chattells of the same Joan, etc.

H 19 H 6 rot. 134 Brownlow London ss. An entry of a special fi. fac. de bonis
testatoris.

H. 9. H. 6. fol. 87. pl. 2. Fitz. Executors pl. 7. this Writ awarded, and by
the Court, The judgment in this case was entered

T. 8 H 6 rot 102 See the old book of entries fol 326 title Execution against
Executo^s pl. 8 scire facias brought against two Administrators after a
Devastavit to have Execution De terris, and catallis propri^s.

P 9 H 6 fol 9 Fitz: Executors 9:

M 11 H 6 fol 8 pl. 12. An Action of Debt brought against the administrators
and suggests that he had wasted the goods etc.

3 H 6 fol 148 P 11 H 6 fol 351.

12 E 3 Fitz Executors pl: 73 and pl 85.

Old Book of Entries, fol 326 title Execution against Executors pl. 8.

See Fitz return De viscount pl. 9 H. 6 H 9 fol 57 that such a return is not
good

M 5 Car: rot 874 the like for Rivers against the Sheriff of Castle maine


It was commanded the Sheriffs, that of the goods and chattells which were of
R. S. late Citizen and Cloth worker of London being in your Bailiwick, in the
hands of John Leweter of London Gent. R. B. of London Draper, B. H. of London
Draper, and Allice who was the wife of R S. late Citizen and Clothier of
London, Administrators of the goods and chattells which were of R. S. late
Citizen and Clothier of London who dyed Intestate etc. yet should cause to be
made forty pounds which William Andrews Citizen and Poulterer of London in the
Court of the King here, recovered against the said Administrators of the goods
of the said Richard, being in the hands of the said Administrators to be levied
and of the proper Lands and Chattells of the said Administrators, nine marks
which to the said William in the same Court of the King here were adjudged for
his Damages which he had by occasion of the detaining of that Debt, and that
they should have them here at this day, to wit, in 8. S. Hill. to answer to the
said William of his Debt and Damages aforesaid, whereof they are convicted, And
now comes the said William by W. B. his attorney and the sheriffs now return
that from the coming of the writ aforesaid until the day of the retorn of the
same, no goods or chattles which were of the said R. S. at the time of his
death in their Bayliwick in the hands of the said Administrators were or are,
whereof the said 40 l. or any moneys thereof they could cause to be made, as by
lawful ways and means which they knew, or better thereof could know, to them
at the present can appear to be made, Notwithstanding they have made of the
proper Lands and Chattles of the said Administrators the 9. Marks aforesaid,
which they have ready here at this day, which said nine Marks are delivered to
the said W. Therefore as well the said sheriffs as the said administrators are
thereof quiet, And because the return aforesaid as to the said 40 l. is
reputed insufficient, and conceived to be made in delay of the execution of the
recovery aforesaid, And in the Kings Court here on the behalf of the said W.
it is testified, that the same administrators have sold diverse goods and
chattles which were of the said Richard at the time of his death, And the
moneys for those goods and Chattles have converted to their own uses, And that
the residue of the goods and chattles of the said Richard by the administrators
aforesaid are eloyned, with the in intention, that the said execution should
not be made thereof, Therefore the same sheriffs to wit W. C. and R. L. in
mercy, And are Fined by the Justices here at 20 s. And the Lord the King not
willing that those things which in the Court here are rightly Acted and
adjudged should by subtle Art and unfaithful ingeny be infringed, Commands
the same shriffs that the said 40 l. of the goods and Chattles which were of
the said Rich. at the time of his death, being in the hands of the said
Administra^ if they can thereof levy them otherwise so much thereof as is
deficient, as the goods and Chattles aforesaid by the same Administrators sold
or cloyned do amount unto, as by the Inquisition in this behalf to be taken or
any other way wherein you can be better certified, you cause to be made of the
proper lands, and Chattles of the said administrators, and that you have those
moneies thereof made here in October. Pur. beat Mariae to render to the said
William for his debt aforesaid, etc.

Entry of a F^^ fac^ for damages in replevin, the Sheriff returns fieri
fecit, and brings not the money into Co^u^, nor paid it to the party; A Sci:
fac: is awarded to the Coroners against the Sheriff, because the Plaintiff
cannot have an execution against him for the moni^^ by him levied in form
aforesaid.
T 19. Jac Rot. 3313. Brownlow Buck. ss. It was commanded the sheriff that of
the Lands and Chattles of Anthony Chester Baron. in his Bayliwick he should
cause to be made 16 l. pound which to Will. Carpenter Gent. in the Court of the
Lord the King here were adjudged for his damages which he sustained by occasion
of the taking and unjustly detayning of the goods and chattles of the said W.
by the same Anthony and T, in a certain place called Ozier Cob otherwise the
Ozier Holm in the County aforesaid, and that he should have those moneys here
to wit in Cro, S. Trin. to render to the said William for his debt and damages
whereof he is convicted, And now here at this day came the said William by T.
S. his attorney and the sheriff to wit H. Lee Knight and Barronet now here
retorneth, that by virtue of the said writ to him directed, of the goods and
Chattles of the said Anthony in his Bayliwick he causes to be made those
monyes which said moneys, he has here ready at the same day, As by the said
writ it was commanded him, etc. And because the same sheriff the moneys
aforesaid here at this day has not ready to render to the said William for his
damagas aforesaid in Form as aforesaid according to the command of that Writ,
Sc^: fac: awarded ^oron. against the Sheriff.
to him in Form aforesaid directed nor has hitherto paid the damages
aforesaid to the said William, nor otherwise contented. Therefore the same
sheriff to wit the same Henry Lee in mercy and is Fined by the Justices here at
40 s. And it is commanded to the Coroners of the county aforesaid that by
honest, etc. they make known to the said Henry Lee sher^ff of the County
aforesaid that he be here in Cro. Anim. to show if any thing, etc. wherefore
the same William execution against them f^r the said 16 l. by the said Henry in
Form aforesaid levied ought not to have of the proper goodslands and Chattles
of the same Henry if, etc.

IN this Case I conceive a doubt, Nota and quere for the Presidents are dubious.
in what County this Scire fac. ought to issue, whether out of the County where
the return of the Fi. fac. was made, to wit, in the county of Buch. or in the
County where the record of the return of the Fi. Fac. remains to wit in the
County of. M And Justice J then Sergeant and counsel with the pla. and Brownlow
Prothonotary agree that it ought to be awarded in the county where the action
lies and so it was made, H: 16. Jac: rot: 2255. the like Sci: fac:
and afterward the matter was agreed 9. E. 4. fo. 50. Br. Sci, Fac. 134. A,
Sci. Fac. issued to the new sheriff, by which it appeared that the Sci. Fac.
issued in the county where the return was made, And Br. return de Brief 55.
See H. 9. E. 4. Rot. 349. A. distringas nuper vic. to render the moneys by him
levied awarded, But by the said book of 9. E. 4. fo. 50. it appears by
Littleton that the Justices are advised upon the return of the Fi. feci to
award a Sci. fac. and not a Distringas, because upon the Distringas petit.
issues are returned, whereby the Plaintiff is a long time delayed.

M 13. H, 7. Rot. 307. Foringer of an attorney.
Midd. ss. Be it remembered that the 8 day of November that same Term, one
Rowland Brigg one of the attorneys of the Bench here present here in Court, was
solemnly called by the Court here to appear and answer unto certain matters,
Offenses, objections, and impositions, by him done as it is said and against
him in the Court here imposed and objected, Therefore the said R, for his
contumacy is forejudged from exercising his office of an attorney of this Court
until, etc.

An attorney for judged the Court for forgery of a writ and committed and sent
to the cour^s of the Queen the Exchequer and her Court to be looked upon.

For judged of the Clerk of the Jurat. for non attendance in his Office.


H 31. Eliz. Rot. 1720. A special entry of the imprisonment and Forejudging of
an attorney of the Common Bench for Forging of a Supers. de non molestando. And
note that he was committed to the Fleet, and sworn that he would not afterward
prosecute as an attorney of the same court and was put out of the Bar of the
same Court, and sent by the Warden of the Fleet, and sent up to the Queens
Court to be looked upon there and afterward in the Court of the Exchequer to
be looked upon there.

M 9. Edw. 4. Rot. 328. Copleg. Be it Remembered that John Cheker, who was
admitted to the Office of Clerk of the Jurat. and writs of Dedimus potestatem
of this Court, and was sworn well and faithfully to exercise and occupy the
same, to which said Office aforesaid of the said John does belong to receive
Writs of Dedimus Potestatem of acknowledgment of Fines levied, to make writs of
Nisi Prius and other Jurats out of the Court issuing, from the exercise and
attendance of the same Office for a long time has withdrawn and absented
himself without the license of the chief Clerk of the Lord the King of the
common Bench here, to whom the gift of the same Office belongs, And without
the license of Rob. Dierby chief Justice of the Court here, So that the same
Office by the same Io. or any clerk for him or in his name, remained a long
time undon and unoccupyed, to the prejudice of diverse Liege People of the Lord
the King and delay of their Suits, Whereupon upon the complaints of diverse of
the same Liege people who intend to prosecute such writs of Nisi Prius and
other Jurats, and intending to deliver writs of Dedi. Potestatem and
acknowledgment of Fines here in Court, And not having such clerk ready in Court
who should receive and make such writs and Jurats, upon the 20. day of October
this Term, it is besought, as well by Peter Stainford who had occupied that
Office for the same John in the life time of John Quick Deputy of the said John
at diverse times at the entreaty of the said John Quick in his absence, as his
clerk in other precedent Terms by the license of the chife justice here, As
also by Thomas Thorold under Keeper of the Writs and Roles of the Lord the King
of this Court, that if they or either of them, to the same Office for the same
Io. Cheker and in his name would attend, and the writs and Records due to be
made in that Office for the same John and in his name he or they would Receive
write and do who said severally, that not, By which the same John the same day
of Friday in the morrow of the same day was solemnly called to exercise the
Office aforesaid, and appeared not, whereupon he by the consideration of the
said Court here is removed from his said Office and William Snayth at the
nomination of the said chief cleark here in the Court, faithfully to extrcise
and occupy that Office on the same morrow was admitted and sworn to have and
hold that Office as the Philizers, Exegenters and other officers of our Lord
the King here hold and occupy their offices.

M 22. Iac. Rot. 436. Brownlow, Foringden of a Crier of the Court for his non
attendance upon the Court, nor any cause shown to the Court for his absence. T.
15 E: 4. f: 26. T: 15 E: 4 f. 7. P. 6. Ca^: Rot: 1314. Admission of a Crier
upon the surrender of Hyliard.
Be it remembered that George Baker one of the Cryers of this court, who to the
office of one of the Cryers of their Court, was before sworn and admitted well
and faithfuly to exercise and occupy the same, To whose office it apperteineth
to attend every Law day in court here in his proper person and to do in the
Court those things which belong to the Office of a Crier of this Court to be
done, three several days to wit, 19. of November 20. November and 22. of
November this term, in full Court being solemnly called to attend his office
of Crier aforesaid as of right he ought to have don, came not, but himself
from his Office aforesaid, the same three days and by the space of 5. years
last past and more without the license of the court here absented and withdrew
himself, no cause of his absence to the Court here by any on the behalf of
the said Georg being shown, Therefore the same Georg by the consideration of
the court here is removed from further exercising of his Office of Crier here,
And Robert Hylyard at the nomination and presentation of Walter Zankey Esquire
to whom the gift of the Office aforesaid belongs faithfully to exercise and
occupy that Office the 24. day of November this term by the Court here is
admitted and sworn to have exercise and occupy the office aforesaid as the
other Cryers of the court here have and occupy their Offices, etc.

H 31. Eliz. Rot. 1720, Be it remembered that the 27. Attorney of the Common
Bench, for that he forged a Writ of Sup. de non molestando, upon an Utlary
where no Writ of Error was sued out of the Chancery for warrant the same. And
the party outlawed thereupon was delivered out of prison, was committed to the
Fleet. And because he could not gainsay, but confessed the same, that he had
forged the same Writ, it was awarded that he should not entermeddle more in the
Office of an attorney, but should lose his privilege of the same: and that his
name should be taken out of the attorneys Roll, and that he should be forjudged
the Court, and thrown over the bar, and fined at 5 l. and should be sent to the
several Courts to be inspected, and was sworn thereunto, and after he was
shorn he was thrown over the bar.
day of January that same term came here in court one Richard Hillington one of
the Attorneys of the Court here in his proper person, and for that he by the
Tie of his Oath in his office of attorney made, the falsehood, if he shall
understand any in the Court here to be don or perpetrated, is bound with that
speed which is convenient, to reveal and certify to the Court here, gave to
the Court here to understand that E.G. one of the attorneys of the Bench here,
in the exercise of his Office of an Attorney to the scandal of the Court here,
and in falsity and deceit of the same Court behaved himself and Fradulently,
For that to wit whereas certain John Vernon and Richard Carter lately in the
Court of the Lady the Queen now of the common Bench here have impleaded Ric.
Michell. late of M. in the County of S. Yeamon W. M. late, etc. And John M.
late, etc. in a plea of Debt, and the same R. W. and I. O. for that they came
not before the Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench here to answer
the said Io. Vernon and R. Carter therein, they were put in Exigent in the
County of the City of the said Lady the Queen at Oxford to be utlawed, and upon
that occasion were afterward ut-Lawed, And afterward the same Io. Michell by
virtue of a certain Writ of the Lady the Queen of Capias Vtlagat upon the
utlawry aforesaid to the sheriff of of Surry in this behalf taken and in
prison of the said Lady the Queen and under the custody of the said Sheriff was
detayned, the same Edward Osbulston not having the fear of God before his eyes
nor his oath that he should not do any falsehood in the same Court, fearing, a
certain false Writ, under the name of the Lady the Queen, caused to be written
made and counterfeited the tenor whereof Follows in these words Elizabeth,
etc. reciting the Superse, de non molest. T. Edmund Anderson of Westminster the
28. day of Nov. An. etc. 31. whereas no Writ of Error out of the Chancery of
the said Lady the Queen to the same Edmond Anderson was directed by the same
Edw. Osbalston or any other person for the same R. M. W. M. and I. M. upon the
utlawry aforesaid was ever prosecuted, as by due Search in this behalf made to
the Court here plainly appears, Notwithstanding the same Edward Osbalstone
the said false and forged writ afterward with the seal to seal writs in the
court here caused to be sealed, And the same to the said sheriff of Surry to
wit to Richard Brown Esquire. as a true writ delivered by color or which said
false and forged writ the same sheriff delivered the same Io. Michell out of
prison aforesaid, to the great scandal of the Laws of the Lady the Queen now
and the deceit of the said Queen and of the Court here, and great delay of the
said Io. Vernon and Richard Carter in their suit aforesaid whereupon the said
Ed. O. being present here in Court and by the court here examined, whether he
made the said false writ in Form aforsaid, or not says that he cannot
gainesay but that he made the said false writ in form as aforesaid as is above
alleged, and hereupon the same Edward O. is committed to the Prison of the
said Lady the Queen of the Fleet there to stay until, etc. and afterwareds to
wit the 30. day of Jan. that same Term came there in Court the same Ed. O. in
his proper person under the custody of the Warden of the prison of the Fleet
brought and being asked how he would excuse himself of the premises, says
that he cannot gainsay but that he is guilty of the premises aforesaid as it
is above alleged against him, and therein puts himself upon the favor of the
Court here, whereupon for that it seems to the Court here, that the said Ed.
Osbalston the said false Writ, not only out of negligence but out of malice
voluntary fraud and falsehood caused to be written and made; therefore it is
considered that the same Edw. in his Office of attorney in the Court here from
henceforth shall not intermedle but shall loose all his Privileges therein,
and that his name shall presenty be taken quite from the attorneys and that he
from the Court here before judged and put out of the Bar of the Court Roll
here, and that he make a Fine with the Lady the Queen for his falsehood
aforesaid at C. and also that afterward the same Edward after he is put out of
the bar here, shall be led by the warden of the Fleet through the hall here
into the Court of the said Lady the Queen to hold Pleas before the said Lady
the Queen commonly called the Kings Bench that the Justices of the said Lady
the Queen there having notice of the falsehood of the said Edward before by the
command of the Court here, might command the same Edward in as much as the same
Edward, etc. in nullo sed intromittas, And immediately is brought back from the
same Court through the hall there by the same Warden of the Fleet into the
Exchequer of the said Lady the Queen before the Barons there that the same
Barons likewise taking notice of his falsehood, etc, in that Court, T: 20 H: 6.
f: 37 Pl. 6. br. attorney 70.
in nullo se intromittat, etc. And further the same Edward by the command of
the Justces here took his Corporal oath in these words, This hear you
Justices that I. E. Osbaston late one of the Attorneys of this Court, having my
name by you, for diverse my misdemeanors by me committed in the exercise of my
said Office, justly drawn out of the Roll of Attorneys, And forejudged this
Court from the exercise of the same Office shall not from henceforth directly
or indirectly, as an attorney pursue defend, or otherwise intromit in any
action, suit or Canse, in this court here or in any other of the Queens
Majesty's Courts at Westminster so help me God, and the contents of this book,
whereupon the same Edw. to the terror and example of others in the like case
offending by the cryers of the same Court was put out of the Court here beyond
the Bar, etc.

P 7. H. 7 Rot. 1. 34. In the Kings Bench Angl. ss. Forindger of a Philizer of
the Kings be^^h, no a^tending his Office in person.
Be it remembered that it seems to the Court of the Kings here before the same
King and it is plainly known to the same Court that Phillip Wharton otherwise
called Philipp Wharton who is possessed of an Office of the Filizer of writs of
the same Court of the Countyes of Cornwell, Glos. hereof the town of Glou. and
the town of Bristoll and for 6. years and more last past was possessed, that
Office within the space of two years, and diverse Terms before has not
personally occupied as he of right and according to the custom of the Court
aforesaid ought; and for that the same Philip in the Term and Years aforesaid
was not vexed with any such disease or infirmity, but that he might fitly in
person attend the Office. And the same Court of the Lord the King here by
diligent examination in that behalf had, manifestly appears, And also for
that the same Philip was often times admonished by the said Court of the said
Lord the King according to the custom of the said Court personally to attend
that office, and never offered himself nor offers to exercise and occupy the
same office, but himself from personal exercising of that office by a long
time now elapsed, being in no wise licensed, has absented himself. Therefore
by the advice of the whole Court of the Lord the King aforesaid, the same
Phillip diverse days and times in the same Term and other Terms past being
solemnly called according to the custom of that Court personally to exercise
and occupey that office, appeared not, and that the said office for default of
the said P. remains in nothing executed and observed for which it is considered
in the same Court that the same Philip from the said Office and from further
exercising and occupying of the same from henceforth forever be forejudged,
which said default upon him by the Court here at the end of the same Term to
wit the fourth day of the Plea de 15. S. Ioh. Bapt. which said fourth day that
Court until the 8. S. Mich. next following is adjorned, is Recorded, etc. see
in the title Commitment an ordinance made 35. Hen. 6.

Fine quashed upon the examination and inspection of the Infant, by him
acknowledged upon dedimus potestatem, which was not admitted to be recorded.
P 4. Ia. Rot. 1409. Brownlow Derb. ss. Be it remembered that the 29. day of May
that same Term it seemed to the Court here as well by the inspection and veiw of
the body of J. Zouch the younger, Esquire. then present here in Court in his proper
person as by the examination of diverse faithful witnesses then and there
examined upon their oath, and other lawful Proofs in that behalf in the
Court here made that the same John who otherwise to wit the second day of
August Ano. 3. R. nunc, before James Story Lon. and Robert Cotton Esquires by
virtue of a certain writ of the Lord the King de Dedmi. Potestatem to them and
certain Thomas Hutchison and Robert Smith Esquries directed, to give power to
three or two of them to take the acknowledgment which the same John before the
said I. S. K. C. T. H. and R. S. three or two of them would make, upon which said
writ of covenant depending before the Justices of the said Lord the King of the
Common Bench between certain Tho. Fortesceu Esquire. and Io. Slany, and the same
Io. Zouch of the Manor of Alfreton ali. Awfreton with the appurt. and of 120.
Mes. 100. Cottages 500 tofts 4 Mils, etc. with the appurt. in A. otherwse. A.S.
otherwise S. S. otherwise S. etc. And also of the profits of the markets and
Faires and Toll in A. otherwise A. in the same County of Derb. acknowledged the
Manor Tenements, Rents, and Profits aforesaid to be the right of the same
Thom. and the same remised and quit claimed from him and his heirs to the same
Thomas and John Slany, and the Heirs of the same Thomas for ever, at the time
of that acknowledgment upon the writ aforesaid, was and yet is within the age
of one and twenty years Therefore it is considered by the court here (...) of
May that same Term that the acknowledgment aforesaid by the same Io. Zouche
before I. S. and Rob. Cotton made is void and of no Force in Law, and that as
well the said Writ of Covenant as the said writ of Dedimus Potestatem are
quashed and adnulled, and in the Files of the writs of this Court are not to be
received or Filed, nor that any record be made thereof in the court here.

Brev. de Gardiano admittendo.
H 10. J. Rot. 2002. Brownlow ss. Entry of a Writ De gardiano admittend. in a
Writ of Partition.

M: 22 Jac: Rot: 554. the like in debt.

T: 33 Eliz: To: 1556. like in Dower, Int. S. and G.


The King sent to the Justices here his Writ closed in these words, James by
the grace of God of England, etc. To his Justices of the Bench Greeting Know ye
that we have admitted Nicholas S. Gent. the Guardian of Mary B. and Grace B.
Daughters and heirs of Richard Barret Esquire., being within age as is said, to
prosecute and defend the Suit which is before us by our Wirt between the same
Rich. Barret, and one Ralph Raulin in a Plea of making partition as is said,
And therefore we command you that you admit the same in Guardian of the same M.
and G. to prosecute and defend the Plaint aforesaid, Witness our selves at
Westminster the 19. day of May An. 10. and 45.

Habeas Corpus.
ss. IT was commanded the sheriff as more times it was commanded to the same
Sheriff that he should have here at the third day, Entry of a Hab. cor^: in a
plea of debt: and the Sheriff returns that he was not taken nor ever in his
custody. And a Writ awarded de distring: nup: vic.
to wit ter. die, the body of E. T. etc. whom by precept of the Lord the King
he took and him detayneth, and the same sheriff to the Justices here ter. die
last past returned, to answer T. S. in a plea that he render unto him 20 l.
which he owes and unjustly detayneth etc. And now here at this day came the
said T. by T.C. his Attorney and the sheriff retorneth that the said E. was
not taken by the said sheriff by virtue of any writ, either is, or ever was in
the custody of the said sheriff either by I. N. Knight his Predecessor, by
indenture between him the late sheriff, or the said sheriff, to the sheriff now
was over delivered, And therefore the body of the said E. before the Justices
here at this day he could not have, Distring: nup: vic.
Therefore it is commanded to the sheriff now that he distrain the said late
sheriff, by all his lands, etc. and that of the issues, etc. so that he may
have here. 15. Martini the body of the said E. whom to answer to the said T.
in the Plea aforesaid etc.

Entry of a Writ of Hab: corp: upon privilege wi h the recognizance.
H 12. Iac. Rot. 2271. It was commanded the Mayor Aldermen and sheriffs of
London and every of them, whereas it was showed to the Lord the King now on the
behalf of Peter Furb, that whereas he, and every liege man of the Lord the
King, in coming to the Court of the said Lord the King of common Bench here to
wit at Westminster, to prosecute or defend any plea or writ there, ought to be
under the protection of the said Lord the King, and customs according to the
Liberties and Privileges of the same Court from the time whereof the memory of
man is not extant used and approved in the same, Cause of privileges.
Notwithstanding some malevolent indevouring much to prejudice the same Peter,
the same Pet. after he came to the Court here, to consult with his Council and
attorney to have their advice in a certain plea of debt upon demand of 30 l.
prosecuted by the same P. in the said Court of the Lord the King against one
James Robinson, whereupon the parties aforesaid pleaded to issue of the Country
to be tried in London, to be arrested by the ministers of the said Mayor
Aldermen and Sheriffs, and in the Prison of the Lord the King, under the
custody of the said Mayor Aldermen and Sheriffs, procured to be detained,
unjustly to the imoderate damage and grievance of the said Peter, and against
the liberties and Privileges aforesaid, whereupon he supplicated to the Lord
the King to exhibet to him a remedy, the said Lord the King willing to do to
the same P. in that behalf which was just and consonant to reason, and
inviolably to observe the liberties and privileges aforesaid, That if the same
Peter should be detayned in the prison aforesaid under the custody aforesaid,
Then the same Peter by whatsoever name reputed together with the day and cause
of his taking and detaining, they should have, or one of them should have
before H. Hobert Knight and Baronet Chief Justice of the said Lord the King of
the common bench at his chamber Situate in Lincolns Inn in the county of Midd.
immediately after the receipt of the said Writ, Hab: corp: rem. immediately
before the Chief.
that the same chief Justice of the Lord the King, seeing the cause aforesaid,
should do in that behalf, what of right and according to the law and custom of
the Lord the King of England, and the liberties and privileges aforesaid should
be don, and that they should have then there that writ, Afterward to wit the
24. J that same Term the chief Justice delivered here in Court with his own
hands the writ aforesaid directed to the said Mayor Aldermen and sheriffs in
Form aforesaid, The writ delivered in Cou t. The party comes in his proper
person. Return de causes.
And before the said chief Justice by the same Mayor Aldermen and sheriffs the
10th, day of Jan. last past returned and executed, and the same chief Justice
has certified here in court that then and there before the said Ch^ife Justice
at his chamber aforesaid came the said P. in his proper person under the
custody of the said sheriffs, and Martin L. and P. P. Sheriffs of the City
aforesaid now return that before the coming of the said writ the 15th day of
Dec. An. R. etc. 12. The same Peter was taken in the City aforesaid, and
detained in the prison of the said Lord the King under the custody of the said
Sheriffs by virtue of a complaint levied against him the same day and year, in
the Court of the Lord the King held before the same M. L. by the name of Peter
Furbusher Gent. at the suit of H. R. in a plea of Trespass, 1 Cause in a plea
of Trespass Damages 40 l.
to the Damages of forty pounds, the said Peter was also detained by virtue of
a complaint against him 20 Ja. praed. levaet. in the Court of the said Lord the
King, held before the said Martin Limny by the name of P. F. at the suit of
Alexander Ratcliffe, in a plea of Debt upon demand of sixty pounds, 2 Cause in
debt for 60 l.
(and so recite all the causes) whereof the parties aforesaid have pleaded, and
so depend undetermined, and that these were the causes of taking and detaining
of the said Peter in the prison aforesaid, whose body they have ready, as by
the said Writ to them it is commanded, etc. whereupon the premises being seen,
and by the said chief Justice then and there fully examined and understood,
The party and She iffs are discharged.
it seemed to the said chief Justice, that the said P. ought then and there to
enjoy the liberties and privileges aforesaid, whereupon the same Peter was
then and there dismissed from the custody of the said Sheriffs by the said
chief Justice, Vpona foreign Attachment accordingly, 1 H 15 El^^t 588
and the same Sheriffs then and there were discharged by the same chief Justice
from his custody, and hereupon the same P. and R. H. of Stepney, etc. and I.B.
of the same, Dyer, undertook, and every of them did undertake, Much. 8 and 9
El. rot. 329. Entry of a privilege for diverse causes, and the bail entered
severally and there rot. 1754.

Recognizance to appear to Writs or Actions to be brought.

Note that in this case, the Original ought to be brought the next Term
ensuing, but in a reversall the plaintiff has liberty of two Terms to bring
his Writ.


to wit the same P. in the sum of one hundred and twenty pounds, and the same
R. and I. severally in the sum of sixty pounds at the suit of Alexander
Ratcliff, and Sic de ceteris, etc. That the said P. should appear here in
Court, in his proper person, or by his sufficient Attorney in Law, and answer
to the several Actions or Writs of the same H.R. etc. against the same P. of
and upon the several pleas aforesaid, before 15 Pasch. then next coming, to be
brought and prosecuted here in Court, and also if it shall happen judgment
after the apperance of the said P. here in Court made in the same pleas for the
same H. and A. and against the said P to be given, to satisfy the same H. etc.
of their Damages, and the said Alexander of his Debt and Damages for the same
H. etc. and A. against the same Peter in the same Court here to be recovered,
or adjudged in the pleas aforesaid, or that the same P. render himself to the
prison of the Fleet of the Lord the King for those occasions, which said
several sums by the said Manucaptors in form aforesaid acknowledged, the
same Manucaptors acknowledge to be made of their Lands and Chattells, and which
said several sums by the same P in form aforesaid acknowledged, the said
Peter acknowledges to be made of his Lands and Chattells and to be levied, to
the use and behoof of the said H. and A. in form aforesaid, if it happen the
same P. make Default in any of the premises, and in lawful manner to be
convinced thereof, Brownlow.

T 41 Eliz. rot. 1229. ss. That the said R shall appear here in Court in his
proper person, or by his sufficient Attorney in Law, to the Action or Writ of
the said A, against the said R. of and upon the cause aforesaid, before such a
day, to be brought and prosecuted in Court here and to answer to the said A. in
the plea aforesaid, and also if it happen, etc.

Entry of a privilege returnable immediate in banck.
H 12 Jac. rot. 2262. Brownlow, As before in the president for P.F. until, or
one of them should have, before the Justices of the Lord the King here, to wit
at Westminster, immediately after the receipt of the said Writ, that the same
Justices of the said Lord the King, seeing the cause aforesaid, etc. until the
end of the Writ. Afterward, to wit, the ninth of February that same Term,
came here into Court the same Michael in his own person, under the custody of
the Bailiff of the Marshall and Judges, etc. And recite the Return of the Writ,
whereupon the premises being seen, and by the Justices here fully examined
and understood, it seems to the said Justices here, that the said M at
present ought to enjoy the liberties and privileges aforesaid, and so as in
the president before.

Alit.
T 14 Eliz. rot. 1288. Diverse causes returned, wherein are diverse Complaints in
Trespass and debt, and the Entry is that he shall appear in Court in his
proper person, or his sufficient Attorney in Law, of and upon the several
Actions of and for the sums aforesaid against the same W. by the said T. M.
and M. or any of them before 8 Michaelis next coming to be brought or
prosecuted here in Court, severally to the same T. M. and M. or either of them
in the said Court here, in the several pleas aforesaid, P. 28 Eliz. rot. 328.
the like.
against the said W. severally to be recovered or adjudged, or that he the same
W. render himself upon that occasion or occasions to the prison of the Fleet
of the Lord the said King, which said sum of fifty pounds, to wit, twenty
pounds thereof the same T. ten pounds to the said M and O. to the said I. and
I. acknowledged and every of them acknowledges severally to be made of their
Lands and Chattells, and to the use, etc.

Special Amerciament of the Sheriff. for not returning of a Writ of Habeas
corpus in debt, after three a^e s given him to do it.
T 2 Car. Regis Rot. 841. Brownlow, Berks. ss. John B. Sheriff of the County
aforesaid, for that he in Easter Term last past, at the several days that
same Term, by the Court of the Lord the King here to him given, as in the bill
of pleas this Term it does appear, has not returned to the Court here a
certain Writ of the said Lord the King of Habeas Corpus, issuing on: of the
Court here, and to the same Sheriff directed and delivered to be executed, in
form of Law, against one I W Esquire, at the suit of R. B. Esquire, in a plea
of Debt of two hundred pounds returnable before the Justices here Quinque pas.
last past in mercy, etc. And he is fined by the said Justices here for the said
four defaults at twenty five pounds, etc.

H 43. Eliz. Rot 451. Prisoner in the Fleet brought to the bar by Hab corp. at
the petition of an estranger, a who brought Writ in debt against him, and he is
demanded by the Justices that he would appear to the said writ, who said he
w^n du^^ therefore process of Ou^ law^y is awarded against him
ss. It was commanded to the Warden of the prison of the Fleet, that he should
have here at this day, to wit, upon Satturday next after, October. S. Hillar. the
body of W. A. Esquire, in the prison of the said Lady the Queen, under the
custody of the said Warden detained, to do and receive what the Court of the
Queen here shall consider of him, and now here at this day came here into the
Court, H. T. by A.S. his Attorney, and brought here into Court, a certain
Original Writ in Debt, upon demand of an hundred and twenty pounds directed to
the Sheriffs of London, and before the Justices of the Lady the Queen here,
returnable against the said Walter by the name of W A. Esquire, of Tomby in the
County of Lincoln Esquire, and prays that the said Walter may appear to his
said Writ, whereupon by the same Warden of the Prison aforesaid brought here to
the bar, present in Court in his own proper person, being spoken to, says,
that he will not appear to the Writ, Therefore let process be made against
the said Walter, upon the Original Writ aforesaid, etc.

T 25 El. rot. 860. G against I.C. like Hab. corp. and such an Original and
demand, who says that he is not the same person against whom the said G.
brought the said original writ and that he will not appear etc. Therefore let
further process be made against the said I. C. late of L Gentleman, against
whom the said Original Writ was brought upon the said Original, and the said
I.C. who is now brought to the Bar, is sent back to the prison, under the
custody of the Warden, for the occasion that he is therein detained, there to
remain, etc.

H 13 Jacorot. 588. Entry of a Capias ad respodend. and thereupon a Non
inventus returned, and a Habeas Corpus to the Warden of the Fleet is awarded,
received such a day, and then thus, and now here at this day came the said
Defendant in his proper person, under the custody of the Warden aforesaid,
brought to the Bar, who being demanded if he would appear to the said Writ or
not, said that not, Therefore let process of Outlawry be made, etc.

M 5. Jac. rot. 2254. Fleet ss. Entry of an Habeas corpus of a prisoner
committed to be Fleet by the Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical and his
enlargement without bail.
It was commanded to the Warden that he should have here to wit at Westminster
immediately after the receipt of this Writ, the body of Anthony Rooper Knight, in
the prison aforesaid under his custody detained, by whatsoever name he is
reputed, together with the day and cause of taking and detaining of the said
Anthony, that the same Justices here viewing the cause, may cause to be done
what of right and according to the Law and custom of the Realm of the Lord
the King of England, The like for Langton, P. 8. Jac. rot. 819. The lik for
Melton there, rot. 1939. The like for Throckmorton, T. 8. Jac. rot. 1675. But
they entered into a Recognizance of a 100 l. i^ the Bench to appear from day to
day. P. 9. Jac rot. 1510 P 8. Jac. rot. 1939.
ought to be done. And no where at this day, to wit, on Satturday next after
Octab. Martini, that same term came the same A in his proper person, under the
Custody of the same Warden brought here to the Bar, and the same Warden then
returned, that before the coming of the Writ, to wit the ninth day of October
last past, the said A.R.M. rendered themselves to the prison aforesaid before
committed by virtue of a certain Warrant, dated the thirtieth day of I last
past, which follows in these words, These are in his Majesty's name
straightly to charge you by virtue of his Highness Commission for causes
Ecclesiastical, under the great Seal of England, to us and others directed,
That herewith you receive and take into your custody the body of Sir Anthony
Rooper Knight, and him safely detain prisoner at this our Commandment, until
we shall give you order for his enlargement, signifying unto you, That the
cause of his commitment is for that there being a certain cause referred unto
us by his Majesty's especial direction, betwixt him the said Sir A.R. and I.B.
Vicar of B. for that he detaineth wrongfully from the said Vicar a certain
yearly pension due unto him from the said Sir A.R, and being called before us,
and after full hearing of the cause in the presence of the said Sir A. R. and of
his Council three or four several times, and at last adjudged by us to pay
the said pension, he having some time of deliberation given unto him, by us to
consider thereof, has notwithstanding obstinately disobey our said Order, and
does so still persist, and this shall be your Warrant in that behalf, given at
Lambeth this thirtieth day of June 1607. And that this was the cause of taking
and detaining of the said Anthony in the prison aforesaid, the body
notwithstanding of the said A he has now here ready, as by the said Writ it
was commanded him, etc. whereupon the premises being seen, and by the
Justices here fully examined and understood, Judgment by the Court.
it seems to the said Justices here, that the said cause of Commitment of the
said A. to the prison of the Fleet aforesaid in the Return aforesaid, above
spec^fied, to be insufficient in Law to detain him the said A in the prison
aforesaid, or to deprive the said A from his privilege of the Court of the
Lord the King here, therefore the same Anthony is dismissed from the prison
aforesaid by the Court here, and the same Warden is fully discharged by the
Court here of such custody, etc.

T 18 Iac. rot. 3157. Brownlow, Entry of an Habeas corpus cum causa, for B the
Sheriff returned, that he was detained by virtue of a certain Warrant, etc. And
that he had brought his body, etc. Pro ut pro breve, etc. whereupon the said I
is committed to the prison of the Lord the King of the Fleet, Ib. remans.
quousque, etc.

M 9. and 10. Eliz. Rot. 1667. London, Nota.
one Thomas L. one of the Attorneys, etc. was committed to the Fleet upon a
warrant from the High Commissioners, And one cause of his commitment was
expressed in the warrant, and the Justices granted him a Writ of Privilege
because he was an atorney with a Corpus cum causa, directed to the wardens of
the Fleet, who returned the warrant in haec verba etc. wereupon his body being
brought to the bar, he was allowed his privilege and discharged from prison.

Inquiry.
H 41. Eliz. Rot, 1119, Bark. ss. Entry of a Writ of inquiry of better issues,
directed to the Justices of Assizes upon a Writ De Distring. Balliv. and
Burgeness upon a Cepi corpus, by them returned upon a Testat. in debt, against
the late Sheriff for finding petty issues upon return of a Distringas. T: 6 H:
6. Rot. 303. Sil. M 24. H 6. Rot: ^09 Issues six shillings eight pence. West;
2. cap: 40.

Alias Distringas awarded. P: 8. H: 6. Rot: 113 Amercement against the return
of the Sheriff upon a Distringas: Jur. T:23 H: 6. scil. upon a Rescous.

P: 226. Rot: 2, the like Writ awarded to the Coroners to enquire de quantis
exitibus; quere quia non est lex. Plur. Distringas.


It was commanded the sheriff that he should distrain the Mayor Baylifes and
Burgesses of the Borrough of Abington in the County aforesaid by all their
Lands, etc, And that of the issue, etc. so that he should have here in Osto,
Mich. last past the body of F. E. late of, etc. whom the same Mayor and
Burgesses late took, as etc, To answer R.B. of a plea that he render unto him
10 l. which to him he owes and unjustly detaineth, etc. At which day here came
the said R. by I. D. his attorney, and offered hmiselfe the fourth day against
the same F. in the same plea, and he came not, etc. And C. L. then sheriff of
the said county of Berk, then here returned that the said Mayor Bayliffes and
Burgesses were distrained by their chattels to the value of 6 s 8 d. And that
the said Mayor B. and B. were bayled by I. D, and R. R, Therefore they in
mercy, etc. And as before it is commanded the sheriff that he should distraine
them by all their lands, etc. And that of the issues, etc. so that should have
here at this day to wit in Oct. S. Hill. the body of the said F, which the same
Mayor B, and B of late took, etc. As, etc. To answer the said R, B. in the plea
aforesaid, and now here at this day to wit at the said Oct. S. Hilli. came the
same R, by his attorney aforesaid and offered himself the 4 th. day against the
said F. in the plea aforesaid and he came not, And the sheriff did nothing
therein, nor sent the writ thereof and as more times, It is commanded the
Sheriff that he destrain them by all their lands, etc. And that of the issues,
etc. so that they may have here, 15. Pas. the body of the said F, who the same
M, B. and B. of late took, as, etc. to answer the said R in the plea aforesaid,
And thereupon it is testified in the court of the Lady the Queen here on the
behalf of the said R. that the said C. L. late sheriff, after the said writ of
distress was first delivered to him, of greater issue, to wit of 100 l. the
lands and Tenements of the said Mayor Bayliffes and Burg. in his bayliwick to
the Lady the Queen might have answered, Averment of the party aginst the
sheriff or retorning the petty issues upon ^he first w it of distress after the
als. and plur. distr. we reenter upon the Roll.
Therefore it is commanded to the Justices of the said Lady the Queen assigned
to take the assiz^s in the county aforesaid, that by the oath of honest and
lawful men of the County aforesaid in the presence of the said sheriff, if he
will be present, they diligently inquire, of what and how much issues, the said
sheriff of the issues of the lands and Chattles of the said Mayor B and B. of
Abingdon aforesaid in his bayliwick, from the time in which the said writ of
distress was delivered unto him until the said Oct. S. Mich. could have
answered to the said Lady the Queen, and the inq^isition which, etc. they make
known here 15, Pas. by their letters sealed, etc. See the old book of entries
in the title of issues returned, 1. 2. and 4. for such a Writ and entry, And
for a Writ awarded to the Justices of Assize see the statute of Westminster the
2. Cap. 40.

A djudged to the Justices at the assize to inquire of what issu^s the sheriff
could answer.
T 9. lac. Rot. 3623. Brownlow, Wigor. ss. It was commanded the sheriff that he
should distraine R. G. Knight late sheriff of the county aforesaid by all his
Lands, etc. So that he should have here at this day to Wit in C S. Trinitatis
the body of R. Y. late of C. in the county aforesaid Yomam which he took by the
precept of the Lord the King now, And detayneth by him, as the said sheriff to
the Justices of the said Lord the King here to wit at Westminster 15. Pas. An.
R nunc Angl. 8. returned to answer to M. F. widow of a plea that he should
render unto her 20 l. which to her he owes and unjustly detayneth, etc. And to
hear his judgment of more defaults, etc. And now here at this day came the
said Mary by I. F. her attorney, and the sheriff now retorneth, that the said
R. G. is distrained, by his chattles to the value of 40 s. and bayled by I. D.
and R. R Therefore they in mercy, Amercement that the sheriff can answer the
King of greater Issues.
etc. And here upon it si testified in the court of the King here, on the
behalf of the said Mary that the said now sheriff of greater issue to wit of 20
l, to the said Lord the King could answer therefore it is commanded to the
Justices of the Lord the King assigned to take the assizes in the county of
Worcest. that by the oath of honest and lawful men of the county aforesaid, in
the presence of the said sheriff, if he will be present, Note that the statute
says die impetr. Br.
they diligently inquire, of what and how much issues, of the lands and
Chattells of the said R. G. the said sheriff, might have answered to the said
Lord the King, from the day of the receiving of the writ aforesaid until the
said day of the return thereof, and the Inquisition which, etc, The same
Justices make appear here in S Mich. by their letters Sealed, etc.

M 13. Jac. Rot. 2096. Brownlow Wiltes. ss. It was commandethe Justices of the
Lord the King at the assize in the County aforesaid, whereas the King had
commanded the late sheriff of the county aforesaid as otherwise he had
commanded him, that he should distrain W. Dutton Knight, late sheriff of the
county aforesaid his predecessor, by all his lands and chattles in his
Bayliwick, so that neither he nor any one for him, put their hands upon them,
Entrey of a w^it to inquire de quantis exitiff etc.

See the statute Westmi. 2.29. which granted this writ Hn. 13. E. 1.


until he shall have an other precept therein from the Lord the King, and that
he should answer of the issues of them to the said Lord the King so that he
should have before the Justices of the said Lord the King there to wit at
Westminster in Cr. S. Trinitatis. last past, the body of R. G. late of, etc.
otherwise called R. G. etc. which by the precept of the Lord the King he had
lately taken, as Fr. Popham Knight late sheriff of the county aforesaid,
predecessor of the sheriff now otherwise returned to the Justices of the Lord
the King here to wit at Westminster aforesaid to answer to W. Mariat of a plea
that he should render unto him 30 l. which, etc. And to hear his judgment of
more defaults, etc at which day the said now sheriff to the Justices of the
said Lord the King now here to wit at Westminster aforesaid, T. 18. Rot. 1674.
retorneth that the said W. D. was distrained by his Chattells to the value of
66 s. and 8 d. where upon it was test fied in the Court of the King here, on
the behalf of the said W. M. that the said sheriff of greater issues to wit of
20 l. might have answered, that by the oath of honest and lawful men of the
county aforesaid in the presence of the said now sheriff if he will be present
they should diligently inquire of what and how many issues of the lands and
chattels of the said W. D, P. 12. H 6. Rot. 2 a ve fac awarded to the Corone^s
to inquire de quantis exitibus
besides the said 66 s. 8 d. in his bayliwick the now sheriff could have
answered to the Lord the King, etc. from the day of the receiving of the said
Writ, until the same day of the return of the same, And the said Inquisition
which, etc. the said Justices of assize should make appear here at this day to
wit in 8. S. Mich. by their letters sealed and now here at this day came the
said W. M. by Tho. P; his attorney and the said Justices of assize to wit
Laurance Tanfeild Kni. Chief Baron of the Lord the King of his Exchequer and
Henry Mountague one of the Sergeants at law of the said Lord the King assigned
to take the assize in the county afaresaid, The Justices of assizes ^^to^ne
into the bench an ^^quisition taken by them.
now return here a certain Inquisition at new Salisbury in the county
aforesaid the 19. day of I. last past by virtue of the said writ by the oath of
12. etc. taken by which it is found that the said W. D. Kni. late sheriff of
the county of the said Cr. S. Tri. last past and long before had diverse lands
and chattells in the county aforesaid whereof the said now sheriff to wit H. M.
from the day of the receiving of the said writ of Distring. above mentioned
until the return of the same, of twenty pounds in issues besides the 66 s.
and 8. d. above, might have answered to the said Lord the King to wit at L. in
the county aforesaid, Therefore it is considered that the said H. L. for his
concealment in this behalf in gui. Sit. Mia. of the Lord the King, And that
he answer the Lord the King of the said 20 l. whereof he, besides the said 66
s. 8 d. of the lands and chattells of the said W. D. as aforesaid could have
answered, according to the Form of the statute in this case provided, etc.
statute 13. E. 1. Cap. 39.

A W^it to enquire of damages awarded de novo, where the Sheriff returned that
he could not execute the old Writ, for that some of the Jurors refused to take
their Oath, and a Capias awarded against them for contempt. Capias awarde^.
P 20. H. 8. Rot. 461. At which day here came the said Plaintiff by his attorney
aforesaid, and the sheriff to wit W, P. Knight now retorneth that he such a day
and year last past caused to come before him at L. in the County aforesaid A.
B. C. D. and others, to inquire of and upon the premises which said C. D.
their corporal oath of and upon the premises to perform or swear, altogether
refused and denied, in manifest contempt of the Lord the King now and the laws
of his Kingdom, So that execution of the said Writ he could not then do,
Therefore as before the sheriff was commanded that by the oath of honest and
lawful men of the county aforesaid he diligently inquire what damages the said
plaintiff sustained as well by occasion of the entry aforesaid, as for his
costs, etc. and in as much, etc. he make appear here such a day under the
seal, etc. and Seals, etc. And also it is commanded to the said sheriff that
he omit not for any liberty but that he take the said C. and D. if, etc. and
safe, etc. so that they may have their bodies here at the said Term to answer
unto the Lord the King of the contempt aforesaid, etc. The same day is given to
the said Plaintiff here, etc.

Entry of a Writ of inquiry against an Attorney in Covenant.
LOndon ss. Whereas Hugh Beeston Knight in our Court before our Justices at
Westmin. exhibited to our said Justices his certain bill against R. G. Gent.
one of the attorneys, etc. otherwise called R. G of Cliffords Inn London. Gent.
in a plea of covenant, for that whereas the same Ricard by his certain Writing
sealed with his seal and into our Court before our Justices brought, made at
London in the parish of St. Mary Bow. in the ward of Cheap the 29. day of Nov.
An. Dom. 1616. whose date is the same day and year, acknowledged himself to
have his custody two Fether beds 1. Bolster 4. Stools covered with Scottish
work, etc. of the proper goods and chattles of the same Hugh Beeston, which
same Goods and Chattles after the delivery of them to the said Hugh, were left
in the custody of the said Richard. And whereas also the same Richard had
promised, and by his said writ covenanted to and with the said Hugh to
redeliver the same goods and chattels to the same Hugh Beeston or his assigns
within the space of one Month after warning thereof to the said Richard given,
as by the writing aforesaid fully appears, And the same Hugh in Fact says,
that he after the making of the writing aforesaid, and before the day of
exhibiting of the same bill to wit the 9, day of Feb. An. 16. etc. at London in
the parish and ward aforesaid requested the said Richard to deliver to the said
Hugh the same goods and chattels within the space of one month then next
following after the warning aforesaid in Form aforesaid given, according to the
Form and effect of the writing aforesaid, And so the same Richard although
often requested the covenant aforesaid, In that the same Richard should
redeliver to the said Hugh the same goods and chattels within the space of one
month after warning to him thereof given has not held but broken, and the
same to him yet to hold, gainesayd, and yet gainsayeth, whereupon he says, that
he is the worse and has damage to the value of 30 l. In such sort it is
proceeded in our said Court and that the said Hugh his damages by occasion of
the breaking of the Covenants aforesaid in not delivery of the goods and
chattles aforesaid to wit one Fether bed one long Table, etc. of the goods and
chattells aforesaid against the same Richard ought to recover. But because it
is unknown what damages the said Hugh has sustained by occasion of the
breaking of the covenant aforesaid in not delivering the goods and chattles
aforesaid, we command you that by the oath of honest, etc. you diligently
inquire what damages the said Hugh sustained as well by occasion of the breaking
of the covenant aforesaid in not delivering of those goods and chattells, as
for his costs and charges by him about his Suit in this behalf laid out, And
the Inquisition, etc retornable upon Thursday next after the morrow of S.
Martin under your Seals, etc. And the seals, etc. damages 8 l. charges 26 s.
8 d. increase 4 l. 7 s. 4 d. in whole 14 l No judgment was entered because the
Parties agreed.

H 18. I. Rot. 568. Devon. ss. Entry of a Writ of Inquiry in case for sees for
suing forth of a Writ of covenant.
Whereas John Blachford was attached to be in our court before our Just ces at
Westminster, etc. to answer John Hoar Gent. one of the attorneys of the court
of common Bench for that that whereas the said Io. here the 28. day of Sep. An.
etc. 12. was, and always hitherto is one of the attorneys of the bench
aforesaid and so being one of the attorneys of the same Court, the same Io.
Blachford the said 28. day of Sept. An. 12 above said at Chagford in
consideration that the same I. Hoar at the special instance and request of the
same I. Blachford would be the attorney of one Tho. Wise Knight and to
prosecute for the same Tho. out of our court of Chancery a certain writ of
ours of covenant of and for levying of a Fine in our said Court of the common
Bench between the said Tho. and certain O. W. Esquire, and Margaret his wife
of certain lands with the appurtenances in W. and D. in the county aforesaid,
and a certain other Writ of ours of Dedimus Potestatem to certain F. F.
Knight H. C. Gent. and I the same I. Hoar to be directed to acknowledge the
Caption which the same Oliver and Margaret before them or two of them should
make of the same lands that a Fine thereupon might be had according to the
course of Fines at the common Law of our Realm of England assumed upon himself
and to the said John Hoar then and there faithfully promised that he the said
John Blachford all expenses which the same John Ho. in and about the
prosecution of the Writs aforesaid, the levying and engrossing of the Fine
aforesaid, and other things which in that behalf should be requisite and
necessary to be don, should expend and deposit And also 3 s. 4 d. for his
attorneys Fee, For every Term wherein the same John Hoar should be the
Attorney of the same Thomas Wise in and about the prosecution of the businesses
aforesaid, when thereof he should be required well and faithfully would pay and
content. And although the said John Hoar giving credit to the promise and
assumption of the said John Blachford afterward to wit the 6. day of October
An. 12. abovesaid, the said Writ of Covenants of the lands aforesaid, to wit of
1. message 1. Garden one orchard 200. acres of land, etc. with the
appurtenances in W. and T. under the name of the said T. W. against the said F.
Whi. and Margaret his wife before the Justices of the Bench in Oct. S. Hillar.
then next following retornable and returned. And the 7. day of the said month
of Octo. the aforesaid other writs of Dedi. Potestat. of our said Court of
Chancery to the same Fr. F. Knight. H. C. and to the same I. H. directed was
likewise prosecuted and a Fine thereupon before our said Justices was in due
manner had levied and engrossed, And a Fine thereupon according to the common
Law of our Realm of Eng. was levied, And all and singular other things which in
that behalf were necessary and expedient to be don did and performed, And was
attorney for the said Thomas in that cause in the Term of S. Michael An. 12.
abovesaid and in the Term of S. Hillary then next following, and 6 s. and 8 d.
for his Attorneys Fee in the same Terms were due to the same I. Hoar and the
same John 78 s. 2 d. in and about the bringing and prosecution of the same
Writs and levying and engrossing of the said Fine, and in doing all and
singular other things which in that behalf were necessary and expedient to be
done in and about the premises, laid out and deposited, which said several
sums in the whole do amount unto 84 s. and 10 d. nevertheless the said I.
B. his promises and assumption aforesaid not regarding but endeavoring and
fradulently intending him the said J. Hoar of the said 84 s. 10 d. craftily and
subtly to defraud, the same 84 s. 10 d, to the same I. H. according to his
promise and assumption aforesaid has not paid although to this by the same I.
H. afterward to wit the 20. day of March An. etc. 14 s. at Chagford aforesaid
was requested but the same to him heitherto to pay has denied and yet denies,
etc. In such sort it is proceeded, etc. damages 6 l. mi. 20 s increase 6 s. in
whole 8 l.

Liberari Facias.
P 4 Eliz. rot. 1919. H 32 Eliz. rot. 1606 Heref. ss. Entry of a w^it of
Liberari fac to the Cognizee of lands extended by extent upon statute merchant,
but not delivered to him for that the Conusor dyed, and the h^ir at the time of
the inquisition taken, was within age, but now at full age if it do appear to
the Sheriff that the heir is of ^u ^ age. See the Statute for Merchants, 13 E.
1. accord.
It was commanded the Sheriff, whereas the Lady the Queen by her certain Writ
out of the Court of the said Lady the Queen here at Westminster, in the Term
of the Holy Trinity, Anno Reg. etc. 38. issuing and directed to the Sheriff of
the County of Hereford, reciting by the said Writ, That whereas the said Lady
the Queen had commanded the Sheriff of Middlesex by her said writ that the
bodies of E. W. of D. in the County, etc. and I.T. of W. in the same County,
etc. if they were lay men and found in his Bail^wick, he should take, and
should safely keep in the prison of the said Lord the King, until they had
fully satisfied S. B. of W etc. of fifty pounds, which the same E. and I. the
second day of July, Anno 23. Eliz. before R. N. and R. C. then Bailiffs of the
City of W. and keepers of the greater piece of the seal of the statute
Merchant there and W. I. Gent. then Clarke of the City aforesaid, and keeper of
the lesser part of the seal of Statute Merchant aforesaid, Deputed to take
acknowledgment of such Statutes for Debt, for Merchants at the City aforesaid,
acknowledged themselves to owe to the said S. which they ought to have paid
unto him at the Feast of Saint Michael the Arch Angel then next following, and
they have not paid the same unto him as it is said, and in as much as the said
Sheriff of Middlesex shall have executed the precept of the said Lady the
Queen, he should make appear to the Justices of the said Lady the Queen here in
8 Hillarii Anno 37 Reginae Nunc and the said sheriff of Middlesex to the
Justices of the said Lady the Queen here at Westminster at that day returned,
that the same W, and I. were Lay men and were not found in his Bailiwick, and
to the Sheriff of Hereford commanded that all the goods and chattells of the
same E and I. and all the Lands and Tenements whereof the same E and I. at the
day of the acknowledgement of the Debt aforesaid, Recital of the Writ of
extent.
or at any time afterward were seized, to whose hands soever they should come,
unless to any heir within age by hereditary Descent, they should descend, he
should deliver to the said S by reasonable price and extent, To hold the goods
and chattells aforesaid, as his proper goods and chattells. and the Lands and
Tenements aforesaid as his free Tenement to him and his Assigns, according to
the form of the Statute therein made and provided, until the Debt aforesaid
together with his reasonable and necessary Damages and costs, as in Labors,
Suits, Delays and Expenses, he should levy thereof.

And nevertheless, That he should take the bodies of the said E. and I. and
should safely keep them in the prison of the said Lady the Queen, until they
should satisfy the said S. of the Debt aforesaid in form as aforesaid, and in
as much as that precept of the Lady the Queen should be executed, he should
make appear to the Justices of the said Lady the Queen here at Westminster in
October Sancti Michaelis, Anno 38. abovesaid, and that he should have then there
the Writ aforesaid, the same Sheriff of Hereford to the Justices of the said
Lady the Queen here at Westminster, The Sheriff returns that the Conusors
are dead. Inquisition taken, and the Lands extended, but the Lands descended to
an infant, and the Sheriff by reason of his nonage, could not deliver them to
the Conusees.
at the said 8 S. Mich. returned that the same E. and I. were dead, and also to
the same Justices of the said Lady the Queen here at that day, returned a
certain Inquisition before him the said sheriff of Hereford, by virtue of a
certain Writ to him therein directed, at K. in the County of Hereford, the
thirteenth day of S. Anno 38. abovesaid, by the oath of twelve honest and
lawful men of the County of Hereford, was taken, by which it was found that
the same E. I. were dead, after the acknowledgment of the Debt aforesaid, and
long before the taking of the said inquisition, and that the same I the day
whereon he dyed, was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of and in four Closes or
parcells of pasture, lying and being in H within the parish of L. in the same
County of Hereford, containing by estimation fifteen acres, etc. as in the
Inquisition. And the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, were worth by
the year in all issues besides Reprizes, sixty shillings, and that the same
I.T. of the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in form aforesaid
being seized, after the acknowledgement of the Debt aforesaid, and before the
coming of the said Writ dyed thereof seized, after whose Death, The lands
descend to the heir within age.
the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances descended to one I.T. son and
heir of the said I.T, the son, at the time of the taking of the Inquisition
aforesaid, was within the age of one and twenty years, to wit, of twenty
years and no more, so that the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances to
the said S. by reason of the minority of the said I.T. the son, he could not
deliver, according to the Tenor of the said writ to him therein directed, and
that the said E. at the time of the acknowledgement aforesaid made, or at any
time afterward, had no Lands or Tenements in the County of Hereford, as by the
Record and proceedings therein in the Court of the said Lady the Queen here
plainly appears.

Suggestion, that the heir is of full age.
And now in the Court of the said Lady the Queen, before the Justices of the
said Lady the Queen here at Westminster, it is alleged, that the said I.T. the
son is come to his full age of one and twenty years, and has of a long time
been of full age, therefore the said Lady the Queen does command the said
Sheriff of Hereford, that if it can appear to the said Sheriff, that the same
I.T. came to his full age of one and twenty years before the issuing forth of
this Writ, and now to be, then the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances
by the Extent aforesaid, in form aforesaid made, he should deliver to the said
S. to hold as his free Tenement to him and his Assigns, according to the form
of the Statute aforesaid thereof made and provided, until the Debt aforesaid,
Liberate conditional, that if it could appear to the sheriff that the heir is
at full age.
together with reasonable and necessary Damages and Costs, as in Labors,
Suits, Delays and Expenses, be thereof levied, etc. and in as much, etc. he
make appear here, 15. Trinitat. etc.

Mittimus.
T 3. Jac. rot. 24 10. Entry of a Mittimus of the Record and proceedings Which
was removed out of another Court, by a certiorare out of the Chancery, and sent
to the Justices of the Bench.
The Lord the King sent to his Justices of the Bench here, his Writ closed in
these words, James, by the Grace of God, etc. To his Justices of the Bench
greeting, The Record and proceedings in a certain plaint which was in the Court
of our Honor and Castle of Windsor, before our dear Cosen and Counselor,
Charles, Earl of Nottingham of the noble Order of the Garter, Knight, Admiral
of England, Constable of our honorable Castle aforesaid, and keeper of the
whole Forest of the same, or to his Deputy of Keeper of his place there,
without any writ, between William R. Esquire, and J. M. Gent of cattle of the
same W. taken and unjustly detained as is said, by Jo. Trevor Knight, Deputy of
the same County, by virtue of our writ of Certiorare to you into our Chancery
certified, we send you in these presents enclosed, commanding you, that the
Records and proceedings of the plaint aforesaid being inspected, you further do
therein at the prosecution of the same James, what of right, and according to
the Law and custom of our Realm of England is to be done, Test. etc. James
by the grace of God, etc. To our dear Cosen, etc. greeting, we will^ng for
certain causes to be certified, by the Record and proceedings in a certain
plaint which is before you in our Court of the Honor and Castle aforesaid,
without out writ, between W.R. Esquire, and I Moor of cattle of the same W.
etc. we command you, that the Record and proceedings in the plaint aforesaid,
with all things touching the same, by whatsoever names the parties aforesaid in
the said plaint are distinguished to us into our Chancery, wheresoever it shall
then be, under your seal, without delay you distinctly and plainly send, and
this Writ, etc.

Note, Nota.
That if the Record had been sent to the Justices of the common Bench, they
could not have proceeded upon the Tenor of the Record, but upon the Return
sent, etc.

H 17 Eliz rot. 939. Nota.
Cause certified into the Bench was removed by a procedendo, because the moneys
in the plaint amounted not to 40 s.

T 20 Jac rot: 3371. Brownlow, The Lord the King, etc. The Tenor of the Record
and proceedings, etc. We send to you enclosed in these presents, and so recite
the Certiorare, which is, we willing for certain causes to be satisfied upon
the Tenor of the Record, etc, and the plaint, etc, And now here, to wit, at
Westminster, in Cr. Trin. that same Term came as well the said Plaintiff by T.
R. his Attorney, as the said Defendant by F. M. his Attorney and the Writs and
Return aforesaid being seen, and by the Justices here fully understood and
examined, to the said Justices here it sufficiently appears, that the Court
here upon the Tenor of the Record aforesaid cannot proceed, Therefore it is
considered, that the said Mayor and Burgesses of the Borough of N aforesaid,
in the plaint aforesaid, according to the Law and custom of the Borough
aforesaid, at the prosecution of the said William, may proceed with effect, and
to the parties aforesaid, full and speedy Justice therein, according to the
custom of the Court aforesaid, may exhibit, etc. between C. and A.

Ne Exeat Regnum.
Ne exeat Regnum
M 7. H. 6. rot. 600. or 606. Security found that he depart not the Kingdom.

Nvsance.
Selde.
M. 8. Car. Regis rot. (...) To the Sheriff of Middlesex, greeting, whereas of
late we have made public Proclamation (amongst other things) that none should
erect any Walls whereupon (...) might be super added within our City of London,
or the Subburbs of the same, or within the distance of three thousand paces, of
any of the Gates of the same City, or from the Palace of Westminster, license
from our Commissioners assigned to oversee the buildings in those parts not
before had, Notwithstanding Thomas Ford late of the parish of Saint Andrew
Holborne, in your County, Yeoman, contemning our commands, promulgated (license
of our Commissioners not before had) in a certain Field in the Parish of Saint
Clements Danes without Temple Bar London, Selde.
on the south part of the ancient Inn called Clemants Inn, of a long time
appointed for the Residence of men incumbent in the study of our Laws, a
certain wall to which (...) may be superadded of Brick, Lime, and Sand, to
erect, and part of the same Field intends to enclose as an ally or common
place to bowl in, And the foundation of the same Wall has now laid and more
Brick Lime and Sand for further progress in the same Wall has here also put
and has ready, as it is said, and if that place should be also enclosed, It
would happen that the Students of that Inn, incumbent in the same in the study
of our Laws with the Clamors and noise of men resortng to that place would be
so much disturbed, that they could not Follow their Studies We (to observe our
commands) and willing to regard the quiet and tranquillity of the students
aforesaid that they should not be diverted from their Studyes, Command you that
you omit not for any liberty of your county but that you command the said
Thomas on our behalf that from further building of the wall aforesaid, he be
altogether superseded and the wall begun and the Foundation of that wall by him
in the place aforesaid put, he cause to be demolished upon the danger to
follow. Test 19. Nov. Car. T. C. C. S.

Cartwright

Original.
M 18. H 8. Rot. 2. ss. An original Writ out of the Chancery at the Suit of
the party directed to the Justices of the Common Bench, to stifying that he is
a Lord of the Parliament, and that they should make no other process against
him, only such as are made against the Pee^s of the Land.
The Lord the King sent to his Justices of the bench here his writ closed in
these words, Henry the 8. by the grace of God, etc. To his Justices of the
Common Bench Greeting we command you that if Edward Sutton of Dudly in the
County of Staff. Knight be impleaded before you at the suit of any one in a
personal action, you cause so to be made against him such Process and no other
in the action aforesaid, as ought against Lords Peers Earls and Barons of this
our Kingdom of England which ought to come to our Parliaments upon our summons
or any of them as according to our Laws and Customs of the Realm of England
ought to be made, Because we record the same Edward one of the Barons of our
Realm aforesaid coming to our Parliament, and this to you and every of you who
are interested therein, we notify witness our selves at Westminster etc. And
it ought to be written upon the back of the said writ as follows, It is
inroled in the Bench in the Term of S. Michael An. Regni R. H. 8. 18. Rot. 2.
and ought to be Filed amongst the Records sine die etc. See the old Book of
entries fo. 313. Title, Error in utlawry 20. Ms 31. H. 6. Rot. 309. H. 1. H 7.
Rot. 305. A servant of a Knight in the Parliament impleaded in the Bench
brought his writ here out of the Chancery testifying it, and there upon the
Justices Surcease, and the servant goes thereof without day, etc.

Pardon.
Entry of the allowance of a uenerall pardon gpon an Utlary after judgment,
wherein it appears by the Record that the Pl. is satisfied of his debt and
damages.

P. 3. ^ Eliz: rot: 1131. tiel. upon satisfaction given to the Executor after
the death of the testator.

M 22 Jac: rot: 2781. e.

Brownlow for Andrews against Mason the like: but note, that the judgment was
entered with Waller, and the pardon was pleaded with Mr. Brownlow chief
Prothonat ry.

H: 44 Eliz. rot: 2550. the like but more general.


T 19. I. Rot. 1887. Midd. ss. It was commanded the sheriff that he should not
omit for any liberty of his county but that he should take F. T. late of, etc.
Esquire. utlawed in London die lun. prox. pro fest. etc. Ano. Regni etc. 3. at the
Suit of F. W. in a Plea of debt whereof he is convicted, and him safely, etc. so
that he might have his body here at this day to wit tres Trinitatis, etc. to do
and receive what the Court of the Lord the King here shall consider of him in
this behalf, and now here at this day came the same F. T. By F. B. his
attorney, And says that after the utlawry aforesaid against him the said
Francis in Form aforesaid published and had by a certain act in Parliament of
the said Lord the King now held at Westminster in the county of Midd. 9. of
February An. 7. amongst other things it was inacted and established by the
authority of the same Parliament that all and singular the subjects of the said
Lord the King as well Spiritual as temporal of this Kingdom of England Walls
Jsls of Jernesey and Garnsey and of the town of Barwick their heirs
Successors executors, and administrators of them and every of them, And all and
singular Corporations or Towns, incorporate, Cities, Buroughs, Counties,
Ridings, Hundreds, Lath, Rape, Wapentacks, Towns Uillages, Hamlets, and
Tithings and every of them and the Successors of them and every of them, by
authority of the same Parliament should be acquitted pardoned, released and
discharged against the same Lord the King his heirs and Successors and every
of them, from all Treasons and Felonies, Offenses, contempts Trespasses,
entries injuries deceipts, etc. As in the Act, and the same Francis Tunstall
says that the utlawry aforesaid against the same F. in Form aforesaid
published and had is not excepted and foreprised in the Act aforesaid and that
he is and at the time of the making of the Act aforesaid and long before was a
subject and Liege man of the same Lord the King now, borne under his obedience,
to wit at Westminster aforesaid in the said County of Midd. And that he
satisfied to the said Francis Waswell for the said debt of 401 l. which the
same Francis White in the court of the said Lord the King here recovered
against him as of the said 36 s. which to the same Francis White in the same
Court of the King here were adjudged for his damages which he had by the
occasion of the detayning of the said debt as it appears in the Term of S.
Hillary An. Rs. nunc 2. Rot, 1846. For which said debt and damages the same
Francis Tunstal was at the suit of the said Francis White in Form aforesad
utlawed and this he is ready to verify where and When and as the Court of the
Lord the King here shall consider, etc. Therefore it is not intended that the
Lord the King now will impeach or charge the same Francis Tunstall by occasion
of the utlawry aforesaid, whereupon he Prays judgment and that he may be
discharged from the utlawry aforesaid, And because by upon inspection of the
record of the same Term of S. Hillary An. 2. abovesaid, It sufficiently
appears to the said justices upon Record that the same Francis White is
satisfied of the debt and damages aforesaid, Therefore the same general pardon
is allowed to the same Francis Tunstall. And the same Francis may go thereof
without day, etc.

P 32. Eliz. Rot. 1131. Scot. Essex. Entrey of special pardon of an utlawry
after satisfaction of the judgment; Note. Note.
that the defendant came there by a Cepi Corpus and is committed to the Fleet,
And then he pleads the pardon and the satisfact on, and prays that the pardon
may be allowed and he set at larg, and it was don. P, 44. Eliz Rot. 1539. H.
19. Eliz. Rot. 424. Tiel.

H 8. Iac. Rot. Brownlow London. ss. R. T. utlawed An. 34: Eliz. Whereof he is
convicted, at the suit of G. At 8. Pardon and release of demands pleaded in the
discharge of an Expostat.
Pur. comes and pleads the pardon de 39. Eliz. and sets forth that the
utlawry is not excepted, etc. And that he is a Subject, etc. And that the same
Edw. after the utlawry aforesaid against the said R. in Form aforesaid
published and had to wit 30. Jan. An. 37. Eliz. released all demands to the
Defendant as by the said writing more fully appears and th s he is ready to
verify, etc. vnde non intendit Dom. Rex. etc. But because it is not known
whether the writing of the release aforesaid by the same R. above pretended, be
the deed of the said Edward or not, And because it is expedient and necessary
that the said Ed. for his interest in this behalf be premonished before it be
further proceeded in to discharg the same R. from the utlawry aforesaid
according to the Form of the Act aforesaid, the sheriff is commanded that by
the honest, Sci. fac. awarded.
etc. they make known to the said Ed. etc. 15 Pas. to acknowledge or gainesay
the writing of release aforesaid, and also to show if any thing, etc. wherefore
the said Rob. ought not to be discharged from the utlawry aforesaid if, etc.

M 18. Jac. Rot. Brownlow Sussex ss. It was commanded the sheriff whereas
Walter Covert Knight was summoned to be in the Court of the Lord the King now
here to answer Ed, Culpeper Knight of a plea wherefore, Entry of a writ to make
partition, and partition made thereupon, and judgment therein.
whereas the same Ed. and Walter together and und^videdly do hold 20. Mes. 6.
mills 20. Gardens 2000. acres of land 500. acres of Meadow 1000. acres of
Pasture 2000. acres of wood, 2000 acres of Furs and heath and 500. acres of
land covered with water with the appurtenances in Balcombe, Tuck-feild,
Slewham, Crawley, and Porth the same Walter to make partition thereof between
them according to the Form of the statute in such case provided, gainsayeth
and unjustly permited not the same to be don and against the Form of the
statute aforesaid, And the same Walter in the Court of the King here well
grants that partition thereof be made, by which it was considered in the same
Court of the Lord the King here, that partition should be made between the
parties aforesaid of the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, That
taking with him 12. Free and lawful men of the neighborhoods of B. C. S. C.
and W. by whom, etc. he should come in his proper person unto the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances and in the presence of the parties aforesaid
by the same Sheriff to be premonished, if they will be present, the same
Tenements with the appurtenance, by the oath of honest and lawful men of his
county, respect being had to the true value of the same Tenements with the
appurtenances, he should cause to be parted into two equal parts, and one part
of the some Tenements with the appurtenances to the same Edward, and the other
part of the same Tenements with the appurtenances residue to the same Walter to
hold to them in severalty, he should cause to be delivered and assigned, so
that neither the said Edward nor the same Walter may have more of the
Tenements, aforesaid with the appurtenances then belongs to them to have, and
that the said Edward of his purpart to the same Edward out of the tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances happening, And the same Walter of his purpart to
the same Walter out of the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances happening
may severally apportion themselves and that partition by the same sheriff
distinctly and openly made, he should make appear here in Oct. S. Mich. under
his seal, and the seals of them upon whose oath that partition shall be made,
and that he should have here the names of them upon whose oath he should make
that Inquisition, and that writ, And now here at this day came the same Edward
by Robert Moyle his attorney and the sheriff to wit Nicholas Eversfeild Esquire.
now retorneth here a Certain partition between the parties aforesaid of the
tenements aforesaid by the same sheriff before him by virtue of the writ
aforesaid and according to the Form of the said writ by the oath of 12, etc.
made which follows Sussex ss. I. N. E. sheriff of the county aforesaid to the
Justices of the Lord the King do certify by virtue of a writ therein to me
directed and to this schedule annexed the seventh day of August An. etc. 18.
See the new book of Entries, title Partition, fo 411. such a form.
took with me I. F the elder I. F. the younger and ten others twelve Free and
lawful men of the Neighbourhoods of B. C. S. C. and W. in the same writ
specified I came in my proper person to the tenements in the same writ
specified, to wit to 20 Mess. 20. Gardens, 2000. acres of Land 500 acres of
Meadow 1000. acres of pasture 2000. acres of Wood 2000. acres of Furze and
heath and 500. acres of Land covered with water in B. C. S. C. and W. in the
same writ mentioned, And there by their oath respect being had to the true
value of the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances in the presence of the
parties in the same writ named by me the same sheriff premonished, the same
Tenements into two equal parts with the appurtenances, I have made to be
parted and one part of the Tenements aforsaid with the appurtenaces to wit one
Capital Message or mansion house called T. with the appurtenances, etc. and
so receite the parcells, etc. I have caused to be delivered and assigned to
Edward Culpeper Knight in the same writ named for his purpart of the Tenements
aforesaid to hold to the same Edward in severalty by himself as by meets and
bounds they are now divided, And an other part of the same Tenements with the
appurtenances that is to say one Message called the glovers house otherwise
Gardners farm etc. And so receipt the other particulars, etc. 2. Part.
I have c^used to be delivered and assigned to Walter Covert Knight in the same
writ likewise named for his purpart of the Tenements aforesaid, to hold to the
same Walter in severalty by himself as by meets and bounds they are now
divided, so that the same Edward of his purpart of the same Edward out of the
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances hap^ing, And the same Walter of his
purpart to the same Walter out of the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances in Form aforesaid happening may severally apportion themselves as
by the same writ it was commanded to me, in Testimony whereof as well I the same
sheriff as the Jurors aforsaid to this partition have severally put our seals
the day and year abovesaid, Judgment that the pa^tion be held f^^m amd stable.
Therefore it is considered that the partition aforesaid be held Firm and
Staple for ever. Note that at the retorn of this writ of particion Hickham the
Kings Sergeant at Law and of council with the defen. Sr. Walter Covert Knight
came to the bar and moved that the partition might be quashed and that a new
Writ to make partition might issue, For that the partition was not Legally made
by the sheriff, And upon much debate in Court the 4, Judges Hobort, Warborton,
Winch and Hutton ordered Sr. Walter Covert to pay to Sr. Edw. Colpeper 3500 l.
for his part, wherewith the parties are agreed, and Sr. Walter Covert in joyed
the lands aforesaid, and the writ was not Filed nor the judgment entered, but I
added it to the partition because of the presedent.

Plur. Replegiare.
M 6. 7. Eliz. Rot. 423. Entry of a wr^ of Plur. replegiare,
Otherwise as it appears in the time of the holy Trinity An. 6. Regin. nunc,
Rot. 621, It is thus contained, Derb, ss. It was commanded the sheriff, that
whereas of late the Qu. had more times commanded the said sheriff that
instantly and without delay, he should make replevy to M. S. widow, a certain
ox which E. T. and W. T. took and unjustly detayned, etc. Or the sheriff of
the County aforesaid should be before the Justices of the said Lady the Queen
here to wit at Westminster in Oct. S. Mich. An. 4, Reg. nunc, to show
wherefore he contemned to execute the command of the Lady the Queen so often to
him therein directed, And the same sheriff to the Justices of the said Lady the
Queen here at the day of the return, that no other writ besides that writ came
to his hands thereof, And that he could not deliver the ox aforesaid to the
said Margaret, For that the said E. and W. claimed the propriety of that Ox by
the command and to the use of Ralph L. his Master, The said Lady the Queen
being unwilling that the said Margaret should be defrauded of the said Ox by
such a false return, Property claimed by the defendant of the goods distrained.
but being willing without delay to replevy him to the said M. If he should be
Summoned according to the Law and custom of the Realm of the Lady the Queen
of England, by her writ commanded the said sheriff, that taking with him the
Keepers of the pleas of the Crown of the said Lady the Queen in the presence
of the said Marg. and of the said Ralph Edmond and W. by the same sheriff to be
premonished, if they will be present, by the oath of honest and Lawful men of
the county aforesaid by whom the truth of the matter may be the better known,
he diligently inquire whether the propriety of the said Ox should be to the
said M. or to the said R. L. and if he shall find by that Inqisition that the
propriety of that Ox should be in the said M. then without delay he should
replevy him to the said M. according to the Tenor of the command of the said
Lady the Queen at other times to the said sheriff directed, A Writ of
proprietate probanda awarded.
and should put by sureties and safe pledges the said Edmon and William that
they should be before the said Justices of the said Lady the Queen here to wit
at Westminster in Oct. S. Trin. then next following to answer as well the said
Lady the Queen of the contempt, as to the said Margaret of the damages and
injuries to her in this behalf don, and the said sheriff to the Justices of the
Lady the Queen here at that day returned that he took with him the Kepers of
the pleas of the Crown of the said Lady the Queen, Property found in the
Plaintiff, and that the Ox is eloyned.
in the presence of the Parties aforesaid by the oath of 12, etc. And made
diligent Inquisition of and upon the premises, by which it was found that the
propriety of the Ox aforesaid then and at the time of the taking of the same
was the said Margarets, And that the said Ox before the coming of the writ
aforesaid, was eloyned and the said E. and W. to places unknown to the said
sheriff, so that he could not replevy the said Ox to the said Margaret, Capias
in Withernam awarded of the defendants Cattle.
as by the said writ it was commanded him, etc. And the said sheriff also
retorneth that the said E. and W. have nothing in his Bayliwick by which they
could be attached, wereupon the said sheriff the said Lady the Queen now
commands, that of other cattle of the said E. and W, to the value of the Ox
aforesaid before taken, he should take in Withernam, and deliver them to the
said M. to hold to her until the said Ox before taken should be returned, and
in as much, etc. he should make appear here to wit at Westminster in Ost. S.
Hill. An. 5. Eliz. The Lady the Queen also commanded to the said sheriff that he
should take the said E. and W. if, etc. and them safely keep, Capias for
contempt.
so that he should have their bodies here at the same Term to answer as well
the said Lady the Queen for the contempt of the said M. for damages and
injuries to her in that behalf don, And the said Sheriff to the said Justices
here to wit at Westminster at the said 8. Hilli. retorneth, that the said E.
and W. had no Cattle in his Bayliwick which he could take in Withernam, As by
the said writ it was commanded him, Return that the defendants had no Cattle
that could be taken in Withernam, and not to be found as to the Capias for
contempt.
nor were found in the same, whereupon the Queen commanded the said sheriff, as
other times she had commanded him that he should take the said E. and W. if,
etc. and them safe, etc. so that he should have their bodies here to wit at
Westminster in 8. Pur. S. Mariae then next following to answer to the said Lady
the Queen of the contempt aforesaid as to the said M. of the damages and
injuries to her in this behalf don, And the said sheriff, to the said justices
here to wit at Westminster the said Oct. Pu. B. Mariae, retorneth that the said
R. and W. were not found in his Bayliwick whereupon the said Lady the Queen
commanded the said She. as more times she had him commanded, Capias awarded
gene^ally.
that he should take the same E. and W. if, etc, and safely, etc. so that he
should have their bodies here to wit at Westminster 15. Pas. then next
following, to answer as well the said Lady the Queen of the contempt aforesaid
as to the said M. of the damages and injuries to her in this behalf don, non
invent* ^ened.
And the same sheriff to the said Justices here to wit at Westminster aforesaid
at the said 15. Pas. returned that the said E. and W. were not found in his
Bayliwick whereupon the Qu. commanded the said sheriff quod. exigi Fac. the
said E. and W. from County to County until, etc. if not, Exigent awarded.
etc and if etc. then he should take them and safely keep them, so that he
should have their bodies here to wit at Westminster in Oct. S. Mich. then next
following to answer as well to the said Lady the Queen of the contempt aforesaid
as to the same M. of the damages and injuries to her in this behalf don,
adjornment of the time.
at which said Oct. S. Mich. The plaint aforesaid was adjorned, by writ of the
Lady the Queen, de Com. adjorna mento, Further adjorment.
at Westminster until Oct. S. Hill. then next following, At which day here to
wit at Westminster the Plaint aforesaid was Further adjorned, by writ of the
said Lady the Queen de Com. adjornamento, from Westminster aforesaid unto the
Castle of the said Lady the Queen of Hertford, Non mi. bre.
in the county of Hertf. until 15. Hilarii then next following, at which day
before the said Justices of the said Lady the Queen at the Castle of Herf. the
said sheriff sent not the Writ, whereupon the Lady the Qu. commanded to the
said sheriff that he should of new put in exigent the said E. and W. from
county to county until, etc. they should be utlawed if not, Exigi fac. de Novo
awarded.
etc. then they should take them and them safely keep so that they should have
their bodies here before the said Justices at the said Castle of Hertf, in
Octab. Sancti Tri. then next following, Adj^u^ment of the Term,
to answer as well to the said Lady the Queen of the contempt, etc. as to the
said M. of Damages and injuries to her in this behalf done, before which said
October. S. Trin. the plaint aforesaid was adjourned by writ of the said Lady the
Queen, De C. adjornamento, from the said Castle of Herford, unto Westminster
aforesaid.

Plaintiff and Defendants appear by Attornyes.
And now here, to wit, at Westminster aforesaid, at the same day, to wit, at the
said 8. S. Trin. came as well the said M. by T. H. her Attorney, as the said E.
and W. by L. S. their Attorney, and hereupon the said M. declaring against the
said E. and W. in the plaint aforesaid, complains that the said E. and W. the
twenty fourth day of June Anno 4. Eliz, at O in a certain place called B, took
the said Ox of the said M. price eight pounds, Count in replevin for cattle,
and the value, etc. and that the Defendant may gage deliverance.
and him unjustly detained against sureties and pledges, etc. whereupon she
said that, etc. damages twenty pounds and thereupon brings suit, etc. and
prays that the said E. and W. may gage deliverance of the Ox aforesaid, and
the said E. and W. pray license to imparle here until 8 Mich. and have it,
etc. the same day is given to the said M. here, etc.

And now here at this day, to wit 8 Mich. came as well the said M as the said E
and VV. by their Attornyes aforesaid, Nil dicit. A writ to enquire of damages
for taking the ox awarded. Quere if it ought not to be also of the value, etc.
and nothing in Bar or preclusion of the Action, etc. as in others until,
without defense, for which the said M her Damages by occasion of the taking and
unjust detaining of the Ox aforesaid against the said E. and VV. ought to
recover, but because it is not known what Damages the said M. sustained, by
occasion of the taking and unjust detaining of the Ox aforesaid, the Sheriff
is commanded, that by the oath of honest and lawful men of the County
aforesaid, he diligently enquire what Damages the said M. sustained, as well by
occasion of the premises, as for her costs and charges by her about her suit
in this behalf laid out, and the Inquisition which, etc. The Sheriff make
appear here in 8 Hill. under his seal and seals, etc.

Entry of a plur, repleg. A. B. in homine repleg the Sheriff returns that A
is enlarged, etc. and a. Capias in Withernam of the body of the avowant awarded
see F N B fol. 68. agrees.
M 32 H. 8. rot. 319. Essex. ss. The Sheriff was commanded as more times, that
he should replevy A. B. Spinster, who E. L. took and taken, kept, etc. or that
the same Sheriff should be here at this day, to wit, in Cro. Any. to show
wherefore he could not execute the commands of the Lord the King to him so
often therein directed, at which day, the sheriff, to wit, I. D. Esquire
returned, that the same A. was enlarged to places to him unknown, so that he
could not replevy her according to the Tenors of the commands to him therein
directed, Therefore the Sheriff is commanded that he take the body of E. in
Withernam, and cause him safely and securely to be kept, until the same A. in
form aforesaid taken, may be replevied, and if the same Sheriff can replevy
the same A. that then the same A shall secure the same sheriff to prosecute her
plaint, by return of her body, if return thereof shall be adjudged, then the
same sheriff put by sureties and safe pledges, the same E. that he be here 15.
Hillarii, to answer to the said A. of the taking and unjust detaining of the
same A, and as well to the Lord the King of the contempt, as to the said A. of
the Damages and Injuries to her in this behalf offered, and in as much, etc.
the same sheriff should make appear here at the same Term, etc,

M 7 and 8 Eliz. rot. 1729. Fylmer. London ss. Entry of a writ of plur. Repl.
See M. 7 and 8 El. rot. 245 pl. 67. Dyer, this case reported. H 12 H 6 rot. 316.
It was commanded the sheriffs, whereas of late more times, the Lord the King
had commanded the same sheriffs, that justly and without delay they should
cause to be replevied to William Hurst all the goods and chattells, which
Richard Millers Knight, N.W. and I.S. took and unjustly detained, or would
signify the cause to the said Lady the Queen, wherefore they would not
execute her command otherwise to the same sheriffs therein directed, or that
they could not and the same sheriffs contemning the commands of the said Lady
the Queen, to the same William have not replevied his goods and chattells
aforesaid, or at leastwise hitherto have not regarded to signify, to the said
Lady the Queen the cause wherefore they would not or could not do the same, in
manifest contempt of the said Lady the Queen, now and her commands aforesaid,
and the immoderate Damage and greivance of the said William, wherewith the Lady
the Queen is very much injured and moved, Return thereof Custom of the City of
Land. that when any goods are distrained within the City, that they ought to be
re^levied by plaint within the city, before the sheriffs to be levied, and not
by a writ issuing out of the Chancery. Note Dyer fol. 246. That before the
statute of Marlebridge cap 21. The Sheriffs by the common Law could not make
replevy without a writ.
that Return is not made to the said W. of his goods and chattells aforesaid,
according to the Tenor of the commands of the said Lady the Queen, before to
them therein directed, therefore let the same sheriffs be here at this day, to
wit, in C. A. to show, wherefore they have contemned to execute the commands of
the said Lady the Queen, so often to them therein directed, And now here at
this day came the said W.H. by T. H. his Attorney, and the sheriffs, to wit,
I.R. and I.H. to the Justices here, have certified That any Writ of the Lady
the Queen to replevy any goods or chattells to the same W.H. besides the Writ
aforesaid, to the same sheriff, or either of them was not delivered, and that
the City of London is, and from the time whereof the memory of man is not to
the contrary, was an ancient City, and that within the same City is had, and
from the time whereof the memory of man is not to the contrary, was had,
accustomed used and approved, that whenever any Cattle, goods, or chattells
by the Law of the Land were replevyable, within any place of the City
aforesaid, or liberties thereof were taken, that then all such cattle, goods,
and chattells, ought, and were accustomed by the whole time aforesaid to be
replevied, by the sheriffs, Ministers of the City aforesaid, for the time
being, by virtue of a plaint in the Court of the said Lady the Queen and her
progenitors Kings of England, held before the Sheriffs of the City aforesaid,
for the time being levied and not by writ of the said Lady the Qu. or her
progenitors Kings of E. issuing out of the Chancery, and also that all the
customs of the City aforesaid, by Authority of Parliament of the Lord E, late
King of England, after the Conquest at Westminster, The Sheriffs are free men
of London, and held by their oath to observe the customs of the City.
the fifteenth year of his Reign held, were ratified and confirmed to the then
Mayor and Comminalty of the same City and their successors, which said
Liberties and free Customs of the same City, they the same sheriffs and
freemen of the City aforesaid, before the purchasing of the said Original
Writ, and always afterward, hitherto being bound by oath have observed, and
are bound to hold without any violation, for which causes, the sheriffs
aforesaid could not replevy; the goods and chattells in the said Writ
specified, or do Execution upon the said writ nor can at the present, but
because it seems to the Court here, that the Return aforesaid, The Return of
the Sheriff vicious.
in form aforesaid made, is as well in contempt and prejudice of the said Lady
the Queen now, and of her Court, and also in Derrogation of her Crown and
Dignity, and manifest Danger of her Dis-inheriting, and also that it gives way
and redoundeth to the immoderat damage and greivance of the same W, and Delay
of his suit, therefore as before, the sheriffs are commanded without Delay to
replevy to the same W. the goods and Chattells aforesaid according to the Tenor
of the commands of the said Lady the Queen now aforesaid therein to them
directed, Plur. repleg. awarded.
and in as much, etc. They make appear here in 8 Sancti Hillarii, etc. It is
also commanded the Coroners of the said Lady the Queen that they cause to come
here the same sheriffs at the same Term, to answer as well to the said Lady the
Queen as to the same W, of and upon the premises, further to do and receive
what the Court of the said Lady the Queen here shall consider of them in this
behalf, and in as much, etc. The same Coroner cause to appear at the same
Term, etc.

Pone.
Sheriffs return upon a Pone adjudged void, for that he show edssino the
cattle in specie named in the Return, See p. 3 El. Dyer fol. 199. pl. 54.
Report of the case, 21 E 4 fol. 23. M. 18. H. 6. rot. 428.
H 2. Eliz. rot. 191. It is recorded by the Court here, the third day of May, in
the year of the Reign of the Lady Elizabeth now 3. That the Return aforesaid,
is vicious, invalid and insufficient in Law, for that there are no cattle
named in Specie, in the Return aforesaid contained, for which the same Sheriff
by virtue of a Writ of (...) was attached to be here at the said Octab. Pur.
etc. whereupon no judgment by the Justices then here for any forfeiture to be
made to the Lady the Queen upon the Attachment, by the Law of the Land ought to
be given, nor is given as it appears above, and so the process and extracts
for the price or value of the Cattle aforesaid, to be forfeited, without
Judgment and consent of the Court here, by the Officers of the same Court,
without Warrant was made, etc. Quaere if not between Netherfall and Lawrence.

Privilege.
H 45. Eliz. rot. 818. Brownlow, Lanc. ss. At the return of a Capias against a
servant of the c^cife Cle^k of the Kings Bench, the servant came in person into
the Court of Common Beuch, delivered to the Justices a writ of supersedias, and
prayed the allowance thereof, that they would not hold plea, etc, A writ of
privilege for a servant of the chief clark of the Kings bench
It was commanded the Sherif that he should take John Wood late of Brenset in
the county aforesaid, Yeoman, of, etc. and safely etc. so that he might have
his body here at this day, to wit, in Octab. Sancti Hillarii, to answer to T.
L, in a plea wherefore with force and arms, one Message, ten acres of Land
with the Appurtenances in B. which Margeret Erlington widow, to the same T.
devised for a Term, which is not past, entered, and him from his Farm
aforesaid ejected, and other Enormities, etc. To the great Damage, etc. and
against the peace, etc.

And now here at this day came as well the same T. by I. P. his Attorney, as
the same John Wood in his proper person, and hereupon the same J W. brought
here into the Court a certain Writ of the said Lady the Queen of Supersedeas,
in the cause aforesaid closed, to them directed, The Tenor whereof follows in
these words, Elizabeth, etc. To our Beloved and faithful Edmund Anderson
Knight, and his Associates, Justices of the same Bench greeting, As well of our
Dignity, as according to the ancient Custom used and approved of in times
past, hitherto obtained, That our chief Clark of the pleas in our Court before
us, ought not to be drawn or compelled to answer before any secular Judges upon
any pleas or complaints (pleas of Free Tenement only excepted) nor by the whole
time aforesaid were accustomed.

And now in our Court here before us, on the behalf of John Wood, one of the
servants of John Rooper Knight, our chief Clarke assigned to Roll pleas, in our
said Court before us, It is given us to understand, That one Thomas Lack
little regarding the custom aforesaid, the same I W by the name of I. W. late
of B. in the County of Kent Yeoman, has drawn into plea, of a plea wherefore
with force and arms, one Message, etc. as above until against our peace,
etc. to the very great disprofit and greivance of the said I.W, and manifest
infringement of the Liberties and privileges aforesaid in our Court before us
by the whole time aforesaid, hitherto used and approved, whereupon we are
willing to provide him a fit and speedy remedy, and to observe the Liberties
and privileges aforesaid, for so long time used and infringed. We command you,
that from further holding of the plea aforesaid before you, or compelling him
the said I. W. further to answer before you in the plea aforesaid, ye be
altogether superseded, saying on our behalf to the same T L. That he at our
said Court before us may come and have Justice there if he will, Test John
Popham at Westminster, the twenty fourth day of January Anno Regni nostri 45.
Rooper, Which said Writ being read and heard, the same John Wood says, That he
is, and at the day of purchasing of the Writ of the said T. Lack, was servant
of the said John Rooper, Knight, Chief Clarke of the said Lady the Queen, now
assigned to enroll the pleas of the said Lady the Queen before the same Queen,
and prays that the said Writ of Supersedeas, according to the Form of the
same Writ to be granted and allowed to him, and that the Justices here will not
take Cognizance of the plea aforesaid against him, etc.

Counter plea to the writ of privilege, that the Defendant is farmer of the
said chief clark, of dives lands, etc. and traverseth that he is a fervant to
him, and abiding with him, attending in the office. Traverse.
And the said Thomas says, That the Court here, for any thing before alleged,
ought not to be repelled from the having and taking Cognizance of the plea
aforesaid, because he says, That the said John Wood, at the day of the
purchasing of the Original Writ of the same Thomas, to wit, the same
seventeenth day of September, Anno, etc. 44. was Farmer of the same I Rooper
Knight, of certain Lands of the said I. at B. aforesaid in the said County of
Kent, without this, that the same I W the same day of purchasing of the
Original Writ of the same T. or at any time afterward was servant of the said
I.R. Kinght, abiding with the said I. or attending the said I R in his
affairs, in the Office aforesaid, and this he is ready to verify as the Court
shall consider, and prays the Supersedeas not to be allowed him, and that the
Court would take further Cogn zance against him, etc.

Demurrer to the counter plea
ANd the same John Wood says, That the said Plea of the said T. above pleaded,
to adnull the said Writ of Supersedeas, and also the matter in the same plea
contained, are insufficient in Law to deprive the same I W. from having the
said Writ of supersedeas allowed, or that the Court here should take further
Cognizance against him in the plea aforesaid, and that he to the plea
aforesaid, in form aforesaid pleaded, has no need, nor by the Law of the Land
is held to answer, and this he is ready to verify, Joinder in Demurrer.
whereupon he prays Judgment that the said Writ of supersedeas according to
the form of the said Writ, may be granted and allowed unto him, and that the
Justices here would not take further cognizance against him in the plea
aforesaid, etc.

And the same T. from whence he sufficient matter in Law to deprive the same I
W from having the said Writ of super, and that the Court here should take
further Cognizance against him of the plea aforesaid, has above alleged,
which he is ready to verify, which said matter the same I. W. does not
gainsay, nor any wise answer to the same, but does altogether refuse to admit
of the verification thereof, prays judgment if the said Writ of Supersedeas
ought to be granted or allowed unto him, and that the Court would take
Cognizance against him the said I. W. in the plea aforesaid, and because the
Justices, etc.

M. 9 Jac. rot. 705. ss. A Writ of privilege allowed for one of the six Clarks
of the Chancery.
The Lord the King sent to his Justices of the Common Bench here his Writ
closed in these words, James by the Grace of God, etc. To his Justices of the
Bench greeting, Whereas the Masters, Clarks, and Officers of our Court of
Chancery, and of our progenitors late Kings of Eng, and also their servants and
familiars whosoever, to answer in our Court before you, or before any of our
Justices or Ministers, or other secular Judges whatsoever, besides before us in
our Chancery aforesaid, upon any Writs, Causes, or Complaints, Trespasses,
Actions, or Demands, which concern not our person, (pleas of Freehold,
Felonyes, and Appeals only excepted) according to the Jurisdiction, Liberties,
privileges, and Customs of our Chancery aforesaid, from the time whereof the
memory of man is not to the contrary hitherto obtained, ought not to be drawn,
compelled or imprisoned, nor hitherto were wont, And now we understand that W.
S. Knight, does implead in our Court before you Valentine Saunders Esquire, one
of the six Clerks of our Court of Chancery aforesaid, for 400 pounds which the
same W. does demand of the said Valentine, as it is said, in Derogation of our
Court of Chancery, and against the custom aforesaid, and because we will
inviolably observe the Jurisdiction, Liberties, privileges, and customs
aforesaid, We command you that from further holding before you of the plea
aforesaid, by whatsoever name the same V. be reputed, you be altogether
superseded, declaring to the said W. on our behalf, that he follow against the
same V. before us in our Chancery aforesaid, and no where else. If it seem
expedient for him, Test etc. 9 November Anno 16. and 45. By pretext of which
said Writ, the Rolls and other Memorables of the Court of the Lord the King
here remaining being searched, it sufficiently appears upon Record, that
before the same writ of supersedeas was delivered to the said Justices here,
the same V was put in Exigent in the Hustings of London, to be outlawed at the
suit of the said VV. in the plea aforesaid, which said writ of Exigent before
the Justices here, is returnable in Octab. S. Hillarii, whereupon the same
Valentine for his indemnity prays a writ of the Lord the King to be directed
to the Sheriffs of London, to supersede the Execution of the said writ of
Exigent, so that the same VV. at that day may show if he can, wherefore the
same Va the privilege of the Court Chancery of the said Lord the King
according to the form and effect of the writ aforesaid, ought not to have, if,
etc. and it is granted to him returnable here at the same Term, etc. The same
day is given to the said V. here, etc.

H Il. 1. and 2. Eliz. rot. 630. The like writ is allowed for a Chancery Clarke.

H 18 El. rot. 602 the like writ is allowed, T. 19. El. rot. 1213. H. 25. Eliz.
rot. 2019, A writ of privilege for a Prothonotaries clarke of the Kings Bench
allowed in the Common Bench.

P 44 Eliz. rot. 1841. The Lord the King, etc. reciting the writ of privilege
for Richard Swain Doctor of Laws, one of the Masters of the Chancery. Test
Anno 44. and for that the plaintiff alleged nothing in court here wherefore
the said writ ought not to be allowed him, therefore the plea aforesaid against
the same R in the court of the King here, shall be no more attempted, etc. M.
11 H 7 rot. 133. T 5 Jac. rot. 750 P 18 Jac. rot. 1795. for M. P 13. Jac. rot.
2192. P 11 Iac. rot. 1368. P 36 Eliz. rot. 320 P 8 H 7 rot. 130. Allowance of a
writ of privilege, for T.S. his Clerk, one of the servants of our beloved
clarke I.B. keeper of the Rolls of our chancery allowed, etc.

Entry of a writ of attachment of privilege in the Common Bench for an
attorney of the same Bench in debt against 2 several persons severally.
M 19 Iac. rot. 2948 Brownlow, Lincoln ss. The Sheriff was commanded that he
should attach T, B. clerk, and L E clerk, so that he should have them here
upon Satturday next, after the morrow of all Souls, to answer R, Clarke, Gent.
one of the Attornyes of the court of the Lord the King of Common Bench here,
according to the liberties and privileges, etc. in a plea of Debt severally.

And now here at this day came the said Robert in his proper person, and
offered himself against the said T and L in the plea aforesaid, and they came
not, and the sheriff, to wit, T T Esquire, now returns, that he by virtue of
the writ aforesaid to him directed, took the bodies of the same T and L. whose
bodies the same sheriff has now here ready, as by the said writ it was
commanded him, Cedi corpus returned.
and because the same sheriff the bodies of the same T and L now here at this
day has not ready, therefore the same sheriff, to wit, the same Tho. T Esquire
in mercy, etc. and he is fined by the Justices here at forty shillings, and it
is commanded to the same sheriff that he have here upon Wednesday next after 15
san. Martini the bodies of the same T and L whom, etc. to answer to the same
Robert in the plea aforesaid, and the same sheriff to wit, T.T. Esquire, now
returns that the said T. and L. are in prison of the Lord the King at his
Castle of Lincoln, so languishing, that he could not have their bodies here at
this day without peril of death, as by the said writ it was commanded him, etc.

And hereupon in the same Court of the King here on the behalf of the said
Robert, it is testified that the same T and L are sound and whole and able to
travel, therefore it is commanded the same sheriff, that he or his under
sheriff be here upon Wednesday next after eight days of Saint Hillary,
bringing with him the same T and L whether they be found or infirm, to answer
to the same Robert in the plea aforesaid, and that he omit nothing herein under
the penalty of 20 l. which if he shall not do, the sheriff shall know, he is to
loose, etc. Duces recum awarded under the penalty of 20 l.


Procedendo.
H 35. H. 8. Rot. 318. ss. A Procedend. awarded in a plea of lands to be
removed out of an inferior Court by Recordare.
Whereupon the cause aforesaid being seen, alleged by the same B. to remove
the Plaintiff aforesaid and in the writ aforesaid above specified, It seems
to the justices here that cause to be in sufficient in law to remove the plaint
aforesaid out of the Court of the said Elizabeth B. nor but that the Bailiff of
the said E. B, of her manor of B. with the Soke aforesaid, in the court of the
same E. B. and upon the plaint aforesaid ought to proceed, etc. Therefore it is
considered that the said Brian, notwithstanding the said Writ to the said
sheriff to Record and remove the plaint aforesaid before directed, he may
proceed in the plaint aforesaid with effect, And to the parties aforesaid
exhibit full and speedy justice therein according to the Law and Custom of the
Lord the King of England and the Court aforesaid, etc.

M 8. H. 4. Rot. 114. Procedendo. Rege inconsulto.
In a Sci. Fac. the Tenant pleads an attaint of the predecessor of the
demandant, by act of Parliament, and that the Tenements of the demandant came
to the Kings hands, and prays judgment, si Rege in consulto, etc. And the
King sent his writ de procedendo therein directed to the Justices, that the
Tenant plead de novo with the demandant, etc.

H 13. Jac. Rot. Brownlow London ss. A Procedendo after much debate granted
upon a special return made upon a Hab. cor. upon the custom of London,
concerning Prentices, their ages, and their Indentures between them and their
Masters. Indenture void, if the Prentice be not of the age of fourteen years
when he was bound.
An Habeas Corpus upon the privileges in the Bench for Martin Slater was
directed to the Mayor Aldermen and sheriffs of London retornable immediately
before Henry Hobert Knight and Baron Chief Justice, etc. Test 28. Nov. 13.
Iac. by H. Hobert, Execution, etc. ss. London ss. we I. Knight. Mayor of the said
City of London and of the same City Aldermen and W. I. and I. G sheriffs of
London to H. H. Knight and Baronet Chief Justice of the Lord the King now of
the common Bench at this time in the precincts of great S. Bartholomew. London
do certify that, etc.

Prohibition.
BE it remembered that the 20. day of November the same Term came here into the
Court I. L. in his own person and gave the Court here to understand,
Prohibition to the Court of Stanneries in the County of Cornw for holding plea
of matters which contcern the Stanneries. Suggestion.
That whereas by the laws and statutes of the Realm of the Lord the King of
England, it is provided that Keeper of the stanuaries of the Lord the King and
of the court of the Stannaries within the counties of Devon and Cornwall, or
Keeper or Keepers of his place for the time being, may not nor shall not hold
pleas before him in the Court of Stannaries aforesaid unless arising between
the Stannators whilst they work in the stannaries, and between them and other
Foreigners of any trespasses plaints or contracts made within the places
wherein they work within the Stannaries; nevertheless certain I. C. Gent.
Administrator of the Goods and Chattles which were of I. C. his Father not
being a Tinner in any of the stannaries aforesaid, not ignorant of the
premises but endeavoring and intending very much to vex and disturb the same
I, against the laws of the Realm of the Lord the King of England, In the
stannary court of the Lord the King of F, in the said county of C, before the
Substeward of the Stannary Court aforesaid or deputy, or Keeper of his place in
the Court aforesaid or any of them, in a certain plea of Account by plaint by
the said I. C. the same against the said L. in the same Court levied upon
supposall that the said L. was receivour of the moneys of the said I. C. the
Father, and to have received of the moneys of the said I.C. the Father in his
life time 20 l. of one I. M, to render an account thereof to the said I. C.
drew into plea, And the same L. to appear in the said Stannery Court of F.
aforesaid by occasion of the premises, and to answer the said C. of and upon
the premises, against the law of the land of the Realm of the Lord the King of
England unjustly constrained by arrest of his body whereas in truth neither the
said I. L. nor the said I. C. nor either of them at the time of the levying of
the said plaint or any time afterward hitherto was Tinner working in any
Stannary work within our Counties of D. or C. And whereas in truth the account
aforesaid does not concern any Tinner or matter or matters belonging to the
said Stannaries, Averment that neither Plaintiff or Defendant were Tinne^^.

Averment that the account did not concern T^nning.


and although the same I. L, the matter aforesaid by him above alleged, before
the said Warden Subwarden and steward often pleaded and alleged in the
Stanuary Court aforesaid, and offered to prove with inevitable truth and
Testimony, Nevertheless the said warden Subwarden steward Deputy or Keeper of
the place would not admit of that plea or allegations, but altogether refused,
and the same I. C. notwithstanding the plea alegation and probation of the said
I. L. aforesaid in the premises aforesaid the said I, L. before the said
warden underwarden steward Deputy or Keeper of the place in the plea aforesaid
to be condemned, with his whole strength indeavoureth and tries from day to
day in contempt of the Lord the King now, and manifest damage impoverishment
and greivance of the said L. and against the laws of the Realm of England and
this he is ready to verify, whereupon the said L. humbly imploring the aid
and munificence of the Court of the Lord the King now prays remedy and a writ
of the Lord the King de Prohibitione to the said warden underwarden, etc. And
to the said C. Counselors Attorneys and Solicitors of the said C. in this
behalf whatsoever to be directed in Form of law, to prohibit them and every of
them, that they nor any of them proceed not further in the cause aforesaid, or
any thing that concerns the premss. in the court aforesaid, before the said
Warden, etc. or presume to attempt any thing more in the cause aforesaid in the
court aforesaid which may give way to indamage the said I.L. or prejudice of
the Law of the Lord the King now his Crown or dignity and to him it is
granted, etc.

Warburton

Mich. 25. H. 6. Rot, 323. Prohibition without a cause depending against the
Bishop of Winchester for excommunicating a man for serving a warrant of peace
upon his Chaplain.

EAster. 44. Eliz. Rot. 1738. The like (Causa non pendente) out of the Court of
Request, against the corporation of Myners.

THat this Prohibition (causa non pendente) being granted upon the motion of
Sergeant Hele Justice Gaudy and Warburton Walmesly being absent, Nota.
And at another day Justice Walmesly being present and Justice Gaudy being
absent, Justice Walmesly said that the prohibicion lay not (Causa non pendente)
And thereupon the Prohibition did not issue forth, though Warburton put his
hand to it, Yet Gaudy and Walmesly denied.

Quare Impedit.
H 12. H. 7. Rot. 315. Mordent. Leic. ss. Tho. and Eliz. his wife, In Quare
Impedit, the Plaintiffs have a Writ to the Bishop upon the Bishops plea, after
the death of the Patron.
bring their writ of Q. Impedit to present to the Church of N. which is void,
etc. And count in right of their Fee of an advouson in gross against W. Bishop
of Lincoln I, G. Knight. and R. M. Clerk, issue upon the traverse of the advouson
in gross and judgment against the Bish. with a cessat, etc. and the plea
depending, the patron and incumbent dye, the Plaintiffs pray execution of the
judgment against the Bish. and have it, etc.

Ravishment de Guard.
Ravishment de guard brought by the King, the Kings Attorney by force of the
Letters Patents under the privy seal sealed Waives his issue, and says, that
the Defendant is not guilty, and judgment that the defendant go without day,
the Kings right being saved.
H 12. H. 7. Rot. 228. Mordant, Oxon. ss. the King brought his writ of
Ravishment de Guard. against I. G. and A. his wife for Ravishment of Richard Son
and heir of Edward Bockingham etc. the defendant Pleads non cul. and
afterward James Hobard attorney of the King and the Defendants come in their
proper persons and the Kings Attorney Relicta verificatione, etc. by virtue of
a certain warrant, with the sign manual of the said Lord the King signed
directed to the same James and showed here in Court on the behalf of the said
Lord the King says they are not guilty prout, etc. Therefore it is considered
that the said Io. and Anne. go thereof without day, etc. the Kings right being
reserved, when at an other time therein she would speak, etc.

Retorn. Recordi.
Return of the Record sent to the Justice at Lanc. to be tried after trial in
the Bench.
Afterward to wit upon Monday next after, tres Pas. next following the said C.
came back here into Court in his proper person And Humphery C. Justice of the
said Lord the King at Lanc. before whom, etc. sent the record and proceedings
(cum toto facto suo) in the premises, before him at L. in the county aforesaid
had, in these words, Afterward on monday in quarta septimana LX. before H. C.
Justice of the Lord the King at Lanc. came as well the within named R. R, as the
within named R. B. in their proper persons, And hereupon the same R. prays a
writ of the said Lord the King of ve. fac. here 12. Ven. fac. aWarded at Lanc.
etc. before the said Justice at L. etc. to try the issue within written, to
be directed to the sheriff of the county of Lanc. which was granted him, etc.
whereupon it was commanded to the sheriff of Lan. that he cause to come before
the said Justice at Lanc. upon Tues. quarta septimana XL. prox. next coming
12. etc. of the neighborhood of C. by whom, etc. and who neither, Return of
the Ven. fac.
etc. to recognize, etc. because as well, etc. At which day here came the
parties aforesaid, etc. in their proper persons, And E. S. Knight sheriff of
the said county of Lanc. returned, before the Justices here, to wit at L.
aforesaid the writ aforesaid in all things served and executed, together with
the names of the jurors between the parties aforesaid impanelled annexed to the
same writ, which said jury being solemnly caled came not whereupon it is
commanded to the said sheriff of Lanc. that he have before the said Justices
here to wit at Lanc. aforesaid upon Wednesday Jury came not.
in dec. quart Sept. 40. next coming, the bodies of the said Jurors between the
parties aforesaid before impaneled, to make that jury, the same day is given to
the parties aforesaid here, etc. at which day of Wednesday here to wit at L.
aforesaid here, etc. came as well the same R. as the same R B. in their proper
persons, and the jurors of the jury aforesaid being called came, who being
elected tried and sworn to speak the truth of the within contained, said upon
their oath, ut in Recordo, where upon the same Justices at L. pe^fixed a day to
the parties aforesaid before the Justices of the Lord the King of the Common
Bench at Westminster, Justice at Lanc. prefixeth a day for the parties to be at
West.
to wit upon Monday n^xt after tres Pas. next to come to hear their judgment
thereof, etc. therefore, etc.

Afterward to wit in Oct. Mich. next following, Judgment in Banco after issue
tried in the county P^ll. of Lanc. upon a mittim of the record there. P: 4. and
5 P. and Ma. rot. 632. Judgment in debt.
here to wit at Westminster, which same day the same plaintiff and Defendant
have by the prefixment of W, R. and N. P. Justices of the said Lady the Queen
at L. to hear their judgment here, etc. came as well the said Plaintiff as the
said Defendant by their attorneys aforesaid, and the said Justices at L. sent
here his record in these words, Afterward, etc. whereupon the premises being
seen and by the justices here fully understood, it is considered that the said
plaintiff, recover against the said defendant his debt aforesaid And his
damages to ten shillings by the jury here in Form aforesaid assessed, and also
40 s. to the same plaintiff at his request for his costs and charges aforsaid,
by the Court here adjudged of increase, which said damages in the whole do
amount unto 50 s. and the Defendant in mercy, etc.

P 4. Eliz. Rot. 503. Brownlow ss. Entry of a Resu^. in debt against an heir,
he prays the Plaint may cease till plea in age, and it was granted and after
full age, a Resum. is awarded against a Baron and Feme. P: 8 Jac: Rot: 205.

Satisfaction for part.


It was commanded the sheriff whereas I. H. late of, etc. Spinster daughter and
heir of D. H. Gent. lately called, etc. in the county of Cornwall Gent, late
in the Court of the Lady Eliz. late Queen of England of the Common Bench was
summoned to answer E. V. of a plea that she render to him 40 l. which she then
ought him and unjustly detayned for that, to wit, that whereas the said D.
Father of the said Jane whose heir she is, in his life time to wit the 21. day
of I. An. 22, Eliz, Reg. at L. by his certain bill obligatory, which the said
S. with the seal of the said D, Sealed into the said Court of the Queen
brought the date hereof was the same day and year acknowledged himself to owe
to the said S. 43 l. 16 s. to be paid to the said S. when he shall be thereof
required, for which payment well and truly to make the said D. had bound his
heirs and executors by the same B. and the said D, in his life time of 96 s.
thereof to the said S. afterward satisfied, and that the said D. in his life
time and the said Jane daughter and heir of the said D. after the Death of the
said D. although often required the said 40 l. residue have not rendered but the
same to him to render have gainsaid and the same I. to the said D, to render
yet does gainesay, as the said S. then said, The said I. appearing in the said
Court of the said Lady the Queen said that she was within the age of 21. Plaint
remains until, etc.
years, And that she intended not, nor ought during her minority aforesaid to
answer the said S. in the plea aforesaid, and prays that the plaint aforesaid
might remain unto the full age of the said Jane, And because the same S. in
the same Court of the Queen did not gainesay that it was considered that the
said plaint should remain until the full age of the said I. as by the Record
thereof in the court of the Lord the King here remaining manifestly appears,
and whereas the said S. afterward to wit the 23. day of I. An. Reg. nunc 3.
came into the court of the Lord the King before his Justices, Averment of the
full age of the Feme, and that she is married.
etc. And said that the said Jane was of full Age, and that the said Jane after
that the said plaint remained without day, and before the said 23. of Jan, An.
3. etc. abovesaid, to wit such a day and year, at L. had taken to husband one
A. P. Gent. and is now married to the said A. Resummon by good summoners the
same A, and I. his wife that they be before the Justices of the Lord the said
King here at this day to wit, such a day to hear the record and their judgment
of the plaint aforesaid, and that he should then have here the summons and that
writ, and now here at this day came the same S. by I. H. his attorney and
offered himself the 4. day against the said A. and I. in the plea aforesaid and
they came not, Nihil returned.
And the sheriff to wit N, P. Esquire. now retorneth that they had nothing in his
bayliwick whereby they could be summoned, and hereupon it is testified in the
said court of the Lord the King here, that the said A. and I. have sufficient
in the county whereby they may be resummoned, Testat resummons,
Therefore the Sheriff of Devo. is commanded that he resummon by good summoners
the said A. and I. of being here, 15. Trini. to hear their judgment in the
plaint aforesaid, the same day is given to the said S. here, etc.

Remissio Recordi.
The Record, remitted Justic. Lanc. upon a foreign Voucher. P: 26 H. 8. rot:
337.
Afterward the process being continued between the parties aforesaid in the
plea aforesaid, by the Jury put therein between them, is respited here until
this day, to wit Oct. Mich. then next following, unless the Justices of the
Lord the King assigned to take the Assizes in the County aforesaid by form of
the Statute, etc. on Monday at the Feast of Saint Lawrence next past, at Salop
in the said County of S. first came.

And now here at this day came the same Executors by their Attorney aforesaid,
and the same Justices of Assizes before whom, etc. sent here their Record in
these words, Postea, etc. And because the Court of the King here cannot proceed
further in the plaint aforesaid, therefore the said plaint is remitted to the
Justices of the said Lord the King of his County Palatine, to proceed in the
said plaint, as of right, and according to the Law and Custom of the County
Palatine aforesaid is to be done, etc. And it is said to the said F. F.
Attorney of the said Executors, that the same Executors be before the Justices
of the Lord the King of his County Palatine of Lancaster, upon Monday in Quarta
sepquadrag next coming, to answer there in his plea aforesaid if, etc.

ss. BE it remembered, That T.E, Knight, H 25 H 8 rot. 121. Remissio recordi
sent by the Justices of Chester into the Bench, to determine a foreign
voucher, and at a day in the Bench, the Tenants make default, and the cause for
that was determined.
Justice of the Lord the King of Chester, the twenty third of J that same Term
by virtue of a writ of the Lord the King to him directed, which follows in
these words, Henry the eighth by the Grace of God, King of England and France,
and Lord of Ireland, to his Justice of Chester, or to the Keeper of his place
there greeting, Whereas T T in our Court, in our County aforesaid, had demanded
against R. B. Esquire, T.W. and P. A. one windmill, one water-mill, etc, with
the Appurtenances in N as his right and inheritance, and into which the same
R.T.W and P. had to entrance, unless after the Demise which R.T. Knight,
kinsman of the said T. T whose heir he is, thereof made to R. S. for a Term
which is past, and which after that Term ought to revert to the said T. T. and
the same R.T. and P. pleading in the same Court lately vouched thereof to
warranty P.B. summoned in our County of Wilts. by the aid of our court of
Chester, because the same P. B. had no lands within our County of Chester
aforesaid, by which he could be summoned, which said Warranty in our said Court
of Chester for the cause aforesaid cannot be determined, to the great Damage of
the said T.T. and manifest hinderance of the obtaining of his Right, whereupon
he has besought us to provide him a fit remedy in this behalf. We who are
Debtors to exhibit Justice to every one within our Kingdom, willing to do what
is just to the said T.T. in this behalf, Command you, that if it be so far
proceeded in our Court of Chester, then the Record and proceedings therein with
all things touching the same, to our Justices of the Bench under your seal, you
distinctly and openly send, and this Writ, so that they may have them at
Westminster in Octab. Hill. prefixing the same day to the parties aforesaid,
that they may be then there to do and receive what shall be considered in our
Court there in this behalf, that that warranty being determined before our
said Justices in the Common Bench, the said Record and proceedings may be sent
you, to proceed in the plaint aforesaid as of right, and according to the Law
and Custom of our County of Chester is to be done witness our self at
Westminster 6 November Anno, etc. 25,

ANd the said Justice sent there the Record and proceedings of the said plaint,
whereof mention is made in the said Writ annexed to the same Writ, the Tenor
whereof follows in these words, Pleas of the County of Chester, at Chester,
before T. E. Knight, Justice of the Lord the King upon Thursday next after the
Feast of Saint James the Apostle Anno H. 8. post Conquest. of England 25.

Count in Enter ad term. qui pret. in the County Palatine of Chester
CHester ss. Thomas Torhet, by H. H. his Attorney in the Court of the Lord the
King here, demands against R, B. Esquire, T W. and P A one wind mill, etc.
with the appurtenances in N. as his right and inheritance, and into which the
same R, T. W. and P. have no entrance, unless after the demise which Robert S.
Knight Kinsman of the said T, T. whose heir he is, thereof made to R. Scot for
a Term which is past, and which after that Term ought to revert to the same T.
T. and whereupon he says, that the said Robert, kinsman, etc. was seized of
the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, in his Demesne as of Fee, in
the time of peace, in the time of Edward late King of England, the second after
the Conquest, taking thereof the profits to the value, etc. and the same Robert
being so thereof seized, demised those Tenements with the Appurtenances to the
said Richard Scot for a Term which is past, and from the same Robert the right
descended, etc. to one Robert as son and heir, etc. and from the said Robert
the son, the right descended to one Thomas as son and heir, etc. and by many
descents the right came to John, and from the said John the right came to the
said Thomas, who is now Demandant, as son and heir, etc. And which after that
Term, etc, and thereof brings suit, etc.

And the same R. B. T. W. and P. A. by T. B. their Attorney, come and defend
their right when, etc. and pray license thereof to imparl here until the next
County, to wit, until Thursday next after the Feast, etc, next coming, and
have it, etc. The same day is given to the said T. T. here, etc.

At which day, here came as well the said T. T. by his Attorney aforesaid, as
the same R. B. T. W. and P. A. by their Attorney here, etc. and hereupon the
same R. B. T. W. and P. A. vouch thereof to warrant P. B. who has no Lands or
Tenements in the County of Chester, but all in the County of Wilts, and prays
that the said Peter may be summoned in the County of Wilts. A forraigner
vouched to warrant.
by aid, etc. and the said T. T. well allows the said vouchee, etc. let him
have it, etc. And because their vouchee to warrant cannot be determined, in the
said County of Chester, day is given to the parties aforesaid here, until the
next County, to wit, until Thursday next after the feast of the Translation of
Saint Edw. next coming, etc. And in the mean time the writ of the Lord the King
may be followed, if, etc.

At which day, further day is given to the parties aforesaid here until the
next County, to wit, until Thursday next after the Feast of Saint Martin the
Bishop next coming, etc. And in the mean time, etc.

At which day a further day is given to the parties aforesaid here, until the
next County, to wit, until Thursday next after the Feast, etc.

And further the said Justice C to the Justices of the Common Bench here, to
wit, at W aforesaid returns, That he by virtue of the writ aforesaid to him
directed, prefixed a day to the parties aforesaid, at the said Oct. Hill. that
they should be here to do and receive as that Writ in it self commands and
requires.

At which said Octab. Hill before the said Justices of the Bench here, to wit,
at Westminster aforesaid, Remandment of the plaint.
came the same T. T. by R. Jenour his Attorney, and offered himself the fourth
day against the said R. B. T. W. and P. A. in the plea aforesaid, and they came
not, being solemnly called but made Default, whereupon the default of the said
R B T. W. and P. A. by the said Justices of the Bench here being recorded,
because the Court of the Lord the King cannot proceed in the plaint aforesaid
in this behalf, therefore the plaint is remitted to the Justices of the Lord
the King, Cestr. or keeper of his place there, to proceed in the plaint
aforesaid, as of right, and according to the Law and custom of the county of
Chester is to be done. And it is said to the said R. I. Attorney of the said T.
T. that the same T. be before the Justices of the Lord the King, Cestr or
Keeper of his place there at the next County, to wit, upon Thursday in S.
septimana quadragessimae, next coming, there to be held, to prosecute there his
plea aforesaid, if, etc.

Secunda Deliberatio.
H 15. Eliz. Rot. 708. Entry of a w^it of second deliverance after cattle were
taken in Wirhernam, and the defendants attorney was compelled to gage
deliverance of the cattle taken in Withernam.
Some, ss. It was commanded the Sheriff whereas T, P. Esquire. was summoned to be
here in the court of the Lady the Queen here to answer P. B. of a plea
wherefore he took the cattle of the said Peter and them unjustly detayned
against Sureties and privileges, etc. the same Peter afterward in our said
court here made default, for which it was considered here that he and his
pledges to prosecut should be in mercy, etc. and that the said Thomas should
go thereof without day and should have return of his Cattle aforesaid. For
which it was commanded to the said sheriff that he shall make retorn of the
cattle aforesaid to the said Thomas, and should not deliver them at the
complaint of the said Peter without a writ of the Lady the Queen that shall
make express mention of that judgment, and in as much, etc. the said sheriff
make appear here in 8. S. Michaelis, last past, etc.

At which day the sheriff then returned, That before the coming of the writ
aforesaid, the Cattle were cloyned to places to him unknown by the same
Peter, so that he could not return them to the said Thomas as by the said writ
it was commanded him, whereupon it was commanded the said Sheriff, that of the
cattle of the said Peter, to the value of the cattle aforesaid, before taken
in Withernam, he should take and deliver them to the said Thomas, to hold to
him until he could return the cattle aforesaid before taken, and that he put
by sureties and safe pledges the said Peter, that he be here in Oct. Hill. then
next following, to answer as well to the said Lady the Queen of the contempt,
etc. as to the said Thomas for damages and injuries to him in this behalf done.

At which day here came as well the said T by I. W. his Attorney, as the said
Peter in his proper person, and the Sheriff now returns here, that he by
virtue of the writ aforesaid to him directed, took in Withernam of the cattle
of the said Peter one Mare and one colt to the value of the cattle of the said
Peter before taken, and those cattle delivered to the said Thomas P. to be
kept until the cattle of the said Peter before taken, may be returned to the
said T. P. as by the said writ to him it was commanded, A writ of second
deliveronce granted after a withernam. Defendant prays that the plaintiff may
find pledges as well to prosecute as for his second deliverance.
and that he put the same Peter by pledges I D and R R. and hereupon the same
Peter prays to be admitted to make a fine with the said Lady the Queen by
occasion of the contempt aforesaid, and is admitted for three shillings and
four pence, which the same P in the Court of the Queen here, by the command of
the Justices, here paid to Tho. Foster Clark of the Essoines of the Court here,
for diverse reparations by him here in Court to be made.

And afterward, to wit, at the said 8 Sancti Hillarii came here into the Court
the said Peter by W. B. his Attorney, and by the statute, etc. prays a writ
of the Lady the Queen De Secunda deliberatione, and it is granted to him
returnable here, 15. Pas. etc.

At which day here came as well the said Peter as the said Thomas by their
Attornyes aforesaid, whereupon the said Thomas prays that the said Peter may
find pledges as well to prosecute his complaint, as to return the cattle
first taken, Pledges given.
if return of them should be adjudged, for that, that the Sheriff of the County
aforesaid has not received sufficient pledges of the said P upon the said writ
of second deliverance, and hereupon the said P. here in Court found pledges as
well to prosecute his complaint, as to return the cattle aforesaid before
taken, The Plaintiff prays that the Defendants Attorney may gage deliverance
of the Cattle taken in Withernam.
if, etc. To wit, the said VV B of S. in the County of Dorset, Gent. and VV B.
of, etc. And hereupon the said Peter prays that the said I. VV. Attorney for
the said T. P. may gage deliverance of the cattle aforesaid taken in
VVithernam, and because the Justices will advise of and upon the premises of
making deliverance, day is given to the parties aforesaid here, A die pas. in
15 dies, of heareing their judgment therein, because the Justices here, not as
yet, etc.

At which day here came as well the same P. as the same T. by their Attornye;
aforesaid, and because the Justices, etc. until Cro. Trin. At which day here
came as well the said P as the said Tho. by their attorneys aforesaid whereupon
the premises being seen and by the justices here fully understood, The Court
will advise.
it seemed to the same Justices here that the said I, W. attorney of the said
T. P gage to the P. deliverance of the Chattles aforesaid taken in Withernam.
Judgment that the Defendants Attorney gage deliverance for the Cattle raken in
Withernam.
And whereupon the said I. gageth deliverance of the chattles taken in
Withernam, and assumed upon himself for the said Thomas that the said Thomas
should make deliverance of the Cattle aforesaid taken in Withernam to the same
Peter about the Feast of S. Peter next following at C. in the county of Some. at
the common pound there, under the panalty of 20 l, which said 20 l. the said I.
W. acknowledges to be made of his lands and Chattles to be levied to the use
of the said P, The Attorney gives secu^ity in Court for his Client to deliver
the Cattle above such a day. 25. E: 3. Gager 25 6 E: 4. 8. 1 H: 7. 11. 15 E:
3. Gager 4. accord that the attorney may gage if the Defendant appear by
attorney.
if it shall happen that the said T. P. not to make deliverance of the Cattle
aforesaid taken in Withernam or the value of them, etc.

Scire Facias.
TRini. 9. Jac. Roll. 3510. Entry of a Scire facias upon a Recognizance against
sureties in Replevin after Averia elongat. returned.
Otherwise as it appears in Easter Term in the 9. year of the Reign of the
Lord the King now Roll. 2982, it is thus contained, London ss. It was commanded
the sheriffs whereas I. A. of the City of Coventry Tailor B, A. of L. in the
county of N. clerk and W. S. of C. in the county of War, Gent. to wit the fifth
day of Ju being there in Trinity Term in the 7. year of the Reign of the Lord
now King of England, before Peter W. Knight one of the Justices of the said
Lord the King of the common Bench at his chamber in Chancery Lane London in
their proper persons undertook and every one of them did undertake for H. A. in
the sum of 20 l. and the same H. A. then and there before the said Justices of
the Lord the King in his own person undertook for himself in the sum of 40 l.
that the same H. should cause to be returned to David Harris certain cattle of
the same H. formerly taken by the same David and which were adjudged by the
court here to the said David for the default of the said Henry, The
Recognizance recited. See the statute West. cap: 2. 13. E: 1.
if retorn of them to the same David by the court here should be adjudged,
which said sum of 20 l. every one of the Manucaptors do acknowledge to be
levied upon their lands and chattles And which said sum of 40 l. the same
Henry acknowledges to be levied of his lands and chattles to the use and
behoof of the same David if it happen that the said Hen. make default in the
premises, and thereof be lawfully convicted, which said recognizance in Form
aforesaid taken, afterward to wit the same fifth day of July in the said Term
of the holy Trinity in the seventh year of the Reign of the Lord the Keng now
of England abovesaid the said Justices of the same court of the said Lord the
King before his then Justices with his own hands delivered to be inroled upon
record, Delivery of the Recognizance in Court to be enrolled.

Count upon the second deliverance.


as by the record thereof remaining in the same court here manifestly
appears, and whereas thereupon the same David was attached by the writ of the
said Lord the King de Sec. Delib. to be in the Court here to wit, at
Westminster aforesaid to answer the same H. A. of a plea wherefore he (such a
day and year) at W. in a certain place there called Woodpark had taken the
cattle (that is to say) 35. heifers of the same H. and unjustly detayned them
against sureties and pledges until, Avowry.
etc. the same David in the said court of the said Lord the King appearing for
a certain reason by him alleged, as Bailiff of G. C. Knight. well acknowledged
the taking of the cattle aforesaid in the place aforesaid to be just, Nonsuit
of the Plaintiff for default of Bar to the Avowry. Return Haben. awarded.
whereupon the said Henry afterward although solemnly called in the same court
of the said Lord the King came not, nor has not further prosecuted his said
writ, whereupon it was considered in the same Court here that the said Hen. and
his pledges for prosecution should be in mercy, etc. And that the same David
should go thereof without day, etc. and that he should have return of the
cattle aforesaid to hold to him for ever irreplevishable, whereupon the said
Lord the King by his writ commanded the sheriff of Devon. that without delay he
cause to be returned to the said David the cattle aforesaid to hold to him
irreplevishable, Averia elongat. returned.
and as much, etc. he should make to appear here in Oct. Mich at which day the
said sheriff of Devon. returned to the Justices here, that before the coming of
the said writ to him directed, the cattle aforesaid by the said Henry A. were
conveyed to places unknown to him so that he could not make return of the same
cattle of the said David and therefore the said Lord the King commanded the
said sheriff of Devon. that of other Catles of the same Henry to the value of
the Catle aforesaid before taken, Capias in Withernam awayded.
he should take in Withernam, and should deliver them to the said David, to
keep by him until the cattle aforesaid before taken could be returned to the
same David, and that he should put by sureties and safe pledges, N^lla averria
returned.
the said Henry that he should be here in Oct. S. Hill. as well to answer the
said Lord the King of his contempt as the same Da. of his damages and injuries
in this behalf done. The same sheriff of Devon. at that day returned to the
Justices here, that the same A. H. had no Cattle in his Bayliwick, Sci: fac:
against the party and Manucaptors severally.
which he could take in Withernam, according to the Exigency of that Writ, and
that the same Henry had nothing in his Bayliwick by which he could be attached,
as by the record and proceedings in the same court here remaining does
manifestly appear, And because, etc. That by honest, etc. it should be made
known to the said I. B. W. and H. that they should be herein Oct. Pur. to show
if any thing etc. wherefore the same David ought not to have execution against
the same I. for the said 20 l. by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged to be
levied of his lands and chattles and against the said Bartholomew for the said
20 l. by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged to be levied of his lands and
Tenements, and against the said William and others as before, The Plaintiff
offiers himself against the Defendant.
etc. according to the Form of the Recognizance aforesaid if, etc. And now here
at this day came the same David by R, R. his attorney and offered himself the
4. day against the said I. B, W. and H. in the plea aforesaid and they being
solemnly called came not and the sheriffs of Land now return that the same I.
B. W, and H. have nothing, Nichil returned
nor any one of them has any thing, nor are found, nor any one of them is to
be found, etc. Therefore as before it is commanded the said sheriffs of London
that they should make known to the said I. B. W. and H. that they be here 15.
Alias Sci: fac: awarded.
Pas. to show in Form aforesaid and now here at this day came as well the same
David by his attorney aforesaid as the same I. B. W. and H. by H. W. their
attorney, Plaintiff and Defendant come by attorney.
And there upon the same David prays execution against the same John for the
said 20 l. by him in Form aforesaid acknowedged to be levied of his lands and
Chattles and against the same Bartholomew for the said 20 l. etc. and so
against the rest severally, And the same I. B. W. and H. pray liberty to
imparle until Cr. Tri. and have it, etc. The same day is given to the same
David here, etc. Execution prayed severally.


PAsch. 9. Jac. Roll 349. Walter, Devon. ss. It was commanded the sheriff
because in the record and proceedings, Scire facias after a judgment reversed
in a writ of false judgment upon a Record in Detinue.
and also in commencing of a certain plaint which was in the hundred of N. C.
Esquire of N. without writ of the Lord the King between I. C. W. H. in a plea
of detinue of corn which the same I. C. demanded of the same W. a writ of
false judgment was given against him in the said plaint as the King is informed
by the grievious complaint of the said William and as by the inspection of the
Record and proceedings, in the cause aforesaid which the said Lord the King
now, caused to be brought before his Justices at Westminster sufficiently
appears that false judgment was given against the same William in the plaint
aforesaid, For which in the Court of the Lord the King now here before his said
Justices it was considered, that the judgment aforesaid should be revoked,
nulled, and altogether taken for nothing, Judgment reversed.
And that the same William should be restored to all things which he had lost
by occasion of the judgment aforesaid, Notwithstanding because the said Io.
Clerk after the judgment aforesaid in the hundred aforesaid given, and by force
thereof, and pretense of a certain judicial precept, issuing out of the
hundred caused to be don and levied upon one Cow of the same Willam 39 s. 11 d.
for the value of the said Corn, to wit, for eight bushels of Rye and 12 d, to
the same John for his costs and charges which he had and sustained by the
occasion of the detention of the corn aforesaid, in the hundred aforesaid
adjudged, And thereupon the said Cow was sold by which occasion the said John
Clark of the said 39 s. 11 d. for the value of the said corn and of the said
12 d. for his costs and charges aforesaid in the hundred aforesaid, by virtue
of the judgment aforesaid recovered, was and is satisfied, as by the relation
and information of the said William the Lord the King is informed and
understands, And because, etc. that by honest, etc. he should make known to
the said I. C. that he should be here at this day to wit, Men. Pas. to show if
any thing, etc. Wherefore the Cow aforesaid or the value of the same, or the
said 10 s, and 11 d. in Form aforesaid recovered, Scire facias to have
restitution
ought not to be restored and repayd unto the said William according to the
Form and effect of the said judgment in the said Court of the said Lord the
King now in Form aforesaid if, etc. And now here at this day came the same W.
H. by R. S. his attorney and offered himself the 4 th. day against the said I.
C. in the plea aforsaid and he being solemnly called came not and the sheriff
now retorneth that he has nothing, Alias Sci. fac. awarded.
etc. nor is to be found, etc. Therefore as before it was commanded the sheriff
that by honest men, etc. he shall make known to the said I. C. that he be here
in Cr. Trin. to show in Form aforesaid, etc.

PAas. 13. Jac Rot. 774. Brownlow Civit. Covent. ss. It was commanded the
Coroners of the City aforesaid whereas the King had commanded the late sheriff
of the City aforesaid that of the lands and chattls of H. L. late of D. in the
county of Cest. Gent. in their bayliwick they would cause to be made as well a
certain debt of 150. Scire facias directed to the Coroners and Sheriffs both,
to levy a certain debt upon a fi. fac. and not paid to the party at the
return of the fi. fac.
l. which H, S. in the Court of the King here, to wit, at Westminster recovered
against him as 30 s. which to the same H. in the same Court of the King here
were adjudged for his damages which he had by occasion of detayning of that
debt and that they should have those moneys before the Justices here, to wit,
at Westminster 15. Marti. last past to render to the said Humphery for his debt
and damages aforesaid whereof he is convicted, at which day here to wit, at
Westminster aforesaid came the same H. by G. B. his attorney, and the sheriffs
to wit, T. L. and I. B. then returned that they by virtue of the said writ to
them directed, of the Chattles of the said H. have caused to be made 125 l.
parcel of the debt and damages aforesaid which said 125 l. here, to wit, at
Westminster aforesaid at that day they have ready, notwithstanding the same
sheriffs the said 125 l. had not here in Court of the Lord the King at that day
nor have satisfied the same Humphry for the said 125 l. as by the information
of the said H. to the King was made known, and because, etc. that by honest
and, etc. they should make known to the same T. and I, that they should be
here at this day, to wit, 15. Pas. to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the
same H execution against them for the said 125 l. by them in Form aforesaid
levied ought not to have, etc. if, etc. And now here at this day comes the
said H. by his attorney aforesaid and offered himself the 4 th. day against the
said T. and I. in the plea aforesaid, and they being solemnly called came not,
and the Coroner, to wit, W. F. now retorneth that he by virtue of the Writ
aforesaid to him directed by F. N. and T. W. honest, etc. made known to the
same T. and I. to be here at this day to show in Form aforesaid, etc, therefore
it is considered that the said H. have execution against the same T. and I. for
the same 125l. by them in Form aforesaid levied, by default, etc.

LOndon ss. Pasch. 11. Jac. Rot. 620. The entry of a Sci. fac. upon a general
pardon Capias ut lagat.
Brownlow ss. It was commanded the sheriffs that they should not omit for any
liberty within their Bayliwick but that they should take H. H, late, etc.
otherwise called, etc. utlawed in London next before the Feast of St. Dunston
the Bpp. An. primo, etc at the suit of G. E. in a plea of debt if, etc. and him
in safty, etc. so that they should have his body here at this day to wit, 15.
Pas. to do and receive what the Court of the Lord the King here shall consider
of him in that behalf, and now here at this day comes the said Henry by W. C
his attorney and says that after the utlawry aforesaid against the said Henry
had and published by a certain Act in Parliament of the said Lord the King now
by continuance held at Westminster in the county of Midd. the 9 th. day of
Febru. in the seventh year of the Lord the King now (amongst other things) it
is inacted and established by authory of the same Parliament that all and
singular subjects of the said Lord the King as well spiritual as temporal of
this kingdom of England Wales the Islands of I. and G. and the Town of Barwick
the heirs, successors, executors, and administrators, Pardon pleaded
of them and every of them, and all and singular corporations in any wise
incorporated Cities, Borroughs, Counties, Rideings, etc. and every of them, And
the Successor, and Successors of them and every of them by the authority of the
same Parliament should be acquitted pardoned released and discharged against
the said Lord the King his heirs and successors and every of them of all
Treasons, Felonyes, offenses, contempts, Trespasses, entries, injuries,
deceipts, misdemeanors, penalties, Sums of moneys Punnishment by death,
corporal punishments, and pecuniary, and generally from all other things,
causes, compl^ints, suits, judgments and Executions, in the statute aforesaid
(not excepted nor Foreprised) which by the said Lord the King by any means or
in any other manner could be pardoned, before and until the 9. day of November
then last past before the making of the said Act to every or any of his
subjects, Corporations, incorporat Cities, Buroughs, etc. or any of them yet
so notwithstanding that every person utlawed, shall prosecute his writ of Scire
Facias, against such party or parties at his or at whose Suit he or they were
utlawed, before the pardon in such case be allowed to the party utlawed, as in
the same Act is more fully contained, and the said Henry, further says that
the utlawry aforesaid is not excepted nor Foreprised in the same statute,
Averment that the Utlary is not Averment that he is a Subject.
and that he is and at the time of the making of the said Act, and long before,
was a subject and liege man of the said Lord the King now, born under his
obedience, to wit, at London in the parish, etc. and this he is ready to
verify, where when and how the Court of the Lord the King now shall consider
thereof, whereupon it is not intended that the said Lord the King will impeach
the said Henry by occasion of the utlawry aforesaid whereupon he prays
judgment that he may be discharged from the said utlawry, and because it is
expedient and there is a necessity that the same Griffin should be premonished
for his interest in this behalf before the discharging of the same Henry from
the utlawry aforesaid, be further proceeded in, according to the Form of the
staute aforesaid, The sheriffs are commanded that by honest, etc. they make
known to the same G. that he be here in Cr. Ascen. Dom. to prosecute against
the same Henry his plea aforesaid if, etc. at which day came the same Henry by
his attorney aforesaid and the sheriffs, Sci: fac: awarded. Sheriffs return
Sci: fac: Mercy.
to wit, E. R. and A. P. now return that they by virtue of the writ aforesaid
to them directed by I. W. and R. G. honest, etc. made known to the same G. of
being here to this day to prosecute in Form aforesaid and he the fourth day of
the plea being solemnly called came not; nor any whit further prosecute his
said Writ, therefore he and his pledges are thereof in mercy, let the names of
the pledges be inquired of, And that the said Henry go thereof without day,
General Pardon allowed.
etc. and that the general pardon aforesaid be allowed him, etc.

Count in debt upon a Sci: fac: upon the general pardon.
PAsch. 12. Iac. Rot. Brownelow, retorn. Mense Pas. to follow in Form
aforesaid, etc. and now here at this day, to wit, Men's. Pas. came as well the
said William by his attorney aforesaid, as the said Tho. by R. D. his a torny
and the sheriffs as before, now retorneth here that he has nothing, etc. nor
is to be found, etc. And hereupon the same Tho. declaring against the said
Will. upon his original writ in the plea aforesaid, said that the said W. had
not rendered to the said T. 20 l. which to him he owes, and unjustly detayneth,
etc. for that, to wit, that whereas the said W. the 20. day of Octo. An. etc,
3. at London in the parish and ward aforesaid by this certain writing
obligatory granted, etc.

M 1. and 2. Eliz. Rot 1248 in a Scire facias against B. and A. upon a
Recognizance, one of the defendants is alleged to be, dead, and one other
process against him, and the others prays imparlance;

ss THe sheriff was commanded whereas R. C. and I. his wife in the Court of the
King here had recovered against I. H, Sci: fac: against a Tenant by Elegit, and
part of the money levied, the Tenant against whom the execution was brings the
residue, and a redelivery awarded.
68 s. for their damages which they had by occasion of the detaining of the
dower, of the same I. of the Tenements in N. of the indowment of I, Son of I.
H. her late husband as by a certain Jury of the country before the Justices of
the King assigned to take the assize in the county aforesaid, such a day and
year, at Wigo. thereof between them Summoned and taken, was convicted, and the
same R, and I. came afterward into the court of the Lord the King here, and
chose to be delivered to them all the goods and and Chattles of the said I. H.
besides the Oxen and Cattles of the Plough and likewise the moiety of all his
lands, and Tenements in his Bayliwick, to hold as their free Tenements to them
and their assigns accor- to the Form of the statute in such case provided
until 68 s. for the damages aforesaid should be thereof levied whereupon the
King commanded them, that all the goods and chattles of the said I. H., besides
his oxen Cattle of the Plough, and likewise the moiety of his lands and
Tenements in your Bayliwick without delay you cause to be delivered to the same
R. and C. by the reasonable price and extent to hold to them and their assigns
as their Free Tenement in Form aforesaid until 68 s. for their damages
aforesaid should be thereof Levied, and in what sort, Elegit awarded Return of
the Elegit.
etc. should be made Known here such a day, etc. the same sheriff to the
justices of the King here at that day returned a certain extent taken before
R. T. Bayliffe of the liberty of the honorable. Epi. Wigor. of O. at N. on
Saturday such and year, etc. by virtue of the return of a certain writ of the
Lord the King^ to him, by him thereof directed, by which it was found that the
same Bailiff by virtue of the return of the writ of the Lord the King
aforesaid delivered to the same R. and I. the moiety of all the Lands and
Tenements which the same I. had in his Bayliwick, to wit, the third part of one
Message and 40. acres of Land with the appurtenances in N. which said third
part is worth by the year 4 d. and the said 40. acres of land are worth by the
year 5 s. to hold to them and their assigns as their Free Tenement until the
said 68 s. should be thereof levied and although the same R. and I. 10 s. 8 d,
Tender of the residue of moneys by the defendant.

Refusal by the Plaintiffs to accept it.


out of the tenements aforesaid have now leyyed, as by that extent it
manifestly appears, and the same I. H. the whole residue of the said 68 s. to
wit 49 s. 4 d. is ready to pay notwithstanding the same R. and. I. have
hitherto refused to receive that money, as by the information of the same I. H.
there the King is given to know, Therefore the Bailiff is commanded that by
honest, etc. he make known to the said R. and I. that they should be here at
this day, to wit, in Octo. Mich. to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the same
R. and I. ought not to be satisfied with the same 49 s. 8 d. and the Tenements
aforesaid to them before delivered, they ought not to be redelivered to the
said I, H. if to them it seemed expedient and now here came as well the same I.
H. in his proper person as the same R. and I. by R. W. their attorney, Money
brought into Court.
and the sheriff retorneth that he made known to the same R. and I. of being
here at this day in Form aforesaid by R. B. etc. honest, etc, and hereupon I.
H. brings here into court 8 s. 8 d. ready to render the same R. and I. if,
etc. and prays delivery of the Tenements aforesaid, Satisfaction.
etc. whereupon it is requested of the same R and I. if they have or know any
thing to say for themselves, The moneys are paid in Court to the Plaintiff. and
the Court awarded a redeliverance to be awarded to the Plaintiff.
wherefore they ought not to be satisfied with the money and to redeliver the
Tenements aforesaid to the said I. H. who say that not, and hereupon the said
53 s 8 d. is delivered to the said R. and I. And it is considered by the Court
that the said I. and H. shall have delivery of the Tenements aforesaid first
delivered to the same R. and I. out of the hands of the same R. and I and that
they go thereof without day, etc.

SEe 21. E. 3. f. 1 Plaintiff 1. A Scire Facias awarded in Aid. 21. E. fo.
20. Pl. 21.

ss. IT was commanded the sheriff whereas I. C. Gent. lately it the Court of
the Lady Eliz. late Queen of England here, to wit, in Easter in the 36. Entry
of a Sci fac. by an administrator against an executor. H. 2 Jac. rot. 1613.
year of her Reign before E. A. Knight and his associats then Justices of the
said Lady the Queen of the common Bench here by the consideration of the same
Court recovered against R. W. late of, etc. as well a certain debt of 200 l. as
6 l. which to the said I, in the same Court were adjudged for his damages which
he had by occasion of the said debt whereof he is convicted as by the record
and proceedings thereof in the court of the Lord the King here remaining
manifestly appears, execution notwithstanding of the said judgment yet
rests undon. And as well the said I as the said R. W. are dead, as by the
information of R. C. Gent. administrator of the goods and Chattles which were
of the said I. C. at the time of his death the King understands, And because,
etc. that by honest, etc. It be made known to P. R. executor of the Testament
of the said W. that he should be here at this day, to wit, (in Cr. Ascen. Dom.)
to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the debt and damages aforesaid of the
goods and chattles which were of the said W. at the time of his death in the
hands of the said P. R. to be administered ought not to be made to the same I.
according to the Form of the recovery aforesaid if, The Plaintiff shows the
Letters of administration, and prays execution.
etc And now here at this day came as well the said R. by H. H. his attorney by
the said P. premonished by A. B, his attorney, and the Sheriff now retorneth
that he made known to the said P. of being here at this day, by G. D. and D.
E. honest, etc. to show in Form aforesaid, etc. And hereupon the same R. says
that the said I. C. died intestat and that the administrators of all the goods
and Chattles which were of the said, at the time of his death, by I, by Divine
providence, etc. was committed, And he brings here into the Court the Letters
Administratory of the said Archbishop, which the Commission of the
Administration aforesaid, in form aforesaid testify, etc. and prays
Execution against the said P. of the Debt and Damages aforesaid, of the goods
and chattells which were of the said I. C. being in the hands of the said P at
the time of his death, to be administered, to him to be adjudged, etc.

AND the said P. says, Defendant confesses assets to 40 s. and tra^erseth
that any other goods of the Intestate besides etc. came into his hands, etc. T
19 Jac rot. 2892.
That the said R Execution against him of the D^bt and Damages aforesaid of the
goods and chattells which were of the said W at the time of his death in the
hands of the said P to be administered, ought not to have, because he
protesting, says, that the said W after the judgment aforesaid against him in
Form aforesaid had, at L aforesaid, dyed intestate, and that diverse goods and
chattells which were of the said W at the time of his death, to the value af
Forty shillings, after the death of the said W. into the hands and possession
of the said P. came, and that the same P. the said forty shillings about the
Funeral of the said W. after the death of the said W. expended, without this,
that any other goods or chattells which were of the said W. at the time of h s
death, besides the goods and chattells to the value of forty shillings, ever
came to the hands and possession of the said P. after the death of the said W.
and this, etc. Judgment if Execution, etc.

AND the said R. says, Peplication that he had more assets at tue Test of the
Writ, etc. to the value of the debt, etc. and issue thereupon.
That he by any thing before alleged from having his Execution aforesaid, of
the Debt and Damages aforesaid ought not to be barred, because he says, that
the said P. the day of the obtaining of the writ of Scire facias aforesaid to
wit such a day and year, had diverse goods and chattells which were of the same
W at the time of his death to be administered, to the value of the Debt and
Damages aforesaid above recovered, besides the goods and chattells to the value
of forty shillings, which came to the hands of the said P. after the death of
the said W. whereof the same P. might have satisfied the said R. of the Debt
and Damages aforesaid, to wit, at S. in the County aforesaid, and this he
prays may be enquired of, by the Country, and the same Defendant, etc.
Therefore the Sheriff is commanded, that he cause to come, etc.

THe Jury say upon their oath, Verdict that he had assets to 30 l. at the
Test, etc. over^ etc. and no more, etc.
as to thirty pounds of the within written two hundred and six pounds parcel,
that the said P. the day of purchasing of the said Writ of Scire facias, to
wit, such a day and year, had diverse goods and chattells which were of the
within named W at the time of his death and in his hands to be administered, to
the value of the said thirty pounds, besides the goods and chattells to the
value of the said Forty shillings, which came to the hands of the same P. after
the death of the same W to be administered, whereof the same P might have
satisfied the said R. of the said thirty pounds, Verdect for the Defendant.
to wit, at S aforesaid, as the same R has thereof within alleged, and as to
the seventy four pounds of the within named two hundred and six pounds
residue, the same Jury say upon their oath, That the same P. the day of
purchasing of the Writ of Scire facias, to wit, such a day and year, had no
Lands or Chattells which were of the within named W. at the time of his death
in his hands to be administered, to the value of the said one hundred seventy
four pounds, beside the goods and chattells, to the value of the said forty
shillings, Judgment.
which came to the hands of the said P. after the death of the same W. whereof
the same P. could satisfy the same R. of the said one hundred seventy four
pounds, to wit, at S. in the County aforesaid, as the same P. thereof within
alleged, therefore, etc. search the Judgment with Mr. Brownlow.

Entry of a Sci: fac: against an executor of one Manucaptor, of three
Manucaptors upon a Recognizance of bail upon an arrest in debt, etc.
P 1. Jac. rot. 817. Middlesex ss. It was commanded the Sheriff, whereas by I R
of B, etc. H D of C. etc. and T. M. of C. etc. of late, to wit the twentieth
day of April, Anno 41 Eliz. before E. A. Knight, chief Justice of the Court
of Common Bench of the said Lady the Queen here at his dwelling house in the
Charterhouse near London undertook, and every of them did undertake for M. T.
late of London, etc. otherwise called, etc. in the County of Somerset Gent. in
one hundred and fifty pounds. And the same Morgan then and there assumed for
himself in three hundred pounds and if it should happen the same M in a
certain plea of Debt, upon Demand of one hundred and fifty pounds against the
same M by one Elias I in the said Court of the Lady the Queen of the Common
Bench, Recital of the recognizance.
here prosecuted in any lawful manner to be convinced, and Judgment for the
same E in the plea aforesaid, against the said W. in the said Court to be
given, that then the same M. the said Debt of one hundred and fifty pounds and
also all Damages to the said E by occasion of the detaining of the said Debt,
in the same Court of the late King against the same M in any manner to be
assessed or adjudged, would satisfy and render, which said one hundred and
fifty pounds the same I H and T M severally acknowledge to be made upon their
Lands and Chattells, And which said three hundred pounds the said M
acknowledges to be likewise made of his Lands and Chattells, and to Be levied
for the use of the said E if it should happen the same M contrary to the
Manucaption aforesaid in any manner to make Default, And although the same E
afterward, Judgment against the principal Hill. 42 Eliz:
to wit in the Term of Saint Hillary, Anno 42 Eliz. before E. Anderson Knight
and his Associates, then Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench
aforesaid, by consideration of the same had recovered against the same M. as
well the same one hundred and fifty pounds at the same forty shillings which to
the same E in the same Court of the Queen here were adjudged for his Damages,
which he had by occasion of the detaining of that Debt whereof he is
convicted, as by the record and proceedings therein in the same Court of the
said late Queen here remaining manifestly appears.

Nevertheless, the same M. hitherto has not satisfied the same E. of the Debt
and Damages aforesaid, Breach of the Recognizance.
nor in the same Court here has rendered his body in Execution for the Debt and
Damages aforesaid, according to the Form of the Recognizance aforesaid, and
the said T M is dead, as by the information of the same E the King is given to
understand, And because, etc. that by honest, etc. he make known to A M Widow,
An Alias Sci. fac. was awared, and continuances and diverse imparlances ought to
be here.

The Defendant pleads assets to the value of 36 l. 5 s. came to her hands after
the death, etc. and pleads a judgment against the Testator in his life time in
London upon concessit solvere, and that she had imploye^ part of the assets
about the funeral, part about the the proba^e of the will, part to compound
the judgment, and the residue brings here into Court ready to pay: etc. with
plea that she has no more, etc.

The plaint levivi^d.

The plaintiffs find pledges to prosecute and make their Attorney.


Executrix of the testament of the same T. M. of being here at this day to wit,
in Cro Asc Dom, to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the same one hundred and
fifty pounds by the same T in form aforesaid acknowledged, of the goods and
chattells of the same T. at the time of his death being in the hands of the
said A to be administered, to be made, and ought not to be rendered to the same
E. according to the Form of the Recognizance aforesaid, if, etc.

And now here at this day came as well the same E. by A his Attorney, as the
same A by D D her Attorney, and the Sheriff now returns, that she has
nothing, etc. nor is found, etc. And hereupon the same E prays Execution
against the same A for the said one hundred and fifty pounds in Form aforesaid
acknowledged, of the goods and chattells which were of the same T at the time
of his Death in the hands of the same A Being to be administered, to be adjudged
him, etc.

And the said Ann says, That the said E. ought not to have Execution against
her for the said one hundred and fifty pounds by the same T. M. in Form
aforesaid acknowledged, of the goods and chattells which were of the same T. at
the time of his Death in the hands of the said A to be administered, because the
says, That after the Recognizance aforesaid, by the same T. M. in Form
aforesaid acknowledged, and before the same Term of Saint Hlllary, Anno 42 of
Queen Eliz. abovesaid, to wit, the tenth day of December, Anno 42 Eliz. etc.
abovesaid, in the Court of the said late Queen held at the City of London
before R. C. Alderman, then one of the Sheriffs of the City aforesaid in his
Counter, situate in the parish of Siant Michael in Woodstreet, London,
according to the custom of the same City, from the time whereof no memory is
extant, used and approved in the same, came certain M C and I W in their proper
persons, and then and there by the name of M C and I W. of London Brewers,
levied a certain plaint against the said T. M. in his life time by the name of
T M etc. in a plea of Debt upon demand of a hundred pounds, and then and there
found pledges to prosecute that plaint, to wit, I. D. and R. R. and then and
there in the same Court put in their places, T H their Attorney against T M. of
the plea aforesaid. And a^terwards, to wit, at the Court of the said late Queen
held at Guild Hall of the City aforesaid situate, in the parish of Saint
Lawrence in the Old Jury London, the ^ourteenth day of January, Anno 42 Eliz.
abovesaid before the same Sheriff came the said M and I. by their Attorney
afo^esaid, The Defendant appears gratis, and pleads at the peril of the
plaintiff. Note, That such form is the Common form of bayles in London.
and offered themselves against the said T. in the plea aforesaid, whereupon
the same T. M. in the same Court, then and there, in his proper person likewise
came, and freely offered himself to answer the said M and I. in the plea
aforesaid, whereupon the said T. M. afterward in the same Court was bayled by
I. D. and R. R. at the instance and peril of the same M and I. according to
the custom of the City aforesaid, to have the same T. M. at the said Court,
the same fourteenth day of January, at Guildhall aforesaid, to be held
according to the custom of the City aforesaid, and so afterward from Court to
Court, until the end of the plea, Form of the recognizance.
of the plaint aforesaid, to answer the same M and I in the plea aforesaid,
according to the custom of the City aforesaid, and the said T. M. then in the
same Court, put in his place F. T, against the said M and I. in the plea
aforesaid, whereupon afterward, to wit, at the Court of the said Lady the
Queen held at Guildhall, aforesaid, Defendant makes his Attorney.
before the sa d then Sheriff, the sixteenth day of January Anno 42 Eliz.
abovesaid, came as well the same M and I as the said T. by their Attornyes
aforesaid, and the same M and I by their Attornyes aforesaid, declared against
the said T of and upon their plaint aforesaid, in manner and form as in these
words follows, ss. M. E. I. W. etc. by T H. their Attorney, demand against T.
M. etc. as in the Count, word for word, Count upon a Concessit solid.
until Praedict. sextam, etc. And the same T by his Attorney aforesaid, then
and there acknowledged the Debt aforesaid to be true, whereupon then and there
it was considered in the same Court of the said Lady the Queen, That the same M
and I should recover against the same T, their Debt aforesaid, together with
nine shillings four pence, Judgment by confession of the debt.
for their Damages, costs and charges by them, in and about their suit in that
behalf laid out, and that the said T should be in mercy, etc. as by the Record
aforesaid in the same Court of the said late Queen remaining more fully
appears.

And the said Anne further says, That the said T. M. after the judgment
aforesaid against the same T. in the said Court of the late Queen in Guildhal
aforesaid in Form aforesaid given, to wit the thirtieth of December Anno, etc.
at London, in the parish, etc. made his last Will and Testament in writing, and
the same A constituted and ordained Executrix of the Testament aforesaid, The
death of the Defendannt
and afterward such a day and year, at London, in the parish and ward
aforesaid, the same M and I of the same one hundred pounds and nine sh llings
and four pence, in form aforesaid recovered, not being satisfied, after whose
death the same A took upon her the burden of the Execution of the Testament
aforesaid, and diverse goods and chattells which were of the said T. at the
time of his Death, Ex^ences about the Fnner all.
to the value of thirty six pounds and five shilli. after the Death of the same
T came to the hands and possession of the same A whereby the same A 4. pounds
of the said thirty six pound five shillings about the Funeral of the said T
after the death of the same T expended, Expenses about proving the will.
and the same A twenty seven shillings of the said thirty six pounds five
shillings about the probate of the Will aforesaid, as Executrix of that Will,
after the Death of the said T likewise Expended, And the same A further says,
That she after the Death of the same T. and before the same A had any notice of
the said Debt, of one hundred and fifty pounds, by the same T in his life time
to the said E. in Form aforesaid acknowledged, and before the day of
purchasing the Writ of Scire facias of the said E. E. to wit such a day and
year, at London in the said parish of Saint Lawrence, in the Old Jury, London,
Payment of the judgment befere notice of such debt and suit.
paid to the same M and I twenty five pounds and eight shillings, of the said
thirty six pounds and five shillings in full satisfaction and payment of the
said one hundred pounds nine shillings and four pence, to the same M and I in
Form aforesaid owing, as by the Record thereof in the same Court of the said
late Queen at Guildhall aforesaid remaining, manifestly appears. And the
same A further says, That neither the same T at the time of his Death, nor the
same A after the Death of the same T. before the Day of purchasing the said
Writ of Scire facias, nor at any time afterward, Nothing else in her hands but
goods to such a value which the executrix brings into the Court to pay the
plaintiff in part of his debt:
had any goods or chattells which were of the same T at the time of his Death,
in her hands to be administered, besides goods and chattells to the value of one
and thirty pounds five shillings, by her in Form aforesaid administered, and
besides the goods and chattells to the value of ninety shillings residue of the
said thirty six pounds five shillings, yet remaining in the hands of the said A
not administered, which said sum of ninety shillings, the same A brings here
into Court to pay the said E, and this she is ready to verify, whereupon she
prays Judgment if the same E ought to have execution against her for the said
150 l. etc.

ANd the said E. says, That he by any thing before alleged, Replication that
no such record of recovery is had in London:
from having his Execution aforesaid against the same A. for the said one
hundred and fifty pounds by the same T. in form aforesaid acknowledged, of the
goods and chattells which were of the said T. at the time of his death in the
hands of the said A to be administered, ought not to be barred, because he
says, That there is not had any such Record of the plaint aforesaid, between
the same M. and I. and the same T. in the Court aforesaid remaining, as the
said A has above alleged, and this he is ready to verify, whereupon as
before, he prays Judgment and Execution against the said A. of the said one
hundred and fifty pounds by the same T. in form aforesaid acknowledged of the
goods and chattells which were of the said T. at the time of his death, being
in the hands of the said A to be administered, to him to be adjudged, etc.

Rejoinder, that such a record is had of a recovery in Land.
ANd the same A. as before says, That such a Record is had of the plaint
aforesaid, between the same M and I. and the said T. M. in the Court aforesaid
remaining, as she has above alleged, and this she is ready to verify here,
when and how, the Court of the Lord the King here shall consider.

And hereupon the same A further says, That the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Aldermen
of the City of London, Custom of L. alleged by the defendant.
amongst other Liberties, Franchises, and privileges, of the Citizens of
London, by diverse late Kings and Queens of England, progenitors of the Lord
the King now granted, and by the said Lord the King now confirmed, they have
their liberty, that they ought to record every Record pleaded before them, made
or had, presently and not otherwise and therefore prays for, that the Record
aforesaid being now in the custody of the sheriffs of the City aforesaid, A
certiorare awarded to the Sheriffs of L. to certify, etc.
a writ of the said Lord the King to be directed to the said now Sheriffs of
the city of L, to certify the lustices here whether such a Record be had, or
not, and to her it is granted, etc. Therefore the Sheriffs of London are
commanded, that searching the Records, and other memorables upon Records, in
the time of the said late Sheriffs of London, being in the custody of the said
now Sheriff, they make appear to the Justices here in Cr. Trin. whether there
is had such a Record of the plaint aforesaid in their custody, as the said A.
has above alleged or not, the same day is given to the parties aforesaid
here, etc.

AT which day here came the same E. by his Attorney aforesaid, and the same A.
the Record of the plaint aforesaid by her above alleged, Judgment for the
plaintiff for failer of the record.
here at this day has not, but made Default thereof, therefore it is
considered, that the said E. have Execution against the said A. of the said one
hundred and fifty pounds by the said T in form aforesaid acknowledged, to be
levied of the goods and chattells which were of the same T. M at the time of
his death, in the hands of the said A to be administered, etc. Brownlow.

Nota.
NOte. That after a Scire facias, nulla min.

Note and study the diversity, 19 H 6 19 tr. Record 24. Continuance of ^ul.
tiel. record
NOte, That the Court held, that the Defendant ought to procure the Record to he
certified at his peril, and not stay the Return, or certificate of the
Sheriffs, against the opinion of Master Brownlow Prothonotary.

ANd hereupon by the consent of the said Plaintiff, further day is given to the
said Defendant to have the Record aforesaid by him above pleaded, here until
in Oct. Mich. To show in form aforesaid, etc.

T 43 Eliz rot. 1822. Gibson against Brook, Bar upon a Sci. fac. against an
executor to have execution of his proper goods after a Devastavit. returned
upon in a writ to inquire what goods came to his hands, after suggestion that
diverse goods came to his stands, and that he had wasted them after a Nulla
bona returned upon a fi. fa. of the goods of the Testator.

Suggestion that the executor had wasted diverse goodr of the Testator.

See the new book of entries, fol. 268. 269. 271 and 272. pl. 5. Pet^fers case
title error. A writ of fi. fa. de bonis testatoris with a writ of inquiry what
goods of the testator the executor had wasted.

M 2 Jac. rot. 1812 H 6 Jac. rot. 1806. H against B. T 38 Eliz. rot: 910
demurrer upon Scire facias quod bre. est insufficiens H: 33 Eliz: rot: 612: W
against S, H 9. H 6 rot: 134:

Return vic: per inquest. de office: That the goods of the Testator to the
value of 110 l after the death of the testator, came to the hands of the
executor to be administered, and that the executor had wasted the goods: Scire
facias awarded against the executor to have execution of his proper goods.


ss. Otherwise as it appears in Hillary Term last past, roll 1434 London ss.
It was commanded the Sheriffs that of the goods and chattells which were of W B
late, etc. at the time of his death in the hands of G B. Executor of the
Testament of, etc. in their Bayliwick. they should cause to be made as well a
certain Debt of a hundred pounds which T G in the Court of the Queen here
recovered against him, as six pounds, as forty shillings, which same T. in the
said Court here were adjudged for his damages, etc. Re. Oct. Hillar.

And now here at this day, etc. and the Sheriffs Nichil, etc. And hereupon it
is testified in the same Court, That the same G. after the death of the same W
sold diverse goods and chattells which were of the said W. at the time of his
death, and the moneys received for those goods and chattells converted into his
own use, and the residue of the goods and Chattells which were of the said W
were eloyned, or to his own use converted, with the intention that the said
Execution should not be done, Therefore it is commanded the Sheriffs that of
the goods and chattells which were of the said W at the time of his death,
being in the hands of the said G. they should cause to be made the Debt and
damages aforesaid If they can be found in their Bayliwick, otherwise by the
Oath of honest and lawful men of their Bailiwick they should make diligent
enquiry, what goods and chattells that were of the said W at the time of his
death by the said G after the death of the said W are sold or eloyned, or
converted to the use of the said G. and what they shall find by that
Inquisition, the sheriffs should make appear here such a day, under their seal
etc. and seals, etc. the same day is given to the said T here, etc.

At which day here came the said T by his Attorney aforesaid, and the Sheriffs,
to wit, T. C. and W. C. now return a certain inquisition taken before them, at
Guild Hall, of the City of London, by the oath of twelve, etc. by virtue of the
Writ aforesaid taken, by which it is found, that diverse goods and chattells
which were of the said W. B. at the time nf his death, to the value of one
hundred and ten pounds, came to the hands of the same G. B. after the death of
the same W. B. to be administered, and that the same G. had converted all the
same goods and chattells to his own use, Therefore it is commanded the Sheriffs
that by honest and lawful men of their Bailiwick, they should make known to
the said G that he should be here alia die to show if he had, or knew any
thing to say for himself, wherefore the said T Execution against him for the
Debt and Damages aforesaid of his own goods and chattells, ought not to have,
etc. according to the Form of the Recovery aforesaid, if, etc.

Nihil returned Al: fi: fac: awarded:
At which day here came the said T. by his Attorney aforesaid, and the Sheriffs
now returned, that he has nothing, etc. nor is found, etc. Therefore as before
it is commanded the Sheriffs, that by honest etc. they make known to the said
G. that he should be here at this day to show in Form aforesaid, etc.

Defendant appears
And now here at this day came as well the same T. by his Attorney aforesaid, as
the said T. premonished, etc. by T. W. his Attorney, and the sheriffs now
return that the said G has nothing, etc. nor is found, etc. and hereupon the
said T prays Execution against the said G of the Debt and Damages aforesaid,
Prays Execution of his proper goods, Quere
of the proper goods and chattells of the said G to be levied, to him to be
adjudged, etc. Quaere if such a Writ be usual, See Petifers case, Coke 5 fol.
32. That such writ, Est male.

Bar by confession that execution ought to be against him for the damages of
his proper goods, but as to the debt pleads fully administered, before the Test
of the original against funerals and payment of debts, and that he had not
the goods found by the inquisition, nor wasted, etc. and the eupon a demurrer,
Plene administravit specially pleaded, about funerals, payments of debts, and
other necessaries, etc: And traverseth the wast found by the inquest of office:
Judgment for the defendant after demurrer Nota
And the same G as to the Damages aforesaid, says, That he cannot gainsay but
the same T ought to have Execution against him for those Damages, of the proper
goods and chattells of the said G. according to the recovery aforesaid,
therefore it is considered, that the said T. have Execution against the said G.
of the Damages aforesaid, of the proper goods and chattells of the same G.
according to the Recovery aforesaid, and as to the Debt aforesaid, the said G.
says, That the same T ought not to have Execution for that Debt, of the said
proper goods and chattells of the said G by pretense of the Recovery and
inquisition aforesaid, because he says, That he before the day of purchasing
the Original writ of the said T. fully administered all the goods and chattells
which were of the said W.B. at the time of his death, about the Funeral and
payment of Debts of the said W. and other necessary things, to be done and
administered, by the same G as Executor of the Testament of the same W. and
then, nor at any time afterward, had not, nor yet has, any goods or chattells
which were of the said W B in his hands to be administered, nor goods or
chattells in the inquisition aforesaid above contained, or any of them, or any
other goods which were of the said W B at the time of his death, to his proper
use converted, or otherwise wasted, and this he is ready to verify, whereupon
he prays judgment if the said T execution against him for the Debt aforesaid
of the proper goods of the said G. by pretense of the Recovery and Inquisition
aforesaid, in Form aforesaid, ought to have, etc. And thereupon the plaintiff
demurrs in law, and judgment for the Defendant, which judgment was afterward
reversed in the Kings Bench by writ of Error.

That the first issue was, Non est factum Testatoris, and found against the
Defendant, and thereupon judgment, and a Fieri Facias, and the sheriff
returned Nichil, and upon a Testat. Devastavit a writ of ad inquirend. de Wast,
and wast found by Inquisition, and thereupon this Scire facias to the Defendant
who appears and pleads.

Two Scire facias.

Where the Defendant pleads Plene administravit, Nota.
and assets are sound and judgment thereupon, and the sheriff returns a
devastavit, such special Devastavit is not a good plea, for that it is
contrary, and repugnant to the sheriffs Return; but in such case, such
Inquisition may be traversed.

HIll. 33. Eliz. rot. 612. Between W and S. Scire facias against an Executor
upon a surmise, that the Executor had wasted the goods of the Testator against
which Judgment was given, and in that case, the Defen. after Trial, and a
special verdict given, compounded with the plaintiff by the advice of I. P.
Knight, chief Justice of England.

M 39. and 40. Eliz Rot. 110. ss. Otherwise as it appears, etc. as in the
Scire Facias, and award the Alias Scire Facias, Bar upon an Alias Sci: fac:
upon a recognizance of privilege, where one makes default and the other pleads
in bar, payment of the condemnation at the peril of the Principal against him
before the Test of the first Scire facias. Execution awarded against one of
the Conuzers by default, etc.
and now here at this day, to wit, at the said, Tres Tri. came as well the said
I. by his Attorney, aforesaid, As the said S. by I, E. his attorney, And the
said H. the fourth day of the Plea came not, but made default, And the sheriff
as before now returns, that the said H. has nothing, nor is Found, etc. And
hereupon the said I. prays execution against the said H. of the said 50 l. by
him in Form aforesaid acknowledged, to him to be adjudged, etc. Therefore it is
considered that the said I. have execution against the said H. for the said 50
l. by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged by default, etc. And further the said
I. prays execution against the said S. of the said 50 l, by him in Form
aforesaid acknowledged to him to be adjudged, etc. And the said I. prays
license thereof to imparl here until Oct. Mich. And has it, etc, the same day
is given to the said I. here. etc, and now here at this day, to wit, at the
said Oct. S. Mich. came here as well the same I. as the said S. by their
attorneys aforesaid, And hereupon the same I. as before prays execution
against the said S. of the said 50 l. by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged to
be adjudged him, etc,

ANd the said S. says that the said I ought not to have execution aagainst him
for the said 50 l. in the Form aforesaid acknowledged, Bar that the principal
after the recovery, and before the Test of the Sci: fac: paid to the Conuzee,
the debt and damages recovered.
because he says that the said E after the judgment aforesaid given, And
before the day of the purchasing of the said first Writ of Scire Facias, to
wit, T. Die. and An. paid to the said I the debt and damages aforesaid, by him
against the said E in form aforesaid recovered according to the form and effect
of the Recognizance aforesaid, And this he is ready to verify, where upon he
prays Judgment if the same I. ought to have execution against him for the
said 50 l. by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged, etc. Replication that the
principal, non solint, and issue thereupon.


ANd the said I. says, that he, by any thing before alleged, ought not to be
repelled from having his execution aforesaid of the said 50 l. against the said
S. by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged, because he says that the said E.
after the judgment aforesaid given, and before the day of purchasing of the
said first writ of Scire Facias, has not paid to the same I. the debt and
damages aforesaid, by the same I. against the said E. in Form aforesaid
recovered, according to the Form of the Recognizance aforesaid, As the said S.
has above allowed, and this he prays may be inquired of by the Country, And
the said S. likewise Therefore 12. etc.

Entry of a Sci. fac. against the Ter-tenants, upon a judgment in debt, after
the death of the Obliger, and the judgment by default. Recital of the recovery.
PAs. 38. Eliz, Rot. 1854. ss. Otherwise as it appears in the Term of S.
Hillary An. 38, Eliz. Reg. Rot. 511. It is thus contained, Midd. ss, It is
commanded the sheriff whereas H. S. Esquire lately in the court of the Lady the
Queen now, to wit, in the Term of St. Michael An. regni sui 30. and 31. before
E, A. Knight and his associates of the said Lady the Queen of the Bench here at
Westminster, by the consideration of the same Court had recovered against I. C,
late of London Esquire, as well a certain debt of 19 l. as 7 l. which, etc.
whereof he is convicted, as by the record and proceedings in the court of the
Queen here remaining manifestly appears, Execution notwithstanding of the
judgment aforesaid yet remains undon, And the said I. C is dead, and dyed
seized of diverse Lands and Tenements in his Demesne as of Fee, as by the
information of the said H. the Queen understands, and because, etc. that by
honest, etc. he should make known to the Tenants of the lands and Tenements
which were of the said I. at the time of the judgment aforesaid given,
Suggestion of the death of the Defendant, and averment that he died seized of
diverse lands etc. Sci. fac. to the Ter-tenants.
or at any time afterward, That they should be here at this day, to wit, in
Oct. Pur. St. Mariae, to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the said H. ought to
have execution against them of the debt and damages aforesaid, of the lands,
and Tenements before said, according to the Form of the recovery aforesaid, and
now here at this day came the same H. by F, B. his attorney and offered himself
the 4th. day against the said Tenants of the Lands and Tenements which were of
the said I. at the time often he judgment aforesaid given, or at anytime
afterward in the plea aforesa d, and they being solemnly called came not, and
the sheriff now retorneth that there are no lands nor Tenements in his
Bayliwick which were of the said I. at the time of the judgment aforesaid
given, The Sheriff returns quod milli sunt Tenements.

A Testat. sci. fac. prayed. Corn Testat sci. fac. awarded to the Ter-tennants
in a foraign County


or any time afterward, and here upon it is testified in the same court of the
Queen here, that there are diverse lands and Tenements in the county of C. which
were of the said I. at the time of the judgment aforesaid given and afterward,
whereof he might make and levy the debt and damages aforesaid, and prays a
writ of the Lady the Queen to be directed to the sheriff of Cornwall, to
premonish the tenants of the lands and Tenements which were of the said I. in
Oct. S. Mich. An. 30. and 31. abovesaid which day judgment was thereupon given
or at any time afterward in his Bayliwick that they be here 15. Pas. to show,
etc. And now here at this day, to wit, the said 15, Pas. came the same H. by
his attorney aforesaid, and offered himself the 4th. day against the Tenants of
the lands and Tenements which were of the said I. at the time of the judgment
aforesaid given or at any time afterward, in the plea aforesaid, and they
being solmnly called came not, and the sheriff of Cornwell, to wit C. T.
Esquire now retorneth, that he by virtue of the writ aforesaid to him directed,
such a day and year, Tertenant returned of a Message, and thirty acres of
land.
by W. N. and H. F. honest, etc. made known to R. D. Tenant of one message and
30. acres of land with the appurtenances in T. C. now or late in the tenure of
I. C, and L M which were of I C in Fee simple at the time of the judgment
given, and afterward, that he should be here at this day to show in Form
aforesaid, etc. Therefore it is considered that the said Hugh have his
execution against the said R. D. Tenant of the debt and damages aforesaid, to
be levied, Judgment.
of the said Massuage and 30, acres of Land with the appurtenances, Execution
by default, for the debt and damages aforesaid to be levied of the lands and
tenements aforesaid. Elegit of the moiety awarded of the lands.
for default of the said R. and hereupon the said H, chose to be delivered to
him, the moiety of the said message and 30. acres of land with the
appurtenances, according to the Form of the Statute thereof made and provided,
until the debt and damages aforesaid be thereof levied, and prays a writ of
the said Lady the Queen thereof, to be directed to the said sheriff of the
County of Cornwall, and it is granted him, retornable here, tres Trin. And in
as much, etc. Brownlow,

H 43. Eliz, Rot. 157. Suff. ff. Scire fac. For Seaman against the Ter-tenants
of T. L Re. in Cr. Trini. 41. Eliz. upon a Recognizance for 60 l. 33 s. 4 d.
for damages, For P L returned ter-tenant of diverse lands, etc. says that the
said T L before the said judgment 10. of August 35. Eliz, enfeoffed I. and T
Brown to the use of the said Tho. and his heirs males, and that he was seized
in Spec. Fee-tayle, at the time of the judgment given, and that he 11. Sept,
41, dyed seized in tail: And that the Lands descended to the said P, as Son
and heir and that he entered and was seized in Spec. Tail, judgment if
execution, etc, the Plaintiff says that T was seized in fee simple, Entry of a
Sci: fac: upon a bail to make deliverance after gage deliverance of Cattle in
Court, against the Manucaptors because the Conusor had not made deliverance. 1
H: 7: 11. and 21 E 3. B^: Pledges 9. and 18.
at the time of the judgment given, and traverseth the Feoffment, modo et forma.

HAs. 33. Eliz. Rot. 2045. ss. It is commanded the sheriff whereas G. G. of,
etc, R, S. of, etc. in the Court of the Lady the Queen here, to wit, in the
Term of St. Hillary An. etc. 82, Before E.A. Knight. etc. of the bench here, to
wit, at Westminster aforesaid had undertaken and both, of them did undertake
for S G that the same S should make deliverance and return of 6. Cows to E C
before the Feast of the Appostle P. and I then next following under the penalty
of both of them 40 l. which said 40 l. the same G S acknowledged and each of
them acknowledges, to be made of their Lands and Chattles and to belevied to
the use of the said T. E. if the said S. G should not make deliverance of the
Chattles aforesaid to the same T. according to the Form and effect of the
recognizance aforesaid, And the same S heitherto has not made deliverance of
the Chattles aforesaid to the said E. according to the Form of the recognizance
aforesaid, as by the information of the said T. the Queen understands, And
because, etc. that by honest, etc. he make known to the said G. and S. that
they should be here at this day, to wit (tali di.) to show if any thing, etc.
to wit the said G. wherefore he the said 40 l by him in Form aforesaid
acknowledged, of his lands and chattles, And the same S. wherefore the said 40
l. by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged of his Lands and chattles and either
of them ought not to be made and rendered to the same T. according to the form
of the recognizance aforesaid if, etc. At which day here came as well the same
T. by F. E. his attorney, as the same G. and S. in their proper persons, and
hereupon the same T. prays execution against the same G. of the said 40 l. by
him in Form aforsaid acknowledged, etc. and against the said S. for the said
40 l. by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged, Test: Nichil: dic.
to be adjudged by him, etc. And the said G. and S. reserving to themselves all
and all manner, etc. Pet. tit. entry of a Nihil dic. hereupon, Mich 34. Eli.
Rot. 1813.

Entry of a Sci: fac: upon a recognizance taken to make deliverance upon a gage
deliverance against Manucapt. because the Conusor had not made deliverance.
ss HIll. 18. Eliz. Rot. 405. ss. It is commanded the sheriff whereas H. N.
late, etc. and G. H. of, etc. lately in the Court of the Queen here to wit in
Trinity term An. 17. etc. before I. D. Knight and his associates Justices of
the Lady the Queen here of the common Bench, and undertook for W. C. that the
said W. should make deliverance and retorn of ten Oxon, or of the value of them
to T. H. upon the tenth day of June then next following within the Church yard
of the parish Church of S. in the county of S. under the penalty of 200 l.
which said 200 l. the said H. and G. acknowledged to be made of their lands,
and Chattles, and to be Levied to the use of the same T. and D. the said W.
made not deliverance of the Cattle aforesaid, nor of the value of them
according to the Form of the racognizance aforesaid, as by the information of
the said T and D the Qu. understands, T: 9 Jac: rot: 3: 510.
and because, etc. that by honest, etc. he make known to the said H. and G.
that they should be here at this day, to wit in Oct. S. Hill. to show if, etc.
wherefore the same T. and D. ought not to have execution against them of the
said 200 l. according to the Form of the recognizance aforesaid, Sci. fac: in a
writ De droit de guard.

Sci: fac^ upon judgment in debt and detinue.


if, etc. And now here at this day came as well the said T. and D, by their
attorneys aforesaid, as the same H, and G. by F. their attorney, And the
sheriff now retorneth that they have nothing, etc. nor are found, etc, And
hereupon the said T. and D. pray execution against the same H. and G. of the
said 200 l. to be adjudged them, etc.

H 10. H. 6. Rot. 141. Scire Fac Upon a judgment in a writ, de droit de Guard.
P. 2. H. 7. Rot. 50, Scire Fac, upon a judgment in detinue for Cattle and for
Debt.

ss IT was commanded the sheriff, whereas I. P. one of the attorneys of the
Court of the Lady the Queen here of the common Bench, lately in the same court
of the Lady the Queen here, to wit, 1. Feb. An. 25. before F. A. Knight and his
associates then Justices of the Lady the Qu. of the common Bench here, Entry of
a Sci: fac: against an heir upon a judgment against his father in debt, and an
Elegit awarded.
by the consideration of the same Court had recovered against I. K, Knight. as well
a certain debt of 12 l. as 16 s. and 4 d. which to the same I. P. in the same
court were adjudged for his damages which he had by occasion of detayning of
that debt whereof he is convicted, and by the record and proceedings therein in
the same court of the Queen here remaining, manifestly appears, Nevertheless
execution of the judgment aforesaid yet remains undon, M: 26, and 27. Eliz.
rot.
and the same I. K, Knight is dead, as by the information of the said I, P. the
Queen understands, And because, etc. that by honest, etc. he make known to I.
K. Esquire son and heir of the said I. K. Knight, and now tenant of all the
Lands and Tenements which were of the said I.K.Knight. in Fee simple, at the time
of the judgment aforesaid given, that he should be here at this day, to wit, in
Cr. Anim, to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the said 12 l. 6 s. and 13, s. 4
d. ought not to be made of the lands and tenements which were of the said I. K,
Knight in Fee-simple at the time of giving of the Judgment aforesaid in his
bayliwick, being in the seisin of the said I. K. the son and rendered to the
same I. B. according to the form of the recovery aforesaid, And now here at
this day came the same I. P. in his proper person and offered himself the 4.
day against the said I. K. the son in the plea aforesaid. And he being solemnly
called came not, and the sheriff now retorneth that he has made known to I K
the son of being here at this day by I D and R F honest, etc. Therefore it is
considered that the said I P have execution against the said I K the son of the
said 12 l. 6 s. and 13 s. 4 d. to be levied of the lands and tenements which
were of the said I K Knight. in Fee-simple, at the time of giving of the judgment
aforesaid, being in the seizure of the said I. K. the son by default, etc. and
hereupon the same I. P. has chosen to be delivered to him the moiety of all
the Lands and Tenements, which were of the said I. K. Knight in Fee-simple
being at the time of the judgment aforesaid given in the seisin of the said I.
K. the son to be levied according to the form of the statute thereof made and
provided, until the said 12 l. 13 s. 4 d. be thereof levied, and prays a
writ thereof to be directed to the sheriff of the County aforesaid, And it is
granted to him retornable here in Oct, S. Hill. etc. quaere de rest* form,

H 3. Jac. Rot. 308. ss. Entry of a Sci: fac. against an heir and judgment
thereupon by default upon a judgment had against the Father deceased in the
time of another King.
It was commanded the sheriff whereas R. S latly in the court of the Lady Eliz.
late Queen of England, to wit, in the Term of the holy Trinity An. 30. before
E. A. Knight, etc. by the consideration of the same Court had recovered against
T S late, etc, as well a certain debt of 40 l. as 40 s. which, etc. as by the
record and proceedings here in the Court of the Lord the King now here
remaining, manifestly appears, notwithstanding execution, etc. And the same T
is dead, as by the information of the same R. etc. and because, etc. that by
honest, etc, that he make known to W S son and heir of the said T. who has
lands and Tenements which were of the said T in Fee simple, in Cr. Tri. An.
etc. or at any time afterward, that he should be here at this day, to wit, in
Oct. Hill. to show if any thing; etc. wherefore they ought not to make the debt
and damages aforesaid, of the lands and Tenements, aforesaid, being in the
county aforesaid and render them to the said R. according to the Form of the
Recognizance aforesaid if, etc. And now here at this day came the same R, by I
H his attorney aforesaid, and offers himself the fourth day against the said
W. in the plea aforesaid, and he being solemnly called came not: and the
sheriff now retorneth that he had made known to the said W. son and heir of
the said T. and tenant of two messuages and 100. acres of land, Scit fac:
returned.
with the appurtenances in M. in his county that he should be here at the said
Octab. S. Hilli. to show in form aforesaid, etc. by I. K. and L. I. honest,
etc. and hereupon the same R. prays execution against the said W. of the debt
and damages, of the lands, and Tenements aforesaid which were of the said T. in
Fee simple in the said morrow of the holy Trinity, to him to be adjudged, etc.
Therefore it is considered that the said R. have execution against the said W.
of the debt and damages aforesaid to be levied of the tenements aforesaid by
default, etc. Inquire of the form of this writ,

P 4. J. To. 25 57, Upon a Recovery in debt against G. K son and heir of W K.
by I. Harper Sci. fac. to the Tenants of the lands and Tenem. which descends
to the said G. in fee simple from the said William his Father And which were of
the said G. 12. die Febr. An. 42, Eliz. which day the said John Harper
purchased his original writ in debt against the said W. that he should be here
in Oct. Hill. etc.

Entry of a Sci: fac: brought by an executor against an h ire upon judgment
against his Father, etc.
H Ill. 5. Jac, Rot. 1011. Otherwise as it appears in the Term of the holy
Trinity An. 5. Rot. 9. It is thus contayend, Corn. ss. It was commanded the
sheriff whereas W. W. Gent. lately in the court of the Lady Eliz. late Queen of
England, to wit, in Mich. Term An. 37, and 38. before E A Knight and his
associates then Justices of the said late Queen in the Bench here, to wit, at
Westminster, had recovered against I C late of, etc. as well a certain debt of
40 l. which, etc. as 40 s. which etc. put, etc. Execution notwithstanding, etc.
and as well the said W. as the said W W are dead as by the information of W S
executor of the testament of the said W W the King understands, and because,
etc. that by honest, etc. he make known to C C Gent. son and heir of the said
I, and now Tenant of all the lands and Tenements which were of the said I in
Fee-simple at the time of giving the judgment aforesaid that he should be here
at this day, to wit, in Cr, Trin. to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the debt
and Damages aforesaid ought not to be made of the lands and tenements of the
said I. in Fee-simple at the time of the judgment aforesaid given being in the
seisin of the said C in the county aforesaid according to the form of the
recovery aforesaid, and now here at this day came as well the said W S by I B his
attorney as the said C by P K his attorney and the sheriff now retorneth that he
by virtue of the writ aforesaid to him directed die tali and An. by E D and W W
honest, Sci: fac: tenenti terr. returned.
etc. made known to the said C son and heir of the said, I and tenant of 1
Message and 10. acres of land, etc. in C in the county aforesaid, which were
of the said I C in Fee-simple at the time of the judgment aforesaid given, that
he should be here at this day to show if any thing, wherefore the debt and
damages aforsaid ought not to be made of the lands, and Tenements aforesaid
being in the seisin of the said I and rendered to the said W S according to the
form of the recovery aforesaid, And hereupon the said W S brings here into
court the letters testamentary of the said W W by which it is sufficiently
manifest to the Court here, the same W S to be executor of the testament
aforesaid and thereof to have the administration etc. and prays execution
against the said C of the debt and damages aforesaid, of the lands and
Tenements aforesaid to him to be adjudged, etc. and hereupon the same C prays
license thereof to imparle here, etc. until Oct. Hill, etc. at which day here
came as well the same W as the same C by their attorneys aforesaid and hereupon
the same W S as before prays execution against the said C, of the debt and
damages aforesaid of the lands and Tenements aforesaid to be adjudged to him,
etc.

ANd the said C says that the said W execution against him, as son and heir
of the said T C of the debt and damages aforesaid ought not to have because he
says, that he has not, Monstrans de testament. Bar riens per descent. Quere.
nor at any time after the judgment aforesaid given, had any lands, or
tenements by hereditary descent, from the said I his Father in Fee-simple,
whereof the debt and damages aforesaid could be made, and this he is ready to
verify whereupon he prays judgment, of the said W S execution against him as
son and heir of the said I of the debt and damages aforesaid ought to have etc.

ANd the said W S says that by any thing before alleged, Replication that he
had assets by descent at the test of the Sci^ fac:
he ought not to be barred from having his execution against the said C as son
and heir of the said I of the debt and damages aforesaid, because he says
that the same C before the day of the judgment aforesaid given, and the day of
purchasing the said writ of Scire fac. to wit, tali die and An. had sufficient
lands and tenements by hereditary descent from the said I. his father in
Fee-simple, whereof he might have satisfied the said W S of the debt and
damages aforesaid, to wit, at C aforesaid, and this he prays may be inquired
of by the Country and the same C likewise Therefore 12, etc.

Continuance of a Scire facias.
ss AT which day here came the said Plaintiff by his attorney aforesaid And the
sheriff sent not the writ, Therefore let the defendant as before be premonished
that he be here in Ost. S. Mich. to show in Form aforesaid, etc.

Sci: fac: by the surviving Administrator of goods of the first intestate not
administered by the first administrator.
T 16. Jac. Rot. 3109. London Int. G and H Scire fac by the surviveing
administrator of the goods of the first intestat, of goods not administered by
the first administrator,

Sci: fac: brought upon a Devastavits post An. and diem.
T 19. Jac. Rot. 1779. Scire fac. to have execution de bonis propriis upon a
devastavit returned post An: and diem.

Sci: fac: brought against the administrator by the executor at his full age
upon a judgment had against the intestate by the administrator, during the
minority of the Infant.
H 7. Jac. Rot 109. Brownlow. London ss. It was commanded the sheriff whereas I
B and H G administrators of the goods and chattles which were of I W during the
minority of Margaret W executrix of the testament of the said I W lately in the
court of the Lady Eliz. late Queen of England, to wit, in Mich. term An. 27.
and 28. before E A Knight and his associats then justices of the said Lady the
Qu. of the Common Bench here, to wit, at Westminster by the consideration of
the same Court had recovered against W D late, etc. otherwise called, etc.
as well a certain debt or 160 l. as 98 s. which, etc. whereof he is convicted
as by the record and proceedings therein in the court of the Lord the King now
here remaining manifestly appears, execution notwithding of the judgment
aforesaid yet rests to be done, and the said W is dead, Averment of the full
age of the executrix and the death of the Defendant.
And the same Margaret after the judgment aforesaid therein given is come to
the full age of 21. years, and afterward took to husband one Tho. Knight as
by the information of the said T. and M executrix of the testament of the said
I W deceased, the King has understood: And because, etc. by honest, etc, they
should make known to W D and Margaret his wife Administratrix of the goods and
Chattells which were of the said W D who died instated, Sci: fac: awarded
against the administratrix of the defendant.
etc. at the time of his death, That they should be here at this day, to wit,
in Oct. Hill., to show if, etc. wherefore the same Thomas and Margaret his wife
execution against them of the debt and damages aforesaid, of the goods and
Chattles which were of the said W D at the time of his death, being in the
hands of the said W and M his wife to be administered, ought not to have, etc.
according to the Form of the recovery aforesaid if, etc. and an al Sci. fac.
awarded ret. Oct. Pur. Defendants appear, non sunt inven. etc. and hereupon
the same T and M his wife bring here in court the letters Testamentary of the
said Io. Wright by which it appears to the Court here the same Margaret to be
executrix of the testament aforesaid, The Plaintiff shows Letters of
administration of the will. Averment that the defendant died intestate.
and thereof to have the Administration etc. and the same Tho. and M his wife
further say that the same W D after the judgm. aforesaid given, at L. in the
parish, etc. died intestat, And that the administration of all the goods and
Chattels which were of the said W D at the time of his death by Io. by Divine
providence, etc. after the death of the said W to Margaret now wife of the said
W D. while she was sole at London in the parish and ward aforesaid was
committed, which said Margaret after the judgment aforesaid given at London in
the parish and ward aforesaid, took to husband the same W D, And pray execution
against the said W D and Margaret his wife of the debt and Damages aforesaid,
See the new Book of Entries f: 623. Pl: 9. tiel Sci: fac: respectuat judicium
Quere.
of the goods and Chattells which were of said W Dowgle at the time of his
Death, in the hands of the said W Death and M his wife, being to belevied, to
them to be adjudged, etc. Null. Judgm. quaere if the executor at his full age
shall have such a Scire fac. upon a Recover by the administrator during the
minority of the executor, or not, Tri. 9, Jac, Rot, 1619. and afterward
satisfaction was acknowledged upon this entrey, without any judgment.

Mich. 44. and 45. E. Rot. 2816, Sci: fac: against Tertenant.
Scire fac in debt to the lands and tenements of the lands and tenements, etc.
according to the form of the Recovery aforesaid if, etc. And now here at this
day came the said A. by I. H. his attorney and offered himself the 4th. day
against the said Tenants of the Lands and tenements aforesaid in the plea
aforesaid, And they being solemnly called came not, Null. Tertenant returned.
and the sheriff now retorneth that there is no tenant of any lands or
Tenements which were of the said I. at the time of the judgment aforesaid given
or at any times afterward in his Bailiwick whereby he might make known to
him, whereas it is testified in the said Court of the said Queen here, that
there are diverse Tenants of Lands and Tenements in the County of Norff. which
were of the said I. at the said time of the judgment aforesaid given and
afterward whereof they could make and levey the debt and damages aforesaid,
Averment that there are diverse Tenants in another County A Testat: Sci. fac:
awarded after non-suits returned.
Therefore it is commanded to the said Sheriff of Norff. that by honest, etc.
be make known to the tenants of the lands and tenements which were of the said
I, at the time of the judgment aforesaid given or at any time afterward that
he be here in Oct. S. Hill. to show in form aforesaid if, etc,

Al. Sci. fac. against the Administrator upon judgment against the Intestate.

T: 22 Jac. rot. 629 the same. Al. Sci. fac. awarded.


M 44 and 45 Eliz. rot. 3118. Brownlow ss. Otherwise as it appears etc. And
now here at this day came the said R. N. by I his Attorney, and offered himself
the fourth day against the said G. in the plea aforesaid, and he being solemnly
called came not, and the Sheriff now returns, That the said G has nothing,
etc. nor is found, etc. therefore as before the Sheriff is commanded that by
honest, etc. he make known to the said G that he should be here in Cr.
Animarum, to show in Form aforesaid, if, etc. At which day here came the said
I by his Attorney aforesaid, and the same G the fourth day of the plea being
solemnly called came not, and the sheriff as before now returns, that the
said G has nothing, etc. nor is found, etc. And hereupon the said R. I. says,
That the said Defendant dyed intestate, etc. and that the administration of the
goods and chattels which were of the said Intestate at the time of his death,
The plaintiff says, that the Administration was committed to the Defendant
against whom the Sci. fac. issues.
by John by divine Providence Arch Bishop of Canterbury, etc. such a day and
year at London, in the parish, etc. after the death of the said intestate, to
the said G was committed, and prays Execution against the said G. of the Debt
and Damages aforesaid in form aforesaid to him to be adjudged, etc. Therefore
it is considered, That the said I have Execution against the said O of the Debt
and damages aforesaid of the goods and chattells which were of the said R. H.
at the time of his death being in the hands of the said O to be administered, to
be levied if he have so much in his hands to be administered, by default of the
said O. etc. Trin. 13. Jac. rot. 526. Brownlow into H. and H.

Entry of a Sci. fac. with cas. and testat. thereupon awarded.
T 12 Jac. rot. 2524. Brownlow ss. Civitas Exon, C P. against B. E. in a Scire
facias, etc. Re. Cr. Trin. By Default, etc. And hereupon the said C prays a
writ of the said Lord the King to be directed to the Sheriffs of the City of
Exon, to take the same R if, etc. to satisfy the said C of the Debt and
Damages aforesaid, etc. And it is granted to him returnable here, Tres Trin. At
which day here came the same C in his proper person, and the Sheriff now
returns, That the said R is not found, Reurn of the Cap. Testat. awarded.
Devon.
etc. and hereupon it is testified in the same Court here, that the same
Richard does lie hid, wander, etc. run from plac to place in the County of
Devon, Therefore it is commanded to the said sheriff of Devon, that he take
him, if, etc. and safely keep etc. so that he should have his body here in Cro.
Animarum, to satisfy the said Christopher of the debt and damages aforesaid,
etc.

Entry of an al. Sci. fac. upon judgment had against the principal upon an
arrest, upon an original in debt sued out in the Common Bench, and a capias
thereupon, in another Term, wherein the first Sci. fac. was returnable in a
former Term, T. 20. Jac. rot. 3186. Note that the first writ of Sci. fac. in
this case, ought to issue from hence out of the Philizers office returnable in
the Prothonotaryes office.
T 13 Jac rot. 2621. Brownlow, Otherwise as it appears in Easter Term Anno 13
Regis nunc Rotulo, It is thus contained, Middlesex ss. It was commanded the
Sheriff, whereas I L of the parish of Saint Bridget London, Felt-maker, R A of,
etc. in the County of Surrey Felt-maker, and W D in the parish of Saint Olave
Southwark in the County of Surrey Felt-maker, lately in the Court of the Lord
the King, now, The condition of the Recognizance.
to wit in the Term of Saint M. Anno Regis Franc. and Hiberniae, etc. 12. and
Scotiae 48. before Henry Hobart Knight and Baronet, and his Associates then
Justices, etc here to wit at Westminster, did acknowledge, and every of them
does acknowledge himself to owe to P. S. widow, four hundred pounds of lawful
money of England, which said sum of four hundred pounds the same J. R. and W.
for themselves and their heirs, Recovery against the principal.
would and granted, and every of them wills and grants to be levied, of
their Lands and chattells, and of every of them to be made and levied to the
use and behoof of the said P under condition, that if it should happen for the
same Petro Nello, against the said J.S, late of London, Felt-maker, otherwise
called, etc. in the same Court of Common Bench of the Lord the King here in a
certain plea, of debt upon demand, of two hundred pounds, by the same P against
the same J. S, in the same Court of the King here prosecuted, to be given, then
the said J. S. shall satisfy the said Debt of two hundred pounds, and also all
damages by occasion of detaining of that debt, against the same I. S. in the
same Court of the King here to be recovered or adjudged, or should render his
body in Execution upon the same judgment in the Court of the Lord the King
here. And although the said P afterward to wit in Hillary Term Anno Regis
nunc 12. Sup. in the same Court of the King here, before the same Henry Hobart
Knight and his Associates, Breach of the condition, that the principal had not
paid the debt and damages, nor rendered his body, etc.
then Justices of the said Lord the King of Common Bench here, to wit, at
Westminster, by the consideration of the same Court, recovered against the same
I. S. as well the said Debt of two hundred pounds as fifty three shillings and
four pence which to the same P in the said Court of the King here were adjudged
for his damages which he had by occasion of the detaining of that debt whereof
he is convicted, as by the Record and proceedings therein in the same Court of
the Lord the King here, to wit at W aforesaid remaining, manifestly appears.
Nevertheless the said I. S. the debt and damages aforesaid to the said P has
not yet paid, nor rendered his body in execution upon the judgment aforesaid in
the Court of the King here, according to the Form of the Recovery aforesaid,
as by the information of the said P is made known to the King. And because,
etc. that by honest, etc. he should make known to the said I. L. R. and W.
that they should be here at this day, to wit. Quin. Pas. to show if any thing,
etc. to wit the said I. L. wherefore the said 400 l. by him in Form aforesaid
acknowledged, ought not to be made of his lands and chattells, and the said
Richard wherefore the said four hundred pounds by him in Form aforesaid
acknowledged ought not, etc. And the said Walter, wherefore the said four
hundred pounds by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged, etc. and rendered to the
same Petronell, according to the Form of the Recovery aforesaid, Nihil
returned upon the first Sci: fac. Alias Sci: fac: awarded. T: 19 Jac: Rot: Such
a form of entry of an alias Sci: fac: where the first Sci: fac: was returnable
in another term Returned as before.

Judgment seve ally against the Manucaptors by default, etc.

Entry of an alia, Sci: fac: where the fi st Sci: fac: was returnable the same
term. T: 19 Jac: Rot: 2089. See the form in another term.


and now here at this day came the same P by G.B. her Attorney, and offered her
self the fourth day against the same I. L. R. and W. in the plea aforesaid,
and they came not, and the sheriff now returns, that they have nothing, etc.
nor are found, etc, Therefore as before it is commanded the sheriff that he
make known to the said I.L.R. and W. that they should be here in Cr. Trin, to
show in Form aforesaid, etc. And now here at this day, to wit, to the said Cr.
Tri. came the same P. by her Attorney aforesaid, and offered her self the 4th.
day against the said I. L. R and W. of the plea aforesaid, And the sheriff as
before now returns that they have nothing, etc. neither are found, etc.
Therefore it is considered that the said P have execution against the said I.
L. for the said 400 l. by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged, and against the
said R A of the said 400 l. by him in form aforesaid acknowledged, and against
the said VV D of the said 400. pounds by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged by
default, etc.

T 19. Jacobi Rotulo. 4840. Brownlow ss Middelsex. ss. entry of Scire fac
against Manucaptors upon a Bail, re, Cr. Trin. And now here at this day, to
wit, at the same Cr. Trin, came the same Plaintiff by his attorney aforesaid,
and offered himself the 4. th day against the said Defendant in plea aforesaid
And he solemnly called came not, And the Sheriff returned a Nihil, Therefore as
before it is commanded the sheriff that by honest, etc. he make known to the
said defendant that he be here Tres Tri. to show in form aforesaid, etc. And
now here at this day, to wit, at the same Tres Tri. came the said plaintiff by
his attorney aforesaid, and the said Defendant the 4th day of the plea being
solemnly called came not, and the sheriff as before retorneth nichil. habet.
etc. Therefore it is considered, etc. as in others,

Entry of a Sci: fac: upon a recovery in dower for value of the damages against
the Tertenant.

Recital of the judgment.


ss M 44. and 45. Eliz. Rot. 405. Otherwise as it appears in the Term of S.
Michael An. Eliz. 44, and 45, Rot. 743. It is thus contained, Norff. ss. It was
commanded the sheriff whereas W, G and M. his wife, who was the wife of R. B.
lately in the court of the Lady the Queen now, to wit, in Easter Term An. Regni
43. before E. A. Knight and his associates then Justices of the said Lady the
Queen of the bench here, to wit, at Westminster by the consideration of the
same Court had recovered against T. B. 45 l. 10 s. which to the same W. and M.
in the said court of the Lady the Qu. here were adjudged as well for the value
of the Dower of the said M. of one Message, 29. acres of land etc. with the
appurtenances in M. from the time of the death of the said R, her late husband,
etc. As for their damages which they had by occasion of the detayning of the
Dower whereof he is convicted, as by the Record and proceedings therein, in the
Court of the Queen here remaining manifestly appears, Tenant in the writ of
dower after judgment dies.

Sci: fac: awarded against the son and heir.


Nevertheless excution of the judgment aforesaid yet rests und on, And the
same T. B. is dead as by the information of the said W. and M. the Queen
understands, and because, etc. that by honest, etc. he should make known to E.
B. son and heir of the said T. who holds the lands and tenements which were
of the said T. at the time of the judgment aforesaid given, that he should be
here at this day, to wit, in Cr. Anim. to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the
said W. and M, ought not to have execution against him of the value of the
Damages aforesaid of the Lands and Tenements aforesaid, according to the Form
of the recovery aforesaid if, etc. Return de vic. Alias Sc^: fac: awarded.
And now here at this day came the same W. and M. by I. G. their attorney and
offered themselves the 4th. d^y against the said E. of the plea aforesaid, And
he being solemnly called came not, and the sheriff now retorneth that he has
nothing, etc. nor is found, etc. Therefore as before the sheriff is commanded
that by honest, etc. he should make known to the said E. that he be here 15.
Marti. to show in Form aforesaid if, etc. And now here at this day, to wit, the
said 15. Marti. came as well the same W. and M. by their attorney aforesaid, as
the same E. premonished, etc. by W. D. his Attorney, Sci: fac: returned, but
note that the Sheriff does not return of what lands the son and hei^ is tenant,
according to the point in the writ.
And the sheriff to wit R. I. Esquire now retorneth that he made known to the
said E. of being here at this day to show in Form aforesaid by T. D. and I. G.
honest, etc. And hereupon the said W. M. prays Execution against the said E.
of the value and damages aforesaid of the lands and tenements aforesaid to them
to be adjudged, etc. and the said E. reserving to himself all and all manner of
exceptions and advantages as well to the said writ of Scire fac. as to the
declaration aforesaid, prays imparlance here until Oct. S. Hill. and has
it, etc. Special imparlance.
The same day is given to the said W. and M here, etc. At which day, etc. and
from thence imparleth until Oct. Mich And now here at this day, to wit at the
said Oct. Mich. came as well the said W. M, as the said E. by their Attorneys
aforesaid, and hereupon the said W. and, M, as before prays execution against
the said E. of the value and Damages aforesaid to them to be adjudged, etc. And
the said E, says nothing in bar or hinderance of the execution of the said W.
and M aforesaid by which the same W. and M. remain against the said E. and
thereof without defense, therefore it is considered that the said W. and M.
have Execution against the said E. of the value and Damages aforesaid of the
lands and Tenements aforesaid by default, etc. And because it is not known
what Lands and Tenements the same T, had at the day of his death in Fee-simple,
Judgment by nichil dic. Suggestion to have a Writ to inquire of the value of
the lands awarded.
nor how much those Lands and Tenements were worth by the year according to
the true value thereof, it is commanded the sheriff, that by the oath of honest
and Lawful men, of his Bayliwick, he diligently inquire what Lands and
Tenements the said T. had the day of his death in the Bayliwick of the said
sheriff, And if the said T. died seized of any Lands and Tenements with the
appurtenances in Fee-simple, Then how much those Tenements were worth by the
year in all issues beyond reprises, Quaere for these words are neither perfect
nor good.
And after such inquisition by the sheriff made, he deliver the same Lands, and
tenements to the same W. and M without delay, according to the true value of
them, to hold to the same W. and M. until the said 45 l. and 10 s for the
value and damages aforesaid thereof be levied, etc. and in as much, etc. the
sheriff make appear here 15. Mich. At which day there came the said W. and M
by their attorney aforesaid and the sheriff to wit, Quaere de rest. matter.
I. B. Knight now retorneth here a certain Inquisition, etc. that the father
was seized in Fee of 22. acres of Land at the day of his death to the value of
9 s. 8 d. which said 22 acres of Land the sheriff delivers entirely, etc.

Debt against f^ur Executors, two appear, and the Plaint tame against the same
two, with a simul cum, etc. Judgment against the four and the two that appeared
only a mercied.
H 12. H. 7. rot. 361, Mordant. Devon. ss. Roger Viell brought his Account of
debt against Nich. Yeo. and Eliz. his wife executors of Eliz. Mounck executrix
of I. Mounck that they together with W. Mo. and H. Mounck should render to him
38 l. 17 s. upon bill obligatory made for the payment of 64 l. 19 s. 7 d. ob,
and satisfaction confessed for 26 l 2 s. 7 d. ob by the testator,
Notwithstanding the executors, although often requested, etc. have not rendered,
etc. And the same N. and Eliz his wife together with those, etc. to him to
render, gain say and unjustly detain, etc. and the same Nicholas and Ann
confess the account, and judgment that the plaintiff should recover against
the said Nicholas and Elizabeth W. and Humphery the debt, and damages to 10 s.
de bonis testatoris levand. and the said Micholas and Eliz. in mercy, etc. and
the damages remitted, A Sci. fac. was brought against the Executors upon this
judgment as follows.

H 13. H. 7. Rot. 309. Mordant, Devon. ss. R. U. brought his scire fac. upon
the judgment next above against the said executors to have execution upon the
said judgment returned Cr. Trin. the sheriff retorneth Scire Feci to Humphery
Mounck one of the executors who comes, Sci: fac. upon the judgment abovesaid
etc. And nothing against the other two Executors which came not, and the said
Humphery pleaded ne unq, Execut. The Plaintiff says that he ought not to be
barred from having his execution aforesaid upon the judgment aforesaid, and
notwithstanding the said plea of the said Humphery, above pleaded, the said
Roger at his peril prays execution against the said Nicholas Yeo. and Eliz
his wife William and Humphery of the goods and chattells aforesaid to him to be
adjudged, etc. Therefore notwithstanding the said plea, it is considered that
the said R have execution against the said N. Y. and E. his wife, W and
Humphery of the debt aforesaid of the goods and chattles which were of the said
I. M. at the time of his death in the hands of the said N. and Eliz. his wife
Will. and Humphery being to be levied by default of the same N. Yeo and Eliz.
his wife and Will. etc.

H 20. Jac. Rot. 3276, Brownlow, Sci: fac. by a new administrator during the
minority, etc. of goods not administered by the first administrator upon a
recovery by the first administrator, after the first administrator avoided, and
judgment thereupon by nil dic.
Otherwise as it appears Mich. 20. Jac. Rot. 2213. it is thus contained,
London ss. it was commanded the sheriff whereas VV W administrator of the goods
and chattles which were of T. W, who dyed intestate, etc. lately in the court
of of the Lord the King now, to wit, in the Term of S. Hill. An. of his reign
of England 18. before Henry Hobert Knight and Baronet and his associates then
Justices of the said Lord the King of the Bench here, to wit, at Westminster. by the
consideration of the said Court had recovered against Charles Howard late of L.
Knight and Mary his wife, daughter and heir of I F late called I F of F in the
County of Devon. Knight as well a certain debt of 200 l. as 7 l. 14 s. and 4 d.
which to the said W in the said Court of the Lord the King here were adjudged
for his damages which he had by occasion of the said Debt whereof they are
convicted as by the Record and procedings thereof in the same Court of the King
here remaining it manifestly appears, And whereas also after the judgment
aforesaid had, the commission of the administration of all the Goods and
Chattles aforesaid by George by divine providence, etc. to whom of right the
administration of the Goods and chattles aforesaid belongs, 27. die Jan. An.
Dom. 1621. at London in the parish, etc. was in due manner revoked made void
and anulled, And the same Arch Bpp. afterward, to wit, the 6. day of February
An. Dom. 1621. abovesaid at London in the parish and ward aforesaid the
administration of all the goods and Chattles which were of the said T W by the
said W W not administered, to one Henry Smith during the minority of Austin Sm.
yet being within the age of 18. years and in full life, was rightly and
lawfully committed, and execution of the judgment aforesaid yet rests undon.
And the said Charles is dead, As by the information of the said Henry Smith the
King understands, And because, etc. that by honest, etc. they should make
known to the said Mary that she should be here A. die S. Mich in unum mensem,
to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the said Henry Smith execution against her
for the debt and damages aforesaid ought not to have, etc. according to the
Form of the recovery aforesaid if, etc. And now here at this day comes the
said H S by I B his attorney and offered himself the 4 th. day against the said
Mary in the plea aforesaid, And she being solemnly called came not, And the
sheriffs now return that she has nothing, etc. nor is found, etc. Therefore
as before it is commanded the said sheriff that by honest etc. they should make
known to the said Mary that she should be here, in 8. days, of S, Martine, to
show in form aforesaid, etc, At which day here came as well the said Hen: by
his attorney aforesaid as the said Mary by G C her attorney and the sheriff as
before now retorn, that she has nothing, etc, nor is to be found, etc. And
hereupon the said Hen. prays execution against the said Mary for the debt and
damages aforesaid to him to be adjudged, etc. And he brings here in the Court
the lettres administratory of the said Arch Bpp, which the Commission of
administration aforesaid to the said Henry in Form aforesaid committed,
testify, etc.

ANd the same M. prays license therein to imparle, here until in Oct. Hill.
and has it, etc. the same day is given to the said He. here, etc at which day
here came as well the said Henry as the same M. by their attorneys aforesaid,
And hereupon the said Henry as before prays execution against the said Mary
of the debt and Damages aforesaid to him to be adjudged, etc. and the said Mary
nothing in hinderance of the execution of the said Henry aforesaid, whereby the
said Henry remains against the said Mary therein without defense, Therefore
it is considered that the said Henry have execution against the said M. for the
debt and damges aforesaid, Nichil: dic.
etc. hereupon the said Henry being present here in Court in his proper person,
25. day of January that same Term acknowledged, That he is satisfied of the
debt and damages aforesaid, etc. and therefore the said Mary of those debt and
damages be quiet, etc.

Sci: fac: to have the penalty given by the statute of 23 H: 6. cap: 11.
against a Sheriff for lev^ing of more moneys upon a Town for Knights of the
Parliament expenses then the Town was taxed. The offense against the statute.
H 25. H. 6. Rot. 362. It was commanded the sheriff whereas in the Parliament of
the King now at Westminster in the 23. year of his Reign it is ordained that
the sheriffs of every County for the time being, at the next County, held in
his County, after the delivery of writs, to levy the expenses of the Knights of
the County for the Parliament, For the time being to him made, to make public
proclamation that the Coroners and every Constable of peace of the said County,
and the bayliffes of every hundred Wapentake of County aforesaid, and all
others being willing to assist the Knights expenses, be ready at the next
County there to be held, to assist the expenses of the Knights aforesaid. And
the sheriff or under-sheriffs Coroners or Bayliffes for the time being shall be
here at the same time in their proper persons, under the penalty of Forfeiting
to the Lord the King for every of their defaults made 40 s. And so recite the
statute, as in the statute aforesaid is more fully contained, and the King has
understood that although T. S. late sheriff of the County aforesaid came in
full county at B. held at the presant time, and the Suitors of the same county
then being there, a certain Sum of the Town of C. for Knights expenses
coming to the Parliament of the Lord the King at Reading, the 6. day of March.
An. Regis nunc 21. held, made to be assessed to be paid Notwithstanding the
said Thomas the statute aforesaid not regarding, more money of the town of C
aforesaid, then unto which it was assessed, against the manner and form of
assessement made upon it, caused to be leived, in contempt of the Lord the King
now, and against the form of the statute aforesaid that he should make known
to the said T. that be should be here at this day, to wit in 15 Hillarii, to
answer as well for the said Lord the King as for himself follows in this
behalf, wherefore twenty pounds to the said Lord the King, and ten pounds to
the said John he ought not to be satisfied according to the form of the
statute aforesaid, And now here at this day came as well the said John by R. H.
his Attorney, as the said T. by T.G. his Attorney, and the sheriff now
returns, That he made known to the said Thomas of being here at this day,
etc. to answer in Form aforesaid, etc. by W. R. I. R. and I, D. honest, etc.
And hereupon day is given to the said I. B. as to the said T.S. here until 15
Pasch. in State as now, reserving to the said parties their pleas, exceptions
and advantages to the Writ aforesaid, etc. Abridge in Poulton title de
Parliament 12.

H 27. H. 6. rot. 240. In Trespass the Defendant justifies for Knights
expenses, Et tree. de sum, and another summons directed to the Sheriff to
assesse the Knights expenses, the plaintiff says that the Vill is parcel of
the Barony, etc. and discharged from payment and issue thereupon.

T 21. H. 6. rot. 117. A Writ of Attachment to the sheriff of S out of the
Parliament, to hear their Bill in the same Parliament.

M 9 H. 5. rot. 579. Special bastard^ pleaded in bar to a Sci: fac to have
execution upon a fi^e.
ss And the said Richard Holt as to the Manor of D with the Appurtenances, and
the said Advowson of the same Church of S says, that the said Hugh ought not
to have Execution against him thereof, because he says that the said Joan,
which the said Hugh supposes to be his Mother, whilst she was sole was not
married to any man, long before the same Joan was married, was notably great
with child at D in the County aforesaid, by one W.L. of the said Hugh, by the
said W of the said John begotten, he the same W then also being sole, and not
married to any woman, and long afterward, that the said I was so notoriously
great with child, and continually sole and not being married to any man,
Elopement.
and with the same W.L. there continually abiding, took to husband one T. M. at
D. aforesaid, from which Thomas, the said Hugh took to him his kindred, and
afterward Matrimony and Espousalls between the same T. M. and Joan at D
aforesaid were celebrated, the same Joan incontinently departed thence from the
said Thomas her husband, and enlarged her self from the said Thomas unto the
house of the said William, in the said Town of D. and with the said W L. there
continually the whole life time of the said Joan was commorant, and continued
in adultery with the said William, After which Matrimony and Espousalls so
celebrated, the said H at D aforesaid was borne, without this that the said I
was ever married to any other man, but only to the said T. M. and all and every
of these things the said R. H. is ready to verify, whereupon it shall not be
intended, that the said Hugh as son and heir of the said Joan ought to have
Execution against him of the Manor aforesaid with the Appurteuances, and of
the Advowson of the Church of S. in this behalf, etc. And as to the residue of
the Tenements aforesaid with the Appurtenances, and the said Advowson of the
said church of F. in the Fine aforesaid contained, the said R. Holt prays
license thereof to imparle, here until in 8. Hill and has it, etc. by the
consent of the said Hugh, the same day is given to the said Hugh here, etc.

ANd the same Hugh not knowing any thing by the same R Holte above alleged,
Demurrer in Law.
besides the said Matrimony and Espousalls between the said T. M. and Ioane
celebrated, whereby the Remainder of the said Manor of D with the
Appurtenances, and the Advowson of the Church of S to the said Joan and the
heirs males of her body coming, by the fine aforesaid was intailed, and the
same H as Son and heir of the said I, sufficiently demands Execution thereof
by virtue of a fine aforesaid, and the said R, Holte does not contradict it,
but the said Hugh is son and heir of the said I and as to the matter by the
said R. H. above alleged, the same Hugh has no need, nor by the Law of the
Land is held to answer, prays judgment and Execution thereof for Defect of
sufficient answer to him to be adjudged, etc.

Joynder.
ANd the said R Holte as to the said Manor of D with the Appurtenances, and the
Advowson of the Church of S. wherein the said H. does not gainsay the said
matter, by the said Richard above aleadged, which said matter is sufficient in
Law to exclude the said H from having his Execution thereof by virtue of the
Fine, aforesaid, which said matter the said Richard is ready to verify,
prays judgment, and that the said H may be barred from having his Execution
therein, and because the Justices, etc. until 8 Hillary, etc. And to another
parcel thereof, the Defendant says Non Tenure, And to the whole residue
pleads in Bar as before, and a Demurrer in Law thereupon, and continued until
15 Pasch. At which day here came as well the said Hugh by his Attorney
aforesaid, as the said Richard Holt in his proper person, and hereupon the plea
aforesaid being heard and understood, it seems to the court here that the
said Hugh Marchon ought to have Execution of the said Manor of D. and
Tenements with the Appurtenances, and of the Advowson of the Church of S
whereof the parties aforesaid have pleaded to judgment by virtue of the Fine
aforesaid, notwithstanding, any matter for the said Richard Holt before
alleged, Therefore it is considered, that the same Hugh have Execution
against the said Richard Holte of the said Manor of D and Tenements with the
Appurtenances, Judgment for the demandant.
and of the same Advowson of S. etc.

T 31. H. 6. Execution awarded at the Assizes upon issue in a Sci. fa. upon a
fine, before the day in the Bench. Aid of the King.
rot. 315 ss. An Entry of a scire facias upon a Fine for W. L. Knight, against
I H. of the Manor of H. with the Appurtenances near R at the Nisi prius at
Bitingford, verdict for the plaintiff, before Io. Prisot Knight, then Justice
of the Assizes, and Execution therein awarded at B. before the day in the Bench.

P 28. H 8. rot. 438. Aid of the King granted in a Scire facias, to execute a
fine between Melton and the Earl of Northumberland.

EAster 34 Edw. 1. rot. 27. A sci. fa. brought by the King upon a jud^ment in
an assise Darrein presentment had by the King by reason of the wardship of an
idiot, brought against man and wife, an estranger upon disturbance, Defendant
pleads that the lessor was respited until 8 Hill. for default of the
Recognitors, etc.
ss. It was commanded the sheriff that whereas the Lord the King in the Court
here, to wit, in 8 sancti Martini, Anno Reg. 21. had recovered against H C. and
I his wife and R. B. the presentation to the Church of W hy reason of the Lands
of R. W. a Fool, and in the Kings custody, by which it was commanded the Bishop
of Winchester, that notwithstanding wreck-land of the said I and R. B. he
should admit of a fit Parson to the said Church, at the Presentation of the
King by virtue of which said command the said Bishop admitted one I S his
Clerk at his presentation to the Church aforesaid, and the said Church by the
resignation of the said I. S. Clerk is now void, and belongs to his Donation
by reason of the custody aforesaid, the same H. I. and R. B. do not permit the
said King to present a fit parson to the Church aforesaid in contempt of the
Lord the King, etc. and his immoderate loss and vexation, We command you that
by honest, etc. you shall make known, etc. to show, etc. wherefore the Lord the
King ought not to present a fit parson to the Church aforesaid by reason of the
custody aforesaid, etc. And now here at this day came N. W. who follows for
the Lord the King, and the same H. and R. came not, and the sheriff now
testifies, that he made known to them of being here, etc. by T. D. and F. E.
whereupon the said N. W. who, etc. prays Execution by default of the said H.
and R. And hereupon came the said Ioane, and one Isabel, the wife of the said
R. and the same Joane assevering the same Advowson to be the right of the said
Ioane, and the same Isabell assevering the same Advowson to be the right of the
same Isabell, say, That the Lord the King now by that writ, nor also by virtue
of the Record, from whence that Writ issued, ought not to have Execution
therein, because the said Isabel says, That she is jointly enfeoffed of the
advowson aforesaid together with the said R her husband, and prays that she
for default of her husband, etc. and prays to be admitted etc. and the same
Joan well knows that the Lord the King otherwise in the Court of the King
here in Cro saucti Martini, Anno supradict, superdico, arrayed the said Assize,
ult. praesentationis, against the said H. the same Joan and the same R of the
advowson, of the Church aforesaid, at which said assize they personally
appearing pleaded, and then put themselves upon that Assize, so that then it
was considered that the said Assize should be taken, but that it should be
respited here until in 8 Hill then next following, for defect of Recognitors,
etc and say that afterward in the same that Assize depending thereof between
them undecided, The Attorney confesses the action without warrant in deceit of
his client
as is before said, the Attorney of them the said H and I^and of the said R
again appeared in the same Court without warrant, and granted to the said Lord
the King presentation to the said Church, that turn, etc. reserving the right
of the said H I and R when they would speak therein, wherefore whereas that
Court had no authority or Jurisdiction to admit of the grant of the attorney of
the said A I and R of the Advowson of the Church aforesaid, upon the said Writ
of Assize, ultimo praesentationis, which was respited here until another Term
to come, pray judgment, if any Execution upon such grant after the said Assize
as aforesaid was respited, ought to be made, etc. And because this same is
found by the Record of the same Rolls of this Term, it is considered, that the
said Joan and Isabell go thereof without day, etc. and whatsoever shall be done
by pretense of the said Grant made after the Assize aforesaid was respited as
aforesaid, Judgment against the King
shall be null and void, and the Lord the King may bring an original writ, etc.

P 27 Edw. 1. rot. 127, ss. A Scire facias for the Tenant against the Vouchee
to show if any thing, Scire facias brought by a Tenant in recovery to have
execution of Lands in value against the voucher:
etc. wherefore the Tenements aforesaid of the lands of the said Vouchee, to
the value of the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, in a competent
place he ought not to have, etc.

Judgment against the plaintiff in Sci. fac. for execution of a fine.
H 5 H 6 rot. 304 ss. In a Scire facias for executing a fine, judgment was
given against the plaintiff as follows, therefore it is considered that the
said Plaintiff shall take nothing by his writ of scire facias, but that the said
Defendant go there of without day, etc.

Sci fac. upon a judgment in debt where the Defendant before execution,
fraudulently conveyed his lands and took sanctuary, to the intent to defeat the
plaintiff of his debt.
ss. T 71 H 4 rot. 109. Scire facias against one that made a Feoffment of his
Tenements by Fraud and Covin, and took Sanctuary, but the said Defendant
intending the plaintiff from the Execution of his debt and damages aforesaid
maliciously to retard, gave and granted diverse lands and Tenements goods and
chattells within his Bailiwick to diverse certain persons, by collusion between
them had, to wit, that the Defendant should receive the profits thereof, to his
own use, which same Defendant the profits thereof notwithstanding the said gift
received, and yet does receive, and fled to the liberty of the Abbot of W. and
within the same Liberty stayed, and there lives upon the profits of his Lands
and Tenements goods and chattells aforesaid, as by the information, etc.
praying according to the Form of the statute in this case made, to be provided
of a fit remedy in this behalf, etc. and because, etc.

M 3 H 4 rot. 11 5. ss. Scire fac. for Execution of Damagesr recovered in an
Assize of fresh force in the City of Canterbury, Sci. fac. for damages in an
assize of fresh force.
and also for forty shillings according to the form of the statute thereof
made, for that that the Defendant brought not the Record by him pleaded in Bar
of the Assize, according to the form of the statute of Westminster 2 Cap. 25.

T 2. H. 6 rot. 131. Scire facias against the sheriff, Sci. fac. against the
sheriff for taking in sufficient pledges in Replegiary. Sci. fac. and judgment
therein superseded, for that the Defendant was in the Kings custody. Sci. fac.
against one Executor to have execution etc. upon a Sci. Fac: de bonis
testatoris against 2. executors, returned no goods in the hands of the one, and
a devastavit against the other. See 4 Eliz. Dyer f. 110. pl.
for that he took not sufficient pledges to have return of the Cattle
irreplegiary.

T 2. H. 4. rot. 110. entry of a scire fac. upon the note of a fine and Exetion
awarded, but afterward a writ out of the Chancery was directed to the
justices, Ad supersedendum. etc. for that the Defendant against whom the
judgment was awarded, was in the Custody of the King.

P 4. H. 4. rot. 403. A scieri facias against two Executors was returned that
the said Executor have no goods or chattells, which were of the Testators at
the time of his death, nor had at the time of the receiving of the Writ, etc.
But that that the said A one of the Executors aforesaid, had diverse goods and
chattells to the value, etc. but had wasted them before the receiving of the
said writ thereof, Scire facias against him, wherefore he ought not to have
Execution against him, De bonis propriis, and Eexcution was therein by default,
etc.

SCire facias for I. S. widow, A genervll acquittance pleaded in bar to a Sci.
fac. to have execution upon a judgment.
Executrix of the Testament of I. S against I. R. an Attorney of the Bench upon
a recovery by the Testator, for Debt and Damages, and the Defendant appeared
and pleaded a general Acquittance made by the Executrix. etc.

A Sci: fac: against Coheires. makes default and execution against him
proportion. ejus de hereditate contingen.
T 27. Ed. 1. Rot. 17. in a Scire Fac, against Coheires vouch by the Tenant for
the value, one of the heirs appears and pleads and the other makes
default, Therefore let the execution be made against him for the portion to him
happening out of the inheritance, etc. to the value of the residue, etc.

P 6. H. 4, Rot. 192. ss. in a Scire fac. against Tenants for exempting a Fine,
Nota.
the process was continued until the parties were at issue, at which day one
of the tenants dies, and an other writ was sued by Jornies accounts, Journeis
Accounts.
and afterward at the return of the 2. Scire Fac. an other of the Tenants
dies, and an other writ was sued by Jorneis accomptes and afterward one of
the Defendants made default, Receipt.
and afterward came at a day in Court, he that made default dies, after the
last continuance, Parol demur, for nonage of the heir.
and at a day in Court, came his wife and her sister and prays to be
received, and for that they were within age they pray paroll demur, etc.

M 14. H. 8 Rot 439. P. 4. H, 8. Rot. 437. A Scire Fac. awarded to have
execution against the Termor for years within the Term upon suggestion that
the Termor had surrendered to the Defendant, A Sci: fac: against a Termor.
and had execution by default, etc.

COrnub. ss. It was commanded the sheriff whereas Richard Rawlin was summoned
to be before the Justices of the Lord the King to answer Richard Barret Esquire
in a plea wherefore, A Sci. fac: brought by the heir of the Plaintiff in
partition, who after judgment and before partition made died.
whereas the same Ri. and Ralph had held together undivided 1. Message, 1.
Garden, 40 acres of Land 6. acres of meadow and 60. acres of Pasture with the
appurtenances in S. Minver, the same Ralph to make partition thereof between
them, according to the Form of the statute in this case provided, contradicted
and suffered not the same to be don against the form of the statute aforesaid
in such manner thereupon in the same court it was proceeded that afterward to
wit, in Mich term An. Reg. dicti domini. Rs, nunc 9, It was considered that
partition should be made between the same Ri. and the said Ralph of the
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances as by the Record and proceedings
therein in the same Court here remaining manifestly appears, Execution
notwithstanding of the judgment aforesaid yet rests undon, and the same
Richard is dead as by the information of M. B. and G. B. daughters and heirs
of the said Ric. the King understands, and because, etc. that by honest, etc.
he should make known to the said Ralph that he should be here at this day, to
wit, 15. Pas. to show if any thing, etc. wherefore partition between the same
M. and Grace and the same Ralph of the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances ought not to be made, according to the Form of the consideration
aforesaid if, etc. See the entry of this writ in the title Gardiano admittendo.
And now here at this day came as well the said M. and Grace by N. Sprey who is
admitted by the Court here to prosecute for the same M. and G. who are within
age, as Guardian of the same M. and Grace in the plea aforesaid, As the same
Ralph by John Hunking his attorney, and the sheriff now retorneth that the said
sheriff by William Cook and Richard Harris honest, etc. made known to the
said Ralph that he should be here at the day and place aforesaid as by that
writ it was commanded him, T: 15 Jac: rot: 2035. H: 20 Jac: rot: 679. between
C: and C:
and hereupon the same Mary and Grace pray that partition between the same M.
and G. and the said Ralph of the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances may
be made etc. whereupon the same R. prays imparlance until Cr, Trin. and has
it etc. the same day is given to the said M. and G, here, etc. See, Tri, 33. E.
Rot. 1814. The tenor of a Writ of Dedimus Potestatem in gardiano admittendo in
Dower, sent to the Justices of the Common Bench and the entry there, And after
the entry this, And hereupon it is granted by the Court here that the said T.
M. follow for the same T. B. who is within age and guardian of the same Tho.
against the said Eliz. in the plea aforesaid, etc.

P 28. H. 8. Rot, 408. ss. L. and others against A. and others, Entry in the
Post, The Tenant by W. A. his attorney comes, and calls the Common Uouchee,
and after the judgment, a Writ out of the Chancery to receive the attorney
admitted is entered in haec verba.

M 44. and 45. Eliz. Rot. 1658. Entry of a Sci: fac: to have execution and
seisin of new in d^wer, for that the Sheriff in favor of the Tenant had not
duly made his execution.
Suff. ss. It was commanded the sheriff whereas William Ayleff Esquire and
Barbara his wife lately in the court of the Lady the Queen here, to wit, at
Westminster by the consideration of the same Court had recovered their seisin
against I. A. of the third part of the Manor of Abbotts with the appurtenances
in D. etc. and whereas also at the prosecution of the same W. and B out of the
said Court of the Lady the Queen here of and upon the judgment aforesaid, to
wit, the 6. day of November An. 42. Eliz. issued forth a certain writ of the
Lady the Queen de Sesina directed to the sheriff of the county aforesaid. By
which said Writ the said Lady the Queen commanded the said sheriff that he
should know that the same W and B. in the Court of the Lady the Queen of the
common Bench here, to wit, at Westminster aforesaid had recovered their seisin
against the said I. of the said third part of the Manor of Abbotts in the
appurtenances and 8 messuages, etc. with the appurtenances as the Dower of the
said Barbara of the indowment of Martin A. her late husband, etc. whereupon the
said Lady the Queen now, to the said sheriff commands that the said W. and B.
full seisin of the third part aforesaid with the appurtenances to hold to them
in severalty by meats and bounds he should cause to be had, and in as much as
he should, that precept of the Lady the Queen he should make appear to the
Justices of the Lady the Qu. here, to wit, at Westminster in 8. Hill. then
next following which said Writ of seisin afterward to wit the 16. day of
January then next following at Y. aforesaid in the county aforsaid to E. B.
Esquire then sheriff of the County aforesaid being, was delivered to be
executed in Form of Law, And also by the information of the said W. and B. the
same Lady the Queen has understood that the said Edward favoring the same I.
A. and endeavoring wholely to defraud the same W. and B, of the recovery of
the third part aforesaid afterward to wit the 17. day of Jan. An. 43.
abovesaid caused to be had to the same W. and B. full seisin of 1 Message in E
aforesaid late in the tenure, etc. to hold to the same W. and B, as the Dower
of the same B. of the Indowment of the said Martin her late husband, in the
same manor of A. and to the Tenements and Rents aforesaid in Y. etc.
contingent, as by the Record and proceedings here in the same Court of the said
Lady the Queen remaining manifestly appears, whereas notwithstanding all and
singular the Tenements aforesaid to the same W. and B. by the said Ed. Bacon,
for the third part of the Manor Tenements and Rents, aforesaid with the
appurtenances in Form aforesaid delivered and assigned, are not parcel of the
manor, lands, and Tenements aforesaid whereof the same W. and B. have recovered
their third part in form as aforesaid to the immoderate damage and grievances
of the said W. and B. whereupon they have supplycated the said Lady the Queen
to adhibet to them a fit remedy in this behalf, the same Lady the Queen not
being willing in any wise to injure the same W. and B. But being willing that
complete justice be don, and used to them in this behalf, that by honest. etc,
he should make known to the same I. that he should be here at this day, to wit,
in 8. Mi. to show if any thing, etc. Wherefore omitting the Tenements aforesaid
to the same W. B, in Form aforesaid delivered and assigned, the same W. B,
seisin and execution of the said third part of the manor Tenements and Rents
aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof the said W. and B. have recovered
their third part in Form as aforesaid according to the Form of the recogniz.
aforesaid against the same I. ought not to have if etc.

THe Defendant appears and says that the said W. and A. any further
execution of the third part aforesaid of the manor and Tenements etc.
aforesaid with the appurtenances by them above recovered against him ought not
to have, because he says that well and true it is, etc. And confesses the
Recovery, the writ of seisin, and the return thereupon, and that the Defendant
entered into the land, and further says, That the said message, 3. acres of
Land, etc. in D. aforesaid to the same W. B by the same E. B. for the third
part of the manor, etc. in Form aforesaid delivered and assigned, are parcel
of the manor and Tenements whereof the same W. and B. have recovered their
seisin of the third part abovesaid in Form as aforesaid, and this, etc.
Judgment for the Tenant upon the demurrer.
And demurrer for that the writ lies not, but afterward an other Writ
general was brought, And it was adjudged to be well brought, See Hill. 25.
Rot. 650. P. 9. Jac. rot. 656. Entry of a Sci. fac. in a Quare Impedit.


T 30. Eliz. rot. 1308. Lincoln, ss. It was commanded the sheriff whereas
Thomas Beverly Gent. in the Court of the Lady the Queen now here to wit, in the
Term of of S. M. An. Eliz. 28. and 29. before Ed. Anderson Knight and his
associats then Justices of the said Lady the Qu. of the Bench here by the
consideration of the same Court had recovered his presentation against John
Arch. Bpp. of Canterbury and G. Cornwall his Clerk of the Church of Somerby in
the County aforsaid being void and belonging to his gift by writ of the said
Lady the Queen de Quare impedit, as by the record and proceeding therein in the
same Court here remaining it manifestly appears, Execution notwithstanding of
the judgment aforesaid yet rests to be don, as by the information of the said
Thomas the Queen understands, and because, etc. that by honest, etc. he
should make known to the said Arch Bpp. and Gabriel that they should be here at
this day, to wit, in Cr. S, Tri, to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the same
Thomas execution against them ought not to have according to the Form of the
recognizance aforesaid if, etc. And now here at this day came as well the said
Thomas by William Be. his attorney as the same Arch Bpp. and Gabrill by R. P.
their attorney. And here upon the said Thomas prays Execution of the
judgments aforesaid against the said Arch. Bpp. and G. to him to be adjudged,
Says nothing but the ordinary
etc. and the same Arch Bishop defenderth the force and wrong when, etc. and
nothing in Bar of the execution of the said Thomas says whereby the said
Thomas remains against the said Arch. Bpp. thereof without defense, Therefore
it is considered that the same Thomas have execution of the judgments aforesaid
against the said Archbishop according to the Form of the recovery aforesaid by
default, etc. But let execution therein cease, The Incumbent pleads in Bar that
the writ of Quare impedit depending the plaintiff was utlawed, and that he
resigned by which it appertained to the Queen to present, and the Queen
presented him, and that he was indicted such a day, and after that the
plaintiff sued a writ of Error forth to reverse the utl^ry, and afterward it
was reversed.
as to have a writ to the Bishop until the plea between the said Thomas and
the said Gabriel be determined, etc. and the said Gabriel says that the said
Thomas execution upon the judgment aforesaid against him ought not to have,
because he says that the said writ of quare impedit depending, to wit, such a
day and year certain C. B. Esquire out of the Court of Chancery of the Lady
the Queen at Westminster in the County of Midd. then being prosecuted a
certain Original writ of the said Lady the Queen against the same Thomas
Beverly, etc. And recite the outlawry, Therefore he by the judgment of W. D.
and T. G. then Coroners of the said Lady the Queen of the County aforesaid was
utlawed, after which said utlawry against the same Thomas B. in Form aforesaid
published, remains reversed or adnulled, and after the said recovery of the
presentations aforesaid in the said writ of Scire facias specified, to wit, the
first day of December An. Rn. etc. 23. the same Gabriel being then Parson of
the Church of Somerby aforesaid at Somerby aforesaid on his own accord
resigned the same Church into the hands of William then Bpp. of Lincoln
ordinary of that place whereof the Church aforsaid was then void, By pretext
whereof the right of the presentation to the same Church being so void, by
force of the utlawry aforesaid, as is before said, then being in his strength,
to the said Lady the Queen belonged, the same Lady the Queen to the said Church
being so void, afterward, to wit, the third day of December An. Regni sui 9.
by her letters Patents, which the said Gabriel with the Great Seal of England
Sealed, brings here into the Court whose date is at Westminster, in the
County of Midd. the same day and year, Presented the same Gabriel her Clerk,
and the same Gab. by virtue of the presentation afterward, to wit, the 5 day
of December An. 29. abovesaid was admitted and instituted in the same, and
afterward and before the day of the purchasing of the said Writ of Scire
facias, to wit, the 16. day of December An. 29. abovesaid the same Gabriel into
the Church aforesaid was inducted, by pretext whereof the said Church was full
and yet is of the same Gab. by the presentation of the said Lady the Queen,
after which said admission institution and induction of the said Gabriel into
the Church aforesaid, to wit the 13. day of February An. Rn. 29. abovesaid, the
same Thomas Beverly prosecuted out of the same Court of Chancery aforesaid at
Westminster aforesaid, then being, a certain writ of the said Lady the Qu. De
Errore corrigendo, to her beloved and faithful Edm. Anderson Knight directed,
By which said writ the said Lady the Queen now recites by the said Writ that
because in the Record and Procedings and also in publishing the said utlawry
against the said Thomas in the County of Lincoln aforesaid published and before
the same E. A. and his associates then Justices of the said Lady the Queen of
the Bench, as is said returned manifest error has intervened to the great
Damage of the said Thomas as by his complaint the Queen understood, the same
Lady the Queen willing the error (if any be) in due manner to be corrected and
to the same Thomas full and speedy Justice may be don in this behalf, commanded
the said Edmond Anderson that if the utlawry aforesaid before the said Edmond
and his associats aforesaid in the bench aforesaid be returned so it was said,
then the record and process of the utlawry aforesaid with all things touching
them to the said Lady the Queen, under your Seal you distinctly and plainly
send, and that Writ so that we may have them a die Pas. in tres Sept. then next
following wheresoever we shall be in England that viewing the Record and
proceedings aforesaid, we have cause further to be don thereupon for correcting
the said Error that of right and according to the Law and custom of the Lady
the Queen of E. ought to be done, by virtue of which writ de err. corig. the
same E. A. the record and proceedings aforesaid, whereof mention is made in the
said writ of Error, Certificat of the utlawry upon the writ of Error.
to the said Lady the Qu at W. aforesaid at the said tr. Sep. Pas. under his
seal sent according to the form and effect of the said writ, the Tenor of which
Record and proceedings follow in these words, Pleas at W. before E. A. Kr. and
his associats Justices of the said Lady the Qu. of the Bench of E Term An. of
the reign of El. by the grace of God, etc. 28. rot 1209. Lincoln ss. Charles
Bawdes Esquire by his attorney offered himself the 4. day against Thomas
Baverley, etc, of A plea wherefore with force and arms, etc. And he came not,
etc. therefore the sheriff was commanded that he attach him, etc. and the
sheriff now returns that he has nothing, etc. therefore let him be taken
that he may be here (Tli. die) At which day there came the said Charles by his
attorney, and offered himself the 4. day against the said Thomas in the plea
aforesaid, and he cannot, And the sheriff was commanded that he should take
him, etc. and the sheriff now returns that he is not found, etc. Therefore as
before let him be taken that he be here Tli, die ss. Pleas at Westminster
before, etc. and recite the entry of the Plu. Capias, and the pleas at
Westminster, etc. And recite the entry of the Exigi. Fac. At which day the
sheriff returned that his county held at Lowth in the county aforesaid the 24.
day of Oct. An, Regni Eliz. now etc. 28. The same Thomas Beverly was the 5.
time called and appeared not, And that so at the 4. Countys next preceding the
same Thomas was likewise called and appeared not, and because he appeared not,
at any of the aforesaid Countyes, therefore he is utlawed, and afterward, to
wit, on Thursday next after tres Sept. S. Mich. then next following before the
said Lady the Queen at Westminster came the same Thomas B in his proper person
and rendered himself prisoner to the Marshall of the Marshallsey of the said
Lady the Queen before the same Queen by occasion of the utlawly aforesaid, who
was committed to the Marshall, etc. Error assigned.
And presently said that in the record and proceedings aforesaid, and also in
publishing of the outlawry aforesaid, it was manifestly erred in this, that
within the county of Lincoln aforesaid were, and at the day of purchasing of
the original Writ aforesaid, and also from the time whereof the memory of man
is not to the contrary, there were two Towns, one called Humby the great, the
other Humby the lesser, and neither Town was named or called Humby alone
without addition, and this he was ready to veryfie whereupon he then prays
judgment and that the utlawry aforesaid for the said Error, and etc. others in
the Record and proceedings aforesaid being, might be revoked, adnulled, and
taken altogether for nothing. And he to the common Law of the Realm of the Lady
the Queen of England, and also to all things which he had lost by the occasion
of the utlawry aforesaid might be restored, etc. And then the said T. B. prayed
a writ of the said Lady the Queen to premonish the said Charles of being before
the said Lady the Queen to hear the record and proceedings aforesaid and it was
granted him, Scire facias.
etc. Whereupon it was commanded the sheriff that by honest, etc. he should
make known to the said Charles that he should be before the said Lady the
Queen in Oct. S. Marti. then next following wheresoever, etc. to hear the
record and proceedings if, etc. and further, etc. the same day then given to T.
B. etc. And hereupon then came W, K. of, etc. Gent. S. T. of the parish, etc.
Gent. I D of London Yoeman and L. R etc. and undertook for the same John
Beverly to have the body of the same Thomas before the said Lady the Queen at
the same Term, The plaintiff bayled, corpus pro corpore.
and so from that day until etc. every of the said Manucaptors body for body,
etc. at which said Oct. Martini before the said Lady the Queen at Westminster
aforesaid came the said Thomas B. in his proper person and the sheriff of the
said county of Lincoln then returned there, that by virtue of the said writ to
him directed, by G. S. and R. B. honest, etc. he had made known to the said
Charles, B. of being before the said Lady the Queen at the day and place in
the same Writ contained, to hear the record and proceedings aforesaid if, etc.
according to the exigency of that writ which the said C. B. the 4. day of the
plea being solemnly called by S. W. his attorney came, whereupon the said
Thomas as before then said that in the record and proceedings aforesaid and
also in the publishing of the utlawry aforesaid it was manifestly Erred,
alleging the Error aforesaid, by him in form aforesaid alleged, and prays
that the utlawry aforesaid for that error and others in the record and
proceedings aforesaid found, might be revoked adnulled and altogether taken for
nothing. And that he to the Common Law of the Realm of the Lady the Queen of
England, and also to all things that he by occasion of the utlawry aforesaid
had lost might be restored, and that the said Charles might rejoyne to the said
Error, And the same C. prays license therein to imparl and it was granted
him, etc. and here upon day therein was given to the parties, aforesaid before
the Lady the Queen here until in 8. S. Hill. then next following wheresoever,
etc. to wit, the said Charles Baudes of speaking to the said Error, and then to
rejoyne to that Error, at which said Oct. S. Hill. before the said Lady the Qu.
at Westminster came as well the said T. B. in his proper person as the same Chapter
by his attorney aforesaid. And the same C. then said that the utlawry aforesaid
ought not to be revoked, because he said that within the County of Lincoln
aforesaid was, and at the same tine of the purchasing of the original writ
aforesaid, and also from the time whereof the memory of man is not to the
contrary, there is one Town called and known, as well by the name of Humby
alone, as by the name of Humby the great, and this he was ready to verify,
whereupon he prays judgment and that the judgment aforesaid in all things
might be confirmed, And the said Thomas Beverly as beforesaid, That within the
said County of Lincoln were and at the same time of purchasing of the
original writ, and also for the time whereof the memory of man is not to the
contrary were two Towns the one called H. the great, the other called H. the
lesser, without this that within the county of Lincoln aforesaid was and at the
same time of purchasing, etc. was one Town called and known by the name of H.
only, Travers.
as by the name of H. the great in manner and Form as the said C. B. above in
pleading had alleged and this he was ready to verify, whereupon as before he
prayed that the utlawry aforesaid might be revoked, adnulled, and altogether
taken for nothing, And that he to the common Law of the Realm of the Lady the
Queen of England, and to all things which he by occasion of the utlawry
aforesaid had lost might be restored, etc. And the same Charles as before,
said, that within the county of Lincoln aforesaid there was and at the same
time of purchasing of the original writ aforesaid, was one Town called and
known as well by the name of Hu. only, as by the name of Humbly the greater, in
manner and Form as the said Charles had above alleged, and of this he put
himself upon the Country, and the said Thomas likewise therefore it was then
commanded the sheriff of the said County of Lincoln that he should cause to
come before the Lady the Queen in Oct. Pur. 12. of the body of the County of
Lincoln by whom, etc. And recite the Postea, who say upon their oath that
within the county of Lincoln aforesaid, there is not, nor at the within written
time of purchasing of the said original writ within writien was there a Town
called and known as well by the name of Humby only, as by the name of Humby the
great, as the same Thomas B. has within alleged, whereby it was then
considered in the same Court there, that the utlawry aforesaid should be
revoked adnulled and altogether taken for nothing and the same Thomas B. to the
common Law of this Realm of England and to all things that he by occasion of
the utlawry aforesaid had lost should be restored, etc. And this he is ready to
verify whereupon he prays judgment, and that the said Thomas Beveley may be
barred from having execution against him of the judgment aforesaid, etc.
Judgment was given against the Queen. quaere.

T 11. Jac. rot. 707. Brownlow, ss. Otherwise as it appears, A Scire faci^s
brought against the principa^l, and bayl to prosecute an Audita querela. where
judgment was given for the plaintiff upon Nil capiat pro bre.
Pas. 11. Jac. Rot. 1510. It is thus contained, Mid. ss. It was commanded the
sheriff whereas G. B. of Cobham in the County of Surry gent. had prosecuted a
certain Writ of the Lord the King of Audita querela to the Justices of the
Lord the King here directed against one I. D. Doctor of the Laws upon a
certain judgment in the Court of the said Lord the King of the Common Bench
here given for the same John against the said O. given as well of a certain
debt of 200 l. as of 33 s. and 4. d. for his damages which the same I. had by
occasion of detayning of that debt by the same John against the said O. in the
same court of the said Lord the King here rccovered, and the same O, thereupon
afterward, to wit, the 29. day of May An. Rs. etc. 7. out of the same Court
had obtained a certain writ of the said Lord the King directed to the sheriff
of Suss. against the same John, to premonish the said John of being before the
Justices of the said Lord the King here, to wit, at Westminster, such a retorn,
the next following to answer to the said writ of Audita querele, And further to
do and receive what the Court of the Lord the King shall consider of him in
that behalf, and whereas also afterward, to wit the said 29. day of May An, 7.
abovesaid, in the same Court before the Justices of the said Lord the King at
Westminster came E. M. of, etc. G. M. of, etc. T. W. of, etc. and R. E. and
undertook, and every of them did undertake for the same O. in the sum of 200
l. and the same O then present in the same Court undertook for himself in the
sum of 500 l. to prosecute the said writ of Audita querela with effect and if
it shall happen judgment against the said O. in this behalf to be given, that
then the same O. should satisfy to the same I. of the debt and damages
aforesaid in the same Court recorded, which said sum of 500 l. the said Owen
acknowledges of his Lands and Chattles to be made and to be levied to the use
and behoof of the said John, And which said several sumes of 200 l. every of
the Mnucaptors, aforesaid acknowledge of their Lands and Chattles, and every of
them to be made if it should happen the said Owing to make default in any of
the premises and thereof to be lawfully convicted, and although afterward, to
wit, in the morrow of the holy Trinity An. Rs. etc. 8. after the appearance of
the said John to the writ aforesaid made in the Court of the said Lord the King
before his Justices here, to wit, at Westminster by the judgment of the same
Court it was considered that the said Owing shall take nothing by the said writ
aforesaid, but should be in mercy for his false clamor therein, And that the
said John should go therein without day, etc. and prosecute for his execution
if to him it should seem expedient. Nevertheless the said Owing of the said
200 l. of the debt aforesaid the said 33 s. and 4 d. for the damages aforesaid
has not satisfied to the said John neither the said Owing the said 500 l. by
him in Form aforesaid acknowledged, to the said John hitherto has not paid nor
the same Edmond George Thomas, and Robert or any of them the said 200 l. by
them severaly in Form aforesaid acknowledged of their lands and chattles to the
same I. D, hitherto has paid, as by the information of the said John, the King
understands, And because, etc, that by honest, etc. he make known to the
said O. E. G. T. and Rob, that they should be here at this day, to wit, 15,
Pas. to show if any thing, etc. to wit, the same O, wherefore the same 500 l.
by him in Form aforesaid acknowledged of his lands, and chattles, and the same
E- G. T. and R. wherefore the same 200 l. by them severally in Form aforesaid
acknowledged of their Lands, and Chattles, ought not to be made and rendered to
the said John according to the Form of the acknowledgment aforesaid if, etc.
At which day here came the said John by I, N his attorney and offered himself
the 4. day against the same O. E. G. T. and R. in the plea aforesaid and they
being solemnly called came not, and the sheriff now retorneth that they have
nothing, etc. nor are found, etc. Therefore as before it was commanded the
sheriff that by honest, etc, he should make known to the said O. E. G. T. and
R. that they should be here 15 Pas. to show in Form aforesaid, etc. At which
day here came as well the same John by his Attorney aforesaid as the said O. E.
G. T. and R. by Oath. Gager their Attorney and the sheriff as before retorneth
that they have nothing, etc. nor are to be found, etc. And hereupon the same
John prays execution against the said Owin of the said 500 l. by the same O.
in Form aforesaid acknowledged, and against the same Edmond for the same 200 l.
by the same E. in Form aforesaid acknowledged and against the said George for
the said 200 l. by the same George in Form aforesaid acknowledged, And against
the said Thomas of the said 200 l. by the same Thomas in Form aforesaid
acknowledged, And against the said Robert of the said 200 l. by the same Robert
in Form aforesaid acknowledged to him to be adjudged, etc. and the same O, E.
G, T. and R. praylicence to imparle and have it, etc. At which day came here
as well the said John as the said O. E. G. T. and R. by their attorneys
aforesaid and hereupon the same John as before prays judgment and execution
against the said O. E. G. T. and R. of the said several sums by them in Form
aforesaid acknowledged to him to be adjudged, etc. And the same attorney of the
said O. E, G, T. and R. says that he is not informed, etc. therefore it is
considered that the same I. D. have execution against the same O, for the said
500 l. by the same O. in Form aforesaid acknowledged, and against the said Ed.
for the said 200 l. by the same E, in Form aforesaid acknowledged, and against
the said George for the said 200 l. by him in Form acknowledged, And against
the said Thomas for the said 200 l. by the same Thomas in Form aforesaid
acknowledged. And against the said Robert for the said 200 l. by the same
Robert in Form aforesaid acknowledged, etc.

T 10. Jac. Rot. 338, Walter Staff. ss. It was commanded the sheriff, Entry of
a special writ of Scire facias where the lands are extended for the P^. but
the sheriff says that he extended the same Lands upon an other Elegit and
delivered them to the party, and that he cannot deliver them to the p^. now
until the debt aforesaid be levied, and upon a judgment that the first
recorder is sati^fied he shall have such a Scire fac. against the first
creditor to remove him, and to have the lands delivered upon the second extent.
38, E. 3. 12. 6.
whereas it was considered that in the Court of the Lord the King here that
Edward B. Knight should have execution against Thomas Coney late of, etc.
otherwise called, etc. as well of a certain debt of 80 l. which the same Ed.
otherwise in the Court of the Lady Elizabeth late Queen of England here, to wit
in Mich. Term An. of the Reign of the said Lady the Queen 39. and 40, had
recovered against him, as of 50 s, which to the same Ed. in the same Court were
adjudged for his damages which he had by occasion of the detayning of that debt
whereof he is convicted. And the same Edward afterward came into the Court of
the Lord the King now here, and by the statute in such case provided chose to
be delivered to him all the goods and chattles of the said T. besides his Oxen
and other necessaries for the plough, and likewise the moiety of all his lands
and Tenements in the County of Staff. to hold as his Free Tenements to him and
his assigns, according to the statute aforesaid until he had levied the debt
and Damages thereupon, whereupon the King by his writ commanded the sheriff of
Staff. that all the goods and chattles of the same T. besides his Oxen and
necessaries of his Plough, and likewise all his lands and Tenements in the
County of Staff. whereof the same T. in Cr. Anim. An. of the Reign of the late
Queen 39. or at any times afterward was seized or possessed, without delay he
should cause to be delivered to the said Edward, by a reasonable price and
extent, to hold to him the goods and Chattles aforesaid as his proper goods and
Chattles, And also to hold the moiety aforesaid as his Free Tenement to him and
his assigns, according to the Form of the statute aforesaid, until he had
levied the debt and Damages aforesaid thereupon, and in as much, etc. the
sheriff should make to appear here in Crast. Anim. An. Regni Rs. nunc 9, and
the same sheriff here then returned that he by virtue of the writ aforesaid to
him directed had take a certain Inquisition before him at Stafford in the same
County of Staff. the 22. day of October last past by the Oath of 12. etc. by
which it was found, that the same T. after the Judgment in the same Writ
specified given, to wit, the 20, day of November, before the taking of the
inquisition aforesaid was seized, in his Demesne of Fee, of and in the Manor
of W. Coney with its Rights members and appurtenances in the said County of
Saff. of the yearly rent in all issues besides reprizes 40 s. and recite the
return of the inquisition word for word, until in all issues besides reprizes
20 s. And further by the Inquisition aforesaid it is found that the same T. C.
at the time of giving of the judgment in the Writ aforesaid specified, or at
any time afterward until the same day of taking of the inquisition aforesaid,
had no other or more land or Tenements, nor any goods or Chattels in the same
County of Stafford to the knowledge of the Jury of the Inquisition aforesaid,
and further the same sheriff then and there returned that he by virtue of the
Writ aforesaid, the moiety of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid above
mentioned to be extended, to the same Edw. B. according to the exegency of that
writ he could not cause to be delivered for that the Manor aforesaid and all
other the premises with the appurtenances, by virtue of an other writ of
Extent and Liberi fac to him before therein directed the eight day of January
last past to one H P. made to be delivered, All and singular which premises
with the appurtenance in the hands of the same H. yet are and remain by
occasion thereof. And as to any further execution of the said writ nothing by
the said sheriff was further acted therein, As by the Record thereof in the
Court here remaining manifestly appears, and although after the taking of the
Inquisition aforesaid the 8. day of November An: Regni of the said Lord the
King now of England the 9, th. abovesaid, it is satisfied to the said Humphery
by the said T. Coney of his debt and Damages in the said other Writ specified,
And although also the said Edward be not yet satisfied of his Debt and Damages
aforesaid, Notwithstanding the same Humphery yet keeps possession of the
lands and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, General avermant of
satisf^ction.
as by the information of the said Edward the King understands, And the same
Lord the King being willing to do to the said Edw what is just and consonant to
reason does command the sheriff that by honest, etc. he should make known to
the said Humphery that he should be here at this day, to wit, Cr. S. Trin, to
show if any thing, etc. wherefore the same Humphery whereas he is satisfied of
the Debt and Damages aforesaid, in Form as aforesaid, The possession of the
Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances he would hold or ought,
and row here at this day came as well the said Edward by John Richards his
attorney as the same Humphery by R. G. his attorney, and hereupon the same E.
prays judgment and that the same H. from his possession of the Manor and
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances may be removed, And that the said
Edward into the possession of the moiety of the same Manor and Tenements with
the appurtenances may be restored, so that the moiety of the same to the said
Edward according to the extent aforesaid may be delivered, etc.

ANd the said Humphery reserving to himself all and every advantatages and
exceptions, Special imparlance.
as well to the Writ as to the declaration aaforesaid, prays license thereof
to imparll until Oct. S. Mich. and has it, etc. the same day is given to the
said Edward B. here, etc. At which day here came as well the said Edward as the
said Humphery by their attorneys aforesaid, And hereupon the same Edw as before
prays judgment, and that the said H. from his possession of the manor and
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances may be removed, and that the moiety
of the same Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances to the said
Edward according to the Extent aforesaid may be delivered, etc. And the same
Humphery nothing in Bar or delay of the judgment aforesaid says whereby the
same Edward, remains against the same H. therein without defense, Therefore
it is considered that the same Humphery from the possession of the manor and
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances be removed, etc. And that the moiety
of the same Manor and Tenements with the appurtenances according to the
Extent, aforesaid to the said Edward should be delivered, and etc. And hereupon
the sheriff is commanded that he remove the same Hum. from the possession of
the manor and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances and the moiety of the
same Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances according to the
Extent aforesaid without delay he should cause to be delivered, And in as much,
etc. the sheriff make to appear here 15. Hill. at which day here came the said
Edward by his Attorney aforesaid, and the sheriff of the said County of
Stafford, to wit, R. M. Esquire now returns that he by virtue of the writ
aforesaid to him directed the 20, day of January An. etc. 10. came to the
manor and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances And the same Humphery P,
from the possession of the Manor, and Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances removed, And the moiety of the same manor and Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, to wit, one Close called the Mills. of the
yearly in all issues besides reprises 8 l. and so recite such premises as are
expressed in the Writ by the first Inquisition, unto beyond reprizes 4 l. being
the equal and just moiety of the whole Manor and of all the Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances to the same Edward B. made to be delivered
according to the extent aforesaid in the Inquisition aforesaid above made, as
by the said Writ it was commanded to him, etc.

Entry of a Sci. fac. against the Conusee in a statute merch. brought by the
conusor to have back the possession of lands extended, for that he is
satisfied. M. 47. E. 3. fo. 11 Pl. 9. fit. Sci. fac. 96. T. 17. E. 3. fo. 43.
Pl. 38.
T 19 Jac. rot. 2159. Brownlow London ss, It was commanded the sheriffs that
they should take the body of Thomas Leake of L. in the County of Nottingham
Gent. if he were a Layman, and in the prison of the Lord the King under their
custody should safely keep, until unto G. Woodnot of S in the same County
Gent. of four hundred pounds which the same Thomas, the thirtieth day of
October, Anno Regni, etc. 4. before I. R. then Mayor of the City of Lincoln,
and Leonard Carr Clark, deputed to take the Recognizance of Debts within the
City, acknowledged himself to owe to the said George, and which to him at the
Feast, etc. then next following he ought to have paid, and the same to him
hitherto he has not paid, as it is said, and insomuch as shall be executed of
that precept of the Lord the King, they should make known to the Justices of
the said Lord the King at Westminster in Cr. S, Trinitatis An. Rs. etc. 18, And
the same sheriff to the Justices of the Lord the King at Westminster at that
day returned, H. 17. Jac. rot 293 ^. L. a. R. and F. the like Scire fac. upon a
promise that the conusee is satisfied pro fluxum temporis.
That the said Thomas was not found in their bayliwick, Therefore it was
commanded to the sheriff of B. that all the goods and Chattles of the same
Thomas, and all his Lands and Tenements whereof the same Thomas at the day of
the acknowledgment of the debt aforesaid or at any time afterward was seized
unto those hands soever they have came, unless they descend to some heir being
within age by hereditary descent, you cause to be delivered to the said George
by reasonable price and extent to hold to him the goods and Chattles aforesaid
as his proper goods and Chattels, And to hold the Lands and Tenements aforesaid
as his Free Tenements to him and his assigns according to the Form of the
statute thereof provided until the Debt aforesaid together with reasonable
Damages costs and charges as in labors suits delays, and expenses he had
therein levied, T: 39 Eliz: rot: 1711. the Defendant after judgment and before
execution makes a Feoffment in fee to I: S: who enfensss J: N: and then the
lands are extended, the second Feoffee bring the moneys into the Court, and
prays restitution, the Plaintiff warned comes and receives the money, and
restitution was awarded.
and in as much as the said sheriff had executed the said precept of the said
Lord the King, he should make appear to the Justices of the said Lord the King
at Westminster. from the day of the holy Trinity in three weeks An. R. etc. 18. At
which day Humphery Foster Baronet, sheriff of the County of Berke then returned
to the justices of the Lord the said King at Westminster. a certain Inquisition
before him at Winsor in the County aforesaid the first day of July then last
past taken, by which it was then found that the said Thomas after the
Recognizance of the Debt aforesaid and at the time of taking of that
Inquisition was seized in his Demesne as of Fee and right of and in the Manor
of W. otherwise E. W. and also of the Site and Mansion house of the same
manor of W. otherwise E. W. And so recite the whole Inquisition verbatim, unto
the issues besides reprises of 50 l. which said manor and Site and of the
manor aforesaid with all their appurtenances, the sheriff aforesaid the first
day of July delivered by the extent aforesaid, to the said George to hold to
him and his assigns as his Free Tenement until the Debt aforesaid, together
with the reasonable and necessary Damages costs and charges should be levied
thereof as by the same writ, and return thereof in the same Court of the Lord
the King here of Record remaining manifestly appears, And although after the
taking of the Inquisition aforesaid the said George was satisfied of his Debt,
Damages, costs and necessary and reasonable charges, Nevertheless the same G.
possession of the Manor and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances yet
holds, as by the information of the said Th. the King understands, The Lord
the King willing to do in this behalf what is just and consonant to reason,
does command the sheriffs of London that by honest and lawful men of their
bayliwick they should make known to the said George W. that he should be here
at Westminster in Crastino S. Trinitatis to show if any thing, etc. Testat:
Sci: Fac: awarded.
wherefore the same George (whereas to him) of his Debt, Damages, Costs and
reasonable and necessary, charges, it has been satisfied, possession of the
manor and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances he ought or can hold, At
which day the sheriff, return to the Justices of the Lord the King here that
the said G. has nothing in their bayliwick whereby they could make known to
him, neither was found in the same, whereas it was Testified in the same Court
of of the Lord the King here that he has sufficient in the County of Not.
whereby the same sheriff can make known to him, whereupon it was commanded to
the same sheriff of N. that by honest and lawful men of his Bayliwick he make
known to the said George that he should be here at this day, to wit, tres
Trin. to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the same George, whereas to him, of
his debt Damages, costs and reasonable and necassary charges it has been
satisfied, possession of the Manor and the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances he ought or can hold, At which day here came the same T. by John
Mayor his attorney and offered himself the 4th. day against the said George in
the plea aforesaid and he being solemnly called, by Thomas Bennet appeared, and
the sheriff, to wit, Thomas Huchison Knight, now retorneth that he by virtue of
the Writ aforesaid to him directed by George West and G. Mercer honest, etc. of
his bayliwick make known to the said George that he should be before the
Justices of the Lord the King at the same Term. And hereupon the same George by
his attorney aforesaid prays license therein to imparle here until in 8. S.
Mich. And has it, etc. The same day is given to the said Thomas here, etc.

Entry of a Sci: fac. after a devastavit returned brought by the Administrator
of the plaintiff who is dead, after judgment upon the devastavit that he should
have execution de bonis propr. executoris. M: 9 Jac: Rot: 703. the like.
H 19. Jac. Rot. 2098. B. Cornub, ss. It was commanded whereas the King had
lately commanded W. C. late sheriff of the County aforesaid that of the goods
and Chattells which were of Io. P. late called Io. of M. within the parish of
P. in the County aforesaid Gent. at the time of his death in the hands of W.P.
late of P. etc. Gent. and Joane P. late of P. in the County aforesaid widow
executors of the Testament of the same John in your bayliwick he should make
as well a certain Debt of 40 l. which Gar. B. widow in the Court of the King
now here, to wit at Westminster had recovered against them, as 40 s. which to
the same G. in the same Court of the King here were adjudged for her Damages
which she had by occasion of the detayning of the said Debt, if the same W. and
I. so much goods and Chattells which were of the same I. at the time of his
death in their hands to be administered had, and if they had not. Then the
Damages aforesaid of the proper goods and Chattells of the said William and
Joane to be levied and that he should have those monyes here in Cr. S. Martini
last past to render to the same Gar. for her Debt and Damages aforesaid whereof
they are convicted. And now here at this day came the said Gar. by Nich. Cory
her attorney, And the same now Sheriff at that day returned, that before the
coming of the Writ aforesaid to him directed, the same William and Joane the
goods and Chattles which were of the same John at the time of his death in the
hands of the said William and Ioane to the value of the debt and Damages
aforesaid had wasted, by which the Debt and Damages aforesaid or any parcel
thereof he could cause to be made and the same sheriff further returns that
he caused to be made of the proper goods and Chattels of the said William 40 s.
for the Damages aforesaid, which said 40 s. at the day and place abovesaid he
had ready as by the said writ it was commanded him, And the same Gar. is dead
as by the information of E, L. and Margaret his wife Administratrix of the
goods and Chattels which were of the said Gar, at the time of her death and
Ric. Penhallow and Mary his wif co-administratrix with the said Margaret of the
goods and chattells aforesaid, the King understands, and because, etc. That
by honest, etc. he should make known to the same William and J, that they
should be here at this day, to wit, Tres Tr. to show if any thing, etc.
wherefore the said Ed. and Margaret R. and Mary, Offer.
execution against them for the Debt aforesaid, of the proper goods and
Chattells of the same W. and I they ought not to have, etc. And now here at
this day came the same Ed. and Margaret, Richard and Mary by the same N. C.
their Attorney, Averment, that the plaintiff died intestate, and the Letters of
administration showed, etc.
and offered themselves the fourth day against the same William and Ioane, in
the same plea, etc. and they being solemnly called came not, and the sheriff
now returns, that they have nothing, etc. nor are found, etc. And hereupon
the same Edward and Margaret, Richard and Mary say, that the said Gartrude dyed
intestate, and that the Administration of all the goods and chattells which
were of the said Gartrude at the time of her death, by George, by Divine
providence, etc. the twenty sixth day of May, Anno Domini, 1621. at London, in
the Parish of Saint Mary Bow, in the Ward of Cheap, to the same Margaret and
Mary after the death of the said Gartrude was committed, and they bring here
into the Court the Letters administratory of the said Archbishop which the
Commission of the Administration aforesaid, in form aforesaid, testify, etc.
and pray Execution against the same William and Joan of the Debt aforesaid, to
them to be adjudged, etc. Therefore it is considered that the same Edward and
Margaret, Richard and Mary, Execution by Default.
have Execution against the said W. and Io. of the debt aforesaid, of the
proper goods and Chattells of the same W. and Ioane to be levied by default,
etc.

TRin. 2. H. 6. rot. 131. Essex ss. It was commanded the Sheriff, Entry of a
Scire fac. against the Sheriff for taking insufficient pledges in a Replegiare
in Com.

2 H. 6. fol. 15. pl. 15. This case reported agreeing with this Record.
Fitzherbert process 72. 9 H. 6. 42. Book of entries, 564. 570 571. 15 E. 4.
fol. 19. by Callow Detinue ^yeth- H 11. Jac. 10^. 3563. By: Leicester ss.
Sommerfield and Buney against Beamount, the like Scire facias.

F.N.B. 69. cap. 74.21. H. 6. 40. Hill. 44. Eliz. rot. 2555.


whereas of late, the King had commanded the same sheriff, that by honest and
lawful men of his County he should make known to Jo. Wallis and William
Bennet, who for John Compeer late of O. etc. became pledges for the Return of
the cattle to be made, which Jo. Armor Citizen and Mercer of London took and
unjustly detained, as is said, if it should be adjudged, that they should be
before the Justices of the Lord the King here in October. saucti Hillarii, last
past, to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the cattle aforesaid, for that
return of them to the said I Armor, for default of the same I. C. in the same
Court afterward made, was adjudged, and that the cattle aforesaid were sold
and eloyned, to the same I. Armor, ought not to be returned, or for defect of
Return of the same Cattle, the Price of them of the lands and chattells of the
same I W. and W. B. in your Bailiwick to be made and rendered to the same I A
according to the form of the statute therein made, and of the pledges
abovesaid, the same sheriff to the same Justices of the Lord the King at that
day returned, that the same I W and W B have nothing in his Bailiwick by which
he could make known to them, nor were found in the same, whereby the said I. A.
from having return aforesaid, has received a very long delay, whereupon he
has besought the Lord the King to exhibit justice to him, and that the
statutes of the Kingdom of the Lord the King made for the bettering of the
same, may remain stable, the King will for the benefit of his Liege people, by
speediest remedies, consonant to the same statutes, that by honest, etc. he
should make known to W. L. late sheriff of the County aforesaid, predecessor of
the now sheriff, who took the pledges aforesaid in Form aforesaid, that he
should be here at this day, to wit, in 8 sancti Trinitatis, to show if any
thing, etc. wherefore he so many cattle, to wit, two horses and eighty sheep,
as the same I. A. took from the same I. C. as in the same Court he has avowed,
Sci. fac. returned.
or the price of them for the insufficiency of the pledges aforesaid, to the
same I. A. in the name of the Return of the Cattle aforesaid, ought not to
render according to the Form of the statute aforesaid, Judgment 'by default,
and the awarding of a writ to take of the said sheriff totanimali vel prec. and
to deliver them to the plaintiff Nomine returni.
if etc. And now here at this day comes the same I. A. in his proper person,
and the said W.L. late sheriff, 4 Die pl. being solemnly called came not, and
the sheriff now returns, that he made known to the said late sheriff of
being here at this day to show in Form aforesaid, by I.S. and W.C. Therefore
it is considered, that the same I. A. have of the late sheriff two horses and
eighty sheep, to the value of the other goods aforesaid, which the said I. A.
late took or the price of them, and a writ to the sheriff to take of the late
sheriff the Cattle aforesaid or the price of them, and them or that to the
same I. A. in the name of the Return of the other cattle aforesaid to
deliver, etc.

Count in Sci. fa. upon a Recognizance acknowledged in the Country before a
Justice of the common Bench, and afterward delivered to be enrolled, and is
enrolled in the same Term, in which it was delivered to be enrolled, H. 8.
Eliz. rot. 104 3. H. 15. Jac. rot. 21. int. Pl. ter. and there rot. 80. a
recognizance is entered with a condition, T. 21. Jac. rot. 73. or 78. the like.

Inrollment of a recognizonce with the Term and number of the roll extressed,
Mich 28. and 29. Eliz. rot. ^046.

General entry of a recognizance taken before a Justice of the Common Bench,
and a Scire facias thereupon.


M 20 Jac. rot. 843. Brownlow, otherwise as it appears in Michaelmas Term 19.
Jac. rot. 1906. It is thus contained, Oxon ss. It was commanded the sheriff,
whereas R. H. of S in the County of Oxon Esquire, the twentieth day of July
Anno, etc. 18. and Scotland 53. before Peter Warburton Knight then one of the
Justices of the Lord the King of the Common Bench of the City of Oxford, in the
County aforesaid, acknowledged himself to owe to Richard Farmer of S. in the
County aforesaid Knight, one thousand Marks of lawful money of England, which
he ought to have paid him at the Feast of the birth of our Lord then next
following, which same Recognizance, the same Peter Warburton afterward, to
wit, the twelfth day of February in the Term of Saint Hillary, Anno 18
abovesaid, delivered here in Court with his own proper hands to be there
enrolled upon Record, and there before Henry Hobart Knight, Chief Justice of
the Lord the King of Common Bench, and his Associates, Justices of the said
Lord the King of the same Bench, in the same Term of Saint Hillary, it is
enrolled upon Record, which said one thousand Marks the same R to the said R.
has not yet paid, as by the information of the said R. the King understands,
and because, etc. that by honest, etc. he should make known to the said Ralph
that he should be here at this day, to wit, A die sancti Michaelis in unam
mensem, to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the said one thousand Marks ought
not to be made of his Lands and chattells in your Bailiwick, and rendered to the
same R. according to the Form of the Recovery aforesaid, if, etc. And now here
at this day came the same Richard by Thomas G. his Attorney as the said Ralph
forenamed, etc. by Io. Wells his Attorney, and hereupon the same Richard
prays Execution against the same Ralph, of the said one thousand Marks of
the Lands and chattells of the same Ralph, to be made by pretext of the Recog.
aforesaid to him to be adjudged, and the same Ralph prays the hearing of the
Recognizance aforesaid, and it is read unto him, etc. And also prays the
hearing of the Condition of the same Recognizance, and it is read unto him in
these words, The condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the said Ralph
Holte his He^^^ or Assigns shall and will for his and their parts, well and
truly observe fulfill and keep the Award, Doom, and Order of Sir Thomas
Spencer Knight, and Baronet, and Edw. Sheldon Esquire, for and concerning
Suits, matters, and controversies moved, depending or being between the said
Ralph Holte on the one part, and the above named Sir Richard Farmer on the
other part, for and concerning the Common for four hundred sheep, and right
for keeping conyes, in and upon the grounds called Bayards green, in the County
of Oxford, and all Commons and other profits claimed therein by the said Ralph
Holte, and the Right, Title, and possession of the same Common, and keeping of
Conyes so as the said Sir Thomas Spencer and Edward Sheldon, do make their said
Award touching the premises or any part thereof, on this side the Feast day of
the Nativity of our Lord next coming, after the Date hereof, and do cause the
same to be put in writing under their hands and seals ready to be delivered
unto the said Ralph Holt, then this present Recognizance to be void, or else to
stand in force and virtue, which being read and heard, the Defendant prays
imparlance and has it, etc. And it is continued by imparlance until Cr. Tri.
20. Jac. at which day the Defendant pleads no award made generally, The
plaintiff pleads an award and sets forth a breach, Causes of demu^rer.
that the Defendant at Midsomer 1621. did not pay 14 l. of an Annual sum of
14 l. by the award yearly to be paid the Defendant demurs for two causes 1.
for that the plaintiff has not set forth any sufficient breach of the award,
2, for that the award for payment of the said 14 l, is void, Joinder in
Demurrer.

Entry of a writ of Testat. Sci: fac: against Ter tenants, who appear upon the
Sheriffs return, and say that there is another Tertenant in an other County,
non praenuncit, and pray that they may not answer to the w^it of Sci: fac:
brought against them usque alius p^aemuniatur.
T 20. Jac. R. Rot. 3047. Brownlow, Otherwise as it appears Mich. 19. Jac.
Rot. 939. It is thus contained; otherwise as it appears M. 19. Rot. 1637. It
is contained thus London ss. It was commanded the sheriffs whereas V.
Norrington latly in the Court of the Lady Elizabeth late Queen of England, to
wit. in Mich. Term An Regni sui 35 and 36. before Edmond Anderson Knight and
his associates then Justices of the Lady the Queen of the Common Bench at the
Town of S. Alb. in the County of Hertf. by the consideration of the same Court
had recovered against Far, Earl of D. otherwise called F. Ear. of D. as well a
certain Debt of 300 l. as 50 s. which of the same Vin. in the same Court of the
late Qu. of the Common Bench were adjudged for his Damages which he had by
occasion of the detayning of that Debt whereof he is convicted as by the Record
and proceedings therein in the same Court of the Lord the King here, to wit, at
Westminster remaining manifestly appears, Execution notwithstanding of the
judgment aforesaid yet remains undon, And as well the said Earl as the said
Vincent are dead As by the information of I. A. and Sarah his wife
administratrix of the ^^^ds and Chattells which were of the said Vincent by
Joan Norrington ^^te Executrix of the Testament of the said Vincent not
administered, the King understands, and because, etc. that by honest, etc.
They should make known to the Tenants of the lands and Tenements which were of
the said Earl of Derb. An. of the late Queen 35. which day the judgment
aforesaid was given or at any time afterward that they should be here at this
day, to wit, tres Trin. to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the Debt and
Damages aforesaid ought not to be made of those lands and Tenements and rendered
to the same John and Sarah according to the Form of the recovery aforesaid if,
etc. And now here at this day came the same John and Sarah by Thomas Cony their
attorney and offered themselves the 4. day against the said Tenants in the plea
aforesaid, And they being solemnly called came not, and the sheriff, to wit, R,
D. and E. A. now tetorne that there are not any Tenants nor any Tenant of any
lands or Tenements which were of the said Earl at the same time of the
judgment aforesaid given, Testat. Sci: fac:
or any time afterward in their bayliwick to whom or to which they could make
known, And hereupon it is testified in the same Court of the said lord the King
here, that there are diverse Tenants of lands and Tenements which were of the
said Earl at the time of the judgment aforesaid given and afterward in the
County of North. to whom he may make known, Therefore it is commanded the
sheriff of North. that by honest, etc. that he make known to the Tenants of
the lands and Tenements which were of the said Earl at the time of the
judgment aforesaid given or at any time afterward in his bayliwick that they
be here in 8. S. Mich. to show in Form aforesaid if, etc. At which day here
came as well the said I. Awberry and Sarah by their attorney aforesaid, as John
Earl of Bridgwater and Francis his wife premonished etc. by William Cragg
their attorney, and the sheriff of the said County of North. to wit, Lodowich
Pemberton Knight now retorneth that he by virtue of the Writ aforesaid to him
directed by William Smith and Thomas Allen honest, etc. made known to the said
John Earl of Bridgwater and Francis Tenants of 2. Messu. 1. Cottage 100. acres
of land 20. acres of Meadow and 100. acres of pasture called Swillington lands
with the appurtenances in Brackley in the same County of North. Tertenants of
diverse lands returned.
of the lands and Tenements which were of the said Fardinand Earl of Darb. of
which the said Earl was seized in the Cr. Anim. An. 30, abovesaid of being
here at the same Oct. S. Mich. to show in Form aforesaid, etc. And that there
are no other or more Tenants of any lands or Tenements which were of the said
Earl at the said Cr. Anim. or any time afterward in his bayliwick to whom he
can make known. And hereupon the same John Awbery and Sarah say that the
administration of all the goods and Chattels which were of the said Vincent at
the time of his death by the same Joane Norrington not administered by George
Archbishop of Canterbury of all England Primate and Metropolitan the 12. day
of November An Rs. nunc 12. at London in the parish of S. Mary Bow in the Ward
of Cheap after the death of the same Joane to the said Sa. were committed, And
they bring here in the Court lit. Administrator of the said Arch Bpp which the
commission of the Administration aforesaid in Form aforesaid testifies, etc.
and pray execution against the said Earl of Bridgwater and Francis of the Debt
and Damages aforesaid of the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances in
Form aforesaid to them to be adjudged, etc. And the Earl of Bridgwater and
Francis pray license therein to imparle here until 8. S. Hill. And have it,
etc. the same day is given to the same John Awbery and Sarah here, etc, which
imparlance is continued until Cr. Tri. 20. Jac. At which day the Defendant
pleads as follows, And the same Earl of Bridgwater and Francis say, that the
same I. A. and Sarah ought not to have execution against them for the debt and
Damages aforesaid, because they say, that the day of purchasing of the said
Writ of Scire facias prosecuted against the same Earl and Francis, to wit, the
first day of June An. Rs. etc, 19. one Christopher Earl Esquire was and yet is
Tenant as of Fee, Tenant of the manor of S. M. with the appurtenances in S. M.
in the county of Dor. and of 20. Messuages 20. Gardens 20. M. 11 Edw. 3. Fitz.
brev: 266. such plea is adju^ged good.
Orchards, etc. with the appurtenances in S. M. aforesaid whereof the same
Fardinand late Earl of Darb. in the said morrow after all Souls An. 35. of
the said late Queen abovesaid, which day the judgment aforesaid was given, was
seized in his Demesne as of Fee, And that no writ of Scire facias issued out of
the Court here directed to the sheriff of Dor. to premonish the same Tenant of
the Manor and Tenements aforesaid of being here so that execution of the
judgment aforesaid may be don upon him if it can, and this they are ready to
verify, whereupon they pray judgment and a Writ of Scire Fac. against the
Tenant of the Manor and the Tenements aforesaid in the same County of Do. at
the prosecution of the said I. Awbery and Sarah to be directed to the same
sheriff of Dor. to issue out of the court here to premonish the same Tenant of
the manor and Tenements aforesaid which were of the late Earl of Darb. of
being here to answer of and upon the premises, The same Earl of Bridgwater
and Francis pray that a Writ of Scire Fac. may issue out of the Court here to
premonish the same Tenant of the Manor and Tenemants aforesaid in the County
of Do. being here, etc. To show in Form aforesaid, etc.

ANd the same John and Sarah that they by any thing before alleged from
having their execution aforesaid against the said Earl of B. and F. for the
Debt and Damages aforesaid of the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances
whereof the same Earl and Francis are above returned Tenants, Replication and
Travers, without that, that the Debtor was seized in fee of those lands at the
time of the judgment.
ought not to be hindered because they say that long before the judgment
aforesaid given in Form as aforesaid the said Edward late Earl of Derb. was
seized of the said manor of Sturmister Marshalls and Tenements in Fee, and
being so thereof seized, and afterward and before the judgment aforesaid, to
wit, 12. April An. 3. and 4. Ph. and Mary of the same manor and Tenements
infeoffed W. M. and I. E in Fee, to the uses of H. S. Seignior Strange, and
Margaret for their Lives, and the life of every of them, and after their deaths
to the use of the heirs of the said H. of the body of the said M. begotten or
to be begotten, and for default of such heirs males, to the use of Edward
Earl of Derb. and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and for default of
such issue, to those of the right heirs of the said Edward Earl of Derb. a
tout jours and show that the said Henry and Margaret had issue the aforesaid
Fardinand Earl of Darbey and died seized etc. by which the said Fardinand
entered and was seized in special Tail to wit etc. And being so thereof
seized, the judgment aforesaid upon the said writ of Scire facias above
specified was had against the same Fardinand then seized of the said Manor and
Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances in his demesnes of Fee, to wit to
him and his heirs males of his body lawfully proceeding, And the same
Fardinand being so thereof seized, the same Fardinand after the judgment
aforesaid given at Brackly aforesaid died, of such his estate thereof seized
without heir Male of his body lawfully proceeding, without this, that the said
Fardinand late Earl of Derb. at the same Cr. Anim. An. 35. abovesaid was
seized of the said Manor of S. M. to the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances in S. M. in his demesnes of Fee as the same Earl of Bridgwater
and Francis have before alleged, Travers.
and this they are ready to veryfie whereupon they pray judgment and their
execution aforesaid against the same Earl of Bridgwater and Fr. of the Debt
and Damages aforesaid of the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof
the same Earl and Francis are above returned Tenants to them to be adjudged,
etc. issue upon the Travers, Issue upon the Travers.
and a ven. fac. awarded to the sheriff of Do. of the neighborhood of
Sturnister Marshall, quaere if it ought not to have been of the Manor, etc.

P 20. J. Rot. 2075. Buk. ss. Whereas Samuel Cowper and John Sanders executors
of the Testament of Antony Cowper Gent, Entry of a Sci. Fac. against
^e^t^enants of lands, etc. tempore judiciireddit. And diverse tenants of diverse
lands a e returned who came not and a writ of Elegit is awarded of the moiety
of the lands whereof they were returned tenants H: 39. Eliz. rot 2336.
lately in the Court of the Lord the King now, to wit, in Trinity Term An. 19.
before Henry Horbert Knight and Baronet and his associates then Justices of the
said Lord the King of the common Bench here, to wit, at We. by the
consideration of the same Court had recovered against Ric. Gosnold. late, etc.
otherwise called R. G. of, etc as well a certain Debt of 40 l. as 60 l. which
to the same S. and I. in the same Court of the King here were adjudged for
their Damages which they had, etc. whereof he is convicted, As by the Record,
etc Execution nevertheless, etc. And the same Richard is dead as by the
information of the said Samuel and John the King understands and because,
etc. that by honest, etc. he should make known to the Tenants of the lands and
Tenements in your Bayliwick, whereof the same Richard was seized in his demesne
as of Fee in Cr. S. Trin. last past, on which day judgment aforesaid was given
or at any time afterward, that they should be here at this day, to wit. Quinq
Pas. to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the same Samuel and Io. Execution
against them for the Debt, and Damages, aforesaid, of the Lands and Tenements
aforesaid ought not to have according to the Form of the recovery aforesaid if,
etc. And now here at this day came the same S, and I. by John Andrews their
attorney and offered themselves the fourth day against the Tenants of the Lands
and Tenements which were of the said Richard at the time of the judgment
aforesaid given or at any time afterward in the same plea, Scire fac. to
several ter-tenants of diverse lands and tenements, 2. of whom make default.
And they being solemnly called came not and the sheriff, to wit, John Denham
Knight now retorneth that by G. B. and G. G. honest, etc. he make known to
Eliz. G. widow Tenant of one capital Message, etc. in Becconfeild aforesaid,
etc. and also to one R. G. Gent. an other Tenant of one capital Message or
Farm, etc. And to Susanu G. and T. G. Tenants of one Message, etc. and to
Thomas G. Gent. Tenant of one Message or Inn, etc. And also to one Ia. Necton
Esquire. Tenant of one Message, etc. which were of the said Rich. Goswold in
Fee-simple at the time of the judgment given, and afterward, And hereupon the
same Sam. and Io. pray execution against the said Ter-tenants of the Debt and
Damages of the several Lands and Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances
which were of the said Richard at the time of the judgment aforesaid given to
be adjudged to them, Execution by default.
etc. Therefore it is considered that the same Samuel and John have Execution
for the debt and Damages aforesaid against the said several Tenants of the
said several Lands and Tenements with the appurtenances by default of the said
several tenants to be levied, etc. And hereupon the same Sam. and John have
chosen to be delivered to them the moiety of the several Lands and Tenements
aforesaid with the appurtenances, to hold as their Free tenement to them and
their assigns according to the form of the statute therein made and provided
until the Debt and Damages aforesaid shall be thereof levied, Elegit awarded.
and pray a Writ of the Lord the King to be directed to the sheriff of the
county aforesaid and it is granted to them retornable here from the day of the
holy Trinity in three weeks, etc.

P 39. Eliz. Rot, 1347. a Scire facias against. Ter-tenants 2. are returned, 1.
makes default and the execution awarded against him of the Lands whereof he is
Tenant, And the other Tenant pleads, etc.

H 7. Eliz. Rot. 1357. diverse testats Scire fac. awarded into several Counties
at one time, against the Ter-tenants.

M 7. Jac Rot. 45. int. Plit. ter. Brownlow Not. ss. It was commanded the
sheriff, Scire fac. brought by the heir and exec. of the demandant to have
execution of a judgment in an Assize of nuisance quod nocumentum amoveatur and
for damages after the record of the assize is certified unto the Bench 43. E.
3. 2. br. Execut. 3 z. accord, Assize of nusans brought in Confinio Com.

P. 10. H. 4 Rot. 225. Scire fac. brought by the heir of the defendant upon
the recovery in an assize to have execution upon the land, and the tenant
pleads no tenure for want


whereas latly, to wit, upon Monday the 21 day of September An, of the reign
of the Lord the King now 5. before T. G. Knight and Leonard B. Esquire. and N. C.
Esquire. late Justices assigned to take the Assizes of the said Lord the King in
the Countyes of No, and L. at D. P. in the same C. of. L. and at Ha. in the
said C. of Not, by the recognitors of the same Assize of Nusans it is found.
that Tho. Conians Esquire. unjustly without Judgment raised a certain banck in B.
in the County of Not. to the hurt of the Free Tenement of Tho. Tailor Esquire. in
D. aforesaid within 30. years now last past, to wit, whereas the same T. T.
was seized of and in one Close of pasture containing by estimation 100. acres
with the appurtenances called D. Carres in D. aforesaid in his demesne as of
Fee, And whereas also the same T. T. is likewise and of a long time was seized,
of and in one Close of pasture containing by estimation 40. Plaint in an assiz
of nusans
acres with the appurtenances called H. in B. aforesaid in his demesne as of
Fee nere adjoining to the same Close of pasture called D. C. And the same T. T.
and all those whose estate the same T, T. then had in the same close of pasture
of the same T. T. called D. C. from the time whereof the memory of man is not
to the contrary, good presedent
have had and were accustomed to have a certain gutter or Sewer leading of and
from the same close called D. C. through the same close of the said T.T. called
H. otherwise H. and from thence unto the common River called the Fosse in the
county of Lincoln aforesaid, in which said Gutter the water running falling and
flowing in and upon the same close of pasture of the same T. T. called D. C.
from time to time and by the whole time abovesaid was continually accustomed
and wont to run through the same close of the same T. C. called H. otherwise H.
and from thence unto the said common river called the Fosse and the same T. T.
being so seized of the same close of pasture called D. C, and of the same
Gutter in F. aforesaid and the same T. T. being likewise seized of the same
close of pasture called H. otherwise H. in F. aforesaid the same T. C. before
the purchasing of the original writ of the assize aforesaid, to wit the 21.
day of May An. Rs. nunc 5. a certain banck in and upon the same gutter in the
same close of the same T, T. being, unjustly and without judgment made erected
and exalted, And the watercourse, into the gutter aforesaid from the same close
called D. C. falling and descending and being wont to fall and descend into the
gutter aforesaid by the exalting making and erecting of the banck aforesaid
obstructed and stopped by reason whereof the water in and upon the same close
of the said T. T. called D, C. from the time of the exalting making and
erecting of the banck aforesaid, running falling and descending from the same
close of the said T. T. by the ancient course through the said close of the
said T. T. And from thence unto the said common river called the F. aforesaid
as before it was wont and accustomed to run and to be convayed, is hindered
where by the water by the gutter aforesaid out of and from the same close of
the same T. T. by its ancient course descending and running until the banck
aforesaid newly exalted, back again in and upon the said close of the said T.
T. does reflow and overflow the same Close, whereby that close by the
overflowing aforesaid became Sterrill and unfertill And the same T. T. the
Profit of his close by a long time, to wit, from the said 21. day of May until
the day of purchasing of the original Writ of the assize aforesaid, to wit,
the 22. day of June An. Rs. nunc 5. abovesaid lost to the nocument of the Free
tenement of the same T. T whereupon before the same Justices it was considered
that the hurt aforesaid by the view of the Recognitors aforesaid should be
removed and that the banck aforesaid should be cast down, Iudgmenn in an
assize of nusans
so that the water aforesaid by the gutter aforesaid through the same close of
the same T. T. called H. otherwise H. and from thence unto the common River
called the Fosse, in the same County of Lincoln, into its ancient course at
the charge of the said T. it should be reduced, and that the said T. T. should
recover against the same T.C. his damages to eight pounds by the Recognitors of
the Assize aforesaid assessed, and also 8 l. and ten shillings to the same T.C.
at his request, for his costs and charges at the discretion of the Justices,
here adjudged of increase, which said Damages in the whole do amount to sixteen
pounds and ten shillings, The record of the Assize certifi d into the Bench.
and that the same T.C. should be thereof in mercy, as by the Record and
proceedings therein the Justices of the said Lord the King here, to wit at
Westminster, at the command of the Lord the King sent, and in the same Court
here before them remaining manifestly appears, Execution notwithstanding of
the judgment aforesaid yet remains undone, and the same T.T. is dead as by
the information of T. T. Esquire, son and heir of the said T.T. his Father, and
Executor of the Testament of the said T.T. his Father, the King understands,
and because, etc. that by honest, etc. he should make known to the same T.C.
that he should be here in 8. Sancti Michaelis, to show if any thing, etc
wherefore the same T. T. the son Execution upon the judgment aforesaid ought
not to have if, etc. At which said 8. Sancti Michalis. Adjournment until Men's.
Michaelis.

ANd now here at this day came as well the same T.T. the Son, by E. S. his
Attorney as the same T. C. premonished, etc. by I. A. his Attorney, and the
sheriff now returns that he had made known to the said T.C. of being here at
this day, to show in Form aforesaid, etc. by M. H. and E. H. honest, etc. and
hereupon the same T.T. son and heir, brings here into Court the Letters
Testamentary of the said T.T. his Father, by which it appears to the Court
here, the same T. T. the son to be Executor of the Testament aforesaid, and
thereof to have the Administration, etc. And as Son and heir of the said T. T.
his Father, prays that the Nuisance aforesaid by the view of the Recognitors
aforesaid may be removed, and that the banck aforesaid may be cast down, etc.
so that the water aforesaid by the gutter aforesaid through the same close of
the same T.C. called H. and from thence unto the common River called Fosse in
the said County of Lincoln, into its ancient course at the charges of the said
T.C. may be reduced, and as Executor of the Testament aforesaid, prays
Execution for the Damages aforesaid to be adjudged unto him, etc.

ANd the same T.C. nothing to hinder the Execution of the judgment aforesaid,
says, whereby the same T. T. the son remains against the same T.C. therein
without defense, N. l. dic.
Therefore it is considered that the said T.T. son and heir of T.T. his Father,
and as Executor of the Testament aforesaid, have Execution of the judgment
aforesaid against the same T.C. in form aforesaid given, etc.

P 21. Iac. rot. 1816. Brownlow. Norff. ss. Entry of a Sci. fac for the Tenant
in a w^it of dower, to have execution of the lands, to the va^ue, etc. of the
third part recovered in dower after seisin hod af the third part demanded for
the demandant against the Tenant.
It was commanded the sheriff, whereas Ioane Morrell, widow, who was the wife
of John M. Gent. lately in the Court of the Lord the King now here, to wit, at
Westminster, had demanded against Robert Long Gent the third part of one
Message, etc. with the Appurtenances in H. as her Dower which happened to her
out of the free Tenement, which was of the said I her late husband, by writ of
the Lord the King, Dedo te unde nichil habet. And the same Robert in the same
Court of the Lord King here called John N. Gent. summoned in the County
aforesaid to warrant against her, which said John M. summoned, afterward in
the Court of the Lord the King here made default, by which it was then
considered in the same Court, of the King here, in the Term of Saint Michael,
Anno Regis nunc, 18. that the said Joan should recover her seisin against the
same Robert of the third part aforesaid with the appurtenances, and that the
same Robert should have of the third part of the said I. N. to the value of the
third part aforesaid with the Appurtenances, by default of the said I. N. and
although the same Joan has obtained her seisin of the third part aforesaid,
with the appurtenances by virtue of the judgment aforesaid, nevertheless the
same Robert of the third part of the same I. N. to the value of the third part
aforesaid has not attained, and because, etc. that by honest, etc. he should
make known to the said I.N, that he should be here at this day, to wit, A Die
Pas. in ^unam mensem, to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the same Robert of
the third part of the same I N. to the value of the third part aforesaid with
the Appurtenances according to the Form of the Recovery aforesaid, ought not
to have, etc. And now here at this day came the same Robert by Luke Constable
his Attorney, and offered himself the fourth day against the said I. N. in the
same plea, and he being solemnly called came not, and the sheriff now
returns, that he by virtue of the Writ aforesaid to him directed, made known
to the same I.N. of being here at this day, to show in form aforesaid, by John
Do and R. R. etc. Therefore it is considered, that the same Robert have
Execution and seisin against the said I.N. of the lands of the said I. N. to
the value of the third part aforesaid with the appurtenances by default, etc.
and hereupon the same Robert prays a Writ of the Lord the King to be directed
to the sheriff of the County aforesaid to cause to be made to him full seisin
of the Lands of the said John N. to the value of the third part aforesaid with
the appurtenances to hold to him in severalty by metes and bounds, and it is
granted to him returnable here in Crastino sancti Trinitatis, etc.

T 21. Iac. rot 3360. Brownlow Dorset ss. Sci. fac. sued by the administrators
to have Execution upon a judgment had by them as administrators.
Hurding and Martin Admistrators of Martin, sue out a Scire facias upon a
judgment had by them as Administrators M. 18. Iac. against Starr for fourteen
pounds as for six pounds and have Execution by default, without showing the
Letters of Administration, Quaere for they brought them into Court upon the
first declaration.

H 21. 21. Iac. rot. 3150. Gulston, Otherwise as it appears in Mich. Term
Anno 21. Entry of a Sci. fac. against the sheriff to render to the plaintiff so
man catrell as were replevied by him by pledges for that the pledges are
insufficient.

Quaere, whether such writ ought to be brought in Middlesex, where the record
of the recovery remains, or where the Testat. Sci. fac. is, to wit in the
county of Surrey, 18 E. 4. 18. and 22. 9 H. 6. fol. 42. 15 24. 19 2 H. 6. 15.
21 H. 6. 40. 4 H. 7. 67. 10 H 7. 11. 3 Henr 6. Fitzh. process 72. The great
question was whether the plaintiff should have such a Scire facias against the
sheriff or a writ of Detinue, but it was not adjudged, but by the consent of
the parties, the dem^urrer was waived, and issue taken.

Note, that in the very case there was a non suit at Surrey Assizes, upon issue
taken upon the avowry for damage feasant, and such issue is not expressed in
the writ, for which the writ is not good, Quaere tamen.

Note, where the pledges were sufficient at the time of the taking, etc. and
afterward in the Term it was tried at the bar, and found for the Defendant,
notwithstanding that the plaintiff gave in evidence, that one of the pledges
was insufficient, because he should have replied, that I.S. one of the pledges
was not sufficient at the time of the taking, etc.


Iac. rot. 2752. It is thus contained, Surr. ss It was commanded the Sheriff,
whereas Edmund Travers was summoned to be in the Court of the Lord the King now
before his Justices here, to wit, at Westminster to answer Rich. Ray of a plea,
wherefore he the thirtieth day of August Anno of the Lord the King now of
England, the nineteenth, at Deptford in a certain place there called H. took
the cattle, to wit three Geldings, four Oxen, five Cowes, seventy sheep, and
one Calfe of the same R. and them unjustly detained against sureties and
pledges, etc. of which said taking and unjust detaining of the cattle
aforesaid, the same Richard Raye another time, to wit, the one and thirtieth
day of August Anno 19. abovesaid without our writ, levied a certain plaint
against the same Edmond Travers before R. M. Knight, late Sheriff of the county
of Surrey, in his County Court then held at Guildford, in the same County of
Surrey, and then and there in the same County Court aforesaid, found to the
then sheriff of the said County of Surrey, Pledges as well to prosecute his
plaint. as for the Return of the cattle aforesaid to the same Edmund or the
price of them, if return of them should be adjudged to the said Edmund, to wit
certain R.R. and R.K. upon which said pledges the same then sheriff of Surry
afterward to wit, then at the petition of the said R.R. the cattle aforesaid
according to the Law and Custom of the Realm of the Lord the King of England,
to the same Richard Raye caused to be replevied, the Record of which said
plaint afterward by Writ of the said Lord the King to the sheriff of the said
County of Surrey, in due manner sent here, to wit, at Westminster aforesaid was
had, and the same R. Ray afterward in the same Court of the Lord the King
here, being solemnly called came not, but made Default, by which afterward, to
wit, in Michaelmas Term Anno 19. abovesaid in the same Court of the Lord the
King here, it was considered that the same Richard Ray and his pledges to
prosecute should be thereof in mercy, let the names of the pledges be enquired
of, and that the same Ed. Travers should go thereof without day, etc. And that
he should have Return of the Cattle aforesaid, whereupon by writ of the said
Lord the King it was commanded to the late sheriff of Surrey that he should
without delay make return of the cattle aforesaid to the said Edmond Travers,
and should not deliver them at the complaint of the said Richard Ray, without
the writ of the said Lord the King which should make express mention of the
said judgment, and in as much as that precept of the Lord the King should be
executed, he should make to appear to the Justices of the Lord the King here,
to wit, at Westminster in Cro. sancti Trinitatis Anno Regis nunc 20 And the
same late sheriff of Surrey to the Justices of the said Lord the King here, to
wit, at Westminster aforesaid at that day returned, that before the coming of
the said writ to him therein directed, the cattle aforesaid were eloyned by
the same R. Raye to places to him unknown, so that he could not make return
of the cattle aforesaid, to the said Edmund Travers, as by the said writ to
him it was commanded, etc. whereupon it was commanded to the same Sheriff of
Surrey, that of other cattle of the said R. Ray, to the value of the cattle
aforesaid first taken, he should take in Withernam, and should deliver them to
the said Edmund Travers to keep to him, until he could cause to be returned to
the said Edmund Travers the cattle before taken, and that he should put by
sureties and safe pledges the same R. Ray, that he should be before the
Justices of the said Lord the King here, to wit, at Westminster, Tres Trin.
then next following to answer as well the said Lord the King for the contempt,
as to the said Edmund Travers for the damages and injuries to him in this
behalf done, and the said sheriff of Surrey to the same Justices of the Lord
the King at Westminster at that day returned, that the same R. Ray had no goods
nor chattells in his Bayliwick which he could take in Withernam nor had any
thing in his bayliwick by which he m ght be attached according to the Exigency
of that writ, as by the Record and proceedings therein in the same Court of the
Lord the King here remaining manifestly appears, whereupon the said Lord the
King to the same then sheriff by another writ of his had commanded, that by
honest etc. he should make known to the same R. R. and R. K. his pledges that
they should be here at this day, to wit, in Cro. Animarum then next following,
to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the cattle aforesaid ought not to be
delivered to the same Edmund Travers, for the same cattle of the same Richard
Raye by the same Edmund Travers so before taken, and now by him eloyned, as
they, as aforesaid, became pledges. And now here at this day came the said
Edmund Travers by Henry Millet his Attorney, and offered himself the fourth
day against the same R.R. and R. K. pledges in the plea aforesaid, and they
being solemnly called came not, and the sheriff now returns that they have
nothing, etc. nor are found, etc. And whereupon the same Edmund Travers of
having the Return of the cattle aforesaid, has been a long time delayed,
wherefore he supplicateth to the said Lord the King to exhibit Justice to him,
and that the statutes of the Lord the King of his Kingdom made for the
bettering of the same, may remain stable, the King will, for the benefit of his
Liege people, by speediest remedies consonant to the same Statutes, be
assistant, The sheriff is commanded that by honest etc. he make known to the
said R. M. late sheriff of the same County of Surrey, who took the pledges
aforesaid in form aforesaid, that he should be here at this day. A die in
sancti Martini in 15 dies to show if any thing, etc. wherefore he so many
cattle, to wit, three Geldings, four Oxen, five Cowes, seventy sheep, and one
Calfe, or the price of them for the insufficiency of the pledges aforesaid, and
against the Form of the statute in this case provided taken, to the same
Edmund Travers, in the name of the return of the cattle aforesaid by him first
taken, and by the same R. Raye eloyned, ought not to be rendered according to
the Form of the statute aforesaid if, etc. At which day here came as well the
said Edmund Travers by his Attorney aforesaid as the same R. M. premonished,
etc. by George Bretton his Attorney, and hereupon the same Edmund Travers
prays that the same R. M. the cattle aforesaid, to wit, as above, and the
same M. by Henden sergeant in Law demurreth, And for cause shows that it
appears not for the said writ of scire facias, whether the pledges aforesaid
were taken by the same R. M. then sheriff of the said county of Surrey being,
upon any plaint before the same Sheriff in the County Court of the said County
of Surrey, by the same R. Ray against the said Edmond Travers, before then
levied, or upon any writ of the said Lord the King, De averiis Replegiand.
issuing out of the Court of Chancery of the said Lord the King, as by the
statute therein made is provided, and also that the plea aforesaid, and the
proceedings in the same plaint, whereupon the pledges aforesaid are supposed to
be found, do not appear in the same writ of Scire facias, as they ought to
appear, and this he is ready to verify, whereupon for Defect of sufficient
writ of Scire facias in this behalf, the same R. M. prays judgment, and
that the said Edmund from having return of the cattle aforesaid against the
said R. M. may be barred. etc. Harris Sergeant joines in demurrer. Note Reader,
That the Owner of the Original copy converted this writ in the beginning
thereof, to wit, from (of which said taking, etc.) until (at Westminster
aforesaid had) for defect of which matter the Defendants council demurred in
Law, and showed the causes, but the Record is as the original Scire facias is,
As also for his own learning, and because of the president, 21 Ed. 4. fol. 30.
Fitzh. sci fac. 113. 27 H. 6. fol. 7. Ibidem pl. 34. 9 E. 4. fol. 50. were
vouched to maintain this Scire facias, because it is (...) of the said Lord the
King, Fest. remed. and the plaintiff therein shall recover no damages, which is
for the benefit of the Defendant.

H 22. Iac. rot. 2426. Etntry of a writ of Scire fac. in debt for the demandant
against a st anger whereby he afer a recovery had against the tenant, and before
execution sued, enters into the third part recovered by writ of dower unde
riens avorit.

The tenant dies.


Brownlow Essex. ss. In was commanded the sheriff whereas John Frith and Agnes
his wife lately in the Court of the Lord the King now, to wit, in Easter Term
An. Regni, etc. 22. before Henry Hobert Knight and Baronet and his associates
then Justices of the said Lord the King of the Common bench here, to wit, at
Westminster by the consideration of the same Court had recovered their seisin
against Samuel Ram of the third part of Tenn acres of wood with the
appurtenances in Dagenham as the dower of the said Agnes of the indowment of
William Humphery her late husband by our Writ of Dower unde ni chil. hat. etc.
As by the record and proceedings therein in the same Court of the King here
remaining it manifestly appears, And the same Samuel is dead, and one Mary
Ram widow is entered into the third part aforsaid with the appurtenances, and
holds the same against the Form of the recovery aforesaid as by the
information of the same John and Agnes, the King understands and because,
etc. that by honest, etc. he should make known to the said Mary that she
should be here at this day, to wit, in 8. Pur. beatae Mariae to show if any
thing, etc. wherefore the same John and Agnes, An estranger enters into the
lands recovered and holds them against the recovers.
seisin and execution of the third part aforesaid with the appurtenances
against her ought not to have, according to the Form of the recovery aforesaid
if, etc. And now here at this day came the same John and Agnes by G. P. their
attorney and offered themselves the 4. day against the same Mary in the plea
aforesaid, and she being solemnly called came not, and the sheriff, to wit,
Scire fac. returned.

Judgment that the demandant have execution of the third part by default etc.


Edward Botler Knight now retorneth that he by virtue of the Writ aforesaid to
him directed to John Humfery and Humphery Clark honest, etc. has made known
to the same Mary Ram widow that she should be here at this day to show in Form
aforesaid, etc. therefore it is considered that the same I. and A. have seisin
and execution against the same Mary of the said third part aforesaid with the
appurtenances by default, etc.

H 22. Jac. Rot. 1688. Brownlow Midd. ss. The sheriff was commanded whereas
Thomas Holt lately in the Court of the Lady Eliz. late Queen of England, to
wit, Entry of a writ of Scire fac. upon a judgment in a writ de annuo redditu,
to have execution de arreragiis incu^sis after judgment.

P: 10: H: 4: rot. 123: rot: 224: 127: tiel: 12: H: 7: 8: 40: E: 3: 4: 11: H:
4: 34: 6, E 6, 134, 13 2, H, 6, 9 Pl. 6, 23 H, 8, fo, 5, Br. No, cases 28,
accord with this Scire fac, execution 119. Scire fac. 203.


in the term of the holy Trinity in the year of the Reign of the said late
Queen 32. before James Dyer Knight and his associats then Justices of the said
late Queen of the common Bench at Westminster by the course of the same Court,
had recovered against John Bradshaw late of Bradshaw in the County of Lanc.
Esquire., otherwise called, etc. a certain annual Rent of 80 s. to the same Tho.
and his associets for term of life of the said T. at the several Feasts of the
Nativity of St. John the Baptist and the birth of our Lord by equal portions
to be paid yearly as by the Record and proceedings therein in the same Court of
the Lord the King now here remaining it manifestly appears. And 20 l. in
arrearages of the yearly rent aforesaid after the judgment aforesaid given, for
five whole years ended at the Feast of S. John the Baptist An. Regni, etc. 22.
to the same Thomas are in arreare and not paid as by the information of the
said Thomas the King understands. And because, etc. that by honest, etc. he
should make known to the same John that he should be here at this day, to wit,
8. Hill. to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the same Thomas execution against
him for the said 20 l. the arreareges of the yearly rent aforesaid after the
judgment aforesaid given as aforesaid being in arreare ought not to have
according to the Form of the recovery if, Judgment, Nota been, P. 26. and 27.
H. 8. rot. 359. M. 29. and 30. E. rot. 1024. hill. 7 H. 8. rot. 526. tiel.

judgment that Pl. have execution de arreragis tam tante diem impetr. brev, de
Sci. fac. qu. post. incursis.


etc. And here now at this day came the same Thomas by George N. his attorney
and offered himself the fourth day against the said Io. in the plea aforesaid,
And he being solemnly called came not and the sheriff now retorneth that he
has nothing, etc, nor is found, etc, Therefore it is considered that the said
Tho. have execution against the said John as well of the said 20 l of arrearages
of the yearly rent aforesaid after the judgment aforesaid given, and before the
day of the purchasing of the same writ of Scire fac. as of 40 s. of arrearage;
of said yearly Rent, after the day of purchasing of the same writ of Scire
fac. incurred, which said arreages in the whole do Amount unto twenty two
pounds by default, etc. T. 22. Eliz. Dyer fo. 377. Pl. 28. record.

T 24. Eliz. Rot. 1856. Forde London ss. It was commanded the sheriffs that
they should not omit for any their liberties but that they should take John
Davis late of, Scire fac to take bail where one comes to the bar and pleads
matter in discharge of an utlawry
etc. utlawed in London ter. die, etc. at the suite of Thomas Jurdaine in a
plea of debt, etc. and safely, etc. so that they should have his body here at
this day, to wit, in Cr. S. Tri. to do and receive what the Court of the Lady
the Queen here shall consider of him in this behalf, etc. And now here at this
day came the same John in his proper person, and the sheriffs now return that
they took the body of the same John and the same have now ready, hereupon the
same I. so taken and brought to the Bar says that he ought not to be injured
in this behalf, and that he by the Law of the land ought not to be charged with
the said utlawry, because he says that he at the day of the original writ of
the said Thomas and the day of publishing of the utlawry was conversant and
commorant in the parts beyond the Seas, Allegation that he lived beyond Sea the
day of publishing of the utlawry.
to wit, at the City of Valencia in the parts of Spain, without this that the
same days or any of them was commorant or conversant at L. Reg. aforesaid in
the same County of Dor. as by the writ aforesaid is supposed, For which the
utlawry aforesaid against the same John in form aforesaid published and had is
altogether void and of no force nor effect in Law, And this he is ready to
veryfie, whereupon he prays judgment, and that he from the utlawry aforesaid
quiet and discharged may be dismissed from the Bar here, etc. And because it is
expedient and needful that the said T. for his interest in this behalf be
premonished, before it be further proceeded in to discarge the same Io. from
the utlawry aforesaid. The sheriffs are commanded that by honest, A Scire fac
to premonish the party for his Interest; etc.
etc. they should make known to the said Thomas that he be here, tres. Tri. to
show if any thing, etc. wherefore the same I ought not to be discharged from
the utlawry aforesaid, and hereupon W.W. of, etc. Merchant and I.B. of L. etc.
undertook to have the body of the same I here at the same Term and so from day
to day and at every day of the plea until the plea aforesaid should be ended
and judgment therein should be given, to wit, each of them body for body, Bail
body for body.
etc. and the same John Davis assumed for himself to be then here and at every
day of the plea under the penalty of 10 l. which said 10 l. the same I. D.
acknowledges to be made and levied of his Lands and Chattells to the use of
the Lady the Queen to whose hands soever, etc. it shall happen the said John
Davis at the same Term, or at any other day to him by the Court here in the
premises to be prefixed, to make default, or not to prosecute his Suit in this
behalf with effect, At which day here came the said John in his proper person,
And the sheriffs now return that the said Thomas Jurdaine has nothing, etc.
nor is found, etc. therefore as before the sheriffs are commanded that by
honest, etc. they should make known to the said Thomas that he be here Men.
Mich. to show in Form aforesaid, Alias Scire fac awarded.
etc. and in the interim the same John Davis is dismissed by the bail
aforesaid, etc.

P 12. Iac. Rot. 448. Walter Tarne of New Castle upon Tyne ss. Entry of a
Scire fac. awarded and returned, after a Capias upon statute merchamt into the
Bench, for the administration of the Conusce of the statute where the Conusee
dyed after the capias returned, S^e M. 19. Iac. rot. 726. P. 2. El. Die fo. 150
Pl. 49. 2. R. 3 fo. 8. Pl. 16. that such a Sci^e fac. lies not in this case F.
N. B. fol. 13 Register of writs fo, 1486
It was commanded the sheriff whereas it was latly commanded by Writ of the
said Lord the King to the same sheriff, that the body of I. H. late of H. in
the County of Durham Knight if he were a Lay man and found in his bayliwick, he
should take, and in prison of the Lord the King should safely keep until he
had fully satisfied to I. H. etc. Gent. of 1600 l. which the same I. H. Knight,
the 10. day of August An. etc. 8. before T. L. then Mayor of the town of
New-Castell upon Tyne and W. I. then Clerk deputed to take Recognizances of
deb: according to the Form of the statute merchant within the same Town
acknowledged himself to owe to the same I.H. Gent. which to him he ought to
have paid at the Feast of the birth of our Lords then next to come, and the
same to him has not paid, etc. and in as much, etc. he should make appear to
the Justices of the Lord the King here, to wit, at Westminster, aforesaid Men.
Pas. last past and the same sheriff to the Justices of the said Lord the King,
to wit, at Westminster aforesaid at that day returned that the same I. H.
Knight is a lay man, and not found in his bayliwick as by the record and
proceedings therein in the same court of the Lord the King before the Justices
of the same Lord the King, here to wit, at Westminster aforesaid remaining
manifestly appears, Execution notwithstanding of the judgment aforesaid yet
remains undon, and the same I. H, Gent. is dead, as by the information of
Robert Broundling Esquire. Administrator of the goods and Chattles which were of
the same I, H. at the time of his death during the minority of W. H. and R, H.
Executors of the Testament of the said I. H. Gent. the King understands, and
because, etc. that by honest, etc. be should make known to the said I. H.
Knight that he should be here at this day, to wit, 15. Pas. to show if any
thing, etc. wherefore the same Robert ought not to have Execution against him
of the debt aforesaid ought not to have, etc. according to the form of the
acknowledgement aforesaid, etc. and now here at this day came the same Rob. by
I. Gill his attorney, and offered himself the fourth day against I. H Knight in
the plea aforesaid and he being solemnly called came not and the sheriff, to
wit, Henry Chapman now retorneth that the said I. H. Knight has nothing, etc.
nor is found, etc. And hereupon the same R. says that after the said 15. Pas.
last past the same I. H. Gent. at the Town of New-Castell upon Tyne made his
last will and Testament, the same William H. and Ralph his Sons being then
within the age of 17. years Executors of the same Testament made and ordained,
And that the Administrators of all the goods and Chattles which were of the
said I H. Gent. at the time of his death during the minority of the same
William and Ralph by Clement Colmor, etc. The 19. day of November in the year
of our Lord 1613. at the Town of New Castle upon Tyne after the death of the
said I. H. Gent, to the same Robert was committed, And he brings here into
Court as well the letters Testamentary of the same I. H. Gent. by which it
sufficiently appears to the Court here the same William and Ralph to be
Executors of the Testament aforesaid, And thereof to have the administration,
As the letters administratory of the said official which the Commission of the
administration aforesaid in Form aforesaid do testify, whose date are the same
19 day of November An. Do. 1613. abovesaid with this that the said Robert will
verify that the same William and Ralph are yet living, to wit, at the Town of
New-Castell upon Tyne, and are within the age of 17. years, and hereupon the
same Robert pays execution against the same I. H. Knight of the Debt
aforesaid by default, etc. and hereupon the same Robert prays a writ of the
Lord the King by the statute, etc. to the Reverend Father in Christ William
Bishop of Durham or keeper of his place there to be directed, And it is granted
him retornable here in Cr. S. Trin, etc.

ss. BRownlow ss. Whereas A. M, Gent. and W. H. late of, Entry of a Sci fac:
against manucaptors.
etc. Gent. at an other time, to wit, 29 day of June An. 21. before Henry
Hobart Knight and Baronet our Chief Justices of the common bench at his
Chamber in Sergeants Inn Fleetstreet London, undertook and each of them did
undertake, to wit, the same A. in the sum of 160 l. And the same W. in the
sum of 80 l. that he the same A. should appear in our Court before our
Justices at Westminster in his proper person or by his sufficient attorney in
Law to an action or writ of one R. S. against the same Arthur of and upon an
action of debt upon demand of 80 l. before 8. Mich. then next to come to be
commenced and in our said Court before our Justices at Westminster to be
prosecuted, and to answer to the same Richard in the plea aforesaid, And also
it should happen judgment after the appearance of the said A. in the Cour here
made, in in the same plea, for the said Richard against the same A. to be
given, to satisfy to the said Richard of the debt and damages for the same
Richard against the same A, in the same Court in the plea aforesaid to be
recovered or adjudged, or that he the same A, upon that occasion should render
himself to the prison of the Fleet, Which said sum of 160 l. the same A
acknowledges to be made of their lands and chattles and which said 80 l. the
same W. acknowledges to be made of his lands, and Chattles to be levied to the
use and behoof of the said Richard if it should happen the said A. to make
default in any of the premises and thereof lawfully to be convicted, which
said Recognizance in Form aforesaid taken, The said Chief Justice afterward,
to wit, the 30 day of June then next following in our said Court with his own
hands and delivered to be inroled upon Record, and now there before our
Justices of the common Bench aforesaid at Westminster aforesaid in the Term of
the holy Trinity An. 21. abovesaid is inroled, of which said plea of Debt, a
certain plaint before them was levied in our Court before John Hodges Esquire. then
being one of the sheriffs of London and the same plaint by our Writ upon our
Command, before our Chief Justice at his Chamber aforesaid was sent and had, As
by the record and proceedings therein in our said Court before our said
Justices at Westminster remaining manifestly appears, And although the same
Richard before the said Oct. S. Mich. to wit, the 17. day of September An. etc.
21. abovesaid our certain original Writ in a plea of debt of 80 l. against
the same A. out of our Chancery at Westminster aforesaid then being, before our
Justices of the Common Bench at Westminster aforesaid Oct. S. Mich. then next
following retornable, Commenced and the same A. at the said 8. S. Mich. by I.
R. then his Attorney to the said Writ in Debt aforesaid as by the same Richard
against the same A. in Form aforesaid commenced according to the Form of the
Recognizance aforesaid appeared, And afterward, to wit, in 8. S. Hill. then
next following the same A. as well of the said Debt of 80 l. aforesaid as in 7
l. which to the same Richard in our said Court were adjudged for his Damages
which he had by the occasion of the detayning of that Debt whereof he was
convicted, and judgment there against the same A. for the same Richard in the
same plea in our Court aforesaid was given, as by the Record and proceedings
therein in the same Court before our Justices at Westminster remaining
manifestly appears, Nevertheless the same A. has not rendered his body in
execution of the Judgment aforesaid, in our said Court at the said Oct. S. Hill
nor satisfied the said Richard for the said Debt and damages aforesaid, and
because we will that those things which before our Chief Justice were rightly
acted and known to be duly executed we command you that by honest, etc you
should make known to the said A. and W, that they be before our justices at
Westminster quinq. Pas. to show if any thing, etc. to wit the same A. wherefore
the same 160 l. by the same A. in Form aforesaid acknowledged to be made of
his Lands and Chattles, and the same W. wherefore the said 80 l. by him in Form
aforesaid acknowledged to be made of his lands and Chattles and to the same
Richard ought not to be rendered according to the Form of the Recognizance
aforesaid if, etc. And have you there the names, etc. And this writ, etc. Test.
14. Aprillis An. etc. 22.

Entry of a Scire fac. in an audita q^erela.
M 21. Jac. rot. Brownlow ss. Whereas we were ^nformed by the great complaint
of S. A. Clerk that whereas one R. B. lately in the Court, to wit, in Hillary
Term An. etc. 19. before our Justices at Westminster had recovered against the
same S. as well a certain debt of 12 l. as 40 s. which, etc. whereof he is
convicted, And although the same S. in execution of the Debt and Damages
aforesaid by virtue of a certain Writ of ours of Capias ad satisfaciendum
thereof to our sheriff of Lincoln directed by Edward Hussy Knight and Baronet
late sheriff of the same County at the suit of the same Richard was taken and
imprisoned, and by the same sheriff out of the same prison was permitted to go
at larg whither he would, and from the execution aforesaid was delivered, As by
the same S. by ways and means convenient is ready to inform, Nevertheless
the same Richard for the debt, and Damages aforesaid against the same S. upon
the recovery aforesaid has again now prosecuted, and unjustly has procured
the same S. for that occasion again to be taken, and hitherto to be detayned
in our Prison, unto the immoderate Damage and grievance of the said S,
whereupon he has be sought us to adhibit to him a fit remedy, And because we
will not that the same S. be injured in this behalf, And being willing to do
what is just we commanded our Justices that hearing the complaint of the same
S. in this behalf, and calling before them the parties aforesaid and hearing
their reasons therein, they cause to be done to the same S. full and speedy
justice as of right and according to the Law and custom of our Realm of England
ought to be done, we command you that by honest, etc you make known to the
said Richard that he be here, etc. retornable Oct. Hill. Test. 30. Oct. An. 21.
etc. Scot. 47.

H 20. Jac. in Mr. Brownlowes remembrance litera B. ss. Entry of a Sci fac.
after a Sci. fac. against Ter-Tenants.
- Whereas we have lately by our writ, we have commanded the sheriffs of
London that by honest, and Lawful men of their Bayliwick they should make
known to the Tenants of the lands and Tenements which were of F. C. late of W.
etc. otherwise called, etc. in Fee-simple from the day of S. Martin. etc. An.
42. Eliz. Regin. which day E. G. in the Court of the said late Lady the Queen
of the Common Bench at Westminster before E. A. etc. by the consideration of
the same court had recovered against the said F as well a certain debt of 24 l.
as 6 l. which to the same Edmond in the same Court were adjudged, etc. whereof
he is convicted, or at any time afterward in their bayliwick that they should
be before our Justices at Westminster in Oct. Pur. S. Mariae last past to show
if they had or knew any thing for themselves to say wherefore the Debt and
Damages aforesaid, of the lands and tenements which were of the said F at the
time of the judgment aforesaid given or at any time afterward in the seisin of
the same Tenants in your Bayliwick ought not to be made and rendered to the said
Edmond according to the Form of the recovery aforesaid if it shall seem
expedient to them, and our sheriffs of London to our said Justices at
Westminster at that day returned that there were not any Tenants of any of the
lands or Tenements which were of the said Francis at the time of the judgment
aforesaid given or at any time afterward who had any thing where or by which
they could make known to them whereupon it was testified in our said Court on
the behalf of the said Edmond that there are diverse Tenants of diverse lands
and Tenements which were of the said F* at the time of the judgment aforesaid
given in the County of Suff. to whom the same sheriff may make known. Good
president.
Therefore it was commanded to the same sheriff of Suff. that by honest and
lawful men of his bayliwick he should make known to the Tenants of the Lands
and Tenements which were of the said F. R. in Fee-simple at the said 15. S.
Martin. An. 42. abovesaid that they should be before our Justices at
Westminster 15. Pas. last past to show if they had or knew any thing for
themselves to say wherefore the debt and Damages aforesaid ought not to be made
of the Lands and Tenements and rendered to the same E. in Form aforesaid, And
our said sheriff of Suff. to wit, W. H. Esquire. to our said Justices at
Westminster, at that day renorned that he by P. K. and L. S. honest and lawful
men of his bayliwick made known to certain F. B. Esquire. Tenant of the manor of
P. with the appurtenances in W. in the same County of Suff. And to R. L. Gent.
Tenant of the rectory of the Church of L. in the County of S. which were of the
said F. B. Esquire. at the time of the judgment aforesaid given of being before our
said Justices at Westminster. at that day to answer in Form aforesaid, etc. and that
there are no other Tenants of the lands and Tenements which were of the said F.
B. in his Bayliwick to whom he could make known, and the same F. B. and R. at
the same 15. Pas. in our said Court appearing said that the same E. Execution
against the said F. B. of the Manor aforesaid with the appurtenances and
against the same Richard of the Rectory aforesaid with the appurtenances ought
not to have, because they say that before the writ of Scire sac. to the sheriff
of Suff. directed, to wit, such a day and year one Thomas B Gent. was Tenant
as of his Free Tenement of the manor of E otherwise E. Court with the
appurtenances in the County aforesaid of which said manor with the
appurtenances the same Francis Burnall at the same 15. Martin An. 42.
abovesaid, which day the judgment aforesaid was given was seized in his
demesnes of Fee which said manor of E. otherwise E. Court with the appurt. is
chargeable with the execution of the judgment aforesaid, together with the
manor and Rectory aforesaid and this they were ready to verify whereupon for
that as well the said Manor of E. otherwise E. Court as the said Manor of P.
with the appurtenances whereof the same Francis Bruster was returmed Tenant and
the Rectory aforesaid with the appurtenances whereof the said R L. was returned
Tenant are chargeable with the payment of the debt and Damages aforesaid the
same Francis Brewster and Rob. London pray judgment and that they may not
further answer to the said Writ of Si. facias against them in Form aforesaid
brought before the said Tho. Br. by our process of Scire Facias be premonished
to show wherefore execution upon that Manor together with the manor and
Rectory aforesaid ought not to be don, And therefore we command you that by
honest and lawful men of your Bayliwick you make known to the said Thomas
Bunell Tenant of the said Manor of E. alias. E. Court and to all Tenants of
the lands and Tenements which were of the said Francis B. in Fee simple in your
county of the same 15. S. Martin An. 42. abovesaid that they be before our
Justices at Westminster 8. S. Hill. to show if any thing, etc. Wherefore the
Debt and Damages aforesaid of the same Manor of E. al, E. Court or of any
lands and Tenements which were of the same Francis at the time of the Judgment
aforesaid given or at any time afterward, together with the same manor of P.
and the Rectory aforesaid ought not to be made according to the Form of the
recovery aforesaid if to them it would seem expedient and have you here the
names of them by whom you shall make it known to them, and this Writ Test H,
Hobert at Westminster the 6. day of November An. 20. et Sco. 46.

Retorn.
BY virtue of that Writ to me directed by I. W. and E. W honest and lawful men
of my bayliwick, I have made known to the within named Thomas Burnall Tenant
of the Manor of E alias. E. court with the appurtenances and that there are no
other Tenants of other lands or Tenements in my County to whom I can make
known, A. B. Sheriff.

T 21. Ja. Hitcham the Kings Sergeant brought a certificat out of the Kings
Bench into the Common Bench that if the defendant in any Action wherein Bail
is given die before a non invent. be returned against the Defendant upon a
Scire fac. the bail is discharged, and this was showed in the case of Sparrow
of Lowgate which is entered P. 19. Jac. Rot. 973. this is the true number Role.
in Banco Regis,

P 12. Jac. Co. Banco. S. against S. Debt against the bail upon a Rerog. in
the Kings Bench the Defendants plead that the Pl. died before any Cap. was
awarded against them, a general demurrer, and judgment with the defendants
after much debate H. 4. Jac. Rot. 975. in the Kings Bench D. against C. and W.
against L.

Seisin.
H 21. I. rot. 2988. Brownlow Oxon ss. Entry e fa writ of Habere. facias
sesinam in dower and the return thereof P, 3: 6: Eliz: rot. 1559. the like
form of entry in dower.
It was commanded the sheriff whereas Briget Countis of Barks widow who was
the wife of Francis late Earl of Barks lately in the court of the Lord the
King now here, to wit, at Westminster by the consideration of the same court
and recovered her seisin against Fr. R. otherwise N. of the third part of the
hundred of Do. with the appur. and of the M. of D and W. upon the green with
the appurtenances and of 200. Messuages, 2. Mils, 3. Dovehouses, etc. with the
appurtenances in D, and W. and also the third part of the Rectory of Weston
upon the green and the Advowson of the Vicaridg of Weston upon the green with
the appurtenances as her Dower of the indowment of the said late Earl her late
husbend by writ of the said Lord the King de dote unde nichil habet. for
default of the same Francis R. otherwise N. that to the same Countess full
seisin of the third part aforesaid with the appurtenances to hold to her in
severalty by meets and bounds without delay he should cause^ to be had, and
as much, Tert. pars hundri. manors tenements Rectory and Advowson.
etc. the sheriff should make to appreare here at this day, to wit, in Cr. Pur.
beat. Mariae, etc. and now here at this day came the same Countess by Rob.
Tomblinson her attorney, and the sheriff, to wit, William C. Knight now does
return that he by virtue of the the writ aforesaid to him directed the 15. day
of December last past caused to be had to the said Countess full seisin of the
third part of the hundred, Manors, Tenements, Copyheld land.
Rectory and Advouson aforesaid with the appurtenances, to wit, of 11.
Messuages, 3 Dove-houses, 700. acres of land, 300. acres of Meadow, and 400.
acres of pasture with the appurtenances in Dorchester and Drayton being
Costomary lands of the manor of Dorchester and parcel of the said Manor then
in the several Tenures or occupations of I. p. Gent. E. H. Gent. etc. or of
their assigns with all lands, Tenements, cottages, Meadows, Pastures,
Commons, Rents, Services, and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the same belonging
or appertaining, and of the Chief Rent of twenty shillings, and eleven pence
issuing out of the Farm of Draycot aforesaid, and the lands and Tenements to
the said Farm belonging and appertaining, and also the third part of the
profits of the Manor Court of Dorchester aforesaid, The third part of the
profits, our manerii.
and of nine Messuages, four Cottages, etc. with the Appurtenances in Weston,
upon the green, being customary Lands of the Manor of Weston aforesaid, and
parcel of the said Manor then in the several Tenures or Occupations of
I.G.W. H. etc. or of their Assigns, with all Lands, Tenements, Cottages,
Meadows, Pastures, Commons, Rents, Services, and Hereditaments whatsoever to
the same belonging or appertaining, 2 Mills.
and of all those new buildings called the Brew House, and of one Barn, etc.
And also of two Water mills with the appurtenances in Weston aforesaid, and all
Tithes yearly growing and renewing, Tithes.
as well out of the same Lands and Tenements in Weston aforesaid, in the
several Tenures and occupations of the said I. A. W. H. etc. or their Assigns,
as out of all and singular other the Lands and Tenements whatsoever above
named, and to the Rectory of Weston aforesaid belonging or appertaining,
Rectory,
or being parcel of the said Rectory of Weston aforesaid, and of the West part
of the Wood or Copice called Weston wood in Weston aforesaid, containing by
estimation fourteen acres, and of the Tithes from and out of the West part of
the same Wood or Coppice, called Weston Wood aforesaid, and also the third part
of the profits of the Mannor-Court of Weston upon the green aforesaid, Tithes
of wood. Third part of the profits of Manor Count. 3d part of the the advowson
of the vica ridge of W.
and of one Close called Cow-lease, etc. And also the Advowson of the vicaridge
of the Church of Weston aforesaid, to hold to the said Countess and her
assigns in severalty by metes and bounds, in the name of her whole Dower, to
her out of the Hundred, Manor, Tenements, Rectory. and Advowson aforesaid,
after the death of the said Francis, late Earl of Berks, her late
Husbandhapning, as by the said Writ to him it was commanded, etc. The like
assignment of Dower between the same parties upon the same Roll.

Summons.
ss. JUry of twenty four Knights of the Neighbor hood of T. ven. recogn. if
the Jury by whom a certain inquisition was lately summoned, in the Court of the
Lady the Queen, Entry of a writ of summons in an attaint executed, and awarding
of a resummons against the defendant, hab: corp. against the grand Jury, and
Distring. against the petii jury.
before the Justices of the said Lady the Queen here, to wit, at Westminster,
by writ of the Lady the Queen, and afterwardr before the Beloved and faithful
of the said Lady the Queen, R. C. Knight, Chief Justice of the Lady the Queen
assigned to hold pleas before the said Queen, and G. G. Esquire, Attorney
General of the said Lady the Queen, Justices of the said Lady the Queen,
assigned to take the Assizes in the County aforesaid, by writ of the said Lady
the Queen of Nisi prius, by Form of the statute, etc. at Stonystratford in the
County aforesaid taken, between R M. Gent. plaintiff, and I.Y. of T. etc. and
R. W. of T. etc. of a certain Trespass to the same R. by the said I. and R.
done, as it was said, made a false oath, as the same R. greivously complaining
has showed to the said Lady the Queen, or not, And now here at this day, to
wit, in Octab. sancti Hillarii, came the same R. M. by T. his Attorney, and the
said I. Y. and R.W. summoned, etc. 4 Die pl. being solemnly called came not,
and of them the sheriff now returned that he summoned, Summons returned.
etc. therefore let the same I.Y. and R W. be resummoned, that they be here 15.
Pas. to hear the said Jury of twenty four Knights, and also J. Jugram, I. S. I.
S. etc. twelve Jurors of the first Inquisition aforesaid, being called came
not, and of them the sheriff now returns, that every one of them is severally
attached by pledges, J Denn and R Fenn, Hab. corp. Iur. 24 Milit.
Therefore they in mercy, etc. therefore the Jury of twenty four Knight
aforesaid is respited here until the said Term, Distring. Iur. prim
inqisitionis.
etc. and that the sheriff have then and there the bodies of the same Jury of
twenty four Knights, to make the said Recognizance, etc. their Lands, etc. and
that of the issues, etc, so that he may have their bodies here at that Term,
to hear the Recognizance, the same day is given to the same R.M. here, etc.

P 8. Jac. rot. 1938. Brownlow Lincoln ss. Entry of a writ of sum. and resumm.
in attaint, and Distring awarded against the grand Jury, the party and the
petit Jury.
Jury of twenty four Knights of the Neighborhood of W. vid. Recogn. si. Jur.
by whom a certain inquisition was lately summoned before the Lord the King at
Westminster, by Bill without the writ of the said Lord the King, between Henry
Earl of Lincoln one of the Peers, etc. of England, and Ed. Dymock Knight, of
certain Trespasses and contempts against the Form of the statute, De scandalis
magnat, therein lately made and provided, and afterward, before the beloved
and faithful Peter Warburton Knight, one of the Justices of the Lord the King
of the Common Bench, and Thomas Foster Knight, one of the Justices of the said
Lord the King of the same Bench, Justices of the said Lord the King assigned,
to take the Assizes in the County aforesaid, by writ of the said Lord the King,
De nisi prius, by Form of the statute therein made and provided, P 4. Eliz
rot. 532. Cerciorare to certify a retorn, whereupon an attaint is brought. The
grand jury, the Defendant and the petit Jury make default.

Quaere the sheriff returns not the writ.

Resummons awarded against the grand Jury parties, and petit Jury.


at the Castle of Lincoln in the County aforesaid taken, made a false Oath, as
the said Earl to the said Lord the King now greiviously complaining shows or
not, And now here at this day, to wit, Tres Sept. Pasch. here came the said
Earl by his Attorney aforesaid, and as well the Jurors of the Jury of twenty
four Knights aforesaid, as the same E. D. and also Lawrence Coddington of C.
with eleven other Jurors, of the first inquisition aforesaid, being solemnly
called came not, therefore let the same jurors of the jury of twenty four
Knights be resummoned that they be here in Octab. Sancti Trinitatis to make the
jury of twenty four Knights, and that jury of twenty four Knights is respited
here until that Term, and as well the said E as the said jurors of the first
inquisition aforesaid, are resummoned, that they may be here at the same time,
to hear the said Jury of twenty four Knights, the same day is given to the said
Earl here, etc. At which day here came the said Earl by his Attorney
aforesaid, and the sheriff did nothing therein, nor sent the writ thereof,
therefore as before let another writ thereof be made returnable here 15.
Michaelis, the same day is given to the said Earl here, etc. At which day here
came the said Earl by his Attorney aforesaid, and as well the said Edward as
the said twelve jurors of the first inquisition aforesaid resummoned, Al.
resum, awarded.
etc. 4 Die pl. being called came not, etc. and also the jury of twenty four
Knights aforesaid, likewise being called came not, therefore that jury of
twenty four Knights is respited here until Cr. sancti Martini and the sheriff
is commanded, that he distrain as well the said jury of twenty four Knights
that they be then here to make the jury of twenty four Knights aforesaid, A
Distring: awarded.

See the like between the parties aforesaid. M, 9 Iac: rot. 3127. Br.


as the same Edward, as the same Jury of twelve jurors of the first inquisition
aforesaid, that they be here at the same time, Auditur Recognitionem illam,
etc. the same day is given to the said Earl here, etc. and it is to be known
that a writ thereof, the Justices here in Court that same Term have delivered
a writ thereof to R. S. Deputy sheriff of the County aforesaid in Form of Law
to be Executed, etc. by proclamation thereof made according to the form of the
statute, etc.

Entry of a summons in a Q^ar. imp. with the ess^ine, and an attachment awarded
for default
H 2. Jac. rot. 192. North. G C. Esquire, by his Attorney, offered himself the
fourth day against Thomas, Bishop of the Borough of Saint Peter, otherwise
Peterburrough, and William B. his Clarke, that they permit him to present a fit
person to the Church of W. which is void and belongs to his gift, etc. and
they came not, and they had therein day, to wit, the same Bishop by essoine
here until in Octab. Sancti Hillarii last past, and the said W. has day
therein by his Essoine here until this day to wit in October. Pur B. Mariae
after they were summoned, etc. judgment that they be here 15. Pasch. etc.

H 10. Jac. rot. 20. Wollaston, Eber. ss. Special entry of a summons in quare
Imp. and the she if returns, tarde, and an al: sum: awa^ded:
It was commanded the sheriff that he summon by good summoners George bishop of
C. E. C. Gent. and I.T. Clark, that they should be here at this day in Oct.
Pur. B. Mariae, to answer M W. Knight, and F. S. Esquire, of a plea that they
suffer them to present a fit person to the Church of S which is void, and
belongs to their gift, and now here at this day came the same M. and F. by
their Attorney, and the sheriff to wit, C.H. Knight, now returns, that that
writ was delivered to him so late, that for the brevity of time he could not
execute it, as by the said Writ it was commanded him, therefore as before it is
commanded to the said sheriff, that he summon by good sum oners thsame
Bishop, E. and I. that they be here 15. Pas. to answer to the same M. and F. in
the plea aforesaid, etc.

P 11. Iac. rot. 20. Wellaston ss. It was commanded the sheriff, Entry of an
al: sum: ^n a quar: imp: ^n feverance, and an attachment aw^rded against the
defendant:
as otherwise the King had commanded the said sheriff, that he should summon by
good summoners G. Bishop of E. E. E. Gent. and I. T. Clerk, that they should
be here at this day, to wit, 15. Pasch. to answer as above, And now here at
this day came the same Marmaduke by A. B. his Attorney, and the said F likewise
plaintiff, etc. the fourth day of the plea being solemnly called came not, and
hereupon the same M offers himself the fourth day against the said Bishop, E
and I in the plea aforesaid, and they came not, and the sheriff now returns
that he had summoned, etc, judgment they be attached that they be herein Cro.
Trin. and it is commanded to the same sheriff that he summon by good summoners
the same F. that he be here at the said Term to follow against the said
Bishop, E and I his plea aforesaid together with the said Marmaduke if, etc.

Surrender.
H 1 Iac. rot. 1699. Brownlow ss. Surrender of a Philizers office: see the old
book of entries, f: 442: title de office and officers,
Be it remembered that the thirteenth day of February that same Term came here
into Court Edward Pytt Knight, Philizer in the same Court as well of London as
of the County of Middlesex, Huntington and Cambridge, in his proper person, and
of his own accord surrendered into the hands of Edmund Anderson Chief Justice of
the Lord the King of the Bench here, his office of philizer aforesaid to the
use of James Pyt Knight whom the said Chief Justice, as the Custom is, freely
admitted to the same Office, to hold, occupy, and have to him as his free
Tenement according to the custom of the Court aforesaid in the whole time
aforesaid used and approved, The oath:
and presently the same James Pytt upon the taking of his corporal Oath, as
the custom is, well and faithfully to behave and carry himself in the office
aforesaid, Put into possession.
put and constituted him into the corporal possession of the same Office, to
hold, occupy, and have the same in form aforesaid with the Fees and profits
incumbent to the said office, and anciently due and accustomed, etc.

SEE Hill. 13. Iac. rot. 732. the like in Ady and Maydwell.

H 10. Iac. rot. 3279. in Gulston and Mill.

T 28. H. 8. rot. 511. Surrender by Pateshal Philizer of Essex and Hertford.

T 22. Iac. rot. 2085. Surrender by the Philizer of Norfolk, Lamb to
Thelwall, M. 28. H. 8. rot. 108. T. 33. H. 8. rot. 1. T. 3. and 4. Philip and
Mary rot. 904. T. 1. C. Reg. rot. 958. Grant of the office of the Philizer of
W. made by H. P. after the death of Plumstead, by the Lord Hobart.

Supersedeas.
Supersedeas to a Cap. i^ Withernam, quia inconsult. emanavit, and aver.
elongat. returned thereupon, and a cap, Withernam, awarded for the Defendant
against the plaintiff upon a writ of Plur. repleg. Aver. elongat returned upon
the plur. replevin.

C^pias in With rnam of the Ca tell of Defendant awarded for the plaintiff, 3.
El. Dyer fol. 189. pl. 12.


P 8. Edwardi 4. rot. 106. Surrey ss. Be it remembered that the Iustistices here
in Court the fourteenth day of May that same Term delivered here to W.F.
Deputy sheriff of the County aforesaid, a certain writ of the Lord the King now
closed, directed to the said sheriff under form of Law to be executed, which
said Writ the same W. opened here in Court. the Tenor whereof follows in
these words, Edward by the grace of God King of England and France, and Lord of
Ireland, to the sheriff of Surrey greeting, Whereas lately by our Writ, as more
times we have commanded you, that justly and without delay you should replevy
to W.W. and T. M. his cattle, which I. L. took and unjustly detained, as he
says, or that you your self should be before our Justices at Westminster 15
Trin. last past, to show wherefore you have contemned to execute our commands,
so often to you therein directed, and then to our said Justices at Westminster,
at the same 15 Tr. have returned, that those cattle aforesaid, were enlarged
to unknown places, by the same I. so that you could not have sight of them,
and that you could not replevy the said Cattle to the said W. and T. wherefore
we have commanded you, that you should take of the cattle of the said I in
your Bailiwick, to the value o the sa^d cattle, of the said W and T in
Withernam, and should deliver them to the said W and T to be kept until the
said Cattle of the said W and T you could redeliver to the same W and T and in
as much as you shall execute this our precept, Pone Def. ad respondend. of the
taking of the cattle, with a repleg. fac. of the cattle fi st taken.
you make known to our Justices at Westminster 15 Michaelis last past, and that
you put by sureties and safe pledges the same I, that he should be before our
Justices at Westminster at the said 15 sancti Michaelis, to answer to the said
W. and T. of the taking of the cattle aforesaid, and in the mean time if you
could, to replevy to the same W and T their cattle aforesaid, and afterward
for that it seemed to our said Justices at Westminster, for certain causes
propounded before them, and them specially moving, that our Writ aforesaid
Quoad Cap. in With, The writ of cap. in Withernam inconsulte emanavit,
therefore a Supersedeas is therein awarded. The cattle of the Defendant taken
and and delivered to the pl intiff in with n. before the delivery of the sup.
and that he by force of the supersed, cannot redeliver them, for that they were
eloyned.

Withernam post Withernam.

The cattle taken in Withernam eloyned before the reception of the Writ of
Sup. Plur. cap. in Withernam for the Def. with a writ in the mean time to
deliver the cattle first taken in Withernam.


of the cattle of the said I for the cattle of the said VV and T by him taken
before, improvisely issued out of our Court aforesaid, by another Writ we have
commanded you, that of any cattle of the said I to be taken in VVithernam, for
the same cattle of the said W and T by him before taken, you be altogether
superseded, and if you shall have taken any of the cattle of the said I in
VVithernam, by occasion of the premises, then you shall redeliver them to the
said I without delay, and inasmuch as you shall execute this our precept, you
shall make appear to our Justices at Westminster at the said 15 Michaelis, and
then our said Justices at Westminster at the said 15 Mich. returnest, that by
virtue of the said Writ, De Capiend. in VVithernam to you before directed, to
wit, such a day and year abovesaid, of the cattle of the said I. L. four
Cowes, etc. to the value of the said cattle, of the said W. and T which I
took, thou have in VVithernam, and that afterward such a day and year
abovesaid, our said Writ of Supersedeas was delivered thereof to you, and at
the same 15 sancti Michaelis, you certified to our Justices at Westminster,
that the cattle of the same I in Form aforesaid taken in Withernam, and
delivered to the same W and T. you could not redeliver to the said I after the
coming of the said Writ of Supersedeas, according to the Tenor of the said writ
of Supersedeas, for that the same cattle were eloyned, and yet are eloyned and
transmitted by the same W. and T. to places to you unknown, so that by no
means you could have sight of the said cattle, after the coming of the said
Writ of Supersedeas, and therefore we command you, as more times we have
commanded you, that of the cattle of the said W and T in your Bailiwick, to
the value of the said cattle of the said I taken in Withernam, you take in
Withernam, and deliver them to the said I to be kept, until the said cattle
of the said I. taken in Withernam you can redeliver to the same I. And inasmuch
as you shall execute this our precept, you make to appear to our Justices at
Westminster such a day, and in the mean time if you can, to make redelivery to
the said I, of the cattle aforesaid first taken in Withernam, and have there
this writ, Test, etc.

Entry of a Sup. to an Exigent and pledges de novo after the retorn of a nichil
upon a cap. in Withernam awarded after averia Elongata returned af er nonsuit
of the plaintiff and before declaration in replevin.
T 3. Jac. rot. 612. Brownlow, Cornub. ss. It was commanded the sheriff,
whereas, I. H. and O. R. were summoned to be in the Court of the Lord the King
here, to wit, at Westminster, to answer I. K. Esquire. of a plea wherefore they
took a certain Cow of the same I. K. and her unjustly kept against sureties
and pledges, etc. the same I. K. afterward in the same Court of the Lord the
King here, to wit, at Westminster aforesaid made default, whereupon it was
then considered in the said Court of the Lord the King here, that the same I.
K. and his pledges to prosecute should be in mercy, and that the said I. H. and
O. should go thereof without day, etc. And that they should have return of
the Cow aforesaid, whereupon it was commanded the sheriff, that without delay
he should return the Cow aforesaid to the said I. H. and O. And her at the
complaint of the said should not deliver without a writ of the said Lord the
King which should make express mention of the judgment aforesaid, Reto. habend
awarded.
and in as much, etc. he should make appear here 15. Pas, last past, at which
day the sheriff returned to the Justices here, that before the coming of the
writ aforesaid, the said Cow was cloyned by the said I. K. to places to him
altogether unknown, whereby he could not return the Cow aforesaid to the said
I. H. and O. as by the said Writ it was commanded him, vacca elongata returned
etc. whereupon it was commanded the sheriff, that of the Cattle of the said I.
K. to the value of the Cow aforesaid before taken he should take in VVithernam
and should deliver them to the said I. H and O. to hold to them until he could
return the Cow aforesaid before taken, Capias in Withernam awarded.
Cap as for the contempt.
and that he should put by sureties and safe pledges the said I. K that he
should be here in 15. Trin. in the second year of the Lord the King now to
answer as well the said Lord the King now of the contempt, Nichil habet. that
the sheriff could take in Withernam
As to the said I. H, and O. of the injuries to them in this behalf offered,
and that he should have here, the names of the pledges and that writ, at which
day the sheriff returned to the justices here, that the said I. K. had no Cow
in his bayliwick, which he could take in VVithernam, Q^ere if good because the
Capias is not awarded before the Exigent. Exigent awarded.
nor had any thing in his Bayliwick by which he could be attached whereby as
more times the sheriff was commanded that he put in exigent the same I. K. from
county to county until, etc. he should be utlawed, if not, etc, and if, etc.
then he should take him, and safely, etc. so that he should have his body here
15. Trin. as well to answer to the said Lord the King of the contempt, as to the
said I. H. and O of the damage and injuries to him in this behalf done, and
that he should have here, that writ, The Nonsuant prays to be admitted to his
fine for the con^empt and the fine was assessed
and now here at this day, to wit, the said 15. Trin. came as well the said I.
K. and T. R. his attorney as the same I. H. and O. by I. H. their attorney, And
hereupon the said I. K. prays himself to be admitted to make a fine with the
said Lord the King by occasion of the premises, and is admitted, etc. and is
fined by the Justices here at 2 s. 6 d. which by the command of the Justices of
the Court here he paid to R. B. Chief Prothonotary of the Court of the said
Lord the King of the bench here for necessary reparations in the Court here
done and to be done, Fine paid.
etc. Therefore the same I. K. go thereof without day, etc. whereupon the same
I. K, by the statute, A writ de S^ccuda. deliberatione prayed. Pledges de novo.
Recognizance.
etc. prays a writ of the said Lord the King de Secunda Delib. and it is
granted to him retornable here. in Oct. Mi. etc. And also the said I. K. in the
same court here found pledges de novo as well to prosecute his Claim, as of the
Cow aforesaid before taken, to be returned to the said I. H. and O. if return
thereof should be adjudged, to wit, T, R. of O. etc. and I, D, of, etc. each of
them under the penalty of 100 s. whereupon it was commanded the sheriff that of
the said I, K. further putting in Exigent, utlawing, Super sedias awarded upon
the Exigent.
taking or in anything molesting by occasion of the premises he be altogether
superseded, etc.

M 18. H. 8. rot. 2. The Lord the King sent to his Justices of the Bench here
his writ closed in these words. Henry by the grace of God, Supersedeas out of
the Kings Bench to discharge sureties of peace in the Common Bench because he
found security of peace in the Kings Bench.
to Robert Brudenell Knight and his associats our Justices of the Common Bench
greeting, because Thomas Travers of W. in the County of Essex Clerk came into
our court before us at Westminster this instant day of Thursday next after 15.
days of S. John the Beptist in his proper person, And then found there
sufficient security, that he should personally appear before us in 15. Pas.
next to come wheresoever we should then be in England, And that in the mean
time he should carry himself peaceably toward, and all our people, and that he
would not bring nor cause to be brought by himself or any other in his name any
Damage or grievance to any of our people upon their bodies by treachery,
assault or any other means which may in any manner give way to the
infringement and disturbance of the peace as in our court before us is fully
manifest upon Record, Therefore we command you, that from compelling the said
Tho. Travers to find any security for our peace, or for any of our people
before you or any of you until after the same 15. Pas. you are altogether
superseded T. I. fifty James at Westminster the 11. day of July An. etc. 18.
and now, to wit, in 8. S. Mich. that same Term came here the same Thomas in
his proper person whereupon the same Thomas by the same Justices here is
altogether dismissed and discharged from finding of any other security further
in this behalf, etc.

Charles, etc. To the sheriff of L. greeting, A Supersedeas after a Fi. fac. ne
venditioni exponas.
whereas of late we did command you that of the goods and Chattles of T. E.
late of, etc. being in your bayliwick you should cause to be levied 161. 5 s.
which D. I. in the Court, etc. had recovered against him for her Damages which
she had sustained by reason of a certain trespass upon the case by the
aforesaid T. to the said D. done, whereof he is convicted, as by the Record,
etc. it manifestly appears, And that you should have those moneys which you
had so levied before, etc. at Westminster aforesaid such a return to render to
the said D. in that behalf as in that Writ is more fully contained, and you at
that day did return to the Barons of our said Exchequer at Westminster
aforesaid that you had levied of the goods of the said T. to the value of the
sum abovementioned which goods did remain in your hands unsold for want of
buyers, but because the said Writ of Scire facias to you as above directed, did
unduely issue forth. Therefore we command you, that from selling of the goods
aforesaid, or any part thereof by virtue of the said Writ of Scire fac. you
altogether forbear as you will answer the contrary at your peril, witness,
etc,

Ventre Inspiciendo.
Entry of a writ de ventre inspiciendo. see Bracton fo. 69.
H and E, terms A. 5. H. 3. rot. in the common Bench Norff. ss. Peter de Meanton
has requested, that Muriell who was the wife of VV. de Meanton who makes her
self not not to be with child by the same VV. her husband, was not with child,
and for this cause makes herself not with child to disinherit the same Pet,
whereupon at the petition of the same Muriell it was commanded the sheriff that
by law^ull women they should make diligent inquiry whether she was with child,
or not, And Inquisition was made and sent to Westminster, but in the interim
came she before the Justices of the Bench and offered her self and showed to
them that she was with child, and this she offered to show and prayed that it
might be seen by the command of the Justices by 14. lawful gentle women of
London to be chosen by the Mayor and sheriffs of London, and it seemed to them
that she was with Child, so that it was said to her that she might go therein
without day, until any one should complain thereof, but afterward came the
same Peter and offered himself, and again said that she was not pregnant of
his brother, so that upon his complaint she was again resummoned, and
questioned when her husband dyed, and at what time he departed from her, said,
that in truth he departed from her upon Wednesday next after the Feast of the
holy Trinity, and that he died on the day of the Appostles Peter and Paul so
that after that same Wednesday she never saw him and Peter acknowledges this
same, and said well she was not with child with his brother and prayed that she
might be committed to custody, so that by the counsel of the court she was
committed to the Mayor of L. into custody and 4 lawful gentle-women were
assigned to see her often and to keep her But afterward came the same Peter
and showed that the Term of bringing forth, if she had been pregnant with his
brother is past, and prayed Justice to be exhibited to him, so that the same
Muriel come come before the justices of the Bench upon command upon Wednesday
next before the Feasts of the Appostles Peter and Paul in the second year
following. And the same Muriel said that before, to wit, that she was pregnant,
and by the said William, and well acknowledges that his term of being borne
is past, and she expects the mercy of God, and the said Peter likewise said
that the term is past, and prays this to be allowed him, And hereupon it is
found that 48. weeks have passed since the first Wednesday wherein she
acknowledge that her husband departed from her, but afterward she acknowledged
that she was not with child but long since being sore greived with such an
infirmity that she thought her^elfe to be with child. Confession that she is
not pregnant. Judgment.
Therefore it is considered that Peter be received as heir of the said
William and may have his inheritance notwithstanding this that she made
herself impregnant, Et habeat. brevia. ad dominos suos, etc. and hereupon came
the same Peter, and prays ju^gment whether she ought thereof to have her
dower, because she to disinherit him, falsely made her self impregnant.

Vtlawry.
P 4. Jac. rot. 808. Brownlow ss. It was commanded the sheriff that he should
not omit for any liberty of his county but should take R. W. late, etc, utlawed
in London, Entry of a non omit. upon a Cap. utlagat Denbigh. Vtlawry.
such a day and year at the suite of H. B. in a plea of debt if, etc. and
safely, etc. so that he might have his body here this day, to wit, in Pas. to
do and receive what the Court of the Lord the King here shall consider of him
in that behalf, etc. And now here at this day came the said H. by ^. Guy his
attorney and the sheriff, to wit, I, W. Esquire. now retorneth that he by virtue of
the writ aforesaid to him directed commanded the Bailiff of the liberty of the
Town and liberty of Denbigh, Mand. Ballio.
who has the return of all the writs and the execution of them within the
liberty aforesaid, which said Bailiff gave him this answer, to wit, that they
have taken the body of the said R. and have him ready. Amerciament vir.
Notwithstanding the said Bailiffs have not delivered his body to the said
sheriff according to the strictness of that command but yet keep the body of
the said R. under the custody of the said Bailiffs so that the sheriff could
not have his body at the day and place aforesaid as it was commanded him, And
because it seems to the justices here that the said ^etorne is insufficient
in Law. the said sheriff, Attachment awarded to the Coroners for Contempt.
to wit, I. W Esquire. in mercy and fined by the Court here to 6 l. 13 s. 8 d. And
it is commanded the Coroners of the county aforesaid that they attach the said
sheriff so that they may have his body here in 15. Trin. to answer the Lord the
King of the contempt, etc.

Entry of the reversall of an Vilary against the Intestate prosecuted by the
Administrator for defect in the return of the writ of Exigent, for that three
Hust. were held after the return of the Exigent. Letters of administration
showed.
Pas. 36. Eliz. rot. 1990. ss. Afterward that is to say 12. February An. 39.
Eliz. came here into the Court one T.H. of, etc. and said that the same I. N.
after the utlawry aforesaid against him in Form aforesaid published died, and
dyed instate, etc. And that the same T. is Administrator of the Goods and
Chattels which were of the same I. at the time of his death, and brings here
into Court the letters administratory of I. by divine providence Archbishop of
Cant. Primate and Metropolitan of all England which are dated at London 14.
Feb. An. Do. 1596. which the commission of the administration of the goods and
Chattles which were of the same I. at the time of his death, to the same T. in
form aforesaid testify, etc. and prays the hearing of the return of the said
writ of Exigent, returned in the Bench here against the said N. in Oct. S.
Mich. and it is read to him in these words, at the Hustings of the pleas of
Land held at Guild Hall in the City of London upon Monday next after the Feast
of S. Dunstan the Archbishop An. 38. within written the within named I, N. was
the first time called and appeared not, At the Hustings aforesaid upon Monday
next after the Feast of Boniface Bishop An, Suprad. the said I. was the second
time called and appeared not, at the Hustings of the pleas of land held in G.
in the City aforesaid, upon Monday next before the Feast of the Annunciation,
etc. An. Supr. the said I. was the third time called and appeared not, At the
Hust. of the pleas of L. and held in Guild Hall in the City aforesaid upon
Monday next before the Feast of S. Marg, the Virgin An. Sup. the said I was the
fourth time called and appeared not, at the Hustings of the pleas of land of
the City aforesaid held, etc the said I. was the fi^^t time called and appeared
not therefore he is utlawed, The answer of T. L. and L. H. sheriffs, that writ
is above indorsed we the now she. of L. have received of the la^e Sh. of L. the
going from their Office the answer of I. W. and R.G. sheriffs, which being read
and heard the same T H. says that the utlawry aforesaid against the said I. in
Form aforesaid publ shed and had is void in law and of no force nor effect,
Error for that the three Hust. was h^ld after the day of the return of the
Exigent.
for that that it appears by the return aforesaid, that the same I. was the
third time called upon Monday next before the Annunciation of the Blessed
Virgin Mary which said day of Monday, next before the Feast of the Annunciation
etc, was long after the return of the said writ of Exi. whereupon the retorn
being seen, And by the justices here fully understood, it seemed to the
Justices here, that the allegation of the said T. is true. Therefore for the
defect aforesaid, Judgment that the Vtlary be reversed.
and diverse others in the return aforesaid it is considered that the utlawry
aforesaid, be adnulled, vacated and altogether taken for nothing, etc.

Pas. 4. Eliz. That an utlawry was reversed for that, Nota. Utlawry reversed
for that the 3. proclamations, upon the writ of proclamacion in a foreign
county, was made that day the pes. Was 5. exact upon the Exig.
that it appeared upon the return of the proclamation the third proclamation
in the County of Essex was made the same day that the guinto Exactus was made,
upon the exigent in the County of Lincoln and by the opinion of Court it was
adjudged Male, for that the proclamation ought to have been at least a Mo.
before the 5. Eactus, and the reason in the court was, for that the return of
the proclamation was, that the defendant should yield himself to the sheriff
of Lincoln, which he could not do, before the utlawry, for that the utlawry was
pronounced the same day with the proclamation.

ss. Mich. 36. and 37. Eliz. rot. 2894. London ss. Entry of a travers de
Comorance in an other county and reversall of an utlawry pur. non Comorans and
possession of the attorney general.
It was commanded the sheriffs that they should not omit for any liberty of
their County. but they should take P. L. of, etc. utlawed in London, upon
Monday next after the Feast of the Ascension of our Lord An 36. Eli. at the
suite of W. G. in a plea of debt if, etc. and safely, etc. so that they might
have his body here, at this day, to wit, in Oct. S. Mich. etc. to do and
receive what the Court of the Lady the Queen here shall consider of him in that
behalf, And now here at this day, came the same P. in his proper person, and
the sheriffs of L. now return that they by virtue of the Writ aforesaid to
them directed took the body of the same P. whose body they have now here
present, as by the said writ it was commanded them, and hereupon the same P. so
taken and here had, prays the hearing of the Record, Alit. sur. Comorans in
aut Uill. in codem Com. Pas. 2. Iac. rot. 1012.
of the Writ of the said Lady the Queen of Exigent, whreupon the same P. at the
suite of the said W. was in Form aforesaid utlawed, issued, And it is read unto
him in these words, London ss. W. E. Gent by E. Y. his attorney offered
himself the 4. day against P. L. late of, etc. otherwise called P. L. etc. of
a plea that he render unto him 200 l. which to him he owes and unjustly
detayneth, etc. Recital of the record of the exigent. Pas. 37. Iac. rot. 1612.
T. 3. Ia rot. 651. issue fuit Comorans.
And he came not, and as more times, the sheriffs are commanded that they
should take him etc. and safely. etc, so that they might have his body here at
this day, to wit (tali die) to answer the said W. in the plea aforesaid, And
the sheriffs now return that he is not found, etc. Therefore the sheriffs are
commanded that they put him in Exigent from Hust to Hust until, etc. he be
utlawed if not, etc. and if, etc. then they take him, and safely, etc. so that
they may have his body here in Cr. Trin. to answer the said W. in the plea
aforesaid, and whereupon, etc. And it is to be known that a writ thereof the
Justices here in Court that same Term delivered to Z. deputy of the sheriffs
of London in Form of Law to be executed, Proclamation awarded upon the exigent.
etc. and the sheriffs of Midd. is commanded that in his full county, he
proclaim the same P. three several days according to the Form of the statute
An. 31. Eliz. thereof made and provided, that the same. P. render himself to
the sheriffs of London, so that the same sheriffs may have his body here at the
same Term, to answer the said W. in the plea aforesaid, 31. Eliz. Cap. 3.
Poulton novell statuts 186. or 77 86.
And it is to be known that a Writ thereof, the Justices here in Court that
same Term delivered to Z. S. Deputy of the sheriff of Midd. to be executed in
Form of the Law, etc. which being read and heard, the same P. says that he is
injured in this behalf and that he by the Law of the Land ought not to be
charged with the said utlawry, because he says that he at the aforesaid Oct.
Pur. which day the said Writ of exigent, whereupon the said P. was utlawed at
the suite of the said W. issued out of the court here, Plea that at the
awarding the Exigent he was comorant in an other County. Traverse.
was Comorant and conversant at N. within the Isle of Weight. in the county of
Southampton, without this that he the same day or at any time afterward was
comorant or conversant at Graies Inn in the county of Midd. as by the same
Record issuing forth of the said writ of Exigent is suposed, and this he is
ready to veryfie, whereupon for that the said Writ of proclamation was not
directed to the sheriff of the said County of Southampton, wherein the same P.
at the day of issuing forth of the said Writ of Exigent was Comorant and
Conversant as of right it ought to have been directed, according to the Form
of the statute aforesaid, the same P. prays judgment, and that he from the
Court here, of the utlawry aforesaid, may be acquitted discharged and set at
large, And because it is expedient and necessary, Scire Fac. awarded to
premonish the Pla.
that the said W. for his interest in this behalf be premonished, before it be
further proceeded to discharge the same P. from the utlawry aforesaid, It is
commanded the sheriff of London* that by honest etc. they make known to the
same W. that he be here in Cr. Anim. to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the
same P. ought not to be discharged from the said utlawry, etc. and hereupon the
same M. W. of, etc. and R. C. The defen. is bayled, the entry of the Recog.
Note the form of the recog.
of etc. undertook and each of them did undertake for the same P. to have his
body here at the said Term and so from day to day at every day of the plea,
until the plea aforesaid be determined, And judgment thereupon given, to wit,
each of them body for body, and the said P. in his proper person assumed upon
himself to be then here at every day of the plea, under the penalty of 10 l.
which said 10 l. the said P. acknowledged to be made and levied to the use of
the said Lady the Queen of his goods, Return of a Scire Fac and the Pl. appears
by Attorney.
and Chattells, to whose hands soever they shall come, and if it happen the
same P, at any day of the plea by the Court here to be prefixed, to make
default, or not to prosecute his suite with effect, etc. At which said Cr. Anim
came here as well the said P, in his proper person, as the same W. premonished,
etc. by E. Y. his attorney and hereupon the same P. as before says that he at
the said Oct. Pur. which day the said Writ of Exigent, whereupon the same P.
was utlawed at the suite of the said W* issu^ng out of the Court here, Count
against the Pl. la non comor^ns. Travers.
was Comorant and conversant at N. aforesaid within the Isle of Weight in the
said county of Southampton, without this that he the same day or at any time
afterward was Comorant and coversant at Grayes Inn in the County of Midd. As
by the said Record, of emanation of the said writ of Exegint above is supposed,
and this he is ready to verify, whereupon for that the writ of proclamation
was not directed to the sheriff of the said county of South. wherein the said
P. at the day of the issuing forth of the said writ of Exig. was comorant and
conversant, as of right it ought to have been directed according to the Form
of the statute aforesaid the same P. prays judgment, and he from the court
here of the utlawry aforesaid, may be acquitted, discharged, and set at large
etc.

ANd the said W. says that he cannot gainesay but that the allegation of the
said P. in his discharge of the utlawry aforesaid is true, Confession of the
garnishee.
nor but that the same P. at the said Oct. Pur. which day the said writ of
Exigent whereupon the same P. was utlawed issuing from the court here was
commorant and conversant at N. etc and that no writ of proclamation in this
behalf was directed to the sheriff of the County of S. as the same P. has
above alleged. etc.

ANd E. Coke Esquire Attorney general of the said Lady the Qu. who follows
for the said Lady the Queen in this behalf, Confession of the attorney
general upon a testimony.
thereof consulting if he knew or would say any thing, wherefore the said P.
ought not to be discharged from the utlawry aforesaid of which credable
information is given him, by W. M. of, etc. and others faith worthy that the
allegation of the said P. in the discharge of the same P. from the utlawry
aforesaid is true, whereupon the same E giveing credit to them, says that he
cannot gainesay, but truly confesses, Judgment that the utlawry be reversed,
salvo jure Reginae etc.
that the said P. at the said Oct. Pur. which day the said writ of Exigent
whereupon the said P. is utlawed, issuing out of the court here, was commorant
and and conversant at N, aforesaid, etc in the county of S. and that no writ of
proclamation was ever directed to the said sherff of S. in this behalf as the
said P. has above alleged, wherefore it is considered that the same P. be
discharged of the utlawry aforesaid, and upon that occasion not be molested, in
any thing, nor grieved but go thereof quiet, etc. reserving a writ to the Lady
the Queen; otherwise if, etc. Entry of a speceill writ of Cap. utlagat, and
amerciament of the sheriff for bad attendance upon the court and not coming to
receive a special Cap. utlagat.

Recital of the special Utlagat




H 2. Jac. Rot. 1362. Broker Cardigan ss. It was commanded the sheriff that he
should not omit for any liberty of his county but by the oath of honest and
lawful men of your county you should inquire what goods and chattels lands and
Tenements M, U, etc. with all his additions has or had in his Bayliwick, such
a day and year, or at any time afterward which day he was utlawed in the
County of the City of the city of O. at the suit of I. S. in a plea of debt
whereof he was convicted As the sheriff of the City of Oxon to the Justices of
the Lord the Ki. now here at a certain day now past returned, P. 24 Iac. rot.
323. Vict. in mia. 5. marks for retorning trade upon a writ that was ent ed
upon Record.

P. 6: H: 8: rot: 296. the like sur nichil fec. nec: remisit, H. 8 H, 6, rot.
333: vic. in mia: 40 l. for not returning of a writ of Nisi prius, H: 24: Eliz:
rot, 1702. entry of a special amerciament for an insufficient retorn upon an
Habere fac: possessionem, emii:

Recital of days given to the sheriff to come and receive the writ sin court


And that upon their oath he cause them to be extended, and appraised according
to the true value of them, And such things as shall be found by that
Inquisition he cause to be taken into the hands of the Lord the King now, and
safely to be kept so that he may answer to the Lord the King of the true value
and issues of them, and with them so extended and appraised he make known to
the Justices of the Lord the King here (tli. retorn.) distinctly and openly
under his seal, and the seals of them by whose oath he had made that extent
and appraisment, And for that the same M. did ly hid, wander and runn from
place to place in the county aforesaid, in contempt of the Lord the King now,
and prejudice of his Crown as the King has been informed, That wheresoever it
shall happen the same M. to be found in his Baylickwick as well within as without
the liberties he should take him and safely keep, so that he might have his
body before the Justices here at the said Term to do and receive whatsoever
the said Court of the Lord the King shall consider in that behalf; and it is to
be known that at the two several days in that same Term given to the said
sheriff of Cardigan by the Court here, To come here into the Court and receive
the Writ aforesaid to be executed in Form of Law, the same sheriff came not
here into the Court to receive that Writ, therefore the same sheriff, to wit,
R. P. Knight in miserec. And he is fined by the Justices here to 12 l. etc.

TRin. 8. Jac. Rot. 2700, Brownlow, Norff. ss. It was commanded the Coro. of
the Lord the Ki of the C. aforesaid that whereas it was testified for the Lord
the Ki. in the C. of the said Lord the K. here, that diverse wits of the said
Lord the Ki. by exig. of late directed to the sheriff of N. issuing out of the
said Court here, A special amerciament of the coroners for not certifying of an
utlawry after a Cerciorare to them made:
and before the Justices here at certain days as well past, as to come,
retornable, and many utlawries into the said Court here not as yet certified
against the parties Defendants in the same writs named, in the county aforesaid
published, and judgments thereupon are given by the said Coroners, And
Especially one utlawry against one R. B. late of P. etc. in the County of
Norff. Gent. at the suite of R. W. in a plea of Debt, and because the Lord the
King will adhibit due and speedy remedy to the said R. W. in his action
aforesaid he does command the same Coroners, that scearching their Roles and
Record and other memorables, T. Io: 21 23: bail to an ulawry.
being in their custodyes, the utlawry aforesaid upon the writ aforesaid, in
Form aforesaid published, and the judgment thereupon by the said Coroners
given, they have here at this day, to wit in Oct. S. Trin. That the same
justices may do therein, what of right and according to the Law and custom of
England ought in this behalf to be done, and now here at this day came the
same W. H. by W. B. his attorney, and because the Coroners of the County
aforesaid the writ aforesaid, which was otherwise delivered to them to be
executed in Form of Law, had not here at this day, Miserec. XL s.
Therefore the said Coroners, to writ, H. T. and I. L. in Miser. And are fined
by the Justices here at 40 s.

P 12. Jac. Rot. 2243. Goldesbursh Montgomery, ss. E. P. Esquire sheriff, of
the County aforesaid for that he returned not here in court a certain writ of
Capias utlagat. against M. P. at the suite of R. O. Kni. in a plea of Debt,
retornable before the Justices here Men's. Pas. that same Term. in mercy, etc.
And is fined by the Justices aforesaid at 60 s. See Grislyes case Cok. 8. fo.
40. B. according to the old book of entryes title record, M. 27. H. 7, rot 531.
Amerciament det ver at 10 l. for not returning the Habeas Corpus Jur. Devant.
the Justices de Nisi prius.

P 13. Jac. rot. 733. Brownlow Sar. ss. Reversall of an Utlary for insufficient
return of a Certiorare.
It was commanded the sheriff that he should not omit for any liberty of his
county but that he should take H, N. of, etc. utlawed in London on Monday next
after the Feast of S. Leonard the Abbot An. regis, etc. 12. at the suite of
Henry Breton in a plea of debt if, etc. so that he might have his body here at
this day, to wit A d^e Pas. in 15. dies, To do and receive what the court of
the King here should consider of him in this behalf, and now here at this day
came the said Henry N. in his proper person, and the sheriff, to wit, Rowland
Traps Esquire now retorneth that he by virtue of the said writ to him directed
took the body of the said He. N. whose said body, he now has here ready, as by
the said writ it was commanded him, etc. And hereupon the said Henry N. prays
the hearing of the writ of Cerciorare whereupon the utlawry aforesaid, by John
Gore and William Gore then sheriffs of London, To the court of the Lord the
King here was certified, and to him it is read in these words London ss. we I.
G and W, G. sheriffs of London, do certify to the Justices of the Lord the
King at Westminster in the writ to this schedule annexed specifyed, that
searching the roles records and other memorables being under our custody we
find in the same that Henry N. of A. in the County of Sur. Esquire in the writ
aforesaid named, put in the hustings of London, being five times called and not
appearing he was utlawed in manor as follows That is to say, at the hustings
of the Common pleas held in Guild Hall in the City of London upon Monday next
after the Feast of etc. An. Rs. etc. 12. the said Henry N. was the first time
called and appeared not and at the bustings of the Common pleas held in
Guild Hall, etc. on Monday next after the Feast, etc. An. Sup. the same H. was
the second time called and appeared not. The answer of H. Iay and T. B.
sheriffs. That writ as above indorsed was delivered subscirbed to the sheriffs,
by the said sheriffs at their departure from their office, At the hustings of
common pleas held at Guild Hall of the City aforesaid on Monday next before the
Feast, etc. An. Supr. the said Henry was the third time called and appeared
not, At the hustings of the common pleas held, etc. The said Henry was the
fourth time called and appeared not, at the husting etc. The said Henry was the
fifth time called and appeared not, Therefore he was utlawed, The answer of P.
P. and M L. sheriffs, and this is the utlawry in manner and Form as it is
published against the said Henry Nudigate, which we have ready before the
Justices, at the day and place contained in the same writ, according to the
intent of that writ, The answer of John Gore and William Gore sheriffs, which
being read and heard the same H. Nudigate says that he is injured in this
behalf, and that by the law of the land ought not to be charged with the said
utlawry, because he says that in the return aforesaid, between these words
(said sheriffs) a certain material word is omitted, to wit, late, so that by
the omission of the said word, it does not appear by the return aforesaid, by
which sheriffs the said Henry N. was the third, fourth, and fifth time called,
or by the said sheriffs now, or by the said late sheriffs, as it ought to
appear by the said return, For that cause the said return is insufficient in
Law, and this he is ready to verify, whereupon he prays judgment that he may
be discharged from the said utlawry, whereupon the said return being seen, and
by the said Justices here being fully examined and understood, It seemed to the
Justices here that the allegation of the said H. N. is true, in his discharge
from the utlawry aforesaid, therefore it is considered that the said utlawry be
adnulled and altogether taken for nothing, And that the said H. N. for that
occasion be unmolested not in any thing grieved, But go therein quiet, etc.

Vtlary reversed for variance between the Record and the writ of Exig. fac.
T 7. Jac. rot. 3608. Brownlow Sussex ss. It was commanded the sheriff (and so
recite the Capias utlagat. as in the next before) as by the said writ to him it
was commanded, etc. which said Francis being so taken and had, prays bearing
of the writ of Exigent whereupon the same F. at the suite of the said W. in
Form aforesaid is utlawed And it is read unto him in these words, James by the
Grace of God, etc. reciting the writ, and Test until you come to, and of
Scotland the XL. he also prays the hearing of the record whereupon that writ
Issued, And it is read unto him in these words ss. It was commanded the sheriff
that he should take Francis Challoner late of, etc. in the county aforesaid
Esquire otherwise called F. C. de L. in the County of Sussex Esquire if etc.
and safely, etc. so that he shall have his body, etc. and so recite the whole
entry until you come to in Form of Law to be executed, etc. which being read
and heard the said Francis says that he is injured in this behalf and that he
by the law of the land ought not to be charged with the utlawry aforesaid,
because he says that there is manifest variance between the said writ of
Exigent and the said Record from whence the said Writ issued, and which ought
to warrant that writ, in this, That in the said Record the said Francis is
named F. C. of Lynfield, And in the said Writ of Exigi, fac. he is named F. C.
of Lymfeild, and so there is variance between the Record and Writ aforesaid,
whereupon he prays judgment, and that he may be discharged from the utlawry
aforesaid, Whereupon the writ and record aforesaid being seen and by the
Justices here fully understood, it sufficiently appears to the justices here,
That the allegation of the said F. in discharge of the utlawry aforesaid is
true, Therefore it is considered that the said F. be discharged from the
utlawry aforesaid, And for that occasion shall not de molested or in any thing
grieved but go thereof without day, etc.

M 6. Jac. rot. 924. And now here at this day came the said A. by W. K. his
Attorney and prays the hearing of the writ of Exigi. Fac. whereupon the said
A. at the suite of the said G. is utlawed, Utlary reversed for that the Capias
whereupon the Exigent issued, was awarded after a year and a day, without a
Sci: fac: to revive the judgment.
And it is read unto him in these words James, etc. which being read and heard
the same attorney on the behalf of the said A. says, That the same A, ought
not to be charged with the utlawry aforesaid, because he says that the
judgment whereupon the same A. was convicted, was given in Mich. Term An. Rs.
3. that is say, by one year three Months and more before the proclamation of
the said Writ of Capias ad satisf. whereof mention is made in the said Writ of
Exigent, whereupon the said writ of Exigent issued, In which case the same G.
Execution upon that judgment ought not then to prosecute, unless he had
prosecuted before out of this Court a writ of the Lord the King of Scire
Facias, to premonish the said A. of being here in Court, to show wherefore the
said E. ought not to have execution against him according to the Form of the
Recovery if to him it had seemed Expedient, And so the said Writ of Capias for
execution of the judgment aforesaid in Form aforesaid prosecuted, And the said
writ of Exigent thereupon issuing, was erroniously prosecuted, and for that
cause prays that the utlawry aforesaid may be adnulled, etc. whereupon as well
the Record of the judgment aforesaid, as the record of the adjudging of the
said Writ of Exigi Fac. whereupon the said writ of Capias ad satisfaciendum in
the same record recited, by the Court here being seen and fully understood, It
is found that the allegation of the said A. is true, Utlary reversed for
omission of the word Quinte, in the 5. Exact. and for that the last County was
held upon Sunday.
Therefore it is considered, etc. and that the utlawry be reversed.

M 4. Jac. Rot. 306. Which being read and heard the said A. says that he ought
not to be charged with the utlawry aforesaid, because he says that by the
return aforesaid it does not appear, That the same A. at the said County of
South. held at the Castle of Winch. the same eight day of September An. 8.
abovesaid was called, and so the same A. was not the fifth time called, as by
the law of the Land he ought to have been, And also for that the 6. day of
October whereupon the last County was held was Sunday, in which case according
to the Law of this Realm of England, the County ought to be held, And so the
utlavvry aforesaid against the same A. in Form aforesaid published and had, is
altogether void, And judgment that it be reversed, The like reversall in Mich.
44, 45. Eliz. rot. 1909.

Utlary reversed for that the day of the 5 Exact. was before the Test of the
Exigent.
T 13. Iac. Rot. 3617. Brownlow. Which being read and heard, the same Robert
says that he is injured, etc, because he says that it is vicious, to wit, in
that that it appears, That the said first day of March An. Sup. upon which
day the said Robert was quinto Exactus, was long before the issuing forth of
the said Writ of Exigent, And for that cause and others in the return
aforesaid being prays judgment that the utlavvry aforesaid may be reversed,
etc. vvhereupon, etc. And it was reversed, etc. Int. Smith and Wingham, M. 10.
Iac Rot. 3398. the like Cook against Tompson.

Primo Exact. held after the return of the Exigent.
M 10. Iac. Rot. 1708. Brownlow. Bradbury, adv. Allen, Exigi Fac. retornable
Tres Trin. T. 24. Ia. 8. I. The first County was held 7. Feb. 9. Ia: And
because it appears by the return aforesaid That the first county, vvhereat
the said E. was first called, was held after the return of the said Writ of
Exigent, and for that cause, etc.

Vtlary reversed for omission of the word Scotie out of the style of the Writ.
T 13. Iac, Rot. 3527. Brownlow. Hearing of the Writ of Exigi fac. is prayed,
vhich being read, etc. the said Writ is vicious, to wit, in this that this
word Scotiae, is omitted in the beginning of the said writ, And for that
cause and others being in the said Writ he prays judgment, etc, And the
utlavvry is reversed, betvveen Walker and Vaughan.

H 12. Iac. Rot. 2265. Brownlow Utlavvry reversed for not naming the names of
the Coroners particularly at the end of the return of the Exigent, Vtlary
reversed for default of the Coroners names.
and hereupon the same I. prays hearing of the return of the writ de Exigi
Fac And it is read to him in these words, At my County held, etc. until,
Therefore by the judgment of the Coroners of the county aforesaid he is
utlavved, which being read and heard, onerari non, because he says that in
the record aforesaid, no mention is made of the name of any Coroner who gave
judgment upon that Writ, or should vvarrant the judgment, And for that cause
the return aforesaid is insufficient in law int, Lavel. and others at the
suit of Godolph, see Harper fo. 19 a by Justice Brown, If the sheriff return
upon the Exigent the quinto Exact. et non Compe. Ideo ut lagat. est. It is a
good return, Although he return not the judgment of the Coroners for it is
comprised in these words, Ideo ipse utlagat. est.

H 12 Jac. rot. 1949. Brownlow, Utlar. and Waviar. reversed for the same defect.
Reversall for omitting the Coroners Names, which being read, etc. the same
Martha and Anthony say, that they are wronged in this behalf, and that the
same M of the Waiver aforesaid, or the said Anthony with the Outlawry
aforesaid, ought not by the Law of the Land to be charged, because they say,
that the return aforesaid is vicious and insufficient in Law, for that the
names of the Coroners of the said county of York, who gave judgment upon the
Waivery and utlawry aforesaid, are omitted in the said Return, whereupon, etc.
that the allegations of the said Martha and Anthony in discharge of the said M.
from the waivery aforesaid, and of the said A from the Outlawry aforesaid are
true, therefore the same M. from the Waivery aforesaid, and the said A. from
the Outlawry aforesaid are discharged, and for that occasion shall not be
molested or in any thing greived, but go thereof without day, etc.

T 14. Jac, rot. 3603. Brownlow London, Utlary reversed for returning the first
Hustings to be held at the Common Pleas, and the other to be held at the Pleas
of land.
Reversall for holding the first Hustings at the Common pleas, and the four
other at the pleas of Lands, etc. prays hearing of the return of the
Exigent, which being read, Onerari non, because he says, that by the Return
aforesaid it appears that the same George and Arthur were first called at the
Hustings, De cmmunibus placitis, and the 2, 3, 4, and 5. that they were called
at the Hustings, De communibus placitis terrae, whereas they ought to have been
called at Hustings certain, so that they might have rendered themselves to the
said sheriffs, to save themselves from the said Outlawry, and for that cause
the said Return is insufficient in Law, and this, etc. judgment that the
Outlawry be reveversed, etc. Note, That in H. 12. Jac. That by the opinion of
the Justices, Prothonotaries, and Clerks of the Counter, that an Outlawry upon
an Allocat, as this is, shall not be reversed, because the Defendant ought to
be demanded at the next Hustings, etc. As the words of the writ, etc. whether
it be the Hustings, Nota been.
De communibus plcaitis terrae, or De communibus placitis, etc. the reversall
before was between Carnes and Mamvering and others.

T 14. Jac. rot. 3603, Br. Reversall for not naming the day the sheriff called
the Defendant at the second County, Utlary reversed for not returning the day
on which the second County was held.
at my County held at the Castle of Leicester, in the County aforesaid, the
said John was the second time called, whereas it ought to have been, at my
County held at the Castle of Leicester in the County aforesaid such a day and
year, the same Jo. etc. and prays hearing of the Writ of Exigi fac. which
being read and heard, Onerari non, because he says, That it does not appear by
the Return aforesaid, what day the said County, whereon the said Jo. was the
second time called, was held upon, as of right it ought to appear, and for that
cause the return aforesaid is insufficient in Law, judgment that the Outlawry
be reversed, Int Newton and Hustings, etc.

Vtlawry rever-for holding two Counties within the months to wit; by more
days then 28.
T 14. Iac. rot. 3603. Hearing of the return of the Exigent prayed, which being
read, etc. Onerari non, because he says that it appears by the return
aforesaid, that they were the second time called at the County held the fourth
day of January, and the third time were called at the County held the twenty
ninth of February, and that between the same twenty ninth day of February and
the same fourth day of January, were fifty six days, and so the same two
Countyes at which the same E. and A. were the second and third time called,
were not holden from Month to Month as of right they ought to be held Eaque
de causa, etc. judgment the Outlawry be reversed, between Wilson and others;
and Thornhill.

Vtlawry reversed for returning utlegat for Waviat.
T 14. Iac. rot. 3604. Brownlow, Cornub. Outlawry reversed, for returning
Vtlegat. est, for Waviat. est, and prays hearing of the Return of the
Exigent, which being read, etc. Onerari non, because she says, that every
woman upon any Writ of Exigi. fac. being the fifth time called and not
appearing, ought by the Law of the Land to be waviated and not outlawed, which
does not appear by the Return aforesaid, that the same Beatrix was waviated,
which of right ought to appear, and for that cause the said Return is
insufficient in Law, judgment that the Waviary be reversed, Int. Trelowny and
Bastard.

Vtlawry revesed for omission of the word Ante.
T 14. Iac. rot. 2071. Brownlow Canterbury ss. Reversall for Monday next the
Feast, etc. Return of the Exigent prayed to be heard which being read. etc.
Onerari non debet, because he says that it appears not certainly by the
Return aforesaid, whether the said E was the fifth time called Die lunae prox.
ante festum, etc. or Die lunae prox. post fest. etc. and so by that return it
appears not certainly, what day the said Hustings at which the said E. was
the fifth time called, was held, so that he at the same Hustings could not
render himself to the said Sheriffs of London to save himself from the
Outlawry aforesaid, and for that cause the said Return is insufficient in Law,
and this, etc. judgment that the Outlawry be reversed, Int. King and Porter.

T 13. Iac. rot. 2528. Outlawry reversed for omission of the word terre in the
first Hustings.

H 12* Iac. rot. 2165. For omission of the word Anno.

H 30. Jac. rot. 1205. Brownlow Middlesex ss. Vtlawry reversed for variance
between the Original writ and the Exigent:
Reversall for variance between the Original Writ and the Exigent. And pray
Oyer, etc. And hereupon the said R. and I. pray hearing of the Original Writ,
whereupon they are in form aforesaid outlawed, and it is read unto them in
these words, James by the Grace of God, etc. And also pray hearing of the Writ
of Exigent, which issued forth upon the Original Writ, whereupon the same R.
and I. are in form aforesaid outlawed, and it is read unto them in these
words, James, etc. which being read and heard, Onerari non, etc. because they
say, that it manifestly appearreth that there is varience between the said
Original Writ, and the said Writ of Exigi fac. that is to say in this, that in
the Original Writ it is contained, that the said Ralph Moore should render to
Nicholas T one hundred pounds, and in the Writ of Exigi. fac. it is contained,
that the said Ralph should render to the said N. T. one hundred pounds, and so
the Original Writ does not warrant the said Writ of Exigi fac. as of right it
ought, for which said cause and others in the said writ of Exigi. fac.
specified they pray judgment that the Outlawry aforesaid may be reversed, etc.
whereupon the Writs being seen, etc. Therefore it is considered that the said
R. and I. be discharged from the Outlawry aforesaid, and for that occasion
shall not be molested or in any manner greived, but be thereof in quiet, and
dismissed at large, etc.

T 10. Jac. rot. Brownlow, London, Reversall for that the Defendant was the 1
and 2 time called before the T^ste of the Exigent:
R. adds of Evans Utlawry reversed for variance between the Original Writ and
the Exigent, in this that in the Writ of Exigi. fac. this word Gent. which is
the name of the degree of the said Henry, is omitted, which is inserted in the
Original writ, Et pro ea causa, etc.

T 11. Jac. rot. 1521. Brownlow Int. G. and P. Outlawry reversed, for that the
Defendant was the first and second time called, before the Test of the Exigent.

T 18. Eliz. rot. 1529. Civit. Bristoll, ss. Afterward to wit, Vtlawry
reversed for that, the 5 County was held, as appears by the return of the
writ, before the Test of the Allocat.
the fourteenth day of May, then next following, came here into the court one
T. D. on the behalf of the said Ellen, and prays heareing of the Writ of
Allocat. whereupon the Waviary aforesaid is published against the same E. and
it is read unto him in these words, Elizabeth by the Grace of God, etc.
reciting the whole Writ, Test* 16. die November. anno, etc. 18. And also prays
hearing of the Return of the said Writ, and it is read to him in these words,
Alloc. to her four Countyes, etc. At our County held at the City of Bristoll
in the Guildhall there, 13. Ian. Anno infra script. etc. which being read and
heard, the same T. D. faith for the said Ellen, That the Return of the said
Writ of Allocat. is insufficient in Law, for that by the Return it evidently
appears to the Justices here, that the said fifth County held the same
thirteenth day of Ian. Anno 18. abovesaid, at which County the said E. was the
fifth time called and appeared not, was held Before the issuing forth of the
said Writ of Allocat. whereupon the said Writ, Mich: 6 and 7 Eliz: o^: 1971.
the like si^e.
and return upon the said Writ made, by the Justices here being fully
understood, it does seem to the said Justices here* that the said Return is
insufficient in Law, whereby the Waviary aforesaid, against the same E. in
form aforesaid published and had, is altogether void, and of no force nor
effect in Law, Therefore let no process nor any other thing against the said
E. upon the Waviary aforesaid, The Sheriff amerced for ill returning of the
Writ of Allocat
be further made, etc. and the sheriffs of the said City of Bristoll, to wit,
A. and B. in mercy for the insufficiency of the Return aforesaid made, and they
are fined by the Justices here at twenty shillings, etc.

T 7. Iac. rot. 3648. Brownlow ss. Prays hearing of the Return of the Writ of
Exigent, and it is read unto him in these words, A County holden at the Castle
of Salop, Utlary reversed for this word Me^m. T. 13 Jac: ^ot: 633.
etc. which being read, etc. Onerari non, because he says, that by the Return
aforesaid it appears not that the Countyes aforesaid in that Return
specified, whereunto the said James was in form aforesaid called, were the
Counties of the said sherif of Salop, as by the Return aforesaid it ought to
appear,, whereupon, etc. the Outlawry was reversed, Int. Burmom and Ap-Thomas
Salop:

T 7. Jac. rot. 3647. Brownlow, hereof Oyre of the return of the Exigent
prayed, at the hustings of the common Pleas in Guildhall of the City aforesaid
upon Monday next after the Feast, Utlary reversed for omission of this word
Tent. and for S^do. for being without a tittle, ^r dash.
etc. the same Henry was the second time called, and appeared not, which being
read, etc. Onerare non. Because he says that by the return aforesaid, it does
not appear that any hustings of Common pleas were held at the Guild Hall in
the City of Herford the said Monday next after the Feast etc. in the same
return mentioned for that this material word, Tent. in the same retorn was
there omitted, And also for that this word, Scdo, in the same return specified
was written without any dash, having no signification, And for those causes and
others, etc. pet. judicium, etc. may be discharged from the utlawry, etc. And
it is reversed, Int. Vaughan and Masters.

Vtlary reversed for that the Capias was not returned.
M 32. and 33. Eliz. rot. 131. Brownlow, Midd. ss It was commanded the sheriff
that he should not omit, etc. and here upon the said I prays hearing of the
said writ of exigent, whereupon he at the suit of the said W. is utlawed, And
it is read unto him in these words Elizabeth, etc. which being read and heard
the said I. says, etc. because he says that the original writ in the Court
here in Oct. S. Mich. An. Reg. etc. 30. retornable, and was returned and that
upon the same writ three Writs de Capiendeum by the Court here in Mich. Term
An. Regin 30. and 31. were considered and adjudged, As it appears in the Roll
of the same Term, To wit, one of the said Writs de Capiend. retornable in the
court here in Cr. Any. An. 30. abovesaid and one other writ de capiend. by the
Court here in Form aforesaid considered and adjudged, retornable at the said
Cr. Any. in the same Court here amongst the writs of Cr. Anim. An. 30.
abovesaid in the said County of Ebor. is filed, which said writ is not
returned, whereupon the Justices here can in no wise certify in Execution of
the said Writ that it is indorsed, As by the said Writ of Capias amongst the
said Writs de Cr. Anim. in the Court here filed fully appears, And so the
said writs of alias and plures Capiend. and the said Writ of Exi. against the
same I. afterward considered and adjudged erroniosly and without sufficient
warrant issued, And for that cause he prays to be discharged by the Court
here from the utlawry aforesaid etc. whereupon the said Writ de Capiend. filed
in the Bench here at the said Cr. Any. being seen it sufficiently appears to
the Justices here upon Record that the allegation of the said I. is true
therefore it is considered that the said I. by occasion of the utlawry
aforesaid be not molested nor greived but go thereof quiet, etc.

T 16. Iac, rot. 3109. Brownlow, between Ioanes and Griffin, Vtlary reversed
for infram. for infranominat and dua, for duo.
utlawry reversed, infrom, for infra nominat. and dua for duo.

T 16 Iac. Rot. 3114. Brownlow, int. Washer and Dignbey In this that it
appears to the Court here, Vtlary reversed for the misplacing of the Sheriffs
names.
that that writ was returned by certain Peter Proby and Martine Lumnly
sheriffs of the City of London, whereas in truth Martine Lumnly was not then
sheriff of the said City but certain Martain Lumnley and the said Peter Probey
were then sheriffs of the said City, etc.

M 23. and 24. Eliz. rot. 339. Midd. ss. For that the same R. by virtue of the
publishing of the utlawry aforesaid, Utlary reversed for that the Supersedeas
upon the Exigent was entered upon Record before the Defendant was 5 exactus.
to wit the 27. day of Ap. An. etc. came here into the court and then proved a
writ of the said Lady the Queen of Super quia improvide, For that the said Writ
of Exigi fac. whereupon the said R. is utlawed out of the Court here
erroniously issued, For that the said Rob. by the said I. C. his attorney at
the day of the return of the plu. Cap. thereupon and always afterward before
the issuing forth of the said writ of Exigi facias often times offered himself
to answer to the said M. in the plea aforesaid, By pretext whereof it is
commanded to the said sheriff of Midd. that of putting in Exigent utlawing
taking or in any thing molesting of the said same R, by occasion of the
premises he be altogether Superseded, as by the said Writ of Supers, entered
upon Roll in the Court of the Queen in the county held 15. Pas. Rot. 1020. it
sufficiently appears, And this the same I. C. for the said R. is ready to
veryfie by the Record, And so the utlawry aforesaid against him in Form
aforesaid published is void, Whereupon he prays judgment and that the said R.
may be quiet of the utlawry aforesaid, and discharged from the court here and
set at large, whereupon the Record being seen and upon the oath of R. U.
servant of the said I. C. of his delivery of the writ of Sup. before the
publishing of the utlawry aforesaid, To one T. L. then being under sheriff of
the county of Mi. before I. Dyer Knight Chief Justice, here examined, and also
the said T. L. then present, not contradicting the reception of the said writ.
It sufficiently appears to the Justices here that the allegation of the said
I. C. in discharge of the said R. from the utlawry aforesaid, is true therefore
it is considered that the said utlawry be adnulled, and altogether taken for
nothing, And that the said R. upon that occasion be in nothing molested or
grieved, but go thereof without day, etc.

M 19. Iac. rot. 2047. Brownlow London int. B. and E. Oyer of the return of the
Ex. fac. prayed, which being read, etc. onerari non because he says that in
many places of the said return is used a certain word, to wit, Civit. written
for this word Civit. which word Civit. so written is no word of sense nor
Latin, having in it any signification. Eaq causa, Utla^ reversed for this Word
Civit. for Civitat. H: 12 Jac: rot: 2265 quto for quinto.
the utlawry reversed by Justice Hutton, Hill, 8. Iac. Rot. 3526. Coronator,
for Coronatorum H. 12. Iac. Rot. 1949 Brownl. inter S. and S. exact and not
written exact. with a dash, T. 13, Iac. Rot. 3538. ura for vra T 19. Jac. rot.
635. Anino for Anno. H. 11. Ja, rot 3524 praedictus for praedictis, same roll
mercii for marcii. rot, 3522, mertris for martins ad Com. Exon, for ad commit.
Civitatis Exoniae. T, 13 Jac, Rot. 3527 Brownlow, quinto Exactus for quarto
Exact. 13, Jacobus Rot, 2538, utlawry that it appeared not where the Castle of
Leic. is, Hill. 12. Iac. rot 2265. T. 13. Iac. rot. 3538, that there is no such
Feast as Kenelim Rs. and Martiris, T. 13. Iac. Rot. 635. for no return in the
Writ of Exigi fac-to warrant the writ, H. 37, Eliz. rot. 132. non comperuit
omitted in the return of the Exigi fac. P. 24, H. 6. rot. 24. reversall for
that 2. Cap. were filed, and not the plures, T. 9. Iac. rot. 129. Crompton, for
that the Feast at which the first hustings were held, was before the Test of
the Exigi fac. M, 10. Iac. rot. 1709. Brownlow reversal for false Lattine,
Vtlary of the intestate reversed by the Administrator by special entry in the
same term, in which the Utlary was reversed.
to wit, comperuit for comperuere H. 11. Iac. rot. 3522. reversall for that it
appears not in the return that the old sheriffs had delivered the Writ to
the new.

M 21. Iac. rot, 3059. Brownlow Norff. ss, It was commanded the sheriff that he
should not omit for any liberty of the County aforesaid but that he should take
I. B. late of F. in the County aforesaid Gent. Executor of the Testament of I.
B. late called I. B, of F, in the County of Norff, Yeoman, utlawed in the
County aforesaid 6, Ap. An. 22. Eliz. at the suite of W. Gray Administrator of
the goods and Chattles which were of R. G. who dyed intestate, etc. T: 3. or 5
Car: rot 531. the like for B.
in a plea of debt whereof he is convicted if, etc. And safely, etc. so that he
should have his body here at this day, to wit, in Oct. Martini, to do and
receive what the Court of the Lord the King shall consider of him in that
behalf. Return mortues
And now here at this day, to wit, in Oct. S. Martini the sheriff of the said
County of Norff. to wit, R. B. Baronet retorneth that the said I. H: 12 Jac:
rot: 829. tiel: H: 45 Eliz: rot: 2834. general pardon pleaded by the Executor
for him that died utlawed.
is dead, And hereupon came in to the Court one R. S. of F. in the county
aforesaid Gent. Administrator of the goods and Chattles which were of the said
James in his proper person and says that the said James after the publishing
of the said utlawry, to wit, The 8. day of January An. 20 Rs. nunc, at F.
aforesaid dyed intestate, etc. And that the administration of the goods and
chattles which were of the said I. at the time of his death by Robert Redmaine
Doctor of laws, etc. The tenth day of January An. Dom. 1622. at F. aforesaid to
the said administrator after the death of the said James was committed, and he
brings here into the Court the letters administratory of the said Official,
which the commission of the administration aforesaid in Form aforesaid
testify, etc. whose date is the same 10. day of January An. Dom. 1622.
abovesaid and for the securing of the goods and chattles which were of the said
I. at the time of his death from the utlawry aforesaid he prays the hearing
of the return of the said writ de Exigi Faciend. whereupon the said Ia. at the
suit of the said William was utlawed, And it is read unto him in these words
Norff. At my county held at the castle of Nor. within the shiere-house in the
county aforesaid the 25. day of December An. Reg. 24 within written, The within
named I. B. was the first time called and appeared not, etc. Return of the
Exigent.
which being read and heard the same administrator says that the utlawry
aforesaid against the said I. in Form aforesaid published and had, is
altogether void and of no Force nor effect in law, because he says that in the
return aforesaid whereas it is expressed the said James to have been called at
the said first county, a certain principal word, to wit, Norff. between
these words, meum Tent. which should denote and declare the name of the County
aforesaid is omitted out of the said return whereby no first county by the law
of the land was held, To which the said James in his life time could render
himself to the said sheriff of No. to save himself from the utlawry
aforesaid, And for that cause and others being in the return aforesaid, That
return is insufficient in law And this he is ready to verify whereupon he
prays judgment that the utlawry aforesaid may be reversed avoided and taken
altogether for nothing, and that the goods and chattles which were of the said
James at the time of his death in the hands of the said administrator to be
administered may be discharged from the utlawry aforesaid and hereupon the said
return being seen, And by the Justices here fully examined and understood, It
seems to the Justices here that the utlawry aforesaid shall be reversed,
vacated, and taken altogether for nothing and that the goods and chattels which
were of the said James at the time of his death being in the hands of the said
administrator to be administered, be discharged from the utlawry aforesaid, etc.

Another form of reversall of an Vtlary against the Intestate by the
Administrator upon the Exigent roll, and not in the same te^me in which it was
reversed.
T 4, Jac. rot. 2990. Page London ss. Hugh ap David against Williams in debt,
the Exigent awarded returned 8. Mich. 4. Jan. the utlawry is entered upon the
Role, and afterward the 25. day of April 10. Iacobi, Henry Williams
administrator of the said W. Williams comes and shows his letters of
administration, and prays hearing of the writ of Exigent with the return
thereof, And prays that the goods in his hands may be discharged from the
said utlawry, because the Exigent and the return thereof are erroneous, And
the utlawry for error was reversed, And that the goods and chattles which were
of the said intestate at the time of his death being in the hands of the said
Henry should be discharged from the utlawry aforesaid, etc.

Utlary reversed for that there is no such name in Baptism.
M 21, Iac. rot Brownlow Norff. ss. It was commanded the sheriff, etc. utlawry
reversed by the administrator, which being read, etc. and the administrator
prays hearing of the Roll of the Exigent And it is read unto him, etc. which
being read, etc. the said administrator says that the record is vicious and
defective in law in this, to wit, That in diverse places of the record aforesaid
is written, Edmindo for this word Edmundo, which said word Edmundus is a name
of Baptism, and that there is not any such word Edmindus, as it is written in
the Record aforesaid, And that in the Record aforesaid is written recuperuit,
whereas it ought to be written or thographically Recuperavit, and not
Recuperuit, And in the Record aforesaid there are material Words omitted, To
wit, quodam Debito in these words, de and quadraginta so that by the omission
of those material words aforesaid, The Record aforesaid is altogether
imperfect, And this the said administrator is ready to verify by the same
Record of the Term of the holy Trinity An. 16. Reg. Rot. 1297. in the Court of
the Lord the King now here remaining, whereupon he prays judgment and that
the utlawry aforesaid may be reversed, etc.

Reversall of an Vtlary, for that in the body of the Record, the Proclamution
is direct^d to the Sheriff of Kent, but in the Margent it is written Sussex for
Kent.
M 21. Jac. rot. Brownlow Sussex ss. inter Smith and T. utlawed in Com. Sussex,
And prays hearering of the Exigent Role and it is read unto him, until and
it commanded to the sheriff of K. that in his full county he make proclamation
to the said David, etc. And the proclamation in the Margent is awarded in
Sussex, which being read he says that the record is vicious in it self, to
wit, in this that in the body of the record aforesaid, it is commanded to the
sheriff of Kent that he should make proclam the said David according to the
Form of the statute in this case made and provided, And in the margent of the
said record it appears that the said writ of proclamation to be adjudged to
the sheriff of Sussex and so it appears that the record aforesaid is varying
uncertain and contrary in it self, And that searching the writ retornable in
Cro. Trin. of the sheriff of the county of Kent, noe Writ of proclamation
against the said David was returned by the said sheriff of Kent whereby the
utlawry aforesaid against the said D, in Form aforesaid published and had is
void and of no force nor effect in Law, Whereupon the record being seen, and
the Writs of the said county of Kent, of the said Cr. Trin. filed in court here
being searched fully examined and understood, it seems to the said justices
here that the alilegation of the said David is discharged of the utlawry
aforesaid, is true, etc.

H 22. Jac. rot. 2426. Brownlow. Land. ss. B. and P. at the suit of C. the
utlawry reversed for that the first county was held 14. Iu. 22. and the 2.
Counties was held 9. August 22. Jac. which being read and heard, etc. Onerari
non, Utlary reversed for that one month was united between the first and the
second Counties.
because he says that the return aforesaid is vicious and defective in Law,
to wit, in this that it appears by the said return that the said county at
which the said John and Eliz. were first called was held the said 14. day of
June an. 22. abovesaid and the said county at which the said John and Eliz.
were the second time called was held the said 9. day of August An. 22.
abovesaid, whereas in truth the said second county the 9. day of July An. 22.
abovesaid being the Month next following the month of June, in which the said
first County was, as is aforesaid, held, by the sheriff of the county
aforesaid, ought to have been held, and so by the retorn aforesaid it
suficiently appears that the said 5. counties by the sheriff said for the
county aforesaid in form aforesaid held, and at which the said John and Eliz.
in form aforesaid were called, Were not held from month to month
successively one after an other, as by the law of the land by the said sheriff
they ought to have been held, And this they are ready to verify whereupon, etc.

T 8. Iac. rot 4640. which being read and heard onerari non, Vtlary reversed
for omitting the second exact. between the first and third.
because he says that by the return aforesaid it evidently appears, that
the said R. was never the second time called upon the said Writ of Exi. fac. so
that the utlawry aforesaid against the said Ric. the second calling of him the
said R. upon the Writ aforesaid being omitted, was published and had so that
the utlawry aforesaid against him the said R. so published and had is void, and
this, etc. The utlawrie is reversed,

Januaii for Januarii. Vtlary reversed for omitting the return of the Plu. cap.
in the close of the Exigent.
H 22. Iacobi rot. 1404. Ianuaii for Ianuarii.

H. 7. Iac. rot. 3503, utlawry reversed, for omitting the retorn of the plu.
cap. in the close of the Exigent.

P 10. H. 4. rot 337. One renders himself prisoner to the Fleet upon an
utlawry, And because it appears that the exigent was not entered upon record
in any other Term, he is discharged of the utlawry and set at large, Norff. I.
at the suit of D.

Veiwe.
Entry of a writ of view in Formedon in discender, and a quashment of the same
for a speedier return thereof, then by Law it ought.
TRin. 8. Iac. roll. 485. Wolastone, City of York ss. It was commanded the
sheriffs that without delay they should cause to be had to the Guardian searcher
or master of the Scoole and Elemosinary poor of the Hospital of S. John the
Baptist in K. R. the view of one Mesuage with the appurtenances in the parish
of Arpon the pavement which William Lister in the court here claims against
them as his right by writ of the Lord the King de forma donationis in
discendere, and that it should be said to 4. Knights who should be present at
that view, That they should be here at this day, to wit, in Cr. Trin. to
testify the said view, And that they should have here the names of the Knights
and that writ, and now here at this day came as well the said W. L, as the
Guardian, etc. by their attorneys aforesaid and upon this, Writ of view is
quashed.
because it appears here that the said writ is vicious, to wit, in this that
it issued forth retornable here on the said morrow of the holy Trinity where it
ought by due course of Law to have been made retornable here tres Trin.
because the plea aforesaid had his last continuance until Oct. Pur. Beat.
Mariae last past, Therefore at the petition of the demandant, A new writ of
view awarded,
and by the consent of the attorney of the said Guardion, etc. let another writ
thereupon be made in Form as aforesaid retornable here in Cr. Anim. And in the
mean while, etc. at which day here came the parties, etc. by their attorneys
and the sheriff sent not the Writ, Therefore let another Writ thereof be made
in Form aforesaid retornable here tres Pas. the same day is given to the same
W. L here, etc.

TRin. 11. Iac. roll 3388. Goldesburgh Ebor. ss. The sheriff was commanded that
he should attach William Denton so that he might have him here (at such a day)
to answer W. H. Gent. one of the attorneys, Entry of a bail taken upon an
attachment of Privilege in an action of debt.
etc. according to the liberties and privileges etc. of a plea of debt etc.
and now here at this day came as well the said W. H. in his proper person as the
said W. D. in his proper person under the custody of the sheriff of the county
aforesaid by virtue of the Writ aforesaid here brought to the bar, And hereupon
(such a day) that same Term before Peter W. Knight one of the Justices of the
said Lord the King, etc. at his chamber in Chancery Lane London came the said
W. D. in his proper person under the custody of the sheriff of the county
aforesaid, And hereupon one R. W. of Cliffords Inn London being present in his
proper person before the said Justices undertook for the said W. D. H: 8. b. 8
rot. 1. an appearance entered upon an attachment upon an information.
in the sum of 20 l. and the said William D. assumed for him self in the
sum of 40 l. to have the body of the said W. D. here in court from day to day
at every day of pleading, until the plea be determined and judgment be
thereupon given, and also if it happen judgment in the same plea to be adjudged
for the same W. Hamp. against the said W. Denton, would satisfy, or render his
body in execution to the prison of the said Lord the King of the Eleet upon
that judgment which said sum of 20 l. the said R. acknowledged to be made out
of his lands and chattles and which said sum of 40 l. the said Will. Denton
acknowledged, Recognizance enrolled.
etc. (as in others) which said recognizance the said Justice with his own
hands delivered here in Court that same Term to be inroled upon record.

T 28. H. 8. rot 328. View.
View was granted in a Writ de consuetudinibus and Servitiis.

M 2. and 3. P, and M. rot. 315. Norff. ss. Alias writ of view awarded, where
the Sheriff retu ned upon the first writ of view, that none of the Demandants
would show him the lands.
It was commanded the sheriff that justly, etc. he cause to be had to T. K.
Knight the view of the manors of B. and B with the appurtenances which Geo. O.
Esquire. in the Court of the Lord the King and the Lady the Queen here claymeth
against him by Writ of the said Lady the Queen de ingru. in le per, And that
he should say to 4. Knights who would be present at that view that they should
be here at this day, to wit, tres Mich. to testify the said view, And now here
at this day came as well the said G. by I. C. his attorney as the said T. by P.
P. his attorney, And the sheriff, to wit, I. S, now retorneth that none on the
part of the said demandant came to show the said sheriff the Manors aforesaid,
and for that default he could by no means execute the execution and command of
that Writ, As that Writ in it self does exact and require, Therefore as before
let the said Thomas have view of the Manors aforesaid with the appurtenances,
the same day is given as well to the said George as to the said Thomas here,
etc. in Cr. Pur. and in the mean time, etc.

THat the view ought to be examined in an assize and Wast, and that there ought
to be 6. Nota.
Recognitors to have the veiw and that 4. of them be hundreders, etc.

Venire Facias.
P 3. and 4. P. and M. rot. 126. Whotly London, It was commanded the sheriffs
whereas I. N. late of, etc. lately in the Court of the Lord Edward late King of
England the 6, Venire fac: to account against Tenant in Elegit, and judgment
against the Tenant and reliberate awarded.
before the Justices of the same late King of the Common bench here by the
consideration of the same Court recovered against T. D. etc. as well a certain
debt of 400 l. as 6 l. which to the same I. in the same Court of the said late
King were adjudged for his damages which he had by occasion of detayning of
that debt whereof he is convicted, And the same I. afterward, to wit the 28.
day of N. An. Reg. nunc primo, coming into the Court of the said Lady the Qu.
now before the Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the bench here, to wit, P
2, and 3 P. and M: ^ry, rot: 926. or 126. Dyer fol: 1. Pl: 6. 4 H: 8.
at Westminster close to be delivered to him, etc. to hold, etc. and prays a
writ thereof to the then sheriff of the said County of War. to be directed,
which was granted to him whereupon the Lady the Queen now by her writ commanded
the then sheriff of War. that all good, etc. to hold, etc. and how far he shall
execute that precept he should make appear to her Justices at Westminster 15.
Hillarii and that then he should have there that writ, at which said 15.
Hillarii R. T. Knight then sheriff of the said County of War. to the said
Justices of the said Lady the Queen of the Common Bench here, to wit, at
Westminster returned that he had done execution upon the lands and Tenements
which were of the the same T. the same day of the judgment aforesaid thereon
given, And that a moiety thereof, to wit, one Park, etc. which amounted by the
year in all issues besides reprizes to 62 l. the 13. day of I. An. abovesaid
and delivered them to the said I. N. according to the value and extent
aforesaid to hold as his Tenement to him and his assigns until the 300 l. See
the old Tenures, fol: 123 E: according to thy writ of Ven: fac.
for the debt and damages aforesaid be thereof levied and further the said
sheriff to the said justices of the said Lady the Queen here, to wit, at
Westminster aforesaid returned that 105 l. in ready moneys which were of the
said T. the same day of the judgment aforesaid therein given he likewise
delivered to the same I. to hold to him the goods and Cattle aforesaid as his
own goods and Chattles for the residue of the said 105 l, for the Debt and
Damages aforesaid, And because the King and Queen now by the information of
the said T. B. know, Suggestion that the Pla. had levied a 100 l. above the
debt and damages in cutting down woods See F^. tit. Scire Fac. Pl. 101. P. 32.
E. 3.
that although the said moiety of the said Lands and Tenements of the same T.
B. so delivered to the said I. M. did only extend unto 62 l. notwithstanding
the said I. N. as well of the issues and profits of the moiety aforesaid, whose
true value does extend it self to a greater value then the extent aforesaid as
also of the woods and under-woods growing upon the same moiety by the same I.
N. lately cut down and sold 150 l. above the said 406 l. for the Debt and
Damages aforesaid has now levied whereupon he supplicates the King to be by
the King and Queen provided of a fit remedy, A Venire fac. awarded ad
Computandum, de Exit. deterie and bosci.
And the said King and Queen willing to do what should be just to the said T.
in that behalf commanded the sheriffs of London to cause to come here 15. Pas.
the said I. N. to account with the same B. of the moneys received as well out of
the issues and profits of the moiety aforesaid, according to the true value of
the same, from the time of the delivery aforesaid as of the woods and
under-woods of late growing, upon the said Moiety by the same I. N. cut down
and sold, And further to show if any thing, etc. wherefore the said moiety
delivered before to the said I. N ought not to be delivered to the same T.B.
if, etc. Non inventu. returned. Testat cap. awarded to the sheriff of Mid. ad
compuandum. quaere de hoc. The parties come by attorneys Vic. retorneth a Sup.
At which said 15. Pas. came the said T. B. by F. M. his attorney And the
sheriffs, to wit, T. and I. now returned that the said I. is not found, etc.
And hereupon it is testified in the Court of the King and Qu. here that the
said I.N. does hide and run from place to place in the county of Midd.
Therefore it is commanded to the sheriff of the said County of Midd. that he
take the same I. N. if etc. and safely, etc. so that he may have his body here
tres Trin. to accout and show in Form aforesaid etc. And now here at the said
tres Trin. came as well the said T. B. by his attorney aforesaid as the said I.
N. by F. M. his attorney, and the sheriff of Midd. to wit, T. and F. now
returned that after the receipt of the said writ of Capias I. N. delivered to
the said sheriff a Writ of the Lord the King and the Lady the Queen of Sup. by
which Writ the same sheriff as to the taking of the same I. N. could not
proceed, And hereupon the same T. B. says that after 15. Hillarii An. Regin.
1. Count upon the venire facias.
as well of the issues and profits of the moiety aforesaid whereof the true
value did amount to a great sum of money, to wit, 62 l. by the year above
the extent aforesaid, as also for the wood, to wit, Registered judiciale fo 14.
such a writ against tenant by Elegy.
of 1200 Oaks and 340. Beech Trees and under-woods, to wit, C. cart load of
underwood to the value of 200 l. late growing in the said Moiety late cut down
and sold by the same I. N. Cl. above the said 206 l. levied thereof for Debt
and Damnges aforesaid, whereupon he prays judgment and that the said I. N.
may account with the said T. B. etc. and also prays delivery of the Tenements
aforesaid to the said T. B. to be done etc.

Nil dic.
ANd the said I. N. defends the force and wrong when, etc. And nothing in bar of
the action of the said T. B. aforesaid wherefore the said I. of the moneys
received of the premises aforesaid to account with the same T. nor wherefore
the said moiety to the same I. N. before delivered, ought not to be redelivered
to the same T. says, neither shows whereby the same B. Judgment that he
should account and that the moiety should be redelivered.
remains against the said I.N. thereof without defense, Therefore it is
considered that the said I. N. of the moneys received by the same I. as well for
the issues and profits of the moyetyes aforesaid as of the woods and
under-woods aforesaid in the said moiety late growing by the same I. N. cut
down and sold, should account with the said T. B. And also that the moiety of
the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances should be redelivered to the
said T. B. And hereupon the same T. B. prays a Writ of the Lord the King and
of the Lady the Queen de Reliberand, to the same T. B. the moiety aforesaid to
the said sheriff of War. to be directed, and it is granted him retornable in
Cr. S. Martin, etc.

Entry of a Venire facias direct d by the (...) of the common Bench to the
keeper of the Palace of the Lord the King of West. (who is the warden of the
Fleer) to retu^ne a Jury of attorneys of the Common Bench to inquire of all
misdemeanors done in the same Court.
ss. It was commanded the Keeper of the Palace of the Lord the King of
Westminster that he should cause to come before the Justices of the Lord the
King of his Bench here the 29, day of November that same Term, 12, attorneys of
the Court of the Common Bench here whereof every one of them should have 100 s.
in lands Tenements or rent by the year at the least, by whom the truth of the
matter might be the better known to inquire upon their oath of all Felonies,
Falsehoods, rasures, and deceits whatsoever in the court of the Lord the King
here done or committed, etc. At which day W. B. Esquire keeper of the palace
aforesaid retorneth here a certain Paunell with the names of the Jurors, etc.
16. of whom, to wit, W. K. etc. are elected and sworn to inquire of and upon
the premises, whreupon further day is given to them by the Court here to
inquire of and upon the premises here until Cr. Pur. At which day here came
the said Jurors, And hereupon for certain causes the Court here moving,
further day is given them by the court here to inquire of and upon the
premises until, tres Sept. Pas. At which day here came the Jurors aforesaid,
who say upon their oath that whereas otherwise, to wit, in the Term of S,
Hillary An. Rs. nunc, 17. before Io. Br. Knight and his associats then Justices
of the Lord the King of the Common bench at Westminster, one 1. Allen Knight
prosecuted a certain account of debt against Robert Hodgson late of,
Presentment made by the inquest of the attorneys
etc. Gent* upon demand of 20 l. And the same R. in the said Court by R,
Swinlow his attorney appearing in the defense by him made, says nothing in Bar
of preclusion of the action of the said I. A. aforesaid for which it was then
considered there that the same I. should recover against the said R. his debt
aforesaid and his damages by occasion of the detayning of that debt as it
appears in the same Term rot. 325. and the same R. afterward for that cause
was put into the Hustings of London to be utlawed, and for that cause
afterward was utlawed as it does appear in Trinity Term An. Rs. nunc 18. rot.
260. and afterward, to wit, 12. November An, Rs. nunc 21, at Westminster in
the county of Midd. in the Tresurehouse there whereunto the records of the Lord
the K. belong to the Common Bench, under the custody of Geo. Roll Clearke of
the Tresury aforesaid were kept these, words or sayings, to wit, Wassan and
Sinhowe, by the procurement of the said To. Hodgson were rased, to the
intention to vacat and altogether to make null the utlawry aforesaid, and of
the same word or saying, called Wassand, was made warrant, and of the same word
or saying of the name of the attorney of the said Robert Hodgson called
Swinhow, the letter H. at the end of the same Writ was cased and abstracted,
and the letter H. was made the letter B. so that the name of his attorney on
the plaint aforesaid, by the procurement of the said To. Hodgson by reason of
the said rasure now is, Swinbowe, in contempt of the Lord the King, but who or
whom rased that record, the Jurors hithrto are altogether ignorant, and
hereupon the Jurors aforesaid have further day to inquire of and upon the
premises, to wit, until the feast of St, John Baptist then next following,
etc. At which day here came the Jury aforesaid and upon this day is further
given to the Jury aforesaid to inquire of and upon the premises here until
15. Mich. then next following, etc.

Withernam.
P 44. Eliz. rot. 1201. ss. It was commanded the sheriff, Entry of pledges of
new after withernam and warding of second deliverance and awarding of a writ ad
Deliberan. averia capt. in Withernam upon an nonsuit beore appearance.
whereas W. H. bad been summoned to be in the Court of the Lady the Queen
here, to wit at Westminster to answer I, K, of a plea wherefore he took a
certain Ox of the said I. and him unjustly detayned against sureties and,
pledges, etc. The same I. afterward in the same Court of the Lady the Queen
here, to wit, at Westminster made default, by which it was considered in the
same court of the said Lady the Qu. here that the same I, and his pledges of
prosecuting should be thereof in mercy, And that the same W. should go thereof
without day, and that he should have return of his Ox aforesaid whereupon it
was commanded to the same sheriff, 30: H: 8: Dier so: 41. Pl 4: and fo. 59. Pl:
14 Pasch. 27 Eliz rot: 1134 entry of a w it of Capias in withernam in like
case. H. 19: 7: rot. 401. like entry P: 44 Eliz. rot: 1935 inter. L: and P: and
others
that without delay he should make return of the said Ox to the same W. And
should not deliver him at the complaint of the said I. without a Writ of the
said Lady the Queen that of the said judgment should make express mention, And
in as much, etc. he should make appare here in Cr. Pur. last past, And the same
sheriff to the Justices of the said Lord the King here at this day returned,
that before the coming of the Writ aforesaid, the said Ox was enlarged by the
same J. to places altogether to him unknown, so that he could not make return
of the Ox aforesaid to the said W as by the said Writ to him is was commanded,
Therefore, etc. that of the cattle of the same I. to the value of the Ox
aforesaid before taken, he should take in Withernam, and should deliver them to
the said W. to hold to him until the Ox aforesaid before taken, could be
returned, And that he should put by Sureties and Sure pledges, the said I. that
he should be here at this day, to wit, A die Pas in un. mensem, to answer
asvvell the said Lady the Queen of the contempt, as to the said W. of the
Damages and injuries to him in this behalf done, etc. And now here at this
day came asvvell the same I. by I. P. his attorney as the same W. by P. K. his
attorney and the sheriff to wit, H V Esquire now retorneth that he by virtue
of the Writ aforesaid to him directed took in Withernam three Covvs of the
goods and cattles of the said I; And caused them to be delivered to the said W,
to hold to him until the Ox aforesaid before taken might be returned, And
that the said I was attached by his cattles to the value of 12 d. And hereupon
the same I prays to be admitted to make a fine with the said Lady the Queen
by occasion of the premises, And is admitted, etc. and is fined by the
Justices here to 3 s. 4 d. which by the command of the Justicas here, he paid
to R. B. Esquire chief Prothonotary of the Court of the Common bench of the
said Lady the Queen here for necessary reparations of the Court here don and to
be don, Note that it is a better form to award the writ of 2: Deliverance,
after the Recognizance. Fit: Na: br: fo: 72: D:
Therefore the same I. may go thereof without day, etc. or quiet, etc, And
hereupon the same I. by the statute etc. prays a Writ of the Lady the Queen,
de secund delib. And it is granted him retornable here in Cr. S* Trin., and
also the same I. in the said Court here found pledges of new as well to
prosecute his claim, as to retorn to the same W, the Ox aforesaid before
taken, or the price of the same cattle, if return thereof be adjudged; to
wit, I P of, etc, under the penalty of the said I K. 20 l. and I. G. of, etc.
under the penalty of the same I P and I G of 40 l. etc. vvhereupon the sheriff
was commanded that without delay he make deliverance to the same I of the
cattle aforesaid taken in Withernam, Note that diverse prefidents mentioned the
writ at large:
And in as much, etc, he make to appear here at the said Cr. S. Trin. etc. and
that he should put by sureties and safe pledges the said W. that he should be
here at this day, or the said Term, to answer to the same I. of the taking of
the Cattle aforesaid before taken, etc. The like in Hill. 12. Ja. rot. T: 9:
Iac, rot 11: Brownlow int: Smith and al: Mich: 16: Ia: rot: 505: Mich 34: and
34: Eliz: rot: 617. after entry of the pledges. etc. thus after wards, to Wit,
at the said Cr: Trin. came the said I: by his attorney aforesaid and by the
statute, etc. prays a writ second deliverance etc.
2280 Brownlow between Wenworth and Wilton: See Mich 10. Jac rot. 393. or 2393.
between Loueday and White, like pledges, etc.

Note that in this case the Plaintiff prays that the defendants attorney
present in Court might gage to him deliverance of the cattle taken in
Withernam, And Serieant Pelham moved the Court, Gage deliverance prayed and
denied.
that the course was such, and showed a president in Hill. 15. Eliz, rot. 708,
where a demurrer was upon the like point, and was adjudged that the Attorney
should gage deliverance for his Clyent, and also he vouched the authority, but
notwithstanding that the court held such course to be very inconvenient for the
attorneys, and there upon adjudged, that a Writ should issue out to the
sheriffs, to deliver the cattle taken in Withernam, as in this president, which
note.

ALso at the said Cr. Nota:
Trin the sheriff returned that the Cattle taken in Withernam were enlarged,
Testar. Capias. in Withernam
and moreover that he to whom they were delivered, had nothing in the County,
And in truth they were eloyned in an other County, and hereupon a testat, br.
awarded in the other County where the cattle were eloyned.

ANd also that Justice Glanvill said that he who shall have Cattle in
Withernam, cannot sell them, or kill them, Mich: 11 Eliz: Dyer fo: 280: Pl:
accord:
as he who has Cattle irreplegiable, and in that case, an Action of trover
well lies after tender of satisfaction in Court, which note, but inquire.

M 36. and 37. Eliz. rot. 2640. Brownlow, An entry as in the president before
the entry of the pledges de novo at the end of the recognizances, And hereupon
the same T. prays that the said W, may gage to him deliverance of the cattle
aforesaid taken in Withernam, in Form aforesaid which said W. to gage
deliverance of the same Cattles in form aforesaid taken in Withernam, here in
Court refused, Therefore it is commanded to the sheriff of Devo. that those
cattle taken in Withernam in Form aforesaid, without delay he cause to be
delivered to the same T. and what, etc. The sheriff make appear here etc.. in
Oct. Hill, etc.

P 11. Jac. rot. 2446. Walter, Sommerset Int. P. and P. such an entry after
Cap. in VVithernam entered and pledges found if return thereof should be
adjudged, to wit, W. R. and H. W. Subpoena 10 l. which the same W. and H, have
acknowledged, and both of them do acknowledge to be made of their Goods and
Chattles and to the use and behoof of the avowant to belevied, If it shall
happen the said R. not to make deliverance of the Cattle aforesaid, before
taken in form as aforesaid, Or not to satisfy the said I. of the price of the
cattle, and hereupon the same K. prays deliverance of the said cattle taken
in Withernam as is aforesaid to her to be adjudged, etc, and because the said
I. was solemnly called to gage deliverance and came not therefore it is
considered that the said K. may have return of the Cattle aforesaid taken in
Withernam, therefore it is commanded to the said sheriff that the cattle
aforesaid by him taken in VVithernam without delay he cause to be delivered, to
the said K. and in as much, etc. the sheriff make to appear here in Cr. Trin.
etc.

THE TABLE.
Abatement. ABatement pleaded to a Scire fac. against an administrator for that
the administration was by two and but one named in the Scire fac. fo. 1.
Admission. Admittance to a fine after a Cepi Corpus returned upon a Capias pro
fine. ib. Admittance to a Fine after Averia elongat. returned in a retorn.
habend. ib. Admission of the third Prothonotary to his Office. fo. 3. Admission
of the second Prothonotary to his Office. ib.
Accedas ad cur. Accedas ad cur. entered to remove a cause out of the court
Baron, etc. And a Procedendo granted, etc. for the insufficiency of the cause
shown. fo 4. Accedas ad cur. to remove a plaint out of an inferior Court and
a Procedendo awarded for that the damags in the plaint are under 40 s. fo. 5.
Allowance. A writ of allowance entered for one of the Just of the common Bench
by reason of infirmities. fo. 7. Amertiament. Amerciament entered against a
sheriff for his insufficient retorn upon a writ of wast. Amerciament nor
returning for a Capias Utlagat. ib. Amerciament for not returning of Capias ad
Satis. after several days given by the court. ib. Amerciament for the
marshall for non attendance upon the judge upon the essoine day. ib.
Amerciamet. Amerciament entered against the sheriff upon an attachment of
Privilege and a Habeas Corpus awarded fo 11. Amerciament entered upon an
attachment of privilege for one of the Judges clarks of the common Bench and
awarding of a Habeas Corpus. ib. Amerciament entered against a baily of a
liberty upon a Cepi corp. returned and a Distringas awarded upon an attachment
of privilege. ib. Amerciament entered against the sheriff upon return of the
Languidus in prisona upon an attachment for contempt. 12.
Appearance. Appearance and bail in court entered upon a writ of privilege in
discharge of the sheriffs bond. 9 Appearance entered to a writ of privilege in
trespass. ib. Appearance made in discharge of Manucaptors upon mean Process
10.
Attachment. Attachment in the Mayors court for debt, the attachment
disattached by bail and plaint removed by a common writ of privilege with
Cerciorare. 10 Attachment entered in a Quare impedit and a distres awarded ib.
Attachment awarded in the like with summons and severance 1. of the plaintiffs
comes not; judgment that the other sequat solus, the Bishop Essoines, etc. ib

B
Ballivo Amovendo. Entry of a writ of Ballivo amovendo for continuing his
office above one year together contra formam statuti. 13
C
Capias ad satisfaciendum. ENtry of a testat ca sa. for residue of a debt
whereof part was levied upon a testat fi. fac. 14 Capias pro fine entered and an
Exigent thereupon ib. Entry of Ca. sa. after a Fi. fac. and Spec. return of
Devastavit against the executrix upon the inquisition. 15. Entry of a writ of
Testat ca. sa. in the county Palatine after a devastavit returned against the
exec. upon a testat si. fac. de bonis Testatoris 17 Entry of a Ca. sa. by the
executors of the Conusor after the death of the Conusee in a statute merchant
18 Entry of a Capias ad sat. upon a statute merchant and upon the sheriffs
return that the defendant is dead, an Extent is prayed against his lands by
the statute and granted in the county Palantine of Lanc. 18. Entry of a Capias
upon a statute merchant and upon Laici. and non inventus returned an Extent
awarded 19 Continuance of an extent where the writ is awarded in one county.
ib. Entry of a Capias ad satisfaciendum after nulla bona returned upon an
Elegit. ib. Entry of Ca. sa. in the proper county and non inventus returned and
a testat ca. sa. awarded into a foreign county. 20. Entry of a Capias ad.
sat. upon a writ of privilege and Cepi corpus returned and after the sheriff
returns that specially that before he took him by virtue of an other writ etc.
the defendant is bayled upon the Execution, and an attaint brought, etc. ib.
Commitment. Commitment specially entered for levying of a fine in the name of
the person who refused to acknowledge 22. Commitment for forging of writs and
counterfeiting of the seal. 23 Commitment for making a feigned writ of
Supersedeas. 24. Commitment to the Fleet upon a Cepi corpus upon a Capias
utlagat with a Remittitur into London to answer the plaint there, etc. ib
Commitment to the Fleet of one in execution upon a judgment there ibe
Commitment of one in execution upon a Scire sac. upon judgment the defendant
says nothing in bar, judgment that execution, etc. ib Commitment of one to
the fleet for rasure of a Record in the common Bench ex confesso, afterward
fined and set at liberty. 25. Commitment by the indictment roll without any
process of execution sued forth upon a Habeas Corpus. Commitment of a
Prothonotaries clarke and a sheriffs clarke for rasing an execution the return
and and test and serving of the writ before it was new sealed, spe. examinants.
ib. Commitment of an attorney for altering of a counter plea of the voucher.
26. Commitment to the fleet for rasure of a fine and a fine imposed ib.
Commitment upon a Habeas corpus from the Judges chamber, the writ bore test 4.
July 18. Iac, the term ended 5. July upon which day the judge delivered the
commitment to be inroled. 30 Commitment of one to the Fleet in vacation time
brought by the sheriff of London by Habeas corpus before the Judge. 32.
Commitment of a prisoner to the Fleet brought to the bar in term by a Habeas
corpus. ib. Commitment for forging a Cirography to a fine. 33 Commitment of an
attorney for prosecuting a Capias in trespass without any original to warrant
it dismissed upon a fine. Entry of orders for the right regulating of Offices
in the court of common Bench. 34. Commitment of an attorney turned over the Bar
for diverse falsities. 35

D
Debt. ENtry of writ ad Levand. deb. de bonis mobili. Cleric. upon a statute
merchant upon return of nulla bona mobilia and that he is benificed, an extent
is awarded. 36. Distringas. Entry of a distringas against the Lord of a Manor
in ancient demesne, to hold his court that the sheriff Recordari fac. Loquelam.
36 Entry of a distringas against a sheriff for returning of pettit issues and a
Testat distringas granted to a foreign county to distraine the Defendant by
greater issues. 37

E
Elegit. ENtry of an Elegit upon the Roll of the entry of the Scire fac. the
same term in which it was returned and a special return of the sheriff. 37
Entry of a writ of Elegit against a clerk the sheriff returns non habet Laic.
Feod. and an Extent awarded to extend bona and terra ecclesiastica but upon
motion a Fi. fac. was thought more proper and awarded. 39 Entry of an Elegit
after an Elegit. 40. Entry of an Elegit for the value in dower. 41.
Execution. Entry of the tender of the body in execution in discharg of the
Manucaptors, 41. Entry of a tender of the body in execution after judgment
against the principal in discharge of his suretyes. 42. The defendant
discharged out of prison for that the plaintiff prayed him not in execution. ib
Execution. Entry of a tender in execution the Pla. prays him in execution of
the court, Cur advisare vult, because a writ of Error is brought and the record
and recognizance are certified away but at length committed in discharge of his
sureties. 34. Extent. Entry of an Extent. upon a statute Merchant by an
executor 34
F
Fieri Facias. Entry of a testat Fi. fac. de bonis propriis after a Devastavit
returned. 45 Entry of a Fi. Fac: where parcel of the money is returned levied
and a Fi: fac: awarded for the residue. ib. Entry of a Fi: Fac. where the
sheriff returned nihil habet and a Fi: Fa: awarded to the ordinary de bonis
ecclesiasticis: 64 Entry of a Fi: Fac. de bonis testatoris the sheriff returned
that part is levied de bonis testatoris and as to the residue a devastavit by
the executor, execution awarded de bonis propriis. ib. Entry of a special Fi.
Fac: de bonis propriis. Entry of a Fire Fac. for damages in replevy Fi: Fac:
returned, but the money not brougth into the court a Scire Fac. is awarded to
the Coroners, etc, because the plaintiff is without remedy against the sheriff,
ib. In this entry precedents must vary.
Foringer. Entry of a Forenger against an Attorney. 49 Entry of a Foringer and
commitment of an Attorney forging a writ de non molestando. 50 Entry of a
Foringer of the Clerk of the Jurat. for not attending his Office. ib. Entry of
a Poringer of a Crier of the court for his not attendance causa pro absentia
non ostens^. 51 Entry of a Foringer and several punishments against an
attorney for forging of a writ of Sup. to reverse an utlawry. ib. Entry of a
Foringer of a Philizer of the Upper Bench for non attendance in his office in
person. 53
Fine. Entry of the quashing of a Fine upon the execution and inspection of the
infant acknowledged upon a Dedi. Potestatem. 54 Breve de Gardiano Admittendo.
Entry of a writ de Gardiano Admittendo in a writ of partition
H
Habeas Corpus. ENtry of a Habeas corpus in debt where the sheriff returned
that he was not taken, etc. and a Distringas Nup. Uic. awarded. 55 Entry of a
Habeas Corpus upon Privilidg with the Recognizance 56 Entry of an Amerciament
for not Retorning a Habeas Corpus. 58 An entry thereupon is broguht to the Bar
by Habeas Corpus and charged with 20 l. debt by an Original, and process of
utlawry is awarded because he would not appear to the writ. 59 The like where
the Prisoner is remitted to prison. ib. Entry of a Habeas Corpus of a Prisoner
committed for causes Ecclesiastical and enlarged without bail. ib. Entry of a
Habeas Corpus cum causa, the sheriff returntd that he was detayned vertute
warrantii, whereupon he is committed 60 Entry of a Corpus cum causa of an
attorney committed by a warrant from the High Commssioner who was discharged.
61

I
Inquiry. Entry of a writ of Inquiry directed to the Justices of Assize to
inquire of better issues. 61 Entry of a writ of inquiry directed to the
Justices of Assize to inquire of what issues the sheriff could answer. 62 Entry
of a writ to inquire de quantis exitibus. 63 Entry of a writ to inquire awarded
de novo where the sheriff returned that he could not execute the old writ. 64.
Entry of the like writ against an Attorney in covenant broken ib. Entry of a
writ to inquire of Damages for Fees for suing forth a writ of Covenant. 65

L
Liberari Facias. ENtry of a writ of Liberari Fac. to the Conusee of lands
extended upon statute merchant. 67
M
Mittimus. ENtry of a Mittimus of a record removed out of another court by a
Certiorare and sent to the Justices of the Bench. 69
N
Ne Exeat Regnum. ENtry of Ne Exeat Regnum and surety found. 70 Nuisance. ENtry
of a writ of Nuisance to demolish a foundation laid ad nocumentum of a society
of the Law 70
O
Original. ENtry of an Original directed to the Justices, sued out by a Lord
in Parliament. 71
P
ENtry of a general Pardon, to an utlawry after judgment for that it appears
by record both debt and damages are satisfied 73 Entry of a special Pardon
after satisfaction of the judgment where the defendant upon a Cepi Corpus
being committed pleads the pardon and satisfaction, and is set at liberty 73
Pardon and Release of demands pleaded in discharge of an Ex post. cap. and a
Scire facias awarded ib. Partition. Entry of a Writ de partitione facienda and
partition made. 73 Plur. Replegi^^e. Entry of a writ of Plur. Replegiare
properly claimed by the defendant a Writ of Proprietate probanda awarded, etc.
75 Entry of a Plur. Replegiare in homine repleg. the sheriff returns he is
enlarged, a Capias in Withernam awarded of the body of the Avowant. 78 Entry of
a Plur. Repleg. 67. Diet this case reported. 79
Pone. Entry of a Pone and the sheriffs returned thereupon adjudged void for
that he named not the Cattle in specie. 80 Privilege. Entry of a writ, of
Supersedias for the servant of the Chief Clerk of the upper Bench, And a
counter part that the Defendant is Farmer to the said Chief Clerk of diverse
lands, etc. And traversed that he was is Clerk Demurrer. 81 Entry of a Writ of
Privilege for one of the Six Clerks of the Chancery. 83 Entry of the like writ
for a Chancery Clerk. ib. Entry of the like writ of the Ptothonotaries Clerk.
84 Entry of the like for one of the Masters of Chancery. ib. Entry of the like
for the servant of the Keeper of the Rolls. ib. Entry of an Attachment of
privilege against an attorney. ib.
Procedendo. Entry of a Procedendo awarded in a plea of Lands to be removed out
of an inferior court by Recordare 85 Entry of a Procedendo Rege inconsulto.
ib. Entry of a procedendo upon a special return made upon a Habeas Corpus,
about the custom of London touching Apprentizes and their Indentures. ib.
Prohibition. Entry of a Prohibition to the court of Stannaries. 86 Entry of a
Prohibition (sine causa procedente) to the Bpp. of W. for excomunicating one
for serving a warrant of peace upon his Chaplin. 87 Entry of the like out of
the court of Request against the Corporation of Myners. ib.

Q
Quare impedit. Entry of a Quare impedit where the plaintiffs have a writ to
the Bpp. upon the Bishops plea of the death of the Patron, 87
R
Ravishment de Guard. ENtry of the Writ brought by the Ki. The Kings attorney
waives issue and the defendant, erat sine die, salvo jure Regali. 88 Retorn.
Recordi. Entry upon the return of the Record sent to be tried before the Judge
at Lanc. after trial in the Bench. 88 Entry of judgment after issue tried in
the Common Pallat Lanc. upon a mittimus of the Record there. 89 Entry of a
Resum. against an heir sued within age, after full age and it is awarded
against him and etc. ib.
Remissio Recordi. Entry where the record was remitted to the Judge at Lanc.
upon a foreign voucher. 90 Entry where the record was sent back from the
Justices at Chester to the Bench to determine a Foreign voucher, day is
given, the tenants make default, and for that the cause was determined. 91
Entry of a Count ad Terminum qui Praet. in County Palatine of Chester with the
Pleadings. 92

S
Secunda Deliberatio. Entry of a writ of Second Deliverance after the goods
were taken in Withernam and the Defendants attorney was compelled to gage
deliverance. 93 Scire Facias. Entry of a Scire Facias upon a recognizance
against sureties in replevin after Averia elongat. returned 95 Entry of a Scire
fac after a judgment reversed in writ of false judgment upon a Record in
Dtinue. 97 Entry of a Scire Fac, directed both to the sheriff and Coroner to
levy a debt upon a Fieri Facias and not paid at the return of the Fi, Fac. 98
Entry of a Scire Fac. upon a general pardon after a capias ut lagat wherein
are special pleadings. 110 Entry of a count in debt upon a general pardon.
100 Entry of a Scire Facias upon a recognizance where one of the defendants is
dead and the other prays imparlance. ib. Entry of a Scire Fac. against the
Tenant by Elegit where part of the debt is levied, the residue brought And a
delivery awarded. 101 Entry of a Scire fac. awarded in Aid 102
Scire Facias. Entry of a Scire fac. by an administrator against an executor
where the letters of administration are showed assets confessed to 40 l. and
traverseth that he has Nulla alia bona, Replication that he has more Assets
and verdict. 102 Entry of a Scire Fac. against an executor of 1, Manucaptor of
3. Manucaptors, upon a Recognizance in debt, judgment against the Principal,
Special pleadings. 104 Entry of a special bar to a Scire fac. against the
executor to have execution de bonis propriis after a Devastavit returned wherein
judgment is for the Defendant after demurrer. 109 After plene administravit
plea^ded assets are found and judgmen-thereupon, the sheriff retornes a Deo
vastavit such Spe. Devastavit, ^n 1 good plea. 11^ Entry of Scire fac. against
an executor upon surmise that the executor had wasted the goods of the Testator
after judgment trial and special verdict therein. ib. Entry of a Bar to an
alias Scire facias upon Recognizance in privilege where one makes default and
the other pleads payment, issue non solvit. ib. Entry of a Scire fac. against
Ter-tenants upon judgment in debt after death of the obligee, the recovery
recited, Elegit awarded de medietate terrarum. 112 Entry of a Scire fac. upon a
Recognizance, the defendant pleads a feoffement made of the lands, etc. before
judgment, etc. and prays Judgment, The plaintiff says that the Lands are
held in Fee simple and Traverseth the feoffment. 113 Entry of a Scire fac. upon
bail to make deliverance after gage deliverance of Cattle in Court against
Manucaptors because the Conusee had not made deliverance, Judgment by nichil
dicit. ib. Entry of the like Scire fac. against Manucaptors, etc. 114 Entry of
a Scire fac, upon a Judgment in a Writ de Droit. de Guard. Entry of a Scire fac.
upon Judgment in detinue for Cattle. ib. Entry of a Scire fac. against an heir
upon Judgment against his father in Debt and an Elegit awarded. 115 Entry of a
Scire fac. against an heir upon Judgment against his father in the time of
another King. ibi. Entry of a Scire fac. against the Ter-tenants of lands
descended to G. in Feesimple from W. his father, and which were of the said G.
12. F. test. of the original. 116 Entry of a Scire fac. at the suite of an
executor against an heir upon a Judgment against the father viens per Descent,
pleaded in bar, replication, Assets per descent at the test of the Scire fac.
111 Entry of a continuance of a Scire fac. 118 Entry of a Scire Fac. by the
surviving Administrator of the goods of the first intestat not administered by
the first Administrator. ib. Entry of a Scire fac. to have execution de bonis
propriis upon a devastavit returned post Annum and diem. ib. Entry of a Scire
fac. brought by the executor against the administrator at the full age of the
executrix upon a Judgment had against the intestat by the administrator during
the Minority of the Infant, ib. Entry of a Scire fac. against ter-tenants. 119
Entry of an alias Scire fac, against the Administrator upon Judgment against
the intestat. 120 Entry of a Scire fac, with a Capias testat. thereupon
awarded: ib. Entry of an Alias Scire fac. upon Judgment had against the
Principal upon original in debt out of the common Bench. ib. Entry of an
alias Scire fac where the first term. 122 Entry of a Scire fac. upon a
recovery in Dower against the ter-tenants for the value of the Damages. ibi.
Entry of a Scire fac. upon Judgment had against 4. executors, whereof 2. only
appeared, and those only amersed. 124 Entry of a Scire fac. by a new
Administrator during the minority etc. of goods not administered by the first
administrator upon a recovery by the first administrator, Judgment by nihil
dic. 125 Entry of a Scire fac. to have the penalty given by the statute of 23.
H. 6. cap. 11. against a sheriff for levying more moneys upon a town for Knight
service then the town was taxed. 126 Entry of a writ of Attachment issued out
of Parliament to hear a bill to the same Parliament. 127 Entry of a plea of
special Bastardy pleaded in Bar to a Scire fac. to have execution upon a fine
demurrer thereto and judgment for the demandant. ib. Entry of a Scire fac.
wherein execution was awarded at the Assize upon the trial before the day in
the Bench. 148 Entry of a Scire fac. wherein aid is granted by the King to
execute a fine. ib. Entry of a Scire fac. brought by the K. upon a judgment in
Assize of Darreigne presentment had by the King by reason of the wardship of an
Ideote. Defendant pleads that the Lessor was respited until 8. Hill. for the
default of the recognitors and judgment therein against the King ib. Entry of a
Scire fac. brought by the Tenant in Recovery to have execution of lands in
value against the voucher. 130 Entry of a Scire fac. wherein judgment is given
against the Pla. in execution of a fine. ib. Entry of a Scire fa: upon an
indictment in debt, where the defendant before execution fradulently convayed
his lands with intent to defeat the plaintiff. ib. Entry of a Scire fac. for
damages in an Assize of fresh force. 131 Entry of a Scire fac. against the
sheriff for taking insufficient pledges in Repleg. Entry of a Scire fac. and
judgment herein superseaded for that the def. was in the Kings custody. ib.
Entry of a Scire fac. against 1. execut. to have execution upon a Sc. fac.
against 2 executors, the sheriff retorneth no goods in the hands of one and a
Devastavit against the other. ib: Entry of a Scire fac. and of a general
acquittance pleaded in Bar thereunto. ib. Entry of a Scire fac. against
Coheires who make default, and execution awarded pro Portion: de hereditate
conting. 140 Entry of Scire fac. against tenants for exempting a fine and
demurrer for the nonage of the heir. ib. Entry of a Scire fac, against a
Termor. ib Entry of a Scire fac. brought by heir of the plaint in partition,
who after judgment and before partition made dyed. ib. Entry of a Scire fac. to
have execution and seisin de novo for that the sheriff in favor of the tenant
had not duly made his executions, pleas and judgments for the plaintiff upon
demurrer. 141 Entry of a Scire fac. in a Quare impedit the defendant pleads in
bar that Pendente Brevi de quare impedit the plaintiff was utlawed, and that he
resigned, etc. 135 Entry of a Scire fac. against principal bail, to prosecute
an Audita Querela. Entry of a Scire fac. where lands are extended by the
plaintiff where the sheriff returns that he extended the same lands upon an
other writ of Elegit and delivered them, etc. and that he cannot deliver them
to the plaintiff until the first debt be levied 149 Entry of a Scire fac.
against a conusee in a statute merchant brought by the Conusor to have back the
possession of Lands extended, for that he is satisfied 152 Entry of the like
Scire facias upon promise that the Conusee is satisfied, Per fluxum temporis
special pleadings, ibid. Entry of a Scire facias after a Devastavit returned,
brought by the Administrators of the Plaintiff after Judgment upon the
Devastavit, to have Execution de bonis proprij. 150 Entry of a Sci. fac against
a sherif for taking of insufficient pledges in Repleg. 151 Entry of a Scire
facias upon a Recognizance acknowledged before a Judge of the Common Bench in
the Country 156 Entry of an Inrollment of a Recognizance with the Term and
number roll expressed, and a Scire facias thereupon ibid. Entry of a Testat.
Scire facias against Ter-Tenants upon the Sheriffs return, who say that there
is another Ter-Tenant in another County, Non praemonuit, and pray that they may
not answer to the Writ of Scire facias usque alius praemoniatur, adjudged a
good plea, and a Replication, etc. 146 Entry of a Scire facias against
Ter-Tenants of Lands, tempore judicii reddit, who came not, and a Writ of
Elegit is awarded, etc. 161 Entry of a Scire facias, Ter-tenants, two are
returned, 1 makes default, Execution awarded against him of Lands whereof he is
Tenant, and the other pleads 162 Entry of diverse Testat. Scire facias awarded
into several Counties, against the Ter-Tenants ibid. Entry of a Scire facias
by the Heir and Executor of the Demandant to have Judgment in an Assise of
Niusance, Quod nocumentum amoveatur, and for Damages after the Record of the
Assise is certified into the Upper Bench, plea and judgment by Nil. dic. ibid.
Entry of a Sci. fac for the tenant in a writ of Dower to have execution of the
lands to the value of the third part recovered in Dower, after Seisin had of
the third part demanded. 165 Entry of a Scire facias sued out by Administrators
upon a judgment had by them as Administrators, etc. without showing the
Letters of Administration ibid. Entry of a Sci. fac. against a Sheriff to
render to the Plaintiff so many cattle, as were replevied by him by pledges,
for that the pledges are insufficient 166 Entry of a Writ of Scire facias in
debt for the Demandant against a stranger, Judgment that the demandant have
the third part, etc. 169 Entry of a Writ of Scire facias upon a judgment in a
Writ De anuo redditu, to have execution De arreragiis incursis after judgment,
ibid. Entry of a Scire facias to take Bail, where one comes to the bar, and
pleads matter in bar to an Outlawry 170 Entry of a Scire facias awarded and
returned after a Capias upon statute Merchant into the Bench, 171 Entry of a
Scire facias against Manucaptors 173 Entry of a Scire fac. in Audita que: resa.
174 Entry of a Scire fac. after a Scire fac against Ter-tenants with the
return of the writ. 175 In all cases wherein bail is required, if the
defendant die before a non est inventus returned upon the Scire fac. the bail
is discharged. ib.
Seisin. Entry of a writ of Hab. fac. fesinam in dower and the return thereof
177 Summons Entry of a writ of Summons in an attaint executed and awarding of
resummons against the defendant 179 Entry of the like writ with the awarding of
a Distringas against the grand jury, the party and petty Jury. ib. Entry of a
Summons in a Quare impedit with the essoine and attachment awarded for default.
ib. Spec entry of a summons in a Quare impedit the Sheriff returns a tarde and
another awarded 181 Entry of an alias summons in a quare impedit in severance
and an attachment awarded against the defendant ib.
Surrender The surrender of a Philizer office. 181 The like entry. ib. The like
entry. ib. The like entry. ib.
Supersedeas Entry of a Supersedeas to a Capias in Withernam quia inconsult.
emanavit and averia elongat returned 182. Entry of a Supersedeas to an Exegent
and pledges de novo. 184 Entry of a Supersedeas in the upper Bench to discharge
sureties of peace in the Common Bench ib. Entry of a Supersedeas after a fieri
fac. ne vendi exponas. 185.

Ventre inspiciendo Entry of a writ de ventre inspiciendo. 186 Utlary. Entry of
non omittas upon a Capias Utlegat. 187 Entry of a reversall of an utlary
against an intestate prosecuted by an administrator, for defect in the return
of the Writ of Exigent, 188 Entry of a reversall of an Vtlawry for defect in
the Proclamations, 189 Entry of a traverse of a Commorance in another County,
and reversall of the Vtlary Pur non commorance, etc. 191 Entry of a confession
by the Garnisee, ibid. Entry of a confession by the Attorney General, upon a
Testimony, and reversall of the Vtlawry, ibid. Entry of a special Writ of
Capias utlagat. and amerciament of the sheriff for bad attendance upon the
Court ibid. Entry of a special Amerciament against the Coroners, for not
certifying of an Vtlawry after a Certiorare to them made ibid. Entry of a
reversall of an Vtlawry for insufficient return of the certiorare 193 Entry of
a reversall for variance between the record and the writ of Exigent 194 Entry
of a reversall for that the cap. whereupon the exigent issued was after a year
and a day without a Sci. fac. to revive the judgment, ib. Vtlawry reversed for
omission of the word quint. in the 50. exactus ib. Reversall for that the day
of the fifth Exact was before the test of the Exigent ibid. The like for that
the 1 exact was held after the return of the Exigent. ibid. The like for
omission of the word Scotiae out of the style of the writ ibid. The like for
default of the Coroners names, ib. Vtlawry and waiviar reversed for the same
defect 197 Vtlawry reversed for not returning the first Hustings to be held at
the common pleas and the other at the pleas of Land ibid Entry of a reversall
for not returning the day on which the second County Court was held, ib.
Reversall for holding two County Courts within one month 198 Reversall for
returning Utlagat for Waviat ibid. Reversall for omission of the word ante, ib.
Reversall for omission of the word anno ib. Reversall for omission of the word
terre ibid. Reversall for variance between the Original Writ and the Exigent,
199 Reversall for that the Defendant was called the 1. and 2 time before the
Test of the Exigent, ib. Entry of a reversall, where the fifth County was held
before the test of the writ of Allocat. ibid. Reversall for omission of the
word Mem. ibid. Reversall for omission of the word Tent. and Secunda being
written without a dash 200 Reversall for that the Capias was not returned. 200
Reversall for the word infram. for infra nominat. 201 Reversall for that the
Supersedeas upon the Exigent was entered upon the Record before the defendant
was 50 exact ibid. Reversall for the word Civit for Civitat. 202 Reversall of
an Vtlary against the Intestate by the Administrator by a special entry, in
the same term wherein the Vtlawry was reversed ibid Another form of reversall
of an Vtlawry against the Intestate by the Administrator 204 Reversall for that
there is no such name of Baptism ibid. Reversall for that in the Margent of
the Roll, the County of Kent, and in the body of the Record the County of
Sussex is written, 204 Reversall for vicious and defective Return in Law 205
Reversall for omitting of the second exact between 1. and 3. ibid. Reversall
for omitting of the return of the Plur. Cap. in the close of the Writ of
Exigent ibid. Entry of a discharge of an imprisonment, because the Exigent is
not entered upon Record ibid.
View. ENtry of a Writ of view in Formidon in Discender, 207 Entry of a writ of
view in a Writ De consuetudinibus and Serviciis, ibid. Entry of an alias writ
where the sheriff returned upon the first Writ, that the Demandants would not
show him the Land ibid.
Venire facias. Entry of a Venire facias against Tenant in Elegit, to account,
etc. wherein are special pleadings, and Judgment by Nil. dicit 208 Entry of a
Writ of Venire facias directed Custod. Palatii Westminster. to summon a Jury of
Attorneyes to enquire of misdemeanors done in the Court of Common Bench 210

Withernam. ENtry of pledges de novo, after Withernam, and awarding of a writ
of second deliverance, and awarding of a writ Ad deliberand. averia 211 Entry
of a Testat. capias in Withernam where gage-deliverance is prayed of cattle
taken in Withernam ibid. The like Entry after Capias in Withernam entered, and
pledges found if return thereof should be adjudged by the Court 114

FINIS.

