ANOTHER WORD TO THE WISE, Showing that the Delay of justice, is great
injustice. By displaying heavier grievances in petitions from several Counties
to the House of Commons, and letters to Parliament Men, from Mr. John Musgrave
Gentleman, one of the Commissioners from Cumberland and Westmerland, for
presenting their grievances to the Parliament.

Who instead either of redressing those two Counties grievances, or prosecuting
the charge given in by him against Mr. Richard Barwis, a Parliament man, for
betraying his trust, in placing Traitors and Malignant officers in chief places
of command, to the apparent ruin thereof and landing of the Irish Rebels there,
did illegally commit the said Mr John Musgrave to the Fleet, where he has lain
these 4. months, without any justice, or trial of his business.

For refusing to answer Interrogatories, otherwise then according to law by
writing, or to stoop unto the arbitrary and illegal proceedings of a
Committee, who admits the parties accused, to sit with their hatts on, and
commits the accusers to prison, though they themselves do offer to suffer,
if they prove not their charge by sufficient witnesses.

Though band join in band, the wicked shall not be unpunished. The righteous
is more excellent then his neighbor, but the way of the wicked will deceive
them. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even both
those are abomination to the Lord. Pro. 11. 21. and 12. 26. and 17. 15. Printed
in the Year, 1646.

To our worthy and much respected friend, Mr. John Musgrave.
Sir,
AS time (that precious jewel) brings forth the truth of all things, so have
we gained more knowledge of your just cause, and unjust sufferings, since we
published your last letters and Petitions, under the title of A word to the
Wise, for we have not only received more letters and Petitions, which we have
here also divulged, but likewise the coppie of an order from the House of
Commons, against that little book, of which order the words are these.

Die Martis 17. January, 1645.
The house took notice of a Pamphlet, entitled A word to the Wise, displaying
great augmented grievances, and heavy pressures of dangerous consequence: And
it is ordered, that it be referred to the Committee of Examinations, who are
required to make a strict inquitie after the Author, Printer, and divulger of
the said Pamphlet, and to give a speedy account thereof to the House.

Here is a word to the Wise indeed! a great noise of hue and cry for a man that
like worthy Nehemiah never ran away. It is a wonder that those few men should
think all other men blind but themselves. What Butcher is so idle and
undiscreet, as to send his bloodhounds abroad, to drive home an Ox, which he
knows is already in his own back shop. Only it may be, that some time he will
make great search for his knife, whilst is sticks in his teeth. And is it not
as great a wonder, that they do offer thus to search abroad for the Printer
and divulger of that book, and not seek their own s^et prison at home for
the Author Mr. John Musgrave, and owner of the chief parts thereof, whose name
is so eminent and often therein expressed? It is most certain, that such
dealing cannot long prosper, more then Zimri did, who killed his master. But be
of good comfort, the same God who sent the Ravens to seed Eliah, Ebedmelech the
black-more to comfort Jeremiah, and King Pharoahs baker to deliver Ioseph^ will
have the like care of you, and all that stand in the gap either for religion or
the just freedom of the nation: Great cause have we to be jealous of many whem
we have trusted with all that is nearest and dearest unto us in this world, and
in whose defense so many thousands of lives, and such abundance of treasures
have been spent, and such multitudes of Widows and Orphans left in distress;
and still though persecuters and oppressors be changed, yet both persecution
and oppression remains. For although the Counsel table, Star Chamber and High
Commission be put down, ye all the free born of this kingdom do feel the
power thereof transformed in another habit, and still remaining in the
Committees, as is too apparent by their manifold illegal proceedings to
enslave us. But our comfort is, that though the world should turn upside down,
and the mountains fall into the sea, yet it shall be well with those that
fear God. Fare well.

The Copy of the Commitment, 25. October. 1645.
Upon Mr. Lisles report from the Committee, to which the Informations given in
by Mr. John Musgrave, and Mr. Osmotherly, against Mr. Barvis a Member of this
House, was referred, Mr. Musgrave refused to answer such Interrogatories as
were propounded unto him by the Committee, upon the Direction and Order of this
House.

Resolved, etc.

That Mr. John Musgrave be forthwith committed prisoner to the Fleet, for his
contemptuous refusing to answer to such Interrogatories as were propounded unto
him by the Committee upon the directions of this House, and that a Warrant do
issue under M. Speakers hand, for the Commitment of him prisoner to the Fleet
accordingly.

Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

By virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, dated 25. October. 1645. These
are to will and require you forthwith upon the receipt hereof, you apprehend
the body of Mr. John Musgrave, and him safely deliver unto the Warden of the
Fleet, there to be kept prisoner, for his contempt to the said House, until
the said House take further order therein. And the said Warden of the Fleet is
hereby required to receive into his custody; the said John Musgrave to be kept
prisoner accordinlgy: for which, this shall be your warrant, dated 27. October.
1645.

William Lenthall, Speaker.

To the Serjant at Arms, attending the House of Commons, or his Deputy. And to
the Warden of the Fleet, or his deputy.
I do appoint George Bragg, Gentleman, to be my lawful Deputy to execute this
Warrant, dated ^7, October. 1645.

Edward Berkhead, Serjant at Arms,

The 27. day of the first month, 1646. there was a petition out of Yorkshire,
presented to the Parliament whereof the true copy here follows. To the Right
Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, assembled in the Commons
House in Parliament. The humble Petition of many thousands of the Wel^affected
in Yorkshire.
Shows.
THat they ever looked on the Parliament, as the only refuge under God in this
Kingdom, for the relief of the distressed Subject, from Popery, tyranny and
injustice, and therefore have in and for the defense of Religion, the
privileges of the Parliament, the rights and liberty of the Subject; ventured
their lives, spent their estates, and have been plundered of their goods, even
to the utter undoing of many of their wives, children, etc.

That of late many of the Kings party some who have been in Arms, in open
rebellion against the Parliament, others who have stood as neuters, waiting to
side with the stronger party, and no way assisting the Parliament (but by
constraint, have by subtle speeches, and clandestine ways, gradually wound
themselves in to be Committees for the Parliament, and some to be Commanders;
Who so palliate and vail their actions, with pretenses of State, that the
well-affected and friends of the Parliament, cannot have justice; or are so
delayed in their just suits, that they are quite wearied out and discouraged.

The Petitioners therefore humbly pray, this honorable House to take the
premises into serious and due consideration, and for prevention of the great
mischief, that may happen (if not prevented) by disheartning the good, and
animating the ill affected; To order that all such persons, as have been in
Arms against the Parliament, Malignants, and Neuters, may be removed from
being Committees, or Commanders, and that their place may be supplied with
honest men, who have ventured their Lives, spent their Estates in, and for the
Parliaments service.

And they shall ever pray, etc.
The Copy of a letter, sent by Mr. John Musgrave, Gent. to Alexander Rigby,
Esquire, a member of the House of Commons.
Worthy Sir.
LIttle did I expect to have been so troublesome to my friends, upon such an
occasion as this, sitting a free Parliament: we were in hope when the High
Commission, Council Board, and Star Chamber were taken away according to the
Law, that we had been free men and no more subject to any Arbitrary Power; But
according to the Law, we should have been protected in our just Liberties, and
have had justice done us without begging or entreaties; I have been kept
Prisoner here some 13. weeks, yet neither by solicitation of friends, or
petitions, can I get audience, I desire but the benefit of the Law, which I
claim as my Right, either to be justified or condemned, by the same; favor I
desire not, no other then the innocence of my cause deserves, Justice only I
expect; as you have ever professed your self to be the Common wealths servant,
so I desire you in the behalf of my Country, to move the House, that I may
have my Liberty, being their Agent, and their Cause put in a way of Trial.
This is all I desire from you, which I hope you will not deny me, and I shall
be

From the Fleet Prison 29th of the first month 1646. Yours to do you service.
John Musgrave.

The coppie of a letter sent by Mr. John Musgrave, to Sir Arthur Hasilrigge,
Knight, a Member of the House of Commons.
Sir,
I Am given to understand, that my petitions and letters of late published by
some of my wel-wishers under the title of A word to the Wise, were delivered
unto you by Mr. Peter's; there is nothing in any of these petitions and letters
which are mine, but I am ready to own and avow; and if I may have but common
justice and an equal hearing, I doubt not but to make good the same, to be
agreeable to law and truth I am informed that you alone have taken upon you to
be my judge, and have already condemned me, and cast many vile aspersions upon
me giving forth how I comply with the Scotts, to drive on some wicked design
of theirs, tending to the prejudice of the State, and undoing of my Country,
which if it were true, then are you blameworthy to pass by the same, and not
to bring me forth to condign punishment: for already you have given out
sentence and adjudged me guilty though younever heard me speak, and (I suppose)
never knew me by face: but howsoever, though I were guilty of that wherein you
condemneme, yet it does not beseem you, nor any in the place of judicature (as
you are) to condemn any man unheard, and who is absent, nor to have respect of
persons in judgment; And none but unrighteous judges, will do so, for it is
good and agreeable to law what Seneca says. Qui ^^^d statuerit altera part
inauditu aequ^m licet statuerit hand aequus est, He that determines and
orders any thing, the one party being unheard, although he determine and
order that which is right, yet is he unjust. And this your doing is the more
grievous, in that you insult over a poor prisoner, whom you now have in bonds,
and so not in place to answer for himself.

I complain of Traitors whom you suffer to walk at liberty, I have given in
charges against them unto you, yet cannot get them brought to answer, whiles I
am cast into prison before any charge be brought against me, put to answer
interrogatories, and no accusers coming against me. Traitors whom I accuse are
continued in their authorities, yet almost four months have I lain in prison,
and know not for what, but hitherto, neither by friends nor petitions could I
ever obtain that favor and right (which of duty you owe me, and all the free
borne of this Kingdom) to have audience and liberty as a free man to answer
for my self: for as you can exact no obedience of us further then by the law,
so may we boldly claim justice according to the law, which to deny us, is
injustice in you by the law.

I am blamed because I decline the Committee, how should I expect any good from
them, when they dare not or will not suffer our cause to be publicly heard
and debated, but do shut their doors against both our friends and also
against strangers, contrary to law, yet suffer they our adversaries whom we
accuse, to sit with their hats on, as judges in the cause, both permitting them
and they taking upon them to examine us. O England (says one) well in the like
case, what is become of thy liberties? For if Sir Edward Cook spoke truth or
knew the law, that judge who orders and rules a cause in his chamber, though
his order or rule be just, yet offends he the law* and the reason he
rendereth is, for that all causes ought to be heard, ordered and determined
openly in the Kings Courts, whether all persons may resort, and not in chambers
or other private places. See Cook 2. part instit. fol. 103.

And how can I assent unto the Committ^es demands, to bring witnesses to be
examined before such a Committee as cannot, or is not authorized to administer
an oath, and so consequently cannot determine or give any judgment for or
against the party accused, for that all matters of fact and causes criminal
are to be tried and determined by the verdict of 12. men, upon the solemn
oaths and depositions of witnesses. See Cook 3. part instit. fol. 163. And how
can I without incurring the heinous sin of perjury, submit unto the arbitrary
proceedings and determinations of any Committee, being bound by solemn oath
and protestation, to maintain the laws and just liberties of the people, and
that the proceedings, orders, and results of the Committees be arbitrary, and
not regulated by the law. I need no further proof, then that exorbitant and
unlimitted power they take upon them, and daily exercise in seizing on free
men's goods, and imprisoning their bodies contrary to law, For which if they
should as they ought pay 500. l, a piece and treble damages to every party
grieved according to the statute of 17. Car. made for the abolishing of the
Starchamber, I believe they would not adventure so boldly to transgress: sed
impunitas continuum affectum tribuit delinquendi, but neglect of punishment,
gives boldness to transgress. Nay, I am verily persuaded, the whole estates
of many of them, would not give half satisfaction for the wrongs done by them.
That this law were put in execution against such lawless men is my earnest
desire, and daily expect the same.

But it seems you are much displeased that we should impeach a member of your
house, why? have you any privilege to transgress? To be a Parliament man, is
it a good plea in Bar? I ever thought this war had been undertaken for the
preservation and defense of our laws and just liberties, and not for
sheltering nor protecting any delinquents or offenders? Can it stand with your
honors, your oaths, your trusts, your protestations and declarations to refuse
the delivering up your delinquent members to the law, to slight our just
complaints, and to cast us into prison for complaining? Can it stand with
justice and law, for the trustees of the law, to plead privilege and exemption
from the law? Were not this to justify transgression by a law? Does not the
observation of the law generally without any limitation or exemption concern
all equaly and alike? Is not the practice and execution, the very life and
soul of the law? And what says learned Cook? neither can a judge punish
extortion, who is corrupted himself, neither any Magistrate punish any sin as
he ought, that is known to be an offender therein himself.

Therefore (says he in the same place) it is an incident inseparable to good
government, that the Magistrates to whom the execution of the laws is
committed, to be principal observers of the same themselves, Cook lib. 4.
pref. Have not you complained often times expressing great grief, for that the
King would not deliver up his evil counselors and bad servants to be tried by
the law? and can we expect less from you, then you exact of others, even of
the King himself? For my part, I cannot deem them less then guilty to
themselves, who under pretense or shadow of any privilege, go about to avoid
the trial of the law, and so think to escape with Ioab by flying to the
horns of the Altar.

If Mr Lisle (Chair man of the Committee, where unto our cause was referred,
and under whose bare report without any further ground I suffer) had been as
truly zealous for the law, as he would be accounted knowing in the law, and
had been as faithful in discharging his trust, by doing good offices for the
public, as he has been ready to procure by his puolique place in the house,
contrary to the self denying ordinance, private and profitable offices to
himself, he would not have laid our papers and informations aside, to the
great damage and danger of our Country, nor so fallen upon us as guilty
persons by propounding interrogatories to ensnare us, even before he had any
direction from the House so to do he would have not misreported to the house,
that I contemptuously refused to answer, whereas only according to law, I re^^d
time to answer. He would not have (so contrary to law) denied to have given me
and my fellow Commissioner the interrogatories, nor hindered us to write them
from his mouth. Neither would he have refused to give us a reasonable time, to
have advised according to the law, for answer; so (that either he must to his
shame being a professor of the laws, plead ignorance of the law, (which is his
best plea) or else these his practices do discover him to be faithless,
corrupt and unjust, and one of those to whom it is said, woe to you lawyers.

For it appears by Sir Edward Cook 2. part instit. fol. 51. that I ought by
law to have had time allowed me wherein to advise for answer, his words be
these. If anyone be suspected for any crime, be it treason, felony, etc. and
the party be to be examined upon interrogatories, he may take a reasonable
time to answer the same with deliberation, and the examinate (if he will) may
put his answer in writing, and keep a coppie thereof, and so it was resolved in
Parliament in the case of Justice Richel. See the record at large. 1. Hen. 4.
memb. 2. number. 2. O ye Senators, learn wisdom, and take heed how ye either
endanger your selves or us the free borne people of England whom ye represent*
And though we trust you with our great affairs, yet do not you trust too much
those Lawyers, by whom our liberties have been so often betrayed, that except
some few, like noble St. John's; they are all so mercinarie, that even those who
sit in Parliament are nor ashamed to take fees, and moneys, for pleading
causes depending in that high and honorable court, as they do also in all
other courts of justice in Westminster hall, and how short they come in
discharge of the trust committed unto them, let the preceding practice of Mr.
Lile toward me (now a prisoner and agent for the well affected of Comberland
and Westmoreland to the Parliament) bear witness.

As touching our charge against Mr Barwis and the rest, it is evident that they
are to be tried at the Common law, and thus I prove it, the charge is for
treasons committed by them against the state. And in Magna Charta cap. 29. it
is declared, that no free man shall be taken or imdrisoned, or disseised of his
freehold, or liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed, neither will we
pass upon him, neither will we sit in judgment upon him, but by the lawful
judgment of his Peers, or by the law of the land, and to no man will we sell,
deny, or delay justice or right. And hereby that crooked coard (as says Cook
in 2. part instit. fol. 56) of that which is called discretion appears to be
unlawful, unles you take it as it ought to be taken discretio est discernere,
per legem, quid sit just um, discretion is to discern by the law what is just.
And (there he says) it is called right, because it is the best birthright
that the subject has, for thereby his goods, lands, wife, children, his body,
life, honor and estimation are protected from injury and wrong, adding the
words of Citero, Mayor hereditas venit, unicuique nostrum aiure et legibus,
quam a parentibus, A far greater and better inheritance discends unto each one
of us from justice and the laws, then from our parents. And in his proeme to
his 3. part instit. He urges that ancient maxim of the law, Misera servitus
est, ubi i^^ est vagum vel incognitum, It is a miserable bondage, where the law
is uncertain and unknown.

And in the 24. page of the same book: he tells us how treasons are to be
tried saying, there is another excellent branch of a statute made 1. et. 2.
Philip. et. Mar. cap, 10. in these words, Be it further inacted by authority
aforesaid, that all trials to be had, awarded, or made for any treason, shall
be had and used only according to the due order and course of the common law,
which Statute is yet still in as great force as first when it was made, the
same never being repealed, for according thereunto ye tried the Earl of
Strafford since this present Parliament began, who had as good right to have
challenged his priveledge and exemption from the common law (if any such
appeal had been) as ever Mr. Barwis had or any other who so ever, and which
doubtless he would have done, and you have granted. At whose trial I was,
and you made use of me as a witness against him, where I was examined viva
voce upon oath, the Earse himself having first answered his charge according
to law: Where by you may perceive it is plain and evident, that this our cause
and charge is not proper nor pertinent to be tried by any Committee, who are
not authorized to administer an oath, where by to put an end to any
controversy, but altogether such courts of justice as are enabled to begin and
proceed and end in a judicial way, per legem et consuetudmem Angltae, by the
law and custom of this realm. For no priveledge of Parliament can hold or be
pleaded in cases of treason, felony, and the peace, Cook 4. part instit. fol.
15, Herein there only remains then to be done on your parts, to give up your
delinquent members to the law, and we on our parts according to the same law,
to make good our charge by a due and legal prosecution.

And whereas you say, that I have combined with the Scotts, and drive on their
wicked desigoe, give me leave to tell you that I being driven into exile
through the cruelty of those unnatural vipers and traitors of my own
country, who joined with the popish conspirators in this great rebellion, to
ruin our state and country, they thirsting after my blood; and thinking to
devour me, proffered large sums of money, to such as could apprehend me, I was
forced to fly for my life, not being able of my self, to resist their fury.
After these your Committee men with us, had shamefully desarted me and this
just cause of the kingdom, and adhered to the enemy, I having then no other
way open nor apparent means to escape with much difficulty and more danger,
got (by Gods good providence) into Scotland, where I endured no small trials
and troubles through the malignancie of some of their Ministers and such as
they sturred up against me, taking occasion upon my non-conformitie and
refusal to come to their assemblies and high places, unto which I could not
submit nor join my self.

But after much and long struggling and contention with these Ministers, in the
mean time laboring to walk inoffensively toward them and all others in all
other things, by the private means, and secret intelligence of some of my
faithful friends in England, then in bonds for the Parliaments cause, I
discovered several designs of the enemy, and our gentry against that state,
for which I found such favor from the Magistrates there, that the governor of
Drumfreis did take me under protection, and defended me from the persecution
and violence of my adversaries there, wherein he showed himself to be truly
noble, and for which I cannot but acknowledge my self to be much bound unto
him; yea and the more in that neither I nor any of my judgment, have received
the like duty of love at home, notwithstanding the discoveries and all the
faithful services we have done, neither sparing our blood, nor regarding our
estates for the good of the public.

After the reducement of Cumberland by the Scottish horse, upon my return
thither from Scotland (being in exile a year and a half there) some of Mr.
Barwis favorers and bosom friends (who knew me in Scotland and of the good
service I had done there) threatened to root out me and all of my judgment in
our country. Neither did Mr. Barwis himself regard any honest man there,
though here (as I am informed) he pretends to be an Independent, but held up
and countenanced the book of Common prayer, (that English mass,)
notwithstanding all his solemn oaths, covenants, and protestations against it:
and likewise did put in the greatest places of trust and command with us,
traitors and malignants, and men disaffected to the public good of this
kingdom. All his own kindred being such, whom he thus endeavored to promote
and make great, whereof we complaining to him, were altogether slighted, and
those our enemies his friends, kindred and allies borne out and continued by
him in their authorities, neither would he give us any kind of assistance for
releiving some honest and godly men, who had been kept long, and were then
still prisoners in Carlisle by the enemy for the Parliaments cause, and who
afterward by the help of the Scotts were relieved out of prison, whiles I was
at London soliciting this our countries cause, some of them being of the
separation.

Sir, I was the last Winter here in Town above 3. months, expecting that Mr.
Blaxton one of the Burgesses for New Castle, according to his undertaking,
would have preferred my petitions and charges against Mr. Barwis and other
enemies of our Country; which he did not; And upon my return to the Country,
Mr. Blaxton promised, that in my absence with the first opportunity, he would
present to the honorable house of Commons those my petitions and country
grievances, wishing me to encourage my Country men, to press on our just
complaints, and he would be assisting unto us, and likewise I solicited some
of the Committee of both Kingdoms at Goldsmiths Hall, namely Mr. Moyor and Mr.
Allen, (now a Parliament man) who also promising much, but after 5. weeks
attendance upon them, by their own direction, they performed nothing, Where
(by the way) I desire you to take notice, that in all this time whiles I thus
attended with great weariness, much discouragement and no small expenses, I
did not so much as interchange one word with any of the Scots Comissioners,
neither was I known to any of them by face.

But upon our return again from our Country, to present our grievances, with
several Letters to Mr. Blaxton to that purpose, we found him changed, and
become our adversary, which did not a little trouble us, in respect of the
interest which we conceived we had in him. But afterward, by means of one Mrs.
Glancrosse, (a gentlewoman well known to many of our friends of the Separation)
after we had been in Town sundry weeks, were made known to the L. of Wariston,
one of the Scottish Commissioners, who upon perusal of our several charges
against those our adversaries, did promise, that he would use his endeavor to
get the same presented to the House, which not many days after he did
accordingly, And thus as my ends and intentions herein were real and honest,
so I hope the means which I used to attain thereunto, were no wise unlawful
nor indirect: But as I cannot flatter, neither give vain titles to any, so I
hold it ignoble and base to be ungrateful, either by neglecting such persons
or not acknowledging such favors, and the rather that they proceeded from
strangers, when as my own Country men, who both of duty and by oath were bound
unto us, so unworthily, so long delayed, and at last refused, so that they both
neglected us, and slighted our cause and Country:

Let others say and do what they please, as I am not ashamed to own and
acknowledge favors received from my noble friends, so for my part, (as Lieut.
Col. Lilburne speaking of the justice done to him by the House of Peers, says
in his book entitled, Innocence and truth justified, Page 75.) I am resolved
to speak well of those that have done me justice, and not to doubt they will
deny it me, till such time as by experience I find they do it. Sir if I had
found the like timely justice from you, I would neither have had so much cause
thus to complain, nor to have been so much beholden to strangers: whom the
Parliament have still accounted friends: And if you for your own part, had
been as tender of your friends, to whom you profess kindness, and to your
Country to whom you owe duty; as I have always been, and still am ready to
approve my self at all times in all faithfulness to my Country, and
forwardness to promote their just cause wherewith I am entrusted, and which
has purchased no small envy of the great enemies of our Country, I do verily
believe that some of your suffering friends in the like condition with me who
have relied so much upon, you, had not been so frustrated in their expectation,
and driven to so great straites as to seek that comfort which you professed,
and might with ease have afforded.

And you would have been more ready to have vouchsafed your assistance to have
brought Traitors and enemies to the common wealth to condign punishment,
according to your several oaths, protestations, and subscriptions, and would
have been ashamed that traitors should have walked at large in London streets,
whilst your cordial friends their prosecutors are cast and kept by you in
prison, for no other cause, wherewith they can be justly charged, but for that
they stand for the laws and just liberties of this kingdom, neither would you
have been so censorious to condemn that man whom the well-affected of his
country have thus entrusted, and on whom they do still rely, and against
whom you know nothing, but bare and groundless reports, and under hand
calumniations, which no judicious, generous, nor truly honest man will believe:
yet if you be not resolved against knowledge to act, or if there be any hope to
recover and bring you to a right understanding of our countries cause, my
earnest desire is to undeceive you, if possioly I can, and have the more
enlarged my self, the better to inform you of the true state thereof.

And I do assure you if I may have justice done me by mine own country men,
I will never seek unto strangers: for it was no small grief unto me, that
from none of mine own nation, I could obtain so much favor, neither by
entreaties, nor recommendations, as to present the just complaints of two
counties, which so much concerned the weal and safety of two kingdoms, but was
driven to that extremity, even to have returned home to our own Country,
(which is nigh 300. miles distant) without any hope of so much as getting a
petition presented to the House of Commons, if by means (under God) of the
Lord of Warriston (to whom before I was never known by face) those our
grievances by petition and articles had not been put up to the House.

By all which passages you may perceive how wickedly I am dealt with, and
traduced by the friends and favorites of our and our Countries enemies, so that
I may truly say, that the slanders of my adversaries, is more quick then any
martial law, for by them I have been arraigned, condemned, and executed all in
one instant, if in a man's good name does consist his life and honor, your
self being judge. However give me leave to tell you, if I may obtain that
favor from you, as to mediate for me into the house of Commons, and in my
behalf, to present unto them this petition here enclosed, to the intent my
countries just cause may be put into a way of trial: And whatsoever my
adversaries say, I will engage my self in the behalf of my country to
prosecute the same to a full period, and make good our charge against them, or
otherwise (as I have formerly offered by my letter to Mr Speaker) to undergo
such penalty and punishment as by the rigor of the law may be inflicted upon
me.

And in the mean time, J would have my adversaries to understand, that I am
nothing east down, though laid and kept by their means in prison, but still
relying upon God and the strength and truth of my cause, and the justice of the
Parliament; and resolved, though freedom were made capital, and truth
accounted never so offensive, not to relinquish nor desert the just cause of my
country, but in all loyal obedience to authority, my endeavors shall be to
persorme that duty which I owe to my country, and discharge that trust they
have committed unto me. Yea, and to my utmost power (by all lawful ways and
means) according to my oath and protestation, to set my self against the
sactions and attemps of the adversary, in the defense of the laws and our
just liberties, wherein I shall not spare to spend my self, and put to hazard
whatsoever is nearest and dearest unto me, and so I wish you may account it to
be your honor, whom we have honored to choose as our trusties, to sit at the
helm of this our tossed ship, in such an ocean of tempestuous waves, even to
execute righteous judgment, as ye wish to come to a fa^re haven, and as ye
labor to destroy your cruel enemies, so to protect your trusty friends, who
have in all assaults and extremiteis never relinquished you, nor the common
cause of this distressed kingdom: thus hoping ye will all unanimously use
your best endeavors to deliver us, your selves and the posterity from all the
bondage and oppression which is now exercised over this bleeding nation, and
restore us to our ancient liberties at least, which our ancestors by their
blood so dearly purchased, that henceforth we may enjoy peace and truth, with
the administration of justice, which is the earnest suit and servent desire of

Your faithful friend in all due respects John M^^^^
Sir, I forgot one thing, which I desire to be cleared, which is, the Scottish
wicked design (as you are pleased to term it) I pray you, if you suspect any
such thing, and yet know it not fully, why do not you either ask themselves?
for they are old enough* or else deal with them; for ye call them brethren,
yea, and not only have solemnly sworn and covenanted with them your selves,
but urge all of this Nation under your power so to do, and therefore lay the
blame on those who ought to bear it, but never on me, nor any of my judgment:
because both ye, and the Scots know well enough, that we are not minded to
submit to their Presbyterian government, what ever it cost us so if that be the
wicked design you mean (for neither do I know, nor I suppose themselves
intends any other) you are very much mistaken in me, for I, and all of my mind,
are rather adjudged to be sufferers, then any wise accounted to be actors
therein, as you very well know by all our writings and practices, in which you
have already condemned us, though you would never give us a fair hearing, nor
convince us according to the word of God, as may appear in that little book
called, The lawfulnes of the Scots coming into England, page 6. reas. 6. Where
it is said, at the accomplishing of this blessed Reformation there intended (as
both their and your ministers, the true drivers on of such wicked designs if
any be, are pleased to call it) even that there shall not be a papist,
separatist, nor sectary any more mentioned, if this be not the meaning of that
place (being paraleld both with your and their practices since, then I desire,
that there might be a toleration in the one according to the word of truth, and
a resolution in the other, according to equity and reason: however, go on, and
do what you please, I, and others of my judgment will rest upon God, who will
make all things work together for the best unto those that fear him.


Farewell. John Musgrave.

To the right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons
House in Parliament assembed:
The humble Petition of John Musgrave, Gentleman, prisoner in the Fleet.
Shows,
THat I, with one John Osmotherly, were entrusted by the Parliaments friends,
the well affected party in Cumberland, and Westmerland, to present their
grievances to this honorable House, by reason of the plots and cruel
oppressions of some who have formerly betrayed their trust, stirred up the King
to this unnatural wat, borne arms with the King to destroy this honorable
Parliament, and such as stood for them, put in execution the Commission of
Array, and other illegal taxes, and forced the freeborn people of this
kingdom to an arbitrary government; all which persons have been declared by
this present Parliament, to betraytors by the fundamental laws of this
Kingdom: the Parliaments own words in the book of Declarations (fol. 260.) are
these. Resolved upon the question, That whosoever shall serve or assist him
(meaning the King) in the wars against his people, are traitors by the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have been so adjudged by two Acts of
Parliament, and ought to suffer as traitors. 11. Rich. 2. and 1. Hen. 4. But so
it is, that these persons (upon the coming in of the Scottish Army, the
Country being reduced to the obedience of the Parliament) are now set up in
the chief places of trust and command, by the Commissioners of that high and
honorable Court sent into the country, by which means they are enabled to
cover and protect all such as have formerly joined with them in these bloody
wars, and to oppress the Parliaments friends, the well affected party as much
now, or more, then when they were open prosessed enemies, bearing arms for the
King.

And I, with others, having presented our Countries grievances to Mr. Richard
Barwls a Member of this honorable House, and Burges for the City of Garlile,
and to the rest of the Commissioners in the Country, who sat up these men in
military affairs, and Committees for Sequestrations, and other taxes; but they
affording no relief to us and to the well affected of both these Counties,
desired and procured me and my fellow commissioner, to present their grievances
to this honorable Parliament, hoping for relief, according to their
protestations, declarations, subscriptions, oaths, and covenants, to ease the
opressed, and punish the oppressors, where I have attended since April last,
besides three months the last winter, using all lawful means that I and the
other Commissioner could, both to members of this honorable House, and certain
of the Committee of both Kingdoms, and diverse common Council men of London to
get this our Countries cause put into a legal way of trial, but still being
frustrated of presenting the same to this honorable House in the month of
June last, by a providence, we came to be acquainted with the Scottish
Commissioners, who (perceiving that the settling of those two Counties, would be
for the good of both Kingdoms) undertook to assist us, and to deliver our
grievances to this honorable House, who procured the same with their own
papers, to be referred to a Committee, whereof Mr. Lisle is chairman, who laid
aside all our papers, and would have examined us upon interrogatories: but we
declared that we were Commissioners for the Country, and had given in a charge
against Mr Richard Barwis and others, by Counsel, and therefore desired that
the same might be put into a way of trial: And if Mr. Rich. Barwis and others
of whom we complained, should deny any thing which we have given in charge
against them, that we should make it good by sufficient withesses, or else
suffer according to law.

Then the Commit desired power from this Honorable House to examine us upon
interrogatories, and if we should refuse, to commit us to prison, and so
obtaining power (which they had not before) preffed us to answer
interrogatories, and when we desired a copy thereof, or to write the same from
their own mouth, and we would answer according to law, by the advice of
Council, which they denied us, but still they requiring us to answer ex
tempore, and we conceiving that we were not bound so to do by law, could not
thereunto consent. Then report being made to this honorable House, that we
refused to answer, which we did not, but in case aforesaid, this honorable
House ordered me to be committed to the prison of the fleet, where I have lain
these 4. months: and my fellow Commissioner being vexed by Mr. John Fisher, was
committed also to prison, for apretended debt: And after he was released by
virtue of an ordinance of Parliament for securing Commissioners, and such
others as did attend upon this honorable House, for presenting of Country
grievances, yet by the means and direction of Justice Whitaker, chairman of the
Committee of Examinations, the said John Osmotherly was committed again to
prison in Woodstreet Counter, where he was put to great charges to free himself
by a writ, of Habes Corpus from the Chancery, where the suit is depending: but
by the potency and policy of some, he was so pursued (even after he was last
released) that he could not walk London streets, for diversity of Bayliffes,
who were ready awaiting upon all occasions, to arrest him, where upon he was
forced to return to his Country, and the said Justice Whitaker (before I was
committed to the Fleet, whilst we both were to attend on that Committee, where
of Mr. Lisle is chair man) issued out his warrant to search my chamber for
suspected papers against the State, and to attach my body, by virtue whereof, my
chamber was searched in the night time, and my self apprehended, and brought
before the Committee of Examinations, and kept under a messengers custody eight
days before I could procure a discharge, and when I was brought before that
Committee, they had nothing to lay to my charge, but did propound
interrogatories (as I conceive) to ensnare me, All which practices did and do
tend to the obstruction of our Country business, if not to the ruin of the
Country it self, had not some of the Scots forces prevented the incursions of
Digby and Longdale; and they that had the chiefest command in martial affairs
(against whom we complain) doing nothing considerable to preserve the Country,
though they had command and power to have done what was needful, and many of
them since my imprisonment have come to London to compound for their
delinquency and treasons, paying some part of that whereof they have wronged
the Country, and not making any reparation to the poor oppressed people.

Therefore my humble request is, that I may be permitted according to law, to
answer, and I doubt not but to clear my self of that supposed contempt, for
which I was committed, and that my Country business may be put into a speedy
way of trial; and that those whom this honorable House, according to the
fundamental laws of the land have declared to betraytors, and such as kept
correspondency with them, may be put upon due trial at common I Am, and justice
no longer sold, denied, nor delayed, and that their lands and estate, according
to law seized upon, and reparations made out of the same to the parties
wronged, and such men as are and have been the Parliaments friends, the well
affected of the Country may be put in places of trust and command

And as I am in duty bound, so shall I praise God, and pray for you.
The Post script,
CVrteous Reader, thou may very much wonder at the delatory and slow
proceedings of the House of Commons, in doing justice and right; from whom the
Commons of England may justly expect more then from any other Judicatory, being
they are imediatly chosen by them; and to speak properly, are no more but their
stewards and servants for whose good and benefit all their actions ought to be
extended, and ought in honestly and right to have but one and the same interest
with them, but no distinct self-interest from them: Yet by their proceedings
daily, we see it is in vain to expect justice from them, so long as they are
so linkt and glude in factions each to other by their private interests, in
their great places, which ties all such amongst them to maintain one another in
all their unjust ways, and to oppress and crush as much as they are able, all
the prosecuters of just and righteous things, and so to bar and stop justice
that it shall have little or no progress; diverse of them, and their creatures,
sons, brothers, unkles, and kinsmen, and allies, in the sub-committees, having
already committed so much injustice, that they are undone in their blazed
honor, and ill-gotten estates, if justice should run in its native luster, and
full current, and of necessity, they and then great places would quickly be
destroyed.

Otherfore that the freemen of England had but their eyes open, to see the
mischief of members of the House of Commons (men of their own election and
choosing to fit in the supreme Court of England) to be entangled themselves, or
intermeddle with any other place whatsoever, then that whereunto their Country
have chosen them! what a shame is it to see the mercinary long gown-men of the
House of Commons, to run up and down like so many hackney petty foggers, from
bar to bar in Westminster hall etc. to plead before inferior Judges, and to
ingrosse and monopolize, the greatest part of the practice of the law, from
other poor lawyers, although diverse of these Parliament grosses be recorders
of Corporations besides, who ought in Conscience and reason to give way to
their Corporations, to choose new Recorders in their places? for how is it
possible that they should serve the Parliament as members thereof, and their
Corporations as Recorders, at so many miles distance, and at one and the same
time?

And besides, how can such great practisers choose but mercinarily be engaged to
help their clyents over a style, in case that ever they have to do with any of
their own Committees, and what is this else, but to sell justice for money?
Besides, what a snare is it to the new Judges (who are placed in the room of
those that have bought, sold, and betrayed the lives, liberties, and estates of
all the free denizons of England? witness their judgment in ship money etc. to
see 3. or 4. eminent lawyers, members of the House of Commons, come before them
in an unjust cause; when they consider, that if they should displease them, it
partly lies in their power to turn them out of their places, being they are (as
it were) wholly made Judges by the House of Commons, and nominated by the
Lawyers therein.

We profess seriously, that to pull the gowns over these mercinary men's
ears, and forever to throw them out of the House of Commons, as men unfit to
sit there, onto plead at any bar in England, is too little a punishment for
them, the scum of mankind, and the same (we conceive) do they deserve, that are
members of that House, and take upon them to sit as judges in inferior Courts,
by means of which they rob the Freeman of England of the benefit of an appeal,
in case of injustice, because they have no where to appeal to, but the
Parliament, where they sit as judges in their own cause, which is a most
wicked, intolerable, and unjust thing in any judge whatsoever: We hope shortly
that if these men be not ashamed of their evil herein, some honest and resolute
hearted Englishman, will be so bold as publicly to post up their names as
destroyers of the Kingdom.

And as great an evil is it to the Kingdom, for members of the House of
Commons, to take upon them to be fingerers and treasurers of the public money
of the Kingdom, because they are thereby in a condition to fill their own
coffers, and do what wrong they please (or else how comes it to pass that so
many of their children are so richly married of late, that were but mean
before? and no man knows how to call them to account, unless they deal with
them as the Romans sometimes dealt with their Senators, or as the Switzers
dealt with their tyrants: for the money is the Kingdoms, and not the members
of the House of Commons, and the Kingdom ought in Justice, reason, and right to
have a public, punctual, and particular account of it; and therefore it
ought not to be in the hands, or fingers of those that are able to make so
great a faction as are able to protect themselves from Justice, and an exact
account.

O that that gallant man, L. G. Cromwell (to whom the Kingdom for their
preservation, under God, owes so much, would a little more deny himself, and
cease to be a stalking horse, and a dangerous president, of most dangerous
consequence, to these wicked mercinary pluralists, non residentary, great
placemen, for whom an Hospital of any consequence cannot fail, but they must
be government, of it nor a putty place in the p^^ bag office, but they must get
into it: which men, of the Kingdom would rightly consider it, have just cause
to disclaim as none of their patrons, but proclaim as their enemy and
destroyers, being only pecuniary self seekers.

For so long as parliament men can per^ their hands the riches and treasures of
the Kingdom, and live like Kings and Emperors, and like lawless men none such
being of Gods creation (for he never created a lawless man) there will never
be (...) end of this Parliament, which by its everlasting continuance, by the
abuses of lawless and rotten hearted men (Machiavels sons, whose principal it
is, when he would destroy a State or Kingdom, and deliver them into the hands
of their enemies; to put them upon ads of injustice, oppression, and invading
of the people right, which is the only way to effect their ruin and
destruction) will become the must absolute burden, and greatest oppression,
that ever was upon the people: when as in times by past, it used to be their
only remedy from their oppression, and oppressors.

The thing that we wish L. G. Cromwell to consider of, is this, that he was
chosen a Burgess for Cambridge, to sit in Parliament, and not to be Lieut.
Genesis of an Army, both which places he ought not in conscience, nor cannot in
equity, honesty, and honor hold, but either must come and fit in Parliament,
his proper place, or else he ought to advise and permit them to choose another
Burgess to sit in his stead; which we conceive would be the greatest and best
piece of service that ever he did the Parliament or Commonwealth in his life,
(who both are in the high road way of destruction, by these mercinary
pluralists, great place men) for to be a member of the House of Commons is
enough to take up the whole and entire man, without deviding it, although he
were five times wiser then any man there appears to be: and if Cromwell would do
his duty herein, their vail and president were taken of, and laid down, which
would be for his exceeding honor and glory, and the unspeakable good of the
Kingdom.

Wherefore dear and beloved friend Mr. Musgrave, seeing God has given you the
spirit of boldness, wisdom, understanding, zeal, and courage, lay it out more
fully for the good of your Country, and speedily present him with a home and
plain Epistle for that end, and we also entreat you to make some observations
to him, upon what you will find in the 19. 20. 21. pages of Englands
birthright, and press them home to him.

Courteous Reader,

At the Lord Major of London his house, the 16th. of this second month 1646.
upon diverse complaints made by the ministers of London, against many parishes
and particular Citizens, for not payment of tithes, and after several days
disputations in free public meetings at his hall, between the Plantiffes and
defendants, by themselves, and their learned Counsel, and many arguments
discussed on both sides, it was found at last, that howsoever th^se priests
have exacted and received tithes a long time, yet altogether unjustly by the
law both of God and man; for the one, Christ has prescribed voluntary
maintenance for his pastors to feed all his flocks, and for the other, that
statute of the 37. of H. 8. authoriseth certain Commissioners, to make a decree
for the payment of tithes to the London Ministers, and what they shall order
and decree, shall be binding to the citizens of London, in case the decree be
made by such a day, and inrouled in the high Court of Chancery, but in case it
be not inrouled there, it is no law, and so not binding, but Mr. Nerborow the
citizens counsel, produced to the Lord Mayor, a certificate under the
Registers hand, that it neither is, nor never was inrouled: and therefore the
ministers may go whissell for their tithes. Next, the tithes were given to
maintain those priests who read service, which none do now, because the
service book is abolished, and so no work, no wages. And thirdly, Though that
English mass book were yet in force, these black-coats now are not the men for
whom those tithes were provided, but only such as were ordained by, and served
under the Bishops: which ordination and service these Priests now have not only
renounced, but quite deposed and rejected those their masters, And so if they
be to seek new masters, and new work, they must also seek new wages. Yet it is
my advice, and I trow will be their best course, even to work with their
hands, as many better men do, and not to live idley by the sweat of other men's
brows.

Psalm. 141. 5. Let the Righteous smite, it shall be a kindness* and let him
reproove me, it shall be an extellent oil, which shall not break mine head: for
yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities. Proverbs 27. 6. Faithful are
the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.
FINIS.

