VOX TURTURIS vel COLUMBA ALBA ALBIONIS. THE VOICE OF THE TVRTLE, OR, ENGLANDS
WHITE DOVE In the deluge of Division, the second time sent forth from God's Ark, to present a Peace Offering upon the Altar of Jehovah Shalom.

Humbly proposing that divine direction, which the God of Peace has revealed
in his Word of truth, for determining Differences by an holy Ordinance of his
own Institution, wherein himself is the sole Judge, Proverbs 16.33. Prove.
18.18.

Showing how by this Divine way of Gods Judgment, not only the great
differences here in Church and State depending, may speedily and happily be
determined with glory to God, Honor to the King, and happiness to the
Kingdoms, but also all the greatest Controversies, both Civil and Sacred
throughout Christendom may be Composed, the Effusion of Blood prevented, Many
Prophecies conducing to an universal Peace fulfilled, the happy use of this
holy Ordinance made known, and the name of God thereby manifested, and
magnified among all Nations, which by Cruelty and bloody Division is Blasphemed
even among Heathens.

Per E.M. Arm. Christi servorum minimo minorem.

Should not a people enquire at their God? to the Law and the Testimony, if
they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them,

Isa. 8.19, 20. Hearken, and give ear to me, O my people, for a Law shall
proceed from me, and I will bring forth my Judgment, for the light of the
people.

Isa. 51.4. When I shall take a convenient time I will judge righteously, the
earth, and all the Inhabitants thereof are dissolved, but I will establish the
pillars.

Psalm. 75.2.3. Per sortem Deus ipse in judicio sedet. Sicut enim Deus per
Jethronem consulait ut causis levioribus ab aliis judicibus dijudicatis
difficiles Moysis Cognitioni reservaretur: Sic Deus instituit, ut quae nulla
cujusquam ingenii, vi and perspicientia causa dignosci posset, ad se per sortim
judicium deferretur*

Cartw. in Proverbs 16.33. LONDON, Printed for T.W. 1647.

To the Gentle, Judicious, religious Reader: The humble address of the
harmless Dove.
THis Dove, like that of Noah, at the first sending forth found no rest for the
sole of her foot, no place for her peace offering; as in Mesech, and the tents
of Kedar, whilst the Dove persuades, and pleads for peace; proposed and
pressed an holy and happy way of peace; the Serpent prevented and perverted the
progress thereof and preparation was made for war: She looked and labored for
peace, but there was no good and for the time of healing but behold trouble
Jer. 14.19. The Land remained like a glassie sea mingled with fire; Rev. 15.2.
Every field of our Albion so called quasi Olbyon, because happy and pleasant,
was become like that place called Armagedon (1) craftiness of destruction as
it is interpreted, Rev. 16.16. The whole land overspread with waters of Marah
and Meribah of bitter strife bloody division; Waters like the fountains on
which the third Angel poured out his Vials and they became blood like the
rivers of Egypt (which was their first plague) all turned into blood or like
that Sea on which the second Angel poured his Vials of wrath so that it became
as the blood of a dead man and every living thing died therein Rev. 16.3.4. So
deplorable was this deluge of deadly dissentions, Exodus 7.20.21.
that the Rod horse and his rider who had power to take peace from the earth,
and that they should kill one another, etc. Rev. 6.4. may be said to have run a
race of ruin through this wretched Land; and four of those seven Angels which
stood before God with seven trumpets, might seem to have sounded in these
three sorrowful Kingdoms Rev. 8. that seeming but a prophecy, the
performance whereof is manifested in our unhappy Calamities: at the founding of
the first of which Angels trumpet, there followed hail and fire mingled with
blood which falling on the earth* the third part of the trees and all green
grass was burnt up; are not a third part of our trees our strong men, our
young men our provisions and fruits of the earth consumed? The two staves of
beauty and bonds are broken, mentioned Zech. 11.7.10.11. the Bonds of unity and
beauty of orderly government are broken, and we may fear the breach of the
staff of bread comes marching toward us like Jehu, furiously, fearfully. At
the sounding of the second Angels Trumpet as it were a great mountain burning
with fire, was cast into the Sea, and part of the sea he came blood. and the
third part of the living creatures which were in the sea died, and the third
part of the ships were destroyed. In this mare mortuum, and dead sea of
dissentions, it is to be feared we have suffered shipwreck, of at least the
third part of our martial men, Munition, and money, the three sinews of a
State, besides the decay of Trading and Merchandising, etc. At the sounding of
the third Angel, there fell a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp
and it fell upon a third part of the rivers, and fountains of waters, and the
name of the star was called Wormwood, and the third part of the waters became
wormwood, and many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter: The
Lord having permitted that grand Impostor the devil, a dangerous deceiver from
the beginning, Lucifer in the shape of an Angel of light to mix wormwood with
the fountains of living waters the holy word of God; Many men by the wormwood
of mis-interpretation, and gall of misapplication thereof, have so imbittered
those sweet and pleasant waters that they are to too many become aquae mortis
destructive and deadly; which in truth in themselves are the clear Aquae vitae
waters of life quickening and reviving the drooping dying soul; At the sounding
of the fourth Angel, the third part of the Sun was smitten: Christ the Sun of
righteousness obscured by the pride and infidelity of men; the third part of
the Moon, the Church; and the third part of the Stars the Ministers and
teachers; so as the third part of them was darkened; and the day was smitten,
that it shone not, for a third part of it* and the night likewise; the light of
the Gospel clouded by the night of black ignorance. Alas! I.om. 4.1, 2.
how is the gold become dim? how is the most fine gold changed? the stones of
the Sanctuary are poured out* are scattered in every place in every corner of
every street. The sons of Zion comparable to fine gold how are they esteemed as
earthen pitchers the work of the hands of the potter? The Prince, the Peers,
the Priests, all slandered and slighted, derided, despised destroyed. The
whole Land is filled with bitterness and made drunk with wormwood. Lam. 3.15.
Isa. 51.19, 20.
The mighty have stumbled against the mighty, and both are fallen together. The
whole body is sick, and the whole heart is heavy. The Lord has taken his
peace from this people, Jer. 16.5. From the crown of the head, to the sole of
the foot there is no whole part nothing but wound, and bruises and putrefying
sores, Isa. 1.4 5 6. We may with grief of soul hear Englands voice on high
(like the voice in Rama^. Rachel weeping and that bitterly not to be comforted
for her caeildren because they mere not) lamenting the invaluable loss of the
flower of her Nobility, Jer. 4.31.
Gentry and Commonalty in their bud of gallantry wallowing and weltring in dust
and blood. Thus lofty Lucan; Bella per Albinios plusquam civilia Campos,
Jusque datum sceleri, canimus, populum potentem
In sua victrici conversu^ viscera dextra
-- Quis talia fando nefanda
Temperat a lacrimis? --
-- En quo discordia tristem,
Perduxit populum? funestos reddidit agros,
Vastavitque vias exhausit civibus urbes.


So that it may be said of England, what the faithless, and therefore fearful
men, which were sent to search the Land of Canaan, reported thereof to Moses,
it is (...) Land that cateth up the Inhabitants thereof, Number. 13.33. And that
which ought ^ot steightly to escape Christian consideration for the building of
this Babell of bitterness continuing of these Babylonish broils, Number. 14.17.
these Contentions carrying us headlong on (...) confusion) the simple and
ignorant multitude, as natural bruits made to be taken and destroyed, not
knowing what they did, as silly sheep led unto the slaughter, Psalm. 44. they
were killed all day long, and accounted as sheep appointed to be slain; they
were forced on both parts to tread mortar, made and moystened with their own
blood.

What heart not altogether adamantine, can do less, then take up the Prophet
Jeremies lamentation; Jer. 14.17.
Let mine eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease: Lam.
1.16.2.1^
For the virgin, the daughter of Zion is broken with a great breach, with a
very grievous blow. There is no healing of thy bruise, thy wound is grievous:
all that hear the bruit of thee, Nahum. 3.19.
will clap their hands over thee.

In this sad and deplorable condition have these three Kingdoms now for a long
season lain languishing: like an Oak cleft in shivers by wedges of its own
body, like the mad Philistines, and as in the days of Midian, the Lord set
every man's sword upon his neighbor, Judges 7.22. And the people were as meat
to the fire, no man spared his brother, Judges 7. Isa. 9.
Isa. 9.19. What will ye do now in the day of visitation, and of destruction?
to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory? to whom
will ye seek, and of whom will ye take counsel? Isa. 10.3.4. Gather together
on heaps, Isa. 10.
gird your selves, ye shall be broken in pieces; take counsel together, it
shall be brought to naught, pronounce a decree, and it shall not stand, Isa.
8.10. If ye will be safe, Then sanctify the Lord, let him be your fear, and
let him be your dread, Isa. 8.9, 10.
and he shall be as a sanctuary, etc. Bind up the testimony, seal up the Law;
should not a people inquire at their God? to the law, and to the testimony, if
they go not according to this word, there is no light in them. Isa. 13.14 Is
there no balm in Gilead? is no Physician there? Jer. 8 22. Psalm. 10.8, 9.
The way of the Lord is an holy plain way, wherein the ignorant cannot err,
Isa. 35.8.9. A strait way wherein they shall not stumble. Ier. 31.9. vid. Deuteronomy.
17.8 9.15.

If the Lord have in his complete Treasury of truth revealed a Divine way for
curing our Contentions, and settling peace among the Mighty, God enjoynes strict
observation of his ordinances, Deuteronomy. 5.1.35.4.2.5.6.16.17.7.11.12.11.1.6.17.8,
9.
to refuse that pious perfect way, and rely on our own humane powers or
policies, is an argument either of ignorance and blindness, there is no light
in us, or of pride or arrogance, that we will not seek after God, Psalm. 10.4.
That we take counsel, but not of the Lord, and had need beware the woe that
waits on all stubborn contemners of Gods counsels, Isa. 30.

Observe the Lords gracious invitations and encouragements by language of love,
to come and consult with him, and he cured by his divine direction and
prescription; Come unto me all weary and heavy laden, I will ease and refresh
you. Commit thy cause to the Lord he will bring forth thy judgment as the
light; Psa. 37.5, 6, 7.33.
and thy righteousness as the day. Cast thy burden on the Lord etc. Ask of
me things to come: stand in the ways, and behold, and ask for the old way,
which is the good way, Isa. 51.
and walk therein, and ye shall find rest to your souls. Jer. 6.16. There is
none to guide thee, none to lead thee one of the mire of thy miseries, none to
take thee by the hand, of ad the sons that thou have brought up. Man's
extremity, Gods opportunity, Isa. 63.5.59.16. Esa. 42.10, 11, 12.15, 16, 17,
18, 19.21.23.24.25. Jer. 33.6.9. Esa. 40.3.4.5.23.27.41.1.4.5.12.27. This
righteous branch may return this Dove with an Olive Branch of Peace and truth,
being sent out with a prosperous seed of Peace, Zech. 8.12. The day proposed in
this Trtatise is a turning and seeking to God, consulting with, inquiring of,
relying and waiting on God in his, own ordinance, all which are both commended
etc commanded by God in his Word. Sors Intermentia divine predestinationis, non
fortune famula. O^gen. Homil. 23. in Josh.
Thy sons lie in the heads of the streets, (...) as wild bull in a net: Hear
now, miserable and dranken, not with wine, but division: Behold, I will take
the cup of trembling out of thy hand. Hearken and give care to me, O my people:
for a law shall proceed from me, and I will bring forth my judgment, for the
light of my people. Behold, I will give them health and amendment: for I will
cure them, and will reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth: And it
shall be to me, a name, a joy, a praise, and an honor, before all the nations
of the earth, etc. Behold, the days come, that I will perform the good thing
which I have promised; I will cause the Branch of righteousness to grow, and
he shall execute judgment, and righteousness in the Land. Jer. 33.14.15. I
will raise up a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign, and execute
judgment and justice in the earth, Jer. 23 5, 6. The Lord is our judge, the
Lord is our Law giver, the Lord is our King, he will save us, Isa. 33.22. The
Lord will not fail his people, nor forsake his Inheritance, for judgment
shall return to justice, and the upright in heart shall follow after it, Psa
94.14 15. He shall not fail till he have set judgment in the earth, and the
Isles shall waire for his Law, Isa. 42.1.3.4. And again, Isa. 2.4. an
universal peace is there prophesied to be performed by the Lords Judgment
between the Nations. Swords to be beaten into mattocks and spears into pruning
hooks, and no more fighting; and in the preceding Prophece^^t it is showed
that God by Christ's judgment shall restore the state and government of things
to their right use and order.

What this Dove proposes and presses, is no other, then that the
determination of the great differences depending between his Majesty and the
Parliament, might be referred to the Lords judgment by divine Lot, being an
holy way originally instituted by God himself to that peculiar end of ending
Controversies, as by Prove. 18.18. and many presidents in holy writ, and the
authority of Divines both ancient and moderns is plentifully proved. Neither is
there any other way revealed in Gods word, whereby so apparent, and immediate a
judgment may be said to be given by God, as by this way of the divine Lot;
And howsoever, by reason of the ignorance of some who know not, and therefore
neither conceive, nor consider the holiness and happiness of this divine way;
The infidelity of others, who either doubting of the truth of Gods word, (or
perhaps distrusting the justice of their own cause) dare not trust the
judgment of God in the disposition of the Lot; The arrogance and self
conceited obstinacy of others who prefer their own wisdoms, counsels or
ways, before the judgment, Oracle, and ordinance of God: And because of the
selfe-seeking ends of others, who principally prosecuting those designs which
conduce to their own private purposes, profits and preferments, and so grow
careless of promoting Gods glory, and the Kingdoms peace, but rather protract
it) Although I say, by reason of these Remoraes, this sacred Ordinance,
Judgment, and Decree of God, may want its due respect among the worldly wise
(as the best and most divine matters and ordinances, which concerns Gods glory,
and the peoples good, usually meet with strangest opposition) (the Devil and
his agents laboring the prevention of all proceedings tending to that purpose)
yet the harmless Dove humbly desires, that all true lovers of Gods glory, the
Kings honour^ and the Kingdoms peace and happiness, would be pleased
thoroughly to peruse this Treatise (penned and published to no other end, then
the glory of God, and peace of his people) and seriously to consider the
matters especially those Texts of holy truth therein contained, and the happy
effects which by the holy use of this sacred Ordinance may be produced and then
doubtless they will confess the use hereof in this Kingdoms case, to be not
only convenient, but necessary, and to be prefer^ea before any way or means
of humans designment, in these seven several respects.

1. In respect of the glory of God which will hereby be more advanced not only
by committing of our doubtful and difficult differences to his divine
determination, making and taking God for our only Judge, saying with
Jehoshaphat, and the men of Judah; We know not what to do, but our eyes,
hearts and hands, 2. Chron. 20.12.
are toward thee, but also by the just, holy, and happy Judgment which the
Lord will give by his own way of the divine Lot; Whereas if peace be procured
by humane powers and policies, we are apt to attribute most to the arm of
flesh, and sacrifice to our own nets, and the Lords glory is too often laid
aside, as the Lord by his Prophet Jeremy complains; Wherefore say my people,
Jer. 1.31.
we are Lords, we will come no more to thee? 2. All motters in difference, both
Sacred and Civil, in Church and State will be settled according to the will of
Jesus Christ, himself being Judge, which will be more pleasing to God
profitable and satisfactory to men. 3. The Kings Honor will be preserved, and
his mind better satisfied, being wonn by divine judgment willingly to consent,
not forcibly by Conquest and compulsion constrained to pass or sign
Propositions. 4. His Majesty will be more clearly satisfied touching his just
Rights and Prerogatives, being assured that the King of Kings, who is the
primitive of all Principalities, by whom, and from whom all powers are ordained
and derived, knowing what is justly due to Princes, will give to Caesar, the
things that are Caesar's, as to God the things that are Gods. And as concerning
that party of the Nobility, Gentry, and Comminalty, which adhered to his
Majesty in these unhappy wars* their punishments both pecuniary and corporal
touching their lives, liberties, and estates, Deuteronomy. 17.8.9.15 Gods judgment by
Lot will take off all aspersion of cruelty and oppression. Number. 15.34.35
Levit. 24.12.
being left to Divine disposition, rather then humane designement, will be a
way more phasing to God, and more merciful, pions, and satisfactory in the
sight of men. To this purpose you may please to peruse the 2 Chronicles. 28. in a
case of the like nature between Judah and Israel, where the Prophet Oded
presses for fraternall pity and mercy to be showed to the conquered brethren.
And Number. 25.34. The man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day, and the son
of the Israelitish woman that blasphemed, being convicted of their crimes, were
not put to death, until Moses had inquired of God, and received commission
from the great Judge of the world, for their execution. 5. All future ^ewdes
malice and resolutions of revenge, which might remain among Families in
generations to come, will be much mitigated if not cleans remitted, when the
desposition of the Lord, shall be discorned in dispatch of the differences. 6.
All Vows, Covenants and Oaths, made by either party in any matter of
opposition one against the other, may by Gods judgment (declaring the
illegality of the matter sworns to be performed) be made void, and not
binding, which by no humane Laws of dispensation could be discharged, freed,
or made disobliging to the (...) of the Covenanters, etc. 7. Division and
Effusion of Blood, (detestable to God, damnable among men; To the Devil and
his disciples only delightful) will be prevented and avoided, (...) minds
touching all doubtful and difficult differences more clearly convinced,
resolved* and satisfied by Gods own immediate judgment (against which no
honest godly Christian will presume to murmr, dispute, or oppose;) And a
pious, prosperous, s^^^, firm, lasting, found and well-grounded Peace with
Truth, by the Prince of Peace, who is our Peace, truly and perfectly
established. Which that the God of Peace by his blessed Son, on whose
shoulders he has set the government of Peace, with the assistance of his
blessed Spirit of Peace, who is only able, may please speedily to perform,
heartily prays, the unworthiest of Gods servants, who is humbly
Thine also in Christ Jesus, E.M.

The Contents of the ensuing Treatise.
CHAPTER I. OF the several acceptations, and derivation of the word Lot; of
the division, and distinctions of the several sorts of Lots, And of the
definitions and descriptions of Lotts; but especially the Divine Lot, which is
intended for the Subject of this Discourse. CHAP. II. Of the Persons, places,
times, manner and subject matter, by whom, where, when, how, and upon what
occasions, Lotts have been, may, are, or ought to be used. CHAP. III. Of the
manner how Divine Lotts may be applied, and happily used for determining the
great differences depending between His Majesty and the Parliament; and also
all other dissentions fit to be decided by the Lords judgment by Lot, in
Church and State (not only in these Kingdoms, but also throughout
Christendom) may be composed and reconciled. And of the convenience, equality
and necessity of this Divine way, of concluding the Contentions of this
Kingdom. Showing also, how by the reviving of this Sacred way of Peacemaking
many Prophecies in holy writ may be fulfilled.
Errata.
Page 6. line 4. for It, read the Feast of Purim. Page 26. l. 10. read before,
next after minds in the 11. line page 35. live 20. for Iizeh read Iireh. Some
other faults are escaped, which the Reader in his discretion may reform.

CHAP. I. Of the several acceptions of the word LOT.
THE various acception of the word Lot, as it has produced several
observations thereupon, so it has met with many mis-interpretations thereof:
for being in several Languages diversely taken, it is thereby of many much
mistaken: Likewise the use of Lets being ancient and sacred, has in all Ages
bin frequent among men of all sorts: And having been so much in use, by man's
corrupt and irreligious carriage has bin subject to much abuse: Neither ought
that to seem strange, seeing there is no creature of Gods, nor any ordinance,
be it civil or Sacred, howsoever good and holy in it self, but receives some
sully, if not a deep tincture from the defiled fingers of the unlawful and
irreverent users thereof, from the foul hands of the illiterate, ignorant, or
ungodly, and superstitious abusers thereof, or from the false and filthy
tongues and pens of the cunning contemners and opposers, and subtle supplanters
of it. Among such has the lot for a long time suffered, who for particular
designs, and ends of their own, endeavor the utter abolition of this sacred
Ordinance, and seek to smother and obstruct the Sacred use thereof; They cry
down Gods divine way of determining differences, to the end they may fish more
freely in troubled waters, and advance their own covetous and ambitious
purposes, plotts, and destructive devices.

The Latin word sors, signifying in English a Lot, is often taken, or rather
mistaken for Casus, fortuna accident. Chance, fortune, accident, hazard, or the
like; as, sors objecit mihi fortem. Horat. And tuers sortem quam fortuna dedit.
Ovid. But this must needs be in an ignorant, heathenish, atheistical sense; as
the Philistims, 1 Samuel 6.9. their Priests and Southsayers, when they advise to
send away the Acke, made them mark which way it went; if to Bethshemesh, then
'twas God that plagued them with destruction by Emerods; but if not, then it
was a Chance that happened unto them. The wicked attribute almost all things to
Fortune or Chance, whereas indeed there is nothing done without Gods providence
and decree: Quod sapientibus and piis singularis Dei providentia est, id
insipientibus and profanis fortuna dicitur, Downham, in Ram. Dial. l. c. 5.
Ignorantia causarum confuxis fortunam, Lactant. instit. lib. 3. c. 29. Folly,
error and blindness, and (as also Cicero confesses in his Acad. quaest. l.
5.) the ignorance of causes brought in the name of Fortune; When the event of
the Lot which is only in Gods disposal is attributed to Fortune, which in
very truth is it self but a mere fiction. Sometimes it is taken for Conjecture,
Divination, Southsaying, etc. but in a sinful and superstitious sense, as,
ista vetula scit multa de sort, That old wife or witch seems to know many
things by the conjecture, or by the superstitious use of Lots. Ovid styles
Lots, faticinae sorts. And the Diviners, Southsayers, Fortune Tellers, and
superstitious abusers of this Oracle are styled fatidici. Darius pro sortibus
usus ost hinnitu equi, alii aspectu solis exorientis, Pet. Mart. So the Lot
sometimes is taken for Destiny, Fate, fatal necessity, mystery. To facimus
fortuna Deam coeloque locamus, Juvenal. Sometimes for possession, property, or
right in a thing: as, Jerusalem fuit in sort Benjamin, Jos. 18.28. Mic. 2.5.
sometimes for Division and parition of lands by Lot. Sometimes for succession of
time, either from the natural Condition, or Divine disposition there of, Cum
dies abscesserit, noctemque sors reduxerit. Sometimes it is termed capitale, the
whole sum in a common bank or stock, wherein many have part, a principal sum
of money borrowed, or laid out to usury: Quicquid accipitur ulira sortem, usura
est. Etiam de sort nunc venio in dubium. Terent. It Is also taken for a Prize,
prey, booty, reward, had, obtained, given, or gained 1 For charge, office,
state, condition, any kind or course of life, and for whatsoever befalls a man
in any state, course, or condition of life, Isa. 17.14. Isa. 57.6. The event
however casual, in relation to the instrument, yet falls out certainly this
or that, by Gods wholly disposing the instrument, 1 Samuel 14.41. Gratam sortem
habemus. Ovid. We are content with our state or condition. Status ex
dispositione Dei pendens. Sort tua contentus abito. Sort tori gaudens Ovid.
Rejoicing that she was nobly married, for the soboles divinitus data, the
issue, offspring, fruit of the body: Saturni sors ego prima fui. Ovid. I was
the first child that Saturn had. In marriage and children, good or bad success
is sometimes said to be a Lot. Oftentimes it is taken for the judgment,
sentence, and decree, whereby any thing is adjudged and assigned to any one:
For the providence of God, the answer of God, the Oracle of God, so Martinius.
The vocation of the Elect here, and their right to glory hereafter is said to
be their Lot, Ephesians. 1.4.5. Col. 1.12. Acts 1.16. Dan. 12.13. Thou shall rest
and stand up in thy lot, at the end of the days. St. Augustine calls
Predestination a Lot. In holy Writ we find that Almighty God was Consulted
with, and answers thereupon returned by Lot. Thence even the very Heathen had
an honorable esteem of this holy Oracle, Per sacras quaerere sorts, Ovid.
Met. lib. 1.
Tibull. lib. 1. Ille sacras pu^ri sortester sustulit, Heathen Poets giving it
the name of Sacred; showing more reverence to Gods Ordinance then Christians
do in these times. Sometimes Lot is taken for the signum quo sortimur,
instrumentum, whereby the will of God is either lawfully or rashly sought out.
The Divinatorii calculi, the signs, notes, or instruments by which Lottery is
used and executed, whether beans, stones, barks, branches, gold, silver, wax,
clay, paper, parchment, or the like, whereof the Lots are made, Aret. de sort.
and are termed in Greek (...), sors, Lot, as Prove. 16.33. The lot is cast into
the lap, etc. Sometimes for the event, as, give a perfect lot, o Lord. 1 Samuel
14.42.

Also the res ipsa, (...), the subject matter of the Lottery, as the
inheritance to be divided, is termed a Lot. Also (...), possessie quicquid
cuique sortito obvenisset, Whatsoever is given to any one by Lot, is termed
(...)

In the Hebrew language a Lot is called, and that most properly (...) Ghoral by
which word they express the inheritance, place, and portion, which by divine
disposition is assigned to any or every one; Dict-a (...)
Of the same signification is (...) Nachalah, hareditas, c^u sors haereditaria:
according to this sense is David's expression, the Lot is fallen to me in a
fair ground, I have a goodly heritage. In this sense the Land of promise is
said to be the general Lot of the children of Israel, and therein the
possession of every particular tribe, the Lot which the Lord gave them. So the
Lord himself is truly said (for so he is) the Lot of the righteous, as they
are the Lot of the Lord. Hence Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.9. The Lords portion is his
people: and Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. And Jer. 10.16. The Lord is
termed the portion of Jacob, and Israel the red of his inheritance. To this
purpose the sweet singer of Israel; The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my cup: thou shall maintain my lot. Troubles and
persecutions in this vale of misery, the Church militant, are the Lot of the
faithful, which the Lord allotteth to them for confirmation, and obsigation of
their faith, and proof of their patience; But the rod of the wicked shall not
rest on the Lot of the righteous. Their troubles are many, but yet transitory,
not perpetual, the Lord delivers them out of all, and after crowns them with
joy and life eternal in the new Jerusalem, which is likewise the Lot of all
true believers.

Clerus, the Clergy takes denomination, (...), a sort from a Lot, and are so
called either quia sort fuerint electi, and sic sors sint Domini, vel quod
Dominus illorum esset portio either because the Clergy, and all that served in
any office or place in the Temple, from the highest to the lowest were
originally elected by Lot to their several places of service, as appears 1 Chronicles. 24.25.26. chapters, as Aretius, a late learned Writer in his Problemes
confirms. Aret. de ossiciis Ecclesiasticis, Problem. 68.
Or else because the Clergy are (or ought to be) the Lords peculiar Lot, as was
the tribe of Levi, elected and selected, separated and set apart, specially
from the rest of the Tribes, for the Lords service: for Election is also termed
a Lot, as Acts 1.26. Sort cecidit super Matthiam, The Lot, the Lords election
fell upon Matthias.

Or else the Clergy is so called, because God alone is, and ought to be accepted
as their sole and chief portion, and to whom they have, or ought to have solely
and wholly separated and dedicated themselves to serve the Lord in his
Sauctuary, whence also they received their subsistence; For the Levites had no
inheritance with their brethren, but the Lord was their Lot and portion. (...),
sors, Lot, is also used and taken for that part of the Lords flock, which is
committed to the charge of any Pastor, Acts 07 20.28.
whereof the holy Ghost has made him overseer, as the Apostle says. And as
that parish or flock is termed the Lot of the Pastor, so may the Pastor be
said to be the Lot of that flock or Parish, as being thereunto allotted by the
Lord: So the Pastor and parish, may be said to be mutually each others Lot, so
disposed of by the Lord. Many other acceptations Authors afford, which I omit
to recite, as not very pertinent to the present purpose of this discourse,
fearing I have been overtedious in this point.

I shall therefore proceed to the next point considerable concerning Lotts,
which is the Derivation of the Word in the several Languages of Greek,
Derivation.
Latin, English, and some others, whereof I shall endeavor brevity, but
withal set down such Collections as I have made concerning the knowledge of
the name, and the Etimologie or derivation thereof, much conduce into a more
clear knowledge of the nature, property, and condition of the thing it self.
Quandoquidem cum nomen and ejus etimologiam, vel notationem. (ut appellat
Cicero) recte noveris* tunc etiam naturam, proprietatem conditionem, effectum,
materiam, formam, vel finem rerum optime nosse queas: Seeing that by the right
knowing of the name of things, and the true Etimolegy, or (as Tully terms it)
notation thereof, we may attain the knowledge of the nature, property,
condition, effect, matter, form, and end of those things in more perfect
manner. Therefore nomen (a name is so called) quasi notamen, quod notitiam
facit, because it affords a more perfect notice, and a more notable knowledge
of the nature of the thing named. Whence Plato says, (...) 1. Qui intelligit
nomina, resetiam intelligit; He that understands the names of things,
understands the things themselves. And Isiderus says, Nomina si rerum nescis
perit cognitio rerum: Ignorance of the names hinders the knowledge of things
themselves. Nibil aliud est scientia nisi serre per causas, and originationes.
Wherefore, (...), in a true method of teaching, the names ought first to be
sought out, sifted and searched into, Quia rerum notitia a nominibus dependet,
the knowledge of things does much depend upon the derivation and Etimologie of
their names.

Now the Etimology of the word Lot in several Languages, I find very
significant and proper to the end for which Lots were first ordained, the
ending of controversies and settling of Peace.

The word Lot (as Martinius observes) is a Saxon word, and has its derivation,
A lite quam terminat, from strife which it determines. In the German tongue,
Lot is called los a (...) litis, from solving of doubts and difficulties, and
salving of differences and dissentions; for which end it was primarily and
principally ordained, as herein afterward I shall endeavor to demonstrate.
Likewise the word Lot (as it is the proper name of a man) is rendered to
signify, involutas colligatus, involved, rolled up, wrapped up, either because
the isntrumental notes or signs, the Lots (as they are termed) by which
Lottery is used, are usually folded and rolled up, until they are drawn, or
else because upon the unfolding and opening thereof in extricable difficulties
and knots are dissolved, secret and hidden things and mysteries are unveyled
and revealed, and contentions to humane apprehensions irreconcilable are
composed.

The Latin word sors, signifying a Lot, as Martinius Aretius, and others
affirm, is derived from series, which signifies a methodicall course order, and
rule, not per antephrasin, (as some malevolent ignorants would surmize) as
merely casual and being void of order; but because in doubts indissoluble,
Chaos-like confusion, and ambiguous matters; The Lot reduces such distractions
and divisions to a certain divine order and rule; When the Apostles doubted
who should succeed in the place of the Apostate Judas, the Lot immediately
decided that doubt, Act. 1. When the question grew among the nine Hero's, which
of them should Duel with Hector, Hom. Iliad. 7. In adeunda haereditate
haeredes disceptant de partibus, sorts adhibitae cuique declarant ordinem.
Ideoque ab usu and eventu rectissime a serie sorts dictas esse judico. Aret.
de sortibus, loc. 180.
the Lot determined that dispute, and fell upon Ajax, as Homer says, (...). In
any difference touching partition of Lands, goods, or the like; the readiest
way to reconcile is by Lot: so that sors a serie may seem a very proper
derivation, reflecting upon the use and end for which the God of peace and
order prepared the Lot, viz. to be a peacemaker, a special means of settling
contentions, and procuring peace. The earth and the inhabitants, Dissolved, Ps.
75. and 3.
are divided and out of order, I will establish the pillars thereof, says the
Lord, Psalm. 96.10. and the world shall be established, and I will judge the
people in righteousness, and reunite their dis-jointed souls, left it run
into an irrecoverable ruin.

(...), signifying sors, a Lot, some seem to derive from (...), vocare,
relating to the calling, condition, place, or profession which God has
conferred and cast upon any one as his lot or portion: or (...), a ligno, from
the wood whereof the signs, or isntrumental notes, or marks, the Lots were
usually made. Or else (...) quasi (...), bonus, formosus; beatus, from the
goodness, The Clergy should be without blemish, defect, or deformity.
beauty and blessedness, which should always attend the Clergy (being the
Lords lot) both in purity of doctrine, and piety of life and conversation, or
from the good, beautiful, and blessed operation, fruit and effect, which (...)
the Lot produces, 1. Peace, which may well be ranked amongst the best, most
beautiful, and blessed of all sublunary comforts, and then which the woeful
experience of the contrary in these three Kingdoms for these three years past
will force us to confess, nil delectabilius, si rerum seitur verus egendo
valor; If the true worth of things be known by the want thereof. Therefore the
words in the Chaldean and Arabian tongues which signify (...), a Lot, are in
the native and genuine construction rendered dulce, a sweet, delightful
desirable thing, as Martinius relates, and expounds the words. And this is no
improper sympathizing of the words, in regard the very feet of the
Peace-bringer (as God himself tells us) are beautiful, and the Prince of
peace himself has pronounced the Peacemakers blessed. And this surely should
move the Clergy to remember and give due respect to, and not to despise that
divine Ordinance which originally gave them not only this denomination of
Clergy, but also their place and dignity, vid. 1 Chronicles. 24 25.26. whole
chapters. And withal, if without offense I may be so bold, I should pray them
to consider the Covenant that God made with the Tribe of Levi, Mal. 2.4.5.6.
Mal. a Covenant of peace; and, as they were intended for Embasladours of
peace, so they would preach and press peace, and withal their power promote
and further those holy and divine ways that conduce to peace, magnifying God
in those Ordinances (whereof this of the Lot is at this time a most useful
one) which conduce to his glory, and the Kingdoms peace.

I find also another, and that a proper derivation of the word (...), viz.
(...), quasi (...), from the verb (...), signifying frango, to break or
dissolve, which ( Eustathins says) is contracted from (...). And Martinius
sets down another most apt and pertinent derivation of (...), not unlike this
last, scil. (...) quasi (...), Dici videtur quia (...), (1) tollit
controversiam.
1 Quia tollit, fraugit controversias, takes away and concludes Controversies;
which suteth directly with the end for which the Lot was ordained (...) the
effect which it operateth, Vide plus de hoc apud Martinium de sort. Aret.
Problem. de offic. Eccles. 68. and 180. de sort. It was instituted in
remembrance (...) the Jews delivery from Haman, before whom Lots were cast day
by day, (...) from (...) or (...) voco, to call, whence it is that in ordinary
speech men are said to be of this or that vocation or calling.
and month by month for their destruction.

Pur in the Syrian tongue also signifies, a Lot, Sors; thence the Feast of
P^^^^ the feast of Lots, mentioned Esther 9.27. ordained by special decree to
be observed and celebrated by the Jews, and their posterity, in perpetuity as
a memorial of Gods merciful deliverance in their depth of misery. (...) in the
Greek signifies ignis, fire: vel per antiphrasin, quia ignem contentionis
extinguit; By contraries, because it extinguisheth the fire of contention, as
before Lot, a lite quam terminat, Lot, from the strife it determines. Or (...)
ignis quia purgat, and purificat ab effe^^^, and that not improperly according
to the nature of fire, because it purges and purifieth, disperseth,
dispelleth, and cleereth those black and ominious clouds of contention, and
deadly dissension, which if not reconciled may ruin whole flourishing
Kingdoms upon the Rock of confusion. And thus has it been plainly proved by
the very derivation of the word and name of Lot in several languages to su^e
very properly with the nature of the thing it self, and most aptly to answer
the reason and end for which the Lot was by God originally instituted and
ordained, and corresponding also very fitly to the purpose for which it is now
proposed, videlicet, the advancing of Gods glory, preserving the Kings honor,
and promoting the peoples good in determining those differences which by humane
endeavor can hardly be ever happily composed. But hereof More amply hereafter.
I proceed now to the division and distinction of the several sorts of Lots.

Touching the distinction and division of Lots, whereof there are several
sorts, according to the several Authors treating on the subject, I shall use
all possible brevity.

Lyra sets down two sorts; Lyra in Number. c. 34. in Prove. 16. in Je. c. 1.
1. Divisory, used for dividing of any thing among diverse persons, which he
holds very lawful, if used without Avarice, revenge, or injury to any.

2 Consultory used for determining of somewhat to be done, which he holds also
lawful if in case of necessity it be used with due reverence, and the event
expected from God; but unlawful otherwise, if used in trivial occasions,
without reverence, and the event expected from any created power.

Lavatur and Sheindler two sorts, Divisory, Divinatory; Divisoriae licita
quibus haereditates, possessiones pradae, etc. dividuntur.

Divinatoriae illicitae, quibus occulta investigantur, quisve rerum aut
personarum futurus sit exitus.

Serarius heapeth up several sorts, (...) Josh to. 2. c. 7.1.17. Tho. sum.
part. 2 q. 95. art, 8. and de soctibus. cap. 2.3.4.
Sacra, profana; permissa, prohibita; bona and laudabilis; mala and
reprehensibilis. Consultory and Divinatory; Serious, Ludicrous.

Thomas Aquinas makes three sorts, viz. 1. Divisoria, qua quaritur quid cuique
sit exhibendum, determining what each shall have. 2 Consulteria, qua quaeritur
quid sit agondu^^, Inquiring what were best to be done: to implore a divine
sentence, judgment, or decree by Lot, is not only lawful, but commanded by
holy Writ in case of necessity. 3 Divinatoria qua quaritur quid sit futurum,
Searching what shall hereafter ensue. Most learned Writers are of the same
opinion with Aquinas.


Divisoriae cui aliquid sit adjudicandum, ut in divisione agrorum, bonorum,
etc. Consultoriae quibus quaritur quid potissimum sit agendum; aut quid sit
futurum, ut sunt Divinatoriae.

Peter Marter, a late learned Writer sets down the same sorts of Lots, Pet.
Mart. in 1. Sam. cap. 10.
with the same cautions and observations in the use thereof, as hereafter shall
be showed.

Peucer and Krackevitz set down three sorts, but in another sort, Peucer de
Divin. C. de sort Krakevitz in Je. c. 1.
Sortilegium triplex.

1. Divinum, divinitus rectum and directum, Lots divine, divinely disposed, and
directed, guided, and governed immediately by God himself. 2 Civil ceu
politicum, Civil or Politic used for the ending of strifes, lawsuites, or
other great contentions, or the parting of Lands, Goods, Gifts, Legacies, or
the collations, of honors, offices, places, etc. 3 Divinatorium and
superstitiosum, Divinatory and superstitious, whereby men presume upon
unwarrantable grounds to find out hidden matters, and guess at future events
without any precept, direction or president in Gods word, and this by most
Authors is held diabolical.
The two former being piously applied, may prove most profitable and prosperous
means of ending the bloody divisions in these three Kingdoms.

Perkins mentions three sorts in his Cases of Conscience. 1 Civil or
Politic, used as before is expressed for ending of* strifes and contentions,
dividing possessions, goods and places. 2 Sporting used (as he says) commonly
for the setting up of Bankrupts, dicing etc. 3 Divining, used for the
foretelling of future events; The first warrantable in cases of weight and
necessity, with prayer, and other religious duties preceding. The other two
notable abuses, having no warrant in Gods word.


Eastius makes four sorts; East. hist. of the Gospel.
1 Political for election of Magistrates in cases of War, in places of the
Commonwealth, etc. approved by many. 2 Ludicrous for sport and pastime,
questioned and disallowed by most, and by him denied as unlawful. 3
Diabolical, for Divination, Soothsaying, etc, condemned of all as dangerous,
damnable. 4 Divine, appointed, approved, directed by God, confirmed by the
practice of Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles in the Old and New Testament, and by
the opinion and writings of the most learned Divines, both ancient and modern.


Martinius Dictionar. Theologicum.
Martinnus sets down three sorts; 1 Divine, which by Gods command and instinct
is used, and this is not to be practiced, but with prayer to God preceding, who
declares certainly his will in humane dubitation, Jos. 7. 1 Samuel 10. Jon. 1.
Act. 1. 2 Humane, which are lawful for men to use in those things which are
subject to their will and liberty. This is termed sort politica, a politic
Lot: A Lot is sometimes styled a^^ instrument whereby Dei voluntas, aut
legitime, aut temere exquiritur. Legitimae sortis exempla sunt, Levit. 16. Number.
26. Deuteronomy. 1. and 31. and lib. Jos. de illegitima sort multa in historiis
superstitionum Gentium. Martin, ib.
being either first Divisory in parting common goods, Levit. 16. Jos. 18. or
secondly Consultory in things of free Election, as when among persons which
seem to be alike fit for place or employment, some one is elected. Here
begins a special note, which is, that Lots are not rashly to be used, but
then at length when a matter cannot otherwise conveniently be decided or
concluded, and truly with reverence of God, without temptation or contempt of
him, and without any imposture. 3 Diabollicall, abused to inquire curiously of
things, either past, or to come. This kind of Lot is called (...), because
chiefly 'twas used for Divination. 4 Sorts judiciorum apud Romanos erant
(says Martin.) the Romans used Lots of judgments, or judicial Lots. Servius
in Aen. 6. non audiebantur causae nisi per sortem ordinatae; Causes were not
heard, unless ordinated by Lot.


Sortior 1. sort^^s mitto, I cast a Lot; 2. Sorts eligo, I choose by Lot; 3.
Secundum sortis casum assigno and do, I assign and give according as the Lot
falls; 4. Serte dispono, I dispose by Lot; 5. Ordino generaliter, etiam sine
sort, I ordain generally, also without Lot. 6 Sort accipio, I receive and
accept by Lot. 7. Obtine^ tanquam sort, I obtain or gain as it were by Lot.
Sortiri and dimicare, seem to bear the same acception. Apud Sueton in
Augusto cap. 13. where sortiri est sort legere vitam vel mortem; at dimicare,
ferro decernere, (...), to Duel or determine by the Sword. Micare is also
sortiri. nempe, sortiri per digitos subito expanses sub certo numero. Micare,
(...). Hence Causabonus says dimicare to duel or fight is derived, which is
properly by Lot or mication to put an end to controversy. Thence it was taken
for taking away Controversy any way: but because it was often done by the
Sword, it is put for pugnare, to fight in the same manner as (...), and
cernere, to discern Varro in Parmenone micandum erat cum Grace. Utrum illius
numerum, an ille meum sequatur.

Thus much touching the division and distinction of Lots. I shall now proceed
to the definition and description thereof, which is no less various then the
division.

Definition of divine lots.
Touching the description and definition of Lots, I shall not endeavor to
describe or define the several sorts thereof, but principally, and only that
which I intend as the subject of my present discourse, which is the divine Lot,
and the divisory or politic Lot.

Now those descriptions and definitions which Authors afford, seem to be drawn
either from the operation, fruits, and effects which the use of these Lots do
produce, or from the end and final cause for which they were ordained.

St. Augustine upon the ^0th Psalm, describes a Lot thus: Sors res est in
humana dubitatione, indicans divinam voluntatem; or thus, as Peter Martyr
quotes it: Sors nihil aliud est, quam Judicium divinae voluntatis in humana
dubitatione. A divine resolution of humane ambiguity and haesitation; A divine
declaration of Gods will and pleasure in humane dubitation. Diez in Matthioe
festum.
Divina voluntatis decretum. A divine decree of Gods divine will as Diez on 06
Matthias Election. Divinum judicium and voluntatis Dei solennis testificatio.

Which descriptions doubtless are meant of divine Consultory Lots, which in
cases difficult and doubtful were prescribed by God, to be used in a pious
religious manner, answerable hereunto is that expression of St. Ambrose, where
he styles Lottery a divine trial: Sors voluti divino pendet examine, Ambros. A
divine sentence: Ambros. de Tob. cap. 20,
Electi sunt due judicie humano, and electus de duobus unus judicio divino,
August in Psalm. 30. de Matthia, Act. 1.26. Ubi ex fide integra and oratione
praemissa s^rs ducitur; ea que Dei voluntas continet in occulto, (that the Lot
discovers to men Gods hidden will) Sors declarat in manifesto, Orig. in Josh.
hom. 23. the lot makes it known openly what God decrees secretly: Dei
judicium quod est in occulto, sors pandit in publico: Orig, in Josh. hom. 23.
ib. Which sayings all may be well understood of Gods approving will, what he
would have done, or not have done of us, and must be restrained to divine lots
alone, which God has appointed to be used to that purpose. Accordingly it is
true what St. August. Solent quae sort dantur divinitus dari. August. de Genesis
a lit. lib. 10. c. 18.
Those things that fall to us by Lot, are given us of God, according to that of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 16.6, 7. the lines or lot are fallen unto me in pleasant
places* yea, I have a fair heritage, I will bless the Lord for it. Dionysius
says that the election of Matthias by lot was a divine revelation: I sta sors
(says he) fuit splendour quidom divinus per quem ostendebatur quod Matthias in
Apostolum assumendus erat; A certain Divine splendour, whereby was showed that
God had chosen Matthias to be his Apostle, Praecedente oratione, non jam casu
sed providentia sors divinum judicium deferebat, Aret. super. Act. 1.
Origin. ibid. Aretius says that the lot falling on Matthias, was divina vocis
instar: and Matthias non minus divinitus erat electus quam reliqu^ undecim, A
divine voice or choice, declaring that he was no less divinely elected then
any other of the eleven, whom Christ himself personally and immediately called
to follow him.

Orig. in Josh. c. 18. De ratione sortium. homil. 23. Ephesians. 1.11.12. Colos.
1.12. Gratias agentes Deo patri qui dignos and idoneos nos fecit i^ partem
sortis sanctorum in lumine.
St. Paul, Ephesians. 1.11.12. says, In Christo sort vocati sumus, as Origin
observes, praedestinati secundum propositum ejus qui omnia operatur secundum
Consilium voluntatis sua, ut simus in laudem gloria ejus: Whereby the Apostle
notes the impartiality of this divine way of election, and teaches that as
all the works of God are without respect of merit: so to be a Christian is Gods
free gift, showing that both himself and the rest of the Apostles were chosen
in Christ by lot, by the free mercy of God, without any merit of theirs,
according to the counsel of Gods divine pleasure, that as from him, and by
him, and for him, are all things, so in his name, and according to his way, and
will revealed to his praise and glory, should all our intentions and actions be
directed.

To this purpose St. August. says, Praedestinationem and gratiam posse diei
sortem, Predestination and Grace may be termed or called lots, Secundum
interiorem vero intellectum (says Origin) Paulus videtur judisar^ quam dicit,
In part sortis sanctorum, Ephesians. 1.11. Colos. 1.12. Origin Josh. hom. 23.
and sort vocati in Christo, nonsolum in hominibus, sed in supernis virtutibus
sors agatur; Et quod in occultis habetur apud Deum, sortis gubernatione etiam
hominibus demonstratur: Quod ita gestum esse nonsolum in terris arbitror, verum
etiam in coelestibus, etc. Origin upon those forecited places of St. Paul, and
other places of the old and new Testament, seems to be of opinion that lots are
used, not only among men upon earth, terrestrial frail morealls, but even
among the supernall and celestial principalities and powers, and The Angels in
heaven had their several places and charges assigned to them, who should rule
this or that Province, Dan. 10.13.21. who tend this or that person, Mat. 18.10.
who govern this or that Church, Rev. 1.20. Orig. in Luc. hom. 13. Pet. Mart.
com. loc. 7. Cart. com. in Prove. 18.18.
spirits in heaven, grounding his opinion upon that text, Deuteronomy. 32.8. when the
high God divided to the Nations their inheritance; When he separated the sons
of Adam, he appointed the borders of the people according to the number of the
Angels of God, according to the 70 translation. The Lords portion is his
people, and Jacob the lot of his inheritance: Whence he infers, that by Lot
God had Israel for his peculiar lot and people.

Peter Martyr terms Lottery, or the religious use of divine Lots, Modus
consuleudi Deum, inquirendi per divinum consilium, A divine way or means of
consulting and advising with Almighty God, of inquiring and desiring divine
counsel and direction in caset of doubt and difficulty; and to that purpose
says, that sortiri nihil aliud est quam aliquid agere, ex eujus eveuta rem
incognitum possumus deprehendere: Use of Lots is nothing else but the way or
meants by whose event, hidden and secret matters are brought to light and
knowledge: according to that of Cartwright in Prove. 18.18. usus sortis valet ad
rerum recon^itiffimarum per vestigationem quomadmodum soeps ad eam rem adhibita
est; the use of Lots is very prevalent for the pervestigation and discovery of
the most recondite things, and to that purpose has often been applied. And in
another place upon that text says, that Sort est Dei mundi juditis quasi
vicarius, qua Deus ipse de rebus dub^^t, and nulla hominum art^ aut ingonio
investigandis decernis. The Lot is as it were the Vicegerent or deputy of God,
who is the Judge of the whole world, whereby he does discover and determine
such doubtful and obscure matters as by the art and wit of man cannot be
discerned and found out: And the same Author says also upon the same text,
that the singular and special use of a Lot is shown, and was ordained for the
continuing of concord and unity, and composing of strife and enmity, especially
among the mighty. Hoc autem proverbio Balomon specialem and singularem esse
sortis usum designat ad concordiam alendam, and in componendis litibus and
dirimendis controversiis, maxim^cum inter magnates contentio aboritur,
indicans, lites inter magnates agree and difficulter tol^^ docens similiter
concordiam and pacem ut inter omnes fic praecipue inter magnites and cos qui
principatum obtinent colendam and fovendam esse; ut quae difficulter, semel
violatae, recuperetur and redintegretur; quod clientelis, societatibus pecunia
confis^ ^^^tuo non cedunt, and cedere sibi infamiae ducunt, cum quod sort
divimitur, ad neutrius infamiam redundat: neutrius enim aut sapientie aut
potentia, aut opibus in hoc jud^^^ praejudicatur. But in this Solomon sets
forth the special and singular use and end of Lots to be for the nourishment
of concord and amity, and the composing of contentions, and taking away of
Controversies, especially among the mighty, showing that strife among Princes,
Potentates, and Rulers of the people are very hardly decided, teaching likewise
that peace and unity, as among all men, so especially among the mighty, ought
principally to be preserved and cherisht, in regard that love among such being
once violated, is not without much difficulty and danger recovered and
restored, because each side confiding in their friends powers and policies hold
it infamous to yield or submit either to other: whereas, when the controversy
is decided by Lot, it redoundeth to the infamy of neither, for the wealth,
wisdom, power, or valor of neither is hereby prejudiced or disparaged.

Also the same Author in Prove. 16. v. 33. styles a lot judicium Dei, the
judgment of God, Gods immediate judgment, and says that Deus ipse sedet in
judicio per sortem, God himself is present, and sits in judgment by the lot,
grounding his opinion upon the very words of the text it self, in sinum
conjicitur sors a Jehovah autem est totum judicium ejus, tota dispositia, tota
ratia, Whereby is confirmed the event of a divine lot to be the evident
judgment of God: the Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole judgment
thereof, the whole reason and disposition is of the Lot.

St. Ierous upon those words in the Canticles 4.1. spoken of the Church, Eces
speciosaes, etc. oculi tui, oculi columbarum, Hieron. super Cant. hom.
behold thou are fair my love etc. thine eyes are the eyes of Doves: has a
very considerable observation concerning this subject of Lots: which I here the
rather insert and relate because it alludeth in some sort, both to the title
and subject of this present discourse, and will not (I hope) be held
impertinent, in regard the Dove is sent to present a peace offering by this
holy way of the Lort.

The words of St. Ierom are these; Quod autem oculi ejus comparantur columbis,
ab hoc profacto contingit, quia divinas scripturas ne^ jam secundum literam sed
secundum spiritum intelligat, and aspiciat in eis spiritualia mysteria: Columba
enim est indicium Sp. sancti, spirituali ergo sensis intelligere lege^s and
prophatas, h. e. oculos colu^b a habere; That the eyes of the Church are
compard to Doves. Hence it comes, because she understands the holy Scriptures,
not according to the letter, but according to the spirit, and therein beholds
spiritual mysteries: for a Dove is the emblem of the holy Ghost: in a
spiritual sense therefore not in a literal, to understand the Law and the
Prophets, that is, to have oculos columbe, the eyes of a Dove.

And Jerome proceeding in that interpretation* says thus; In Psalmis vero
hujusmodi ani^^ a pennas sibi dari columba desiderat ut volare possit in
intellectu^ spiritualium misterioru^ and requiescere in ^^riis sapi^^tia: Sed
and si dormire quio possit hoc est collocari and requiescere in medio sortium,
atque intelligere sortium rationem, and cognoscare divi^^ judicii causas no^^
solu^^ penna quibus in spiritualibus intellectibus volet, pro^^tuntur ei sed
dear^entate pennae, id est, verbi and rationis ornament^ decoratae scapula
quoque ejus in speci^ auri fieri dicuntur, ubi constantia fidei and dognatun^
stabilitas judicatur perfectorum: In the Psalm. The devout soul desires the
wings of a Dove, that she may fly into the understanding of spiritual
mysteries, and to rest in the Courts of wisdom: wherein if any shall have the
happiness to repose* that is, to be placed and enjoy rest in the midst of
lots, and to understand the reason of lots, and know the causes of that divine
judgment not only wings whereby he may fly into spiritual understanding are
promised to him, but also silver wings, id est, to be decorated and beautified
with the ornament of elegant language, and right reason. Yea, and also feathers
of pure gold, that is to say, resolution and constancy of faith, and stability
and firmness of perfect arguments, and firm resolutions to maintain the
same; To have the discerning eyes of a Dove, is to see with a spiritual eye
into the lofty learning of divine lots; to have the silver wings of a Dove, is
to fly to the spiritual understanding of the reason of divine lotts; and to
have the golden feathers of a Dove, is with spiritual faith and wisdom, to
mount into the transcendent knowledge of the mysterious causes of that divine
judgment; to know and remember the divine author thereof, the God of peace,
and the holy end for which this Sacred Oracle and divine ordinance was
originally instituted, to wit, composing of differences, and settling of peace
and unity.

St. Hieron. on Prove. 18.18. thus defines a Lot, Sors est occulta and
incomprehensibilis praedestinatio ex divina regula procedens, quae inter
potentes, dum singulis propria assignat. dijudicat; The lot is an hidden, and
incomprehensible predestination proceeding from a divine rule, so judging
between the mighty; that what is justly due to each one the Lot asigneth,
being guided and governed by God alone. As Eastius in his history of the
Gospel upon that place of Hierom observes and thereupon says thus, I wonder
then how any frail and mortal worm dares deride or despise so high and holy
an ordinance.

Dudley Fennor, a divine modern writer, defines a Lot thus, Sors est medium a
Deo constitutum quo Deus ipse controversias quae aliter ab hominibus dirimi non
possunt, componit; The Lot is a way or means instituted by God himself;
whereby he composeth those controversies, which otherwise cannot be decided or
determined among men; remedium quo nullum facilias, nullum felicius, A remedy
to prevent ruin, then which none can be more ready and, easy, none can be
more holy and happy.

The Apostles persisted in the ancient custom of the Church under the Law in
difficult cases to cast Lots, Maier in act. 1.2.26.
for they had no figne, which of the two proposed was most worthy, and
therefore left the Election to the Lord. Neither was their Lot in vain; for
if lots being cast in ( Jonah by common ignoble and heathenish persons) had the
due effect much more by the Apostles preparing to it by prays and invocation
of the Lord. Election by Lot, Gods judgment.
Calvin in Act. 1. As there is an abuse so there is a good use of Lots, as by
the Apostles practice appears. The corruption of the abusers does no more
vitiate nor vilify this sacred Ordinance, then the adulterate vanity of the
Caldees genuine Astrology, or an heretical Reader the holy Scripture, an
ungodly preacher, the word of God, or an unworthy receiver, the Eucharish In
this Election we may discern the convenience and necessity of Gods judgment
by lot in case of difficulty by the Apostles care and piety to wait on God.
Commit a doubtful case to Gods determination in the way prescribed in his
Word; Inquire of God, address themselves to the Law and the testimony, not
presumptuously rely on their own judgment (though doubtless they might, with
much more safety then any of the most sanctified of these times) but go to god
in his own way, whereby they gave him the glory and the good redounded to
themselves; For whereas (as Mayer says) they seemed to esteem more of Joseph
then Matthias, as naming him first, and givin him two names of excellent
signification. Barsabas the son of rest, surnamed Iustus, signifying his
singular honesty; yet God contrary to their opinion prefers Matthias and
leaves Joseph. Thereby teaching them and us not to glory in the estimation of
men, but study to be approved of God, and in our opinion and acceptance of
others, not to give too much way to our own wilful partial humor, by
neglecting the one party, and respecting too much the other, but rather in a
case of doubtful difficulty, to leave the judgment to the Lord by lot, lest
we should seem to slight Gods judgment, or to fight against God, in
preferring our own wills before his, which naturally all men incline unto
being partially affected to their own desires and designs, which are weak
and wretched, and whose hearts are deceitful above all things, rather then to
submit to the Lords wisdom, which cannot be deceived and who sees not as man
sees but gives to every one what is justly due, To Caesar the things that are
Caesar's* and to God the things that are Gods.

Seeing then Lotts in general are Gods ordinance, and have been used by the
holiest and best of Gods servants with such good success, the use of them
under the old Testament ought not so to prejudice the use of them now, as that
it should be counted an imperfection in these days to cast lots upon any just
occasion (which tends to Gods glory in settling peace and unity among his
people, then which nothing is more pleasing to God) seeing none will affirm
that whatsoever was in use then, is an imperfection now, especially of matters
moral, which all Divines hold to be perpetual, and none can deny the Proverbs
of Solomon to be sound canonical moral Divinity: And this Augustine also
acknowledges, where he confesses Lots upon Ministers to be lawful, August.
Epist. 119. c. 20.180. Conc. 2. ad Doct. Christis 28.
especially in the time of persecution if it be disputed amongst them who shall
tarry, that the Church may not be lest desolate, or they being slain, it is by
Lot to be decided who shall supply the place. And with him consents Gregory. 1
Reg. 14. and Origin. Nom. 23. in Jos. It follows in the next place, that
something be said touching the persons, places, times, manners, cases, and
occasions; who where, how, and when Lots have been used, and are still in use,
a brief collection whereof in the ensuing chapter appears.

CHAP. II.
IT was the opinion of Origin, and others of the learned Fathers grounded on
the (...).
Septuagints translation of Deuteronomy, 32.8. and other places of Scripture that Lots
were not only used among men on earth, but even by the Lord himself among the
celestial powers and Angels in heaven, who had their several places and
charges assigned to them by Lot, who should rule this or that Province Dan.
10.31. who tend this or that person, Mat. 18 10. Acts 12.15. who govern this or
that Church. Rev. 1.20. Quod ita gestum esse non solum in terris arbitror,
verumque etiam in coelestibus; and hujusmodi sortem quae apud Deum
distinguitur, etiam illo tempore habitam cum divideret and constitueret
excelsus gentes* and disseminaret filios Adam, and constitu^rit fi^es g^^tium
secundum (...) lorum Dei: Which thing was not usual upon earth alone, but in
heaven also with God himself, who allotted to the Angels according to their
several excellencies the tuition of the Nations of the earth, at what time
they were disposed of into their several territories, Origin, in Jesu Nave.
cap. 18. (...). 23.

Ambrosan Luc. c. 1. summus sacerdos adhac sort quaeritur. The high Priest is
elected by Lot.
St. Ambrose also upon the first of Luke, and many (not of former times only,
but of later days also, and those of good esteem and note) affirm that the
high Priest in the old Testament was elected by Lot. Beda in Act. c. 1. Alexan.
de Ales s^^ part. 2. q. 185. in. 4 Tom. de sort. c. 2. and Cajotan. in Luc. c.
1. Bulling. in Act. c. 1 Perkins aurea armill. c. 22. Schindl. Lexlc.
Pontaglot, Luc. 1.9. The Hebrews, says Mayer on the first of the Acts v. 26.
were wont to begin no weighty business, but having first consulted with the
Lord, and the Bible by Lot.

By whom, where in what cases, and upon what occasion Lots have been used, and
where they are still in use, is the next point considerable.

The Apostles of Christ parted among themselves (as Prochorus writes) the
whole world to preach and plant the Gospel in. Proch. hist. Joan. c. 1.
And in like manner the 72. Disciples, which of them should accompany and
attend on each Apostle, as the Levites did on the Priests, and John's lot light
for Asia, and Prochorus his Lot for to attend on John. And in the Jewish Church
for the more ready and orderly performance of Sacred offices, the divisions
thereof were made among them by Lot: where the whole body of the tribe of Levi
was sorted into ranks; 1 Chronicles. 25.8.9.
and first the Priests all divided, into twenty four Companies according to
their Families, which took their courses by turns, every week after week in
order, the order of their courses being determined by lot, to take away all
murmuring, that none might complain as being less regarded and cast behind
others: And accordingly the Levites were divided into twenty four Companies, 1 Chronicles. 14.^. etc.
and appointed to attend the former companies of Priests: but who, which, and
when, was decided likewise by Lot. Moreover, the Priests that were of each
company cast lotts for the sharing of offices among themselves ( ut tolleretur
materia querimoniarum, for the avoiding of emulation and discord in the
Church:) as also for the better settling of servises, namely who should tend
the Altar of Insence, who the Table of holy Bread, who the dressing of the
Lamps, who the Altar of burnt-offerings, who should feed the fire, etc. as
from the books of the Jewish Liturgies is very evident.

Zachary the Priest of the course of Abi^, went in by lot to burn Incense,
Luke 1.9 The Levites Musical, and Porters decided by Lot, what course should
be observed in their ministerial and musical employments by the one, and
which gates of the Temple should be waited at by the other, 1 Chronicles. 26.13.

The election of Matthias to be an Apostle, was by lot, Act. 1.26. Classius in
meditat. Sacr. sup festum Matthew. dicit sortem esse judicium Dei immediatum, and
solennem divinae voluntatis testificationem. Et res (viz. Electio Matthia) ad
ejusmodi fuit inst^tuenda i, e. per sortem, ut omnibus constaret, non tam
hominum suffraglis quam Dei arbitrio and voluntate rem omnem peragi. and in
Act. 1.26. prec^ti dixerunt, Tu Domine qui corda nosti omnium ostende utrum
elegeris ex his duobus, v. 25. D^di^^e dic^^^ur s^^tes Du^ru^ i^^^rum virorum,
i.^. in ^^^am aut (...) ^^^j^cisse, (...) extracta post modum certam de r^
cogn^scenda sent^ntiam pat^fac^r^nt. S^rs ^^cidit super Matthiam: Si^ Dous hoc
judicio manifest declaravit Matthiam esse divi^^ut desig^^tum and electum
Christi Apost^l^m sortibus, qua in pop^le dei ^^aut oli^^ in usu ad explorandum
Dei voluntatem certam, Cajet. Levit. 16.8. Numb. 33.58. 1 Samuel 10.20. Prove.
16.33.18.18. The Apostles used Lots here, because as the Lord had immediately
called the eleven, so it was a fitter supply of the twelfth room, that not
men, but God should elect one, Mayer in Act. 1.26. Matthias non minus di^^itus
electus quam reliqui undecem.

It was St. Austius desire to have it determined by lot amongst the Pastors of
Gods people, where diverse of them are in a City, which of them should stay by
it, and who retire themselves in time of public persecution, that neither the
stayer might be taxed with presumption, nor the removers with cowardice,
August. Epist. 80. According to which rule the Geneva Ministers to this day (as
it is reported by some) use to cast Lots who shall visit the Pesthouse, Bar^.
in Io^. c. 1.

Lotts were used also in the distribution of civil services among Gods people
ordinarily, and that first in a military matter, wherein the Levites quarrel,
that had his Concubine ravished, so that she died upon it at Gibia in Benjamin:
the other Tribes resolved to go up against Benjamin by lot, viz. who of them
should be Warriors, and who bring in provisions for those that abode abroad in
the field: which thing without much tumult in a Democracie could not easily
have been determined otherwise, Judge. 20.9, 10. Pet. Martyr, and Fran. Iunius:
and secondly in a City business, where the same people after their Babilonian
captivity cast Lots among themselves, who should take the burden of bringing in
wood for the Altar, by Ezra's own direction.

Lot^ frequent among other Nations, besides Gods own people, the Jews.
NEither was the use of Lotts less frequent among other Nations, then among
Gods chosen people the Israelites: Plato de (...).
for Plato in his imaginary Model of a Commonwealth, intended the most part
of his Magistrates, to be designed yearly by Lot, for the preventing of, and
meeting with the peevishness and way ward^^sse of the people. For which intent
he advises that ^60. be Elected yearly by most voices of the Commonalty out of
four ranks of Citizens, 90. out of each rank, for Aldermen or Senators; Mr.
Gatak. of the nature and use of Lots, p. 44.
and the one half of them by Lot assigned to govern the City for that year:
as also sixty Sheriffs to govern the territory thereunto belonging, which was
divided into twelve parts; And furthermore it was yearly determined by Lot,
which part of the City should send Rulers into this or that part of the
Country. And besides these three Surveighers of houses, edifices, highwayes,
watercourses in and about the City; Five Clarks of the Market, a Master of the
Revels, and three for Triers and disposers of prizes in solemn g^nes, and
Judges for private Causes, to prevent Corruption, were all appointed by Lot.

Choice of Priests by lot.
The choice of Priests, and such as undertook the charge of Sacred things was to
be left to God himself, to dispose of by Lot, as it pleased him. Many of their
Officers likewise at Athens, both Civil and Sacred, were disposed of by Lot.

Officers both civil and sacred chosen by lot.
The Athenian Senators sent to the Common Council at Delphos, and their
ordinary Council of five hundred were all chosen by Lot: the Election being
alter this manner; The names of all those in each Ward that were capable of
that dignity were noted on little Tables, or tokens of brass into one vessel,
and as many Beans black and white, all but fifty black into another; and so
each man's token being drawn out of the one, and a bean withal out of the
other, either he past to further trial, and held it if he were approved; or he
was for that year rejected, as his Bean proved white or black: so fifty apiece
being extracted out of each of the ten Wards, the number was made up of five
hundred. And out of those so dignified with the Bean, nine were advanced by
like course to further place of authority named Rulers, or Regents: out of
which were six Masters of the Ordinance^ the King, or Master of the Ceremonies,
the Major for the year, and the Marsh^^^. The nine Regents thus called out of
the five hundred, Lots were cast again for the ten Wards, which should rule
first, which next, and so on to the years end: afterward ten Presidents for
the first seven days, and ten for the next seven, and so on till thirty five
days were expired, the full time of their whole principality. Our of which
ten, Lot was again drawn for a Commander or Provost, whose government lasted
but one day of seven. Neither might any one of the ten have it above one day at
once, because the keys of the Castle of Athens were in his keeping; seven of
them had it as the black Bean favored them; and three were necessarily debarted
of it. Sigon. de Repub. Athen. l. 2. c. 3.

Judges elected by Lot.
For hearing and trial of Causes a competent number of persons according to the
quality of the suites to be heard, were assigned by Lot, as they drew Beans or
Acorns with the letters upon them that belonged to those Courts: each of which
persons so allotted received a rod from the Crier, with the name of the Court
written on it, or of the same color that the letter was over the Court-gate,
and then went with that, and his Bean or Acorn, unto that Court that had the
letter on the one of the same color with the other, and was there admitted for
a Judge.

Besides these ordinary Judges, there were certain Arbitrators, or umpires by
Lot assigned for deciding of lighter matters; which matters were divided among
them by Lot. Their Clearks also of the Pleas, with ten Treasurers taken out of
the best rank, ten Comptrollers or Auditors, ten Surveyors or Scavengers, ten
Wardens of the Ports, ten Clerks of the Market, one Register, ten of Sheriffs
and Bailiffs, ten Sacrists for superstitious services. And if any one presumed
to come to Court or Council not being designed by Lot, a penalty was laid upon
him.

In Sparta the Competitors for any office, were sometime in order by lot
admitted to pass the suffrages of the assembly.

At Syracusa in Cicily, Cican Verr. 4.
Joves priest out of three chosen by Voices out of three Families, was designed
yearly by Lot.

At Rome the Vestall Nuns were elected by lot. Attic. l. 1. c. 12.


The two hundred Gentry of Rome, divided into tens, cast Lots for governing the
State in course among themselves after Romulus his death, each ten their fifty
days, and each of the ten his five, etc. till all had taken their turns:
which Custom expired at Na^^a's Election.

The two Consuls so often as any extraordinary business fell out, that was to
be done by them, and could not conveniently be done but by one of them (as the
Dedication of a Temple, the nomination of a Dictator or Sovereign General, the
keeping of Courts for creation of some new Officers, etc.) used by lot to
decide whether of them should have the honor of it: and in time of War they
cast lots also, which should go ^o the wars, and which stay at home: And being
both together in the same service with equal authority, they did sometime in
the execution thereof by Lot daily take their turns.

The Pretors parted the Government of the City between themselves by lot.

And by lot the Questors or Treasurers charge was assigned unto them: out of
which Questors the Tribunes were sometime designed by lot; and out of the
Tribunes were allotted certain persons for foreign Plantations.

In warlike employments Consuls and Praetors had their legions and armies by
this course allotted them. Also such Tribes as should afford Soldiers for
service: and such persons of each tribe as should serve were assigned by lot;
And hence it fell out that M. Curious when a sudden Muster was made in his
Consulship, and none of the younger sort appeared, cast lots upon all Tribes,
and citing him which was first drawn of that Tribe that come next to hand
confiscated his goods, and sold him to be a slave.

Doubts in choice of Ediles or Surveyors (where diverse Competitors had an
equal number of voices) were decided by Lot which of them should hold.

And in their Assemblies for election of Officers the Lot determined, which
Companies or hundreds should be demanded their suffrages the first, and give
the leading voices.

Several Pleas were ordinarily parted among them by lot, some to have and try
Causes of treason, some of murder, some of extortion, and the like; and the the
Judges took assistants to them which they elected by lot, as they themselves,
were by lot appointed for the hearing of such Causes as were allotted to them.

Plin. sec. Epist. 3. lib 9.
In Vintage time Senators were made choice of by Lot, to attend the Court in the
abscence of the rest by the appointment of Augustus.

Dion. Cass. lib. 55.
Augustus by Lot set apart a certain number of Senators to consult with at
convenient times for preparation of Causes to be heard in the Court afterward:
or rather to dispatch businesses by without the Court, yet so as the whole
Court might seem to have some hand in them: he did likewise assay by Lot to
reform the Senate: he first parted the City into certain Regions and Wards, and
then appointed the yearly Officers to share them amongst them, and to undertake
the charge thereof, By lot he enjoined two of those that had been Pretors
formerly to be elected yearly for the custody of the common Treasury.

In Tiberius his reign, there were certain persons assigned by lot to clear
the Laws in some cases then questionable.

Vespasian assigned persons for redress of wrongs done during the civil wars,
and to rid the Courts of multiplicity of suits; which intermission of Justice
had cloyed them with, Taeit. hist. l. 4. Suet. Vesp. c. 10.

Certain persons were assigned by Lot to mitigate harsh Laws, Claud. c. 23.

Legates or Lievtenants were sometime designed by lot: in which case the use of
Lotrery sometimes being questioned, Tacit. hist. l. 4. Cic. ad Attic. Epist.
17. Live. hist lib. 43. and cic. Verr. 1.
though it were by some opposed, yet the major part went with it^ and would
have it still retained as a sovereign preservative against ambition and
corruption; and a singular remedy for the preventing both of injury and envy:
in which regard they esteemed it as a kind of divine Ordinance, where it was
carried without fraud and covine, as it ought.

Panorm. ad 5. de sorti leg.
Neither is the practice of civil Lottery unusual in Italy, even at this day:
for in Venice (the mirror of Policy, and supposed model of Plate's Platform)
the Gentry at twenty years of age come to the General Council by Lot, (but
otherwise not till twenty five years of age, Contaren. l. 1. Gat. of Lots p.
58.
by the ordinary course: in Election of whom, every fourth of December, they
that seek it, having made proof of their Gentry, have their names all cast into
one pot, and brought to the Duke, before whom stands another pot with as many
balls in it, whereof a fifth part is gilt, and all the rest silver only: the
Duke draws out of the one each man's name, and a ball out of the other, which if
it prove a golden one, he is thereupon admitted; if a silver one only, he
stays at least a year longer.

When their Duke (the chief Magistrate) has his designation, there is Lottery
upon Lottery, and Voycing in a prolix and intricate manner, interchangeably
mixed together the one with the other: the place being void either by
deposition or decease, all their Gentry of thirty years of age or upward (and
none under) assemble and come in order as they sit (Lotts first being cast
which side of them shall come in first) to the Lot-pot, having as many balls in
it as there be of them in number, whereof thirty only be gilt, there a child
draws for each of them till for thirty of them, those thirty gilt ones be
drawn. For which thirty the child draws again the second time out of
another pot having nine gilt ones. The nine, withdrawing into a conclave, among
themselves name forty such as have each of them six voices at least: out of the
forty so named, are twelve selected by Lot; which twelve choose twenty five,
each at least by eight Voices: of these twenty five are nine set apart by Lot,
which nine do further nominate 45: those forty five again reduced to eleven,
the eleven choose forty one of the chiese Senators, which forty one have power
to elect a Duke. These forty one after an oath by them severally taken, to
elect whom they judge worthiest, and some other solemnities performed, write
each of them in a scroll whom he thinks good: the scrolls being mingled
together, are drawn as they come, and the fitness of the person first drawn is
discussed: who, if he have twenty five Voices with him, used anciently to carry
it without further ado: but now he that has most voices above that number,
come he first or last to hand, has the place. If none has voices enough, they
begin again, and continue till some be nominated that has.

And in their yearly Assemblies at election of other Officers, all their Gentry
that have suffrage in Council, draw first for sixty gilt Balls out of two Pots
by one Lottery: and after those sixty, for thirty six other gilt ones out of
another by a second Lottery: and the thirty six that have thus drawn gilt Balls
twice, have power to nominate to such offices as are then to be chosen: which
is done in this manner, they go apart into certain conclaves by nine and nine,
in four Companies: where all those of each company in order of years draw out
of a Lot-pot, balls with marks upon them for the several offices; and
according to the ball that each of them has drawn, he nominates what Citizen
he will for that office, who, if he has six voices of those nine, the party
yet holds; if not, another must be nominated by him till some one be so
approved. By this means among those four Companies are four compettitors
nominated for each of their offices, whereof one is chosen by most voices of
the whole assembly, the Electors and the whole Kindred of the parties nominated
being only first excluded.

In the Tuscan State, though not the Electors, Grimston.
yet their offices are elected after the same manner: for dividing those that
are capable of office into three ranks, and casting them into three boxes: out
of the first they draw the Magistrates of highest place, the middle sort out of
the second; and the lowest, out of the third: and having thus drawn five
several ones for each office, he carries it that has of the five the most
voices in the Council: which election stands, and is always confirmed by
the Duke.

Theodosius the Emperor, though at that time a great Commander, disdained not
as a common Soldier in martial services, to take his turn among the rest.

Hom. Iliad. n. Sophoc. ^n Aiale. Ovid. Metam. l. 13. Hom. Iliac. 3. Plaut. in
Timol.
In Duells, a Champion has been sometimes singled out by Lot, by lot it has
been determined which of them should give the onset.

By lot it was determined who should be enclosed in the belly of the wooden
horse at the taking of Troy. Virg. Aen. 2.

Plaut. in Timol.
By lot, Timoleon being to transport his Army over a river in the face of the
enemy took the rings of the several Leaders, by drawing them to decide in
what order they should p^sse, and when the ring of one of them that had a
trophey engraven on it, came first to hand, they left off further lotting, and
very cheerfully made each of them with all the speed they could over, and so
discomfited those forces that stood on the other side to inhibite their passage.

Plaut. in Pericle.
Pericles, to restrain his Soldiers inconsiderate eagerness to fight, divided
them into two parts, and by lot assigned some to fight, and others (that
lighted on the white Bean) to rest the whilst, and make merry.

Joseph. Captiv. lib. 7. c. 35.
Josephus, with his company being in a desperate condition, and they choosing
rather to die than to fall into the hand of the enemy, and to be at his mercy,
decided by Lot who should slay each other and by that means he escaped; his lot
coming out with the last man's, whom he persuaded to surrender himself to the
Romans.

Jos. captiv. l. 7. cap. 35.
The Jews besieged in Masada, at Eleazars instigation, chose by lot ten men to
slay all the rest, with their wives and children, which being done, one of
those ten again singled by lot dispatched the other nine, and in the last place
himself.

At Syracuse they used to deliver their minds in Court by Lot, which practice
continued unto Tullie's time: and likewise the delivery of their minds in
course after the order of Alphabet is celebrated for Di^nysius his act, who
having drawn the letter M. when one jesting, said he would play the Mome, made
answer that he would not play the Mome, but the (...)
Monarch, which proved accordingly, for being chosen General, he turned
tyrant: whence grew the Proverb, to say, M. is his Lot.

In Voyages some were by Lot set ashore for discovery, principally where there
was conceived to be difficulty or danger.

At Sea sometimes Lots have been cast, to determine who should row, and who
were to have other employments.

It was the custom of all the Rhodian State, both rich and poor, to speak
freely in their turns by Lot.

In Public works, as at the building of Tire * and in private labors, as at
Vulcans Forge; and in mutual combinations, as in assaulting the Cyclops, each
man had his task or standing often assigned him by Lot. Aen. 1. Aen. 8, Hom.
Odyss. 1.

P^ta. hist. l. 33.
Sesostris the Egyptian King compelled Kings that were tributary to him, to
draw his Coach in their turns by Lot, like horses in a Charret, when it pleased
him once a year to ride in state.

Thus it does appear that the use of Lots has been frequent among all sorts,
both for the distribution of Civil and Sacred offices and employmems; and also
it will be made clear, that it has been no less frequent in the division of
lands and possessions, goods and chattells, yea, oftentimes of rewards too
(as well as penalties) as honors and dignities.

Number. 26.55. and 33.54. and 36.2.
1 For at the entrance of Gods people into the Land of Promise, the whole
Country in general was divided by Lot, by Gods own special appointment, among
the twelve Tribes: Concerning the manner of Lottery in that particular
busmesse, there is some diversity of opinion; 1 Some think, that the Lots of
the Land were put into one pot, and the Tribes names into another, and that one
choice person, to wit, Eleazar drew for all: Others that out of one Pot of
Tickets containing the names of the portions, one of each Tribe drew for the
Tribe he was of. Others lastly, suppose that the Tribes names only were put
into the Lot-pot, and that each Tribe as it was drawn, had his choice of which
part he would, yet undisposed of, when he drew. The first opinion seems most
probable, and that first, because once drawing so, might well end all: which
could not be in the second, where question might be who should draw first: and
secondly, because it is not said that such a Tribe drew, or was drawn first or
second simply, but that the Lot came out first or second for such a Tribe,
which agrees not with the third.

Number. 35.7, 8. Losh. 25.2.
Now as the Land in general was thus divided by Lot, so in particular were the
forty eight Cities assigned to the Levites, divided among them by Lot according
to their Families: and whereas the Levites were divided into three Families,
according to Levi's three sons Kohath, Gershom, Merari: and the Koathites
subdivided into two ranks, i.e. the Antonites, or the issue of Aaron, Kohath
Nephew by his son A^^^^, which alone had the Priesthod, and the rest of that
house which came not of Aaron; Lots were cast among them for these their
several Families, Josh. 21.8.
in what Tribes there should Cities be assigned unto each: and in conclusion
the Aaronites had thirteen in Juda, Sime^n, and Benjamin; the other Koathites.
ten in Ephraim, Dan, and the one half of Manasses; and the Merarites, twelve
in Reuben, Gad, and Zebul^n: the whole number forty eight.

At the return of the Jews unto the Land of promise from the Chaldean captivity
a colonie was drawn by Lot for the peopling of Jerusalem, one being taken of
each ten, and a tenth of the whole company for the storing of the City. Yea,
the whole City it self was by lot shared in three parts, by the three
seditious Commanders in the time of the Roman siege.

Moreover Lots were used for partition of movables, goods and chattells, and
the like, as in the case of setting forth the tith, of Bullocks, Goats and
Sheep, Levit. 27.32.

And secondly in division of booties, of prey and spoils taken in war, Lorts
are said to have been cast upon Jerusalem when it was sacked by the Chaldees,
and her people by Lot shared among the conquerours for slaves, Obad. v. 11.
Joel. 3.3. Nahum 3.10. as the Nobles of Niniveh were shared by lot among the
Medians, or Scythians, for slaves, when it was several times surprised by them.

And thirdly of goods gotten by pilage or stealth, as David complains that
they had parted his garments among them, and cast Lots upon his Vesture, which
is justly supposed to have been practiced upon David, 1 Samuel 19.11.12. but was
certainly fulfilled in our Savior, Math. 27.35. Mark 15.24. Luke 23.34. Ioh.
19.24. Such a Lot as this is alluded too by Solomon, where he brings in
theevish companions inviting to join and adventure with them, saying, Cost in
thy lot among us, Prove. 1 14.

By Lot certain persons were picked out to be saved, or slain: so David
measured out the Moabites with two cords to be destroyed, but with one cord to
be saved alive, as the Chald. Paraphr. expounds the place, 2. Sam. 8.2. and in
this sense do Interpreters understand that place of Ezech. 24 6. where the Lord
bids the Prophet pull the flesh piece by piece, every piece of it out of the
Pot or Caldron, and cast no lot in it, thereby signifying that the people
should not be some saved and some destroyed, but all utterly destroyed without
distinction or difference. In this kind was the lot cast on the two Goats (for
it was divisory merely, not divinatory to tell whether was fitter for service,
both being alike fit for it) whereby the one was taken for the scapegoat, to
be sent out alive and saved, the other left to be slain to make a sin sacrifice
to God in behalf of his people.

Among Profane writers nothing is commoner than the use of Lotts in this kind:
Inheritances among coheires were by lot divided: Saturns three Sons parted
among them Heaven, Sea and Hell, by this way of Lottery. Claros and Lacedaemon
according to some Grammarians derive their names from hence: that is, Ex Near
Eust. ad
Claros (...) and Lacedamon, quasi (...) i.e. (...).

Thus Poloponnesus after right of possession by joint conquest recovered, was
parted between Cresphontes, Temenus, and the sons of Aristodemus.

Thus Lotharius his four sons parted the Realm of France amongst them after
their Fathers decease. Greg. Tur. hist. l. 4. c. 22.
Thus Fredereck the second King of Denmarks, and Adelph Duke of Holst divided
between them the Territory of the elder John of Holst deceased without issue.
The goods and chattels of every Courtier deceased, where a fourth part is to
come to the Court, is to be parted into four parts by the Heir or Executor,
and Lots are to be cast whether he shall choose his three, or the Court her
fourth by the civil Law. And our common Law allows this course of partition
of Land among Partners or female coheires, viz. that by dividing the land into
parts as equal as may be, and then wrapping up of scrolls of each part in as
many waxen Balls, to be drawn by the partners in order of years out of the
bonnet of some other indifferent party.

In Cities new built, and at the first foundation or altering of a state as
also upon enfranchising foreigners, or non-freemen, each one used to have his
house, portion of land, or tribe, he should belong to, assigned him by Lot: a
thing practiced by Lycurgus in the Spartan Republique: and by Aeneas also, Aen.
5. and by Romulus at the founding of the Roman State.

In Egypt they yearly assigned by Lot to each man or Kindred what land they
should till.

After Victories obtained over some Countries, the Greek and Roman Conquerours
were wont to divide the land by lot among the Soldiers, Aristoph. Dionys.
Hal. li. 2.
or other of the people.

In Countries overburdened with multitudes of people, or such as were unable to
maintain the Natives by reason of a long and grievous Famine, it was an usual
course to decide by lot who should remain at home, and who remove to seek their
fortunes abroad, Live. l. 5.

In the Palestine expedition it was tried by lot which should be first
assaulted, Tire or Askalon.

A Prey taken in the field, or in the sacking of a City, were it goods or
jewels, or garments, or beasts, or men's persons, it was ordinarily divided by
lot,

A swift horse able to travel one hundred miles a day, was put to lot with the
rest of the prey, and drawn for one Probus (one of the Emperors name) of which
name there being four, and Probus still coming out of the Lot pot, to end the
controversy, it was agreed on by all, that Probus the Emperor should have
him, who said at first he was fitter for a flyer then a fighter, when the
people thought he would have kept him to himself, and not have put him to lot
with the rest of the booty.

In distribution of rewards, alms, and gifts, where every ones turn could not
be served, or that which many had alike interest in, could not equally be
divided, it was by Lot designed which way it should go, or to whom, Digest. l.
40. tit 5. leg. 24.

The two Tarquins, Titus and Araus decided by Lot, who should first kiss their
of an Olive leaf. Mother the Oracle telling them, he should reign that gave
his Mother the first kiss: wherein Brutus went beyond them both in kissing his
Grandmother the ground.

When it is questionable in some cases at civil Law, whither party is
Plaintiff, and whether Defendant (both commencing suit (as they may) at once)
that doubt is commonly put to the decision of a lot Vlpian. l. 14.

At the Popes Election, the Cardinals in the Conclave have their cells
assigned them by lot.

At solemn Feasts, messes of meat were anciently assigned by lot unto each man
in particular.

Among Gods people the Hebrews, Levit. 27.32. Thucyd. lib. 3.
Gods part in the tith of their cattle was by lot set apart; and among the
Heathen likewise, where by a solemn Vow a tenth of the increase of the fruits
of the earth, or of their cattle, had been before made over to their Idols,
Dyonis-Hal. l. autiq. 1.

The Arabians formerly consecrated yearly a third part of their Cinnamon, which
the lot lighted on, to the Sun, and the Sun did fire that part of himself, as
they fable. Among those heathen in their feastivall Lottery the mess first
drawn was accounted holy, and held to be some Gods share; Mercuries most
commonly, whom they deemed president of Lottery: that which is rather termed to
be Mercuries Lot, then that which others say of an Olive leaf.

In the division of lands at the settling of new Colonies or estates, some part
was usually by lot set apart for Sacred uses in the first place.

In former times they had a Custom, Herodot. lib. 3.
when buyer and seller could not agree to draw Cutts (as we do) or cast cross
and pile, and by mication or shifting of finger, to decide whether should come
to others price, and this kind of Lot was likewise employed in pecuniary
penalties, where the offenders were too many to be all of them amerced.
Augustus enforced every fifth man (of such as frequented not the Senate as they
should) that the lot lighted on, to pay his fine for his absence, which was
remitted to the rest. Yea in cases of life and death there was an especial use
of it: as when Melchi, Melchizedecks father, who having a purpose to sacrifice
one of his sons cast lots with his Wife whether he or she should choose one of
them to be exempted, and after that, upon the rest of them (She having chosen
Melchizideck by that means preserved a lot was cast for one to be slain for a
sacrifice, as it is surmised by the Pseudo-^thanas. hist. Meleh. Like that of
Hesione the Trojan Kings Daughter, who by the determination of a lot was to be
exposed to a Sea Monster.

The Persian King tithed out his Magicians upon discovery of their frauds: and
Combises his Army in his Ethiopian expedition for want of victuals sequestered
a tenth part of themselves for the rest to make meat of: Augustus commanded the
two Flori to cast lots for their lives, the one whereof offering himself
without ^ot to be slain the other thereupon slew himself. Lots frequent and
famous among the Romans.


Most famous and usual was the Roman practice in this kind, termed therefore
by them their ancient Law, or their Country custom: whose manner it was when
some troops of their Soldiers had deserted their Colors, left their
stations, carried themselves cowardly in fight, or disorderly otherwise, for
frighting of all, and saving of some; to draw out by lot sometime more sometime
fewer, but most usually a tenth part of all that were faulty, or deepest in
fault, by an ignominious kind of death to be made an example to others, the
rest of them punished only with some other kind of disgrace. This tithing of
Delinquents to death by lot, was attempted by Caligula but practiced at
several times by Appius, Jul. Caesar, Augustus, Antonie, Apronius, Crassus,
Galba, Macrinus: Nor is this kind of military discipline out of use with
Martial men among us at this day, with whom Soldiers that are taken tardie
are permitted, sundry of them together, to cast the Dice for their lives on the
Drums head, some of them to be punished or executed, and some to be cleared and
saved.

The use of Lotts was also very frequent in these Dominions among the ancient
Britains (as Cambden in his Britannia says) in matters of doubt and
difficulty, Cambden. fol. 135. English Saxons.
and although sometimes in a superstitious divinatory manner, and in matters
not fit thereby to be inquired of, yet never without all possible reverence and
prayer preceding: Contrary to the irreligious course of these later distempered
times, where Gods sacred ordinance is most impiously abused in all manner of
vain and vile ways of lusorious sporting, playing, Dicing, Carding, Lotteries,
and the like, whereby God is dishonored, and men therefore justly thereby
cheated and abused, and yet these wicked ways continually practiced by many
not of the meanest, yea, maintained by some of our Clergy in press and pulpit.
And that holy way which God ordained for settling peace and unity, is abused by
profane sports and vile vanity whilst we run on in a most destructive way
of ruin and misery by bloody violence and barbarous cruelty. So that we may
lament with David Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, etc. Gods
holy ordinance instituted for ending differences and settling peace is utterly
despised and we like the men of Mesech make ready for war. And no marvel
seeing Cambden derives the Britains from Iaphets line, Ezekiel. 38.
whence the Prophet Ezekiel proves Gog and Magog the princes, and the men of
Mesech to spring, and so by a derivative line, the Britains may seem to
spring from thence or to have affinity to the men of Mesech, both seeming to
spring from the same ^ine of Iaphet; But from the terrible destruction there
threatened after their divisions and wars, The God of peace deliver and
protect the poor distressed Britains, that they never partake of the
fearful judgments there menaced to the men of Mesech, though they seem to
suite with them in their contentious cruel courses.

How this sacred Ordinance may be used and applied as a sovereign Medicine to
heal the unhappy divisions of this distracted Kingdom, and to cure and
compose these destructive dissentions and contentions between the King and
Parliament.
1. THat a Treaty, time and place be appointed, if the Prince and Parliament
shall be so pleased, apt and able persons on both sides selected, and
authorized, truly to state and set down all things in difference betwixt the
King and Subject; Secondly, that particular Propositions, both concerning his
Majesty's and the Parliaments desires and demands, by them be drawn into
particular heads, whereby what is expected by each from other, may more clearly
appear. Thirdly, that all Propositions may be so stated and set down as that
they may tend principally and only to these ends, 1. That the glory of God may
be advanced and maintained in matter of Religion and Church Government.

2 That his Majesty's honor may be preserved in his just Rights and
Prerogative.

3 That the Peace and happiness of the Kingdom and Subjects may be produced
by establishing of the Laws of the Land, confirmation of the Liberty and
property of the Subject and just privileges of Parliament.

These are the three principal, fundamental; and cardinal grounds out of
which all particular Propositions can arise, issue, or proceed.

Zech. 8.19. Hos. 6.6.1, 2, 3. Mercy is prepared for the Land, if the people
prepare to receive it at the Lords hand. Ezr. 8.21. Levit. 23.27, 28. Exodus
19.10, 11 Esth. 4.16.
That three solemn days or set times of Humiliation, fasting, prayer and
praise, be published and proclaimed throughout the whole Realm to be set apart
and celebrated, for our preparation to meet the Lord in this way of his
direction; that we may seek of him a right way for deliverance from the
judgments that do threaten the Land: such a Fast as was prescribed by Ezr.
8.21. may be a fair president for this Land to proceed by. Also like that
Exodus 19.10.11. Moses commanded to sanctify the people for three days, and on
the third day (for on that day the Lord will come down in the sight of all the
people) to have them ready prepared to meet the Lord.

Queen Esther enjoined a Fast to be kept, when she was to go into the King for
the Jewe deliverance; Gather together all the Jews (says she) and neither eat
nor drink for three days, night nor day, When Lorts were cast for their
destruction, but fell for their deliverance, whence the Feast of Purim was
ordained to be celebrated by them and their posterity to all perpetuity.

When dissension was arisen between the servants of Isaac, Genesis 26.20, 21.
and the servants of Abimelech touching the Well of water, Isaac's servants
dug three Wells before the contention was concluded: the names of the first
and second Wells were Esek and Sitnah, signifying Contention and hatred, for
that they strove together; but the third was Shibah signifying an Oath or
covenant of reconciliation that was then and there made between them, because
by Oath or Covenant the contentions between Isaac and Abimelech, and their
servants were then concluded. Thence the City was called Beersh^ba, i.e. the
Well of the oath or covenant of conclusion.

Prayer, preaching, and praises to be as peace offerings for Prince, Priest and
people to make reconciliation for them, Ezekiel. 45.
That on the first day by all of what degree, quality, or profession soever,
hearty prayers be sent up by Prince, Priest and People to the searcher o^ all
hearts, for his holy and heavenly blessing on the endeavors of those who are
on both sides selected for consultation about these great affairs of the
Kingdom, that God who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working,
would be pleased to be present with them, and assist and direct them in the
composing of such particular Propositions as conduce to his glory, the Kings
honor, the Kingdoms happiness, and not to any their own particular ends and
before purposes, and that God would by his remembering Spirit put into their
minds whose presence they stand, and so make them wise and careful to consider
for what they stand, and from whence the sentence and judgment of their
demands and desires is to proceed, even from the omniscient Lord, who tries
the hearts and reins, We know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee. 2
Chr. 20.12.13 Said Jehoshaphat, and al Judah when they proclaimed a Fast, and
gathered together to ask counsel and inquire of God. 2 Chran. 19.6, 7.
sees their inmost secretest thoughts, is a God of pure eyes, and cannot
endure iniquity, impiety, nor injustice; and of most perspective sight,
discerning the most subtle devices, and cannot be deceived by any
State-stratagems, nor deluded by mental reservations, or subtle policies.

These considerations sadly premeditated, will prevent all illegal and unjust
Propositions and promote the way of proceeding by fair and clear particulars,
Propositions and demands; None will dare to make unjust demands if they
consider who is the Judge and disposer. And as Iehoshaphat to the Judges, so
give me leave to speak to both sides; take heed what ye do, for the trial is
not appointed by the judgment of man but of the Lord, and he will be with you
in the cause and judgment: wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon
you; take heed, for there is no partiality with the Lord our God, neither
respect of persons, nor receiving of reward.

The necessity of the use of Gods Judgment by divine Lot, being so just,
equal and impartial. As Azariah, to Asa, and all Judah and Ben^amin. 2 Chr.
15.1.
2 That the Preachers and Ministers whom God has made to be stars in the
firmament of the Church, to lead and guide the feet of the people in the ways
of peace, declare and unfold to the people the authority, happiness and
holiness of this way of proceeding, showing who was the original author and
the only disposer of lotts, for what end God ordered them, and what comfort may
thence arise to the three Kingdoms: Controversies will be concluded, peace
produced, and the further effusion of blood prevented.

3 That the Pastors admonish the people to prepare themselves to appear before
the Lord as Moses did at the delivery of the Law. Thus will I do unto thee, and
because I will do so; therefore prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Isa.
57.14.40.3. Is. 62.10. Go through go through the gates: prepare thou the way of
the people; Cast up, cast up the highway, gather out the stones, take up the
stumbling block out of the way of my people. Lift up a Standard for the people.
This way is not unlike that way, Isa. 35.8. prophesied: There shall be a path
and a way, and the way shall be called holy; the polluted shall not pass by it
etc.

4 That praise be rendered to our gracious God for directing us such a divine
way of determining these unhappy differences and divisions which continued
would bring the Kingdom to desolation and destruction, Say among the Nations,
the Lord reigns: surely the world shall be stable, and not move, and he shall
judge the people in righteousness, vid. Psa. 93.1.94.14.15.96.10. to the end.
Ps. 97.1, 2.98.9.99.1.102.13. to the end.
Isa. 42.10.11, 12.44.23.25.29, 27. Esa. 59. Zech. 7.5. Almighty God at first
revealed this holy and happy way to his own people only; therefore David after
he says. The lot is fallen unto me in a fair ground, etc. presently adds,
I will bless and praise the Lord who has given me understanding to know and
acknowledge so great mercies. Isa. 58.2. They seem to seek me, and delight to
know my ways as a Nation that did righteously, and forsook not the ordinance
of their God: they ask of me ordinances of Justice, they take delight to
approach unto God, etc.

5 Cautions for Fasts, that they be not performed singly and severally, each
side and party at several times, and for themselves severally, and one against
the other as hitherto it has been, which (it may be feared) has caused God to
withold his hand of mercy from us, in regard we have without charity rather
prayed for ruin, then reconciliation one to another fasting for strife and
debate, to smite with the fist of cruelty, having our hands defiled with blood,
God by his Prophet complains of such fasts, as also of the contemners of his
Ordinance of Peace and Justice. Isa. 58.2.
our feet swift to shed blood, not knowing, not willing to know the ways of
peace: such fasts God has not chosen, with such sacrifices of blood God is not
well pleased Is. 1.15. When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes
from you: yea, when ye make many prayers I will not hear, for your hands are
full of blood. Your fasts, feasts, prayers, praises. Assemblies, oblations,
sacrinces, Sabbaths are all vain; not valued, but vilified; not accepted, not
respected, but rejected as hateful detestable abominable Is. 1.11.

But our Fast, must be an universal and unanimous Fast, throughout the three
Kingdoms joining all in hearty prayer for the forgiveness of the crying sins
of the Kingdoms, for the remission of the sins of each place, and person
therein, and with single and sincere hearts forgiving each other, forgetting
all wrongs and renouncing all revenges, even as God for Christ's sake shall
forgive us being members of one body, whereof Christ is the head, brethren in
Christ, God being the Father to whom alone belongs revenge: such sacrifice
(we may believe) will prove acceptable.

In the second day that the like duties, preaching praying, and praising of
God, as on the first, be performed religiously: but Dove-like mourning, and
Bear-like roaring cannot well accord before the Lord; We roar like Bears, and
mourn fore like Doves, says the Prophet Is. 39.11. We look for judgment, but
there is none; for salvation, but it is far off.

Neither our praying, fasting not preaching, can prove acceptable in the sight
of God the searcher of all hearts and tryer of reins, unless the madness of
our malicious minds be mitigated, the hardness of our cruel hearts be
mollified and the act of violence be out of our hands. If we outwardly pretend
to appear before God in the form of Doves, with a show only of simplicity
sorrow and innocence, but in hearts be ravening Wolves, stinging Serpents
roaring Bears, ready to tear and devour one another. What fruit can fasting
produce?

It is said 1 Chr. 10.13, 14. of Saul, that he died in his transgression which
he committed against the Lord and his Word in that he asked not counsel of the
Lord therefore he slew him, and turned the Kingdom to David.

To put on the show of a silly sheep the habit of a harm less Lamb yet
inwardly to be subtle foxes, and greeey wolves, ready to supplant to worrey to
r^^^, to destroy one another cannot but make our fasts or other sacrifices
rather detestable then delightful, rather abominable then acceptable: this is
not the fall that God has chosen: and we may justly fear that the Lord has
protracted our peace making withheld, the happiness of union from us, only for
our Cain like cruelty, bloudy-mindednesse to our brethren: Our fasts have not
found the hoped for fruit, our prayers have not prevailed for Peace, nor has
our preaching been prosperous in the purposes, and thing whereunto it was sent
and appointed.

In the Civil law all appeal is denied from the sentence of a Lot, because it
is the sentence of the Lord, who has no superior.
That after the holy duties religiously performed to prevent revolting from the
judgment which God shall give by Lotts, and revenging private wrongs passed
before between particular parties; that all, both Prince and people Commanders
and Soldiers, Pastors and Flocks, unanimously join in Covenant with Almighty
God willingly to submit to that judgment which God shall give by lotts,
without any repining, repugnancy, or resistance thereafter, and really to remit
all wrongs without retaining any malice, or mental reservation of revenge
hereafter.

A judicio sortis appellari non potest. Baldus Bartol. Jason apud Go. 2. ad
Taur. Le. 38. Greg. Toloss. appel. l. 2. He shall call the heavens, that he
may judge his people. Psalm. 50.5. Call my Saints together unto me, those that
have made a covenant with me. The heavens shall declare his righteousness, for
God is judge himself. Nehem. 10. A pattern for the Covenant, Ezra 10.5. Exodus
19.5, 6. If ye will keep my Covenant, then shall, ye be my chief treasure
above all people, and ye shall be unto me also a kingdom of priests, and an
holy Nation.
And whereas we have joined in Covenant and association, one side against the
other, even to the death and destruction one of another: Now all make Covenant
each with other, una voce, uno animo, uno cord, Altogether with heart tongues,
and hands in thoughts words and deeds, to maintain and preserve the glory of
God in the true Protestant Religion, the honor of the King in his just rights
and Prerogatives, and the welfare of the State and Kingdom in the Laws of the
Land, the Liberty and property of the Subject, and privileges of Parliaments
according as Almighty God by this his judgment shall declare and decree to
renew our league of brotherly love and Christian amity, to live in love
endeavoring by all possible means to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond
of Peace, all professing, protesting and covenanting before Almighty God to
defend, and with their lives and estates to maintain Gods glory the Kings
honor, and the Kingdoms peace against revolters Jer. ^1.6. Proclaim all these
words in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, hear ye
the words of this Covenant and do them. v. 3. And say thou unto them thus says
the Lord God of Israel cursed be the man that obeys not the words of this
Covenant. 2 Chronicles. 15. When Israel had for a long time bin without God without
a Priest and without the Law and there was no peace to him that went out or in
but great vexations on all the inhabitants of the Countries. Nation destoryed
of Nation, City of City, and God did vex them with all adversity. Asa their
King upon the Prophecy and advice of Azariah assembled and gathered togther
all Judah and Benjamin, and the stranger out of Ephraim Manasseh and Simeon to
Jerusalem in the third month the 15th year of his reign; and they sacrificed
and entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God, with all their heart, and
with all their soul, that whosoever would not seek the Lord, should be put to
death, small or great, man or woman; and they swear unto the Lord and all
Israel rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with all their heart, and
sought him with their whole desire, and he was found of them and the Lord gave
them rest round about. And there was no more war unto the thirty fifth year of
the reign of Asa: Whence may be concluded how much so holy a Covenant
conduces to the peace of a divided Kingdom. Let this be like that Covenant,
Number. 18.19 a Covenant of salt, sure, stable, incorruptible.

Cautions in this Covenant, to beware of mental resurvations, malevolent
thoughts and murmurings, remembering still in whose presence they stand, the
presence of that Lord who understands their thoughts before they are
conceived in their minds; who is omniscient, omnipotent, omnipresent, we cannot
deceive, we cannot resist, we cannot evade nor escepe his punishments, his
judgments, his revenging hand: We ought with David to acknowledge, that
Righteous art thou, Psalm. 119.137. Jer. 50.5.
O Lord: and just are thy judgments. And in Psalm. 119.126. I have sworn, and
will perform that I will keep thy righteous judgments. Jer. 50.5. Come let us
join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant. Now I purpose to make a
covenant with the Lord God of Israel that he may turn away his wrath from us 1
Cor. 29.10, 11. Is. 59.21. As for me, this is my covenant with them, says the
Lord, etc. Esaias 61.8. If we shall covenant with God, with submission to obey
his judgments, then the Lord will keep his Covenant with us for remission of
our sins, release of our miseries, and showing abundance of mercies, Hosea
2.18. And in that day will I make a covenant for them, etc. and I will break
the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the earth, and I will make them
to lie down safely, Isa. 2.4 Job 5 23. Mic. 4.2, 3 4 5. and Hos. 2.18. You and
perform unto the Lord your God let all that are round about him, bring
presents unto him that ought to be feared, Psalm. 76.11.

3 That on the third day or time on which the Lotts are to be cast the Sacred
act from which we are to expect the declaration of Gods divine will for
resolving of ou^ doubts, and dissolving and determining our dangerous and
deadly differences, the holy duties of praying, preaching, and praising God, as
on the two former days were prescribed, be also now performed.

That the Min sters in a more special manner stir up the people to a most
serious and hearty consideration, as of the greatness, so of the goodness of
God, as of the incomprehensible glory, so of his incomparable mercy, as of the
infallible justice of God, so of his infinite piety and pity toward his
people, giving them to understand, that as Almighty God vouchsafes his
testifying presence in an oath, so his Majesty is pleased to vouchsafe his
determining presence in a more immediate manner in this divine way of his own
institution.

We read not of divine Lotts used by any of Gods servants, but in case of
greatest consequence, and always with most religious reverence exhort the
people as David in 95. Psalm. v. 6. Come let us worship and fall down, etc. In
the election of Matthias by Lot, the Apostles form of proceeding is a perfect
president, Act. 1.15. The Election is begun with wholesome exhortation: Surgens
Petrus in n^sdio Fratrum dixit, etc. Peter stood up in the midst of the
Disciples, took a text, preached and persuaded the convenience, nay, necessity
of a new election by lot, to make up the number of the twelve. Secondly, the
election proceeds with devout Prayer and p^^^^ supplication; the persons and
lotts being provided, v. 24. And they prayed, (...) said, etc. Thirdly, the
election was determined by divine revelation. v. 26. B^vecidit sors super
Matthiam, The lot fell on Mutthias: which was as Aret. says, Divinae vocis
instar, splendour quidam divinus, as Dionys. Per quens oftende batur M^^thiam in
apostolatum esse assumendum.

He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways judgment: a God of
truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he, Deuteronomy. 32.4. He whose
dwelling is in the highest heavens, whom the heaven of heavens is not able to
contain, will bow the heavens, and deigne to come down, not in thunder and
lightning, as in the giving of the Law with terror and astonishment to the
people; but with mercy and comfort, sunshine of favor, beams of affection,
after these terrible storms of tempestuous troubles, will be entreated to
dignifie his own divine ordinance with his gracious presence, will humble
himself so, as from the height of his Majesty, to behold the depth of our
misery, descend to weak worms of the earth, and by this divine way of his
own direction and institution decide our distractive differences, and
determine our deadly dissentions, and so deliver us from imminent, nay almost
inevitable ruin and confusion. He that is the King of Kings, Rex terrorum, and
terrorum Regum; The primitive of principalities.

He from whom all dominion is derived, that stands in the Congregation of the
mighty, and judges among the Gods; He at whose presence the Mountains of the
mighty leap like Rams, and the Jesser hills of the haughty skip like Lambs, The
boisterous waves of waters fled and, and the swelling Seas fell backward, at
whose looks the earth trembles and if he touch the mountains they sm^^ke;
The Great Creator of heaven and earth will vouchsafe to take the judgment of
an earthly cause into his heavenly hands, Ps. 104.32.
with righteousness will he judge the world and the people, and their matters
with equity. They know not, neither will they understand, that they walk on in
darkness, who delight in division, and desire the Sword for their arbiter
umpire or judge. All the foundations of the Land are dissolved, and disordered,
it must be the Lord Gods work, to establish the Pillars thereof. The Lord is
known by executing judgment, arise therefore, O God, and judge thou the earth,
for thou shall inherit all Nations, Psalm. 82.8. I will heart what God will
speak, for he will speak peace unto his people etc. he makes wars to cease
in all the earth. Psalm. 76. In Judah is God known, etc. In Salem is his
tabernacle: there brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield the sword and the
battle. Thou art more bright and puissant than the mountains of prey; The
stout-hearted (...) spoiled, and none of the mighty men have found their hands.
Thou did cause thy judgments to be heard from heaven. Surely the wrath of
man shall turn to thy praise: the remainder of their rage shall thou restrain.
Awake, A^^se, put on thy strength. O Albion, put on thy garments of beauty, O
Br^ttain trust in God alone by Abraham's example, Isa. 51. Hear ye that follow
righteousness, look unto the rocks whence yet are hewn, etc. hearken unto
me, for a law shall proceed from me, and I will bring forth my judgment for
alight of the people, v. 4. My righteousness is near, I will judge the people:
the Isles shall wait for me, and trust unto me. Arise, O England, be bright, O
Britain; for thy light is come, the glory of the Lord is come, Awake as in the
ancient days, as in the generations of old: remember and revive that ancient
ordinance of the Lords own institution directed, for composing of contentions.
Remember and be ashamed, bring t^againe to mind, O ye R unagates, remember the
former things of old. Isa. 35.8.9. Ier. 31.9. Via Divina, non devia non
Diabolica, sicut illa Sauguinolenta. Zach. 4.6.7.
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, Isa 60.1. Awake, awake, and stand
up, O Jerusalem which have drunk at the hand of the Lord, the cup of his wrath,
thou have drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out. There
is none to guide thee among all the sons whom thou have brought forth: neither
is there any that takes thee by the hand, of all the sous that thou have
brought up. These things are come unto thee, destruction, desolation, and the
sword, therefore hear this now, thou afflicted: Thus says the Lord, the Lord,
and thy God, that pleads the cause of his people. Behold, I have taken out of
thy hand the cup of trembling, etc. Isa. 5.1.17, 18. etc. What have I here,
says the Lord, that my people is taken away for naught, and they that rule
over them, cause them to howl and lament: Therefore my people shall know my
Name; behold, therefore they shall know in that day, that I am he that does
speaks, behold is is I. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him
that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that says unto Sion, thy
God reigns. Isa. 52.5.6.7. That gives to the Lord his due glory, by
committing their cause, and casting their burden upon the Lord, and leaving
the determination of their differences to his divine judgment by that holy way
that he has prescribed in his holy Word, rather then the destructive way of
the bloody Sword, if the Lord will please to arise and have mercy upon Sion;
The Prophet Zachary will show you how, non in ex^rcitu, etc. Not by army, nor
by strength, but by my Spirit, says the Lord, and they shall bring forth the
principal stone with shouting, and crying, Grace, grace unto it.

That the Ministers do admonish the people humbly to wait on God in his holy
ordinance, implore his aid for our reconciliation, and rest, and rely on his
saving sentence; he will give a perfect lot, and just judgment, whereby we
shall be delivered from the heaviest of his temporal judgments, the Sword.

The consideration of Gods greatness may humble the haughty and hardened
hearts of the people: The meditation of his mercy may mollify their malicious
and bloody minds, to be more tenderhearted one toward another, being children
of one Father. and brethren in Christ Jesus, following the precept and pattern
of our Savior, Be ye merciful, as your heavenly Fathen is merciful, so their
Fast will be more religious, their preaching more profitable, and their prayer
more acceptable, whilst they forsake their courses of cruelty, and follow the
way of love, truth, peace and unity. O this worcester unity is the (...), the only
word of comfort that can make us happy. Albion can have no hope of recovery,
till she hear of the sweet names of Peace and Unity, which of an Albion she is
like to become an Acheldama, of an Eden Garden, a ghastly Golgatha, cruelty and
division cry her down, exinanite, exinanite, down with her, down with her, even
to the ground, cry the bloody brood of cursed Cain, and have drawn the line of
vanity, of cruelty over her: God is pleased in mercy to reveal, and revive
this holy way of reconciliation, whereby to recover, restore, and raise her up
again, Ier. 29.11.
vid. Isa. 46.13. and 49.7, 8 9 and adfinem. Their speech bewrays them (as
they say to Peur) to be of Ashdod, or Egypt, that bring into the Church of
Christ, the way of the Sword, to be of the bloody brood of cruel Cain, or
cursed Corah, who preach and teach that the foundation of the Church of Christ,
Christ's church not to be built in or by blood.
who is the Prince of Peace, should be laid in the blood of the members of his
body, that pretend or intend to settle and reform the Christian Religion by
the slaughter of Christians, the true, faithful servants and Saints of God, in
whose sight their death is right dear and precious. These new Builders, like
those of the old world, to get them a name upon earth, make brick of their own
devising, and build them a Babel, a Tower that they hope, may reach up to
heaven; yet when they have all done, they shall have but brick for stone, and
slime for mortar, and the end will be confusion: So too too many in these
times, to get them a name and opinion of being more holy then other men (touch
me not, I am of purer mold then thou art) to make themselves greater, and raise
themselves higher, make brick of their own pretended purity, seeming sanctity
and form of godliness, endeavoring by cruelty and policy, to build them a
Tower, a Babel of power and supreme Authority, that shall gain them the
kingdom of Heaven, and kingdoms on Earth, and when they have all done, it is
but the brick and stime of mortal corruption, and haughty ambition and vain
frustrated imagination; And they can prognosticate to themselves no fairer end
then Babels was, confusion in conclusion.

Dissentions are works of darkness, wrought by the prince of darkness the
Devil, Let us cast away the works of darkness, and put on the armor of light.
Romans 13.12. 1 Cor. 1.10.11.16. thence comes war; And if needs there must be
war, and that war be Gods, and concerning his cause (as it is or has been
professed) in such a war it is fit to use such ways and weapons, such rules
and orders as the only wise and invincible General, the Lord of Hosts
directs and prescribes. In such an holy war, The noble Army of Martyrs,
the chiefest servants of God always used holy Arms, divine Artillery, arma
ocelefiae; they put on the armor of God, their loins girded with verity,
their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, they had on the
breast plate of righteousness, but above all, they took the shield of Faith
wherewith they were able to quench all the fiery darts, and evade the violent
vollies of short, which their most deadly enemies could discharge against them;
Why then may not in this, unhappy war the arm of God rather then the arm of
flesh be happily used? Why not the holy sword of the Spirit, rather then the
bloody sword of sinful flesh? Why not divine points of heavenly doctrine to
penetrate and illuminate and convince the faculties of the soul, rather then
endeavor to beat religion into the brain with a Pole-axe, or pierce the heart
by Pike or Pistol? Why not the holy ordinances of a merciful God, Canons of
comfort tending to peace, and conversion. Before the murdering preces of
merciless man hurrying to perdition and confusion, under which sad and
lamentable condition the three Kingdoms have for a long season layne
languishing. The Prophets Quere; Is it because there is no God in Israel, that
we go to inquire, etc. How long shall the sword devour, know ye not that it
will be bitterness in the end? Should not a people inquire at their God? to
the Law, the testimony, the Ordinance, the Oracle of God; If they go not his
way of peace, it is because there is no light in them; He that hates his
brother is in darkness, 1 Jo. 2.9, 10, 11. where then shall he appear that
murdereth his brother.

For the manner of making, drawing, and using of Lotts, I find not, either in
Gods word or other Divine writings, any certain prescript form or rule of
necessity to be practiced and followed; The use thereof being frequent among
the people of God, and many other Nations, the form of making and using the
Lot in such, or such a manner or way, has bin left to humane designement. For
though the Lot be Gods immediate ordinance, God himself being the original
author thereof, and the sole and only disposer of the event thereof, as it is
before manifestly and plentifully proved: yet where God leaves a matter
indifferent in the manner of use, the restriction of this indifferency is left
to secondary causes; as in case of the Lot; It is left to humane disposure for
the manner how, and the materials whereof Lots may be made, whether written or
printed, in Paper, Parchment, or the like, Vellam; or cut in wood, or the bark
of a Tree, as some have used it, or engraven in any metal, Bone, Ivory, or
other matter. In. act. 1. Maier.
The most Ancient (as by a late learned Writer is observed) used Beans, black
or white, Letters of the Alphabet, or Globules which were either gilded or
silvered, as among the Venetians, or covered over with wool, as among the
Gemcans, etc. as Petrus Gregorius shows in tit. de Elect.

Pet. Martyr, in his common place, chap. 8. part 1. of Vrim and Thummim. Where
it is to be noted, that only the King, or else the father of the Consistory
had power to consult, or propose the matter to the Priest: the Priest only had
the power to resolve, and secondly the matter proposed must not be trivial,
but of moment and great difficulty.
It is observed by Peter Martyr, out of an old expositor of the Law, called
Kimhi, upon Judges 20.27. that it was the manner among the Hebrews, when they
asked any question or counsel of God by Lot, touching public or weighty
matters, to come to the Priest apparelled with his Ephod garment, and standing
before the Ark of the Lord, upon whose Ephod were set twelve precious stones,
wherein the names of the ten Tribes were engraven, together with the names of
the Patriarks Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and also all the letters of the Hebrew
Alphabet: It behoved him that asked a question, to turn his face to the Priest,
and his speech was neither to be so loud as he might plainly be heard; nor yet
so low, as if he had only prayed with his inward cogitations: but in such wise
as Anna prayed, 1 Samuel 1.13. where it is said, that she only moved her lips,
and said nothing that might be heard. After this the Oracle was showed to the
Priest in this manner: By the power of the holy Spirit certain letters did
arise, and eminently appear above the others; as some say, the letters which
gave the answer were (...). An example is taken from 2 Samuel 2.1. when David
asked the Lord, Shall I go up into any of the Cities of Judah? the Lord
answered, (...), go up. Here (it is said) (...) appeared out of the name (...)
Schimeon: as (...) out of the name of (...) Levi: and (...) out of the name of
(...) Jehudah. Others affirm, that the letters which represented the Oracle,
were (...) i.e. that they did after a strange manner join themselves into
perfect syllables, and entyre words, and made the answer complete. And this is
that Vrim and Thummim which is mentioned in the holy Scriptures. Which Peter
Martyr calls Lot, and reckons the Vrim and Thummim among the several sorts
of divine Lotts, and styles that way of consulting with God, Lotts, by which
Gods counsel was asked, as in the 8. chap, before cited appears.

Rabbi Solomon thinks that such was the manner of Lotts, as that the names of
every of the Tribes were written in several Scrolls; which being thrown into a
pot, were afterward drawn by the chief Priest.

Cicero in his book de Divinations affirms, that when Numerius Suffecius had
cut in sunder a flint stone, the Lotts made in an Oak leaped out, and that at
the same time an Olive tree d^d sweat Honey; and that therefore a little Chest
was made of the same tree, into which the Lotts were cast: These were called
Prenestine Lots, which were very famous in times past. In Plautus we read of
Lotts made of Fur and Poplar trees, which were cast into a vessel of water;
and according as every Lot arose, first or last from the bottom, so the
matter was decreed. Pausanius says, that Lotts were wont to be done out of a
pot made of Clay, and that one Cresphon in the division that was made of
Peloponnesus, to handle the matter, that the field of Missena might fall out to
his share, he corrupted the Priest Temenus; for he dried other Lotts by the
Sun, but Cresphons by the fire: and therefore Cresphons Lotts being longer
before they were made wet, he obtained the field of Missena. In a word, it is
evident from what has been said, that Lotts have been of frequent use in all
ages, and among all Nations, especially Gods own people, and are very
justifiable by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, even in such cases
wherein the one party holds his right and interest in the matter controverted
to be unquestionable, as may be certainly concluded from the practice of
Samuel, who knowing assuredly that God had appointed, and he himself had
anointed Saul to be King, yet doubted not to commit the matter unto Lotts, as
being assured of the infallible justice of that sacred Ordinance, whereas
another perhaps would have said, shall a matter of such weight be put to
hazard? perhaps the Lotts will fall out otherwise, and so will exclude this man
from being King, as Peter Martyr well observes, Pet. Martyr. loc. com. c. 8.
part. 1.
but his faith was firmly resolved and assured, that the Lord was just and holy
in all his Oracles, his Ordinances, his ways, his judgments. Moses in the
same manner in his own cause, upon the matter of Corah and his company in their
Rebellious carriage, charging Moses and Aaron with assuming a larger extent of
prerogative then the Lord had lent them, Number. 16. The rods with the names of
each Tribe written thereon, were no other then Lotts. Number. 17.
a g^eater Commission then God had given them; Ye take too much upon you Moses
and Aaron, Mark hereupon the meek demeanor of Moses, you sons of Levi
(said he) ye take too much upon you, and therefore let each one take his Censer
[his Lot, etc.] and go before the Lord, and let God be the just Judge, whom he
has chosen, let God show by the Censor, to whom he has given the Authority of
King, Priest, etc. Is our Religion, our lives, our estates, liberties, or what
is more dear and precious to us, in Controversy; if we distrust not the
justice of our cause, why should we doubt the Judgment of our God?

But to proceed to the manner how the differences now depending, may be
determined by the Lords judgment by Lot: When upon a treaty the differences
in particular shall be truly stated, and for each side and part by the persons
appointed, for that purpose certainly set down; that brief heads or titles of
each particular proposition in difference to be written in several small
papers or Parchments cut into equal proportions, and two Lotts written with
the several brief titles of the several Propositions; And for distinction,
to discern, which is for his Majestle, and which for the Parliament, two
several Motto's be appointed and nominated to be written with the several
titles of the said Propositions in the said papers or parchments respectively,
wherein the several Propositions are inscribed: (...) lea. 23.6.
The Kings own Motto, Dieu and mon droit (if to his Majesty it shall so seem
meet) to denominate his demand or Proposition: And, Jehovah Tsidkenn. The Lord
our righteousness, for the Parliament: (if to the Parliament it shall so seem
good.) And in respect that both parts profess the maintenance of the same
matters, and both appeal to God (though in a wrong way, it may be doubted, by
the sword) to declare who is in the right, this divine way may happily not seem
unsuitable to the present occasion, and being the same it pleased God to put
into my thoughts. I humbly pray it may be without ostence, either to my
Sovereign, or his Parliament) to publish.

For example in some particulars, of composure of the Lotts, thus viz.

If the proposition in difference be, whether Episcopal, or Presbyteriall
government, or the way of Independency (as it is termed) a divine way not to be
despised, be the most right in Gods sight, the King maintaining Episcopacy, the
Parliament Peesbytery: His Majesty's Lot may be thus, Dieu and mon dr^it,
Episcopal government: the Parliaments thus, Jehovah Tsidkenu, Presbyterian
government: The Independants thus, Jehovah Jizeh, Discipline and doctrine
according to Gods word.

In the Controversy touching the proper right of the Militia, thus the Kings
Lot, Dieu and m^n dr^it, Militia mihi regni: The Parliaments thus Militia
Regno, and sic decateris. For all other matters in difference two or more Lotts
as the case requires, may be composed in the same manner. Thus all chief
Officers of trust for Church Kingdom and State may be elected; Lotts for all
in competition Blanks for all but one, and that to have this inscription: Whom
God shall choose.
so the Election being left to the wise and just disposal of God, all siding
partiality and other differences and deceits will be avoided. Thus Delinquents
may have their Clergy, their lotts for their lives, and so their death or life
shall be left to the pleasure of the Lord, not the humor of revengefull men.
The like touching pecuniary mulct upon their estates, vid. Nunth. 15.33.

Now of the casting or drawing of Lotts, whether into the lap, the pot, the
bagg or urn, non refert, It Is merely matter of indifferency. But touching the
manner how the Lotts may be cast, and drawn upon the present occasion.

Thus the Lord God has directed me, that after the Celebration of the third
solemn day of fasting and prayer in some spacious Church, or place which the
Lord shall choose, Dout. 17.8, 9. appointed for that purpose, on the Communion
table there be set, three Chalices, and the Lotts; one for his Majesty,
another for the Parliament be provided for every particular difference.

As 1 Chronicles. 24.6. Shemaiah the son of Nathanael the Scribe of the Levites,
wrote the Lotts before the King and the Princes, and the high Priest, and the
chief Fathers of the Priests and the Levites; So that one particular person be
appointed, or more, for making any writing the several Lotts in the presence
of King, Parliament, and Clergy, or other indifferent men on both sides, who
are to see to the equal composing of them, that no outward distinction may be
discerned by the party or parties, who are selected to draw indifferently
between both parties: for which purpose some of the chief of the Clergy, who
are esteemed most religious, upright, and conscionable, may happily be most
fit, of those not above one, to each part, and these to draw by turn, and
neither of these to see the Lotts, not speak with any concerning them, until
they have drawn them out of the Chalice or Cup, into which they are put to be
drawn.

That only two Lotts at one time (or three Lotts, as in some cases occasion may
require) which concern the same point in difference, be cast into the middle
Chalice on the Table; and then the Lot which is drawn, and taken to be put
into the Chalice which stands at the upper end of the Table, and the Lot
which is left behind in the middle Chalice, to be put into the Chalice at the
lower end of the Table. That the particular Lotts be put into the middle
Chalice successively two or three at a time, and thence drawn, one for each
party, by one of the two persons appointed for that purpose, until the Lotts
be all drawn.

Then the Lotts in the upper Cup to be opened; whereby it may appear what
Lotts are by God given to the King, and what to the Parliament; thus there will
be no fear or danger of the deceit either of Composers or drawers.

Let murmurers against Gods judgment herein, and despisers of his Divine
direction, remember the severe punishment that was inflicted by God upon Gorah
and his Company.

And unto this people thou shall say: Thus says the Lord, Behold, I set before
you the way of life, and the way of death. I call heaven and earth to witness,
I have herein set before you life and good, death and evil, choose therefore
life, that the Land may be preserved from Ruin. Jer. 21.8. Deuteronomy. 30.19.


Who is on the Lords side, let them come unto the Lord, cleave unto the Lord,
commit their cause to the Judgment, sentence and decree of Justice it self,
the great Judge of heaven and earth, who will in the first place settle
Religion and Church Government in such fort as shall conduce to the glory of
God: Give to God the things that are Gods: Exodus 32.26.
and will give to the King, to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, in his just
rights and prerogatives: and to the Kingdom, Parliament, and People what is
their just dues in Laws, Liberties, Privileges, and properties, by this
divine, holy, happy way, without effusion of blood, or further Contention.

The Doves expressions, and intentions, being but suitable to the nature of
Doves, truly simple, and innocent, she desires the integrity of her meaning,
may not be blemished by mis-interpretation, she is assured the Lot is a divine
way of determining differences, and a far more holy and happy way, then any
of humane designment, which her Author will be humbly ready before the right
Honorable, the high Court of Parliament, or the reverend Assembly of Divines,
by divine authority to make good, but the form for the use thereof, she leaves
to the learned and religious to reform if they please. Si quoth novisti rectius
istis, Candidus nuperti, si non haec temnere noli.

Having showed (though with much weakness) how divine Lotts may be used and
applied for composing the present Controversies depending in Church and State,
between his Majesty, and his Parliament, and the form of making and drawing the
Lotts, as the Lord was pleased to put into my mind (a more pertinent, complete,
and perfect manner and way then which, no doubt the wise and learned may find
out.) It rests now that somewhat be said touching the lawfulness, holiness,
and happiness of this way of determing differences, and of the Sacred
necessity and convenience of the use thereof, in cases of greatest difficulty
Civil or Sacred, rather then the Sword, or any other humane way or means, not
only here, but also throughout Christendom, and all parts of the world, where
God Almighty is acknowledged as the great and just Judge in Heaven and Earth,
and how the holy use thereof may be an happy fulfilling of diverse Prophecies in
the book of God contained.

The lawfulness of this Sacred Ordinance, I hope and believe no religious or
learned man, no good and true Christian will presume to oppose or deny,
especially in cases of such difficulty, as by legal means cannot otherwise be
happily, justly, and clearly decided and determined.

First, in regard it is an holy Ordinance originally instituted by God himself
for ending of differences: And also an holy Oracle ordained for the discovery
of hidden matters by humane endeavors inscrutable and uninvestigable, as in
the first chapter of this discourse is plentifully proved and confirmed by
divine authority ancient and modern.

Secondly, because not only the holy word of God does likewise confirm the
lawfulness of the use thereof by Gods special direction, and the practice of
the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, but also the opinion of the best
Divines, both ancient and modern, and the frequent and happy use thereof upon
several occasions, both in former, later, and even in these times do
manifestly attest the same; The Apostles use thereof cleares that. Prove. 18.18.
Isa. 5.16. The Lord of Hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and the holy God
shall be sanctified in justice. Isa. 48.11. Let Mount Zion rejoice, and the
daughters of Judah be glad, because of his righteous judgments. Psa. 50.6. The
heavens shall declare his righteousness, for God is judge himself.
as in the second chapter appears.

Thirdly, this is no Typical thing or Ceremony of the old Leviticall law,
which by the coming of Christ vanished, or was to be abrogated or abolished,
but is set down, and prefixed in the firmament of Gods word, as most happy and
useful in a Maxim, Axiom, statute, and Rule of moral, and so perpetual
divinity among the Proverbs of Solomon, which are no less Canonical then any
other part of holy Writ, being all holy Canons of sound moral divinity, as
Master Cartwright, a religious and learned Expositor of that Book, in his
Preface thereunto affirms, and if any shall object and say it is there expressed
as a prescription, not a precept, and so may be a matter of mere indifferency,
for to be used or not used; I conceive (under favor of the learned) that all
divine directions in Gods word may be said to amount not only to instructions,
but even to Injunctions, especially where the direction is given for use of any
of Gods Ordinances, and the ends of the use and practice thereof tends
immediately to the advancement of Gods glory, and the good and happiness of his
Church and people. As herein it must needs follow, by making God the Judge and
Peacemaker between his people; which divine direction if they shall refuse to
make use of, amounts to at least a contempt of this counsels, if not a
Rebellion against his command, as it must be, if Gods prescriptions ought to be
received as precepts. I put these cases, if an obstinate Patient refuse the
prescription of the learned Physician, all men will confess he wilfully and
deservedly suffers loss of life. The great Physician of Heaven prescribes a
cure for our contentions, if we neglect or reject it; who can deny, but
porditio tua ex te. Hos. 13.9.
o Albion, will be a proper motto, for so obstinate a Nation, this destruction
is of thy self O England, but in God is thine help.

Again, in the other case resembling this of ours, if a loving Master shall
graciously offer himself to be Umpire, Arbiter, or Judge between his divided
Servants, to determine their differences, and they shall ungratefully and
ungratiously reject so Fatherly a favor, and fall to the Sword, what shall we
call this but Contumatious disobedience, if not Rebellion, yea, the Lord by his
Prophet Isaiah is pleased to pronounce them Rebellious and that with a witness
too, even a woe thereunto annexed, Woe to the Rebellious, that take counsel,
but not of me, that cover with a covering, but not by my spirit: we ought not
to believe, but to try the spirits, whether they be of God or no, 1 Jo. 4.1.
who brag so much of the spirit, and yet dare take the Sword out of Gods hand,
and with confidence in the Arm of flesh, in a sensual divellish manner fly in
the face of God, by defacing his Image, destroying their Brethren; Surely (as
our Savior said in another case) ye know not of what spirit ye are, Ibid. v.
7.8.12.20.21. Genesis 9.6.
which despise the sword of the Spirit, the way of peace prescribed by the word
of God, and desire to be tried by the destructive sword of malitions man. To
deny, despise, or neglect the use of this holy Ordinance is an argument that
we disesteeme Gods word, or vilify his Ordinances, and account them matters
of indifferency, to be used, or not used at our pleasure: or that they are
unnecessary, vain, superfluous, unprofitable and useless, which even to
think is a profane and blasphemous opinion.

Again, in the fourth place, God is a God, nay, the God of Peace, he
delights in nothing more then Peace, Unity, and Amity among his People, and
the word of God is a perfect word, a most complete Treasury, wherein are
contained all things conducing to his glory, and the good and welfare of his
Church and people; Now as nothing is more distastful to God, nor prejudicial
to his people then division and dissension, Is there no balm in Gilead, etc.
so nothing more acceptable to God, nor beneficial to them then Peace* Can it
then be doubted or denied, but that our good God has in his word (the Treasury
of Truth) prescribed some cure for Contentions, and some means to settle Peace;
Psalm. 85.8. Psa. 50.1.4.5.6 God shall judge his people: and those that are his
will not refuse his judgment.
And if we will with holy David hearken what the Lord God will say; we may find
that he will speak peace to his people, ye may hear the Lord tell you
Proverbs 18.18. The Lot causes contentions to cease, and settleth peace
between the mighty. There are mighty differences, between mighty persons, the
King, and the Parliament, there is no Supreme Court or persons for either party
to make appeal unto, but the Court and Lord of Heaven, and what Judge I pray
you? what Arbiter? what umpire more fit to decide and determine these mighty
differences between these mighty parties, then the most mighty, most
merciful, most wise, most just Judge of Heaven and Earth? and by what way more
proper and impartial then this way of the Lord, the Lot, whereby the whole
disposition of the business, is done by the Lord, not by the Lot: For
although the Lotts and Propositions are composed and proposed by man, Deus ipse
sedet in judicio per sortem, God sits in judgment by the Lot, and disposes
of the event thereof, The Lot is cast into the Lapp by man, but a Jehovah est
totum judicium, tota ratio, tota dispositio, The whole judgment reason, and
disposition of the event is of the Lord. It then this Sacred Ordinance being of
Gods own ordination and institution, were never abrogated nor abolished, but
remains moral and perpetual, so lawful, so useful, so divine, so holy so
happy, tending immediately to Gods glory, in leaving the conclusion of our
differences to his divine Judgment, what reason can be showed why the Sacred
use thereof should be rejected, and the devouring Sword received and preferred
before the Lord in his own way, seeing bloodshed is not only universally
throughout the Scripture prohibited, but also fearful threatenings thereunto
added, as the most crying sin which pierces the Heavens, and pulls down
upon the offenders inevitable maledictions, and execrable punishments.

Many Prophecies may be fulfilled by the use of this sacred Ordinance, this
holy way of God. There shall be a path and a way, and the way shall be called
holy: the polluted shall not pass by it, for he shall be with them, and walk in
the way, Isa. 35.8, 9, 10.
and the Fools shall not err. There shall be no Lion, nor noisome beast, etc.
A straight way wherein they shall not stumble, Jer. 31.9. By this holy way of
the Lords Judgment in Controversies, the lowest and weakest in estate, degree,
or understanding, shall not be oppressed, despised, or injured; so the loftiest
and worthiest shall not be preferred, accepted, or exalted, but just judgment
shall be executed. And the neglect of this sacred way in cases convenient is an
argument of Gods high displeasure, and an evident sign of the universal
confusion of the cruel contemners thereof, as in the 24 h of Ezech. 6. God
sets it down as a sign of epidemicall destruction to that bloody City, where
the use of the Lot is denied to them. We on the bloody City, etc. let no Lot
fall upon it.

Also for the old way, which is the good way, walk therein, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls. Jer. 6.16. Isa. 35.8 9.10. Jer. 31.7.9. This holy way
the Saints will not refuse, but the wicked either shall not have the happiness
at all to use it, or else shall for a time, till God call them, oppose it, but
the righteous shall revive and receive it, with glory to God, good and
gladness to themselves. It Is a way of righteousness, in respect of God and
man; In respect of the righteous judgment thereby given by God, and secondly
of the righteousness that men are taught thereby. For when Gods judgments are
abroad on the earth, the Inhabitants will learn righteousness, Isa. 42.
Christ Jesus, to whom God, Jo. 3.35. has committed all power and judgment,
shall by his judgment set all things in order upon earth. Ier. 23.5.6. A King
shall reign and prosper, and execute judgment and Justice on the earth, etc.
Judah shall be saved; and Israel dwell safely, and they shall call him the Lord
our righteousness Servants, Prophets, Priests, blind, deaf, dumb, Mat. vide
Isa. 29. ver. 13. to the end of the chapter.


Behold my servant, etc. He shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles, Isa.
42.1. He shall bring forth judgment in truth. He shall not fail till he have
set judgment in the earth: And the Isles shall wait for his Law, v. 34. and v.
10.11. God charge the Inhabitants of the Isles, and the Towns of Kedar (a
place of irreconcilable contention by the Prophet David's relation) to give
glory unto the Lord, promising v. 16. to bring the blind by a way of his own;
To make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight, blaming his
servants for their blindness, his Messengers for their deafness, and those
that should be lights of others for their darkness, either for their ignorance
in not discerning the Lords way of judgment, or negligence in not directing
his people that way, or wilful obstinacy in cleaving and adhering too, and
confiding in humane counsels ways or courses, rather then the Lords divine
directions, telling the people that he is willing to magnify and exalt the
Law, for his righteousness sake, as in the ensuing verses of this chapter
appears, together with heavy threatenings against his own people, because
they walked not in his ways, nor were obedient to his Law, to the end of the
chapter.

If this way of the Divine Lot be a way of the Lord, a Judgment, Sentence,
Decree, Acts 17. God has appointed a day in which he will judge, etc. Jer.
33.14.15. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will perform the good
thing which I have promised, etc. I will cause the branch of righteousness to
grow up, and he shall execute judgment and righteousness, etc. At that day a
man shall look to his Maker, and his eyes to the holy one of Israel, and not to
the Altar, the works of his hands, or fancies of his own brains, etc. Isa.
17.7. Acts 17.31. Jer. 25.15, 16. Blood purged out of the mids of Jerusalem, as
the Lord promised, Is. 4.4. Isa. 43.7. Jer. 31.19. It shall be to me a name, a
joy, a praise and an honor before all the Nations of the earth.
Statute, Law, and Ordinance of the Lord, whereby Christ Jesus may gain glory
to himself from all Nations of the earth, by making them one flock, under one
Shepherd, by the way of his own judgment, bringing Jews and Gentiles,
Christians and Turks, Heathens and Infidels, to be of the same sheepfold under
his government, as by this Prophecy may be intended: If Christ shall not fail
till he have set Judgment on the earth, Psalm. 94.15. Isa. 42.4 viz. set all
things in good order. The whole earth, for the most part, especially
Christendom being at this time in terrible tumultuous turmoiles, combustions
and bloody contentions concerning Religion, and other matters of civil
government: Doubtless it may be a blessed fulfilling of this Prophecy, if all
the differences both concerning Church and State being truly stated, were
referred to the judgment and resolution of the Lord himself by this way of
his own prescription. By this means the barbarous way of war the heaviest
of Gods judgments more fit for heathenish brutish people then Christians would
be avoided, effusion of blood prevented, and the glory given to the Lord alone,
to whom it is only and justly due, and for which end God made man, and so the
name of God being spread ever the face of the earth. All Nations might be
taught it, and brought to the use of this blessed way of Reconciliation. To
difpise or neglect this way of the Lord, and go the way of cruelty and
violence, the way of the Sword, is to change the Judgments of the Lord into
wickedness, and to refuse and contemn the Judgments and Statutes of the
Lord, as the Lord by his Prophet complains, Ezekiel 5.5, 6, 7.

Surely the way of Cain like cruelty, Bloody butchering of our Brethren, can be
no way acceptable, but rather detestable to the God of Peace, no satisfactory
way of Judgment to the consciences of men, no sound foundation whereon to
settle Reformation, or build the Church of Christ. The judgment of Christ in
this way of divine Lot, will appear more consonant to the Word, and will of
God, more Pious and prosperous among men. If we seriously consider these
ensuing Prophecies.

Isa. 9.5, 6, 7. Surely every battle of the warrior is with noise, and with
tumbling of Garments in blood: but this shall be with burning, and fuel of
fire. For unto us a Child is borne, a Son is given; the government is upon
his shoulder: and be shall call his name wonderful, Counselor, etc. the
Prince of Peace. The increase of his Government, and Peace shall have none and:
He shall sit upon the Throne and kingdom of David, to order and stablish it
with Judgment and Justice. Jer. 23.5, 6. Jer. 33.14. Behold, the days come,
says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King
shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice in the earth.
In his day Judah shall be saved, and Israel dwell safely, and this is the Name
whereby they shall call him the Lord our righteousness.

In cases of difficulty and difference, the Prince of peace, the wonderful
Counselor, the true King of the Israel of God, may well be a more competent,
and covenient Judge, then the bloody Sword, which though victorious, yet cannot
by its Conquest so convince the minds and consciences of men, as thereby to
invest the Conqueror with a true right and just title to things thereby
obtained. Peace, amity, unity, how pious, how precious, how prosperous among
Brethren, both Gods Testaments are a plentiful testimony, and if no Text to
prove it might be produced, yet the woeful experience of the want thereof,
would sufficiently confirm it. But if jarres, divisions, dissentions,
dangerous, doubtful difficult arise, (as offenses will and do come) why
should not the determination thereof be referred to the judgment of Justice it
self.

If the rod of Pride bud, and spread, and cause and raise contentions among the
ambitious sons of men; Then shall the bud of the Lord be beautiful and
glorious, Isa. 11.1. And there shall come a rod out of the stock of Ishai, on
whom shall rest the Spirit of the Lord, the spirit of wisdom and understanding
of counsel, and strength of knowledge, etc. And he shall judge, but how? not
after the manner of men, after the sight of his eyes, or hearing of his ears.
But with righteousness and equity shall he judge the poor, and meek of the
earth; and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, etc. Isa. 2.11.
to the end. The haughtiness of men shall be humbled, Isa. 11.1.
the loftiness of men shall be abased, and the Lord only shall be exalted in
that day. Cease ye from man whose breath is in his nostrills for wherein is
he to be esteemed. Isa. 3.13, 14. The Lord stands up to plead, yea, he
stands up to judge the people. The Lord shall enter into judgment with the
ancients of his people. Isa. 4.2. And what shall be the fruits of his
Judgment, why Justice being the girdle of his loins, etc. The wolf shall
dwell with the lamb, the leopard ly down with the kid, the calfe the lion* and
fat beasts shall rest together, and a little child shall lead them, etc. They
shall not hurt nor destroy in all his holy mountain [his Church:] for the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, etc. Jer. 31.34. Blessed
fruits of a more blessed stock, When the Lord shall wash the fi^^hinesse of
the daughters of Zion, and purge the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst
thereof by the spirit of judgment. Isa. 4.4. That Israel may be glad and the
daughters of Judah rejoice because of Gods righteous judgments. Jer. 23.5,
6.^3.14.15, So shall the heathen fear, when the Lord shall build up Zion, and
shall appear in his glory, vid. Zech. 4.6.6 12, 13.15.8.21. Jer. 33.9. Psa.
165.12. cause his power to be known to the sons of men, etc. If a bitter
root bearing wormwood and gall shall be found among you, to whom will ye seek
for health and help; why in that day, the root of Ishai shall stand up for a
sign unto the people, and the Nations shall seek unto it, and his rest shall
be glorious. In cases of bitter contentions and bloody divisions; This tree of
life, whose fruit heals the Nations, has directed us to appeal to his
judgemen^ for reconciliation, he will thereby compos^ our Controversies, and
make his own Name glorious by concluding and ceasing controversies among his
people, and by that means bring all Nations to submit to his divine judgment.

Answerable hereunto is that of the second of Isa. 2* 3, 4* 5. where it is
prophesied, that in the last days, the mountain of the Lord shall be upon the
top of the mountains, and all Nations shall flow unto it. And he shall judge
among the Nations, and they shall beat their swords into mattocks, and their
spears into pruning-hookes, and shall fight no more, etc. vid. Jer. 3.17, 18.
They shall follow no more the hardness of their heart, the house of Judah
shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the
land of the north etc. Now what judgment is intended by these Prophecies and
whether this divine way of Gods judging in cases of difference may not be
received within the compass of these Prophecies, I would be glad to learn?
Seeing there is not (that I can find) in the whole book of God any other
imediate way of divine judgment, whereby differences may be decided,
particularly provided and ordained by God himself to that end, but only this
sacred ordinance: In holy Writ I find but two divine Oracles or sacred ways of
consulting with Almighty God in cases of extreme difficulty, whereby a
certain plain visible, and immediate response and resolution might be
received (videlicet) Urim and Thummim, and the Lot. The former was a more
mystical and obscure way; this not unlike that way before mentioned, Isa.
35.8, 9. for by Lot a plain, certain, and imediate resolution was always
returned, prompt and facile to any ordinary capacity: That way of Urim and
Thummim is abolished, but this sacred way of the Lot (no less Ancient and
holy then the former) as a most useful, holy, and happy way of Gods divine
judgment, ordained for determining of doubtful, difficult and dangerous
differences is still retained, as by these pacificall Proverbs, of the 16.33.
and the 18.18. appears, being both Canonical and Moral Scripture, and so
perpetual divinity; besides many presidents, both Ancient and modern, of the
use thereof before herein premised. And truly, I believe this may be justly
said of this sacred Ordinance, that it was never piously used and performed,
nay, when by irreligious Infidels practiced, but it ever brought glory to God,
and good to the users thereof; that all men may see and confess, that the Lord
is holy in all his ways, and just in all his judgments.

And doubtless this holy way is of especial happy use, for resolving of
doubtful cases, discovering of hidden and recondite matters, and determining
of difficult and mighty differences among mighty persons; For where
Controversies by humane endeavors cannot be decided and the parties on both
sides so stout, that otherwise they cannot be appeased, by this means the
matters may be composed, and the men pacified.

In cases of this nature, those that have the best causes, and the clearest
consciences, will desire to have their differences thus decided. For he that is
confident of the justice of his Cause, needs not doubt the judgment of God:
and the way of the Lord is strength to the upright man: but fear shall be for
the workers of iniquity, Prove. 10.29. They shall go into the holes of the
rocks etc. Isa. 2.19 20 21.

In cases of this difficult condition, when they say unto you Isa 8.19. Enquire
at them that have a spirit of divination, and at the southsayers which whisper
and murm^r. The divine spirit will tell you that those divinato^y spirits are
deceitful, and have no warrant from the divine word of God. That both North
and Southsayers are more subtle then solid, and their words are but wind. A
dry mind not fit to fan or cleanse Jer. 4.11. That whisperers are liars, and
murmurers against Gods divine direction, deserve to have their mouths stopped.
Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels etc. Isa. 47.12, 13.14. That
a woe is pronounced, by the Prophet against them that take counsel but not of
the Lord: that cover with an hypocritis all covering, not of his spirit. That
State po^icies are often State fallacies and that divine directions, though
delivered by a simple Dove, are to be preferred before any Machiavilian
machinations contrived by subtle Serpents, if you would be advised, who so
wise as the Wonderful Counselor, the Prince of Peace? who is wonderful in
counsel and excellent in working, Ier. 32.10.
he will direct you to him that has the spirit of wisdom and counsel etc.
Isa. 11.2. Isa. 45.11.21.22.23.24. Thus says the Lord, etc. Ask of me things
to come, etc. ask after the old way, etc.

Should not a People inquire at their God? from the living to the dead? will ye
deviate from the way, of the living Lord, to the dead Letter of your own
laws? from the divine law of the Lord, to the humane laws, counsels, and
devises of the crafty Achitophels of the Land? will ye deviate from the way of
Peace to the way of War, to the Law of Arms, of Harms? God directs you to
go to the Law and to the Testimony, to the statute judgment, ordinance
prescribed by Gods word: If they speak not according to his Word, it is
because there is no light in them. He that hates, or indeavoureth to supplant
or oppress his brother abides in darkness, and he that despises Gods
Counsel and Ordinance conducing to Peace remains in the shadow of death. Do
ye esteem the heavenly wholesome counsel of God in his word of truth? or the
crafty cruel courses and counsels of men more? Isa. 50.10.11. If God be God
follow him, but if Baal be he, If Mars or Machiavel, be your Gods, the bloody
sword or State stratagems follow them. Is it because there is no God in Israel,
that ye go to inquire of Baalzebub the god of Eckron? Is there no balm in
Gilead, no Physician there? Is it because the Lord has prescribed in his Word
no holy way of ending Controversies, that the cursed way of Cain-like cruelty
must make the conclusion? How long will it be before ye restrain the people
from persecuting and oppressing their brethren? know ye not that it will be
bitterness in the end? Is there no efficacy in the ordinances of God and yet
so much eminency in the ordinances of men? Are the judgments of men so
righteous and shall not the Judge of the whole world do right? Shall the
ordinances of men be commended and commanded and the Ordinance of God
contemned, and condemned as useless or illicite? Hear the Lords expostulation
with his own people: Have I that brought you out of the land of Egypt and led
you through the wilderness Have I been as a wilderness unto Israel or a land
of darkness? Jer. 2.31.
Wherefore says my people then We are Lords we will come no more to thee?
Isa. 45.19. I said not in vain unto the seed of Jacob Seek ye me. v. 22.
Look unto me ye shall be saved: all the ends of the earth shall be saved.
Will ye forsake the Fountain of living waters, which will never fail ye? and
dig ye pits, broken pits of your own power and policies, which may prove
fallacies and will hold no waters of true continuing comfort?

Truly the hope of the hills is but vain, nor the multitude of the mountains,
but in the Lord our God is the health of Israel, Jer. 3.13. The high look of
man shall be humbled, and the Lord only exalted, Isa. 2,
11.12.13.14.15.16.17.19. Isa. 51. I, even I am he that comfort you. Who art
thou that fear man, etc. and forgettest the Lord thy maker, etc? v. 12.13.
No perfect Peace in our case without consulting, and receiving the resolution
of the great Peacemaker. Zech. 8.3. A City of truth. 1 Cor. 3.^1. Psa.
147.2.14. Quo facilius preceptum eo gravius peccatum.
not the hills of our haughty ones, nor mu^titudes nor mountains of our
Mighties can make us happy; All our Powers and policies, wealth and Armies,
without a pious Peace cannot preserve us from ruin. And for a firm and
well-grounded Peace, we cannot be assured, nor ever secured, except the
Propositions for Peace be confirmed, settled, and perfected by the Judgment,
sentence, and decree of the great Peacemaker, who is our peace, who is more
puissant then the Mountains of prey: and in pious Policies more wise then all
the wise men of the world combined and conjoined; who will nullify and
disappoint all their counsels even when he pleases catch them in their craft,
and snare them in their own net.

Jerusalem is builded as a City at unity in it self; Nisi Dominus
Aedificaverit other foundation can no man lay, except the Lord whose Tabernacle
is at Salem, build Bethsalem, Jerusalem all humane labor is but lost. And in
this respect there is a sacred necessity of the use of this holy Ordinance,
there being no other way of Gods judgment for the perfecting of our peace
prescribed in Gods word. Zech. 4.10.7.6. Who has despised the day or way, of
small things? This way of the Lord prescribed by his Word however despicable in
the eyes of sinful mortals. Who art thou o great mountain? thou shall be a
plain: for neither by an Army, nor by strength but by my Spirit, by my self,
by the way of my Word shall the work of Peace be finished says the Lord of
hosts, vide Isa. 2.11. to the end of the chapter.

In a second respect, there is also a sacred necessity of the use of this holy
way, in respect of the equal and impartial proceedings for trial of
differences depending between King and Parliament. 1. In regard the King is
under Christ the next and imediate Supreme Governor of these Kingdoms, and
the Parliament the supreme Court of Judicature in these Kingdoms. Now neither
Party can appeal to any person or Court superiout to them but Christ and the
Court of Heaven. And for either party to become Judges in their own case is
hardly consistent with the laws of God or man. And therefore we must needs
conclude Christ under God to be the most equal, convenient, and just Judge for
determining the differences.

Third^y in respect of the Covenants, Vows or Oaths, which have passed on
both sides, which being made before, and to God (I conceive under favor)
cannot by any humane means consent compulsion or Authority be dispensed
withal, dissolved or disanulled; nor the consciences of those men, that made,
It may be seared, lest for oaths the Land mourns in tears of blood, when so
many lives have been shed and spilt.
or took such Covenants, Vows or Oaths satisfied or cleared until they
shall be convinced by this or some other Divine way of the Lords judgment
concerning the truth or falsity, justness or unjustnesse of their own Tenent
and demands, which they have Covenanted, vowed, and sworn to defend and
maintain, especially when the parties on both sides have Covenanted expressly
and directly one against the other, to maintain things diametrically opposite,
there the one party cannot without breach of his Covenant, or violation of his
vow or oath yield to the other in that particular, neither ought by the rules
of reason or Religion, or any warrant which I find in the word of God, to be
forced or compelled thereunto.

An instance hereof in this case concerning Episcopacy, which the King has
vowed to maintain, and the Parliament Covenanted to eradicate. In this case
the King cannot yield unto the Parliaments demands without violation of his
oath, neither ought his Majesty, as I conceive (under favor) to be compelled
thereunto, it being against his oath unless the Lord shall so give judgment,
and thereby declare the Presbytery or other Government which the King or
Parliament, shall propose to be I^re divino, or fitter to be established in
this Kingdom: As hereby the Lord will surely and truly show upon Propositions
of several forms, which is most consonant to his Word and will. He will give
to God the the things that are Gods. And surely in all Ecclesiastical cases of
this nature, wherein the glory of his Name is so much concerned, the judgment
of God is more proper and fit then the judgment of man.

Again in the case of the Militia, the Question being desired to whom of right
the same appertains, man by the Sword cannot be so competent a Judge as the
Lord (by whom all powers are ordained and ordered,) may be by the Let, in this
case or any other concerning God, the King or Kingdom. He by whom Kings reign
and Princes decree justice. He by whom Princes rule and the Nobles and all the
Judges of the earth, is the fittest judge, Pro. 8.15.16. For where the sword
^^ts as chief justice t^ere might goes away with right. There jus potestatis,
not potestas juris, is predominant, there we find no power of right but that
right which power obtains, bears the sway, justice is justled out by strength
of hand, but by the righteous judgment of the Lord, the right of the Militia,
and all other matters in difference will be justly disposed. We know that the
judgment of God is according to truth Psa. 19.9. Romans 2.2.6.11. None ought to
judge another (but by warrant from God) in right or title especially where the
Judges lay claim to the same thing in question. He will give to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's. Tribute to whom tribute, Custom to whom custom, to
all and every one their proper due: In this divine judgment, as we cannot
fail of right so we need not fear any wrong: where the Lord is Judge, there
is no partiality, nor respect of persons. Give me leave to ask the Apostles
question, why do thou judge thy brother? we shall all appear before the
Judgment seat of Christ, as it is written, War among Christians and neglect
of the use of this Ordinance occastoneth the Lords name to be blasphemed.
Conversation of Christians should winn others to follow their faith, and
glorify God in Christ, Heb. 13.7. 1 Phil. 1.2.3.17. 2 Timothy 2.19 Romans 1.21.22.
Let whosoever names the name of Christ depart from evil, from dissension,
This way ordained not in vain by the Lord, nor set down in his Word to no
purposo.
every knee shall bow, etc.

Why then should the Heathen reproach and scoff at the Christian for their
cruelty, and barbarous bloudy-mindednesse one against another, saying. Where is
that God, that Christ that Prince of peace, which they so boast of? Cannot, or
will not he reconcile them? why does he suffer them thus bruitishly to butcher
one another? cannot he be? or will they not trust him to become their Arbiter.
Umpire. Judge to end their differences and settle peace among his people. Thus
whilst the name of God and Christ should by the use of his holy Ordinance be
magnified by such as are called by his Name, godly Christians, by their
inhumane cruelty, and irreligious carriage in the neglect of his holy
Ord^nance, his holy Name is blasphemed and that among Turks and Infidels*
whereof the Lord himself Isa. 52.5. complains; Now therefore what have I here
says the Lord that my people are taken away for naught and those that rule
over them cause them to howl and my Name continually is blasphemed; as also
the Apostle speaks, that by ill carriage of Christians, the name of God and
Christ is blasphemed among the Gentiles.

I said not in vain to the seed of Jacob; Seek you me: I the Lord do speaks
righteousness and declare righteous things: look unto me and ye shall be
saved: all the ends of the earth shall be saved for I am God and there is none
other. No part of Gods word is useless or superfluous; not any ordinance of
God therein unnecessary or vain. The wicked are so proud they will not seek
after God, Psalm. 10.45. To refuse or resist any way or ordinance of God is to
fight against God. To neglect or despise this holy ordinance, is to dishonor
God by disobedience to his direction.

It Is an argument of guiltiness or infidelity in the refusers: of guilt in
that they dare not endure or abide the test* touchstone or trial of the truth,
or else of infidelity in that either they do not believe the word prescribing
this Ordinance. Or else they dare not or will not trust God in the dispo^^tion
of the Lot; Though the word be plain in that point, and clear as the Sun,
Prove. 16.33.

Reasons why this way ought to be embraced and used before any humane way.
First because it is a most holy way in three respects. 1. In regard of the
Author or first instituter thereof. 2. In respect of the ends for which it was
ordained. 3. In respect of the means to attain those ends, Gods divine way of
judgment.

The Author and Instituter is God himself, as has been plentifully proved in
the precedent part of this Treatise.

The ends three. 1. Gods glory, which should they come in competition, we
ought to prefer before the salvation of our souls.

Secondly, ending the present differences, preventing of future dissentions.

Thirdly, settling and establishing of a firm and lasting Peace, then which
among Gods people nothing more pleasing to God, more profitable to themselves.

The means whereby those ends are attained, viz. the divine judgment makes
this way the most happy for both sides, and for many reasons the fittest to be
used.

Secondly* in respect of the equality and justice of this way of proceeding and
trial, being without corruption, fraud, deceit, or guile, without force or
compulsion, without any partiality.

Thirdly, because the mouths of murmurers and malicious men will hereby be
stopped, and no default or defect, deceit or mistake, injury or falsity can be
attributed to this judgment.

Fourthly, in regard it is satisfactory to the minds and consciences of all
good men, who will believe and honor the Judgment, in respect of the Judges
integrity, who cannot err or do wrong.

Fifthy, because the use hereof is an exercise and an evidence of our faith and
obedience; A true trial is hereby made, whether we believe his Word, observe
his Ordinances, and dare trust his Judgment.

Sixthly, because this being an ordinance of God, there is as strict a Precept
given by God in his Word, for the due keeping and observing thereof, as of any
the Lords laws and Commandments, Isa. 58.2. They seek me daily, and will know
my ways, even as a people that did righteously, and had not forsaken the
statutes of their God, they ask of me the ordinances of Justice, they would
seem to draw near unto God, etc.
Deuteronomy. 30.10.15.16. and many other places of Scripture, with promises of
plentiful blessings thereunto annexed, and menaces, and curses for neglect
thereof. And if humane ordinances must not without much danger, be disobeyed.
I wonder how the wisest and the mightiest men dare despise the divine
Ordinances of the Almighty Lord of Heaven and Earth; Considering that Sacred
and severe Injunction there prescribed, with promise of life* and good to the
obedient observers, death and evil to the disobedient deserters thereof.

Seventhly, because the further effusion of blood will hereby be prevented, all
parties better contented and all future malice feuds, and discontents among
many Families and persons in the Kingdoms forgiven, if not forgotten, removed
if not obliterated, which when they shall discern the the divine hand and
judgment of God in determination of the differences, will remain more
clearly satisfied touching the same and one toward another.

Eighthly* all businesses may hereby be Transacted with glory to God, and
without vainglory, blame accusation or dishonor to either party. In this
trial the Victor cannot sacrifice to his own Nett* attribut any praise to the
arm of flesh, nor the evicted receive any foil or disgrace from the hand of
the Adverse party, in regard the Lord is the only agent, and the judgment
disposition and event is only of the Lord. Whereas if either party should
relinquish their former Tenants and condescend to any Propositions which they
formerly (before the unhappy war commenced) refused to assent unto, it might
be held and accounted as an argument either of much weakness or wickedness in
them, in not yiedling thereunto before so much Christian blood was spilt and so
much misery calamity distraction, and damage had been brought to the Kingdom
by their standing out.

Ninthly* in case of differences in Religion, this divine way without all
peradventure will prove the most pious, prosperous, and most pleasing to God
and men, if we consider these ensuing particulars.

First, the glory of God is primarily and imediatly concerned, and to be
considered herein viz. the salvation of his soul* which has special relation
to, and depends much upon the doctrine and discipline of that Church whereof
he is a member.

Thirdly, the chief and continual care of every man ought to be, first the
glorifying of God, and secondly the salvation of his soul.

Now if differences arise touching the way which is the most pious and best way
to glorify God, and attain the salvation of souls, which is the purest way of
divine worship, which Church has the most orthodox doctrine and discipline,
whether shall the doubting conscience go for satisfaction in those points? It
will be answered to the Scriptures which are Gods Testaments, his revealed
will, the Touchstone of Truth. Thither we are to appeal for satisfaction.

But then put case (as in truth it is) that diversity of Interpretations have
bred diversity of opinions and divisions, and so controversies increase, and
grow end esse; Men's corrupt constructions have troubled the Fountain of living
waters, with the mud of their mis-interpretations, the Word of truth, which
would give light to the whole world, like the Sun in his brightness, an
infallible standard of true doctrine, and determiner of all Controversies, is
hid under the bushel of men's mystie-clouded understanding and apprehension and
that which should be a cure for our contentions, is by man's misprision made an
occasion of further difference and determination of the differences of
Interpretation? Surely he that in the beginning was the Word, and the Word that
was with God, and that Word which was and is God, will be the fittest Judge of
the Interpretation of the Word of truth: That Word by which all things were
made, and without it was nothing made, must make peace between the
Interpreters of the Word, or it will never be made. That Word in which was and
is life, and the Life the light of men* the Light that shines in darkness,
the true light that lightneth every man that comes into the world the way,
the truth and the life must show us the true way, the way of truth, the true
way of life eternal; He must teach us the way of Peace; Lead us in the paths
of Peace, declare unto us by the light of his divine judgment, which way is
most conducible to his glory, and his peoples good* which Interpretation he
best approves of, which way of doctrine and discipline is most pleasing to
God, and profitable for his Church; Reveal that way of Keligion or
Reformation, which is most agreeable to the will and word of Jesus Christ,
Prove. 16.11. Prove. 2.6.
to whom the Judgment is to be committed. None but God only can reveal the
way of life. We can know nothing of God clearly and perfectly, until God
himself manifests it unto us, Psalm. 103.7. and 147.19.2. Dan. 3. J cause to
walk in the way of righteousness, and in the midst of the paths of judgment;
Prove. 8.20. And without this way of divine judgment, Controversies will rather
increase then cease, Divisions be multiplied rather then diminished. Therefore
let us pray with holy David, Arise, O Lord judge thou the earth, for thou shall
inherit all Nations. And in this point the Dove declares her self an
Independent to the world.

For man by humane power or policy, without advising with Almighty God, and
receiving his divine resolution, to set up a Set form of Discipline and
Religion, such as he in his opinion shall conceive most agreeable to Gods word,
and then enforce as he in his opinion shall conceive most agreeable to Gods
word, and then enforce all to fall down and worship in that form and way, or
inflict punishment on the refusers, their course is evil, and their force not
right Jer. 23.10. it is next door to Nebuchadnezzars Image and Idolatry: If we
would have a Religion established consonant to Gods will and Word, let us
consult with the Lord, and convince the consciences of opposers by the
Judgment of Jesus Christ, the way of the Lord, the oracle of God, prescribed
in his holy Word, not the way of the Sword, or other humane way or ordinance,
which can be but a sandy foundation whereon to ground Religion or Reformation.

A sacred necessity of the use hereof in differences in religion, the Lord
ought to be trusted with the interpretation of his own word. The Testator with
the meaning of his Testament.
And I think I may presume, that the wisdom of our wisest men, the most
prudent and potent Pillars of our State and Church, will nor presume an
infallibility of judgment in themselves; a gift so divine, that our most
rarely-gifted Divines will not dare to attribute it to themselves, it being a
quality so incompatible to, or with any sublunary creatures; And we may fear
to find error in Scripture interpretation, as well as in life and conversation
among the sons of Levi, the most sanctified Clergy, who being well advised,
will neither shame nor be ashamed of that sacred Ordinance, which gives them
that title of Clergy, but look upon it as that Star in the East, whereby
with the Wise men they may be led to Christ, the light of the Gentiles, and the
glory of his people Israel. Whereby the Sun of righteousness, with healing
under his wings, the dayspring from on high may visit us, giving light to them
that sit in darkness, and the shadow of death, Luke. 2.32.
and guiding our feet in the way of peace, Luke 1.78.79. For he is the
Fountain of our peace and felicity, and we should be zealous of his glory,
which leads me to the tenth reason.

Tenthly, It is an excellent occasion, cause and means of glorifying God,
whereof man should be most careful: God being the beginning from which all
thing; spring, from whence proceeds every good and perfect gift; the means
by whom we live, move, and have our well being, and the end unto which all
things tend; and to the advancement of whose glory we should bend all our
endeavors, purposes and practices; For his glory is most dear to him, Exodus
7.4.5. He will not give it to another, Esa 42.8. and 48.11. therefore man
should beware lest he intend or endeavor to rob God of his glory, by
preferring humane before divine Counsels, ways and courses, by respecting
man's, and rejecting Gods ordinances etc. No Peace will be on earth, no true
love or good will among men, nor good will of God toward men, unless glory be
given to God on high, as by the doxology of the Angels appears. Gods glory is
the supreme end of all divine revelation, Ephesians. 2.7. of all his works, So the
Heathen shall fear thy name, and all kings of the earth thy glory. The Doves
address to the Divines. Mal. 2.1, 2, 3, etc. If they had stood in my counsel,
and had declared my words and my ordinances to my people, then they should have
turned them from their evil way, and from the wickedness of their inventions,
Ier. 24.22. I create the fruit of the Lips to be peace, I will heal, etc. But
the wicked are like the raging Sea, that cannot rest, whose waves cast up mire
and dirt, Isa. 57.19.20. Isa. 52.7. How beautiful upon the mountains are the
feet of him that declares and publishes peace? that declares good things,
and publishes salvation, saying unto Zion thy God reigns. Christ is the
Prince of peace, and prime and only peacemaker, if we refuse to make him our
umpire, our Judge, we rob him of his honor, and his office. Their course is
evil, and their force is not right, Jer. 23.10. Mal. 1.6.7.8. Mal. 4.4. Jer.
13.15, 16.57.
Ephesians. 1.5.6. Jo. 11.4.48, Exodus 9.16. Psa. 50.15. Prove. 16.4. of man's life Psa.
6.4.5. Psa. 9.13.14. and service, Psa. 101.1. Zach. 7.5, 6. Jo. 3.28 29. it is
the royal Robe of his infinite Majesty, Psa. 104.1. And all means furthering
the same, are available to salvation, Psalm. 50.23. Romans 4.20.21.

Divine providence having made it my Lot (who am lesser then the least of the
servants of Christ) to treat of the sacred Ordinance of divine Lot; Let not
the Divines and reverend Clergy disdain, if some texts of holy truth be
directed to them from the mouth of the Almighty touching this point of
glorifying God, and teaching the people his laws and statures, and ordinances.
And now, o ye Priests this commandment is for you. If ye will not hear it,
nor consider it in your heart, to give glory unto my Name, says the Lord of
Hoasts, I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse your blessings: yea I
have cursed them already, because ye do not consider it in your heart, Behold
I will corrupt your seed, and cast dung upon your faces, etc, And ye shall know
that I have sent this commandment unto you, that my Covenant with Levi might
stand. My Covenant was with him of life and peace; Not war and destruction,
not a covenant with death, and agreement with hell. The law of truth was in his
mouth, and he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many from
iniquity. He taught Gods people to know the ways, and walk in the paths of
Peace, turned their hearts from inclining to strife and debate, their heads
from imagining mischief against their brethren, held their hands from smiting
with the fist of wickedness, or being defiled with blood, stopped their feet
from running the race of Ruin, shedding innocent blood. For the Priests lips
should pleserve knowledge, and the people should seek the law at his mouth;
For ye are the messengers of the Lord to that purpose; But ye are gone out of
the way: ye have caused many to fall by the Law: ye have broken the covenant of
Levi of life and peace, says the Lord, Therefore have J also made you
despised, and vile before the people; because ye kept not my ways, but have
been partial in the law. Have we not all one Father? Has not one God made
us? why do we transgress every one against his brother, and break the
covenant of our Fathers? ye have wearied the Lord with your words, when ye
say, etc. Where is the God of judgment?

As God, is the God, not of confusion, but of peace, so he meant and sent his
Ministers to be Ambassadors of peace, not contention. And if God in his Law,
his Word, have instituted and prescribed a way, an ordinance of Peace, where
shall the people seek the knowledge of this Law, this Ordinance, this Statute,
but at the mouths of his Ministers. Is it lawful for them to go out of this
way, to cause the people to fall from this Law? to be partial touching the
Law, to teach what part thereof they like, and neglect what part they dislike;
Do ye not weary the Lord with your words and ways, when ye deny or doubt of
the way of his divine judgment. If a tender Father shall offer his judgment
to be Umpire, Arbiter, judge, between dissenting Brethren his children; who
refuse such a Fatherly favor, and fall by the Sword, and so fall to the Sword;
ought not the Priest to tell those contentious brethren of their Rebellious
disobedience, and show and direct then the divine way of reconciliation? Jf J
be a Father, where is mine honor? if a master, where is my fear, says the
Lord unto you, O priests, that despise my name, and if ye ask wherein? in that
ye say the way and ordinance of the Lord is not to be regarded and ye offer
blind and lame, and unclean sacrifice, humane deviser, in stead of divine
directions. And 1 Samuel 2 29.30. Mark the Lords expostulation with Eli,
Wherefore have ye kicked against my sacrifice and mine offering which I
commanded in my Tabernacle, and honor thy children above me, to make your
selves fat of the first fruits of the offering of my people? But it shall not
be so: for them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall
be despised. Behold, the days that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of
thy fathers, etc. May not the Lord say the like to the despisers of his
Ordinance? wherefore have you preferred the issues of your own brains, before
my Instituted Ordinance, to make your selves rich and glorious thereby? I will
cut off your power and authority, etc. Remember the law of Moses my servant,
with the statutes. Judgments and ordinances which I commanded, etc. The Prince,
Parliament, Prophet, Priest and People may please to observe and remember those
texts touching the Lords glory, and his ordinances.

I shall conclude this point with that of the Prophet Jeremiah: Hear ye, and
give care, be not proud, for the Lord has spoken it. Give glory to the Lord
your God, before he bring darkness, and before your feet stumble in the dark
mountains, and while ye look for light, he turn it into the stadow of
death, and make it as darkness. But if ye will not hear this, my soul shall
weep in secret for your pride, vide Psalm. 10.4.5. The wicked is so proud, he
seeks not for God, but worldly goods. Gods judgments are high above his
sight, etc.

Zech. 4.10. Thus says the Lord; Stand in the ways, and behold, and ask for
the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for
your souls, Jer. 6.16. Jer. 25.5. Turn again now every one from his evil way,
and from the wickedness of your Inventions, etc.
It Is a most holy, happy, and honorable way in respect of the Authority,
Antiquity, ends and use thereof. Ask for the old way, etc. whatsoever things
are written afore-time, are written for our learning etc. Romans 14.4.

It Is a most plain, perfect, easy, ready way, and as full of felicity as
facility, Quo facilius preceptum, eo gravins peccatum; Who has despised the
day of small things. By how much the divine way; precept, or direction is more
easy, by so much the neg^ect thereof, is more heavy, more sinful.

This judgment of the Lord will be a most firm foundation whereon to build
Bethsalem, Jerusalem, a safe lasting, and well-grounded peace. We may observe
that ship to be most frequently and furiously tossed and tumbled with waves and
tempests that anchors in the mud, and slitting flexible yiedling earth; We may
find it so in those ships of state, which anchor too terrenely, which confide
in their own cracked counsels, too much in the mud of their own imaginations,
the dirt of their own devises, the brittle earthen pitcher of their own
policies. That Peace is most safe that is grounded on the rock of Christ Jesus
his divine counsel, judgment and direction, upon God, the rock of our
salvation; that state remains but in a weak and tottering condition, that
has not the salvation of the Lord for their walls and bulwarks. But that
State or People which dare cast their burden on the Lord, in case of danger,
division, destruction, commit their cause to his heavenly disposition, and
contentedly, and confidently say, The Lord is our Judge, Isa. 33.22. etc. per
totum.
the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us: they shall
dwell on high: their defense shall be in the mountaint of the Rock: surely
there the mighty Lord will be unto them as a place of floods and broud rivers,
etc. Their eyes shall see the King in his glory: Jerusalem a quiet habitation,
a tabernacle that cannot be removed. Isa. 32.16. etc.
Judgment shall return to Justice, and all Nations shall fellow after it.
Judgment shall dwell in the desert, and justice remain in the fruitful
fields. And my people shall dwell in the Tabernacle of Peace, and in sure
dwellings, and in safe resting places. And the work of Justice shall be peace,
even the work of Justice and quietness, and assurance for ever. I shall
conclude with these Admonitions, exhortations of the Lord by his Prophet. Which
the Dove humbly directs to the Prince, Parliament, Clergy and People of the
Land.

Isa. 50.10, 11. Who is among you, that fears the Lord, let him hear the
voice of his servant, he that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him
trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Behold, all you kindle a
fire, and are compassed about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire,
and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand, ye
shall lie down in sorrow. Ezekiel. 15.7. I will set my face against them, they
shall go out from one fire, and another fire shall devour them. Woe to the
rebellious that take counsel, but not of me, etc. Isa. 30.1, 2, 3. vide Isa.
10 and Isa. 29.14, 15. Woe unto them that seek deep, to hide their counsel
from the Lord, etc. vid. ver. 16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23.24. Both Prophet and
Priest do wickedly, wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery ways in
darkness: they shall be driven forth, and fall therein: for I will bring, etc.
Jer. 23.11, 12. Woe is me now, for my soul faints because of the murderers,
Jer. 4.31.
The conclusion of one war, may be the commencement of another, even to
confusion. And Isa. 51.4. Hearken unto me my people, and give care unto me, o
my people, for a law shall proceed from me, and I will bring forth my judgment
for the light of the people. And Isa. 45.7. I form the light, and create
darkness: I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things. v.
11. Ask of me things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the works of
mine hands command you me. And Isa 46.8. Remember this, and be ashamed: bring
it to mind, O you transgressors. Remember the former things of old, for I am
God, etc. My counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will, ver. 9.10.
Hear me ye stubborne-hearted that are far from justice, I will bring near my
justice, etc. ver. 12.13. And Isa. 47.10, 11. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge,
they have caused thee to rebel, and thou have said in thine heart, I am, and
none else. Therefore shall evil come upon thee, and thou shall not know the
morning thereof. etc. And Isa. 48 18.19. Thus says thy Redeemer, the holy one
of Israel, I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to profit, and lead thee
by the way that thou should go. O that that thou had hearkened to my
statutes, then had thy peace been as a river, etc. For mine own sake, for mine
own sake will J do it: for how should my Name be polluted? Surely J will not
give my glory to another, vr. 11. And Jer. 8.7. Even the Storke, the Turtle,
the Crane, and the Swallow know their app^^^ted times, but my people know not
the judgments of the Lord. How do ye say, we are wise, and the law of the
Lord is with us. The wise men are ashamed, they are afraid and taken: Lo, they
have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them. ver. 8.9. Jer.
7.27.23. But thou shall say unto them, this is a Nation that hears not the
voice of the Lord their God, nor receives discipline, truth is perished, and
is clean gone out of sheir mouth, Thou shall speak all these words unto them,
but they will not hear thee, etc. Jer. 7.27.28. Therefore Behold, the days
come* says the Lord, that it shall no more be called Topheth, nor the valley
of Benhinnow, but the valley of slaughter, etc. ver. 30. O that mine head were
full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and
night for the slain of the daughter of my people. Oh that I had in the
wilderness, a cottage of way faring men, that I might leave my people, and go
from them; for they be all adulterers, and an assembly of Rebels. Shall I not
visit for these things, says the Lord? and shall not my soul be avenged on
such a Nation as this? upon the mountains will I take a lamentation, etc. And
I will make Jerusalem an heap, and a den of dragons, etc. who is wise to
understand this, etc. why does the land perish? etc. And the Lord says,
Because of oaths the Land mourns, their course is evil, and their force is
not right, Jer. 23.10. God stands in the assembly of gods, he judges among
gods. Psalm. 82.1. They know not, and understand nothing: they walk in darkness,
albeit the foundations of the earth be moved, ver. 5.
because they have forsaken my law which I set before them; And have walked
after the counsel and stubbornness of their own wicked heart, etc. Jer.
9.1.2.9.10.11.1^.13. Woe to the rebellious, that take counsel, but not of me,
etc. Jer. 11.24. They are all rebellious traitors, walking craftily: they are
brass and iron; they are all destroyers, Jer. 6.28. This people has an
unfaithful and rebellious heart: they are departed and gone, etc. Jer. 5.23.
Thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed; consumed them, but they
have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder then a
stone, and have refused to return. Surely, they are poor, they are foolish
for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. I will
get me to the great men, and will speak unto them: for they have known the way
of the Lord, and the judgment of their God: but these have altogether broken
the yoke, and burst the bonds etc. Jer. 5.3.4, 5. My people is foolish, they
have not known me: they are foolish children, and have none understanding: The
children of men are vanity, and the chief men are lies, Psalm. 62.9. vide Isa.
41.28.29. they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge,
Jer. 4.22. for they have perverted their way, and forgotten the Lord their God.
They have changed my judgments into wickedness, for they have refused my
judgments and statutes, and have not walked in them, Ezekiel. 5, 6. O ye
disobedient children return, and I will heal your rebellions, Jer. 3.20, 21,
22. Thy ways, and thy inventions have procured thee these things, etc. Jer.
4.18. Therefore, thus says the Lord stand in the ways and behold, and ask
for the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein, Isa. ^55.6, 7. Thy
children shall be taught of the Lord, and much peace shall be to them, Isa.
54.13.
and ye shall find rest for your souls, Jer. 6.16. Ask of me things to come,
Isa. 45.11. Should not a people inquire at their God, to the Law and the
testimony, the Lords judgment, the surest testimony of truth. Then shall ye
go out with joy, and be led forth with peace, etc. And it shall be to the Lord
for a name, and for a praise, for an everlasting sign, that shall not be taken
away, Isa. 55.12, 13. This people have J formed for my self: they shall show
forth my praise, Isa. 43.21. How happy and honorable a thing were it for
England to be the first in reviving this ordinance of the Lord for advancement
of his glory. I shall pray pardon for my presumption, in presenting these texts
of truth, to the grave and pious consideration of the great Counsel of the
Kingdom; It will, I hope, Prove. 1.5.33.
prove no hinderance to the happiness of their proceedings, to take along with
them the Counsel of the everlasting Counselor, nor to ask counsel of that
only wise Counselor, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working.
Where no counsel is, the people fall; but where many counselors are, there is
health, Prove. 11.14. Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil, but to
the counselors of peace, shall be joy, Prove. 12.20. Many devises are in the
heart of man, but the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand, Prove. 19.20.
There is no wisdom, neither understanding, nor counsel against the Lord,
Prove. 21.30. The Lord breaks the counsel of the heathen, the politic
worlding, and brings to naught the counsels of the people. Psa. 33.10.11.
Human judgments are often erroneous and sinful, Psalm. 58.1, 2. Do ye indeed
spoake righteousness, O congregations, do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of
men? yea, in heart ye work wickedness; you weigh the violence of your hands in
the earth.
But the counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever. God stands in the
assembly of gods, he judges among gods: How long etc. all the foundations of
the earth are out of course. I have said ye are gods, etc. but ye shall die
like men, etc. O God, arise therefore judge thou the earth, for thou shall
inherit all nations, Psalm. 82. vid. Psalm. 14. The Lord shall sit for ever, he
has prepared his Throne for Judgment. The Lord is known by executing
judgment; For he will judge the world in righteousness, and the people with
equity. And they that know thy Name will trust in thee, etc. Psalm. 9. Thou have
not failed them that seek thee.

The wicked is so proud, he seeks not for God, he boasts of his hearts
desire, blesses himself in his own time, contemns the Lord in his
ordinances. Yet he says in his heart, I shall never be moved, nor come into
danger; God has forgotten, he hides his face, and will never see, will not
regard. Yet thou have seen it, thou beholdest mischief and wrong: that thou
may take the matter into thine own hands: the poor commiteth himself unto
thee, for thou art the helper of the helpless: Thou preparest th^^ heart, and
bend thine ear to judge the cause, that earthly man cause to fear no more:
Let not man prevail put them in fear, that they may know they are but men,
Psa. 10.

The Prophet David also, a man after Gods heart, advises to commit our cause
to God to cast our burden on the Lord, prays that his sentence may come
forth from the Lords presence, Isa. 28.15.
and that the Lord may behold equity, showing that by the holy ways of Gods
word, he had been kept from the paths of the cruel man, of the destroyer.
Psalm. 17.2.4. and Psalm. 16.7 says, I will praise the Lord, David never set
upon weighty matter, without consulting with the Lord.
who has given me counsel* etc. And it is evident that holy David did most
frequently in cases of difficulty, consult with the Lord by Lot, being assured
that the Lord would maintain hi^ Lot. And so did Moses, Joshuah, Samuel, etc.
Prophets, Patriarks, Apostles. David presumed not to make choice of, or settle
any person of the sons of Aaron, the tribe of Levi, in any place or office of
the Lords service in the Temple, of his own will, appointment and pleasure, but
left all both high and low to the Lords own Election by Lot, as before is
showed, and likewise appears, 1 Chronicles, 24.25, 26. chapters.

We read it recorded of King Uzziah that he did uprightly in the sight of the
Lord, 2 Chro. 26.4, 5.
while he sought the Lord in the days of Zechariah (who understood the visions
of God) and when he sought the Lord, Sudden elevated prosperity, an occasion of
sudden ruin causes forget fullness of the Author and man, to trust in
themselves, which procures their perdition.
God made him to prosper; And God did help him marvellously, till he was
mighty. But when he was made strong, his heart was lifted up to his
destruction, ver. 15.16.

An example well worth your meditation, and serious observation, while he
consulted with God* sought God, took counsel of God, in all his great
enterprises, God made him to prosper, and made him mighty; But then mark the
occasion of his fall. his heart was so lifted up and he would exceed his
commission, meddle with matters concerning the Lords service, which pertained
not to his place. It perteyneth not to thee Uzziah though a King to burn
Incense to the Lord, Go forth of the Sanctuary, for thou have transgressed,
and thou shall have (...) honor of the Lord God, ver. 18. Though his zeal and
intention seemed good, yet because they were not governed by the word of God,
and the rules thereby prescribed, he did wickedly, and was therefore justly
reproved, and also punished. And we may remember what befell Vzza, for but
irreverently looking into the Arc; procul hinc, proculite prophani. God alowes
to Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, but reserveth the things of God, for
God; Gods work ought to be done in Gods way; humane helps, humane might,
means, manner, in divine matters, God expects not, respects not. Humane
Forms, Rules, Traditions, Directions, Instruments, or Agents, not warranted by
Gods word, in the execution, or use of divine and spiritual affairs, actions,
or ordinances, are no where commanded, no where commended, but rather condemned.

God has helped you marvellously, until ye are become mighty, As David told
his Pinces, 1 Chro. 22.5. We must build an house for the Lord, magn^ficall
excellent, and of great fame and dignity throughout all Countries.
and ye are about a mighty work, the work of Reformation of Christ's Church.
God has sent his Prophets among you, to bring you unto the Lord, as he did, 2
Chronicles 24 19. to Judah and Jerusalem, and they make their protestations
among you, call heaven and earth ^o witness, that except ye follow the Lords
directions herein, ye will transgress highly, and run into an heavy
primunire, forfeiture of his favor, incurring the penalty of his displeasure,
and so be grievously punished as Vzzah was, for meddling with the Priests
office, Christ's office, the high Priest, (if I may so say) and Pastor of the
souls of his Saints, who is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech,
and for usurping his office, you will have none honor of the Lord God. They
tell you the work of Reformation is most suitable to the Redeemer, and a work
not less then, nor inferior to that of our Redemption, and therefore it is a
work more fit for the hand of the supreme head of his Church, even Christ
Jesus, then any humane power, and to seek to take that divine work out of his
Almighty hand, will prove a transgression of an high nature, and so does the
word of truth tell you, 2 Samuel 7.14. to deprive him of his honor* will be
rather prejudicial then propitious to your proceedings. They tell you that
David, a man after Gods own heart, 1 Chronicles. 22.8.9. 1 Chronicles. 28.3.6. was not
permitted to build a material typical Temple made with hands, because his
hands had been in blood, and yet surely his wars were undertaken for Gods
cause, by Gods direction, and against Gods enemies. Thou have shed much blood,
and made great battles: thou shall not build an house unto my Name: for thou
have shed much blood upon the earth, in my sight. Behold a son is borne to
thee, 2 Chro. 27.9.
which shall be a man of rest, for I will give him rest etc. therefore his name
is Solomon, and I will send peace and quietness upon Israel in his days. He
shall build an house for my Name. Thus said the Lord to David, and thus say the
Lords Prophets to you, as Oded, a Prophet of the Lord once said to the
Israelites in a case of this nature; Behold, because the Lord God of your
fathers was wroth with your brethren of Judah, he has delivered them into your
hand, and ye have slain them in a rage, that reaches up to heaven; And now ye
purpose to keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem, as servants and
handmaids unto you: but are you not such, that sins are with you before the
Lord your God? you have made great Battles against your brethren, 1 Chr.
22.5.8. etc.
and shed much of their blood upon the earth in the fight of the Lord, because
therefore your hands have been in blood ye shall not build (...) house to the
Lords Name; The work is great, the house is not for man, but for the Lord God;
Ye cannot, ye shall not build the Temple of the Lord; ye shall not settle
Religion, in, or by blood. But divine Solomon, the Prince of peace, he shall
build an house for the Ark of God, a Temple for the Lord; he is a man of rest,
God will give him rest, and he will give rest to his Church in due time from
their Enemies, and send peace and quietness upon Israel; In rest and
quietness shall they his Israel be saved, their strength is to sit still, and
wait the salvation of God by Christ, he is our peace, the government of peace
is upon him; his Church his Saints, his servants wait for Reformation of
errors, and Reconciliation of all differences from his Wisdom, Judgment,
Sentence and Decree; and consulting only with Christ in cases of weighty
consequence, not fit for flesh and blood to determine, pray with divine David;
Let my sentence come forth from thy presences, That mount Zion may hear and be
glad, Psalm. 84.11.
and the daughters of Judah rejoice, because of thy righteous judgments, Psalm.
97.8. Say among the Heathen, that the Lord reigns, the World also shall be
established, that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the people righteously.
How beautiful are the feet of those that bring tidings of Peace, that declare
and publish salvation, saying, to Z^^^ the Lord reigns, no perfect peace, but
where the Lord is King and Judge, Who will build up Ziou, and then appear in
his glory, etc. Psalm. 102.15 16. So the Heathen shall fear his Name, and the
Kings of the earth his glory. And now having humbly proposed to you, though
with much weakness, Gods way for advancement of his glory, by composing
Controversies, and settling Peace, I shall shut up with the prayer and advice of
holy David, to his son Solomon, and ^o the Princes of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 22.12,
13.
The Lord give you wisdom and understanding, and give ye charge over Israel,
even to keep the Law of the Lord God. Then shall you prosper if you take heed
to observe the Statutes and the Judgments, which the Lord commended Moses for
Israel. And to the Princes of Israel, ver. 9. Now set your hearts and your
souls to seek the Lord your God, and arise, and so build the Sanctuary of the
Lord God, Psa. 147.14.19.20.
etc. He sets peace in thy borders, etc. He shows his Word, his statutes,
hiss judgments to his chosen Israel, he has not dealt so with every nation
neither have they known his judgments. And touching the respecting, or
rejecting of Gods counsels, ways, and judgments, be pleased to peruse the
first and second chapter^ of Proverbs, prescribed by the Pen of the Goly Ghost,
in the hand of Solomon, I called they refused, none regarded, they would none
of my judgments, but set at naught my counsels. Therefore shall they eat of
the fruits of their own way, and be filled with their own devises, etc. But
if they will receive my words etc. then shall they understand righteousness,
judgment and equity, and every good way, discretion shall preserve them,
understanding keep them, and judgment deliver them from every evil way.

FINIS.

